Arcana Clericalia or The Mysteries of Clerkshipp As to the Sure Settlements of
Estates, by Deeds Fines Recoveries ^^ With the Forms of all manner of
Charterparties in Maritime Cities Towns and Corporations by George
Billinghurst of Grayes Inn Esquire;

depiction of a courtroom, with judges, clerks, etc.

Printed for H. Twyford in Vine Court in the Middle Temple

Arcana Clericalia, Or, THE MYSTERIES OF Clarkship: BEING A sure way of Settling
Estates By DEEDS, FINES, and RECOVERIES. With the Forms of all manner of
Charter-Parties in Maritime Cities, Towns and Corporations. WITH A TABLE of all
the Principal matters therein contained. By George Billinghurst of Grayes-Inne
Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford, in Vine-Court Middle Temple, 1674.

TO THE Practitioners and Students OF THE Common LAW OF ENGLAND: Especially
such as would be thoroughly Acquainted with Conveyancing.
WIthout the least Flattery to the Memory of our deceased Author, I may boldly
say, His indefatigable Labors need not be ushered into the World with studied
Eulogyes: And I doubt not but you will concur with me in the same Opinion, when
you have perused this Book, and confess his own Labors to be his greatest
Commendation.

Touching the Subject matter, it contains the several Forms of Settlements of
Estates to Uses, with power for Cestuy que use for Life, and in Tail, to make
Joyntures, Leases, and, Grants of Rents: Likewise the Forms of Limitation of
Uses for Years; for payment of Debts, discharge of Sureties, and raising of
Portions for Younger Children: It also treats of Limitation of Uses in Fee, for
the Lands to be sold to pay Debts, etc. With several forms of Revocation of
Uses, and limiting Uses de novo, and of Covenants, with other Incidents to the
like Conveyances.

Besides these, there are other most useful Presidents, relating to Merchants
and Traders Affairs, fit for all Maritime Cities, Towns, and places of Trade:
The whole Work is so Methodically digested by the Author, that any Person (who
is not a mere stranger to the Law) may make great use and advantage thereof,
and speedily and readily find any particular matter therein contained.

As to the Author, I shall only say thus much in general of him, viz. That
H^spent a considerable time in the study of the Law at Grays-Inne, and being
unwearied in searching after all opportunities to improve his knowledge, He at
length was called to the Bar, and gained in a little time the Vogue of being a
profound and judicious Counselor; His Apprehension was always quick, his
Judgment deliberate, solid, and not wavering, of a clear discerning faculty,
his Memory sound, and his Patience (the truest index of a Wise man) always
commanded his Passions: in short, He was a Person of exquisite, natural, and
acquired Parts, and that which much contributed to the latter, was his great
Moderation and Temperance, whereby his study and business glided in their
delighted Channels, uninterrupted. Being at length wearied with Business, he
retired into the Country, where having finished this Elaborate Work, he dyed.
Since whose death, his Manuscript being left to the Guardianship of a Friend,
and committed into my hands, in order to be made Public, for the further
advantage of such as would be perfect in the settling of Estates. I have
hereunto added the Learning touching Fines and Recoveries, hoping the Ingenious
will be moderate in their Censures; And if I have, in this, done any thing to
your Advantage, it will answer the pains of him that is,

Your Servant, W. B.

An ANALYSIS of the whole Art of Conveyancing.
Deeds
are either Indented, of two parts three parts or more.
or Poll in 1st Person or 3d Person.

And consists of Grants, which are Constitutive or Creating what was not
before, as The first Grant of A Way A Rent Estate Tail for life for years
Warranty, etc.

And are Absolute or Conditional.
or Conveying, whereby Estates already made are conveyed to others.
or Discharges and are Remissory or Liberatory
which releaseth or discharges something in being, as Releases, Defeazances,
Acquittances.


Ordinary Deeds by which Lands usually pass,
are Feoffment, Bargain and Sale, Gift or Grant, Lease, Assignment, Exchange,
Surrender, Confirmation, Release, Indenture to lead uses of Fines or
Recoveries, Covenant to stand seized to uses, Revocation and new Declaration.
All, or most of which have formal and orderly parts, viz. 1. The Premises
unto the Habendum, including 1. Grantor, 2. Grantee, 3. Thing granted. By apt
and proper Names and descriptions. Which are certain in themselves, or Which by
reference may be reduced to a certainty.

4. Exception by the words. Excepted, Excepting, Besides, Saving, Save only,
etc.
Which must be 1. A Particular out of a General, 2. Part of what is granted,
not all, 3. That which may be severed from the thing granted, and not an
inseparable incident thereto.
5. Recital of something antecedent.
2. The Habendum, whose office is to set down, 1. The Grantee, and 2. Certainty
of Thing, Estate and Life granted, and to what use.
3. The Reddendum, which reserves some new thing to the Grantor, etc. And is
usually made by the words, Yielding, Paying, Doing, Reserving, Finding, etc.
And reserves what was not before. or Abridges the Tenure of what was before.
4. Warranty. 5. The Covenants containing the terms of Granting and Holding,
being either Real, or Personal,
And Inherent, or Collateral,
And must contain things to be done, Lawful, and Possible.
6. The Conditions, which are Precedent, or Subsequent.
To the Estate, and are Affirmative, Negative, Collateral, Inherent,
Restrictive, Compulsory, Single, Copulative, Disjunctive.
And make the Estate whereto they are annexed Void without, or Voidable by
Entry, or Claim.

Or tend to make and enlarge, or destroy or Clogg
Estates.
7. The Conclusion.

To the making of a good Deed
are required, 1. Legible and formal Writing in Paper, or Parchment
before Sealing and Delivery. 2. Capable Persons not disabled by Law; as Donors
that are Persons attainted of Treason, Felony, Praemunire.
Infants, Madmen, Idiots, Femes Covert, Aliens, Deaf, blind, and dumb from
Nativity.
Except in several special cases and things. Donees, as Monks, Friars, etc.
3. A thing to be granted and passed. 4. By proper and sufficient Names and
descriptions of 1. Grantor, 2. Grantee, 3. Thing Granted,
Which must be grantable In its own Nature, and And by him that grants it.
And is either Corporeal and Immovable, as Houses, Lands, Woods, etc.
And are grantable in Fee, Tail, for Life, Years, etc.
And assignable from man to man. Or Incorporeal, as Rents, Services, Advowsons
Presentations, Reversions, Remainders, Offices, Licenses, Franchises, Commons,
etc.
Whereof some are 1. Grantable at their first Creation, but not assignable
after: as Great Offices of Trust, Judicial Offices, Licenses, Authorities, etc.
2. Assignable always. 3. Entirely, but not in part. 4. Entirely, or in part.
5. To any Body. 6. But to special Persons. 7. Somethings incident to others,
not grantable without the things to which they are incident.
Or Chattels, either Real, as Leases for years present, or to come, Extent,
etc. or Personal, as Oxen, Horses, Plate, etc.

5. True Reading or declaring to a blind or illiterate Person, if required. 6.
Sealing and Delivery by the maker or his Authority, Absolutely and positively
to, or to the use of the Party, or Conditional, and as an Escrow to another.
7. To an honest end, and not by unlawful Contract, or made by Force, or Fraud.
8. Due Ceremony; as Attornment, Livery of Seisin, Intolment.



A Deed when well made, read, sealed and delivered, may be void or voidable
when got
by Force, Fraud, Corrupt agreement.
Or may be marred by Rasure, Interlining, Addition, Breaking the Seal, Defacing,
Judgment of Court, etc.

Arcana Clericalia: OR, The Mysteries of Clerkship: Containing the Forms of
Settlement of Estates to uses; with power to make Joyntures, Leases, Grants,
etc.
The First Part.
CHAP. I. Some Observations taken out of our late Reports, and Books touching
the Law of Conveyances in general.
1. A Bargains and sells to B. a Manor Fine joined, with other assurances
extinguisheth not a condition.
etc. and Covenants to suffer a Recovery; and levy a Fine for better assurance
of the Manor: and that all Estates, assurances and conveyances after to be
made of the said Manor, should be to the uses in the said Indenture etc. And
in the said Indenture there is a Proviso that B. (the Bargainee) shall do such
an Act, etc. And it was resolved that this Proviso amounts to a condition in
Law to defeat the whole Estate: and although A. and B. after levied a Fine to a
third Person, in reference to the Covenant aforesaid, yet it was resolved, that
the Fine did not extinguish the said condition, for it was as an assurance, and
was to be guided by the Indenture: Cook lib. 2. 72, 73. Lord Cromwels case.
vide Dyer 157. page 28, 29, 30.

2. Also it was resolved in the said Cromwells case, Several conveyances, etc.
do make but one assurance in Law.
fo. 75. a. that the said bargain and sale, and Recoverie, and Fine, although
made, suffered and levied at several times, do make but one assurance in Law of
the Manor, according to the same original bargain and contract; and every of
them tend to perfect the said Bargain and Sale, and none of them to destroy any
part of it, or to subvert the true intent of the Parties: As, if a man makes a
Lease for life of Lands in several Counties, and first makes livery in one
County, and diverse days after makes livery in another County; yet the Rent
reserved upon the Lease shall issue out of the Lands in both Counties, although
the livery by which the estate passed, was made at several times: And therefore
it might be objected, that presently upon the first livery the Rent should
issue out of it: but the Law shall not judge by parcels in subverting of the
intent and agreement of the Parties, but after all the Acts are done, in
performance of the original contract and agreement of the Parties, the Law
shall adjudge upon all, as executed at the same time. So if one make a deed of
Feoffment, with warranty, and deliver the deed to the Feoffee, and after at
another time makes livery, secundum formam Charta, yet the warranty is good,
although when the deed was delivered, no estate passed, to which the warranty
might be annexed: yet notwithstanding, praxis juris p^^storum is to be
observed, Et qui rationem in omnibus quarunt, ra^ionem subvertunt: Cook l. 2.
75. a. Conveyances to be so construed that they may take effect.


3. A Conveyance shall have such construction that it may take effect: ut res
magis valeat quam pereat. If Tenant for life, and he in Remainder or Reversion,
join in a Feoffment by deed; each one of them passes his estate, ( viz.) the
Lessee for life his estate by the livery, and the Fee-simple moves or passes
from him in Remainder or Reversion: but if the Feoffment had been by Paroll,
then it should have been the Feoffment of him in Remainder or Reversion, and a
surrender of the Lessee for life, for otherwise nothing should pass by Paroll.
Cook lib. 2. Fine, works to corroborate a former estates and makes no
discontinuance.
fol. 15.

4. Tenent in Tail by deed enrolled, bargains and sells an house to another and
his heirs: and after the Tenant in Tail levies a Fine with Proclamations to the
Bargainee of the same house: Resolved, 1. That by the Indenture of bargain and
sale enrolled, the Bargainee had an Estate descendible to his heirs, but it was
determinable by the death of the Tenant in Tail. 2. Resolved, that the Fine
here levied to the Bargainee does not make a Discontinuance of the Remainder in
Tail, nor does any Estate of Freehold pass by the Fine: but only the Fine with
the Proclamations does corroborate the Estate of the Bargainee, and the Stat.
of 4 H. 7, chap. 24. and 32 H. 8. cap. 36. makes his Estate more perdurable,
being (after the Fine) determinable only upon the death of Tenant in Tail
without issue; but if the Fine had been levied before the bargain and sale
enrolled, it had been a discontinuance; but in the case before it was not,
because it operated only upon the Estate which passed precedent. Cook lib. 10.
fol. 96. Edward Seymors case.

5. Nota a diversity when a man has two ways Two ways to pass an Estate ho^
taken*
to pass Lands, and both of them by the Commonlaw, and intends to pass them by
one of those ways: yet, ut res magi^ valcat, it shall pass by the other. As if
a man be seized of two Acres of Land in Fee, and lettath one of them for Years,
and makes a Charter of Feoffment of both, and makes livery only of the Acre in
possession, in the name of both, only the. Acre in possession passes: but if
the lessee for years after does attorne, then both shall pass: because he is by
the common Law in the Per as to both: but, when a man may pass Lands either by
the common Law, or by raising of a use and settling of it by the Statute, there
in many cases it is otherwise: As, if the Father makes a Charter of Feoffment
to the Son, and a let^er of Attorney to make livery; if no livery be made, no
use shall arise unto the Son, because then he should be in by the Statute in
another degree, ( viz.) in the Post: and the intention of the Parties is much
in the raising of uses. Cook upon Lit. 49. a.

6. One sells unto another certain Lands by Acts done for further assurance
refer to the Original agreement.
deed indented, upon condition of Reentry, upon nonpayment of 20 l. and that
all assurances shall then be to him and his heirs: and Covenants to make other
assurances, and that they shall be to the use in the Indenture: afterward he
makes a Feoffment to the same bargainee, to the use of him and his heirs, and
afterward levies a Fine to him, which was to the uses in the Indenture: and it
was judged, that notwithstanding this absolute Feoffment, and to an express
use; yet it being made upon no new agreement, it shall be guided by the
Covenant, so that the bargainees Estate continues conditional. Crook lib. 1.
fol. 300. page 14. Clever verse. Giles. Acts done for further assurance upon
covenants precedent, contained in the original agreement, shall have such
construction as may fortify and not destroy the first agreement. As if ^ man
bargain and sell Lands rendering rent, with condition of reentrie etc. and
covenants to make further assurances; and after he levies a Fine, or makes a
Feoffment: none of these are construed to extinguish the rent, or condition,
but to fortify only the Estate of the purchaser according to the first
agreement. Moors Reports fol. 385.

7. It seems a conveyance of record shall be ^nv eyan^e of record and enpays,
how taken.
taken strictly and not by intendment: as a conveyance in pais shall. Therefore
a Manor in reputation, which is not a Manor in truth, will not pass by the
name of a Manor, in a Fine or common Recovery: otherwise in a conveyance.
Crook part 1. 524. p. 53. yet a remainder may pass in a Fine by the name of a
Reversion, ibid. 594. p. 37.

8. Where an Indenture of bargain and sale is Several conveyances: how the
Party shall be in.
made, and after a Fine is levied of the same land to the bargainee, and after
the deed is enrolled, the bargainee is in by the Fine, and not by the
inrollment: and where a Reversion is bargained and sold by Indenture, and
before inrolment, a Fine is levied by the Bargainor to the Bargainee, and after
the deed is enrolled, yet the Bargainee must have an Attornment, because he is
in by the Fine and not by the Bargain and sale. Crook part 1. 917. p. 8.

9. Where it is possible for a grant to take effect Grant to take effect as by
possibility it may.
according to the Letter, there the Law makes such a construction, as by
possibility it may take effect: as if Lands are given to two men, and the Heirs
of their two Bodies, the Law makes them joynt-tenants for life, and gives them
several Inheritances in Tail. Cook upon Litt. 183. b. Stamford justice Three
grounds for construction of deeds.
( arguendo) takes three grounds for the construction of deeds, First, that it
shall be taken most beneficially for the Party that takes by them. Secondly,
that the deed shall not be void, where the words may be taken to any intent.
Thirdly, that the words shall be construed according to the mind of the parties
and not otherwise: Plowden, Ancient deeds how construed.
fol. 160. Throgmortons case. Ancient deeds shall be construed, as they were
anciently taken, although the Law be since altered: vide Crook part 1. 633. p.
29.

10. Some words are large and have a general extent, Exposition des parol^.
and some have a proper and particular application: the former sort may contain
the latter, as dedi, or concessi, may amount to a Grant, a Feoffment, a Gift, a
Lease, a Release, a Confirmation, or Surrender etc. and it is in the Election
of the Party to use them, to which of these purposes he will^; but a Release,
Confirmation, or Surrender etc. cannot amount to a Grant etc. nor a Surrender ^
a Confirmation, or to a Release etc. because they are proper and peculiar
manner of conveyances, and are destined to a special end. Cook sur Litt. 301. b.

CHAP. II. The several forms of setting forth the grounds or considerations of
a Conveyance, or s^ttlement of an Estate.
1. Witnesses that the said A. B. as well for Money i^ part pa^d, and in part
secured.
and in consideration of the sum of 500 l. of lawful moneys of England to
him in hand paid before the ensealing and delivery hereof by the said C. D. the
receipt whereof lie the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge; and thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof does acquit and discharge the said C. D. his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators by these presents: As also for and in
consideration of the sum of 500 l. more of like moneys, by the said C. D.
secured to be paid unto the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators in
manner and form following, viz. on the 20 day of January now next ensuing, the
sum of 300 l. thereof, and on the first day of March then following the sum
of 200 l. the residue of the said sum of 500 l.

2 Whereas the said A. B. at the ensealing and The barring o^ an Estate ^^il,
and enabling him to make a settlement or assurance.
delivery of these presents, is and stands seiled of an Estate ^ail to him
and the Heirs Males of his Body, with diverse remainders over, of and in the
Manors, Messuages, Lands, and Tenements hereafter in these presents mentioned,
Now witnesses this present Indenture, that for and in consideration of the
barring of the said Estate tail, and all the Remainders thereupon d^pending,
and for the settling of an absolute Estate in Fee-simple of inheritance, in the
said A. B. whereby he may be enabled to make a good and perfect assurance to
such Person or Persons and their Heirs, as have agreed, or hereafter shall
agree with him the said A. B. to purchase the said Manors, etc. [A. B.
covenants to suffer a Recovery] -- Or thus: That for the settling of the
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter in these presents
mentioned to such use and uses, and in such manner and form as hereafter are
in these presents limited and expressed, and for the enabling of the said A. B.
to make and grant Leases and Estates of and in the sold Manors, Lands and
Premises in such manner and sort, and according to the power and authority to
him hereafter in and by these Presents reserved, and for other good causes and
considerations, etc.

3. Witnesses that the said A. B. in consideration Natural love, etc.
preferment of children.
of the natural love and affection which he bears unto C. B. his Son and Heir
apparent, and for his advancement and present maintenance, and to the end that
the Daughters of the said A. B. may have convenient Portions to maintain and
prefer them in Marriage, and for the establishing of the Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, to such uses, intents and
purposes as are hereafter limited and appointed, and for other good causes and
considerations, etc. Or Settlement in the stock and blood, etc.
thus: In consideration of the great love and natural affection, which he the
said A. B. bears unto C. B. the natural son and heir apparent of the said
A. B. and to the heirs males of the body of the said C. B. and to the end,
intent and purpose that the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
hereafter mentioned, shall and may continue in the stock, blood and kindred of
the said A. B. etc. -- Or thus: A well for the advancement and preferment of
the Heirs Males of the Body of the said A. B. lawfully to be begotten, and for
the better advancement and preferment of C. B. D. B. etc. the natural Brothers
of the said A. B. and to the end that the Manors etc. hereafter mentioned may
continue in the name, blood and kindred of the said A. B. so long as it shall
please God, as for diverse other good causes and considerations etc.

4. Whereas the said A. Lord B. is and stands Another form more large.
seiz^d in possession, reversion and remainder, of some Estate of inheritance
of and in diverse and sundry Honors, Castles, Manors, Lordships, Messuages,
Parks, Chases, Lands, Tenements, Advowsons, Liberties, Franchises, and
Hereditaments, all which or the most part thereof have for a long time remained
and continued in the Name and Blood of the said Lord B. and in regard the said
Lord B. is desirous and intends to establish and settle all the said Honors,
Manors etc. to such intents and purposes as that the same may remain in the
Name, Blood and Kindred of the said Lord B. according to the uses hereafter
thereof expressed and declared, for the better advancement of the House,
Honor, and Blood of the said Lord B. so long as it shall please God to permit
the same: and our of the Fatherly love and affection which he bears unto Sr.
T. B. Knight, his Son and Heir apparent: and for the preferment, advancement
and maintenance of the Lady E. B. now the Wife of Jointure.
the said Lord B. and for her jointure in case she shall happen to overlive the
said Lord B. and for Settlement on collateral Heirs.
diverse other good causes and considerations, etc.

5. Witnesses, that for diverse good causes and considerations, him the said A.
B. hereunto moveing, and especially for that the said A. B. and C. B. his Wife
have been married these many years, and have had no issue of their Bodies: and
to the end that in case the said A. B. should die without issue of his Body
lawfully begotten, the Capital Message, Lands, and Tenements hereafter
mentioned shall and may, so long as it shall please God, remain and continue in
the Blood and Kindred of the said A. B. and for the natural love which he
bears unto etc. [naming his Brothers o^ Sisters] and for diverse other good
causes and considerations, etc.

6. Whereas the^e is a marrirge by the grace of A marriage to be had and
settlement of a jointure.
God to be shortly had and solemnized between the said C. B. Son and H^ir
apparent of the said A. B. and A. D. the Daughter of the said C. D. witnesses
that the said A. B. in consideration of the said Marriage, and of the Sum of
800 l. of good and lawful money of England to him in hand paid, as the M^rriage
Portion of the said A. D. by the said C. D. her Father, and for the Natural
love and affection which the said A. B. bears unto the said C. B. and to the
end, intent and purpose that a competent jointure may be had, and made unto the
said A. D. for the better maintenance, livelihood and advancement of the said
A. D. in case she shall happen to survive and overlive the said C. B. and in
full recompense and satisfaction of all the Dower and Title of Dower which she
the said A. D. by or after the death of the said C. B. shall or may have to any
the Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments whereof the said C. B. shall
during the coverture between him and the said A. D. be seized of any Estate of
Inheritance, and for the advancement of the Name and Blood of the said C. B.
and for and toward a provision of Maintenance to be had and made unto, and for
the said C. B. and A. D. during the natural lives of the said A. B. and A
marriage already had, and for a jointure, etc.
E. his wife, etc.

7. Witnesses, that for and in consideration of the natural love and affection
which the said A. B. bears unto the said C. B. his eldest Son and Heir
apparent, and other his Sons hereafter named, and for the advancement of the
Name and Blood of the said A B. and also in consideration of a Marriage
heretofore had and solemnized between the said C. B. and D. B. now Wife of the
said C. B. and of the Sum of 1000 l. to the said A. B. by W. D. Father of the
said D. B. well and truly contented and paid as the marriage portion of the
said D. B. and to the end and intent that a competent and convenient jointure
and estate may be had, made and provided for the said D. B. for term of her
life, (in case she shall happen to survive the said C. B.) in recompense and
satisfaction of all the Dower, and Title of Dower, which the said D. B. by or
after the death of the said C. B. has or shall, or may have in or to any of
the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whereof the said C.
B. is, or during the Coverture between him and the said D. B. shall be seized
of any Estate of Inheritance, and for other good causes and considerations, etc.

8. Witnesses, that in consideration of a Marriage An other in relation to
former agreements
heretofore had between the said A. B. and F. B. his now Wife, and of the good
will and affection which the said A. B. bears unto the said F. B. and for the
true performance of such promises and agreements had and made, by the said A.
B. upon the marriage between the said A. B. and the said F. B. had as
aforesaid, and for a jointure etc. and to the end and intent and purpose that
the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said A. B. hereafter mentioned,
may come and continue to and in the issue of the said A. B. and F. in such sort
Manner and Form as hereafter is in these presents expressed mentioned and
declared, and for other good causes, etc.

9. Whereas, the said A. B. is now lawfully seized Payment of debts.
in his demesne as of Fee, of and in a Message, Tenement and Lands, with the
Appurtenances situate, lying and being etc. of the yearly value of 250 l. per
annum, of lawful moneys of England. And whereas the said A. B. is indebted, and
does owe unto diverse Persons several Sums of Money, amounting in the whole to
1000 l. of like moneys being particularly mentioned in a Schedule hereunto
annexed, which sums the said A. B. is not at present able to pay, and yet
minding and intending to make payment thereof, with such speed as it may be: in
consideration whereof, and for as much as the said C. D. has undertaken out of
the Rents, issues and prossits arising out and from the said Message, Lands,
and Premises, to pay and satisfy the debts owing by the said A. B. rateably to
his Creditors, according to their several debts, as the same shall be yearly
raised, out of the said yearly Rents, Issues, and Proffits Now Witnesses etc.

CHAP. III. Containing several Covenants.
1. This Indenture etc. between A. B. and E. To levy a Fine Sur cogniz. de
droit come ceo. Per. Baron and feme.
his Wife on the one part, and C. D. and G. H. of the other part witnesses,
that it is Covenanted, Granted, Concluded and Agreed, by and between the said
Parties to these presents. And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, and for the said E. his wife does covenant,
grant, and agree, to, and with the said C. D. and G. H. their Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators by these presents, That they the said A. B. and E. his wife
shall, and will before the end of the Term of St. Michael the Archangel next
ensuing, the Date hereof by one Fine with Proclamations in due form of Law, to
be levied before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King, of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, Or before any other Person or Persons
sufficiently, and lawfully, authorized in that behalf [which is sometimes
added.]
Between the said C. D. and G. H. Plaintiffs, and the said A. B. and E. his
wife Deforciants, Recognize and acknowledge, All that tho Manor of etc. and all
other the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, lying and being in the Parish of
B. in the County of C. in which the said A. B. and the said E. his wife, or
either of them, have, or heretofore had any Estate, or Inheritance in
Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, with all and singular the Appurtenances
thereof by some Name or Names, and Contents, and Numbers of Acres in the said
Fine to be contained to be the Right of the said C. D. as those which the said
C. D. and G. H. have of the Gift of the said A. B. and E. his wife, and the
same shall thereby remise, and quitclaime from them the said A. B. and E. his
wife, and their Heirs to the said C. D. and G. H. and the Heirs of the said C.
D. for ever: And moreover, shall by the said Fine, warrant the said Manor and
Premises, with the Appurtenances unto the said C. D. and G. H. and the Heirs of
the said C. D. against them the said A. B. and E. his wife, and the Heirs of
the said A. B. Another more brief.
for ever.

2. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. his wife, on the one part, and C.
D. of etc. on the other part. Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted,
concluded, and agreed by, and between the said parties to these presents. And
the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators; and for
the said E. his wife, does covenant and grant to, and with the said C. D. his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, that he the said A. B. and E. his wife,
shall and Will on this side, and before the Feast of etc. next ensuing, the
Date of these presents, or before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King,
of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster; acknowledge, and levy
one Fine sur cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de lour done, etc. with
Proclamations, according to the form of the Statute in such Case had and
provided, to the said C. D, of all that Message or Tenement, and Lands, etc.
by such Name and Names, Qualities, Quantities, and Numbers of Acres, as by the
said C. D. or his Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised,
advised, or required.

2. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of Another by several persons
severally interessed.
etc. on the first part, C. D. of etc. on the second part: E. F. of etc. on the
third part: and G. H. of etc. on the fourth part: Whereas the said A. B. is
seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of, and in one parcel of Pasture ground,
called, or known by the Name of D. lying, and being in the Parish of F. in the
County aforesaid, containing by Estimation twenty Acres or thereabouts, which
he lately purchased of one J. R. of etc. And whereas the said C. D. is likewise
seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in one Message or Tenement, with the
Appurtenances, and a certain parcel of Meadow grounds lying near thereunto;
containing by Estimation six Acres or thereabouts, lying, and being in F.
aforesaid, which he lately purchased of one L. M. of etc. And whereas the said
E. F. is likewise seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in one Message or
Tenement, with the Appurtenances lying, and being in F. aforesaid, and a
certain Close, or parcel of Pasture ground thereunto belonging, and adjoining,
containing by Estimation Ten Acres or thereabouts, which he the said E. F.
lately purchased of one R. S. of etc. And they the said A. B. C. D. and E. F,
being of the said Premises so severally seized as aforesaid. Now witnesses
these presents, that it is covenanted, concluded, and agreed by, and between
all the said Parties to these presents; That they the said A. B. C. D. and E.
F. shall on this side, and before the Feast of etc. next ensuing, the Date
hereof, in due form of Law, levy, and acknowledge, one Fine sur cognizance de
droit come ceo etc. with Proclamations according to the Statute in that Case
made and provided, before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King, of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster; to the said G. H. and his
Heirs, of all and singular, the Premises, with the Appurtenances, The Uses.
by the Name or Names of etc. And that the said Fine so to be levied, shall be,
and envre, and shall be deemed, construed, and taken to be, and envre, and the
said G. H. and his Heirs, shall by virtue thereof stand, and be seized of, and
in all, and singular, the said Premises, with their, and every of their
Appurtenances to the several uses hereafter mentioned and declared, and in
manner and form following: That is to say of, and in the said parcel of Pasture
Land, called or known by the Name of D, with the Appurtenances thereof to the
only use and behoof of the said A. B. and his Heirs; and of, in, and to the
said Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances, and parcel of Meadow grounds,
to the only use and behoof of the said C. D. and his Heirs, etc. [and so for
the rest.]

4. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. To levy a Fine in the County of
Lancaster.
of the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of etc. on the other part: Witnesses,
That it is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by, and between all and
every the parties to these presents. And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, does covenant, grant, and agree to, and with the
said C. D. and E. F, and either of them, their, or either of their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators by these presents; that he the said A. B. shall,
and will at the next Assizes, or general great Sessions for Pleas, to be holden
at Lancaster, before the Justice or Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King,
there for the time being, levy, and acknowledge one Fine Sur cognizance de
droit come ceo, etc. with Proclamations thereupon to be had in due form of Law,
unto the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs of, and in all, and singular
those Several Mossuages or Tenements, etc. by the name of three Messuages, two
Gardens, two Acres of Land, twenty Acres of Meadow, and forty Acres of
Pasture; with the Appurtenances in B. in the County of Lancaster aforesaid, etc.

5. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. on To levy Fines in the Counties
of Chester and Lancaster.
the one part, and C. D. on the other part. Witnesses; That the said A. B. for
diverse good causes, and considerations, him hereunto moving; has covenanted,
granted, and agreed, and by these presents; does for him, his Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators, covenant, grant, and agree to, and with the said C. D. his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators by these presents; That he the said A. B.
shall, and will before the Feast of etc. next ensuing, the Date of these
presents, in due form of Law, acknowledge, and levy two or more Fines sur
cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. with proclamations within the Counties
Palatine of Chester and Lancaster, before the Kings Majesty's Justices of
Assize, or before some other Person or Persons in that behalf, lawfully, and
sufficiently authorized unto him the said C. D. and his Heirs, of all that etc.
[The one part being in the County of Chester, the other in the County of
Lancaster] by such Name or Names, Qualities, Quantities, and Numbers of Acres,
as by the said C. D. or his Counsel Learned in the Law shall be reasonably
advised, or required, etc.

6. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the To levle a Fine in a Court of
Ancient Demesne.
one part; and C. D. of the other part. Whereas the said A. B. is the Day of
the Date of these presents, lawfully seized of an Estate of Inheritance to him,
and the Heirs Males of his body, of, and in diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, within the Liberty of H. at B. in the County of E. hereafter
in these presents particularly mentioned. Now witnesses these presents, that
the said A. B. for diverse good Causes and Considerations him hereunto
especially moving, and for the settling etc. does for himself, and his Heirs,
covenant, grant, and agree to, and with the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators by these present^: That he the said A. B. at his own proper
Cost and Charges; shall, and will in due form of Law, before the Feast of etc.
next ensuing, the Date of these presents, acknowledge, and levy one Fine in the
Court of Ancient Demesne, within the said Liberty of H. at B. according to the
course and common usage for levying of Fines for Lands, and Hereditaments
within the said Liberty, unto the said C. D. of all those Messuages, Lands etc.
by the Name of three Messuages, three Gardens, forty Acres of Land, etc. in H.
at B. aforesaid, or by such other Name or Names as shall be thought meet, etc.

7. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. To levy a Fine with a Render of
an Estate for Years.
his wife on the one part; and C. D. on the other part: Witnesses, That for
diverse g^od causes and considerations; it is covenanted, granted, concluded,
and agreed by, and between the said Parties to these presents, for them, their
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators; that before the end of Trinity Term now
next ensuing, at the Cost and Charges of the said C. D. his Executors, and
Administrators; one Fine, with Proclamations in due from of Law, shall be
levied, and acknowledged between the said Parties to these presents, in manner
and form following; of one Message, with the Appurtenances in the Parish of
etc. and two other Messuages etc. in, and by which said Fine, the said C. D.
shall remise, release, and quitclame from the said C. D. and his Heirs, unto
the said A. B. and E. his wife; and the Heirs of the said A. B. all his Right,
Title, Estate, and Interest of, in, and to the aforesaid Messuages, and other
the Premises, with the Appurtenances; for which Remise, Release, and Quitclame,
the said A. B. and E. his wife, shall by the said Fine, Render the said The
Render.
Messuages, and Premises, with the Appurtenances unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns; to have, and to hold the same, unto the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns from the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John the Baptist next ensuing, the Date hereof, for during, and
until the full end and term of One and Twenty years, from thence next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended: Yielding, and paying therefore yearly, and
every year unto the said A. B. and E. his wife, their Heirs, Executors, and
Assigns respectively, during the said term, the yearly Rent, or Sum of Five
pounds of lawful Moneys of England, at Four the most usual Feasts in the year;
that is to say, etc. or within thirty Days after either of the said Feasts:
[with Several Covenants to be added, as is usual in I eases.]

8. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. Another with a Render of a Rent.
his wife on the one part, and C. D. on the other part: Witnesses, That for
diverse good Gauses and Considerations; it is covenanted, granted, concluded,
and agreed by, and between the said parties to these presents, for them, their
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators; that before the end of Trinity Term now
next coming, at the Cost and Charges of the said C. D. hi^ Executors, and
Administrators; One Fine, with Proclamations in due form of Law, shall be
levied of certain Messuages, etc. levied, and acknowledged by, and between the
said parties to these presents, by the Names of etc. in, and by which said
Fine, the said C. D. shall remise, release, and quitclame from the said C. D.
and his Heirs, unto the said A. B. and E. his wife, and the Heirs of the said
A. B. all his Right, Title, Estate, and Interest of, in, and to the aforesaid
Messuages, and other the Premises, with the Appurtenances; For which Remise,
Release, and Quitclaim, the said The Render.
A. B. and E. his wife, shall by the said Fine, grant, and render unto the said
C. D. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, one Annuity or yearly Rent of
Twenty pounds per annum, of good and lawful Moneys of England, to be issuing,
and going out of the aforesaid Messuages and Premises, with the Appurtenances;
to have, hold, receive, and enjoy the said Annuity of Twenty pounds per annum,
and every part and parcel thereof unto the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns; from the Feast of etc. next ensuing, the Date
hereof unto the full end and term of One and thirty years, from thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, and the Annunciation of St. Mary the blessed Virgin, by even and
equal portions, yearly to be paid during the term aforesaid: And if it shall
happen the said Clause of Distress.
yearly Rent of Twenty pounds, or any part thereof to be behind or unpaid, in
part, or in all, by the space of twenty Days, after either of the said Feasts
or Days of payment, being lawfully demanded; that then, and from thenceforth,
it shall, and may be lawful to, and for the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, into the said Messuages and Premises, and every
part and parcel thereof to enter, and distrain; and the Distress, and
Distresses there to be found, and taken, lawfully to lead, bear, drive, and
carry away, and the same to detain and keep, until he the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall be fully paid and satisfied the
said Annuity, or yearly Rent, and all, and every the Areres thereof, etc.

9. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. To leavie a Fine Sur concessit.
his Wife on the one part, and C. D. on the other part: Witnesses, That the
said A. B. for diverse good causes and considerations him hereunto moving; does
for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and for the said E. his
wife, covenant and grant to, and with the said C. D. his Executors, and
Administrators by these presents: That he the said A. B. and E. his wife;
shall, and will before the end of this present Term of St. Hillary, leavy one
Fine Sur concessit, with Proclamations in due form of Law, before his Majesty's
Justices of the Common Pleas Court at Westminstor, in the County of Midds, unto
the said C. D. of all the Manors, etc. and the Revertion and Revertions,
Remainder and Remainders of all, and singler the premises and of every part and
parcel thereof: And all Rent and Rents, and yearly services, and other profits
whatsoever reserved and payable upon every demise and demises, Leases, Grants,
and Conveyancies whatsoever; made and granted of the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, by such name and names, quantities and qualities, as shall be
thought meet and ^

10. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. To sue fortha Recovery with
double voucher.
his wife of the first part, C. D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H. on
the third Part: Witnesses these presents, that it is mutually and respectively
covenanted and concluded by, and between the said Parties to these presents:
And the said A. B. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
and for the said E. his wife, covenant and agree to, and with the said G. H.
his Heirs; Executors, and Administrators, by these presents: That he the said
A. H. and E. his wife, shall and will on this side, and before the Feast of,
etc. Tenent to the precipe made by Fine.
now next ensuing, leavy and acknowledge o^e Fine sur cognizance, de droit come
^co quc ils ont de lour done etc. in due form of Law, with Proclamations to be
had and made, according to the common course of Fines in such cases used; and
the Statu^e in that behalf made, and provided, before the Justices of our
Sovereign Lord the King, of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
[or before some other competent person or persons thereunto lawfully and
sufficiently authorized,] to the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, of all
that the Manor of S. in the County of B. and of all Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditame^ts whatsoever, which are or are reputed, part or
parcol of the said Manor, or belonging, or appertaining thereunto; by such
name or names, quantities, qualities, contents, and numbers of Acres, and in
such manner and form, as by the said G. H. his Heirs of Assigns; or his, or
their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised, or
required; which said Fine so, or in any other manner to be levied and
acknowledged between the said Parties; shall be, and shall be construed,
reputed, and taked to be, to and for the use of the said C. D. and E. F. and
their Heirs; to the only end, intent, and purpose, that the said C. D. and E.
F. shall, and may stand, and be full and perfect Tenants of the Freehold of the
said Manor, Messuages, Lands, and Premises, and every part thereof: Whereof
the said Fine is agreed to be leavied as aforesaid, until a perfect common
Recovery; shall and may be lawfully had, and executed of the said Manor,
Messuages, Lands, and Premises, against the said C. D. and E. F. and their
Heirs, according to the true intent and meaning, of these presents, and the
Parties thereunto.

11. And it is further covenanted, concluded, To suffer a Recovery upon a writ
of entry en le post.
and agreed by, and between all the said Parties, to these presents; and every
of them their, and every of their Heirs: That they the said C. D. and E. F.
shall and will permit, and suffer the said G. H. before the Feast of etc. next
ensuing, the Date hereof by Writ or Writs of entry, Sur disseisin en le post to
be sued forth, and obtained out of the Kings Majesty's High Court of Chancery,
and returnable before the Justices of our said Sovereign Lord the King, of the
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in the name of the said G. H. demandant,
against the said C. D. and E. F. being Tenants, to recover to them, and their
Heirs in due form of Law, according to the usual form of common Recoveries for
assuring of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, against the said C. D. and E.
F. and the surviver of them, then Tenent or Tenants of the premises: All and
every the said Manor, Lands, and Premises withal and singular their, and every
of their Appurtenances; by some name or names in the said Writ and Recovery to
be contained; [or thus, by such name of names, and under such number and
contents of Acres; and in such manner and form as shall be advised by the
Council of the said G. H.] unto which said Writ of entry, Sur disseisin en le
post, so to be brought as aforesaid, the said C. D. and E. F. shall appear
gratis, And then, and immediately after appearance and defense made, shall and
will in the said action, vouch to warranty the said A. B. and E. his wife, who
shall likewise appear gratis, and vouch to warranty the common Vouchee; who
shall also appear, imparle, and make default, whereby a perfect Judgment may be
had and given against the said C. D. and E. F. and for the said C. D. and E. F.
to recover aganst the said A. B. and E. his wife; and for the said A. B. and E.
his wife, to recover in value against the common Vouchee: So that a good and
perfect Recovery may be had with double Voucher, and execution be had and made
thereof, etc.

12. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the An other with double Voucher
(the Tenent of the precipe, being before made by Deed, etc.) vide Sect. 13.
first part; C. D. of the second part, and G. H. of of the third part:
Witnesses, that for diverse good causes and consideration, etc. It is
covenanted, granted, and agreed by, and between the said Parties to these
presents, in manner and form following: That the said G. H. shall on this side,
and before the Feast of etc. next ensuing the Date of these presents, purchase
and sue forth out of the High Court of Chancery, one original Writ of entry,
sur disseisin en le post, against the said C. D. returnable before the Justices
of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, at a Time certain in the
said Writ to be mentioned: And by the said Writ, shall demand against the said
C. D. all that the Message, and Lands, etc. [Setting forth the particulars,
and where they lie:] By such names, qualities, and numbers of Acres; as by the
said G. H. and his Council Learned in the Law, shall be devised, advised, or
required: Unto which said Writ. the said C. D. shall appear gratis, and take
upon him the Tenancy of all and every the said Message, Lands, and other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, and shall vouch to warranty the said A. B.
who shall appear gratis, and vouch to warranty the common Vouchee, who shall
likewise appear gratis, and enter into the warranty, and after imparle and make
default in contempt of the Court, so that Judgment shall be given that the said
G. H. shall recover the said Messuages, Lands, and Premises in the said Writ to
be contained, against the said C. D. and that the said C. D. shall recover over
in value against the said common Vouchee: And that execution of the said
Recovery so to be had, shall be made according to the form of common Recoveries
in such cases used and accustomed. And that the said G. H. C. D. and A. B. and
the said common Vouchee, and every of them shall and will do execute perform
and suffer; all and every such Act and Acts, thing and things whatsoever, as as
shall be necessary and expedient for the prosecution of the said Recovery, and
the execution thereof; according to the form and Order of common Recoveries,
with double Vouchers in such cases used, etc.

13. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of To make a Tenent to a Precipe by
barg. and sale.
the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Witnesses, That the said A. B. for
and in consideration of 5s. of lawful Money of England, to him in hand paid
before the sealing and delivery hereof by the said C. D. the receipt whereof
the said A B. does acknowledge: And to the end and purpose that the said C. D.
may be made a perfect Tenent to a Precipe, against whom a common Recovery may
be had of the Manor, and Lands hereafter mentioned: Has granted, bargained,
and sold, and by these presents, does for him and his Heirs, grant, bargain,
and sell unto the said C. D. and his Heirs, all that the said Manor, etc. To
have and to hold the said Manor, Lands, and Premises, and every part or parcel
thereof, unto him the said C. D. his Heirs, and Assigns for ever; to the only
use and behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for evermore.

14. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of To suffer a Recovery, with the
recital of the said former deed; with double Voucher.
the first part, C. D. of the second part, and E. F. on the third part:
Whereas, the said A. B. has by his Indenture of bargain and sale bearing Date,
the etc. last past before the Date hereof, for the consideration therein
expressed, granted, bargained, and sold unto the said C. D. and his Heirs; all
that the Manor, etc. [to the end of the Habendum,] which said bargain and sale
was made to him the said C. D. and his Heirs, to and for the only use intent
and purpose, that the said C. D. should be sole Tenent of the Premises to a
Precipe; against whom the Recovery hereafter mentioned might be had in manner
and form following. Now Witnesses this present Indenture, And it is
covenanted, concluded, and ageed by, and between all the said Parties, to these
presents; for the ^selves respectively and their Heirs: That before the end of
the Term of the Holy Trinity next en^uing, the Date hereof there shall be at
the only cost and cha^g^s of the said E. F. more brief
one Recovery in the nature of a common Recovery for Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in such ca^es used and accustomed, had, and executed of the said
Manor, etc. in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas usually held at
Westminster, by and in the name of the said E. F. dema^dant against the: said
C. D. Tenent of the said Manor, etc. with the appurtenantes, who shall vouch
to warranty the said A. B. who being vouched, shall appear grati^; and vouch to
warranty the common Vouchee, who shall appear gratis; and shall enter into the
warranty, and afterward make default, to the end that a perfect common
Recovery, shall and may be of the said Manor, Messuages, and Lands; with the
Appurtenances had and prosecuted in all things, according to the usual order
and form of common Recoveries, for assurance of Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in such cases used and accustomed.

15. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of To suffer a Recovery of Lands, in
sev^ral Co^nties b^ several Writs: with double Voucher.
the first part, C. D. of the second part, and E. F. of the third part:
Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, and concluded by, and between the
said Parties, to these presents, in manner and form following: That is to say,
that the said C. D. Note he is made Tenent to the Precipe by a former Deed.
shall before the Feast of etc. now next ensuing, the Date hereof suffer the
said E. F. to pursue three of the Kings Majesty's Writs of entry, sur disseisin
en le post, against the said C. D. before his Majesty's Justices of the Common
Pleas at Westminster: By one of which said Writs of entry, the said E. F. shall
demand against the said C. D. all that Manor, etc. in the County of M. And by
one other of the said Writs, the said E. F. shall demand against the said C. D.
one Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances, lying and being in C. in the
County of S. and by the third Writ of entry, the said E. F. shall demand
against the said C. D. All that Capital Message, etc. situate lying and being
in B. in the County of H. By which three several Writs the said Manor, and
several Messuages, and Lands aforesaid, in them respectively to be contained,
shall be demanded as aforesaid, by such name and names, quantities, qualities,
and numbers of Acres, as by the said E. F. or his Council Learned in the Law
shall be thought fit. Unto which said several Writs, the said C. D. shall
appear gratis, and after such appearance and defense by him made, thereto shall
vouch to warranty the said A. B. who shall likewise appear gratis and vouch
over to warranty the common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear gratis, and
enter into the warranty and after imparle and make default; whereupon the said
E F. shall have Judgment to Recover the said several Manor, Messuages, Lands,
and Tenements before mentioned; against the said C. D. and that the said C. D.
shall recover over in value against the said A. B. and that the said A. B.
shall have Judgment to recover over in value against the common Vouchee: And it
is likewise An other Writ for London, by Writ of Right Patent.
concluded, and fully agreed by, and between the said Parties to these
presents; that the said C. D. shall likewise suffer the said E. F. to pursue
the Kings Majesty's Writ of Right Patent, against the said C. D. to be
returnable and returned before the Major and Sheriffs of the City of London, in
the Court of the Hustings of the said City, by which Writ of Right the said E.
F. shall demand against the said C. D: All those several Messuages, lying, and
being in etc. within the said City, by the name of three Messuages, and two
Gardens, with the Appurtenances of them and every of them in the Parish of St.
H. within the said City. And that at the day of the return of the said Writ the
said C. D. shall appear thereunto, and after defense made shall vouch to
warrant the said A. B. who shall likewise appear and enter into the warranty,
and shall vouch to waranty the common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear
imparse and make default, and depart in despite; whereby the said E. F. shall
have Judgment, according to the Laws and Customs of the said City, to recover
the said three Messuages, and two Gardens, against the said C. D. and for the
said C. D. t^ recover in value against the said A. B. and for the said A. B. to
recover in value against the said common Vouchee.

16. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of To suffer a Recovery with single
Voucher.
the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Witnesses, That it is covenanted,
granted, concluded, and agreed by, and between the said Parties to these
presents; that the said C. D. shall before the Feast of etc. purchase and sue
forth against him the said A. B. at the proper cost and charges of the said C.
D. one original Writ of entry, sur disseisin en le post, returnable before his
Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster; and shall
thereby demand against the said A. B. all that the Message, Lands, etc. by
such name or names, quantities and numbers of Acres, as the said C. D. or his
Council shall advise or require: Unto which said Writ to be purchased, the said
A. B. shall appear gratis, and shall vouch to warranty the common Vouchee, who
shall likewise appear gratis, and enter into the warranty and Imparle and make
default, that thereupon Judgment may be given that the said C. D. shall recover
the said Message, Lands, and Premises, with the Appurtenances against the
said A. B. and that the said A. B. shall recover in value against the common
Vouchee, so that a perfect Recovery may be thereupon had: And that the said
Parties to these presents, and the said common Vouchee, shall at the cost and
charges in the Law of the said C. D. make, do, suffer and execute, all and
every matter and thing, matters and things whatsoever, meet necessary and
expedient for the prosecution of the said Recovery, according to the Course of
Common Recoveries with single Voucher, etc.

17. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. on An other with single Voucher more
brief.
the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Witnesses, that it is covenanted,
concluded, and agreed by, and between the said Parties: o these presents, for
them and their Heirs; that before the end of the Term of the Holy Trinity, next
ensuing the Date hereof; there shall be at the only cost and charges of the
said C. D. one Recovery with single Voucher, in the nature of common Recoveries
for Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in such Cases used and accustomed, had
and executed in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas usually holden at
Westminster, of all that Manor, etc. against the said A. B. Tenent of the said
Manor, and Premises, with the Appurtenances, who therein shall vouch to
warranty the common Vouchee, who thereupon shall appear gratis, and enter into
the warranty, and afterward make default, to the end that one perfect Recovery
shall and may be of the said Manor, Messuages, and Lands, with the
Appurtenances had and prosecuted in all things, according to the usual order
and form of common Recoveries for assurance of Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, in such Cases used and accustomed, etc.

14. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and An other with single Voucher, by a
man and his Wife.
E. his wife of the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Witnesses, that the
said A. B. for diverse good causes and considerations him hereunto moving, does
for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, covenant and grant, to and
with the said C. D. his Heirs and assigns by these presents; That he the said
A. B. and E. his wife, shall and will permit and suffer the said C. D. to
prosecute one Writ of entry, sur disseisin en le post, against them the said A.
B. and E. his wife, of and for all that Manor, etc. with their and every of
their Appurtenances, by such name or names, quantities, and numbers of cr^s,
and in such sort, manner, and form, as by the said C. D. or his Council learned
in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised, or required: The which said
Writ of entry so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to be brought shall be
returnable in such Court or Courts, and before such Judges or Justices, as the
said C. D. or his Council learned in the Law, shall advise or direct before the
end of Michaelmas Term now next coming, after the Date of these presents: And
the said A. ^. and E. his wife shall thereunto appear gratis, and vouch over to
warranty the common Vouchee, who shall also appear gratis, and after imparlance
had shall make default, and depart in contempt of the Court, whereby one common
Recovery shall or may be had, or suffered against them the said A. B. and E.
his wife, of and for the said Manor, according to the usual course of common
Recoveries, for assurance of Lands, and Tenements in such Cases used and
accustomed, etc.

19. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and An other by Tenants for life, and
he in revertion in London.
E. his wife, and C. D. on the one part, and E. F. on the other part: Whereas
the said A. B. and E. his wife, in right of the said E. do now hold and are
lawfully (...), to hold and enjoy for and during the natural life of the said E
one Message, etc. The Revertion of which said Message with the Appurtenances*
from and after the decease of the said E. does lawfully belong unto the said C.
D. and the Hei^s of his Body. Now Witnesses these presents, That it is
covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by, and between the said Parties,
for themselves and their Heirs, that the said A. B. and E. his wife, and the
said C. D. shall before the Feast of etc. now next coming, permit and suffer
the said E. F. in and by a Writ of Right Patent according to the Custom of the
said City of London, in due form of Law, with single or double Voucher or
Vouchers to Recover against them the said A. B. and E. his wife, and the said
C. D. the said Message, or* Tenement, and all other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, in such manner and form as by the Council learned in the Law of
the said E. F. shall be reasonably devised, or advised, etc.

20. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. Another in London with double Voucher.
B. of London Gentleman, on the first part; and C. D. and E. F. Citizens and
Grocers of London, on the second part; and G. H. and I. K. of etc. on the third
part: Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by, and
between all the said Parties to these presents: And the said A. B. for himself,
his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, does covenant and grant, to and with
the said G. H. and I. K. and either of them their, and either of their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, by these presents; That he the said A. B. shall
and will within one month next ensuing, the Date of these presents; make and
execute, or cause to be made and executed, unto the said C. D. and E. F. a good
perfect, and absolute Estate, in the Law in Feesimple, of and in all those
Messuages, etc. lying and being in the Parish of etc. London, and also of, and
in the Revertion and Revertions of all, and singular the Premises; to the end,
intent, and purpose, that the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, may stand,
and be seized of the said Premises, and become perfect Tenants of the Freehold
thereof; so that within two months next, after the making and execution of the
said Estate, to them the said C. D. and E. F. as aforesaid; the said G. H. and
I. K. or the Survivor of them, shall and may bring, and pursue the Kings
Majesty's Writ of Right Patent, out of his Highness Court of Chancery, against
the said C. D. and E. F. or the Survivor of them, to be directed to the Major
and Sheriffs of the City of London: By which Writ of Right Patent, the said G.
H. and I. K. or the Survivor of them in the Guild Hall of the said City, before
the said Major and Sheriffs in the Court of Hustings, according to the custom
of the said City, shall demand against the said C. D. and E. F. or the Survivor
of them: The said Messuages, or Tenements, and all and singular other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, by such names or quantities, as shall be
reasonably devised, or advised, by the Council of the said G. H. and I. K. or
the Survivor of them: Unto which said Writ the said C. D. and E. F. ot the
Survivor of them, shall appear gratis, and after declaration and defense made
thereupon, shall vouch to warranty the said A. B who shall appear gratis, and
enter into the warranties, and vouch over to warranty the common Vouchee, who
shall appear gratis, and imparle, and after make default in contempt of the
Court, whereby Judgment shall be given in the said Writ, for the said G. H. and
I. K against the said C. D. and E. F. and for the said C D. and E. F. to
recover in value against the said A. B. and for the said A. B. to recover over
in value against the said common Vouchee, and Execution thereof shall be had
and sued in such sort, that a perfect Recovery with double Vouchers, shall be
had and duly executed of all and singular the Pr^mises, etc.

21. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of To suffer a Recovery of Lands in
Ancient demeasne with double Vouchers, the Tenent to the precipe being made by
Fine.
the first part, C. D. of the second part, [vide sect. 6. of this Chapter and
make such recital as is there, and add the Covenant there to levy a Fine from
A. B. to C. D. and then add as follows.] Which said Fine, so or in any other
manner to be levied and acknowledged of the Premises, between the said Parties,
shall be, and shall be construed, and taken to be, to and for the use of the
said C. D. and his Heirs, to the only intent and purpose, that the said C. D.
may stand and be full and perfect Tenent of the said Messuages. Lands, and
Premises, and every part thereof: Whereof the said Fine is agreed to be levied
as aforesaid, until a perfect common Recovery, shall and may be lawfully had,
and executed of the Messuages, Lands, and Premises, against the said C. D. and
his Heirs, according to ^he true intent and meaning of these presents, and of
the Parties thereunto: And it is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by,
and between all the Parties to these presents: That he the said E. F. at his
own proper cost and charge, shall and will before the Feast of etc. now next
ensuing the Date hereof purchase or cause to be purchased, one or more Writ or
Writs of Right Close, directed to the Judges, Bailiffs, or others, that have
Power to hold Plea in suits Real arising within the said Liberty, and shall
prosecute the said Writ or Writs, in the nature of his Majesty's Writ or Writs
of entry, sur disseisin en le post, at the common Law, after the manner and
course of common Recoveries there used and accustomed, against the said C. D.
and shall thereby demand against the said C. D. the said Messuages, Lands,
Hereditaments, and Premises, with the Appurtenances, by such names, and
quantities of Acres, as in the said Fine shall be expressed, or by any other
name, or names, and quantities of Acres, as shall be thought fit, situate and
being within the said Liberty of H. at B. Unto which Writ or Writs the said C.
D. shall appear, and shall vouch to warranty the said A. B. And the said A. B.
shall also appear upon the said Voucher in the said Court, and shall vouch to
warranty the common Vouchee; who shall appear and imparle, and afterward make
default, whereby a perfect Judgment may be had and given for the said demandant
in the said Writ, against the said C. D. for the Recovery of the said
Messuages, Lands, and Premises; and that he the said C. D. shall recover over
in value against the said A. B. and that the said A. B. shall recover over in
value against the said common Vouchee, after and according to the course of
common Recoveries in such cases used in the Court of the said Liberty of H. at
B. -- Or thus: Unto which Writ or Writs, the said C. D. shall appear, in his
proper Person, or by his Attorney or Attorneys lawfully and sufficiently
authorized, and shall vouch to warranty the said A. B. and that the said A. B.
shall appear upon the said Voucher in the said Court, in his proper Person, or
by his Attorney or Attorneys lawfully authorized in that behalf, and shall
vouch to warranty the common Vouchee, who shall appear and imparle, and
afterward make default, etc. ut supra.

22. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. on the one part, and C. D. on the
other part: To suffer^d Recovery in a Court Baron.
Witnesses, That it is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by, and
between the said Parties to these presents: That the said A. B. before the etc.
next ensuing; the Date hereof shall permit, and suffer the said C. D. to affirm
and pursue against the said A. B. in the Court Baron of the Manor of L. in the
County of M. one plaint, in the nature of a Writ of entry, sur disseisin en le
post, of all and singular that his Message, and twenty Acres of Meadow with
the Appurtenances adjoining thereunto, abbutting etc. situate lying, and being
within the said Manor of L. which said Message the said A. B. late had, in
Remainder of the said surrender of C. B. his Father, by the name of etc. [prout
en le Copie] as by the Cour^ Roll of the General Court of the said Manor,
holden at H. on the twenty seventh Day of etc. last past before the Date
hereof, amongst other things more fully, it does and may appear: And that the
said Plaint shall be affirmed, entered, and pursued of all and every the
Premises with the Appurtenances in H. within the Jurisdiction of the Court of
the said Manor of H. To and upon which Plaint to be affirmed, and entered as
aforesaid; he the said A. B. shall appear in his own proper Person, or by his
Attorney lawfully authorized in that behalf, and shall make his defense
thereunto according to Law, and vouch to warranty of and for the Premises one
I. M. who shall appear and en^er into the warranty, and after make default;
according to the manner and form of common Recoveries in Writs of entry, sur
disscisin en le post, whereby the said C. D. shall have Judgment to Recover the
said Message and twenty Acres of Meadow and other the Premises against the
said A. B. and the said A. B. to recover ov^r in value against the said I. M.
according to the manner and form of common Recoveries, for Lands and Tenements:
Which said Recovery, the said A. B. shall suffer to be executed by precept, or
warrant out of the said Court in the nature of a Writ of haber^ facseifinam,
according to the order or manner of the common Law: And it is further
covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed by, and between the said Parties;
that the said Recovery and the Estate of the Premises, to be had, obtained, and
recovered thereby, or by reason thereof, shall be to the ^se of the said C. D.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever; according to the custom of the said Manor, and
to no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever. In Witness, etc.

23. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Covenant to make assurance of Lands.
the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Witnesses, That the said A. B. for
and in consideration of, etc. does for him his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators covenant, and grant, to and with the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, by these presents: That he the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall
and will on this side, and before the Feast of etc. next ensuing the Date of
these presents, at and upon the reasonable request, and cost and charges in the
Law of the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns by Fine or Fines, with Proclamations
in due form of Law to be levied, Feeoffment or Feeoffmerts, Recovery or
Recoveries, with single or double Voucher or Vouchers; or by any such good and
sufficient means, conveyance, or assurance in the Law, as by the said C. D. his
Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council learnad in the Law, shall be in that
behalf lawfully and reasonably devised or advised, convey and assure, or cause
to be conveyed and assured unto the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns: All that
Message, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances; as also
all and singular Deeds, Evidences, Escripts, Munimens, and Writings whatsoever,
touching or concening the said Message, etc. and Premises, with the
Appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof: To have and to hold the said
Message etc. and other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, unto the said C.
D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: And that the said Fine and Fines, Recovery
and Recoveries, and the execution thereof, as likewise all conveyances and
assurances whatsoever, to be had and made according to the tenor effect and
true meaning of these presents, shall be and enure, and shall be construed,
reputed, and taken to be, and enure to the only use and behoof of the said C.
D. his Heirs and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever:
(With usual covenants from A. B. that he is lawfully seized of an Estate of
Inheritance, has power to sell, that C. D. shall enjoy, free from
Encumbrances, and for further assurances:) In Witness, etc.

24. And the said A. B. for himself his Heirs, Covenant that Tenants shall
Attorn.
Executors, and Admi^istrators, does covenant and grant, to and with the said
C. D. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents: That all and every the now
holders, and occupiers of the Premises above said, shall and will before the
Feast of etc. now next coming, atturn and become Tenants, unto the said C. D.
his Heirs or Assigns of, and for their several and respective Tenements,
whereof or wherein, they or any of them, have or has any particular Estate or
Estates in being, and which are parcel of the Premises before mentioned, to be
granted,

25. And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Covenant to produce Writings,
etc. for defense of the Title of the thing sold.
Executors, and Administrators; does covenant, grant, and agree to, and with
the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents: That if the said C. D.
his Heirs or Assigns, shall at any Time or Times hereafter, have need or
occasion to plead, show forth, or give in evidence, any Letters Patents, Deed^,
Evidences, or Writings, [whereof the said A. B. has covenanted to deliver
Copies as aforesaid, and which are not hereby bargained or sold,] of him the
said A. B. touching or concer^ing the Premises, or any part thereof; for the
maintenance or defense of the Title of the said C. D. of, in, and to the
Premises or any part thereof, or for any other just or reasonable occasion, in
any wise touching or concerning the Premises or any part thereof: That then and
so often the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns upon request in that behalf to be
made by the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, and at the cost and charges of
the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will produce and show forth, or
cause to be produced and showed forth, all and singular the said Letters,
Patents, Deeds, Evidences, and Writings, or so many of them as shall be thought
needful by the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, in any Court or Courts of
Record, or elsewhere; for the maintenance or defense of the Title of the said
C. D. of, in, ^r to the said bargained Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, of for any just or reasonable cause as aforesaid, and shall and will
permit and suffer the same there to remain, so long as the said C. D. his Heirs
or Assigns shall have occasion for the necessary use thereof.

26. And it is covenan^ed, granted, concluded, Covenant to pay back purchase
money upon Eviction of the thing
and fully agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents: And
the said A. B for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and for every
of them does covenant, grant, and agree, to and with said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns by these presents: That if it shall happen at any Time or Times
hereafter, [within the space of Ten years to be computed from the Day of the
Date hereof,] the said Message, or Tenement, and other the Premises herein
before mentioned to be bargained and sold, or any part or parcel thereof, upon
any prior or former Title, to be by any person or persons whatsoever recovered,
or otherwise lawfully evicted from the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns by due
Course of Law, or that any decree in or upon any Bill of Complaint in Court of
Equity, shall pass or be made, or that any Judgment, in any suit or Action real
or personal, shall be given against him the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns,
whereby his and their Title, of, in and unto the said Premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, may be in any wise avoided, adnulled, or defeated: That then,
and in such Case, he the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, next after
such Recovery, Eviction, Decree, or Judgment, so to be had, given, or passed as
aforesaid, shall within six Months notice thereof to be given, and reasonable
request in that behalf to be made, unto him the said A. B. his Executors, or
Administrators, pay or cause to be paid unto the said C D. his Heirs or
Assigns, so much lawful money of England, as the said Premises or any part
thereof, so happening to be Evicted, or Recovered, or whereunto the Title of
the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, so shall be in any wise avoided, annulled,
or defeated, as aforesaid, shall amount unto after the Rate of 18 Years
purchase for the yearly value thereof, according to the Rate, that the same was
valued at, upon the purchase To pay back part of the purchase money which was
paid in case the Purchaser dislike after two Years.
thereof, by him the said C. D. as aforesaid.

27. And the said A. B. for himself his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
does covenant, and grant, to and with the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents: That if the said C. D shall at any Time, within the space of
two Years next ensuing the Date hereof, dislike of the purchase of the said
Message, Lands, and Premises, and thereof within the Time aforesaid, shall
give notice in Writing unto the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators: That then he the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, and shall will within three Montths after such notice given,
and after a Reconveyance made thereof, by the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns,
unto the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, free from all Estates Charges, and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had made or suffered by the said C. D. his Heirs or
Assigns, at the cost and charges of the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, in
such manner and form, as the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their
Counsel shall reasonably advise well, and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns for their purchase of the Premises, the Sum
of etc, of lawful Money of England; at the now dwelling House of the said C. D.
situate in G. aforesaid. Provided always that if the said C. D. his Heirs or
To pay a further sum, if the Purchaser like the Premises
Assigns, shall not within the space of two Years signify as aforesaid, his
dislike of the said purchase: That then he the said C. D. his Heirs o^ Assigns,
shall and will pay or cause to be paid, unto the said A. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, the further sum of etc. of lawful Money of England, (over and above
thr moneys by him already paid) for the clear and absolute purchase of the said
Message, Lands, and Premises, within one Month after the end or determination
of the said two Years.

28. To all etc: Know ye that the said A. Covenant not to claim dower: with a
Release.
B. for and in consideration of the Sum of 500 l. of lawful Money of England,
to her in hand paid before the sealing and delivery hereof, by C. D. of etc.
who lately purchased of E. B. since deceased late Husband of the said A. B. A
Message, and Lands, lying and being etc. whereof he the said E. B. was seized
of some Estate of Inheritance, during the Coverture between him the said E. B.
and the said A. B. The Receipt whereof the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge:
Has covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed, and does by these presents;
covenant, grant, conclude, and agree, to and with the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, that the said A. B. or her Assigns, shall not at any time hereafter,
sue for challenge or demand, by Writ of Dower, or otherwise, any Dower or Title
of Dower, out of the said Message, and Lands, or any part thereof: But that
the said C. D. shall and may lawfully and quietly enjoy the said Message, and
Premises, without the let or interruption of the said A. B. or any Person or
Persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from, or under the said A. B. And the
said A. B. for the consideration aforesaid: Has remised, released, and for
ever quite claimed, and by these presents does remise, release, and for ever
quite claim unto the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, all and all manner of
Dower, and Right, and Title of Dower whatsoever, which she the said A. B. now
has, may, might, should, or of right ought to have of in and to the said
Message, and Lands, and of in or to any part or parcel thereof; So that
neither she the said A. B. nor any other for her, or in her name any manner of
Dower, or Writ, or Action of Dower, or any manner of Right, or Title of Dower,
of or in the said Message, or Lands, or any part or parcel thereof at any time
hereafter, shall, or may, have, or claim, or prosecute against the said C. D.
his Heirs or Assigns or any of them, but of, and from the same shall be utterly
barred and for ever excluded, by these presents: In Witness, etc.

29. And the said A. B. and C. D. severally, The form of covenanting, jointly
and everally.
and not jointly, nor one of them for the other; and for their several, and
respective Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and for every of them
respectively, do covenant etc. -- Or thus, And the said A. B. and C. D. for
themselves severally and respectively; that is to say, each of them for
himself, and for his several Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and for so
much as concerns, or may concern his own Act or Acts only, and not one of
them for the other, nor for the Act or Acts of the other; or of the Heirs,
Executors, or Administrators of the other does severally, and not jointly
covenant, etc. -- Or thus: And the said A. B. and C. D. severally and
respectively each one for himself only, and for his respective Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and not jointly, nor one of them for
the other; nor for the Act or Acts, Deed, or Deeds, Matter or Thing of the
other; does covenant, etc. Or thus: And the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. for
themselves severally and not jointly, nor one of them for the other, and for
their, and every of their several and respective Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators does covenant, etc.

30. An^ the said A. B for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators;
and for the said Another per Baron and feme.
E. B. his Wife does covenant, etc. Or let him covenant singly, that he and his
wife, or that his wife only shall do such an Act. And if two men and their
wives covenant severally; then it may be thus: And the said A. B. himself, and
for the said E. B. his wife, and the said C. D. for himself, and for the said
E. D. his wife, do respectively and severally, and for their several and
respective Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and not one of them for the
other, nor for the wife of the other; nor for the Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators of the other, do covenant, grant, etc. Or thus: And the said A.
B. and C. D. for themselves, and for their said wives respectively, their
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators do severally and respectively covenant,
etc. to, and with the said E. B. and G. his wife, and every of them, their, and
every of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators by these presents, etc.

CHAP. IV. Containing the Forms of Provisoes, to avoid Estates in Fee.
1. PRov^ded nevertheless and upon condition, That Proviso to make void an
^state upon non payment part of purchase Money.
it the said C. D. [the Purchaser] his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators,
shall not, and do not well and truly satisfy and pay, or cause to be well and
truly satisfied, and paid unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns, or some, or one of them, the said Sum of 387 l. of good and lawful
Money of England, being the remainder and residue of the said Sum of 2187 l.
before specified, at, or in the Church Porch of the said Parish of etc. upon
the several Days of payment hereafter mentioned, and in manner and form
following; ( viz.) The Sum of 200 l. of good and lawful Money of England in, or
upon the Tenth Day of December next ensuing, the Day of the Date of these
presents; and the Sum of 100 l. of like Moneys in, or upon the Tenth Day of
June, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God, etc. and the further Sum of
87 l. in, or upon the, etc. next ensuing, being the residue of the said Sum of
387 l. That then, and from thenceforth this present Deed of Bargain and Sale,
and every Matter and Thing therein contained, shall be void, and of n^ne
effect: And that then, and from thenceforth it shall, and may be lawful to, and
for the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns into the said Premises, with the
Appurtenances wholly to reenter, and the same to have repossesse and enjoy, as
in his or their former Estate; any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

2. Provided always, and upon condition; That Proviso to make void an estate
upon discharge of a Suerty.
if the said A. B. his Executors, or Administrators shall, and do well and
truly content, satisfy and pay, or cause to be contented, satisfied, and
paid, all, and every such Sum and Sums of Money, which the said C. D. as
suerty, and together with, and for the said A. B. is, and stands bounden to
pay unto any Person or Persons whatsoever, either by Obligation, Bills,
Specialty, Promise, or otherwise howsoever, according to the purpose and true
meaning of such Specialties or Engagements: And shall, and do at all times
hereafter, well, and sufficiently discharge, and save, and keep harmless, and
indempnified the said C. D. his Executors, and Administrators, and his and
their Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands and Tenements, and every of them, of, and
from the said Suertiship; that then, and from thenceforth this present Deed,
and every matter and thing therein contained, shall be void, and of none
effect; And that then, and from thenceforth it shall, and may be lawful to, and
for the said A. B. his Heirs, o^ Assigns into the said Premises, with the
Appurtenances wholly to reenter, and the same to have again reposs^sse and
enjoy, as in his or their former Estate: Any thing herein before contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

3. This Inden^ure, etc. Between A. B. of the one An other to secure from
suertiship.
part, and C. D. of the other part: Whereas the said C. D. at the request, and
for the only and proper Debt of the said A. B. is, and stands bound together
with, and for the said A. B. in, and by several Bonds and other Writings
obligatory in a Schedule hereunto annexed; particularly mentioned for several
Sums of Money to several Persons in the said Schedule likewise mentioned. Now
witnesses these pres^nts; That the said A. B. for the better security of, and
saving harmless, and indempnified the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and his, and their Lands, Goods, and Chattels of, and from the
said several Engagements; and for their good Causes and Consideration^, has
etc. [let there be a Feoffment, Bargain and Sale, etc.] Provided always, and
upon condition; That if the Proviso
said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators shall, and do well, and
truly satisfy and pay, or cause to be well and ttuly satisfied and paid, all,
and every the said Sum and Sums of Money; for the payment whereof, he the said
C. D. is, and stands bounden with, and for the said A. B. as aforesaid, in
the said Schedule mentioned, according to the several eff^cts and purports of
the said Writings obligatory; and deliver, or cause to be delivered up unto the
said C. D. hi^ Executors, or Administrators all, and every the seve^al Bonds
and Writings obligatory to be cancelled, or else sufficient Releases and
Discharges touching or concerning the same; and that within one Month after the
several, and respective Sums of Money therein mentioned, shall severally* and
respectively, become due and payable: That then, and from thenceforth, etc. as
in the former precedent. Sect. 2.

4. Provided always; and it is the true intent Proviso to make void a Rent
charge granted in Fee upon payment of money.
and meaning of the said parties to these presents; That in case the said A. B.
his Hei^s, or Assigns, or any of them shall be minded or determined to purchase
out, redeem, or discharge his said Lands and Tenements of, and from the said
Rent charge; and shall by the space of six Months before any Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel, give knowledge and notice of such his mind and
determination unto the Person or Persons of the said C. D. his Heirs, or
Assigns, or any of them; or shall by the said space, openly leave to, or for
the said C. D. his Heirs or Assigns, at the now dwelling House of the said C.
D. any Writing or Note, signifying such his determination and purpose: And also
shall, and do at the Feast of the Annunciation next following, after such
Notice given, or left as aforesaid; pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C.
D. his Heirs, or Assigns, the full Sum of etc. of lawful Moneys of England;
together with all the Arerages of the said Annuity or Rentcharge, (if any shall
be) that shall be behind, or unpaid, on the said Feast of Annunciation, at one
entire payment; that then, and immediately from, and after the payment of the
said Sum of etc. and Arrerages aforesaid (if any shall be) the said Annuity, or
Annual Rentcharge of etc. by the year, and these presents; and every Covenant,
Article, and thing therein contained, shall cease, determine, and be utterly
void: Any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

5. Provided always; And it is covenanted, concluded, a part upon money paid
Another to abate in.
and agreed by, and between the said Parties to these presents: That if the
said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, upon six Months
warning thereof in writing, under his, or their hands (before hand to be given)
by the said* A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, unto the
said C. D his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall, and will at,
or upon any first Day of May, or Feast of All Satnts, at, or in the place
aforesaid; pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, the Sum of 100 l. of lawful Moneys of England, over
and besides the said Rentcharge, or Annual Sum of etc. and the Arrears
thereof, (if any then shall be) That then, and from thenceforth, from, and
after the said payment or payments, so made as aforesaid, of every of the said
Sum or Sums of 100 l. with Arrears of the said Rent (if any shall be) to be
Endorsed upon both parts of these I^dentures, and subscribed by the said C. D.
his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, for every Hundred Pounds that shall be
paid as aforesaid (over, and besides the said Arrears if any shall be) the full
and entire Sum of 100 l* of the said 500 l. yearly Rent ^r Annunity, hereby
granted as aforesaid, shall cease and be determined: Any thing herein before
contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

CHAP. V. vid. chap. 7 the forms of limitations of uses.
Containing the Several Ways, and Forms of Introducing Uses, upon Fines,
Recoveries, and other Conveyances.
1. TH^s Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and Upon a Fine to be levied.
E. his wife on the one part; and C. D. and E. F. on the other part.
Witnesses; That for the Conveying, Assuring, and sure making of all, and
singular, the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter in these
presents mentioned, to the uses, in^ents, and purposes hereafter, in, and by
these presents expressed, limited, and declared: It is agreed and concluded
by, and between the said parties to these presents. And the said A. B. for
himself, his Heirs, Execut^rs, and Administrators, does covenant, grant, and
^gree to, and with the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents; That he the said A. B. and
E. his wife, shall, and will at the proper costs and charges of the said A. B.
before the Feast of etc. next ensuing, the Date hereof, in due form of Law,
acknowledge, and levy before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas
at Westminster; one Fine Sur cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. with
Proclamations unto the said C. D. and E. F. of all the Message or Tenement,
etc. [and here set down particularly the Messuages and Lands to pass] by
certain Name or Names, and quantities of Acres in the said Fine to be
contained: And that the said Fine so to be had and levied as aforesaid; Several
forms to begin the limitation of uses.
or in what manner or form soever the same shall be had, shall be, and inure;
and the said C. D. and E. F. shall by force thereof, stand, and be seized of
the said Message and Lands and all other the Premises, with the Appurtenances
to the uses, inte^ts, and purposes; and upon the Conditions and Limitations
hereafter in these presents limited, expressed, and declared; and to no other
u^e, intent, or purpose whatsoever: That is to say, etc.

2. And it is covenanted, concluded, and fully agreed Or thus,
by, and between all the said Parties to these presents: And they, and every of
them, do hereby ex^ress, signify, and declare; That the said Fine so to be
levied as aforesaid, and all, and every other Fi^e and Fines hereafter to be
had and levied of the Premises, or any part thereof between the said Parties or
any of them, before the said Feast of etc. shall be, and inure; and the said C.
D. and E. F. and their and one of their Heits immediately, from and after the
said Fine, as also any other Fine thereof to be levied as aforesaid, shall
stand and be seized of the Premises, to the only uses, intents, and purposes
hereafter mentioned: viz. as to the said Message, or Tenement, and Lands, with
the Appurtenances, now in the occupation of etc. To the use and behoof of etc.
And as to the said Message, or Tenement, and Lands, now in the occpation of
etc. To the use and behoof of etc.

3. And it is covenanted, granted, concluded, Or thus,
and agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents; for
themselves their Heirs and Assigns: That the said Fine to be acknowledged and
levied as aforesaid; of the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
aforesaid, and the execution thereof; and the Estate, Right, Title, Interest,
and Possession of them the said C. D. and E. F. and of the Heirs of such of
them, to whom the inheritance of or in the Premises, shall be limited in, and
by the said intended Fine, shall be, and shall for ever be adjudged, deemed,
and taken to be: And the said C. D. and E. F. and the Heirs of such of them, to
whom the inheritance of the Premises shall be limited, in or by the said
intended Fine, and the surviver of them, shall stand and be seized of, and in
all and singular the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and
of every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances, to the uses, intents,
and purposes, and under and upon the Provises, limittations, conditions, and
agreements hereafter, in these presents mentioned and contained: That is to
say, of, for, and concerning, all that Message, and Lands, etc. with the
Appurtenances in M. aforesaid, in the tenure or occupation of etc. being parcel
of the said Premises, whereof the said Fine before by these presents, is
covenanted to be levied as aforesaid, by the said A. B. and of the Revertion
and Revertions, Remainder and Remainders of the same: To the use and behoof of
etc. And of, for, and concerning all, and every the said other Messuages,
Lands, etc. with their and every of their Appurtenances, whereof the said Fine
is covenanted to be levied as aforesaid, and the Revertion and Revertions,
Remainder and Remainders thereof, to the use and behoof of etc.

4. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. his wife of the one part, and C.
D. and E. F. Upon a Fine already levied.
of the other part: Whereas the said A. B. and E. his wife, have in the Term of
St. Hillary last past, before the Date of these presents, levied one Fine in
due form of Law unto the said C. D. and E. F. of all that Manor etc. The which
Fine was levied by such names number of Acres and other Particulers, as are in
the said Fine contained, as by the said Fine, reference being theteunto had,
more fully it does and may appear. Now Witnesses these presents, and it is
hereby declared by, and between all the Parties hereunto: That the true intent,
and meaning of the levying of the said Fine, at the time of the levying thereof
was, and is to be taken to be, to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter
following: That is to say, to the use of etc.

5. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Upon a Recovery to be had with double
Vouch^r.
the first part, C. D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H. and I. K. of the
third part: Whereas the said A. B. by one Indenture of bargain and sale, Dated
the first day of this instant January, and enrolled in his Majesty's High Court
of Chancery, the twentieth Day of the same Month, (made between the said A. B.
on the one part, and the said C. D. and E. F. on the other part:) Has granted,
bargained, and sold, to the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs; all that
Manor, etc. and the Revertion and Revertions, Remainder and Remainders
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof: To have and to hold the said
Manor, etc. and all and every the said Premises, with the Appurtenances, unto
the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns for ever; to the only proper
and absolute use and behoof of the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns
for ever: To the end, intent, and purpose, that the said C. D. and E. F. might
thereby, and by force of the Statute of transferring uses into possession,
become Tenants of the Freehold of all and every the Premises, that a good and
perfect common Recovery with double Vouch^rs, may be thereof had and executed:
Now Witnesses this present Indenture: And it is covenanted, concluded, and
fully agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents, for them
and every of them, their and every of their Heirs: That they the said C. D. and
E. F. shall and will permit and suffer the said G. H. and I. K. before the
Feast of etc. next ensuing the Date of these presents, by Writ or Writs of
entry, sur disseisin en le post, to be sued forth and obtained out of the Kings
Majesty's High Court of Chancery, and returnable before the Justices of our
Sovereign Lord of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in the Names of the
said G. H. and I. K. demandants against the said C. D. and E. F. Tenants or the
survivor of them, to Recover to them the said G. H. and I. K. and their Heirs
in due form of Law, according to the usual form of common Recoveries, for
assurance of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, against the said C. D. and E.
F. the said Manor and Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances,
by some name or names in the said Writ and Recovery to be contained: In and to
which said Writ, the said C. D. and E. F. shall gratis appear in their proper
Persons, and after defense made, shall vouch to warranty the said A. B. who
shall likewise thereupon appear and enter into the warranty, and vouch over the
common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear and enter into the warranty and after
make default, to the end that a perfect common Recovery may be had and
executed, according to the course of common Recoveries, of the Manor, etc. and
all and every other the Premises, with the Appurtenances.

6. Which Recovery so as aforesaid, or in any The Uses.
other form to be, had, suffered, and executed; and all other Recoveries to be
had, suffered, and executed by, and between the said Parties, or any of them of
the said Manor, and Premises, before the said Feast of etc. and the Recoverors
in and to the said Recovery and Recoveries, shall immediately from and after
the suffering, and executing thereof, stand and be seized of the said Manor,
and Premises, to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter specified,
expressed, and declared, and to none other use, intent, or purpose whatsover:
That is to say, to the use of etc. -- Or thus: And it is covenanted, granted,
concluded, and agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents,
that the said Recovery so to be had, and executed as aforesaid and every common
Recovery with Vouchers, before the said Feast of etc. to be suffered by the
said C. D. and E. F. or the survivor of them of the said Manor and Premises,
and of every or any part thereof; by what names or additions soever, the same
shall fortune to be had or suffered, immediately from and after the Execution
thereof shall be, and the Person or Persons, who shall thereby Recover the
Premises, or any part thereof; and his or their Heirs, after such Execution,
shall stand and be seized of the said Manor, and Premises, or such part
thereof, as shall be recovered as aforesaid, to the use of etc. -- Or thus: And
it is covenanted, granted, and concluded by, and between all the said Parties
to these presents: And either of the said Parties does by these presents;
covenant, grant, conclude, and agree to, and with the other, in manner and form
following: That the said G H. and K. immediately from and after the said
Recovery, had and Executed as aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of, and in
the said Manor, etc. and other the Premises with the Appurtenances: And that
the said Recovery, and the force, effect, and execution of the Premises, or any
part thereof, by and between the said Parties before the Feast of etc. shall
be, and shall be adjudged, deemed, reputed, and taken to be to the uses,
intents, and purposes, in these presents mentioned and declared, viz. To the
use of etc

7. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. Upon a Recovery already had with
double Voucher.
B. on the first part, C. D. and E F. on the second part, and G. H. and I. K.
on the third part: Whereas the said A. B. by one Indenture of bargain and sale
bearing Date, etc. [vide Sect. 5. and recite it as there.] And whereas
afterward, That is to say in the Term of St. Hillary, then next following the
said G. H. and I. K. did pursue out of the said Court of Chancery, one Writ of
entry, sur disseisin en le post, against the said C. D. and E. F. returnable
before the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
whereby the said G H. and I. K did demand against the said C. D. and E. F. the
said Manor, etc. [as in the Recoverie,] to which Writ the said C. D. and E. F.
did appear in proper Person, and after defense made, did vouch to warranty the
said A. B. who did likewise appear in Person, and entered into the warranty, and
vouched over the common Vouchee, who did likewise appear in person, and entered
into the warranty and after make default, whereby several Judgments were had
according to the course of common Recoveries used in the said Court of Common
Pleas.

8 Now witnesses this present Indenture, And The uses.
it is hereby declared and expressed, that the true intent and meaning of all
the said Parties to these presents, before and at the Time of suffering the
said Recovery was, and ever since has been, and yet is, that the said Recovery
and the whole execution thereof should, and for ever hereafter shall be, and
inure: And the said Recoverors and their Heirs, shall for ever hereafter stand
and be seized of and in the said Manor, etc. and all and every the Premises
before mentioned, with the Appurtenances, To the use of etc

9. And the said A B. C. D. and E. F. for Release of Errors sometimes used.
them and every of them, their and every of their Heirs; do, and for every of
them does by these presents, remise, and for ever quit claim unto G. H. and I.
K. and their Heirs, and all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, that shall
or lawfully may have any Estate, Title, Interest, or demand, of, into, or out
of the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, by force or Virtue of the said
Recovery and the execution thereof; and of these presents, or any limitation,
matter, or thing herein contained: All and every Error and Errors, Writ and
Writs of Error, misprisions, misentries, and other cause and causes of Writ or
Writs of Error, which they the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. or any of them, their
or any of their Heirs, have or hereafter may, or ought to have, for or by
reason of any Error or Errors, misprision, misentry, or other defect whatsoever
in or about or any way touching, or concerning the said Recovery, or any
proceeding or prosecution thereof

10. This Indenture made, Between A. B. and Another upon Recovery with double
Voucher, already had
E. his wife of the first part, C. D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H.
and I. K. on the third part: Whereas the said A. B. and E. his wife did in
Michaelmas Term last, levy and acknowledge one Fine sur cognizance de droit come
c^o, etc. in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, unto the said C. D. and
E. F. of all that Message, and Lands, etc. to the intent and purpose, that the
said C. D. and E. F. might be Tenants of the Frehold of the said Message,
Lands, and Premises; and that a Writ of entry, sur disseisin en le post, might
be brought and pr^secuted against them, to the end that a common Recovery might
be had of all and singular the said Message, Lands, and Premises, according
to the form of common Recoveries had, used and accustomed: And whereas a common
Recovery has been sithence had in and by a writ of entry, sur disseisin en le
post, of the Premises against the said C. D. and E. F. by the said G. H. and
I. K. Wherein the said C. D. and E. F. did vouch to wa^ranty the said A. B. who
thereupon entered into the warranty, and over to warranty the common Vouchee,
who likewise appeared and entered into the warranty and after made default,
whereby several Judgments were had, according to the use of common Recoveries
with double Vouchers, for assurance of Lands and Tenements, which Recovery has
been executed by Writ of habere facias scisinam, as by the Records of the said
Court, it does and may appear.

11. Now witnesses this present Indenture, The Uses.
That the true intent and meaning of the said A. B. and of the said Recoverors,
and of all the Parties to the said Recovery, and to these presents, and of
every of them, before and at the Time or Times of suffering the said Recovery,
for, touching, and concerning the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and every of them, whereof the said Recovery was suffered and
had, was and now is: That the said Recovery, should and shall be, and inure;
and shall be construed, adjudged, deemed, and taken to be, and inure: And that
the said Recoverors, and every of them and their Heirs, and all and every other
Person or Persons, and his and their Heirs, who then were, or now are, or
hereafter shall be seized of the said Message, Lands, and Premises, or of any
part thereof by force of the said Recovery, should and shall stand and be
seized of the same, and every part and parcel thereof; to the uses, purposes,
and intents, and under the Provisoes, conditions, and limitations hereafter, in
these presents expressed, limited, and declared; and to no other use, intent,
or purpose whatsover: That is to say, etc.

12. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. Upon a Recovery with single
Voucher to be had.
of the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Witnesses, That it is
covenanted, concluded, and agreed by, and between the said Parties to these
presents: And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, does covenant, grant, and agree to, and with the said C. D. and
E. F. and their Heirs, by these presents: That he the said A. B. shall permit
and suffer the said C. D. and E. F. to prosecu^e one Writ of entry, sur
disseisin en le post, against the said A. B. of and for all that Manor, etc.
with their and every of their Appur^enances, by such name and names, quantities
and numbers of Acres, and in such manner and form as shall be thought fit and
expedient. Unto and in which Writ the said A. B. shall appear gratis, and vouch
over to warranty the common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear gratis, and
enter into the warranty, and make default in contempt of the Court, whereby one
Recovery shall or may be had or suffered against the said A. B. of the said
Manor, etc. according to the usual course of common Recoveries for assurance
of Lands, and Tenements. And it is further concluded, and agreed by, and
between the said Parties, to these presents, That the said Recovery shall be
had and suffered as aforesaid, before the end of Michaelmas Term next ensuing
the Date hereof: And that the said Recovery, and the Execution thereof, and the
full force and effect of the same shall be and inure: And that the said
Recoverors and their Heirs, immediately after the same, and the Execution
thereof had and made, shall stand and be seized of the said Manor, Messuages,
Lands, and Premises, to the uses, intents, and purposes herein after
mentioned: That is to say, to the use of etc.

13. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the Upon Recovery with single
Voucher already had.
one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Whereas the said C. D. and E.
F. did in Michaclmas Term last past before the Date hereof, upon a Writ of
entry, sur disseisin en le post, before his Majesty's Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, Recover by common Recovery against the said A. B.
one Manor, etc. [setting down the Particulars,] and the Revertion and
Revertions, Remainder and Remainders of all and singular the Premises, and of
all and every part and parcel thereof; by the name of etc. [prout en le
Recovery,] in which Recovery the said A. B. did vouch to warranty the common
Vouchee whereby a good and perfect common Recovery, with single Voucher of the
said Manor, Messuages, Lands, and Premises, according to the usual form of
Common Recoveries, was had and after executed against the said A. B. and his
Heirs; as by the Record thereof, remaining in the said Court of Common Pleas,
more at large, it does and may appear.

14. Now witnesses this present Indenture: And Uses.
it is hereby declared, that the true intent and meaning of all the Parties to
the said Recovery, and to these presents, was before and at the time of the
said Recoverie, and yet is, for touching and concerning the said Manor,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Premises, and every part thereof, whereof the
said Recovery, was had and executed as aforesaid; that the said Recovery, and
the execution thereof, should and shall be, and inure; and be construed,
adjudged, and taken to be, and inure; and that the said Recoverors and their
Heirs, should and shall stand and be seized of the said Manor, Messuages,
Lands, Hereditaments, and Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, with
the Appurtenances, to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter, in these
presents set down, expressed, and declared; and to no other use, intent, or
purpose whatsoever: That Upon a Fine and Recovery (with double Voucher,) to be
had of several things, viz. the Fine of one, and the Recovery of an other.
is to say to the use of etc.

15. This Indenture tripartite, made etc. Between A. B. and E. his wife of the
first part, C. D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H. and I. K. of the
third part: Witnesses, That the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators, does covenant and grant to, and with the said G. H. and I.
K. their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, by these presents; that he the
said A. B. and E. his wife, shall and will on this side, and before the Feast
of etc. acknowledge and levy in due form of Law, before his Majesty's Justices
of the Common Pleas at Westminster, one Fine, sur cognizance de droit come ceo,
etc. with Proclamations unto the said G. H. and I. K. of all that his Manor of
M. etc. by such name or names, quantities and numbers of Acres, as they the
said G. H. or I. K. or either of them, their or either of their Council learned
in the Law, shall reasonably devise, advise, or require: And whereas the said
A. B. has by Indemure of bargain and sale bearing Date the etc. last past
before the Date hereof; and enrolled in his Majesty's High Court of Chancery,
the 20th Day of the same month of etc. made between the said A. B. of the one
part, C. D. and E. F. of the other part, for the consideration therein
mentioned, granted, bargained, and sold, unto the said C. D. and E. F. their
Heirs and Assigns; all that Message, or Tenement, and Lands in B. etc. and the
Revertion and Revertions, Remainder and Remainders thereof: To have and to hold
the said Message, Lands, and Premises, and every part thereof, with the
Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns for ever;
which said bargain and sale was had and made, to them the said C. D. and E. F.
as aforesaid; to and for the only end, intent, and purpose, that the said C. D.
and E. F. might be the Tenent thereof to a Precipe, against whom the Recovery
hereafter mentioned, in manner and form following might be had. Now this
Iudenture further witnesses, that it is covenanted, concluded, and fully
agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents; for them and
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, that before the end of Trinity
Term now next ensuing, there shall be one Recovery, (in the nature of a common
Recovery, for Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in such cases used and
accustomed,) and executed in his Majesty's said Court of Common Pleas; by or in
the name of the said G. H. and I K. demandant against the said C. D. and E. F.
Tenants of the said Message, and Lands, with the Appurtenances, who shall
vouch to warranty the said A. B. who being vouched shall appear gratis, and
enter into the warranty, and vouch over the common Vouchee, and the said common
Vouchee shall thereupon appear also, and enter into the warranty, and
afterward make default; to the end that one perfect common Recovery, shall and
may be of the said Messuages, and Lands, with the Appurtenances, had and
prosecuted in all things, according to the usual order and form of common
Recoveries in such cases used.

16. And it is covenanted, concluded, and fully The Uses.
agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents respectively,
for them and every of them, their and every of their Heirs; that the said Fine
and Recovery, so to be had, levied, suffered, and executed as aforesaid, as
touching and concerning all and every the said Manor or Lordship of M. and the
said Message or Tenement in B. and the several Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments before mentioned; whereof the said Fine and Recovery were
severally and respectively had, levied, and suffered as aforesaid: And all and
every other Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries to be had of the said
Manor, and other the Premises thereunto belonging, and of the said Message
and Lands, and other the Premises, before mentioned to belong thereunto, by
and between the said Parties or any of them, before the end of the said Term of
the Holy Trinity, shall be and inure; and as well the said Cognizees as the
said Recoverors, and their several and respective Heirs, shall severally and
respectively stand and be seized of all and every the Premises; to the uses,
intents, and purposes; and under the Provisoes, conditions, and limitations
herein, after mentioned and expressed, and to no other use, Another upon a Fine
and Recovery of several things already had.
intent, or purpose whatsoever.

17. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. and E. his wife of the first part, C.
D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H. and I. K. of the third part: Whereas
in the Term of etc. last past a Fine, ^ur cognizancr de droit come cco, etc.
with Proclamations according to the Statute in such case made and provided; was
levied between the said C. D. and E. F. plaintiffs, and the said A. B. and E.
his wife deforciants of the Manor of etc. by the name of etc. And whereas the
said G. H. and I. K. did in the said Term by Writ of entry, sur disseisin en le
post, recover against the said C. D. and E. F. one Message in B. etc. by the
name of etc. in which Recovery the said C. D. and E. F. did vouch to warranty
the said A. B. who thereupon entered into the warranty, and vouched over the
common Vouchee; proceeding in all things therein, according to the form and
order of common Recoveries for assurance of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
used and accustomed, as in and by the several Records of the said Fine and
Recovery, remaining in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, reference being
thereunto had, more fully and at large it does and may appear. Now witnesses
this present Indenture, that the true intent and meaning of the said A. B. and
E. his wife, and of the Cognizees and Parties to the said Fine; and also of the
said Recoverors, and Parties to the said Recovery, and of all and every Parties
to these presents; before and at the several and respective Time and Times, of
the acknowledging and levying of the said Fine, and of the suffering of the
said Recovery, for and concerning the said Manor, Lordship, Message, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and Premises, whereof the said Fine and Recovery
were severally and respectively levied, suffered, and had, as aforesaid,
always was, and yet is; that as well the said Fine as Recovery, and all and
every Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries of the said Manor of M. etc. and
Message and Lands in B. and all other the Premises with the Apurtenances,
respectively at any Time formerly had, levied, suffered, or executed, whereunto
the said A. B. and E. his wife, or the said A. B. singly was and is in any wise
Party, and all and every the executions of the same, should and shall be and
inure; to the uses, intents, and purposes; and under the provisions,
conditions, and limitations hereafter, in these presents expressed, limited,
and declared: And that the said Recoverors, and either of them and all the
Parties to the said Recovery, and their Heirs; and all other Person and
Persons, and his and their Heirs, who then were and now are, or hereafter shall
be seized of the said Message, Lands, Hereditaments, and Premises contained
in the said Recovery, should and shall stand and be seized thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof with the Appurtenances; to the uses, purposes,
and intents hereafter expressed: And that the Cognizees of the said Fine and
either of them, and all the Parties to the said Fine, and the Heirs of them,
and every of them, and all and every other Person or Persons, and his and their
Heirs, who at the Time of levying of the said Fine, were or now are, or
herafter shall be seized of the said Manor, etc. Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and Premises comprised in the said Fine and every of them,
should and shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof with the Appurtenances, to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter,
in these presents expressed; and to no other use, intent, or purpose
whatsoever: That is to say, To the use and behoof of etc.

18. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Upon a Fine Recovery and other
conveiances to be bad.
the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Winesseth, That the said
A. B. in consideration etc. [set down the grounds and reasons of the
settlement, vide Chap. 2.] and for other good causes and considerations him
hereunto moving, does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, to and with the said C. D. and E. F. and either of them, their
and either of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators and every of them by
these presents, in manner and form following: That is to say, That he the said
A. B. or his Heirs, before the Feast of etc. now next ensuing; shall and will
at the cost and charges of him the said A B. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, sufficiently by Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, or other
sufficient conveyances and assurances in the Law, convey and assure unto the
said C. D. and E F. and to their Heirs or the survivors of them and his Heirs:
All that his Manor, etc.

19. And it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and agreed by, and
between the Uses.
Parties to these presents, and their Heirs: That the said Fine or Fines,
Recovery or Recoveries, and other good and sufficient conveyances and
assurances, to be had, made, levied, suffered, and executed by, the said A. B.
or his Heirs to the persons aforesaid, ot to the surviver of them, his or their
Heirs, before the said Feast of etc. shall be and shall be deemed, construed,
reputed, and taken to be, to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter
mentioned, and to no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever: That is to say,
To the use and behoof of etc. -- Or thus, and it is covenanted, granted,
concluded, and agreed by, and between the said Parties to these presents; for
themselves and their Heirs respectively: That the said Fines, Feeoffments,
Conveyances, and Assurances, for touching, or concerning the said Manor, etc.
to be made, levied, suffered, and executed as aforesaid, shall be; and the
person or persons to whom the said conveyance and Estates shall be made and
executed as aforesaid, and his or their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of the
Premises and every part thereof: To the uses, intents, and purposes, hereafter
mentioned, and to none other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever: That is to say
to the use of etc. -- Or thus, And shorter Co^enant
it is covenanted, etc. That he the said A. B. or his Heirs, shall and will
within the space of etc. next ensuing the Date hereof, by good and sufficient
conveiance and assurance in the Law, sufficiently convey and assure unto the
said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, or to the survivor of them and his Heirs,
All that his Manor, etc. And it is covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed
by, and between the said Parties to these presents; for them and their Heirs
respectively: That the said conveiance and assurances, so to be had and made as
aforesaid, shall be and enure: And the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs
immediately, from and after such conveiance and assurance so had and made,
shall stand and be seized of, and in all and singular the said Manor, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments herein before mentioned, to be conveyed with their
and every of their Appurtenances, to the uses, intents, and purposes hereafter,
in these presents set down, expressed, and declared, and (...) no other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever: ^^at is to say: To the use of etc.

20. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Upon a Fcoffment
the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Witnesses, That the said
A. B. for and in consideration of a Marriage, etc. and for settlement in name
and blood, etc. [vide Chap. 2] Has granted, aliened, enfeoffed, released, and
confirmed, and does by these presents, grant, alien, enfeoffe, release, and
confirm unto the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs, and Assigns for ever. All
that Manor, etc. And the Revertion and Revertions, Remainders and Remainders
thereof, and of every part thereof, and all and every the Rent or Rents
thereupon reserved, due or payable, or upon any part thereof: To have and to
hold the said Manors, etc. unto the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the several uses, intents, and purposes, and under the
several provisoes, conditions, and limitations hereafter, in and by these
presents, expressed, limited, and declared, and to or for none other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever: That is to say, etc. Upon a covenant to stand
seized, etc.


21. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the one part; and C. B. one of the
Sons of the said A. B. of the other part: Witnesses, That whereas the said A.
B. is lawfully seized in his (...)esne as of Fee, of and in all that Message,
etc. [setting down the particulars.] Now the said A. B. for and in
consideration of the natural Love and Affection, which he the said A. B. has
and bears unto his said Son C. B. and for the advancement and maintenance of
the said C. B. and preferment to his Heirs, and for the establishing and
settling of the said Message, Lands, and Premises, according to the true intent
and meaning of the said A. B. in such manner and form as is hereafter
expressed; and for diverse good causes, and considerations, him the said A. B.
hereunto moving: Does for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
covenant and grant, to and with the ^^id C. B. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrato^ ot That he the said A. B. and his Heirs; and all and every other
person or persons, and his and their Heirs, which now stand and be seized of,
and in the said Message, Lands, and Premises, and of every or any part or
parcel thereof; shall from henceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every
or any part or parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of the said A. B. for and
during the Term of his natural Life, and from and after his decease, to the use
and behoof of the Heirs Males of the Body, of the said C. B. lawfully to be
begotten, and for want of such Issue to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the
said C. B. lawfully to be begotten, and for want of such Issue to the use and
behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

22. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Upon a barg. and sale for six
months, and a grant and release of the Revertion.
the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Witnesses, That the said
A. B. for and in consideration of the sum of 5 shillings of lawful money of
England, to him in hand paid before, the sealing and delivery hereof, the
Receipt whereof he the said A. B etc. Has granted, bargained, and sold; and by
these presents, does grant, bargain, and sell unto the said C. D. and E. F.
their Executors, and Assigns, all that Message, etc. And the Revertion and
Revertious, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every part or parcel
thereof, together with all Rents and services reserved, upon all or any lease
or leases of the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof. To have or to hold
the said Message, or Tenement, etc. and all and singular other the Premises
herein before mentioned and intended, to be hereby granted, bargained, and
sold, with their and every of their Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. and E.
F. their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the Day of the Date
hereof, for and during the full end and term of 6 Months from thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: To the end that by virtue of these
presents, and of the Statute of transferring uses into possession the said C.
D. and E. F. may be in the actual possession of the Premises, and be enabled
to take and accept of a grant, and release of the same, to them the said C. D.
and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns for ever. -- Or thus, To the end that the
said C. D. and E. F. may by virtue hereof, and of the Statute of transferring
uses into possession, be in the actual possession of the said Message, Lands,
and Premises, and be enabled to take and except of a grant, and release of a
Revertion and inheritance thereof, to them and their Heirs: In Witness, etc.

23. This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. The release and grant of the
Revertion
of the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Whereas the said A. B.
by Indenture bearing Date the etc. Day of this instant January, [it must bear
Date a Day or two after the Lease,] for the consideration therein mentioned,
did grant, bargain, and sell, unto the said C. D. and E. F. All that Message,
etc. And the Revertion and Revertions, Remainder and Remainders of the same,
and of every part or parcel thereof, and all Rents and Services reserved upon
any Lease or Leases made of the Premises, and every part or parcel thereof: To
have and to hold the said Message or Tenements, Lands, and Premises, and
every part or parcel thereof with the Appurtenances unto the said C. D. and E.
F. their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the Date of the said
recited Indenture, for and during the Term of six Months from thence next
ensuing and fully to be complete and ended: By Virtue whereof, and of the
Statute of transferring uses into Possession; the said C. D. and E. F. were,
and yet are in the actual Possession of the Premises; as by the said recited
Indenture, Relation being thereunto had more fully and at large it does and may
appear: Now Witnesses this present Indenture, That the said A. B. for and in
consideration etc. vide cap. 2.
and for diverse good causes and considerations him hereunto moving: Has
granted, released, and confirmed, and does by these presents, grant, release,
and confirm unto the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns; all that the
a^oresaid Message, or Tenement, Lands, Hereditaments, and Premises, with the
Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, and all the Estate, Right,
Title, Interest, claim, and demand whatsoever, of him the said A. B. of, in,
and to the Premises, and every part and parcel thereof: And the Revertion and
Revertions, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof: And all Rent and Rents, and other services reserved or payable, upon
any demise or demises, Lease or Leases, of the Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof: To have Uses.
and to hold the said Message, or Tenement, Lands, and Hereditaments, and
Premises, and every part thereof with the Appurtenances, mentioned or intended,
to be hereby granted, released, and confirmed, unto the said C. D. and E. F.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever: To the several uses, intents, and purposes
hereafter, in these presents mentioned and declared, and to no other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever: That is to say, To the use and behoof of ^

24. This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Upon a Feoffment past and unexecuted.
the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the other part: Whereas the said A. B.
did by his Indenture of Feoffment bearing Date the etc. made between the said
A. B. of the one part, and the said C. D. and E. F. of the other part; give,
grant, alien, enfeoste, and confirm unto the said C. D. and E. F. and their
Heirs; All that Message, or Tenement, and Lands, etc. and the Revertion and
Revertions, Remainder and Remainders thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof: And all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Property,
Claim, and Demand whatsoever; of him the said A. B. of, in and to the same, and
of, in and to every part and parcel thereof. To have and to hold the said
Message, or Tenement, Lands, Hereditaments; and all and every other the
Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. and
E. F. their Heirs and Assigns for ever: Now witnesses this present Indenture,
And it is hereby declared, that the true intent and meaning of the said A. B.
and of all the Parties to the said recited Indenture or deed of Feoffment, and
to these presents was and yet is, that the said Deed of Feoffment, and the full
force effect, and execution thereof, should and shall be and inure of for
touching and concerning all and every the said Message, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments with their and every of their Appurtenances; to the uses,
intents, and purposes, and under the provisoes, conditions, and limitations
hereafter mentioned and expressed. And the said Feoffees, their Heirs and
Assigns, should and shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof with the Appurtenances; to the same uses, intents, and purposes;
and to no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever: That is to say, To the use
of etc.

CHAP. VI. The several Forms of indorsing of Livery made, and of Attornements.
1. Memorandum, That this fifteenth Day of Livery by Feoffor to Feoffee.
January, Anno Domini 1665. Peaceable and quiet possession and seisin, of the
said Message, Lands, and other the Premises in this Deed contained, was
delivered by the within named A. B. to the within named C. D. according to the
form and effect of this Deed, in the presence of those whose names are hereunto
subscribed.

2. Memorandum, That the fifth Day of etc. Livery made by Attorney.
Anno Domini, 1665. Peaceable and quiet possession and seisin, of the Manor,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments within specified, was taken had
and delivered by E. F. and G. H. the Attorneys within named, to the within
named C. D. according to the Tenor and true meaning of this present Indenture,
in the presence of those whose names are hereunto subscribed.

3. Memorandum, That the Day and Year Another.
within written, full and peaceable possession of all and singular the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments within granted, or mentioned to be grantel; was
taken and had, by the within named E. F. for and in the name of A. B. within
mentioned; and afterward was for and in the name of the said A. B. delivered
by the said E. F. unto the within named C. D. according to the authority within
given: To hold to him the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the
form and effect of this present Deed: in the presence of those whose names are
hereunder written.

4. In case the liberty be made by force of a Another.
Letter of Attorney not mentioned in the Deed: Then the indorsement may be
thus: Memorandum, That full quiet and peaceable possession of all and every the
Message and Lands, within mentioned to be granted, was taken and had by I. H.
the Attorney of the within named A. B. by force and virtue of a Letter of
Attorney to the said I. H. in that behalf made by the said A. B. bearing Date
the etc. for and in the name of the said A B. and was afterward by the same
authority, for and in the name of the said A. B delivered by the said I. H.
unto one G. H. the Attorney of the within named C. D. thereunto lawfully
authorized, by force and virtue of one Letter of Attorney made by the said C.
D. unto the said G. H. in that behalf bearing Date the etc. according to the
form and effect of this present Deed the 20th Day of March, Anno Domini 1665.
in the presence of those Persons whose names are hereunto subscribed.

5. Memorandum, That the within named E. F. Attornement.
lessee of all and every the Message and Lands within mentioned, having heard
this present Indenture read, and taken perfect notice and knowledge thereof, and
of all the contents thereof; does consent and agree thereunto, and does Attorn
Tenent to the within named C. D. for the said Message, Lands, and Premises
the 20th Day of etc. Anno Domini 1666. in the presence of those whose names are
hereunto subscribed.

6. Memorandum, That the within named E. F. Another.
lessee of all and every the Message and Lands within mentioned, after the
sealing and delivery of these presents and perfect notice thereof taken by him,
and of the contents thereof did the Day of etc. in the Year within mentioned
Attorn unto the within named C. D. upon the said grant, according to the form
and effect thereof, by the payment of two Pence of lawful Money of England, in
the name of Attornement, in the presence of etc.

7. Memorandum, That R. C. of etc. Gentleman, Another.
and the rest of the Tenants and Farmers of the within mentioned Premises, by
virtue of several Leases made unto them by the within named A. B. having all of
them had perfect notice of this present grant, did severally Attorne and become
Tenants of, and for their several and respective interests in the Premises, to
the within named C. D. this present Tenth Day of etc. in the Year within
written; and the said Tenants have every of them given unto the said C. D. one
Penny in the name of Attornement, in the presence of etc.

8. This Indenture made the etc. Between An Attornement by a Collateral Deed.
A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Whereas the said A. B is
seized in his demesne as of freehold, for and during the the Term of his
natural Life, of and in etc. by Virtue of a Lease to him thereof made, by I. K.
of etc. Esquire, by his Indenture bearing Date the etc. And whereas the said I.
K by his Deed indented bearing Date the etc. Has granted the said Message,
Lands, and Premises, with the Appurtenances, and the Revertion thereof to the
said C. D. as in and by the said Indentures more at large appears: Now this
Indenture witnesses, that the said A B. for diverse good reasonable causes and
considerations him hereunto moving; Has consented, agreed, attorned, and
become Tenent, and by these presents does consent, agree, attorne, and become
Tenent to the said C. D. and to the said grant to him made of the said
Message, Land^, and Premises, and the Revertion thereof, and in the name of
Attornment, and seisin of the Rent, reserved upon the said Lease thereof; has
at and before the making of these presents, paid to the said C. D. one half
years Rent, due for the said Message, Lands, and Premises, at our Lady Day
last: Which the said C. D. has accepted of and from the said A. B. as from his
Tenent, and in name of seisin thereof and Attornement to the said grant to him
thereof made as aforesaid, accordingly. In witness whereof the Parties above
named, etc. Livery and Attornement together.


9. Memorandum, that the 4th Day of May, in the Year of our Lord 1665.
Peaceable and quiet possession and seisin of the Manor, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments within specified, was taken had and delivered by
the Attorneys within named, to the within named C. D. according to the tenor
and true meaning of this present Indenture, and likewise the Day and Year
abovesaid, E. F. G. H. and I. K. etc. being Tenants of the Premises by several
Leases to them made of their respective Tenercies did severally attorn Tenants
to the said C. D. according to this present grant, whereof they and every of
them had full and perfect notice at the Time of their said respective
Attornements: All which was done in presence of the persons whose names are
hereunto subscribed.

CHAP. VII. The Forms of limitations of Uses, [vide before Chapter the 5th.]
the several Forms of introducing Uses upon Fines Recoveries and Conveiances:
Now follows the limitations of the Uses.
1. ANd it is covenanted, granted, concluded, Limitations for Life.
condiscended, and fully agreed by, and and between all the said Parties to
these presents, for themselves and their Heirs respectively: That the said Fine
or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, conveiances and assurances to be had, made,
and executed, according to the purport and true meaning of these presents; of,
and in the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and Premises, and
every of them and the execution thereof; shall be, and for ever shall be
adjudged, deemed, and taken to be: And also that the said C. D. and E. F. and
their Heirs, and the Survivor of them and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized
of, and in all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
and Premises, and of and in every part and parcel thereof with the
Appurtenances; to and for the several and only uses, behoofs, intents, and
purposes, and upon and under the limitations, Provisoes, conditions, liberties,
and agreements hereafter mentioned: That is to say, of, in and to all that
Capital Message or Tenement, with the Appurtenances, being parcel of the
Premises, commonly called or known by the name of etc. situate and being in
F. aforesaid in the said County of D. now or late in the tenure or occupation
of etc. and of, in and to all, and singular the Houses, Edifices, Buildings,
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, and Hereditaments whatsoever, with the
Appurtenances to the said Capital Message or Tenement belonging or
appertaining, or therewithal, now or heretofore usually occupied or enjoyed,
or accepted, reputed or taken, as part parcel or member thereof, or appurtenant
thereunto; and the Revertion and Revertions, Remainder and Remainders thereof;
to the Uses of the said C. B. Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. and of D.
B. Wife of the said C. B. for and during the Term of their natural Lives, and
of the Life of the longer Liver of them, without impeachment of wast, during
the natural Life of the said C. B.

2. To the use of the said A. B. for and during To the Husband for Life and
after to the Wife for a Jointure.
the Term of his natural Life without impeachment of or for any manner of wast,
and with full power to do or commit wast. -- Or thus, Without impeachment of
wast only, in and for Woods. under Woods, and Timber Trees standing, growing,
or being, or which at any Time hereafter shall stand, grow, or be in or upon
the Premises before mentioned or any part or parcel thereof: And from and
after the decease of the said A B. then to the use and behoof of the said E.
his wife, for and during the Term of her natural Life, in the name of her
Jointure, and in full recompense and satisfaction of her Dower; which she the
said E. shall or may have out of or to the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
of the said A. B. in case she shall happen to survive the said A. B. -- Or
thus, In full Recompenre of her Dower and Title of Dower, to or out of all the
Manor, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, whereof the said A. B. had, now
has or hereafter shall have, during the cover^ure between him and the said A.
B. any Estate of Inheritance.

3. Provided always, and it is intended, and Proviso to make void a Jointure
upon claim of other Lands for Dower.
agreed by, and between all the said Parties to these presents; that if the
said E. B. shall or do at any time or time, hereafter, from and after the
decease of the said A. B. her Husband, (if she shall survive and over Live the
said A. B.) commence and prosecute, or cause to be commenced and prosecuted any
action or suit whatsoever, for any Dower of, out of, or in any the Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments; whereof or wherein the said A. B. her
Husband had any Estate of Inheritance, during the coverture between him and the
said E. and shall not hold her self sati^fied with the said Capital Message,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in or by these presents limited, meant, or
intended to, and for her Jointure and Dower; that then and from thenceforth the
use before limited to the said E. B. of, in and unto the said Capital Message,
Lands, and Tenements, shall cease and be void. And the said Recove^ors and
Cognizees and their Heir^, or the Survivor or Survivors of them, his and their
Heirs, shall stand and be seized of Proviso to make void a use limited to the
Wife in case she go about to depart with her Estate, and to limit over the said
uses.
the said Capital Message, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments with the
Appurtenanees, whereof such use was as aforesaid limited unto the said E. and
of every part and parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of
the said A. B. for ever.

4. Provided always nevertheless, and it is agreed by, and between the said
Parties to these presents; that if it shall fortune that the said E. B. shall
at any time hereafter during the Life of the said A. B. be fully resolved and
determined jointly with the said A. B. or otherwise by any ways or means,
directly or indirectly, to levy any Fine or suffer any Recovery, or do or
assent to do any act or thing by matter of Record or otherwise, whereby the
Estate before limited of, and in the Premises to her the said E. B. for Term
of her Life, or any lesser Estate, derived out of her said Estate, of and in
the said Capital Message, Lands, and Premises, or any part or parcel thereof,
shall or may pass or be altered, taken away, charged, encumbered, or divested
out of or from the said E. B. and shall attempt or go about to put inure any
such full and perfect resolution and determination, that then and immediately
after such attempt or going about, the said use and Estate for Life, of and in
the Premises before limited and appointed, to the said E. B. as touching all
the same Premises, or such part or parcel thereof, touching which such attempt
or going about shall be had or made shall cease and be void as touching and
concerning the said E. B. and that then and from thencefotth, the said Fine and
Recovery, conveiance and conveiances to be had and made to the said C. D. and
E. F. and to their Heirs or the Heirs of one of them, after the said Estate for
Life before limited and appointed, to the said A. B. ended and determined shall
be, and the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, and the Heirs of either of
them; shall stand and be seized of, and in all the said Premises, or such part
or parcel thereof, touching which such attempt or going about, shall be had or
made to the use and behoof of C. B. Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. and
of D. B. second Son of the said A. B. and their Heirs, for and during the Life
of the said E. B. to the end, intent, and purpose, that they the said C. B. and
D. B. and the Survivor of them, or the Heirs of the Survivor of them after the
decease of the said A. B. (in case the said E. shall happen to overlive the
said A. B) shall or may grant over their Estate to the said E. B. in the
Premises within 6 Weeks after the decease of the said A. B. And that after the
decease of the said A. B. and the said E. B. then the said Fine and Recovery,
and other Assurances shall be and remain, as to the said Capital Message,
Lands and Tenements, to the uses and behoofs before, in and by these presents
lymitted, and appointed to begin and take place after the decease of the said
A. B. and E. his Wife.

5. To the use of the said A. B. for the Term For Years determinable upon a
Life.
of his natural Life, and from and after his decease to the use and behoof of
the said C. B. one of the younger Sons of the said A. B. for the Term of 60.
Years, to commence immediately from, and after the decease of the said A. B. if
he the said C. B. shall, and do so long live, and from and after the end or
determination of the said Estate, or Interest before limited to the said C. B.
then to the use of etc. If the use be lymitted of part of the Lands before
limited to A. B. then say thus. To the use of the said A. B. for Term of his
natural Life, and from and after his decease as to such and such Lands [setting
forth the certainty of them] being parcel of the premises before limited to
the said A. B. for Term of his Life, to the use and behoof of the said C. B.
one of the younger Sons of the said A. B. for the Term of 60. Years to commence
immediately from and after the decease of the said A. B. if he the said C. B.
shall and do so long live, and from and after the end and determination of the
said Estate or Interest before limited to the said C. B. then to the use of
etc. And as for touching, and concerning the remainder of the premises before
limited to the said A. B. for Term of his Life, being etc. [set down the
particulers of it] to the use and behoof of D. B. one other of the Sons of the
said A. B. for the Term of 21. Term of Years.
Years to commence immediately from and after the decease of the said A. B. and
from and after the end and determination of the said Estate or Interest limited
to the said D. B. To the use of etc.

6. And from and after the decease of the said Limitations of uses in Talc to
1. 2. 3. 4. etc. Sons.
A. B. and E. his Wife; then to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of
the said A. B. lawfully begotten on the Body of the said E. B. -- Or thus: And
as touching and concerning the immediate remainder of the said Capital
Message, Lands, etc. before particularly limited, or mentioned, or meant to be
limited to the use of the said E. B. for her Jointure as aforesaid,
imimmediately from and after the decease of the said A. B. and E. B. and of the
longer liver of them, and the immediate Remainder of the said Lands, etc.
whereof no use is before limited to the said E. B. from and after the decease
of the said A. B. to the only use and beho^f of the first Son of the Body of
the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such first Son lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of the
second Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such second
Son lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of
the second Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B.
lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of the said third
Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and
behoof of the fourth Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said
E. B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body
of such fourth Son lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue then to the
use and behoof of the fifth Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of
the said E. B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of
the Body of such a fifth Son lawfully begotten, etc. [even to the ninth or
tenth Sons:] And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of all and
every other Son and Sons, of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B.
lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of every such Son
and Sons; the elder Son and the Heirs, Males of his Body being always preferred
before the younger Son; and the Heirs, Males of his Body, according to the
Seniority and Priority of Birth and Age: And for default of such Issue to the
use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said A. B. and for default of
such Issue to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

7 To the use and behoof of the said A. B. for, Another to Sons already born.
and during the term of his natural Life; and from and after the decease of the
said A. B. to the use and behoof of the said E. B. for, and during the term of
her natural Life for her Jointure, etc. [vide before Sect. 20.] And from and
after the decease of the said A. B. and E. B and of the longer liver of them,
to the use and behoof of C. B. the eldest Son and Heir apparent of the said A.
B. and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of the said C. B. lawfully begotten, and
to be begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of D. B.
second Son of the said A. B. and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of the said D.
B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to the
use and behoof of E. B. third Son of the said A. B. and of the Heirs, Males of
the Body of the said. E. B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten: And for
default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the In case there be no more
Sons born, time of the limitation.
fourth Son of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B. his Wife, lawfully
to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such fourth Son lawfully
to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the
fifth Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully
to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such fifth Son lawfully
to be begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of
all and every other Son and Sons of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of
the said E. B. lawfully to be begotten successively one after the other, and in
order, as they shall succeed and be in seigniority of age and priority of
birth; and of the Heirs, Males of the several and respective Bodies of all and
every such other Son and Sons, lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such
Issue to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said A. B. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to the only use and
behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever. Limitation to the Father
for life: after to the Son and his Wife remainder to 1, 2, 3. etc. Sons of him
in Tail remainder to the Fathers other Sons in tail, etc


8. To the use and behoof of the said A. B. for, and during the term of his
natural Life without impeachment of wast, and with full power to commit wast:
And from and after the decease of the said A. B. to the use and behoof of C. B.
Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. and his Assigns, for and during the
Term of his natural Life, and from and after the decease of the said C. B. to
the use and behoof of E. B Wife of the said C. B. and her Assigns, for and
during the Term of her natural Life in recompense and satisfaction of her
dower, etc. [vide sect. 2.] and immediately from and after the deaths of the
said C. B. and F. B. and of the Survivor of them, to the only use and behoof of
the first This form is to be used in case they have no Sons at the time of the
limitation: if they have; then they are to be named, etc. as before. To Sons
for life remainder in Tail.
Son of the Body of the said C. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such first Son lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the second Son
of the Body of the said C. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such second Son lawfully to be
begotten, etc. and [so to 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. Sons] And for default of
such Issue to the use of all and every other Son and Sons of the Body of the
said C. B. on the Body of the said ^. B. lawfully to be begotten, successively
one after the other, as they shall be Born, and shall be in Seigniority of Age;
and the Heirs, Males of their several Bodies lawfully to be begotten. And for
default of such Issue to the use and behoof of F. B. second Son of the said A.
B. for, and during the Term of his natural Life, without impeachment of, or for
any manner of wast: And from and after his decease, to the use of the first Son
of the Body of the said F. B. lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males
of the Body of such first Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such
Issue to the use and behoof of the second Son of the said ^. B. lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such second Son lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the third Son
of the Body of the said F. B. lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males
of the Body of such third Son lawfully to be begotten: [And so to 4. 5. 6. 7.
etc.] And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of all, and every
other Son and Sons of the said F. B. lawfully to be begotten successively, as
they shall be in Priority of Birth, and Seigniority of Age; and of the Heirs,
Males of their several Bodies lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such
Issue to the use and behoof of G. B. and his Assigns, third Son of the said A.
B. for and during the Term of his natural Life, without impeachment of, or for
any manner of wast; and from and after the decease of the said G. B. to the use
and behoof of the first Son of the Body of the said G. B. lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such first Son lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the second Son
of the Body of the said G. B. lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males
of the Body of such second Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such
Issue to the use and behoof of the third Son of the Body of the said. G. B.
lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such third Son
lawfully to be begotten: [And so to the 4. 5. 6. 7, etc. Sons] And for default
of such Issue to the use and behoof of all and every other Son and Sons of the
said G. B. successively as they shall be in Priority of Birth, and Seniority of
Age; and of the Heirs, Males of their several Bodies lawfully to be begotten:
And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of H. B. fourth Son of the
said A. B. for, and during the natural Life of the said H. B. without
impeachment of or for any manner of wast, and from and after the decease of the
said H. B. to the use and behoof of the first Son of the Body of the said H. B.
Lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of such first Son,
lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of
the second Son of the Body of the said H. B. lawfully to be begotten; and of
the Heirs, Males of the Body of such second Son lawfully to be begotten: And
for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the third Son of the Body of
the said H. B. lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of
such third Son lawfully to be begotten: [And so to 4. 5. 6. 7, etc. Sons] And
for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of all, and every other Son and
Sons of the said H. B. successively as they shall be in Priority of Birth, and
Seniority of Age; and of the Heirs, Males of their several Bodies In case A. B.
has no more Sons born at the time of the limitation.
lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof
of the fifth Son of the Body of the said A. B. lawfully to be begotten on the
Body of M. B. now Wife of the said A. B. and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of
the said fifth Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to
the use and behoof of the sixth Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body
of the said M. B. lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body
of the said sixth Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue to
the use and behoof of all and every the Son and Sons of the Body of the said A.
B. on the Body of the said M. B. lawfully to be begotten successively as they
shall be in Priority of Birth and Seigniority of Age; and of the Heirs, Males
of their several Bodies lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such Issue
to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said A. B. lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue to the use and Behoof of the right
Heirs of the said A. E. for ever.

9. Provided Always, and it is fully concluded, Proviso to preserve Estates to
Children en ventre samere etc. vide Sect. 15.
condescended unto, granted and agreed by, and between all the said Parties to
these presents for them and every of them, and for their and every of their
Heirs, and the true intent, and meaning of these presents is, notwithstanding
any limitation of the use and uses aforesaid: That if it shall hereafter happen
the said A. B. or the said C. B. F. B. G. B. and H. B. Sons of the said A. B.
or any of them, or any of the Issue; Male of the several Bodies of them, or any
of them inheritable; or which shall be inheritable, of or to the Premises
before mentioned, by Force of these presents and of the uses before limited and
expressed, (or of or to any part or parcel thereof) to die and depart this
World: The Wife or Wives of them, or any of them being with Child, or concerned
with Child, at or before the Time of his or their Death, of or with any such
Son or Sons, or Issue Male, as by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, or of any the limitations or declarations, of the use or uses
aforesaid, should or ought after the decease of his or their Father, to have
had any Estate or use of or in the Premises or any Part thereof, if such Son
or Sons, or Issue Male had been born in the Lifetime of his or their Father,
that then and from and after the Birth of every such Son or Sons or Issue Male,
the said several Fines and Recoveries, etc. Covenanted or mentioned to be had
levied, knowledged, or suffered of the said Premises as aforesaid shall be,
and shall be adjudged, construed and taken to be, and also that they the said
C. D. E. F. [here name the Recoverors, Cognizees or Feoffees] and their Heirs,
and the Survivor of them and his Heirs, shall stand, continue and be seized of
all and singular the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions
and Hereditaments, and every part and parcel thereof, or of, or in so much of
the said Manors, Messuages, etc. Whereof, or wherein every or any such Son or
Sons, or Issue Male so to be born, should or ought by the true intent and
meaning of the Limitations or Declarations of the use and uses aforesaid, or
any of (...) after the Death of his or their Father to have had any Estate or
use in the same: If such Son or Sons, or Issue Male had been born in the
Lifetime of his or their said Father, to and for the use of every such Son and
Sons, or Issue Male so to be born as is aforesaid, and that of and under every
such Estate, Degree, Order, Course, Quality, Condition and Limitation in all
and every respects, and to an intents and purposes; as, if every such Son or
Sons, or Issue Male had been born in the Lifetime or Lives of his or their
said Father, and with such Remainders and Limitations, over in use, as is
before in or by these presents expressed.

15. To the use and behoof of the said A. B. Other Limitations in Tail to the
brothers of the Feoffor, etc.
and of the Hoirs, Males of his Body lawfully begotten, and to be begotten; and
for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of C. B. Brother of the
said A. B. and of the Heirs, Males of his Body lawfully begotten, and to be
begotten; and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of D. B.
one other of the Brothers of the said A. B. lawfully begotten, and to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of A. B. one
other of the Brothers of the said A. B. and of the Heirs, Males of the Body of
the said F. B. lawfully begotten, and to be begotten. And for default of such
Issue then to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

11. To the use and behoof of the faid A. B. [the Feoffor, etc.] for and during
the Term of his natural Life, and from and after his decease to the use and
behoof of the said C. B. Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. for and during
the Term of his natural Life, without impeachment of, or for any manner of
wast, and with full power to commit wast, and from and after the decease of the
said C. B. and of the said A. B. to the use and behoof of E. B. eldest Son of
the said C. B. and of the Heirs, Males of his Body lawfully begotten and to be
begotten; and for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the third Son
of the Body of the said C. B. on the Body of I. B. his now Wife begotten or to
be begotten; and of the Heirs, Males of the Body such third Son lawfully to be
begotten, etc. [So to the 4. 5. 6. 7. etc. Sons,] and for default of such Issue
to the use and behoof of all and every other Son and Sons of the Body of the
said C. B. on the Body of the said I. B. to be begotten, successively as they
shall be in priority of Birth, and seigniority of Age, and of the Heirs, Males
of their several and respective Bodies lawfully to be begotten; and for default
of such Issue to the use and behoof of F. B. second Son of the said A. B. and
of the Heirs, Males of the Body of the said F. B. lawfully to be begotten, etc.
[so to other the Sons of A. B. [And for default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the Heirs Males of the Body of G. B. (deceased late Father of the
said A. B.) lawfully begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the Heirs, Males of the Body of M. B. deceased Grandfather of the
said A. B. and for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the right
Heirs of the said C. B. for ever.

12. And it is covenanted, condiscended, and Use en Fee, determinable
agreed by, and between the said Parties to these presents; that the said
Recoverie so to be had and executed as aforesaid, and the execution thereof
shall be; and that all other Recovery and Recoveries, Fine and Fines, to be
had, suffered, levied, or executed of the Premises, or any part and parcel
thereof, within one Year after the making and executing of the said Estate of
the Premises, to the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs as aforesaid shall
be; and that the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, and all and every other
Person or Persons, and his or their Heirs, which at any time hereafter shall be
seized of the said Messuages or Tenements, and other the Premises with the
Appurtenances; and of every or any part thereof, by virtue of any Recovery or
Recoveries, Fine or Fines as aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of all, and
singular the Premises with the Appurtenances; to the only uses, and intents
hereafter mentioned, and expressed; that is to say, to the use of the said
Until an intended Marriage had.
A. B. and his Heirs until the said intended Marriage shall be had and
solemnized between him, and the said F. S. And from and after the Marriage had
and solemnized, between him and the said E. S. then to the use of the said A.
and E. for and during the Term of their natural Lives, and the natural Life of
the longer Liver of them, and after their decease to the use of the Heirs of
the Bodies of the said A. and E. between them two Special Tail.
lawfully begotten, and for lack of such Issue to the use of the right Heirs of
the said A. B. for ever.

13. To the use and behoof of the said C. D. Another.
and E. F. [the Cognizees or Recoverors,] and of their Heirs, until the
solemnization of the said Marriage intended, between the said A. B. and E. S.
And from and after the said Marriage had, and solemnized to the use and behoof
of the said C. D. and E. F. and of their Heirs, for and during the natural Life
of the said E. S. and from and after her decease, to the use and behoof of the
said A. B. for and during the Term of his natural The Estate Tail vested in the
Wife.
Life, and after the decease of the said E. S. and A. B. to the use and behoof
of the Heirs of the Body of the said E. S. by the said A. B. begotten and to be
begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the said A.
B. and of the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, and for want of such Issue,
to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said F. B. [the father of A.
B.] for ever.

14. Provided nevertheless, and it is the true Use limited until the Heir in
Tail come to age, I suppose it was to prevent Wardship.
intent and meaning of all the Parties to these presents; that if the said A.
B. shall happen to die, (living the said E. S.) leaving any Issue Male of his
Body, begotten on the Body of the said E. S. (being his Son and Heir apparent)
within the Age of 23 Years; That then, and immediately in every such case after
the death of the said A. B. the said Fine and Fines, etc. shall be adjudged,
deemed, and taken to be; and the said Cognizees, and their Heirs, shall stand
and be seized of the said Messuages, or Tenements, and Premises, to the use and
behoof of the said E. S. until every such Issue as aforesaid, shall accomplish
his full Age of 21 Years, if the said E. S. shall and do so long Live, and from
and after the decease of the said E. S. to the use of such Person or Persons as
the said A. B. shall by his last Will and Testament, or other Writing under his
Hand and Seal, limit and appoint the same for and during the said Minority: And
after the said full Age, accomplished then to the use and behoof of the said
Issue Male, and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully to be begotten, etc.
with Remainders over.

15. To the use and behoof of the said A. B. Another form of limitation during
the Heirs minority, with direction for disposal of the profits until then.
for and during the Term of his natural Life without impeachment of or for any
manner of wast, and from and after the decease of the said A. B. and during the
time that the said C. B. Son and now Heir apparent of the said A. B. or any
other being Heir of the said A. B. shall be under the Age of 21 Years; and
until some Heir of the said A. B. shall accomplish the Age of 21 Years, to the
use of the said C. D. and E. F. [the Cognizees or Feoffors,] and the Survivor
of them, and of the Heirs of the Survivor of them; to the intent and purpose
that the said C. D. and E. F. and the Survivor of them, and the Heirs of the
Survivor of them, shall take, perceive leavy, possess, and enjoy the Rents,
Issues, Profits, Revenues, Commodities, and Emoluments of all and singular the
said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, and the same to employ, during such minority or minorities as
aforesaid, for and toward the performance, payment and satisfaction of all the
Payment of Legacies.
Bequests and Legacies to be mentioned, in the last Will and Testament of the
said A. B. according to the ten^r purport and true meaning of the said A. B. in
and by his said last Will and Testament to be declared; and to the end, intent,
and purpose, that the said C. D. and E. F. and the Survivor of them, and the
Heirs of the Survivor of them; shall likewise with the said Rents, Profits,
Revenues, Commodities, Issues, and Emoluments, Coming, growing, and arising of,
and out of all and singular the said Messuages, or Tenements, Lands, and
Premises, bestow, and disburse from time to time the competent and necessary
charges in the Law, and otherwise for the Defending of the Title
defense and maintenance of the Title and possession of all and singular the
Premises, and of every or any part thereof; and for the reparation and
preservation of the Edifices and Buildings in, Reparation of the Buildings.
and upon all and every the Premises, or any part thereof, necessary meet and
fit to be disbursed and expended, until some Heir of the said A. B. shall have
accomplished the Age of 21 Years. And for the surplusage that shall remain of
the said Rents, Issues, Profits, Revenues, and Commodities, over and above the
said Legacies and Bequests, to be devised as aforesaid; and over and above the
said disbursements and expenses, that the same shall and may remain and come to
The Surplusage to remain to the Heir.
the use, profit, and benefit of the said C. B. or other Heir of the said A. B.
that shall accomplish the full Age of 21 Years; and after the said C. B. or
other Heir of the said A. B. shall have accomplished the said Age of 21 Years:
That then the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized
of and in all and singular the said Message, etc. to the use of the said C. B.
or such other heir of the said A. B. as shall so accomplish the said age, and
of the heirs males of the body of the said C. B. or such other heir, and for
want of such Issue to the use and behoof of the right heirs of the said A. B.
for ever.

(15.) Make an Indenture tripartite between Away to pres^rve contingent uses in
case the particular Estate determine before they come in Esse.
A. B. of the first Part, C. D. and E. F. of the second Part, and G. H. and I.
K. of the third part: and let thereby A. B. covenant to levy a Fine to G. H.
and I. K. of the Manor of L. etc. And then add -- And it is covenanted,
granted, condescended, agreed and declared by and between all the said Parties
to these presents: That the said Fine or Fines and all other Fine or Fines
hereafter to be had and levied by and between the said Parties to these
Presents, or any of them of the said Manor and Premises, or any Part thereof
are meant and intended to be, and immediately from and after the acknowledging
and levying of the said Fine or Fines shall be taken, judged and construed to
be and inure to the several uses, trusts and purposes hereafter mentioned: That
is to say, to the use and behoof of the said A. B. and his Assigns for and
during the term of his natural life: And from and after the determination Nota.
of the Estate of the said A B. to the use and behoof of the said C. D. and E.
F. and their heirs, for and during the natural life of the said A. B. to the
end, intent and purpose, and in trust only to preserve the contingent
remainders hereafter mentioned: And from and after the decease of the said A.
B. to the use and behoof of the first Son of the body of the said A. B.
lawfully to be begotten, on the body of E. B his now wife, and of the heirs
Males of the body of such first Son lawfully to be begotten. And for default of
such Issue to the use and behoof of the second Son of the body of the said A.
B. on the body of the said E. B. to be begotten and of the heirs males of such
second Son, [and in like manner to 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Sons] and for want of such
Issue to the use and behoof of all and every other Son and Sons of the body of
the said A. B. to be begotten on the body of the said E. B. successively one
after the other, as they shall be in Seniority of Age and Priority of Birth,
and the several and respective heirs males of their bodies, the elder and his
heir male of his body to be always preferred before the younger of them, and
the heir male of his Limitation for issue en ventre sa mere.
body. And for default of such Issue, in case the said E. shall be enseint at
the time of the death of the said A. B. then to the use and behoof of the said
E. until she shall be delivered of such Child, or die, which of them shall
first happen, in trust only for the preservation, of the contingent remainder
unto her Son, if she shall be Nota.
enseint of a Son: and if such Child shall be a Son, then to the use and behoof
of such afterborn Son; and the heirs males of the body of such after born-Son
lawfully to be gotten. And Limitation of five hundred years for payment of
daughters portions, if no heir male be.
for want of such Issue to the use and behoof of the said C. D. and E. F. and
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the term of five
hundred years: And from and immediately after the end of the said Estate or
Term of five hundred years to the use and behoof of the said A. B. and the
heirs males of his body, and for want of such Issue to the use and behoof of
the right heirs of the said A. B. for ever. And as for, touching and concerning
the said Estate of five hundred years, herein before limited to the said C. D.
and E. F. It is hereby declared, that The Declaration of the trust, as to the
Estate of five hundred years.
the said Estate is so limited to them as aforesaid in trust, that they the
said C. D. and E. F. or the Survivor of them, and the Executors, Administrators
and Assigns of the Survivor of them, shall and may out of the yearly and
accidental Rents, Issues and Profits of the said Manor, Farm, etc. herein
before limited to them, for the said Term of five hundred years, for default of
Issue male, as aforesaid, levy, raise and pay the several Sums hereafter
mentioned, as well for the Maintenance and Education, a^ for the Portion or
Portions of the daughter or daughters of the said A. B. of the body of the said
E. ^. to be begotten (in case there shall be a Failer of Issue male of the body
of the said A. B. on the body of the said E. to be begotten) in such m^nner and
form as is hereafter expressed and declarede That is to say, The Sum of One
thousand Pound One thousand Pound to one daughter, One thousand a piece if more
daughters.
of good and lawful Money of England, in case they shall have but one daughter
between them two, for the Marriage Portion of such daughter, if such daughter
shall not be preferred in marriage, by the said A. B. in his life time: And in
case there shall be more than one daughter between them begotten, the Sum of
One thousand pound a piece, of lawful Money of England, a piece for every such
daughter, that shall not be preferred in Marriage in the life time of the said
A. B. the said portion and portions to be paid to them respectively at their
several ages of one and twenty years, or respective days of Marriage, which of
them shall first happen. And in the meantime for the raising and paying to, or
Maintenance before Portions paid.
for such daughter or daughters, until their several portions shall become due
and payable, as aforesaid, necessary and convenient maintenance at the
discretion of the said Trustees, or the survivor of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of the survivor of them.

And it is concluded and agreed by and between Upon payment of the Portions the
Estate for five hundred. Years to be void.
all the said Parties to these presents, and it is the true intent and meaning
hereof, that when the several portions and Sums of Money aforesaid, shall be
paid and satisfied to the said daughter or daughters, as aforesaid, according
to the true intent and meaning of these presents: or if he or they to whom the
Remainder or Reversion of the said Manor, Farm, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises shall be, remain or come by virtue of these
presents, after the end or exspiration of the said Estate of Five hundred
years, shall well and truly satisfy or pay, or cause to be satisfied or paid;
or otherwise, secure to be satisfied or paid unto such Daughter and Daughters
the said several sums, as aforesaid, That then immediately, from and after such
payment made, or security given for payment of the said sum or sums, to such
Daughter or Daughters, as aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents, the said Estate or Term of five hundred years, herein before
limited, to the said C. D. and E. F. as aforesaid, shall cease, determine, and
be utterly void and of none effect.

(16.) To the use and behoof of the said Other contingent uses.
A. B. for and during the Term of his natural life, and from and after the
decease of the said A. B. to the use and behoof of E. B. now wife of the said
A. B. for and during the Term of her natural life; And from and after the
decease of the said A. B. and E. his wife, Then to the use and behoof of such
of the Children, between them the said A. B. and E. his wife to be begotten,
and for such Estates as the said E. by her last Will and Testament, or by any
other Writing, To such persons as the Wife by her Will shall appoint.
to be sealed and subscribed by the said E. B. in her life time, in the presence
of two or more credible Persons, shall limit, nominate and appoint: And if no
such limitation, nomination or appointment shall be made by the said E. B. in
her life time, then to the use of the Heirs of the Bodies of the said A. B. and
E. ^. between them lawfully to be begotten. And for want of such Issue to the
use of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever -- To the use and behoof of
such Person and Persons, and for such Estate To such as the Husband appoints by
Will.
and Estates, and for such part and parcel of the Premises, as the said A. B.
shall by his last Will and Testament in Writing, in the presence of two or more
credible Persons, appoint, limit or declare, and for default or want of such
Declaration, Limitation or Appointment, or for such Part of the Premises,
whereof no such Declaration, Limitation or Appointment, shall be to the use and
behoof of, etc.

CHAP. VIII. Power given to Cestuy que use for life, to make Joyntures, Leases,
etc.
(1.) PRovided always, and it is concluded To settle a Jointure upon future
Wife or Wives.
and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, for them and
their Heirs, That if the said A. B. [being a person to whom an Estate was
limited for life, with remainders over] shall fortune to over-live the said E.
B. his now wife, and do after intend to marry again, That then and from
thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. at all times
during his natural life, to assign, limit or appoint such and so much of the
said Manor of C. with Thappurtenances, and of the said Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, Services and Premises in C. aforesaid, as he the said A. B.
shall think fit (so that the same exceed not the clea^ yearly value of One
hundred pounds by the year, over and above all Charges and Reprises) to and for
the use of any Woman who shall fortune to be his lawful Wife, at the (...) of
his decease, for and during the Term of the natural life of such wife, for and
in the name of her Ioynture. And that from and after such use, limitation or
appointment so to be made to or for any such Wife: All and every the said
Assurances and Conveyances of the Premises in C. aforesaid, so to be had, made
and executed, as is aforesaid, concerning such and so much thereof only,
whereof any such appointment or limitation, by virtue of this Proviso, shall be
so had or made, shall be and inure: and the said C. D. and E. F. [who are
Cognizees or Feoffee^, etc.] and their Heirs, and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, and his and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized thereof to the use of
such wife, for and during the term of her natural life, according to the true
intent and meaning of such limitation or appointment, any thing in these
presents contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And
after such use or Estate ended or determined, then to the use of every such
person and persons, and in such manner and form, and with such Remainders,
Over-uses and Limitations, and under all and every such Conditions and
Provisoes, as the same should have been, if no such limitation or appointment,
by virtue of this Proviso, had been made, limited or appointed -- Or thus: And
after the end or determination of Estate to the use of such Person and Persons
to whom the same ought to remain, by the true intent and meaning of these
presents.

(2.) To the use of the said A. B. [being the Another
Feoffor] for and during the term of his natural life, and from and after his
decease, to the use and behoof of the said C. B. son and heir apparent of the
said A. B. for and during the term of his natural life [with remainders over in
Tail] Provided always, and it is hereby declared and agreed, by and between
all and every the Parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of
them and of these presents is, That for the better advancement and preferment
in Marriage of the said C. B. it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C.
B. at any time or times during the term of his natural life by Indenture, or by
any Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings, to be by him the said C. B. sealed and
subscribed in the presence of two or more credible witnesses, to declare, limit
and appoint all or any the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Hereditaments and Premises, with their appurtenances, to or for the Ioynture
of any Wife or Wives, with whom the said C. B. shall hereafter intermarry, for
the life or lives of such Wife or Wives, or for any number or term of years
determinable upon her or their life or lives, the same to take effect from and
after the death of the said C. B. And that then and so often, and from
thenceforth, the said Recovery or Recoveries shall be and inure, and the
Recoveror and Recoverors therein named, his and their Heirs, of and in the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or of or in so much or
such part thereof, of, for or concerning which such Indenture, Deed or Deeds,
Writing or Writings shall be made by the said C. B. as aforesaid, for the
Ioynture of such wife or wives, shall stand and be seized to the use of such
wife or wives, for and during the life or lives of such wife or wives,
according to the true intent and meaning of the same Indenture, Deed or Deeds,
and Writing* or Writings, and according to the intent and true meaning of these
presents. And after the end or determination of such Estate to the use, etc.
vide Sect. j. of this Chapter.

(3.) Provided always, and it is Covenanted Another to settle by Deed or last
Will, for a Jointure.
and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. (the Father) at any time or times
hereafter during his life, by his last Will and Testament, in writing or
otherwise, by his Deed in his life time lawfully executed, to assure, appoint,
limit and convey to any lawful wife or wives, which the said A. B. shall
hereafter fortune to marry, for term of the life only of such wife or wives;
or to any other person or persons, to the use of any such wife or wives, for
term of the life only of such wife or wives, for or in the name of a Ioynture
or Ioyntures, a full third part of less, or so much as shall amount unto a full
third part or less, of all that his said Manor of, etc. And that then and from
thenceforth the said Fine or Fines shall be and inure, and the said Cogniz^es
therein to be named, their and every of their Heirs, of and in such part and
proportion of the said Manor, for or concerning which, such assurance shall be
made for the Ioynture of such wife or wives, according to the intent and true
meaning of these presents, shall stand to be seized to the use of such wife or
wives, for and during the life or lives of such wife or wives, according to the
intent and true meaning of such assurance, be the same by Deed executed in the
life time of the said A. B. or by his last Will and Testament, as aforesaid,
etc. vide Sect. j. of this Chapter.

(4.) The uses being supposed to be limited Another, whereby power is given to
the Father to settle Land upon future Wives; and to Son to settle a Rent for a
Jointure.
to the Father for life, and after to the Son for life, with Remainders over in
Tail: Then add: Provided always, and it is fully concluded and agreed by and
between all and every the said Parties to these presents, for themselves, their
Heirs and Assigns respectively by these presents: and also the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and of the said Parties hereunto, and of the said
Fine, Recovery, and other the Covenanted or intended Conveyances and
assurances, is, and so for ever shall be adjudged and taken to be: And also the
said C. D. E. F. etc. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their
Heirs, and all and every other person or persons, his and their Heirs, which
now are, or stand seized, or hereafter shall stand and be seized of and in the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, and of
and in every or any part thereof, by force of these presents, and of the said
Fine, Recovery, and intended Conveyances and Assurances before mentioned, and
every or any of them, and their and every of their Heirs shall stand and be
seized thereof, and of every part thereof with Thappurtenances, to and for such
use, intent and purpose (notwithstanding any of the former use or uses, in or
by these presents, before limited, daclared or appointed) As well that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time or times during
the term of his natural life, The power given to the Father.
by any his Deed or Deeds in writing, or by his last Will and Testament in
writing, to grant* convey, assure, beque^th, limit or appoint such and so much
of the said Hereditaments and Premises, not exceeding in the whole one third
part thereof, as to himself shall seem meet or convenient, unto or for the use
of any lawful wife or wives of the said A. B. whom he shall hereafter fortune
t^ marry, for and during the term of the natural life or lives of such wife or
wives, for or in the name of her or their Ioynture, or in satisfaction of her
or their Dower, of and in the said Hereditaments and Premises.

(5.) And also, that it shall and may be lawful Power to the Son to settle an
Annual Rent on his Wives.
to an^ for the said C. B. from and after the decease of the said A. B. at any
time or times thenceforth, during his natural life, by any his Deed or Deeds in
writing, or by his last Will and Testament in writing, respectively to grant,
convey, assure, bequeath, limit or appoint one Annual or yearly Rent of One
hundred and fifty pounds of good and lawful Money of England, with or without
clause of Distress, to be issuing and going out all or any the said
Hereditaments and Premises, or out of any part or parcel thereof, as t^
himself shall seem meet and convenient unto o^ for the use of M. his now wife,
or to or for the use of any other wife or wives of the said C. B. whom he shall
hereafter fortune to marry, for and during the term of the natural life or
lives of the said M. or of such other wife or wives, for or toward her or
their Ioynture or Ioyntures, and in satisfaction of her or their Dower or
Dowers: (such of the said Premises as shall be hereafter conveyed, assured or
limited, to or for the use or uses of any wife or wives of the said A. B.
pursuant to the true intent and meaning of these presents, for and during the
life or lives of such wife or wives only excepted and foreprized.)

(6.) Provided always, and it is the true intent Another to settle a Rent for a
Jointure
and meaning of these presents, and of all and every the Parties hereunto, That
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. by any Writing or Writings
sealed with his Seal, and subscribed by him, and duly executed in the presence
of three Witnesses at the least, to give, grant, limit or appoint, to or to the
use of every or any Woman, that is (...)r shall be hereafter his lawful Wife,
one Annual or yearly Rent, not exceeding the yearly sum of One hundred pound,
to be issuing and growing out of the said Manors, etc. or any part of them, or
either of them, so to be conveyed and assured as aforesaid, To have and to hold
the said Annual or yearly Rent, to any or every such Woman, for Term of her
natural life, for and in the name of her Ioynture, the same to be paid at the
Feasts of, etc. yearly, by even and equal portions: and the first Payment
thereof to begin at such of the said Feasts, as shall next happen after the
decease of the said A. B. And that then and from thenceforth the said Fine or
Fines shall be and enure, and the said C. D. and E. F. and their heirs, shall
stand and be seized of and in the said Manors, etc. so to be charged as
aforesaid, to the use, intent and purpose Distress.
aforesaid: and that every such Wife or Wives, to whom or to whose use any such
Grant or Limitation shall be made, and her Assigns, shall and may from time to
time, for non-payment of the said Rent, enter into and upon the said Lands and
Tenements, so to be charged for the same Rent and Arrearages thereof, as in
case of a Rentcharge: and the Distress and Distresses so had and taken, to
lead, drive, bear, carry away, detain and keep, until she or they shall be of
the said Rent and Arrears thereof (if any shall be) fully satisfied, contented
and paid.

(7.) Provided always, and it is likewise further Another to settle Lands in
certain, with reservation of a Rent to be paid by the Wife.
Covenanted, granted and fully agreed, by and between the said Parties to these
present Indentures, for them and their heirs by these presents, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. by any Writing Indented by him,
sealed and duly executed, to assign, limit and appoint the said capital
Message or Mans^on House of B. aforesaid, and the Lands thereunto belonging,
with the Appurtenances, to the use of the said E. B. his now Wife, for Term of
her natural life, reserving and appointing by the said Indented Writing, the
yearly Rent of Ten pounds of lawful moneys of England, to be paid for the same,
from and after the death of the said A. B. yearly, during the life of the said
E. B. at Two usual Feasts or Terms of the year, by equal portions, at the said
Capital Message of B. aforesaid, to the said C. B. the Son of A. B. and the
heirs males of the body of the said C. B. lawfully begotten or to be begotten,
and after to such person and persons, as by the limitation herein before set
forth, shall have the said House and Lands, the first Payment thereof to begin
at such of the said Feasts, as shall first happen after the decease of the said
A. B. And that from and after such limitation or appointment so had or made,
the said Assurances and Conveyances shall be, and the said C. D. E. F. etc. and
their heirs, and the survivors and survivor of them, and his and their heirs,
shall stand and be thereof seized, to the only use and behoof of the said E. B.
and her Assigns, according to such limitation as shall be so had or appointed,
so that the said E. B. and her Assigns, do pay or cause to be paid yearly
during Use limited, after the particular Estate ended.
her life, the said sum of Ten pounds, in manner and form before mentioned,
expressed and appointed: and from and after the death of the said E. B or of
the determination of her Estate, or use therein by any ways, then to the use of
the said C. B. and of the heirs males of his body, lawfully begotten or to be
begotten, and after to the use of such Person and Persons, and in such ^anner
and form, and with all such Remainders, Over-Vses and Limitations, and under
all and every such Conditions and Provisoes, as the same should have been, if
no such Assignment, Appointment or Limitation, by force of this Proviso, had
been thereof made or appointed.

(8.) Provided always, That it shall and may Another more brief.
be lawful to and for the said A. B. from time to time, during his natural
life, by his sufficient Deed or Deeds in writing, or by his last Will and
Testament in writing, to give, grant, devise, lease, limit, dispose or appoint,
to and for the use and benefit of any Wife or Wives, whom the said A. B. shall
happen to marry, for the Term of her natural life for a Ioynture, such and so
much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as to him shall
seem meet (not exceeding one third part in value of the whole) and that in
every such case the said C. D. and E. F. and the survivor of them, his and
their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of such of the said Manors,
Lands, Ten^ments and Hereditaments, as shall be so given, granted, devised,
leased, limited or appointed, to the use of such Wife or Wives, for and during
the natural life of such Wife and Wives, and for and during such Estate and
Estates as shall be so given, granted, devised, leased, limited or appointed,
in manner and form aforesaid, and under such Covenants, Conditions and
Provisoes, as in such Writing or last Will shall be contained and expressed,
and after the end or determination of such Estate or Estates, to the use of
such Person or Person, to whom the same ought to be and remain, by the true
intent and meaning of these presents.

(9.) As to for and concerning the said Manor Another Proviso, for future
Wives, by way of limitation of Use.
or Farm of B. to the use of the said C. B. for and during the Term of his
natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of waste, and from and
after his decease, to the use and behoof of the said E. B. his Wife, for and
during her natural life for her Ioynture, etc. and from and after the decease
of the said C. B. and E. B. for and concerning the said Manor or Farm, or so
much of the same as the said C. B. shall at any Time or Times during his life,
by one or more Writing or Writings under his Hand and Seal, sealed and executed
in the presence of three credible Witnesses, limit and declare for a Ioynture,
for such other Wife as he shall have at the time of his decease, to the use of
such Wife, for and during her natural life for her Ioynture: And for and
concerning the residue of the said Manor or Farm, not so limited by such
Writing or Writings, from and after the decease of the said C. B. and E. his
wife: And for and concerning so much of the said Manor or Farm as shall be so
limited by such Writing or Writings, from and after the decease of the said C.
B. and E. his wife, and from and after the decease of such other wife as the
said C. B. shall have at the time of his decease, to the use and behoof of the
first Son of the body of the said C. B. lawfully to be begotten, and of the
heirs Males of the body of such first Son lawfully to be begotten, etc. to the
tenth Son, and the Heirs of the body, of such tenth Son lawfully to be
begotten: And for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of all the
Daughters Use to Daughters.
of the body of the said C. B. lawfully begotten, and to be begotten, and of
the several and respective Heirs of the bodies of such Daughters lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, etc.

(10.) Provided always, and it is fully Covenanted, Power giv^n to cestuy que
use for life, to make Leases.
concluded and agreed, by and between all the said Parties to these presents,
for them, their Heirs and Assigns, That it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said A. B. And that the said A. B. shall have power and authority from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, at his will and pleasure, during the term
of his natural life, by his Deed or Deeds in writing, to demise, grant, and to
farm, let, all or any, the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
and every or any part of parcel thereof, as well in possession as in Reversion,
or in Possession or in Reversion unto any Person or Persons, for one, two or
three lives, or for any number of years The time for how long he may demise.
determinable upon one, two or three lives, or for the term of twenty one
years, under such Rents, Reservations, Covenants, Conditions, Limitations and
Agreements, as to him shall s^em meet, or without any Rent, Reservation or
Condition at his will and pleasure; and that when and so often as any such
Demise, Grant or Lease, shall be made by the said A. B. of the Premises, or
any part or parts thereof, the said C. D. E. F. The Cognizees, or Feofsees to
stand seized to the use of the Lessees.
G. H. etc. and every of them, and the Survivors and Survivor of them and every
of them, and his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of such
part, parts and parcels of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments
and Premises, as shall be so Demised, Leased or Granted, immediately from and
after such Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases, Grant or Grants made, to the use
and behoof of every such person and persons to whom any such Demise or Demises,
Lease or Leases, Grant or Grants shall be so made, and of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns respectively, only for and during the continuance
of the Estate and Estates, Term and Terms, Interest and Interests to be
expressed in such Lease, Demise or Grant, Leases, Demises or Grants, and under
such Rent or Rents, Reservation or Reservations, Condition or Conditions,
Limitation or Limitations, as in or by such Lease or Leases, Demises or Grants,
shall be limited, expressed or contained respectively, according to the intent,
purport and true meaning of every such Rese^vation, Condition or Limitation.
And of the Reversion and Reversions, Rents and Services reserved and depending
upon the said Leases and Grants, and also after the end and expiration of every
such Demise, Lease and Grant to be made, and as the same shall respectively end
and determine, Then of all and every such part and parts of the Premises as
shall be so Demised, Leased or Granted, as aforesaid, to the use of such person
or persons, and in such manner and form, and of such Estate and Estates, with
such Remainder and Remainders over, as are before, herein and hereby limited
and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever.

(11.) Provided always, and it is fully concluded, Power given to cestuy qu^
use for life, and his issue to make Leases and Jointure.
condescended unto, granted and agreed, by and between all and every the said
Parties to these presents, for them and every of them, and for their and every
of their Heirs, and the true intent and meaning of these presents is,
notwithstanding any limitation of the Use or Uses aforesaid, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said A. B. and also to and for the said C. B. his
Son, and to and for all and every the Issue Males, or Females of the Body of
the said C. B. being seized of the Premises, or any part thereof, in his, her
or their Demes^e, as of Freehold or F^e Tail, by force of any the Uses or
Limitations herein before expressed, by his, her, their or any of their Deed or
Deeds Indented, By Deed, or by last Will.
to be sealed and executed in the presence of two or three credible Witnesses,
or by his, her, their or any of their last Will and Testament in writing, to be
sealed and subscribed with his, her, their, or any of their Hand or Hands, and
pronounced and affirmed in the presence of three or more lawful Witnesses, to
be his, her, or their last Will, to make any Demise or Demises, Lease or
Leases, Devise or Devises, of such of the said premises, or of such part
thereof, as whereof the said A. B. and C. B. or any issue male or female of the
body of the said C. B. shall be then se^s^d of; in actual and real possession
(the chief House Exception.
called C. and the De^esnes of the said Manor of C. etc. before, in, and by
these presents limited, expressed and appointed for the Ioynture of the said E.
B. only excepted) to any Person or Persons whatsoever: To have and to hold the
same, from and after the Time of the making of such Deed or Deeds, Lease or
Leases, Devise or Devises, or any of them, to any Person or Persons, for and
during the Term of eighty years, or any lesser Term of years, so as the same
Lease or Leases, Devise or Devises, be So as the Leases, etc. be not without
impeachment of waste.
not made without impeachment of waste, by any special Covenant, clause or
matter for that purpose, to be contained within any such Deed or Deeds, or last
Will and Testament, and so as the same be made in such sort, as that the same
do or shall end, determine or expire, by or upon the death or deaths of any one
Person, or of two Persons, or of three Persons at the most: or otherwise from
and after the Time of the making of such Deed or Deeds, or last Will and
Testament, for and during the Term or Terms of one and twenty years at the
most, or for any lesser Term of years, from the Time of the making of such Deed
or Deeds, or last Will and Testament. So as upon such Leases the now Rent be
reserved, to the next in reversion
And so that in or upon every such Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases, Devise
or Devises, to be made for twenty years or under, or for the Term of eighty
years or under, determinable upon the death or deaths of one, two, or three
Persons, as is aforesaid, there be reserved and limited, to be paid yearly
during such Term or Terms, to such Person or Persons for the Time being, to
whom the immediate freehold of the things so to be demised, letten or devised,
by the intent and true meaning of these presents, shall from Time to Time,
during the continuance of such Term or Terms, appertain, such yearly Rent or
Rents, and other Services, Boons, Customs and Averages, or more, as are at this
present yearly answered, paid or done, for the said premises, by the now
Tenants, Farmers, or occupiers of the sam^.

(12.) And further also, That it shall and To make a Jointure.
may be lawful to and for the said C. B. and for every or any Son or Sons,
heirs male or issue male of the body of the said C. B. and for every Son and
Sons and issue male of the several bodies of the said Sons and issue male,
being then seized in their or any of their Demesne, as of Freehold or in Tail,
by force of any the Uses or Limitations herein before expressed, of or in any
of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, herein
before expressed, or of any part or parcel thereof, in or by his or their or
any of their Deed or Deeds, Indented by him or them, to be sealed, subscribed
and duly executed in the presence of two or more lawful and credible Witnesses
at the least, or by his their or any of their last Will and Testament in
writing, by him or them to be sealed and subscribed, and pronounced or affirmed
to be his or their last Will or Wills, in the presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, to appoint, limit, give or devise any part of such, and so much of
the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises,
with the Appurtenances, as he or they shall then so stand and be seized of, as
is To settle a Jointure, not exceeding 200 l. per ann.
aforesaid, not exceeding in ancient yearly value or Rent the sum of two
hundred pounds by the year, to or for any Woman or Women, which they or any of
them shall at any Time or Times hereafter lawfully espouse, marry, or take to
his, their, or any of their Wife or Wives, for her or their Ioynture, or in
satisfaction of Dower, during the natural life or lives only of such Woman or
Women, so as the said Gift, Devise, Limitation or Appointment, for Ioynture or
Ioyntures be not made without impeachment of Wast, by any special Covenant,
clause or matter for that purpose, to be contained in any such Deed or Deeds,
or last Will. And it is further granted, condescended and fully agreed unto, by
and between The Cognizees, etc. to stand seized to the use of Lessees, etc.
all and every the Parties to these presents, for them and their Heirs, that
the several Fines and Recoveries, before, in and by these presents Covenanted,
mentioned, meant, intended or specified, to be had, made, acknowledged, ^^vyed
or suffered, of the Premises, and of every or any part or parcel thereof shall
be judged, construed, deemed and taken to be: And also that they the said C. D.
E. F. etc. and their Heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, his and
their, and every of their Heirs, shall stand and be seized: Of, for and
concerning such and so much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other
the Premises as shall be so Demised, Letten or Devised for any Term of years,
as aforesaid, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents,
To the use and behoof of all such and so many of the Person or Persons, and of
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to whom such Demise or Demises,
Lease or Leases, Devise or Devises, for any such term or terms of years, shall
be made, according to the intent and true meaning of every such Demise, Lease
or Devise so thereof to be made, and in such sort as shall be limited,
expressed or intended, in or by such Demise, Lease or Devise: To have, hold and
enjoy the things to him or them so to be Demised, Leased or Devised, for and
during only such and so long time, or term or terms, for the which such Demise
or Demises, Lease or Leases, Devise or Devises, shall be so made, as aforesaid,
so as every such Person or Persons to whom such Demise or Demises, Lease or
Leases, Devise or Devises, shall be made as aforesaid, and his and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, having sufficient notice and knowledge,
to whom the same by the true intent and meaning of these presents, shall So as
they pay their Rents.
of right belong and appertain, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid,
to such Person or Persons for the time being, to whom the next and immediate
Reversion or Remainder of the thing or things, to him or them so to be Demised,
Letten or Devis^d, shall during such term or terms appertain, the yearly Rent
or Rents, in or by such Demise, Lease or Devise to be reserved, or mentioned to
be reserved, at the day or days, and according to the clause of Reservation
therein to be contained, limited and appointed, or within one and twenty days
at the furthest, next after lawful demand made of and for the said Rent or
Rents, at the time or times when the same shall be due and payable, according
to the purport and true meaning of such Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases,
Devise or Devises. And that of, for Cognizees to stand seized to the use of
Wife or Wives, etc.
and concerning such of the Premises aforesaid, as shall be by the said C. B.
or any Issue Male of his body, or the Issue Male of such Issue, according to
the purport, effect and true meaning of these presents, limited, appointed,
given, disposed or devised, to or for the Ioynture or Ioyntures of any such
Woman or Women, which they or any of them shall lawfully marry as aforesaid, To
the use and behoof of every such wife or wives, for and during the term of the
natural After the Leases, etc. determined then to the former uses.
life or lives of such wife or wives. And as the said several Uses, Provisions
and Limitations herein before expressed, by the true meaning and intent of
these present Indentures shall severally end and determine, Then to the use of
such Person and Persons, as by the true intent and meaning of any the
Limitations aforesaid, should or ought to have had the same, if no such
Limitation, Gift, Lease, Devise or Appointment had been done or made, and for
such Estate and Estates, and in such order, form, course, quality and degree,
and with such Remainder and Remainders thereof, over and by, upon and under
such Provisoes and Limitations, as are hereni before setforth and declared.

(13.) Provided always, and it is further Another, to Lease I and settled in
Jointure, at the Rents agreed upon in a Sch^dule.
Covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed, by and between all and every
the said Parties to these presents, and it is the true intent and meaning of
these presents, and of the Parties to the same, that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said A. B. at all and every time or times hereafter, when, and
as often as it shall please him, by any Writing or Writings, to be sealed and
subscribed by and with the Hand and Seal of the said A. B. and by and with the
Hand and Seal of the said E. his wife, and whereunto the said E. shall be
Party, in the presence of three or more sufficient Witnesses, and not
otherwise. And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B.
at any time after the decease of the said E. by any Writing or Writings, by him
to be sealed and subscribed in the presence of three or more sufficient
Witnesses, and not otherwise, to make any Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises of
so much of the said Manor of D. and other the Premises in D. aforesaid, as is
limited or appointed, to or for the Ioynture of the said E. or of any part or
parcel thereof, to any person or persons, or for any term or terms of years,
not exceeding the term of one and twenty years, to take effect immediately from
the making of such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises, so as upon every such
Lease or Leases, so as aforesaid to be made, such and so much yearly Rent or
Rents, or more, shall be reserved for every parcel or parcels of the Premises,
so to be Demised as is mentioned and expressed in a Writing Indented, bearing
Date with these presents, to one part whereof the said A. B. has set his Hand
and Seal, and to the other part whereof the said, etc. has set his Hand and
Seal, by which said Writing, the said Premises so meant or intended to be
Demised are rated and valued at to be yearly worth. And that at all R^coveries,
etc. to be to the use of the Lessees.
times from and after the said Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises, so to be
had and made as aforesaid, the said Recovery and Recoveries before mentioned
shall be, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be, and the said
Recoverors, and their Heirs, and all and every other Person and Persons, and
their Heirs then standing, and being seized, or which at any time from
thenceforth shall stand or be seized of, or in so much of the said Manor and
Premises, as shall so happen from time to time, to be Leased or Demised in
manner and form aforesaid, and according to the true meaning of these presents,
shall from thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, to the use and uses of all and every such Person and Persons,
to whom any such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises shall be made, as
aforesaid, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the
continuance of all and every the said Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises, so
long as the said Lessee and Lessees, his and their Executors. The Lessees
paying their Rents.
Administrators and Assigns, shall and do well and truly satisfy and pay the
Rents reserved, in and by the said Lease and Leases, Demise or Demises: And
from and after the expiration of all and every the said Lease and Leases,
Demise and Demises, to be had and made as aforesaid, and as they shall
severally end and determine: Then and from thenceforth to such further use and
uses, purposes and intents, as be thereof before in these presents expressed
and declared, and as by the true intent and meaning of these presents they
should or ought to have done, if no such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises had
been thereof at any time had or made, any matter or thing herein before
contained, to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding, etc. In
witness, etc.

(14.) Provided also, and it is Covenanted, Another to make Leases at such
Rents as Lessor pleases.
granted, concluded, agreed, and declared, by and between all the said Parties
to these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B.
from time to time, and at all or any time or times, during his natural life, by
any Indenture or Indentures, to make any Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants, of
the said Premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, alone or amongst other
things, as well in Possession as in Reversion, for the term of One and twenty
years or For 21 years, or 3 lives.
under, or for one, two or three life or lives, or for any term or number of
years determinable, upon one, two or three life or lives, at, for and under
such Rents, Covenants and Conditions, as to him the said A. B. shall seem meet,
so as the said E. B. [wife of the said A. B.] be made Party to So as the wife
be Party.
every such Indenture, whereby any such Demise or Grant shall be made, during
the life of the said E. B. And that the said E. B. do seal and deliver every
such Indenture, And that at all times, from and after the making of such
Indenture or Indentures of Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants, the said Fine so
to be levied, as aforesaid, and the Cognizees to stand seized to the use of the
Lessees.
Cognizees of the said Fine, and their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of
them shall stand and be seized of and in such part or parts, as shall be so
Demised or Granted to the use and behoof of every such Lessee or Lessees,
Grantee or Grantees, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to whom any
such Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants shall be so made, and according to the
true intent and meaning of every the same several and respective Demise or
Demises, Grant or Grants, so as the same Lessee or Lessees, Grantee or
Grantees, their Executors and Assigns, shall and do pay the Rents and perform
the Covenants and Conditions in such Indentures of Demise or Grant to be
specified and contained, according to the intent and true meaning of the said
Indentures: And after the end or determination of such Estate or Estates, then
to the use of such Person and Persons to whom the same ought to remain by the
true intent and meaning of these presents.

(15.) Provided always, and it is the true Another form to give power to make
Leases for such Term and under such Rent as Lessor pleases.
intent and meaning of these presents, That if the said A. B. shall at any time
hereafter ^uring his lifetime, demise, grant or lease the said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises, before by these
presents granted or assured, or any part or parcel of them, by his Deed
Indented under his Hand and Seal, for the term of any year or years, life or
lives, and under such Rents and Covenants as he shall think fit: that then and
immediately from and after every such Demise, Lease or Grant, so to be made by
the said A. B. the said C. D. E. F. etc. and their heirs, shall stand and be
seized of such leased Premises, to the use and behoof of the said Lessee and
Lessees, Grantee and Grantees, and every of them, and of their several
Executors Administrators and Assigns, during the term and space mentioned in
the said several Leases, Grants and Demises respectively, so that the yearly
Rent or Ren^s mentioned or reserved So that the Rent be paid to Lessor and
those in Remainder.
by the said A. B. in such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises, Grant or Grants,
be yearly paid to the said A. B. during his natural life, and after his
decease, to such person or persons, as by the purport and true meaning of these
presents, ought to have the Reversion or Remainder, Reversions or Remainders of
the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, so to be leased or granted
at the several days, in every such Lease or Grant, to be expressed or set down
for payment thereof, or within twenty days after every such day or days, and
request made for payment thereof by the said A. B. or by the said person or
persons, in Reversion or Remainder. And so that the said Lessees and And so
that the Lessee perform the Conditions in such Lease mentioned. Cognizees to
stand seized of the Reversion, and of the thing as it falls into possession.
Grantees, their respective Executors Administrators and Assigns, do well and
truly perform the Conditions to be comprised in the Indenture or Indentures of
their said several Leases, Demises or Grants, according to the effect, intent
and true meaning of the same Indenture or Indentures. And that the said C. D.
and E. F. etc. and their heirs, shall stand and be seized of the Reversion and
Remainder, Reversions and Remainders of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, so to be leased or granted as aforesaid, and after the end
or determination of such Lease or Leases, then of the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, so to be leased or granted to such uses and
intents, as the said C. D. E. F. etc. should have stood or been thereof seized,
by the purport, intent and true meaning of these presents, if no such Lease or
Grant had been thereof made, and that of and for such Estate and Estates, in
such order and degree, with the same Remainder and Remainders, and in such
manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as they should have stood and
been thereof seized, by the purport and true meaning of these presents, if no
such Lease or Grant had been thereof had or made.

(16.) After uses limited as follows ( viz.) Another for such Term and
under-Rent, or no Rent, as Lessor pleases.
to the use of the said A. B. for and during the term of his natural life,
without impeachment of waste, etc. [with Remainders over] Provided always, and
it is agreed by and between all the parties to these presents, and by them and
every of them hereby declared to be their true intent and meaning, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said A B. at any time or times during
his natural life, to make any Demise, Lease or Grant, Demises, Leases or
Grants, by Indenture or Indentures (to be by all the parties thereunto duly
executed) of all or any part of the said Messuages, Lands or Premises, either
in possession or reversion, or otherwise to any person or persons whatsoever,
for any term or terms of years, or for the life or lives of any one or more
person or persons, or for any term or terms of years, determinable upon the
death or deaths of any one or more person or persons, or for any other term or
terms of years whatsoever, as by the said A. B. shall be thought fit or
convenient. And that from and immediately after the making Cognizees, etc. to
stand seized to the use of Lessees
and executing of such Demise, Lease or Grant, Demises, Leases or Grants, the
said C. D. E. F. etc. and the survivors and survivor of them, and his and their
heirs, shall stand and be seized of all, or such part, and so much of the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, as shall be at any time or times
hereafter leased or demised as aforesaid, to the use of such person or persons
^espectively, to whom any such Demise, Lease or Grant, shall be so made, for
such Estate, term and interest, and in such manner and form, as the same shall
happen to be so leased, demised or granted, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and of every such Demise, Lease or Grant. So as such
Lessee or Lessees, Grantee or Grantees, during his or their several Lease or
Leases, Grant or Grants, So as Lessees pay their Rents.
or Interests, respectively do pay or cause to be paid the Rent or Rents, or
sum or sums of money, reserved or appointed to be paid in and by the Indenture
or Indentures of his and their Lease and Leases, Grant and Grants, respectively
to such person or persons, to whom the same from time to time shall by the
purport and true meaning of these presents belong or appertain, according to
the purport and true meaning of such Lease and Leases, and that the said C. D.
and E. F. etc. shall stand and be seized of the Reversion, vide Sect. 15. etc.

(17.) Provided always, that it shall and may Another for 21 years, or 3 lives,
under the ancient Rents, and chargable with Rents, etc. before charged, etc.
be lawful to and for the said A. B. [being Cestuy que use for life] from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, during the term of his natural life, by
his Deed or Deeds lawfully executed, or otherwise, by his last Will and
Testament in writing, to Lease, Grant or Demise, give, dispose, limit or
appoint to any Person or Persons whatsoever, All, every or any the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with The
appurtenances [the chief House called B. and the Demesnes of the said Manor of
B. before, in and by these presents limited, expressed and declared, for the
Ioynture of the said M. only excepted] for and during the term of One and
twenty years, or for some shorter or lesser Term of years, or for the term of
one, two or three lives, or for any number of years determinable upon one, two
or three lives, charged Charged with Rents and Payments, etc.
nevertheless, or chargable with such Rents, sums of Money and Payments, as
before or after in these presents are appointed, limited or declared to be
paid, levied, or issuing out of the same, or any part thereof, as in these
presents is mentioned and declared, so that all and every such Lease and
Leases, Devise and Devises, or any of them, be not made to be without
impeachment of Waste, Not to be made without impeachment of Waste.
by any special Clause, Proviso or Covenant therein to be contained, and that
every such Lease, Grant, Demise or Devise so to be made, be made of Lands or
Tenements in Possession, usually letten to farm by the space of Twenty years
last past, and not of any Lands in Reversion. And so that upon every such
Grant, lease, devise or demise, the old and accusto^ed Rent and Rents, Boons,
Arrearages, Customs and Old Rent, or more to be reserved.
Services, or more, be reserved to be due and payable, during the continuance
of every such Demise, Lease, Grant or Devise, at the days and times, and in
such manner and form as the same have been accustomed. [ -- Or thus, So as upon
every such Grant, Lease, Demise or Devise, for life or lives, or years, to be
made, the old and accustomed Rents, Duties and Services, or more, be yearly
reserved and payable during the said Terms, unto such, to whom the immediate
Reversion or Remainder of the Manors, Messuages and Lands, so leased or
devised shall be, and who ought to have and receive the said Rents, Duties and
Services, by the intent and true meaning of these presents.]

(18.) And that the said Assurances and Conveyances Assurances, etc. to be to
the use of Lessees.
of the Premises, by Fine, Recovery, or otherwise to be made, and every of
them shall be and inure, and the said Persons to whom the said Assurances and
Conveyances shall be made, and their Heirs and Assigns shall stand and be
seized of the Premises, and of every part thereof, so to be Demised, Granted,
Leased or Devised, to the use and behoof of all and every such Person or
Persons, to whom any such Lease, Demise, Grant or Devise shall be made, his and
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, during the said term and terms, to
be contained in the said Demise, Lease, Grant or Devise, according to the
tenor effect and true meaning of such Demise, Lease or Devise, so as the So as
the Lessees pay their Rents, etc.
said Lesse^s and Devisees, and every of them, their and every of their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and such Person or Persons to whom their
or any of their respective term or terms, or interest shall come and be
devolved, shall and do content and pay to the said A. B. or such Person or
Persons as shall have at any time (during their respective terms or interests)
the immediate Reversion or Reversions, Remainder or Remainders, of the
Premises so leased or devised, the Rent or Rents, and Services to be reserved
or made due and payable, in and upon every such Lease, and Grant, or Devise: at
the times in the said Lease, Grant or Devise mentioned, or within one Month
next after: And do likewise perform the Conditions, Covenants, And perform
Covenants Conditions.
Clauses and Appointments, specified in such Demise, Lease, Grant or Devise.
And that after the end of such Estate or Estates, the said Conveyances and
Assurances shall be and inure; and the said Persons to whom the said
Conveyances and Assurances shall be made, and their Heirs and Assigns shall
stand and be seized of the said Premises, uso leased or d^vised as aforesaid,
and of every part and parcel thereof, to the use of such Person and Persons to
whom the same ought to remain, by the true intent and meaning of these presents.

(19.) Provided always, and it is the intent Power given to two Tenants for
life, to make Leases successivly.
and true meaning of these presents, and of all the Parties hereunto, That it
shall and may be lowful to and for the said A. B. at any time or times during
his natural life, and also to and for the said C. B. (at any time or times,
from and after the decease of the said A. B.) during the natural life of the
said C. B. by any their several Deed or Deeds in writing, at any time or times
respectively and successively to Demise, Grant or Lease, all or any part of the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises,
heretofore usually demised or letten (which at the time or times of such Lease
or Leases, shall happen respectively to be in the lawful, actual and real
possession of an Estate of Freehold, in such of them as shall make such Lease
or Leases for the time being) to any person or persons whatsoever, for the term
of One and twenty years or under, or for three lives or under, or for any
number of years determinable upon three lives or fewer, in possession, and not
in Reversion, so that in and by every such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises,
so to be made as aforesaid, the old ancient and accustomed Rents, Duties and
Services, or more, be reserved to be therefore respectively due and payable
yearly, during the continuance of such several Lease and Leases. And that then,
and immediately from and after such Lease or Leases, so made as aforesaid, the
said C. D. E. F. the Cognizees, etc. and the Survivors and Survivor of them,
and his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and every part thereof which
shall be so demised or leased as aforesaid, to the use of such Person or
Persons respectively, to whom such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises shall be
made, for such Estate, Term and Interest, and in such manner and form as the
same shall so happen to be demised or leased, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, and of every such Demise, Lease or Grant: And that
from and after the end and determination of the Estate or Estates, in such
Demise or Demises, Lease or Leases to be contained, the said C. D. E. F. etc.
and the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Heirs shall stand and be
seized of the said Premises, so leased or demised as aforesaid, as the Estate
or Estates therein shall cease or determine, to the use of such Person and
Persons to whom the same ought to remain and come, by the true intent and
meaning of these presents.

(20.) The first limitation being thus -- Another, by way of use, limited to
the Lessees; briefly.
To the use of the said A. B. for and during the term of his natural life,
without impeachment of or for any manner of Waste. [Then followeth] And from
and after the decease of the said A. B. to the use of such Farmers or Tenants
to whom the said A. B shall at any time hereafter, during his natural life, by
Deed or Deeds, by him lawfully executed, demise or lease the same, for and
during the term or terms of One and twenty years, or under, or for and during
the term of one, two or three lives, under the Reservations, Provisoes,
Covenants and Conditions in such Demise or Lease, Demis^s or Leases to be
contained, and from and after the end and determination of the said several
Estates for life, lives or years, and as the same shall severally and
respectively end and determine, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body
of the said A. B. and for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the
right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

(21.) To the use of the said A. B. for and Another, to the same effect, but
more full.
during the term of his natural life, and from and after the decease of the
said A. B. As to such part of the Premises as shall be by the said A. B. by
any Deed or Deeds by him duly executed during his life, demised or leased to
any person or persons whatsoever, for and during the term of One and twenty
years, or under, or for and during the Term of one, two or three lives, To the
use of such Farmers or Tenants respectively, for and during their said several
and respective Terms, and Interests, under the Reservations, Covenants,
Provisoes and Conditions, in such Demise or Lease, Demises or Leases to be
contained, And from and after the end and determination of the said several
Terms and Interests, and as the same shall severally and respectively end and
determine, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said A. B. and
for want of such Issue to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A.
B. for ever. And as to such part of the Premises as shall not be so demised or
leased by the said A. B. at the time of his death, to the use and behoof of the
Heirs of the Body of the said A. B. and for want of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the right heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

CHAP. IX. Rents, Annuities, and Portions assured out of the limitation of Uses.
(1.) TO the use of the said A. B. for and during An Annuity for a Charitable
use.
the Term of his natural life, And from and after the decease of the said A. B.
to the use and behoof of the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.
Provided always, that he the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and do
yearly and every year, from and after the decease of the said A. B. for and
toward the relief, maintenance, and sustenance of the poor aged and impotent
People, within the Parishes of B. and R. in the County of M. content and pay,
or cause to be contented and paid unto the Vicar of the said Parish of B. for
the time being, and unto his Successors for ever, at or in the Church Porch of
the Parish of B. aforesaid, the sum of Ten pound per annum, of lawful Moneys of
Ten pound per Ann. to the Poor; payable to the Vicars of the Parishes.
England: And also unto the Vicar of the Parish Church of R. aforesaid, and his
Successors for ever, at or in the Porch of the said Parish Church of R. the
like sum of Ten pound per annum, of like Moneys. The said several sums, or
yearly payments, to be made on the Feast Days of Thannunciation of Saint Mary
the blessed Virgin, and of Saint Michael Tharchangel, by even and equal
portions: and the first payment of the said several sums, to begin and be made,
at and upon such of the said Feasts, which shall first and next happen, from
and after the decease of the said A. B. To the end, intent and purpose, that
the several and respective Vicars, together with the several and respective
Church wardens, for the time being, of the said several Parishes of B. and R.
and their respective Successors, or any two of them for ever, within their
several Parishes, shall yearly, at and upon the Feasts of, etc. distribute, or
cause Distribution of the Money given.
to be distributed the said several sums unto the poor and impotent people,
inhabiting within the said several Parishes. And if the said A. B. his Heirs
and Assigns, do not content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid, the
said several sums of, etc. according to the true intent and meaning of this
Proviso, Then he the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall forfeit unto the
Vicars of every of the said Parishes of B. and R. and their Successors, for the
time being, severally and respectively, where any such default shall happen to
be, the sum of Ten shillings, Nomine poe^ae, Nomine poenae.
for every such default, and so often as the same shall happen, and shall not
incur any other penalty or forfeiture by employed Condition or Limitation, or
any other thing in these presents contained.

(2.) And it is Covenanted, concluded and To stand seized to the use of the
^icars un^il payment.
fully agreed, by and between the Parties to these presents, and every of them,
and for their and every of their Heirs and Assigns: And the true intent and
meaning of all and every Feoffment, and other Conveyances and Assurances of the
beforementioned Premises made, shall be deemed, esteemed and taken to be,
that the said C. D. the Feoffees, E. F. etc. and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall upon default of Payment, made by the said
C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, of the said several sums of, etc. contrary to the
true intent, purport and meaning of this Proviso, stand and be seized of the
beforementioned Premises, unto the use Alteration of the use upon Nonpayment.
and behoof of the said Vicars of every of the said Parishes, and their
Successors severally and respectively, where any such default shall happen to
be, for during, and until they the said Vicars, and their Successors of every
of the said Parishes of B. and R. for the time being, for the several defaults
unto every of them made, shall have severally had, levied and received, as well
the said several sums of, etc. before by these presents appointed to them to be
paid, with all and every the arrearages thereof, as also the said several
penalties of, etc. Nomine poenae, for every default of the said C. B. his Heirs
and Assigns made.

(3.) This Indenture, etc. Bet^een A. B. of Another for a Rent during life,
with clause of ^ntry, and to hold the Land for life, in case it be arrear
the first part, C. D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H. of the third
part: first let there be a Covenant from A. B. to levy a Fine sur Cognizance de
droit come ceo, etc. of all that Manor of, etc. to C. D. and E. F. Then add:
Now witnesses this present Indenture, and it is declared and agreed by and
between all the said Parties to these presents, that the said Fine so to be had
and levied, or in what manner or form soever the same shall be had and levied,
shall be and inure, and the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs and Assigns,
shall by force thereof stand and be seized of the said Lordship, and all other
the Premises to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned: That is to
say, To the end, intent and purpose that the said G. H. and his Assigns, shall
and may yearly, during his natural life, lawfully and peacably have, perceive
and take out of the said Lordship and Manor, and all other the Premises, One
Annual Rent of One hundred pounds of lawful Moneys of England, at two Days or
^easts in the year: that is to say, At the Feast of Th'annunciation of Saint
Mary the blessed Virgin; and of Saint Michael Th'archangel, by even and equal
portions, the same to be yearly paid unto him at the said Feasts, by the said
A. B. his Heirs and To enter and hold for life, upon Nonpayment
Assigns, during the natural life of the said G. H. at or in the Middle
Temple-Hall, London. And further, to the end, intent and purpose, That if it
shall happen the said ^early Rent, or any part thereof, to be behind or unpayed
at the place of payment aforesaid, by the space of twenty days next after
either of the said Days of payment. That then it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said G. H. and his Assigns, into the Premises to enter, and the same
to have, hold and enjoy, for and during the Term of his natural life. And to
and for that purpose it is agreed by and between all and every the Parties to
these presents, for them, their Heirs and Assigns, that after such default of
payment, and En^ry made, The Fine to inure accordingly.
the said Fine shall be, and shall be deemed and taken to be, to the use of the
said G. H. and his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life: And
further, it is also agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents,
for them, their Heirs and Assigns, that the said Fine as to the said Lordship
and Manor, and all other the Premises beforementioned, to be The use of the
Fine to A. B and his heirs subject to the Rent, etc. Another for a Rent for 2
lives, with clause of Distress; and also to change the use upon Nonpayment
thereby conveyed and assured to the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and
Assigns, shall be and inure to the use of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, under, upon and subject unto the said Rent, Condition, r^entry,
limitation, intent and purpose, herein before mentioned and expressed, and
according to the intent and true meaning of these presents.

(4.) Let an Indenture be made between A. B. of the first part, C. D. and E. F.
of the second part, and C. B. younger Son of the said A. B. and M. his wife of
the third part: whereby A. B. is to Covenant by Fine, or other Assurance, to
convey the Manor of, etc. and several Messuages and Lands, to C. D. and E. F.
Then add: Now further witnesses this present Indenture, And it is hereby
Covenanted, declared and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these
presents; That of, for and concerning all that Message or Tenement, and four
Closes, etc. (being parcel of the Hereditaments and Premises, so to be
conveyed as aforesaid) and being of the clear yearly value of Forty pound per
Annum, over and above all Charges and Reprises, the said Conveyance and
Conveyances (so to be had and executed, as aforesaid) shall be, and shall be
deemed and taken to be, and inure, and the said C. D. and E. F. and the
Survivor of them, and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof, to the use, intent, end and purpose, That the
said C. B. and M. his wife, and their Assigns, and the Survivor of them, his or
her Assigns, shall and may yearly, from and after the making hereof, for and
during the natural life and lives of them, and of the Survivor of them,
perceive, receive, take and enjoy one yearly Rent or sum of Thirty pounds per
Annum, of lawful Moneys of England, to be issuing, going and payable out of the
said last mentioned Message or Tenement, and Closes, at two several Feast Days
in the year: that is to say, The Feast of Th'annunciation of Saint Mary the
blessed Virgin, and the Feast of Saint Michael Th'archangel, by even and equal
portions, The said Rent to be paid, as aforesaid, by the said A. B. his Heirs
and Assigns.

(5.) And, that in default of Payment thereof, Clause of Distress.
or of any part thereof, at any of the Feasts, or Days of payment aforesaid,
contrary to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, That then and so
often it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. B. and M. his wife, and
the Survivor of them, and their and either of their Assigns, into the said
Message, or Tenement and Closes to enter, and distrain for the said yearly
Rent of Thirty pound per Annum, or any part thereof, and for the arrearages
thereof (if any shall be) and the Distress and Distresses there taken and had,
to lead, drive, take and carry away, impound, detain and keep, until they and
every of them, of the said yearly Rent or sum of Thirty pound, and of the
arrearages thereof (if any such shall be) be fully satisfied and paid.

(6.) And if it shall happen the said yearly To change the Use, to the persons
that should have the Rent upon nonpayment.
Rent, or sum of Thirty pounds, or any part thereof, to be behind or unpaid, by
the space of twenty days next ensuing after any of the Feast days aforesaid,
the said Conveyance and Conveyances so Covenanted and intended to be had and
executed as aforesaid, of all and every the Hereditaments and Premises
aforesaid, and the execution thereof, shall be and enure, and shall be
adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, as to the said Message and four
Closes only: and the said C. D. and E. F. and the survivor of them, and his
Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in the said Message and four Closes,
and of and in every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances, to the use
and behoof of the said C. D. and M. his Wife, and of their Assigns, for and
during the term of their natural lives, and of the longer liver of them. And
also to such The Use of the Land.
further use and purpose that the said C. D. and E. F. their and either of
their Heirs, shall likewise stand and be seized of the said Message and four
Closes, charged and chargeable nevertheless with the said Rent of Thirty pounds
per annum, and Distress and Limitation for and in respect of the same made as
aforesaid, and of and in all and every the rest and residue of the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and every part thereof,
with the Appurtenances, whereof no Use is formerly limited or appointed, to the
use and behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(7.) -- To the Uses following, that is to Another.
say, to the Use, intent and purpose, That the said C. B. [who is the Son of
the Feoffor or Cognizor] and his Assigns, shall and may have, perceive and take
from time to time during his life, only yearly Rent, of Fifty pounds of lawful
moneys of England, to be issuing and going out of all and singular the said
Message, Lands and Premises, and to be paid at four several Feasts, or days
in the year, that is to say, The Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, the
Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Annunciation of St. Mary the
Blessed Virgin, and the Feast of St. John the Baptist, by even and equal
portions, the first payment to begin at, etc. And if it shall happen the said
yearly Rent to be Distress.
behind or unpaid, in part or in all, after either or any of the said Feasts,
or days of payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, That then
and so often it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. etc. to enter
and distrain, The Use as to the Lands, viz. to Feoffor, until default of
payment: and after to the use of him that should have had the Rent. Another
Form, First, By limiting the Lands to Uses, chargeable with the Rents and after
the Rent it self.
etc. ( vide Sect. 5.) And as touching and concerning the said Message and
Lands, Charges, with the said Rent as aforesaid (saving and reserving the said
yearly Rent of Fifty pounds unto the said C. B. and his Assigns, according to
the Estate to him thereof and therein before limited, and saving and preserving
liberty for him the said C. B. to enter and distrain on the Premises, or any
part thereof, for non-payment of the said Rent as aforesaid) to the use and
behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, until default of payment of the
said yearly Rent, or any part thereof, by the space of one Month next
following after either or any of the said Feasts, or days of payment: And from
and after such default of payment to be made as aforesaid, to the use of the
said C. B. and his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life: And
from and after his decease, then to the use of the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns forever.

(8.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the first part, C. D. E. F. and G.
H. of the second part, and C. B. Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. and M.
the now Wife of the said C. B. of the third part: Whereby A. B. is to Covenant,
to levy a Fine, or make a Feoffment, etc, to C. D. E. F. and G. H. Then add,
And it is hereby declared and agreed by and between all the said parties to
these presents, That the said Fine, etc. so to be levied as aforesaid, shall be
and enure, etc. [and then set down the Uses of part of the Manors, Messuages
and Lands, contained in the Fine or other Conveyance] Then proceed thus, And
of, for and concerning all and singular the rest and residue of the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, whereof the
said Fine or Fines before by these presents, is Covenanted to be levi'd by the
said A. B. as aforesaid (other then such only, whereof the several Estates and
Uses are severally expressed, limited and declared, before by these presents)
To the Uses chargeable with the Rent
use and behoof of him the said A. B. and his Assigns, for and during the term
of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of waste,
nevertheless to be charged and chargeable, with such yearly Rents or sums of
money, and Distresses for the same, as shall be hereafter in these presents
limited and expressed, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents; and after the decease of the said A. B. then to the use and behoof of
the said C. B. and M. his Wife, and the Heirs of their bodies, lawfully
begotten and to be begotten, charged and chargeable as aforesaid: And for
default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of D. B. second Son of the
^^id A. B. and of the Heirs males of the body of the said D. B. lawfully to be
begotten, to be charged nevertheless and chargeable with the yearly Rents,
Payments and Distresses, hereafter mentioned; and for default of such Issue, to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever, to be charged
likewise and chargeable, as aforesaid.

(9.) Provided nevertheless, and it is the C^gnizees to stand seized for the
assurance of Rents.
true intent and meaning of all and every the said Parties, and of these
presents, That the said Fine and Fines to be levied of the said Manors, etc.
shall be and enure; and the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and their Heirs, and the
survivors and survivor of them, and his and their Heirs, shall stand and be
seized of and in the said Manors or Lordships of, etc. being of the clear
yearly value of Three hundred pounds, as well to and for the assurance of such
Rents and Payments, as hereafter in these presents are expressed, as also to
and for the use, intent and purpose, That the several person or persons, to And
the parties upon default may distrain.
whom the said Rents and yearly Payments are hereafter limited and appointed,
or that shall or may hereafter be entitled to have and receive such Rent or
Rents, by force of any the Limitations and Appointments herein after contained,
or any Power or Authority hereafter given and expressed, may upon default of
payment of the said Rent or Rents, or yearly Payments, enter and distrain on
the said Manors, etc. as hereafter is set down and expressed: and according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents, that is to say, to the end,
intent and purpose, That if the said A. B. during the term of his natural life,
or his Assigns, shall not or do not yearly well and truly content, satisfy and
pay unto the said C. B. and M. his Wife, and the survivor of them, during the
natural life of the said A. B. the yearly Rent or sum of Fifty pounds of good
and lawful money of England, at two Feasts, or days in the year, that is to
say, at the Feast of the Annunciation of St Mary the Blessed Virgin, and St.
Michael the Archangel, by even and equal portions, That then and so often as
the said yearly Rent or Payment of Fifty pounds, or any part or parcel thereof,
shall so fortune to be b^h^nd and unpaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said C. B and M. his W^fe, or either of them, their or either of their
Assign or Assigns, Deputy or Deputies, at all times during the life of the said
A. B. into all and singular the said Manors, etc. with the Appurtenances, and
into every or any part or parcel thereof, to enter and distrain, as well for
the said yearly Rent or payment of Fifty pounds, or any part thereof, so to be
behind or unpaid, as aforesaid: As also for the Arrearages of the same, and of
every or any part thereof, if any shall fortune to be behind or unpaid as
aforesaid, and the Distress and Distresses so there to be taken, to lead,
drive, take, carry away, impound, and with them, or either or any of them, to
detain and keep until such time as the said yearly Rent or payment of Fifty
pounds, and every part and parcel thereof, so to be behind or unpaid as
aforesaid, and the Arrearages thereof (if any shall happen to be behind or
unpaid) be unto them, or some or one of them, fully contented, satisfied and
paid.

(10.) Provided also, and it is also Covenanted, Proviso, to give Tenant for
life power to grant Rents.
granted, concluded and agreed, by and between all the said Parties to the
presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time
or times, during his natural life, by any Deed or Deeds in writing, under his
Hand and Seal duly executed, or otherwise, by his last Will and Testament in
writing, to grant, assure, limit, devise or appoint to every or any the younger
Sons of the said A. B. of his body lawfully begotten or to be begotten, for
term of life only of every such younger Son or Sons, such yearly Rent charge,
or Rents charge to be issuing out of the said Manors, etc. with a clause of
Distress in or upon the said Manors, or any part thereof, for every such Rent
or Rents, as unto the said A. B. shall be thought meet: So that the said Rent
or Rents to be granted, assured or devised, in the whole exceed not the yearly
sum, or yearly payment of One hundred pound: And that in Cognizees to stand
seized to assure Grants made of Rents.
every such case the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Heirs and Assigns, shall
stand and be seized of the Premises, to the further use, purpose and intent,
that such younger Son or Sons, to whom such Rent or Rents shall be granted or
devised, as aforesaid, shall and may have, perceive and enjoy the said yearly
Rent or Rents, according to the purport and effect of such Grant and Grants,
Devise or Devises, and shall and may Distrain for the said yearly Rent and
Rents, and for the Arrearages thereof, so often as the same shall happen to be
behind or unpayed, in and upon the said Manors, etc. out of which the same
shall be limited and appointed, and which shall be made chargable therewith, by
such Deed or Deeds, or last Will as aforesaid.

(10.) Provided always, and it is granted, Power to make Leases for raising of
Portions for Daughters.
Covenanted, concluded, condescended and agreed, by and between all the said
Parties to these presents, and it is the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of all the said Parties thereunto, that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said A. B. being the Feoffor, to whom an Estate for life
is limited, with Remainders over, etc. during the Term of his natural life, by
Deed or Deeds Indented, to be by him sealed and duly executed in the presence
of two or more credible Witnesses, to make any Lease or Leases, Demise or
Demises, of all or any part of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Premises, with Th'appurtenances, for the term of One and twenty years or
under, with reservation of Rent, or without reservation of Rent, at his will
and pleasure, unto any person or persons whatsoever, The Trust to raise
portions.
upon trust for the raising of the several portions herein after mentioned, for
such Daughter and Daughters as the said A. B. shall happen to have, and not
otherwise provided for: that is to say, If one Daughter only, then for the
raising of Fifteen hundred pounds for that Daughter, and if more than one
Daughter, then for the raising of Seven hundred pound a piece, for each and
every one of the said Daughters, and that all and every such Lease and Leases,
Demise and Demises, so to be made as aforesaid, shall be good and effectual in
the Law to all intents and purposes, and that the said Fine or Fines so as
aforesaid, or in any other sort to be levied, shall be and inure, and the
Cognizee and Cognizees therein named, his and their Heirs shall stand and be
seized of, and in such part and so much of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
and Premises, as shall be so demised or leased as aforesaid, and of every part
and parcel thereof, to the use of such person and persons, his and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to whom such Demises, Leases, or Grants
shall be so made as aforesaid, for and during such Leases, Estates and Terms,
as shall be Demised or Granted, as aforesaid: And after the end and
determination of the Estate and Estates, in such Demise or Demises, Lease or
Leases to be contained, and as the same shall severally end and determine, to
the use of such person and persons to whom the same ought to remain and come,
by the true intent and meaning of these presents.

(11.) After a Limitation to A. [the Cognizor] A Limitation of part to the
Cognizees, to pay Portions.
for life, and with Remainder in Tail to his Sons [as to part of the Manors,
etc. in the Fine contained] and as to the other part, after a Limitation to E.
B. Wife of A. B. for life, if she survive her Husband for her Ioynture: Then
add: And as for and concerning all and singular the Premises before limited,
to and for the Ioynture and Livelihood of the said E. B. with their and every
of their Appurtenances, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, from and after the
decease of the said A. B. and E. B. his Wife, to the use and behoof of the said
C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and
during the term of One and twenty years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to
be complete and ended, upon Trust and confidence, and to the uses, intents and
purposes hereafter mentioned, limited and declared in and by these presents:
viz. That in case the said A. B. shall at the time of his decease have living
one, two, or more Daughters of his Body, on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, that shall not be then preferred in Marriage, or if
the said A. B. shall at the time of his decease, leave the said E. B. with
Child, with one or more Daughter or Daughters, who shall after be born alive,
that then the said, C. D. E. F. and G. H. and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, his and their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, out of the Rents,
Issues and profits of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
with Th'appurtenances so to them limited and appointed for The Portions to be
paid.
years, as aforesaid, shall raise and levy, so soon as conveniently may be, for
the portion of such Daughter, if there be but one, the sum of One thousand
pounds of lawful Moneys of England, to be paid to such only Daughter at her
age of Eighteen years, or day of Marriage which shall first happen, or so soon
after as the said sum of One thousand pounds can be raised, as aforesaid: And
if there shall be two Daughters, The sum of Five hundred pounds a piece, or if
there be three or more Daughters the sum of Three hundred pounds a piece, to be
paid to them respectively and severally, at their several and respective Ages
of Eighte^^ years, or days of Marriage, which shall first happen, or so soon
after, as the same can conveniently be raised, as aforesaid.

(12.) And upon this further trust and confidence: If Daughters die before
Portions paid, how to dispose the Moneys.
And to the intent and purpose, that if it shall happen the said A. B. to die,
having one only Daughter of his Body, on the Body of the said E. begotten, then
living, or afterward to be born, as aforesaid, and that the said only
Daughter, shall happen to depart this life before that she shall accomplish the
Age of Eighteen years, or be married, or if there happen to be two or more
Daughters of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. begotten,
then living: Then, if both or all of the said Daughters shall happen to die or
depart this life, before either or any of them accomplish their several Ages of
Eighteen years, or be married as aforesaid, That then the several sum and sums
of Money, intended for the Portions and Advancements of such Daughter or
Daughters, as aforesaid, or so much thereof as shall be raised or levied out of
the Rents, Issues and profits of all or any the Premises (all Charges and
Expenses defrayed, wherein a full and liberal allowance shall be made and
given) shall be satisfied and paid to such person or persons, as the said A. B.
by any writing under his Hand and Seal, subscribed by two or more credible
Witnesses, or by his last Will and Testament, to be subscribed as aforesaid,
shall limit or appoint: And in default of any such Limitation or Appointment to
the Executors or Administrators of the said A. B.

(13.) And, upon further trust and confidence, Moneys to be paid yearly for
maintenance of the Daughters.
and to the end, intent and purpose, that the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and
the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Executors and Assigns, shall
out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, so to them limited for raising of Portions as
aforesaid, with their and every of their App^rtenances, levy and pay, or cause
to be levied and paid, to and for the maintenance of such Daughter and
Daughters, as aforesaid, if there be but one Daughter only, the sum of Thirty
pounds per Annum, and if there be two or more Daughters, the sum of Twenty
pounds per Annum a piece, until such Daughter or Daughters respectively shall
attain to her or their age of Eighteen years, or shall be married, and her or
their Portions paid, as aforesaid.

(14.) Provided always, and it is the true If the Feoffor, etc. die without
Daughters, the Estate limited to be void.
intent and meaning of all and every the parties to these presents, That if the
said A. B. shall happen to depart this life, without any Issue female of his
body, upon the body of the said E. begotten, or without leaving the said E.
with child of one or more Daughter or Daughters, that shall be after born
alive, That then the Estate and Estates, so limited as aforesaid to the said C.
D. E. F. and G. H. for years as aforesaid, shall cease, determine, and be
utterly void.

(15.) Provided also, that from and immediately After Portions paid, the Estate
limited to be void.
after such time as the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and the Executors or
Administrators of the survivor of them, shall or might have limited and raised
the said several Portions and present maintenance, for such Daughter or
Daughters as aforesaid, That then the said Estate for years, limited in trust
as aforesaid to them the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. shall cease, determine, and
be utterly void. And the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, so to
them limited in trust as aforesaid, shall immediately go and be to such person
and persons, to whom the Reversion or remainder of the said Messuages, Lands
and Premises, shall belong and appertain.

(16.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. An Estate limited to Daughters, to
cease upon payment of their Portions by the Heir male. The Uses
of the first part, C. D. E. F. and G. H. on the second part, and C. B. (Son
and Heir apparent of the said A. B.) and D. B. Wife of the said C. B. on the
third part: Let there be a Fine Covenanted to be acknowledged, or other
Conveyance (whereupon a use may be raised) Covenanted to be made to C. D. E. F.
and G. H. To the use of the said C. B. for and during the Term of his natural
life, and from and after his decease, to the use of E. B. his Wife, for and
during the Term of her natural life, for her Ioynture, etc. And from and after
the decease of the said C. B. and E. his Wife, to the use and behoof of the
Heirs males of the body of the said C. B. on the body of the said E. lawfully
begotten, and to be begotten; and in default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the Heirs females of the body of the said C. B. on the body of the
said E. lawfully begotten, and to be begotten; and for want of such Issue, to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

(17.) Provided always, That in case the The Proviso.
said C. B. shall happen to depart this life without Issue male of his body,
lawfully begotten on the body of the said E. B. If then the said A. B. or any
Heir male of his body, shall pay or cause to be paid unto the Daughter or
Daughters of the said C. B. on the body of the said E. begotten, these several
sums following, that is to say, unto such Daughter of the said C. B. in case he
shall have but one, the full sum of One thousand two hundred pounds of good and
lawful money of England; and in case he shall have more Daughters then one by
the said E. then living, the sum of Two thousand pounds of like lawful moneys,
among and between them equally to be divided, the said payment and payments to
be made at their respective Ages of eighteen years, or Marriage, which of them
shall first happen, at or in, etc. Or if the said A. B. or any Heir male of his
body, shall at any time or times, by such Security as the said C. D. E. F. and
G. H. or the survivors or survivor of them shall direct in writing, under their
hands, or the hand or hands of the survivors or survivor of them, sufficiently
secure the payment of the said sums in manner aforesaid, That then and from
thenceforth the Estate, The Cessar of the Use to the Daughters.
Use and Limitation of the Premises, to the Heirs females of the said C B. on
the body of the said E. begotten, and to be begotten, shall cease and
determine; and the said Fine and Fines shall be and enure: And the said
Cognizees and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of all and singular the
Premises, from and after the decease of the said C. B. and E. B. and payment
made or Security given as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of the Heirs males
of the body of the said A. B. and for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

(18.) Provided always, and it is Covenanted, Another, to stand seized to the
use of the Daughters until their Portions paid.
granted, concluded and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these
presents, That if the said A. B. shall happen to die, or depart this life,
without Issue Male of his Body, lawfully begotten on the Body of the said E. B.
having Issue by the said E. B. one or more Daughter or Daughters unmarryed, at
the time of his decease, That then, and from thenceforth, the said C. D. E. F.
and G. H. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Heirs of the Survivor
of them, immediately from and after the death of the said A. B. without Issue
Male, as aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of all and singular the Premises
(whereof no use is before limited to the said E. B.) to the use and behoof of
such Daughter or Daughters, until the said Daughter and Daughters shall and may
have and receive, out of the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, the several
sums hereafter mentioned, or shall have received good Money, or Security.
and sufficient Security of and from such person and persons, to whom the
Reversion or Remainder of the Premises, from and after the death of the said
A. B. without Heir Male of his body, as aforesaid, shall appertain by the true
intent and meaning of these presents, for the payment of the said sum or sums,
as is hereafter mentioned: that is to say, The sum of Fifteen hundred pounds of
lawful Moneys of England, to such Daughter of the said A. B. if there shall be
but one, within six Months after she shall have accomplished the Age of One and
twenty years, or be married, which of them shall first happen, and if there be
more then one Daughter, Then the sum of Three thousand pounds of good and
lawful Money of England, to be paid between all such Daughters of the said A. B.
equally, part and part like, for her and their Marriage Portions, at their
several and respective Ages of One and twenty years, or Marriages, which shall
first happen respectively: and after satisfaction or security of the said sum
and sums of Money, given in form aforesaid, then to the use and behoof of the
said Person and Persons in Reversion and Remainder, to whom the said Premises
should have come unto, by the intent and true meaning of these presents, if the
said A. B. had died without Issue Male of his Body by the said E. B. etc.

(19.) -- To the use and behoof of the said Another form for Portions for
younger Sons and Daughters.
A. B. for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of, or
for any manner of Waste, and from and after the decease of the said A. B. then
to the use and behoof of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. being the Feoffees or
Cognizees, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the Term
of sixteen years, to commence immediately from and after the decease of the
said A. B. upon the trust and considence hereafter mentioned: And from and
after the death of the said A. B. and determination of the said Term or
Interest, to the use and behoof of C. B. eldest Son, and Heir apparent of the
said A. B. and of the Heirs of the body of the said C. B. lawfully begotten, or
to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the
right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

(20.) And it is further by these presents Covenanted, The provision for Sons
and Daughters.
concluded and declared, by and between all the said Parties to these presents:
And the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of the said Parties
hereunto is, That all and every the younger Sons, and all and every the
Daughters of the said A. B. which he shall have at the time of his decease, and
shall leave unadvanced and unpreferr'd by the said A. B. shall have and receive
every of them Two hundred pounds a piece, of lawful Monyes of England, 200 l. a
piece to Sons and Daughters unp^eferd: or 800 l. amongst all.
so that it exceed not Eight hundred pounds in the whole, and if the same
exceed the said sum of Eight hundred pounds in the whole, then every of the
said Sons and Daughters to have a proportionable part of the said sum of Eight
hundred pounds, which is to be paid, and share and share like, to be equally
divided between them: And that the said several sums of Two hundred pounds a
piece, or sum of Eight hundred pounds (which of them shall become payable by
the intent and true meaning of these presents) shall be all paid to the said
Sons and Daughters respectively, within four years next after the decease of
the said A. B. by such person or persons, which for the time being shall have
the next and immediate inheritance of the Premises, depending and expectant
upon the determination of the said Term of sixteen years limited to the said C.
D. E. F. and G. H. and that until default shall be made of any the said
payments, which by the To suffer the Persons next in Remainder to enjoy until
failer of payment.
intent and true meaning of these presents, are or ought to be made as
aforesaid, to all and every the said Children, they the said C. D. E. F. and G.
H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns (according to the trust
aforesaid, in them and every of them reposed) shall permit and suffer the said
person and persons, which for the time being shall have the next and immediate
Inheritance of the Premises from and after the determination of the said Term
of sixteen years, as aforesaid, quietly and peacably from and after the decease
of the said A. B. to have and keep the possession of all and every the
beforementioned Premises, and to receive and take the Rents, Issues and
Profits thereof: And that in default of payment of the said sum or sums, or any
part thereof, it is meant and intended by all and every the Parties to these
presents, that the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and the Survivors and In default
of payment the Trustees to enter, and hold until payment.
Survivor of them, his and their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
enter and take the possession of the Premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, according to the Limitation herein before expressed, And the Rents,
Issues and Profits thereof, shall employ and convert wholly, for and toward
the payment of the said several sums of two hundred pounds (...) piece, to the
said younger Sons and Daughters, or sum of Eight hundred pounds to be equally
divided between them (which of them shall become payable, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents) together with Interest of all and every
the said sum and sums, after the Rate of Six pounds per Centum, for every year
that the same shall be unpaid (to be accounted from the end of the four years
beforementioned, for payment thereof) for the forbearance of the said sum and
sums, or such part thereof as shall be unpaid, as aforesaid: And it is likewise
meant, intended and agreed, that after the said sum and sums of Money, with
Interest for the forbearance thereof, shall be truly paid to the said younger
Sons and Daughters, they the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall yield and After the Portions paid, to yield
up their interest, etc.
deliver up the Premises, and all their Estate and Interest therein, to such
Person and Persons to whom the same, next and immediately after the expiration
of the said Term, by the true intent and meaning of these presents shall
appertain, pursuant to the Trust in them and every of them, herein and hereby
reposed.

(21.) Provided always, and it is concluded Another, to pay Portions by power
given to grant Annuity or Rentcharge.
and agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time during the term
of his natural life, by his Deed in Writing under his Hand and Seal duly
executed, to give, grant, limit and appoint unto such person or persons, as
shall to him seem meet, and his and their Heirs, one Annuity or yearly Rent of
Four hundred pounds per annum, to be issuing and going out of all and every the
Manor, Messuages, Lands and Tenements before mentioned, with a Clause of
Distress for the same or any part thereof, when and so often as the same shall
be unpaid, upon all or any the said Manor, Messuages and Lands, in such
Writing or Deed to be contained. Habendum the said Annuity or yearly
Rentcharge of Four hundred pounds, unto the said person or persons, and his
and their heirs, until such time as the sum and sums of money hereafter
mentioned, shall or may therewith be paid and fully satisfied, under and upon
such limitations, trusts and confidences, as hereafter in these presents are
contained and expressed, the same yearly Rent to be paid at the Feasts of the
Annunciation of St. Mary the Blessed Virgin, and of St. Michael the Archangel,
by even and equal Portions; and the first Payment thereof to begin at such of
the said Feasts, as shall happen next after the The trust
decease of the said A. B. upon special trust and confidence: nevertheless,
That the said person or persons, to whom the said yearly Rent shall be granted
as aforesaid, and his and their Heirs, shall out of and with such sum and sums
of money, as shall and may be received and had thereof, content and pay, or
cause to be contented and paid, as well to the Daughter and Daughters of the
said A. B. upon the body of the said E. his Wife lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten, which shall be living at the To pay to the Daughters 300 l. a piece.
time of the decease of the said A. B. and not then married, the full sum of
Three hundred pounds a piece, for and toward their advancement and preferment
in Marriage, or otherwise: As also to such of the said Daughters of the said A.
B. as shall be married in his lifetime, and whose Marriage-money (not
exceeding the sum of Three hundred pounds) agreed upon by him in his lifetime,
shall be unpaid in part or in the whole at the time of his decease; such sum
and sums of money, as together with such part of the said Marriage-money, which
shall be paid in the lifetime of the said A. B. (if any be) shall extend to be
for every such Daughter Three hundred pounds a piece in the whole, the same to
be first paid and discharged according to such Covenants, Bonds and Agreements,
as shall be made or entered into by the said A. B. in that behalf. And then the
other sums aforesaid, How to be paid.
to be levied and paid to every other of the said Daughters successively,
according to the order and priority of their age and birth. And it is further
concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, That
The parties to stand seized, to the end the Grantee may have or distrain for
the Rent.
the said Conveyances and Assurances to be made and executed as aforesaid,
shall be and inure: And the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and their Heirs, shall
stand and be seized of all and every the Manor, Messuages, Lands and Premises
before mentioned, so to be charged to the end, intent and purpose, That every
such person and persons, to whom any such Rent shall be granted, limited and
appointed, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, his and
their Heirs and Assigns shall and may from time to time have, perceive and
enjoy the said Rent, according to the purport and effect of such Grant,
limitation or appointment; and may from time to time for non-payment of the
said Rent, or any part thereof, enter into and upon the said Manor, Lands and
Tenements, so to be charged, and distrain for the same, and the Arrerages
thereof, as in case of a Rentcharge, and according to the effect and intent of
such Grant, Limitation or Appointment.

CHAP. X. Provision taken for Payment of Debts, Legacies, etc. in the
limitation of Uses.
(1.) AS for touching and concerning the said Payment of Debts, Legacies, etc.
Messuages, Lands, Hereditaments, and Premises, not herein before limited to
the use of the said E. B. [wife of A. B.] for her Ioynture (being parcel of the
said Messuages, Lands and Tenements, comprised in the said Fine) to the use and
behoof of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. the Cognizees, for and during the Term
of one and forty years, to commence immediately from and after the decease of
the said A. B. upon trust and confidence, and to the end, intent and purpose,
that the said C. D. E. F. and Term of 41 years limited upon Trust.
G. H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may receive,
perceive, dispose and employ the Rents, Revenues, Issues and Profits of the
said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises respectively, for and during the
said Term of one and forty years, for and toward the satisfaction and payment
of all such Debts and sums of Money, which the said A. B. To pay Debts and
discharge Sureties. Payment of Annuities given to Servants
shall happen to owe at the time of his Death, or for which any Person or
Persons shall, at the time of the death of the said A. B. stand engaged for or
with the said A. B. and for his proper Debt: and for the payment of such
Annuity or Annuities, as the said A. B. has granted, or shall hereafter grant
or limit, to be issuing or going out of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, or any of them: (after that all and every the said Debts
shall be fully satisfied) ^o any Person or Persons which is, are, have been, or
hereafter shall be the Servant or Servants of the said A. B. for and in respect
of their Service or Services, done or to be done to the said A. B. And also,
for and toward the payment of such Legacy and Legacies, and sums of Money,
which the said A. B. shall by his last Will and Testament in writing, to be
signed, sealed and published before three or more sufficient Witnesses, give,
limit, ordain and appoint. And upon further Trust and confidence, After Debts,
etc. paid to surrender the Estate.
that they the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, after all and every the said Debts, Engagements, Annuities and
Legacies shall be paid and satisfied according to the intent and true meaning
of th^se presents, shall and will surrender and yield up their said Estate and
Interest, of and in the Premises, so to them limited as aforesaid, and of and
in every part and parcel thereof to such Person or Persons to whom the Freehold
or Inh^ritance of the said Premises shall next and immediately appertain, by
the purport and true meaning of these presents. And from and after the end,
exp^ration, surrender or other After expiration or surrender, to the use of
such as by last Will shall be appointed.
determination of the said Lease of One and forty years, The said Fine shall be
and inure, and the said Cognizees shall stand and be seized of and in the said
last mentioned Premises, to the use and behoof of such Person and Persons, and
for such Estate and Estates, and for such part and parcel as the said A. B.
shall by his last W^^l and Testament in writing, in the presence of three or
more credible Witnesses, ^imit, appoint and declare, etc.

(2.) To the Use of the said A. B. and his Another by a use limited, to make
Sale. Vide, also Sect. 3 hereafter following, which gives direction for
disposal of the mean profits until Sale.
Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of
or for any manner of Waste, and from and after the decease of the said A. B.
then to the use of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. [the Cognizees] their Heirs
and Assigns for ever: In trust, and for and to this end, intent and purpose,
that they the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and the Survivors and Survivor of
them, his and their Heirs, shall and may bargain, sell, convey, or otherwise
dispose of the same, for and toward the payment, For payment of debts.
satisfaction and discharge of such Debts and sums of Money, as the said A. B.
now, or shall at the time of his death owe to any Person or Persons whatsoever:
And for the discharging Discharge of Sureties.
of such Person and Persons, as do now stand, or which at the time of the death
of the said A. B. shall stand bound or engaged for or with the said A. B. for
the said Debts or sums of Money, or any of them: And also for the satisfaction,
Discharge of Moneys borrowed upon Security of Annuities granted.
payment and discharge of all such sum and sums of Money, which the said A. B.
has, or hereafter shall take up, borrow or receive, and for or in
consideration whereof, he has heretofore granted, or hereafter shall grant any
Annuity or Annuities, or Rent or Rents charge, issuing, or to be issuing or
payable out of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises,
or any of them, whereby the said Rent or Rents shall or may be determined: And
also for and toward the payment and Discharge of Legacies.
discharge of the Legacies and Bequests, which the said A. B. by his last Will
and Testament in writing, to be sealed, subscribed and published by him before
three sufficient Witnesses, shall give or b^queath to any Person or Persons, or
to any Use or Uses, or so much of such sum and sums, Debts and Legacies, as the
value of the said Manors, Lands and Tenements to be sold, as aforesaid, shall
amount unto: And if that any overplus shall be of Moneys made or raised, by To
pay back the Overplus.
sale of the said Manors, Lands and Tenements and Hereditaments, more then
shall be, or will be sufficient to satisfy and discharge all the said Debts,
sums of Money, Legacies and Bequests, That then the said C. D. E F. and G. H.
their Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall and will pay and deliver the
same overplus, which shall remain of the Sale or Value of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, unto the Executors or Administrators of the
said A. B. And further, upon this Trust and confidence, That if such Person or
Persons, that If next Heir discharge, or give Security to pay the Debts,
Legacies, etc. the Trustees are to convey back to him.
shall be next Heir at Law unto the said A. B. shall within one year next after
the death of the said A. B. well and truly satisfy, pay and discharge all the
aforesaid Debts, sums of Money, and Legacies and Bequests, which by the true
intent and meaning of these presents, are limited, intended or expressed to be
paid, for, out of or in respect of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, or shall give or make to the said C. D. E. F. and
G. H. or the Survivors or Survivor of them, good and sufficient Security for
the payment of all and every the said Debts, sum and sums of Money, Legacies and
Bequests, which by the true intent and meaning of these presents are before
expre^t to be paid, That then the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and their Heirs,
and the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall
and will at the Cost and charges in the Law, of such Person or Persons, as
shall be next Heir at Law unto the said A. B. convey and assure the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, to the said
Person or Persons, his and their Heirs or Assigns, by such good and sufficient
Conveyance and Assurance in the Law, with several respective Warranties only
b^ every of them the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. severally and respectively,
against themselves and their several and respective Heirs, as by such Person or
Persons his or their Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the
Law shall be reasonably devised, advised and required.

(3.) And as for, touching and concerning the Another to make Sale, etc.
said Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with
their and every of their Appurtenances in the said County of M. to the use and
behoof of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. the Cognizees, etc. and of their Heirs
and Assigns for ever, upon Trust and confidence: nevertheless, and to the end,
intent and purpose, that they the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and the Survivors
and Survivor of them, his and their Heirs, shall and may, at his and their free
will and pleasure, sell, convey and assure the said Manors, Messuages, Lands
and Premises in the said County of M. and every part and parcel thereof, for
the best benefit, profit and advantage, which shall or may be, bona fide, had
or gotten for the same. And that the Money to be raised by every or any such
Sale, and as every such Sale shall be made, shall be forthwith paid Money raised
by Sale to pay Debts mentioned in a Schedule.
and disposed of as follows: that is to say, for and toward the payment of
the Debts of the said A. B. and sums of money mentioned in a Schedule hereunto
annexed: And in case any Surplusage shall remain over and above such sum and
sums of money, as shall be expended in the payment and satisfaction of the said
D^b^s, That then the said Surplusage or Overplus, shall be paid by the said C.
D. E. F. and G. H. or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the Executors
Disposition of the Overplus.
or Administrators of the Survivor of the^^, unto the said A. B. or to such
other Person or Persons, as the said A. B. shall by his last Will or Testament
in writing, testified by two or more credible Witnesses, or by any other
Writing (testified as aforesaid) under his hand and seal, direct and appoint,
and for want of such direction or appointment, to the Executors or
Administrators Disposal of the Profits before Sale.
of the said A. B. And upon further Trust and confidence, that the said A. B.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and may until such Sale made,
have, receive and take to his and their own proper use, all and singular the
Rents, Issues, Revenues and Profits of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands and
Premises, hereby limited and intended to be sold as aforesaid.

(4.) To the use of the said A. B. for Term of A limitation for years to
Executors to pay Debts.
his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of Waste, and from
and after his decease, to the use and behoof of such Person or Persons as shall
be Executor or Executors of the last Will and Testament of the said A. B. for
and during the end and Term of ten years: upon Trust, and to the end, intent
and purpose, That the said Executor or Executors may dispose of all the Rents,
Issues, Profits and Revenues of the Premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, for and toward the payment of the Debts of the said A. B. and such
Legacies as shall be by the said Will given and devised, the reasonable Cost
and charges of the said Executors, in reparation of the Premises, or any part
thereof, and in execution of the said Trust being deducted: And from and after
the end, expiration, or other determination of the said Use and Estate ^imited
to the said Executors, To the use of, etc.

(5.) To the use of M. B. Widow, Mother of To the use of Executors for
performance of a Will.
the said A. B. for and during the Term of her natural life: And from and after
the decease of the said M. to the use of the said A. B. for and during the Term
of his natural life, and from and after the decease of the said M. B. and A. B.
To the use and behoof of the Executors and Administrators of the said A. B. for
and toward the performance of the last Will and Testament of the said A. B.
for the term of (...) years, and from and after the end, expiration or
determination of the said Term of six years, to the use and behoof of etc.

(6.) After a limitation to A. B. for life: Then Another for performance of a
Will.
follows: And from and after the decease of the said A. B. to the use of such
Person or Persons, as the said A. B. by his last Will and Testament in writing,
or by any other Writing to be by him sealed and subscribed in the presence of
two or more credible Witnesses shall nominate and appoint, for such Term and
until such time, as the same Person or Persons, so to be nominated, shall or
may levy, take or receive, out of the yearly Rents, Issues and Profits of the
Premises, such sum or sums of Money, nor exceeding the sum of Two hundred
pounds in the whole: to be disposed of, distributed or paid to such Person or
Persons, and in such manner and form, and to such ends, intents and purposes,
as the said A. B. shall in and by his last Will and Testament, or other
Writing, as is aforesaid limit and appoint: And in default of such limitation
or appointment, to the Executors or Administrators of the said A. B. And after
the end or determination of the said Use or Estate last beforementioned, Then
to the use and behoof of C. B. Son and Heir of the said A. B. and the Heirs of
the said C. B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten: And for default of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

CHAP. XI. Forms of Alteration of Uses upon Acts done, etc.
(1.) -- TO the use and behoof of the said These were the uses of a Fine, etc.
intended to be acknowledged. If other Lands be conveyed in lie^ of the Lands
limited, then the use in those Lands to be to another, etc.
C. B. [who is Feoffors Son] for and during the Term of his natural life, and
from and after his decease, to the use and behoof of E. B. wife of the said C.
B. for and during the Term of her natural life: and from and after the decease
of the said C. B. and E. B. and of the Survivor of them to the use and behoof
of, etc.

(2.) Provided always, and it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by
and between all the said Parties to these presents, and it is the true intent
and meaning of these presents, and of the said Parties hereunto: That if the
said A. B. or the said C. B. or either of them, shall at any time hereafter,
during the natural life of the said E. B. convey and settle, or cause or
procure to be conveyed and settled a good, perfect and indefeasible Estate in
the Law, in and to the said E. B. or to her use and behoof, of, in or to any
other Manor or Manors, Lands or Tenements, within the Kingdom of England, of
the clear yearly value of Two hundred pounds per annum, of lawful Money of
England, or more, over and above all Charges and Reprises, for Term of the
natural life of the said E. B. and to and for her only use and behoof, to begin
and take effect in possession, immediately upon the decease of the said C. B.
in lieu and recompense of such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in D.
aforesaid, as are before in and by these presents intended or agreed to be
conveyed and assured unto the said E. B. for and during the Term of her natural
life, in such manner and form as is aforesaid: That then the said Estate The
alteration of the use.
for life hereby limited and appointed to or for the said E. B. of, in and to
the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the
Premises in D. aforesaid, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void,
frustrate and of none effect. And that then and from thenceforth, the said
Recovery and Recoveries, etc. shall be, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken
to be, and the said Recoverors, etc. and every of them, their and every of
their Heirs, shall and will stand and be seized, and be adjudged, deemed and
taken, to stand and be seized, from and after the decease of the said C. B. of
and in such and so much, of the said Lands and Tenements* and other the
Premises in D. aforesaid, as is limited and appointed before in and by these
presents, to or for the use of the said E. B. for term of her life, as
aforesaid, to the only use and behoof of the Heirs Males of the Body of the
said C. B. on the Body of the said C. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully
begotten, and to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to such
further use and uses, behoofs, intents and purposes, as be thereof before, in
or by these presents expressed and declared, and to none other use or uses,
intents or purposes whatsoever: Any thing before in these presents contained,
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(3.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. To alter the Use upon nonpayment of an
Annuity or Rent. vide Chap. 9.
of the first part, C. D. and E. F. of the second part, and G. H. of the third
part: Let there be first a Covenant from A. B. to le^y a Fine sur cognizance de
droit come ceo, etc. of all that Manor, etc. to C. D. and E. F. Then add, And
it is Covenanted, agreed, condescended unto, and declared by and between all
the said parties to these presents, That the said Fine so to be acknowledged
and levied as aforesaid, shall be and in^re, and the said C. D. and E. F. their
Heirs and Assigns, and the survivor of them, and his Heirs and Assigns, shall
stand and be seized of the said Manor, etc. and all other the Premises, to
the uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned, that is to say, to the end,
intent and purpose, That the said G. H. and his Assigns, shall and may yearly
during his natural life, lawfully and peaceably have, perceive and take out of
the said Manor, etc. and all other the Premises, one yearly Rent of Two
hundred pounds per annum, of lawful moneys of England, at two usual days or
Feasts in the year, that is to say, the Feasts of, etc. with a Clause of
Distress, etc. [ vide Chap. 8. Sect. 5.]

(4.) And further, That if it shall happen Upon nonpayment to enter.
the said yearly Rent of Two hundred pounds, or any part thereof, to be behind
or unpaid, by the space of Thirty days next after either of the said Feasts or
days of payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, being lawfully
demanded, That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said G. H. and his Assigns, into the said Manor, etc. and Premises, and
every part and parcel thereof, to enter, and the same to have, hold and enjoy,
for and during the term of his natural life. And that immediately from and
after such Entry made, the said C. D. and E. F. [the Feoffees or Cognizees]
their Heirs and Assigns, and all other person and persons whatsoever, Cognizees
(after Entry) to stand seized to Grantees use. Another.
which now are, or at the time of such default made, shall be seized of and in
the said Manor, etc. shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of the said G. H. and his Assigns, for
and during the term of his natural life, etc. with remainders over, etc.

(5.) And that if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. to be behind or
unpaid, in part or in all, by the space of Thirty days next after either of the
said Feasts or days of payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid,
being lawfully demanded, That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said G. H. and his Assigns, into the said Manor, etc.
and every part and parcel thereof, to enter, and the same to have, hol^ and
enjoy, until he shall out of the Rents, issues and profits thereof, have levied
and received the said Annuity of, etc. and all and every the arrears The party
to have the Land, until satisfied of the Rent and Arrear^.
thereof, together with such reasonable costs, charges and expenses, as the
said G. H. or his Assigns shall be at, in the levying and receiving of the
same. And that then and from thenceforth after such default and Entry made as
aforesaid, the said C. D. and E. F. [the Cognizees] and their Heirs, shall
stand and be seized of the said Premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, to the use and behoof of the said G. H. and his Assigns, for, during,
and until such time as the said G. H. or h^s Assigns, shall and may lawfully
hold and enjoy the Premises, according to the intent and true meaning of these
presents, etc.

(6.) Provided always, That if the said Another to make void and alter a Use
upon Marr^age, without Fathers consent.
C. B. or any of the Sons of the said A. B. lawfully begotten or to be
begotten, which shall fortune to be Heir apparent of the said A. B. shall in
the lifetime of the said A. B. marry or take to Wife any Woman, or contract
Marriage with any Woman, without the consent of the said A. B. first had and
obtained in Writing, thereunto, That then the Estate, Use, remainder and
possession of every such person and persons so marrying or contracting, shall
cease, determine, and be void: And that yet nevertheless all other the several
Uses, Estates and Remainders, by these presents limited and expressed, of and
for the said Manors, etc. shall stand, remain and continue in full force and
effect. And the said Fine so to be had and levied as aforesaid, shall be und
in^re, and the said Cognizees, therein to be named, and the survivor of them,
and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized of the said Manor, etc. in the said
Fine to be contained, to the use and behoof of such other person or persons, as
should or ought to have had the same, by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, next after the determination of the Estate of the same person or
persons, so marrying or contracting in such manner and form, and of such Estate
and Estates, as is herein before limited, any thing herein before contained to
the contrary hereof in A Rent to cease upon a Daughters Marriage without
Fathers license, or his payment to her a Portion.
any wise notwithstanding.

(7.) And it is Covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between all the said
parties to these presents, for them and every of them, their and every of their
Heirs and Assigns: And it is the true intent and meaning of the said Feoffment,
Fine, and other assurance of the said Premises, so made as aforesaid, That
they the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. shall stand and be se^sed of the said
Manor, and of all and singular other the Premises, to the uses, intents and
purpose following, that is to say, to the use, intent (...) purpose, that the
said C. B. the Son of the Feoffor A. B. and his Assigns, shall and may receive
yearly, etc. And also to the use, intent and purpose, That K. B. one of the
Daughters of the said A. B. shall and may yearly during the term of her natural
life, have and perceive out of the said Premises, one yearly Rent of Forty
pounds per annum, of good and lawful money of England, to be paid at the Four
usual Feasts of the year, that is to say, at the Feasts of the Annunciation of
St Mary the Blessed Virgin, St. Io^n the Baptist, St. Michael the Archangel,
and the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by even and equal
portions. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of Forty pounds, or any
part thereof, to be behind or unpaid, at any of the said Feasts or days of
payment, whereon the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, That then the said K.
B. and her Assigns, during the life of the said K. shall and lawfully may enter
and distrain in and upon the said Premises, or any part thereof, for the same,
so being behind, as for a Rentcharge, to all intents and purposes.

(8.) Provided always, That if the said The Proviso.
K. B. shall during the lifetime of the said A. B. happen to marry, without
the consent of the said A. B. to such Marriage, first had and obtained: Or if
the said A. B. shall or do at any time during his natural life, bestow upon the
said K. in Marriage, or otherwise, the sum of Five hundred pounds, of lawful
moneys of England, That then and from thenceforth, the said Annual sum of Forty
pounds per annum, shall cease and be determined, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever.

(9.) To the use and behoof of the said A. B. To alter an Use limited to the
Wife upon her claim of Dower.
for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any
manner of waste; and from and after the decease of the said A. B. to the use
and behoof of E. B. now Wife of the said A. B. for and during the term of her
natural life: and from and after the decease of the said A. B. and E. B. and of
the survivor of them, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A.
B. for ever.

Provided always, and it is the true intent The Proviso to alter the Use.
and meaning of these presents, That if the said E. B. shall or do at any time
or times after the decease of the said A. B. (in case she shall fortune to
survive him) commence, or cause to be commenced any Action or Suit, for any
Dower, out of, or in all or any of the Manors, Land, Tenements or
Hereditaments of the said A. B. or whereof he was seized of any Estate of
Inheritance, during the coverture between her and the said A. B. and shall not
hold her self satisfied with the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, limited, meant
and intended to and for her Ioynture, and in satisfaction of her Dower, That
then and immediately from thenceforth, the said Use and Estate herein before
limited to the said E. B. shall cease, determine and be void, to all intents
and purposes: and that then and from thenceforth, the said Cognizees shall
stand and be seized of the Premises, and of every part thereof, to the use and
behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. according to the Limitation
aforesaid.

(10.) To the use and behoof of the said A. B. Another.
for and during the term of his natural life: and from and after his decease,
to the use and behoof of E. B. now wife of the said A. B. for and during the
Term of her natural life, or until such time as she the said E. B. or any other
by her allowance or appointment, shall by any public act, by her, him or them
to be done, or permitted to be done, seek, endeavor or put in practice, to
obtain any Dower, of, in or to any the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the
said A. B. or whereof he was seized of any Estate of Inheritance, during the
Coverture between him and the said E. B. and immediately from and after such
public act as aforesaid, or after the decease of the said E. B. and A. B. to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

(11.) Let there be a Covenant from A. B. to To alter a Use upon Non-payment of
a sum in gross.
levy a Fine to C. D. and then add as follows: which said Fine so to be had
and executed as aforesaid, of all and every the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, shall be and inure, and shall be
deemed, construed and taken, to be and inure to the only use and behoof of the
said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(12.) Provided always nevertheless, That The Proviso.
if the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall not
well and truly content and pay, or cause to be well and truly contented and
paid unto the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in
or upon the, etc. next ensuing the Date hereof, hereof, at or in the now
dwelling house of the said A. B. situate in H. aforesaid, the sum of One
thousand pounds of lawful Moneys of Englands, but in payment thereof, or of any
part thereof, shall make default contrary to the true intent and meaning of
these presents, That then and from thenceforth, the use before limited to the
said C. D. of, for and concerning all and every the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments ^^d Premises, and of, for and concerning every part
and parcel thereof, shall cease and determine: and that then and from
thenceforth the said Fine to be had and executed, as aforesaid, and the
Execution thereof shall be and inure, and the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns,
and all and every other Person and Persons, that shall stand and be seized of
the said Messuages, Lands, Hereditaments and Premises, or of any part or
parcel thereof, shall stand and be seized thereof, from and after such default
of payment made, as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of the said A. B. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, and not to any other use or uses, intents or
purposes whatsoever.

(13.) Provided always, and it is Covenanted, Another being a provision for a
younge^ Son.
granted, condescended, concluded and fully agreed, by and between all the said
Parties to these presents, and the true intent and meaning of them and every of
them, and of these presents is, That if the said C. D. [the Elder Brother] or
some other person or persons, to whom any Estate is hereby limited, or intended
to be limited, of and in the said Manor of D. in the said County of M. and the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments thereunto belonging, or any of them, their,
or some or one of their Heirs or Assigns, or some or any of them, shall not
within two years, next after the decease of the said A. B. well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto E. B. one of the Sons of the said A. B. [if he the
said E. B shall be then living] the su^ of Two thousand pounds of lawful Moneys
of England, That then, and immediately after such default of payment, all and
every the Use and Uses herein before limited and declared, as for and
concerning all the said Mann^r of D. and the Lands, Tenements and Her^ditaments
thereunto belonging, shall cease and be vaid: And then, and from thenceforth,
the said Recovery and Recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in any other sort to be
had and suffered, shall be and inure; and the Recoveror and Recoverors therein
named, his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manor
and Premises, in the said County of M. to the use and behoof of the said E. B.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(14.) Make an Indenture Tripartite, between Another, ^o alter a use upon
payment of a sum in gross.
A. B. and E. his wife, of the first part: C. D. and E. F. of the second part:
and G H. of the third part: and let A. B. for himself, and E. B. his wife,
Covenant to levy a Fine to C. D. and E. F. of all those Manors, etc. Then add:
And it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between all and
every the said Parties to these presents, for them and every of them, their and
every of their Heirs and Assigns, That the said Fine, so to be acknowledged and
levied as aforesaid, of the said Manno^s, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises, and the Execution thereof, and the Estate, Right, Title, Interest
and Possession of them the said C. D. and E. F. and of the Heirs of such of
them, to whom the Inheritance of and in the Premises shall be limited, in and
by the said intended Fine, shall be, and for ever shall be adjudged and taken
to be: And also, that they the said C. D. and E. F. and the Heirs of such of
them, to whom the Inheritance of the said Premises shall be limited, in and by
the said inten(...)ine, shall stand and be seized of, and in all an^ singular
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, and of every
part thereof, with Th'appurtenances, to and for the uses, intents and purposes
hereafter in these presents mentioned: that is to say: To the use and behoof of
the said G. H. his Heirs and Assigns for The use of the Fine.
ever, under the Proviso, Condition and Agreement, hereafter in these presents
mentioned and contained.

(15.) Provided always, and upon Condition, Proviso, to make void the use upon
payment of Money.
That if the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of them,
shall and do well and truly satisfy and pay, or cause to be well and truly
satisfied and paid unto the said G. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, the full sum of One thousand pounds of lawful Moneys of England, at or
in the Middle-Temple-Hall, London, in manner and form following, viz The sum of
Five hundred pounds thereof, on the, etc. That then and from thenceforth, the
said Use and Estate of the said G. H. and of his Heirs and Assigns, of and in
all and every the said Manors, etc. shall forthwith cease and be utterly
frustrate and void: And also, that immediately from and after the said sum of
One thousand The new use limited after payment
pounds shall be fully satisfied and paid as aforesaid, the said Fine so
intended to be had and levied as aforesaid, and the Estate thereby in any wise
to be had or made, shall be, and for ever shall be taken to be, of and in all
and every the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, to
the use and behoof of the said A. B. and E. his wife, for and during their
natural lives, and for and during the natural life of the longer liver of them,
and from and after their deceases, then to the use and behoof of the Heirs
Males of the Body of the said A. B. upon the (...) of the said E. B. lawfully
begotten, and (...) default of such Issue, to the use, To alter an Use upon a
Portion given in Marriage, paid back; if the Marriage take not effect.
etc.

(16.) -- To the use of G. H. and his Heirs, until the said sum of Five hundred
pounds paid by the said G. H. unto the said A. B. as the Marriage Portion of
the said E. H. in case the said intended Marriage between the said C. B. the
Son of A. B. and the said E. H. shall not take effect before the Feast of, etc.
next ensuing the Date hereof, be repayed by the said A. B his Heirs, Ex^^^tors
or Administrators unto the said G. H. his Executors or Administrators. But in
case the said Marriage shall take effect, Then from and after the said
intermarriage had and solemnized, the said Fine so to be had and levied as
aforesaid, shall be and enure, and shall be deemed, construed and taken to be
and enure, to the use and behoof of the said C. B. for and during the term of
his natural life, and from and after the decease of the said C. B. to the use
and behoof of the said E. for and during the term of her natural life: And from
and after the decease of the said C. B. and E. F. and the Survivor of them, To
the use and behoof of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said C. B. on the Body
of the said E. lawfully to be begotten, etc. And in case the said Marriage
shall not take effect before the said Feast of, etc. That then, immediately
from and after the said repayment of the said Marriage Portion, to be made as
aforesaid, the said Fine to be had and levied as aforesaid, shall be and enure,
and shall be deemed, construed, reputed and taken to be and enure to the use
and behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for evermore.

CHAP. XII. Power given to Revoke Uses, and to limit New.
(1.) PRovided always, that if the said A. B. Power to revoke by Deed attested
by two or more Witnesses.
shall at any Time, during his natural life, intend or be minded to alter,
change, repeal, revoke, or make void all the said Estates, Uses, Remainders and
Limitations before in these presents mentioned, or any of them, of and in the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof; And shall by any Deed or Deeds in
writing, under his Hand and Seal, to be attested by two or more credible
Witnesses, subscribing their Names thereunto, signify and declare, that his
mind and intent is, to alter, change, repeal, revoke, or make void the said
Estates, Uses, Remainders and Limitations, or any of them, That then and at all
times, from and after such Deed or Deeds shall be so signed, sealed and
attested, as aforesaid, All and every the said Uses, Estates, Remainders and
Limitations, before in these presents specified and declared, or such or so
many of them as shall be mentioned in the said Writing o^ Writings of
Revocation, to be repealed, revoked, or made void of or in the said Premises,
or any part thereof, shall from thenceforth cease, determine, and be repealed,
revoked and utterly void for ever. And that Cognizees, etc. to stand seized to
other uses.
then and from thenceforth, the said C. D. E. F. etc. and the Survivors and
Survivor of them, his and their Heirs, and all and every other Person and
Persons whatsoever, which shall be then seized of the said Premises, with
Th'appurtenances, or of any part or parcel thereof, shall stand and be seized
thereof, or of so much thereof, as shall be mentioned and contained in the said
Writing or Writings of Revocation, to be therein and thereby revoked, repealed,
and made void, as aforesaid, to the only use and behoof of him the said A. B.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, or to such other use or uses, intents and
purposes, as in and by the said Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings of
Revocation, shall be limited, declared and appointed: and to none other use,
intent or purpose whatsoever: any thing before specified, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(2.) Provided always, and it is fully agreed by and between all the said
Parties to these presents, To revoke, and limit new Uses, by Deed or last Will.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time or times
hereafter, during his life, at his free will and pleasure, by his Deed or last
Will and Testament in writing, by him to be Sealed and Published in the
presence of three credible Witnesses at the least, to alter, change, determine,
revoke, or make void all or any the Use or Uses, Estate or Estates in these
presents before declared, mentioned or limited, of the Premises or any part
thereof: And that at all times from and after such time as the said A. B. shall
by any such his Deed or last Will in Writing, so express and declare his
pleasure and mind to be, to alter, change, determine, revoke or make void all
or any the Use or Uses, Estate or Estates in these presents before declared,
mentioned or limited, of the said Premiss^s, or any part thereof, That then and
from thenceforth, all or such of the said Estate and Estates, Use and Uses
herein before declared, as shall be so declared and mentioned by such Deed or
last Will of the said A. B. to be altered, changed, determined or made void,
sh^l^ cease determine and be void: And that then and from thenceforth, the said
Fine or ^ines, and the said Cognizees therein to (...) named, and all other
Person and Persons, which shall then happen to be seized of New Uses.
the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, of which the Use or Uses shall
be so altered, changed, revoked, determined or made void, shall thereof stand
and be seized to the use of such Person and Persons, and of such Estate and
Estates, and in such manner and form, as in and by such Deed or last Will of
the said A. B. Sealed, Published and Attested as aforesaid, shall be declared
and expressed, and for want of such declaration, to the use and behoof of the
said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(3.) Provided always nevertheless, and it is Another where the Uses were
raised by a Covenant to stand seized.
Covenanted, concluded and fully agreed by and between all the said Parties to
these presents, That if the said A. B. shall be mindful at any Time hereafter,
to alter or revoke the said Uses or any of them, and the Estate or Estates that
shall or may be vested or settled by virtue, force, or reason of these presents,
and of the Statute of transferring Uses into possession, It shall and may be
lawful to and for the said A. B. at all times at his own will and pleasure,
during his natural life, in or by his Deed in writing, to be testified by two
or more credible Witnesses, or by the last Will and Testament of him the said
A. B. to be testified as aforesaid, to revoke, alter, change, determine, annul,
make void and frustrate all or any of the said Uses or Estates in these
presents before mentioned, of all or any part or parcel of the said Manor,
etc. And also by his said Deed in writing, or by his last Will in writing, to
be testified as aforesaid, to limit, declare and appoint the Uses of the said
Manor, Lands and Premises, or of any of them, or of any part or parts of
them, to any of the Persons before-named, or to any other Person or Persons
whatsoever. And, that upon such new Declaration, Limitation and Appointment of
any new or other Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, of or in the Premises, or any
part or parcel thereof, as aforesaid. The Use and Uses, Estate and Estates of
such or so much of the Premises, whereof any such new Declaration, Limitation
and appointment, shall be so had and made, shall be, and the said A. B. his
Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other person and persons, and his and
their Heirs and Assigns, which at any time hereafter shall stand and be seized
of such and so much of the Premises, whereof any such new Declaration,
Limitation and appointment, shall be so had and made, shall stand and be seized
thereof, to the use of such person and persons, and of such Estate and Estates,
as shall be mentioned and expressed in the said Deed or last Will, any thing in
these presents contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(4.) Provided always, and the true intent Another
and meaning of these presents, and of all the parties hereunto is, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. and the said A. B. shall have
full power at all times hereafter, and from time to time during his life, at
his free will and pleasure, by any his Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings, or
by his last Will and Testament in writing, by him to be sealed and subscribed,
in the presence of Two or more credible Witnesses, to alter, change, diminish,
enlarge, revoke, determine or make void all and every, or any the Use and Uses,
Estate and Estates, before, in and by these presents limited, expressed,
mentioned, declared or appointed to any person or persons, of or in the said
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, and to declare, create, limit or
appoint any other Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, to any of the person or
persons aforesaid, or to any other person or persons whatsoever, in such sort,
manner and form, and for such Estate or Estates, term and terms, as the said A.
B. shall think meet and convenient. And that at all times, and from time to
^^me immediately from and after such alteration, change, diminution,
enlargement, revocation or determination of the said Use or Uses, Estate or
Estates, and Creation, Declaration, Limitation or Appointment of any other Use
or Uses, Estate or Estates, The said Fine or Fines, and Recovery or Recoveries,
and all and every other Conveyance and Conveyances, Assurance and Assurances in
the Law whatsoever, heretofore had or made, or at any time hereafter to be had
or made, of the said Manor, etc. or of any part thereof, according to the
intent and true meaning of these presents, shall be and enure, and shall be
construed, deemed, adjudged and taken to be and enure. And the said Cognizee or
Cognizees of the said Fine or Fines, and Recoveror or Recoverors in the said
Recovery or Recoveries, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, their and every
of their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, shall immediately from
thenceforth stand and be seized of and in the Premises, or of or in such part
thereof, whereof any such Declaration, Creation, Limitation or Appointment of
other Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, Term or Terms shall be made, as is
aforesaid, to and for such Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, intents and
purposes, and of such Person and Persons, and in suc^ ^ort, manner and form, as
the said A. B. in or b^ such Deed or Deeds, Writing or Writings, or b^ his last
Will and Testament in writing, by him Sealed, and subscribed and testified as
aforesaid, shall from time to time Create, declare, limit, express or appoint,
and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. These presents, or any
thing therein contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(5.) Provided always, and it is further Another giving power to revoke Uses,
with exception of Leases, etc.
hereby Covenanted, granted, condescended, agreed, published and declared by
and between all and every of the aforesaid parties, That the true intent and
meaning as well of the aforesaid Recovery, as of the said Fine, and of all and
every of the respective parties, to the same and to these presents, was and is,
that it should and might be, and shall and may be lawful to and for the said A.
B. from time to time and at all times during his life, by his Writing or
Writings by him to be signed or sealed, in the presence of Three Witnesses of
credit, or more, to signify or declare, that his will and pleasure is, That
all or any of the Use or Uses, Estate or Estates in possession, Reversion or
remainder, limited, appointed, raised, created or implied in or by these
presents, shall cease, determine, be void or revoked, of, for, touching or
concerning all or any of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, or any of them, or for, touching or concerning any
part or parcel of them, or any of them: And that then and from thenceforth all
and every of the said Use and Uses, Estate and Estates in possession, Reversion
or remainder, so signified or declared, to cease, determine, be void or
revoked, shall then and from thenceforth cease, determine, and be utterly void
and revoked, according to the intent and true meaning of the said A. B. so as
aforesaid to be signified and declared; other then such Lease or Exception,
vide Apres, Sect. 9.
Leases, Estate or Estates, or Charges, which he the said A. B. shall make, lay
or charge of or upon any of the Premises, for satisfying of Debts, or for
valuable consideration in money, or otherwise, by force of the aforesaid
Proviso in these presents before expressed. And also that Raising new Uses.
then and from thence forth, at all time and times after such signification or
significations, Declaration or Declarations, so to be made, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time or times during his life, so often
as he shall think good, by any other his Writing by him to be signed, sealed
and testified as aforesaid, to limit, create, appoint and declare, of, for and
concerning the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or
any of them, any new, or other Use or Uses, to the person or persons aforesaid,
or to any other person or persons whatsoever; and that then and from and after
such new Limitation, the said Recovery and Fine respectively shall be and
inure. And New Uses
the said Recoverors in the said Recovery, and Cognizees of the said Fine, and
their Heirs, and all and every person and persons, who then shall be and stand
seized of and in the Premises, or any part thereof, whereof such new Use or
Uses shall be declared, created, raised, limited or appointed, and his and
their Heirs shall respectively stand and be seized of the same Premises, or
such part thereof, whereof such new Use or Uses shall be declared, limited or
appointed, to such use and uses of such person and persons, to whom such other
or new Estate or Estates, Use or Uses, shall be newly declared, created,
raised, limited or appointed; and for such Estate and Estates, and in such
manner and form, and by and under such Limitations, Conditions and Provisoes,
as shall be so newly appointed, expressed or declared. And for want of such
Declaration or new Limitation, so to be made, after any such Revocation, Then
the said Recovery and Fine touching such of the Premises, whereof no such
Declaration, Limitation or appointment of Use, shall be made, shall be and
inure, to the only use and behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, any thing herein before contained to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding. But it is and always was the intent of all the parties to
these presents, That no Revocation or new Limitation should or shall any way
frustrate or make void any Lease, Estate, Rent or Charge made, granted or
charged, or No Revocation or new Limitation to prejudice Leases, etc.
to be made, granted or charged of or upon the Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, by the said A. B. for valuable consideration, or otherwise, by virtue
or force of any former Proviso in these presents expressed, but that the same
and every of them shall stand good, according to the purport and true meaning
of them and every of them, notwithstanding any such Revocation, or new
Limitation hereafter to be made.

(6.) Provided always, and it is hereby explained Power of Revoc^tion of uses
as to particular persons, and limiting new.
and declared to be the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of all
the parties to the same, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A.
B. and E. his Wife, at any time during the Coverture between them, by any
Writing or Writings Indented, to be by them signed and sealed, in the presence
of Three or more credible Witnesses, who shall thereunto subsscribe or indorse
their Names or Marks, testifying the same, to alter, change, Revoke, determine,
diminish or enlarge all or any the Use or Uses, herein before limited, touching
or concerning the said Message, Lands and Premises, herein before limited, to
the said A. B. and E. his Wife, for their lives, or any part or parcel thereof:
And by the same Writing or Writings, or by any other Writing or Writings
Indented, so signed, sealed and testified as aforesaid, to limit or appoint any
other Use or Uses of the same last mentioned Message, Lands and Premises, or
any part or parcel thereof, to the said person or persons, or to any other
person or persons, and of such Estate and Estates, as to them shall ^eem meet.
And in case any such new Limitation or appointment of Uses shall be made, That
then the said Fine so to be levied, shall be and inure, and shall be deemed,
adjudged, construed and expounded to be and inure, as touching the said
Message, Lands and Premises last before mentioned, and every or any part
thereof, whereof such new Use or Uses shall be limited or declared, as
aforesaid, to and for such new Use and Uses, as in and by such Writing or
Writings, so to be signed, sealed and testified as aforesaid, shall be
expressed, limited and declared.

(7.) Provided always, and it is the true Another as to particular persons.
intent and meaning of these presents, and of all the parties hereunto, That if
the said A. B. shall at any time hereafter during his natural life, be minded
or willing to revoke and make frustrate and void the Use and Uses, limited as
aforesaid to the said C. B. and D. B. and their Heirs respectively, or to
limit, raise or appoint any other Use or Uses, for or concerning the Premises,
to them herein before limited, or any part or parcel thereof: And the same his
will and meaning shall declare in writing under his Hand and Seal, in the
presence of Two or more credible Witnesses, That then and immediately after
such Declaration had and made, the said Use and Uses hereby limited to the said
C. B. and D. B. and their Heirs, of, for and concerning the said Premises, or
so much thereof, whereof the said A. B. shall make such Declaration, shall
cease, determine, and be utterly void. And that then and at all times after the
said Fine shall be and inure, and the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. the Cognizees,
and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of the same Premises,
whereof such Declaration shall be made to such other Use and Uses, as the said
A. B. either by the same, or by any other Writing under his Hand and Seal, to
be testified as aforesaid, at any time during his life, shall nominate and
appoint.

(8.) Provided always, etc. That it shall Another whereby power is given to
revoke, and limit new Uses, with consent of Cognizees, F^ off^^s, etc.
and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time or times during his
natural life, by his Deed or Deeds Indented, to be by him sealed and delivered
in the presence of, etc. by and with the consent and approbation of the said C.
D. E. F. and G. H. or of the survivors or survivor of them, his or their Heirs
and Assigns, testified in writing under his and their Hands and Seals, to
alter, change, determine or make void, all or any the Estate or Estates, Use or
Uses, before by these presents limited and appointed (except only the Uses
hereby before limited and appointed, to or for the Ioynture of the said E. B.
as aforesaid.) And that from and after such alteration, change, Revocation,
determination or making void thereof, or of any part thereof, these presents,
and all other Assurances of the Premises whatsoever, shall be and enure, and
shall be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be and enure. And the said C.
D. E. F. and G. H. and their Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs and Assigns of
the survivor and survivors of them, shall stand and be seized of all and
singular the Premises (except before excepted) Exception.
or so much thereof, whereof such alteration, change, Revocation,
determination, or making void, shall be had and made as aforesaid, to such
other use and uses, and to the use of such person and persons, and for such
Estate and Estates, and in such sort, manner and form, as the said A. B. by any
such Deed or Deeds Indented, sealed and executed in the presence of, etc. by
and with such consent and approbation as is aforesaid, shall declare, limit and
appoint. And from and after such Revocation, in default of such Declaration,
limitation and appointment, then to the use and behoof of the said A. B. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(9.) Provided always, etc. That the said A. B. Another with a Clause to
preserve Leases.
shall and lawfully may at any time, during his natural life, with the license
and assent of the said, etc. or his Heirs, under his or their Hand or Seal, or
Hands and Seals first had and obtained in writing, by the Deed or Deeds of him
the said A. B. duly executed in the presence of, etc. to alter, change, repeal
or revoke, the Uses or Limitations beforementioned, or any of them, and by the
same, or afterward by any other Deed or Deeds to be testified as aforesaid, to
limit or appoint such part of the said Manors, etc. whereof such license shall
be had and procured to be to such Use or Uses, for such Estate or Estates, and
for such Person or Persons, and his or their Heirs, as the said A. B. shall by
such Deed or Deeds declare, limit or appoint. And it is agreed by and between
the said Parties to these presents, That the said Conveyances herein before
Covenanted to be had or made as aforesaid, shall be and inure, and the said
Feoffe^s and their Heirs, after such License had and obtained as aforesaid, and
such Declaration, Limitation and Appointment had and made, shall stand and be
seized of the Premises, or such part thereof, whereof such Declaration,
Limitation and Appointment shall be made to such uses and intents, of such
Estate and Estates, for such Person and Persons, and in such manner and form as
by the said A. B. shall be declared, limited and appointed in manner and form
aforesaid. Provided nevertheless, that the said signification or declaration,
Proviso to pres^ve Leases.
or any thing herein before expressed, touching or concerning the altering,
changing, repealing or revoking of the said Uses, or any of them, shall not
extend to any Demise or Demises, according to the intent and true meaning of
these presents, to be made of the Premises, whereof such signification or
declaration shall be made as aforesaid, or any part or parcel thereof, but that
notwithstanding any such declaration or signification, all and every the said
Demise and Demises, Lease and Leases, in manner and form aforesaid to be made,
shall stand, remain and continue in full force and effect, according to the
intent and true meaning of such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises: any thing
herein before contained, to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(10.) Provided always, and it is concluded Another, as to one particular
Message.
and agreed by and between the said Parties, and the true intent and meaning of
them, and every of them, and of these presents is, That it shall and may be
lawf^l to and for the said A. B. from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
during the term of his natural life, by any his Deed or Deeds, Writing or
Writings, to be by him the said A. B. signed, sealed or delivered in the
presence of two or more credible Witnesses, to revoke, frustrate and make void
all or any of the Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, or Limitations herein before
limited, declared or appointed, of, for or concerning one Message or Tenement
before mentioned, and the Lands thereunto belonging, lying in Y. aforesaid, in
the occupation of the said, etc. or any part or parcel thereof (other then the
Use herein before limited to the said E. B. for term of her life as aforesaid)
And that then and from thenceforth, the Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, and
Limitations herein before declared, limited or appointed, of, for and
concerning the said Message, or Tenement and Lands, or such part thereof, for
or concerning which any such revocation shall be so had or made (other then the
said Use herein before limited to the said E. B.) shall cease, determine and be
utterly revoked, frustrate and made void: And that then it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said A. B. by the same Deed or Deeds, or by any other
Deed or Deeds to be signed and sealed by the said A. B. and testified as
aforesaid, to declare, limit or appoint any other new Use or Uses, Estate or
Estates whatsoever, of the said Messunge and Premises, of, for or concerning
which, any such Revocation shall be so made, or any part or parcel thereof,
unto any Person or Persons whatsoever, subject nevertheless to the said Use
herein before limited to the said E. B. in manner and form aforesaid, any thing
herein before contained, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding:
And that then and from thenceforth, the said Recovery and Recoveries, as to the
said Message and Lands, or such part thereof, concerning which, any such
Revocation and new Declaration shall be made, shall be and inure, and the said
Recoverors, and their Heirs, shall thereof stand and be seized, to such Use and
Uses, intents and purposes, as the said A. B. by any such Deed or Deeds,
Writing or Writings, as aforesaid, shall declare, limit, or appoint.

CHAP. XIII. The forms of Deeds of Revocation, and Limitation of New Uses.
(1.) TO all Christian people to whom this A short Deed of Revocation.
present Writing shall come. A. B. of, etc. sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting: Know ye that I the said A. B. do by this my present Writing,
sealed with my seal, and subscribed with my Name, in the presence of I. K. L M.
N. O. three credible Witnesses, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, revoke,
determine and make void and frustrate all and every the Uses and Estates,
mentioned, raised, created, limited and made in and by one Indenture of
Feoffment, bearing date, etc. made between me the said A. B. of the one part,
and C. D. E. F. and G. H. on the other part, of and for the Message, or
Tenement and Lands, Hereditaments and Premises, with Th'appurtenances, in the
said Indenture mentioned, and of and for every part and parcel thereof. And I
do by these presents New Use appointed to the Party revoking, and his Heirs.
absolutely limit, determine and appoint, that all and singular the Feoffees,
Parties and Persons in the said Indenture mentioned, and their Heirs and
Assigns, shall immediately and from henceforth stand and be seized of the said
Message, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the said Indenture mentioned,
and of and in every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of me
the said A. B. mine Heirs and Assigns for ever, in a pure and absolute Estate
of Fee-simple: In witness whereof I the said A. B. have to this my present
Writing, put my Hand and Seal, and subscribed my Name in the presence of the
said I. K. L. M. and N. O. three credible Witnesses, whose Names are hereunto
subscribed this twentieth Day of May, in the twentieth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord, etc.

(2.) To all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come. I A. B.
of, etc. do Another with recital of the former Deed of uses, and power of
Revocation.
send greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas by one Indenture bearing
Date, etc. made by me the said A. B. by the name of A. B. of, etc. Gent. on the
one part, and C. D. E. F. and G. H. on the other part, for the consideration in
the said recited Indenture mentioned and set forth: I did Covenant, promise and
grant, etc. [recite the Covenant to levy a Fine] which said Fine so to be
acknowledged and levied, as aforesaid, of all and singular the Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments before mentioned, was in and by
the said recited Indenture, Covenanted, granted, concluded and declared to be
to such several uses and behoofs, and of such Estate and Estates, as are
particularly in the said Indenture mentioned and set-forth. And whereas in the
said recited Indenture there is a Proviso contained, as follows: that is to
say, Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of this present
Recital of the Proviso.
Indenture, and of all the Parties hereunto, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said A. B at any time during his life, by any Deed or Deeds,
Writing or Writings, or by his last Will and Testament in writing, by him
sealed and subscribed in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses, to
alter, change, enlarge, revoke, frustrate and make void, all, every or any of
the Use or Uses, Estate and Estates, herein before expressed, limited,
mentioned, declared or appointed to any Person or Persons, of and in the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or in any of
them, or in any part or parcel of them, or any of them, and thereof or of any
part thereof, to create, declare, limit or appoint any other Use or Uses,
Estate or Estates to any Person or Persons herein before named, or to any other
Person or Persons whatsoever, in such sort, manner and form as the said A. B.
shall think meet and convenient, and that at all times, and from time to time,
immediately from and after such alteration, change, enlargement, revocation, or
making void of all or any the said Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, and
Declaration, Limitation or Appointment of any other Use or Uses, Estate or
Estates, all and every those Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, of and in the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or of
or in any part or parcel thereof, or such of them which shall be so revoked and
declared to be made void, as aforesaid, shall cease, determine and be utterly
void and frustrate: And that then and from thenceforth the said Fine, and all
and every other Conveyance and Conveyances, Assurance and Assurances
whatsoever, had, or at any time hereafter to be had, or made between the said
Parties, or any of them, of the said Manors and Premises, or of such part
thereof, whereof such other Use or Uses, Estate or Estates, shall be so limited
or declared as aforesaid, shall be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be
and inure, and the said Cognizees of the said Fine, and the Survivors and
Survivor of them, and the Heirs of the Survivor of them, shall immediately from
thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every part thereof, to and for
such Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, intents and purposes, and of such Person
and Persons, and in such sort, manner and form, as the said A. B. in or by such
Deed or Deeds in writing, or last Will and Testament in writing, to be sealed,
subscribed and testified, as is aforesaid, should create, declare, limit,
express or appoint, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever: And
whereas afterward, Recital del Fine.
in performance of the Covenants, Grants and Agreements in the said recited
Indenture mentioned, One Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. was had,
levied, acknowledged and executed, of and for the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments and Premises, in the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, before his Majesty's Justices of the said Court, by me the said A.
B. unto the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. which said Fine was had, levied and
acknowledged to the Uses, intents and purposes, and with and under the several
Provisoes, Conditions and Limitations in the said recited Indenture mentioned:
Now know ye, that I the said A. (...). for diverse good The Revocation.
Causes and Considerations me moving, and by virtue of the said Proviso before
mentioned, and liberty, power and authority, thereby to me given and reserved,
Have altered, changed, revoked, determined and made void. And by this present
Writing, being by me signed and sealed in the presence of the Persons
under-named, do alter, change, revoke, determine and make void all and every
the said Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, Created, raised, declared, limited
and appointed by the said recited Indenture and Fine, and either of them; and
by force of the Statute of transferring Uses into Possession, of and in the
said Manors, Lands, Tenements Hereditaments and Premises, and of or in any
part or parcel thereof. And I the said A. B. The limitation of New uses.
out of the Fatherly love and affection that I do bear unto R. G. my only
Daughter and Heir apparent, now wife to N. G. of, etc. Esquire; and to the Heirs of
her Body lawfully begotten, do by these presents, by virtue of the said
Proviso, in the said recited Indenture contained, and the liberty, power and
authority therein and thereby to me given, and reserved as aforesaid, Create,
declare, limit and appoint, That the said Fine so had, levied and acknowledged,
as aforesaid, of the said Manors and Premises, herein before mentioned as
aforesaid, shall be and inure, and that the said Cognizees, and their Heirs,
shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manors and Premises, and of and
in every part and parcel thereof, to the use and behoof of me the said A. B.
for and during the term of my natural life, without impeachment of or for any
manner of Waste: And immediately from and after my decease, to the use and
behoof of the said R. G. and N. G. her Husband, and of the Heirs of the Body of
the said R. G. and in default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right
Heirs of me the said A. B. for ever: Here may be a Proviso for Revocation of
these Uses.

(3.) To all Christian People, etc. A. B. of, etc. Another with a more brief
recital.
sends greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Whereas, in and by one
Indenture, bearing Date the, etc. made between me the said A. B. of the one
part, and I. S. of, etc. Gent. on the other part. There is (amongst other
things) one Proviso contained in these or the like words, in effect hereafter
following: that is to say: Provided always, etc. [and to set forth the Proviso
word for word] As in and by the said recited Indenture, more plainly and at
large it does and may appear. Now know ye, That I the said A. B. pursuant to
the said Proviso, and the power and authority to me thereby given, do by this
my present Deed or Writing, sealed and subscribed by me the said A. B. in the
presence of three credible Witnesses, whose Names are hereunto subscribed,
declare and publish my mind, intent and meaning to be, to revoke, alter, make
void and frustrate: And I do by these presents, revoke, alter, make void and
frustrate all and every the Use and Uses, Estate and Estates, Trust and Trusts,
in and by the said recited Indenture, declared, limited and appointed, of, for
and concerning all and every the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
other Hereditaments, mentioned, contained and specified in the said Indenture,
with their and every of their Appurtenances, and of, for and concerning every
part and parcel thereof. And I do hereby, further declare, limit and appoint,
That the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments,
with Th'appurtenances, shall remain and be, and that the said I. S. and his
Heirs, and all and every other Person and Persons standing and being, or which
at any time hereafter, shall stand and be seized of and in the same, shall
stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the use
and behoof of me the said A. B. my Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(4.) This Indenture made, etc. Between Another with a Feoffment added.
A. B. of the one part, and F. G. of the other part. Whereas the said A. B. did
heretofore, by his Indenture bearing Date the, etc. made between him the said
A. B. on the one part, and C. D. E. F. and G. H. on the other part, Covenant,
grant and agree to and with the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, That he the said A. B. and his Heirs, in such
manner and form, as in and by the said recited or mentioned Indenture, is
Covenanted and agreed, should and would convey and assure, or cause to be
conveyed and assured unto the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and their Heirs, and
to the Survivor of them, and his Heirs, All and singular the Manor of, etc.
[with general words] to the several uses, intents and purposes, and under the
several Provisoes and Conditions in the said recited Indenture mentioned,
expressed and declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. The
particulars of which said Uses, does more plainly appear in and by the said
recited Indenture, relation being thereunto had or made: In which said recited
Indenture, there is nevertheless contained and comprised, one Proviso or Clause
to the tenor or effect hereafter following. Provided nevertheless, etc.
[reciting the Proviso and power of Revocation, word for word] Now witnesses
this present Indenture: And the said A. B. according to the tenor, power or
liberty of the said Proviso, being fully minded, determined and resolved to
alter and determine the Estate and Estates limited in Use, in or by the said
recited or mentioned Indenture, unto I. S. of B. Esquire; and the Heirs Males of
his Body, and also the Estate and Estates limited in use, in or by the said
recited Indenture, unto I. S. for term of his life, without impeachment of
Waste, and after his decease, then to B. S. son of the said I. S. and the Heirs
Males of his Body lawfully begotten, does by these presents, and by force of
and according to the said Proviso, and the power The Uses in particular revoked.
and liberty thereby given, revoke, repeal and determine all and every the said
Estate and Estates, in any wise limited in use, in or by the said recited or
mentioned Indenture, unto the said I. S. and the Heirs Males of his Body
lawfully begotten; and also all and every the Estate and Estates, in or by the
said recited Indenture limited in use, unto the said I. S. for term of his
life, and all and every the Estate and Estates, in or by the said recited
Indenture, limited in use unto the said B. S. Son of the said I. and the Heirs
Males of his Body lawfully begotten, of, in, for and concerning all and every
the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, in any wise comprised, in or by the said recited or mentioned
Indenture: And likewise, the said A. B. does hereby declare, that the said
several and respective Estates limited as aforesaid, severally and
respectively, unto the said T. S. I. S. and B. S. and every of them, shall
cease, determine, be frustrate, void and of no further effect, or continuance
in Law. And that New Use.
all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
aforesaid, with their and every of their Appurtenances, and the only use
thereof, shall from henceforth remain, continue and be unto the said A. B. his
Heirs and Assigns. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said A. B.
for and in consideration The Feoffment.
of One thousand pounds of lawful Moneys of England, to him in hand paid,
before the sealing and delivery hereof by the said F. G. the receipt whereof,
etc. Has given, granted, enfeoffed and confirmed unto the said T. G. his Heirs
and Assigns. All that, etc. [with usual general words, as in a Feoffment] To
have and to hold the said, etc. unto the said F. G. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever. To the only proper and absolute use and behoof of the said F. G. his
Heirs and Assigns for evermore.

(5.) To all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come. A. B.
of, etc. does Another, of Uses settled upon a Covenant to stand seized.
send greeting in our Lord God Everlasting: Whereas the said A. B. has by his
Indenture, bearing Date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned,
Covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed to and with C. D. of, etc. that
the said A. B. and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons and
their Heirs, which then stood or were seized of all and singular the Manor of,
etc. should from thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, to the several uses and behoofs in the said recited Indenture
limited and set forth. And whereas in and by the said recited Indenture it is
also Provided in these words following: Provided always, etc. [reciting the
Proviso word for word] Now know ye, that the said A. B. being minded to revoke
all and every the said Uses in the said recited Indenture mentioned and
expressed, in pursuance of the said power and authority to him given by the
said Proviso, does by this present writing sealed and subscribed with his
proper Hand and Seal, declare his will and pleasure to be, to adnul, determine,
make void and frustrate: And does by these presents, clearly and absolutely
adnul, make void and frustrate, all and singular the said Uses in the said
recited Indenture limited, and all and every the Estate and Estates thereupon
executed, or to be executed, of, in or to the said Manor, etc. and Premises,
and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof, in such sort, manner and form,
as if the said Uses, or any of them, had never been limited or appointed. Any
thing to the contrary, etc.

(6.) To all Christian People, etc. A. B. of, etc. Another made upon having
Issue Male, pursuant to the power given.
sends greeting, etc. Whereas by certain Indentures, bearing Date the, etc.
made between me the said A. B. of the one part, and C. D. and E. F. of the
other part: It was for the Causes and Considerations in the said recited
Indenture specified, Covenanted, granted and concluded between the said Parties
to the said Indentures, and every of them, amongst other things, in manner and
form following: that is to say, First, I the said A. B. did by the same
Indenture, for me, mine Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every
of them Covenant, Recital of a Covenant to Enfeoff to Uses.
grant, conclude and agree, etc. [recite here the Covenant to Enfeoff the said
C. D. and E. F.] To such Uses, intents and purposes, as are in the said recited
Indenture contained and set forth. In which said recited Indenture, there was
also one Proviso contained and specified, as follows. Provided always, etc.
[recite here the Proviso word for word: being a power given to A. B. to revoke,
in case he should after have Issue Male of his Body] And whereas also, for the
accomplishment and performance of the Covenants, Grants and Agreements in the
said Recital of the Feoffment.
recited Indenture contained, the said Premises in the aforesaid recited
Indenture specified, were by one Deed Indented, purporting a Feoffment, bearing
Date, etc. conveyed and assured by me the said A. B. unto the said C. D. and E.
F. and their Heirs, unto the said intents and purposes in the said first
recited Indenture mentioned and expressed, and according to the true intent and
meaning of the said first recited Indenture. As in and by the said several
recited Indentures more fully and at large it does and may appear. Now know ye,
That forasmuch He does now (having Issue Male) revoke.
as I the said A. B. has since the said settlement, had Issue Male of my Body
lawfully begotten, being now alive at the time of then sealing and execution of
these presents: I have, according to the power and authority to me the said A.
B. by the said recited Indenture and Proviso therein specified and contained,
given, by this my present Deed in writing, under my Hand and Seal, and
delivered according to the purport of the said recited Proviso, in the presence
of two sufficient Witnesses, altered, changed and revoked: and do by these
presents alter, change and revoke, absolutely and in the whole, all and every
the Use and Uses, in and by the said first recited Indenture limited and
appointed, of all and singular the Premises, with Th'appurtenances, in the
said recited Indenture specified; and of every part and parcel thereof. And I
the said A. B. do further by these presents (in such and as ample manner and
form, as by any Proviso, or power of alteration, determination or revocation of
Use or Uses, I may or can) absolutely disanull, determine and revoke, all and
singular forms, Use and Uses by me limited or declared, in or by any former
Conveyance and Conveyances, Assurance and Assurances whatsoever heretofore, of
the Premises, or any part thereof, by me made and executed in such ample
manner and form as if the said Use, Uses, or Limitations had never been had
made or declared. And furthermore know ye, That I the said A. B. for diverse
good Causes and Considerations, me thereunto especially moving, do by these
presents, according to the power to me given as aforesaid, limit and appoint,
The new Uses.
that the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other
Person or Persons, which now stand or be seized of the said Premises, or any
part thereof, with Th'appurtenances, shall from henceforth stand and be seized
of the same: And that all and singular Feoffments, and other former Assurance
and Assurances whatsoever, by me made and executed thereof, and of every part
and parcel thereof, shall be and inure, and are by these presents declared to
be meant, and intended to be and inure to the use and behoof of me the said A.
B. mine Heirs and Assigns for ever. Any thing herein before contained, etc.

CHAP. XIV. The several forms of Settlements.
(1.) THis Indenture Tripartie, made, etc. A Covenant to levy a Fine, with
declaration of Uses. The Consideration.
Between A. B. and E. his wife of the first part; C. D. and E. F. of the second
part; and C. B. Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. on the third part:
Witnesses, that the said A. B. for and in consideration of the natural love
and affection which he bears unto the said C. B. and for the better settling
of the Messuages, Lands and Tenements hereafter mentioned, to such uses,
intents and purposes as are hereafter specified, and the continuance of the
said Premises in the Name and Blood of the said A. B. Does for himself, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, Covenant, grant and agree to and with the
said C. B. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these presents: That he
To levy a Fine.
the said A. B. and E. his wife, on this side, and before the Feast of, etc.
next ensuing the Date hereof, shall and will at his proper Cost and Charges, by
such Fine or Fines, with Proclamations, to be had and levied in due form of
Law, as shall be devised or advised by the said C. B. or his Counsel learned in
the Law, convey and assure unto the said C. D. and E. F. and to the Heirs of
one of them, All and singular those his Messuages, Lands, etc.

(2.) And it is Covenanted, condescended The Uses.
unto, concluded, declared and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these
presents, That the said Fine or Fines, so to be levied and had of the said
Messuages, Lands, etc. and other the Premises, with Th'appurtenances before in
these presents mentioned, and of every or any part or parcel thereof, and the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest and Possession of them the said C. D. and E. F.
and their Heirs, and either of them and his Heirs, of, in and to the said
Premises, and every part thereof, thereby to be had shall be: and the said C.
D. and E. F. and their Heirs, and the Survivor of him and his Heirs, and all
and every other Person and Persons, his and their Heirs, that shall stand or be
seized thereof, or of any part thereof, shall stand and be seized of the same,
and of every part or parcel thereof, to the several uses, intents, agreements,
limitations and payments, and under the Provisoes and Conditions hereafter, in
and by these presents expressed, mentioned and declared, and to none other use
or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever: that is to say: To the only use To A
B. and E. B. for life remainder in Tail.
and behoof of the said A. B. for and during the term of his natural life,
without impeachment of or for any manner of Waste: and from and after his
Decease, to the use and behoof of the said E. B. his wife, for and during the
term of her natural life, and from and after the Deceases of the said A. B. and
E. B. to the use and behoof of the said C. B. and of the Heirs Males of his
Body lawfully begotten or to be begotten, to be charged nevertheless, and
chargable with such yearly Rent or Rents, and distresses for the same, as shall
be hereafter in these presents limited or expressed: And for want of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of D. B. second Son of the said A. B. and of the
Heirs Males of the Body of the said D. B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten
(and so to the other Sons of A. B. if he has any) charged nevertheless and
chargable, as aforesaid: And for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of
the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever.

(3.) Provided always, That it shall and may Power for Tenant for life to make
a Jointure.
be lawful to and for the said A. B. at any time or times hereafter, during his
natural life, by his Deed or Deeds, in his life time lawfully executed, to
assure, appoint, limit and convey to any lawful Wife or Wives, which the said
A. B. shall hereafter fortune to Marry (in case he survive the said E. F.) for
term of the life only of such Wife or Wives, for or in the Name of the
Jointure or Joyntures of such Wife or Wives, one full third part or less, or so
much as shall amount to a full third part, of all the said Messuages, Lands and
Premises. And also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B.
To convey Rents to younger Sons.
during the term of his natural life, by any Deed or Deeds in writing under his
Hand and Seal, or otherwise by his last Will and Testament in writing, to
grant, assure, limit, devise and convey to every or any the younger Sons of the
said A. B. of his Body lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, for term of the
life or lives of such younger Son or Sons, such yearly Rent charge or Rents
charge, with a Clause of Distress for every such Rent, as unto the said A. B.
shall be thought meet and convenient, to be yearly issuing and going out of all
and every the said Messuages, Lands, etc. or any part of them, from and after
the decease of the Survivor of them the said A. B. and E. his wife, so that the
said Rent or Rents so to be granted, limited or devised as aforesaid, do not
exceed the sum of sixty pounds per annum in the whole.

(4.) And further, that it shall and may be To make Leases to younger Sons.
lawful to and for the said A. B. at any Time or Times, during his natural
life, to make any Lease or Leases unto every or any of his younger Son or Sons,
for the Term of one and twenty years or under, in Possession or Reversion of
all or any the said Messuages, Lands, etc. whereof the said Fine or Fines,
before mentioned, is Covenanted to be levied by the said A. B. or any part or
parcel thereof (the said Lease or Leases to commence immediately from and after
the decease of the Survivor of them the said A. B. and E. his wife) charged and
chargable nevertheless with such Rent and Rents, sum and sums of Money, or
payments, as before or after in these presents are appointed, declared or
limited, to be had, levied or issuing out of the Premises, or any part
thereof, in such sort as in these presents is mentioned and declared, so that
the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, so to be Demised or Leased to any
of the said younger Sons, do not exceed in the whole the yearly value of, etc.
per annum, over and above the Rent or Rents reserved upon such Lease or Leases:
and so as upon every such Lease and Leases so to be had and made as aforesaid,
the old and accustomed yearly Rents, Customs and Services be reserved, to be
yearly payable and done, during the continuance of every such Lease and Leases,
at the Days and Times formerly used: And so that the same Lease and Leases, or
any of them to be made as aforesaid, be not without impeachment of Waste. [Here
may be another Proviso to empower him to grant Rents to Servants, etc.]

(5.) The Fines to be and inure for payment of the Rents, and advantage of the
Lessees.
And it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between the said
Parties to these presents, That the said Fine and Fines, so to be levied and
had as aforesaid, shall be and inure, and that the said C. D. and E. F. and
their Heirs, and the Survivor of them and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized
of all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments parcel of the said Premises,
which shall by virtue of these presents, be limited or appointed to be charged
with any Rent or Rents, sum or sums of Money, or payments to any Person or
Persons, or which shall hereafter be Granted, Leased, Demised or Charged,
according to the intent and true meaning of these presents, and according to
the power, liberty and authority hereby given, permitted and allowed, as well
to the use of such Person or Persons to whom any parcel of the Premises in
these presents mentioned, shall be hereafter so limited, appointed, demised,
leased, granted or conveyed, of such Estate and Estates, and for such Term and
Time as the same shall be pursuant to the said authority hereby given to be
limited, appointed, eased, granted or conveyed: and under the Covenants,
Charges, Conditions and Agreements, in such Lease or Leases, Deed or Deeds to
be contained: As also, to the use and intent, that every Person and Persons, to
whom any Rent, yearly sum or payment shall be hereafter granted, limited,
appointed or devised, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and according to the power, liberty and authority, allowed or given,
in and by these presents shall and may have, receive, levy and take the same,
and likewise distrain for such Rent and Rents, sum and sums of Money, as shall
fortune to be behind and not paid, according to the intent and true meaning of
these presents, and of the several Grant or Grants, Limitation or Limitations,
Devise or Devises, Appointment or Appointments, of, for or concerning the same
to be had or made, pursuant to the power and authority hereby given, as
aforesaid, etc.

(6.) This Indenture tripartie, etc. Between The Uses declared upon a Recovery
and Fine already had and levied.
A. B. on the first part, C. D. on the second part, and E. F. and G. H. on the
third part: Whereas the said E. F. and G. H. in the Term of Easter last past,
did by Writ of Entry sur disseisin en le post, recover against the said C. D.
all those the Manors of A. B. C. etc. and Thirty Messuages, Twenty Gardens,
one Thousand Acres of Land, etc. [ prout en le Recovery] as in and by the said
Recovery, remaining of Record in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, relation being thereunto had, more fully and at large it does and
may appear. And whereas, etc. [recite also the Fine, if any be] Now witnesses
this present Indenture, That the true intent and meaning of the said A. B. and
of the said Recoverors, and parties to the said Recovery, and also of the
Cognizees of the said Fine, and parties to the said Fine, before and at the
several and respective time and times of the suffering of the said Recovery,
and acknowledging and levying of the said Fine, for, touching and concerning
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, whereof the
said Recovery and Fine were severally and respectively suffered, levied and had
as aforesaid, always was, and yet is, that as well the said Recovery, as the
said Fine, and all and every Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, and other
Acts and Assurances of and concerning the said Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with the Appurtenances, or of any of
them, at any time formerly suffered, levied, executed or had, wherein or
whereunto the said A. B. was or is any way a party, and all and every the
Executions of the same, and every of them, should and shall be and inure, and
be construed, adjudged, deemed and taken to be and inure, and are hereby
Covenanted, granted, agreed and declared to be and inure, to the uses, purposes
and intents, and under the Provisoes, conditions and limitations, hereafter in
these presents expressed, limited and declared. And that the said Recoverors,
and either of them, and all the parties to the said Recovery, and takers
thereby, and their Heirs, and all other person and persons, and his and their
Heirs, who then were, now are, or hereafter shall be seized of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with their and every of
their Appurtenances, comprised in the said Recovery, should and shall stand and
be seized of the said Manors, etc. comprised in the said Recovery, and of
every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances, to the uses, purposes
and intents hereafter expressed. And that the said Cognizees of the said Fine,
and either of them, and all the parties to the said Fine, and the takers
thereby, and the Heirs of them, and every of them, and all and every other
person and persons, and his and their Heirs, who at the time of the levying of
the said Fine, were, or now are, or hereafter shall be seized of the aforesaid
Manors, etc. comprised in the said Fine, and every of them, should and shall
stand and be seized of the same Manors, etc. Hereditaments and Premises,
comprised in the said Fine, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
Appurtenances likewise, to the uses, purposes and intents, hereafter in these
presents expressed and declared, that is to say, for, touching and concerning
To the use of A. for life, after to E. his Wife for life.
the said Manor of A. with the rights, members, Appurtenances, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments thereunto belonging, parcel of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, comprised in the said Recovery, to the use
and behoof of the said A. B. and his Assigns, for and during the term of his
natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of waste: And from and
after the decease of the said A. B. to the use and behoof of E. B. now Wife of
the said A. B. for and during the natural life of the said E. B. for her
Jointure, and in lieu and full recompense of her Dower, out of all the Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said A. B. now is, or at any
time was, or shall be seized of any Estate of Inheritance, during the coverture
between him and the said E. B. And for, touching and concerning all and every
the other Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, mentioned to be
comprised in the said Recovery and Fine, to the use and behoof of the said A.
B. for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for
any manner of waste. And for, touching and concerning the immediate remainder
of the said Manor of A. with all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
thereunto belonging, before mentioned, or meant to be limited to the said E. B.
for her Jointure, as aforesaid, immediately from and after the decease of the
said A. B. and E. B. his Wife, and of the survivor of them, and the immediate
remainder of all and every the said other Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and every of them, comprised within the said Recovery and Fine
(whereof there is no Use before limited or declared to the said E. B. for her
Jointure) to such uses, purposes and intents (immediately from and after the
decease of the said A. B.) and under such Provisoes, conditions and
limitations, as hereafter in these presents are specified, expressed, limited
and declared, and to no other To the use of E. F G H. etc for years, to pay
Debts, etc. Legacies.
use, intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, to the use of the said E.
F. and G. H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the
terms and spaces of years hereafter mentioned, to commence and begin, as
hereafter follows, viz. for, touching and concerning the said Manor of A.
etc. before limited to the use of the said E. B. for her Jointure, for the term
or space of Ten years, to begin immediately from and after the Decease of the
longest liver of them the said A. B. and E. his wife. And for touching and
concerning all the rest and residue of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, comprised in the said Recovery and Fine, for and during the like
Term and space of ten years, to commence immediately from and after the Decease
of the said A. B. upon Trust and confidence, and for and unto the end, intent
and purpose, That they the said E. F. and G. H. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall and may receive, perceive, dispose and employ the Rents,
Revenues, Issues and Profits of all and every the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Premises respectively, for and during the said several terms of
ten years, for and toward the payment Payment of Debts.
and satisfaction of all such Debts, and sums of Money, which the said A. B.
does now owe, or hereafter shall borrow or owe, or for which any Person or
Persons now does, or do, or hereafter shall stand engaged for or with the said
A. B. and for his proper Debt, and for and toward the payment of such Legacy
or Legacies, and sums which the said A. B. shall by Payment of Legacies.
his last Will and Testament in writing, to be by him signed, sealed and
published before three sufficient Witnesses, at the least, give, limit, ordain
and appoint. And from and after the end, expiration, surrender or other
determination of the said Term or Terms of ten years, and as they shall
severally end and determine, To the use and behoof of such Person and Persons,
and for such Estate and Estates as the said A. B. shall by his last Will and
Testament in writing, in the presence of three credible Witnesses, or more,
limit, appoint or declare, and in default of such Limitation, Appointment or
Declaration to the use and behoof of, etc. Provided always, etc. Here may
follow a Power given to A. B. to make Leases, etc. reserving the accustomed
Rent. etc.

(7.) This Indenture Tripartie, made, etc. Another, the Uses of a Recovery as
to several Manors severally limited.
Between A. B. of, etc. Esquire; and C. B. of, etc. Son and Heir apparent of the
said A. B. and of E. B. deceased, late the Wife of the said A. B. and sole
Daughter and Heir of E. H. of, etc. deceased, of the first part: C. D. and E.
F. of the second part: And G. H. and I. K. of the third part: Whereas the said
A. B. is seized in his Demesue, as of Fee, of some part of the Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, hereafter mentioned; and is also seized for term
of his life, as Tenant by the Courtesse of England, of other the Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, hereafter specified, the
Reversion whereof in Feesimple being descended by and after the decease of the
said E. B. unto the said C. B. Now, to the end, intent and purpose, That the
Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, hereafter
mentioned and expressed, may be established, vested and settled, in and unto the
said A. B. during the Term of his natural life, and after his decease, upon the
said C. B. and upon his Name, Stock and Posterity, and to such other Uses as
are hereby appointed.

(8.) It is Covenanted, granted, condescended, Covenant to levy a Fine.
concluded and fully agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents.
And the said A. B. and C. B. do for themselves, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, Covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said C. D.
and E. F. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and to and with every of
them by these presents: That they the said A. B. and C. B. shall and will, on
this side and before the end of Michaelmass Term, now next ensuing, in due form
of Law, etc. [Let it be a Covenant to acknowledge a Fine, Come ceo, etc. Vide
before Chap. 3. The use of the Fine, to make Cognizees Tenants to a Precipe.
to G. H. and I. K. of the Manors of A. B. C. and D.] which said Fine or Fines
so as aforesaid, or in any other sort to be levied and acknowledged, shall be
and inure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, esteemed, reputed and taken to be and
inure to the use of the said G. H. and I. K. and their Heirs, to the end,
intent and purpose, that they the said G. H. and I. K. may become perfect
Tenants of the Freehold of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, with their appurtenances, whereby one or more
perfect common Recovery or Recoveries, shall or may thereof be had and suffered
in manner and form hereafter following: For which intent and purpose, it is
Covenanted and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents: That
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. D. and E. F. to bring, pursue
and prosecute against them the said G. H. and I. K. one or more Writ or Writs
of Entry sur disseisin en le post, of and for the said Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, etc. Vide before Chap. 3.
[as in a Covenant to suffer a Recovery] The which said Common Recovery or
Recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to be had and suffered: And
all other Common Recoveries, Fines, Feoffments, Conveyances and Assurances in
the Law whatsoever, since the decease of the said E. B. had, made, levied,
suffered, acknowledged or executed, or to be had, made, levied, suffered,
acknowledged or executed by or between the said Parties to these presents, or
any of them, or whereunto they or any of them shall be Parties, of, for and
concerning the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them or any of them, shall
be and inure; and shall be adjudged, deemed, esteemed, reputed and taken to be
and inure to the uses, behoofs, intents and purposes, and with, upon and under
such Provisoes, Conditions, Powers and Limitations, as are hereafter in and by
these presents mentioned, declared, limited and appointed.

(9.) That is to say, for and concerning the The uses of the Recovery, being
for life with remainders over in Tail.
said Manors of A. and B. etc. [with general words] to the use of the said C.
B. for and during the Term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for
any manner of Waste, and with full power to do or commit Waste, and from and
after the decease of the said C. B. to the use and behoof of the said A. B. for
and during the Term of his natural life: and from and after the decease of the
said C. B. and A. B. to the use and behoof of D. B. eldest Son of the said C.
B. and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully to be begotten, and for default
of such Issue, to the Remainders in Tail to 1, 2, 3, etc. Sons.
use and behoof of F. B. second Son of the said C. B. and of the Heirs Males of
the Body of the said F. B. lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of G. B. third Son of the said A. B. and of the
Heirs Males of the Body of the said G. B. lawfully begotten. And for default of
such Issue, to the use and behoof of the fourth Son of the Body of the said C.
B. on the Body of M. B. his wife begotten, or to be begotten, and of the Heirs
Males of the Body of such fourth Son lawfully to be begotten, etc. [and so to
the tenth Son] And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of all and
every other Son and Sons of the Body of the said C. B. to be lawfully begotten,
successively one after the other, and of the Heirs Males of the Bodies of every
such Son and Sons, severally and respectively to be begotten, as they and every
of them shall be in Seigniority of Age and Priority of Birth, the eldest of the
said Sons, and the Heirs Males of his Body, being ever preferred before the
younger of the said Sons, and the Heirs males of his body; and for default of
such Issue, to the use and behoof of I. B. second Son of the said A. B. and of
the Heirs males of the body of the said I. B. lawfully to be begotten; and for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the body of the
said A. B. lawfully begotten, and to be begotten; and for want of such Issue,
to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said C. B. for ever.

(10.) And as for and concerning the said Use of the Manor in C. in trust to
be sold.
Manor of C. to the use and behoof of the said C. D. and E. F. and of their
Heirs and Assigns for ever. Upon trust and confidence nevertheless, and to the
end, intent and purpose, That they the said C. D. and E. F. and the survivor of
them, and his Heirs, shall and will sell, convey and assure the said Manor of
C. with the rights, members and Appurtenances, Lands and Tenements thereunto
belonging, and every part thereof, late the Inheritance of the said E. B.
deceased, for the best benefit, profit and advantage, which shall or may be,
bon a fide, had or gotten for the same. And that the money to be raised by
every such sale, and as Disposal of the moneys raised by sale.
every such sale shall be made, shall be forthwith paid and disposed of by the
said C. D. and E. F. and the survivor of them, and his Heirs, as follows:
That is to say, so much money thereof to the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators, as according to the true yearly value of the said Manor and
Lands, shall come to Five years and a halfs purchase. And the residue of the
moneys to be raised by such sale as aforesaid, shall be disposed of, for and
toward the payment of the Debts of the said C. B. and sums of money, mentioned
in the Schedule hereunto annexed: And for and toward the payment of such
Legacies, as the said C. B. shall by his last Will and Testament, Devise and
bequeath, if any overplus remain, after that the said Debts are fully satisfied
and paid: And in default of such Devise or bequest, to the Executors or
Administrators of the said C. B. and upon further trust and confidence, that
the To have the Profits until Sale.
said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may have,
receive and take to his and their own proper use, all and singular the Rents,
Issues, Revenues and Profits of the said Manor, Lands and Premises, hereby
limited and intended to be sold, until such sale shall be made thereof as
aforesaid.

(11.) Provided always, and it is the true Uses as to part, to be void, upon
nonpayment of a sum to the younger Son of A. B.
intent and meaning of these presents, That if the said D. B. or such other
person or persons, to whom any Estate is hereby limited, or intended to be
limited, of and in the said Manors of A. and B. his, their, or some of their
Heirs or Assigns, shall not within Two years next after the decease of the said
A. B. and C. B. or the survivor of them, well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the said I. B. second Son of the said A. B. [if he the said I. B. shall
and do so long live] the sum of Two Thousand pounds, of good and lawful money
of England, That then and immediately after such default of payment, all and
every the Use and Uses herein before declared and limited, as for and
concerning the said Manors of A. and B. shall cease and be void. And then also
and from thenceforth, the said Recovery and Recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in
any other sort to be had and suffered, and the Recoveror New Use to the younger
Son, until he has raised the sum appointed to him.
and Recoverors therein named, his and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized
of and in all and singular the said Manors of A. and B. to the use and behoof
of the said I. B. his Heirs and Assigns, until he or they shall or may, out of
the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, have fully levied and received the said
sum of Two Thousand pounds, together with consideration, after the rate of Six
pounds per Centum per annum, for the forbearance thereof, from the end of the
said Two years next ensuing the deaths of the said A. B. and E. B. or the
survivor of them, and all damages, costs and charges, which he the said I. B.
his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall sustain or be put unto, in or
about the Recovering of the said Premises, or the said sum of Two Thousand
pounds, or any part thereof, or in or about any Suit concerning the same: And
from and after such time as the said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns, shall, or
without fraud or covin might have received the said Two thousand pounds,
together with consideration for the forbearance thereof, as aforesaid, and all
Charges, Expenses and Damages, as aforesaid, touching or in any wise concerning
the same, out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said Manors of A. and B.
That then and from thenceforth the said Recovery and Recoveries After the sum
satisfied, the Uses to be as before.
shall be and inure, as to the said Manors of A. and B. And the Recoveror and
Recoverors therein to be named, his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand
and be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the use of such
person and persons, and of such Estate and Estates, to whom the said Manors
ought to have come and remained, by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, in case the said last mentioned Proviso, for, touching or concerning
the said I. B. or any matter or thing whatsoever therein contained, had never
been.

(12.) And it is further Covenanted, granted, The Uses of the Manor of D.
concluded, declared and fully agreed by and between all the said Parties to
these present Indentures, for them and their Heirs respectively, and the true
intent and meaning of these presents, and of all the Parties thereunto is, That
as to, for, touching and concerning the said Manor of D. late part of the
Inheritance of the said E. B. with the Rights, Members, Appurtenances, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments thereunto belonging: The said Recovery and
Recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in any other manner to be had and suffered: And
all other Recoveries, Conveyances, Fines, Feoffments and Assurances in the Law
whatsoever, since the Death of the said E. B. late the Wife of the said A. B.
had, made, levied, suffered acknowledged or executed, or to be had, made,
levied, suffered, acknowledged or executed, by or between the said Parties to
these presents, or any of them, or whereto they or any of them shall be Parties
of for or concerning the said Manor of D. or any part or parcel thereof,
either solely, or together with other the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, or any of them shall be and inure, and shall be adjudged,
deemed, esteemed, reputed and taken to be and inure to the uses, behoofs,
intents and purposes, as to the said Manor of D. with the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereof, and with, upon and under such Provisoes, Conditions,
Powers and Limitations, as are hereafter in and by these presents mentioned,
declared, limited and appointed: that is to say, To the use and behoof To C. B.
for life, and after to his wife for life.
of the said C. B. and his Assigns, for and during the Term of his natural
life, without impeachment of or for any manner of Waste, and from and after his
decease to the use and behoof of M. B. his Wife, for and during the term of her
natural life: And from and after the decease of the Survivor of them the said
C. B. and M. his Wife, to the use and behoof of the said A. B. for and during
the term of his natural life: And from and after his decease, to the use of,
etc.

(13.) Provided always, and the true intent Power to make Leases for Portions
for Daughters.
and meaning of these presents is, That it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said C. B. at any time or times after the decease of the said M. B. in case
he shall happen to survive her, during his natural life, by his Deed or Deeds
Indented, by him duly executed in the presence of two or more credible
Witnesses, to make one or more Lease or Leases, for one, two or three lives, or
one and twenty years or under, of the said Manor of D. or any part thereof,
under such Rent, Rents, Reservations and Covenants, as he shall think fit, to
any Person or Persons whatsoever, upon Trust, for the raising of the several
Portions herein after mentioned, for such Daughter or Daughters as the said C.
B. shall happen to have, and not otherwise provided for: that is to say, If one
Daughter, then for the raising of Five hundred pounds for that Daughter, and if
more Daughters, then for the raising of Three hundred pounds a piece for each
and every one of the said Daughters, to be paid them at their several and
respective Ages of one and twenty years, or Days of Marriage, which shall first
happen: And that all and every such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises, Grant
or Grants, to be made as aforesaid, shall stand and be good and effectual in
Law, to all The Recovery to be to the use of the ^essees.
intents and purposes: And the said Recovery and Recoveries, so as aforesaid,
or in any other sort to be had and suffered, shall be and inure: and the
Recoveror or Recoverors therein named, or to be named, his and their Heirs
shall stand and be seized of and in such and so much of the said Manor of D.
as shall be so Demised or Leased, to the use of such Person and Persons, his
and their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to whom such Demise or
Demises, Lease or Leases, Grant or Grants shall be made, as aforesaid.

CHAP. XV. The forms of several Covenants used upon Settlements of Estates to
Uses.
(1.) ANd it is Covenanted, granted, concluded To stand seized of such Lands
whereof deficiency shall be in the Conveyance to the uses before. This may be
good, where there is consideration of blood.
and agreed, by and between all and every the said Parties to these presents,
for the Consideration aforesaid, That in case any of the said Manors, etc.
intended to be comprised in the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries,
shall be omitted or left out, and not be comprised in the Fine or Fines,
Recovery or Recoveries, or in case there shall happen to be any defect in the
assurance of the Premises, or any part thereof, according to the intent and
true meaning of these presents, That then they the said A. B. and C. B. their
Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other Person and Persons, which now are,
or hereafter shall be seized of, and in such the said Manors, etc. as shall be
so omitted or left out, and not comprised as aforesaid, or whereof such Fine or
Fines, Recovery or Recoveries shall not be levied and had, or whereof the
assurance hereby intended to be made, shall be any way defective, shall stand
and be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, with their and
every of their Appurtenances, and of the Reversions thereof, to the uses, and
for the several and respective Estate and Estates thereof, hereby, and herein
before severally and respectively limited, unto the Person or Persons before
named, and every of them, under the several Provisoes herein before mentioned,
and to none other uses, intents or purposes whatsoever.

(2.) And it is Covenanted, granted and agreed, Another.
by and between all and every the said Parties to these presents, for them and
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, That the said A. B. his Heirs
and Assigns, and all and every other Person and Persons, and their Heirs, which
from and after the said Feast of, etc. next coming, shall stand and be seized
of all or any the said Manors, etc. and other the Premises before mentioned,
with Th'appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof: and, which before the
said Feast of, etc. next coming, after the Date hereof, shall be not well and
sufficiently, by Fine, Recovery, or otherwise conveyed and assured to the
several uses, purposes and intents, before in these presents mentioned; or
whereof no such Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, as is aforesaid, shall
be before the said Feast Day of, etc. as aforesaid, had levied, knowledged and
suffered of and in every part and parcel thereof, according to the intent and
true meaning of these presents, shall at all time and times, from and after the
said Feast of, etc. for the consideration herein before expressed, stand and be
seized of and in the same and every part thereof, to the several uses, purposes
and intents, before in and by these presents, expressed, limited and appointed,
and in such sort, manner, form, quality, degree, nature and Condition, and of
and for such Estate and Estates, and under and upon such Provisoes, Limitations
and Authorities (according to the true intent and meaning of these present
Indentures) in such ample, large, and beneficial manner and form, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as the same should or ought to have grown,
been raised, or taken any effect, in case the said several Fine and Fines,
Recovery and Recoveries, so before in and by these presents Covenanted,
mentioned, intended or agreed, to be had, levied, knowledged or suffered, had
been perfectly had and executed, according as is before in these presents
expressed.

(3.) And the said A. B. for himself, his That he is Owner, and has Power to
convey to the Uses, etc.
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with, etc.
That he the said A. B now is, and at the time of making and executing of the
said Conveyances and Assurances, shall be the true and perfect owner of the
said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with Th'appurtenances, and
shall be then thereof lawfully seized in Possession of an absolute Estate in
Fee-simple, and shall then have full power, Right, Title and Authority, to
pass, convey and assure the Premises, with Th'appurtenances, to the uses, and
according to the effect aforesaid.

(4.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
does Another.
Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and
Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, That for and
notwithstanding any act or thing whatsoever, done, or to be done or suffered,
by the said A. B. to the contrary, he the said A. B. now is, and so at the time
when the first Estate, of and in the said Manor, etc. and every part and
parcel thereof, shall be conveyed and assured to the said C. D. and E. F. their
Heirs and Assigns, to the uses aforesaid, shall stand and be seized thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, of a good, perfect, absolute and
indefeasible Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple or Fee-Tail, without any
Reversion or Remainder in the Crown, or without any Covenant or Use, to alter,
change or determine the same: And also, that he the said A. B. for and
notwithstanding any act or thing done or suffered, or to be done or suffered by
him to the contrary, as aforesaid, has, and so at the time of the execution of
the said first Estate, of and in the said Manor, etc. and every part and
parcel thereof, with their and every of their Appurtenances, to the said C. D.
and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns, shall have full power, good right, and
lawful authority, to grant, convey and assure the said Manor, etc. with their
and every of their Appurtenances, to the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and
Assigns, to the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid.

(5.) And the said A. B. for himself, etc. does Another briefly added to a
Covenant, to stand seized to Uses.
Covenant, etc. That he the said A. B. at the time of the sealing and delivery
of these presents, is and stands seized of a good, perfect and indefeasible
Estate in Fee simple, of and in the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, etc. and of
and in every part and parcel thereof, and that he has full power, good right
and lawful authority, in his own right, by these presents, to raise, limit and
appoint, the aforesaid several Uses and Estates, in manner and form aforesaid.

(6.) And the said A. B. for himself, his That the thing settled is free from
encumbrances.
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does by these
presents Covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said C. D. and E. F.
their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, That the said Manor, Messuages,
etc. and all and singular other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, now are
and be, and so at all times hereafter, and from time to time shall be, remain
and continue, unto the uses, intents and purposes, before, in and by these
presents limited, expressed or declared, free and clear, and freely and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise upon every reasonable
request in that behalf to be made, well and sufficiently saved, defended and
kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Intails, Fines,
Feoffments, Recoveries, Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances,
Judgments, Executions, and of and from all other Charges, Titles, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or done, or to be had, made,
committed or done by the said A. B. or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, by his means, consent or procurement (all such Leases, particular
Estates and Interests, as he the said A. B. has heretofore made to any person
or persons whatsoever, of or upon the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other the Premises, or of or upon any part or parcel of
them, upon which Leases and Estates there is reserved the old and accustomed
yearly Rent or Rents, or more, which shall continue yearly due and payable,
during the several Terms, Estates and Interests aforesaid, only excepted and
fore-prised.)

(7.) After the Covenant, that he is owner, Another.
and has power to settle, etc. then add, And that he the said A. B. shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, acquit, discharge, or
otherwise from time to time, upon reasonable notice and request, sufficiently
save harmless, as well the said Manor, Messuages, etc. as also all such person
and persons, to whom any Use or Estate is before by these presents limited or
appointed, of, from, touching and concerning all, and all manner of former and
other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Fines, Feoffments, Estates, Intails,
Recoveries, Executions, Limitations of Use and Uses, etc. as in the former
Covenant.

(8.) And that the said Manor, Messuages, Another with Exceptions
etc. and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances,
now be and are, and so from time to time and at all times hereafter for ever,
shall or may remain or continue unto the uses and intents aforesaid, and
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, clearly acquitted
and discharged, of and from all and all manner of former and other Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Joyntures, Statutes, Recognizances,
Judgments, Extents and Executions, and of and from all other Titles, Charges,
Troubles and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, suffered or done by him the
said A. B. or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by,
from or under him (except one Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. made and
granted by G. B. (late Father of the said A. B.) deceased, to, etc. for the
term of, etc. under the yearly Rent of, etc. [if there be more Leases, bring
them in here.] And without the let, interruption, challenge, claim, disturbance
or encumbrance of or by him the said G. B. or any person or persons whatsoever,
claiming or to claim by or under him, or his Estate, Right, Title or Interest,
except such person or persons, as shall or may claim by or under the Leases
before excepted: Or thus -- except such person or persons, as shall or may
lawfully claim by or under the Leases before excepted, or either of them, and
for the several and respective Terms, thereby demised or granted only.

(9.) And the said A. B. for himself, his To enjoy
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant, etc. That he the
said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will permit and suffer the said C.
B. and all and every other person and persons, to whom the said Manor,
Messuages, etc. and other the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, shall
happen to come, or of right ought to come by these presents, peaceably and
quietly to have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular the said
Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, before, in and by these
presents mentioned and expressed, without any manner of le^t, trouble,
eviction, disturbance, suit, vexation or expulsion of the said A. B. his Heirs
or Assigns, or any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully having,
claiming or pretending to have any Estate or Title, from, by or under the said
A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, according to the intent, form and true meaning of
these presents.

(10.) And that he the said C. B. and all and Another to enjoy
every other person or persons, to whom any Use is before by these presents
mentioned, intended, limited, appointed or declared, shall or lawfully may
quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said Premises, with the
Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, according to the true meaning
of the Uses before declared, and the Assurances hereafter to be made and passed
in that behalf, without any let, suit, vexation, hinderance, expulsion,
eviction, interruption or trouble of the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or
any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming from, by or under him
or them, or by his or their means, assent, command or procurement.

(11.) And that he the said A. B. shall not at Not to do any act to impeach the
Settlement.
any time or times hereafter, make, do, assent unto, acknowledge, execute or
willingly suffer any manner of Estate, Conveyance, Assurance, Act, Thing,
Matter or Devise whatsoever, whereby, or by reason whereof, the uses and
Estates before declared, or any of them, for, touching or concerning the said
Manor, Messuages, Lands and Tenements, or any part or parcel thereof, shall or
may be discontinued, cut off, debarred, overthrown or made void, or whereby the
said E. B. or any of the said Sons, or any Heir of any of their Bodies lawfully
begotten, or the Heirs of the Body of the said C. B. upon the Body of the said
M. B. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, shall or may by any means be
defeated, defrauded, excluded or disinherited of the Premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, or of any Use or Estate hereby to him, them, or any of them
appointed, limited or intended, or to be contained or mentioned in any of the
said Conveyances or Assurances, contrary to the true meaning of these presents;
or whereby, or by reason whereof the said A. B. shall or may in any sort or
degree, be disabled perfectly, sufficiently and surely, to make, pass, convey
and assure the said Manor, Messuages, Lands and Tenements, or any part or
parcel thereof, according to the Uses and Limitations in these presents
expressed or declared, and according to the purport, intent and true meaning
hereof.

(12.) And the said A. B. for himself, his For further Assurance.
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That
he the said A. B. and his Heirs, and all and every other Person and Persons,
lawfully claiming, or to claim, by, from or under him (except such as shall or
may claim, by or under the Leases before excepted) shall and will from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, upon the reasonable request, and at the Costs
and Charges in the Law, of the said C. D. and E. F. or either of them, their,
or either of their Heirs or Assigns, make, do, acknowledge, suffer and execute,
All such further Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Assurance and Assurances in
the Law whatsoever, for the further and better assuring of the said Premises,
and every part thereof, to the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid, as by them
the said C. D. and E. F. or either of them, their, or either of their Heirs or
Assigns, or their, or either or any of their Counsel learned in the Law, shall
be in that behalf, reasonably devised, or advised and required. And that all
Fines and other Assurances, at any time hereafter to be had, levied, suffered
or executed, of the Premises, or any part thereof, by or between the said
Parties, or any of them, shall be, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to
be, to the uses, intents and purposes in these presents mentioned, limited and
declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever.

(13.) And the said A. B. for himself, his, etc. Another.
does Covenant and grant to and with, etc. That he the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, within
the space of seven years next ensuing the Date of these presents, at and upon
every reasonable request, and at the only cost and charges in the Law, of the
said etc. and either of them, their and either of their Heirs or Assigns,
further do make, acknowledge, execute and suffer, or cause or procure to be
done, made, acknowledged, executed and suffered, All and every such further and
reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Devise and Devises, Assurance and
Assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better and more perfect
assuring, surety, and sure making, settling and conveying of the said Manor,
etc. and of every part and parcel thereof, with Th'appurtenances, to continue,
stand, remain and be, to all and every such several uses, behoofs, intents,
limitations and purposes as are thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof,
in and by these presents limited, expressed, appointed and declared, and under
the Conditions, Provisoes and Limitations before mentioned and declared: Be it
by Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, with single or double Voucher or
Vouchers, Feoffment or Feoffments, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, or
by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said C. D. and E. F. or either
of them, their or either of their Heirs or Assigns, or their, or either or any
of their Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or
required, so as the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or any person or persons
whatsoever, that ought to do or suffer such Act or Acts, be not compelled to
travel from the place of his or their abode.

(14.) And the said A. B. for himself, etc. does For settlement of Land to be
purchased.
Covenant, etc. that in case the said A. B. or any other to his use, shall at
any time hereafter happen to purchase any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, of
any Person or Persons whatsoever, during the life of the said C. B. [the Son]
That then the said A. B. shall cause and procure all such Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, which shall be so purchased as aforesaid, to be sufficiently
conveyed and assured to the use of the said A. B. and C. B. for and during the
Term of their natural lives, and the life of the longest liver and Survivor of
them, and after their decease, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body
of the said C. B. on the Body of the said M. B. lawfully to be begotten; and
for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever.

(15.) And also, that he the said A. B. shall To permit (...) Lands to descend.
and will permit and suffer, all and singular those his Messuages, etc. in the
County of M. which D. B. his Uncle deceased, did in his life time give, grant,
convey and assure to him the said A. B. lawfully to descend, come and remain,
immediately after the Decease of the said A. B. to the said C. B. and his
Heirs. And that the said A. B. shall not at any time hereafter, make, do,
attempt, practice, knowledge, suffer, procure or execute any Act or Acts, Thing
or Things, Conveyance or Assurance whatsoever, whereby the said Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of the Gift and Grant of the said D. B. his late
Uncle deceased, or any part or parcel thereof, shall or may in any wise be
discontinued, bargained, sold, aliened, transferred, given, granted, devised,
or otherwise passed or conveyed away, unto any other Person or Persons
whatsoever; unless it be to the use and behoof of the said C. B. and his Heirs
for ever.

Nota. There are several Covenants set down before, which are not ordinarily
used: yet there may be sometimes occasion for them.

CHAP. XVI. Containing the several Forms of Joyntures, before and after
Marriage.
(1.) THis Indenture made the, etc. Between Upon a Marriage to be had.
A. B. of the one part, and C. D. and E. D. his Daughter of the other part:
Witnesses, That the said A. B. does by these presents, Covenant and grant to
and with the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators by these presents,
That he the said A. B. shall and This Covenant is sometimes used.
will, before the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the Date hereof, marry and take
to wife the said E. D. Daughter of the said C. D. if the Laws of the Church
will permit the same, and the said E. D. shall thereunto consent and agree. And
the said C. D. for him, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and
grant to and with the said A. B. that the said E. D. shall likewise before the
said Feast of, etc. marry and take to Husband the said A. B. if the Laws of the
Church will permit the same, and the said A. B. Covenant to stand seized after
the Marriage had.
shall thereunto consent and agree.

(2.) And the said A. B. does for him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
by these presents, in consideration of the said Marriage so to be had and
solemnized, and for the full and entire Jointure of the said E. D. in case she
shall happen to over-live the said A. B. And in full For Jointure and in
satisfaction of Dower.
recompense and satisfaction of all the Dower and Title of Dower, which she the
said E. D. by or after the death of the said A. B. shall or may have, to any
the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said A. B. shall,
during the Coverture between him and the said E. D. be seized of any Estate of
Inheritance; and for the advancement of the said E. D. and of the Heirs Males
of the Body of the said A. B. upon the Body of the said E. D. to be lawfully
begotten. And for diverse other good causes and considerations, him the said A.
B. thereunto moving, Does for him and his Heirs, Covenant and grant to and with
the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, in manner and form
following, That he the said A. B. and his Heirs, and all and every person and
persons, and his and their Heirs, which now stand and be seized of and in all
that Message, etc. [mention here the several Messuages and Lands] and of and
in every part and parcel thereof, shall from and after the said inter-Marriage,
stand and be seized of all and singular the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, to the only
uses and intents hereafter, in and by these presents expressed, limited and
declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, to
the only use and behoof of the said A. B. and E. for and during the term of the
natural lives of them the said A. B. and E. and of the longer liver of them;
and from and after the decease of the longer liver of the said A. B. and E. to
the use and behoof of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said A. B. upon the
Body of the said E. lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such Issue, to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever. Vide Chap.
14. for Covenants.

(3.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of Another before Marriage.
the first part: C. D. and E. F. of the second part: and C. B. Son and Heir
apparent of the said A. B. and G. D. one of the Daughters of the said C. D. on
the third part. Whereas a Marriage is intended to be shortly (if God permit)
had and solemnized between the said C. B. and G. D. Now witnesses this present
Indenture, That Consideration.
in consideration of the said Marriage, and of a competent sum of Money, by the
said C. D. in hand paid, before then sealing hereof, to the said A. B. as the
marriage Portion of the said G. D. and of the natural love and affection which
the said A. B. bears unto the said C. B. and for provision of maintenance for
the said C. B. and G. D. in case the said Marriage take effect: And for a
competent Jointure for the said G. D. in case she shall happen to survive and
overlive the said C. B. and in full recompense and satisfaction of all the
Dower and Title of Dower, etc. Vide Sect. 2.
He the said A. B. does Covenant, etc. [to levy a Fine come ceo, etc. vide
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. 2. of such Manors, Messuages, etc. unto the said C. D. and
E. F.]

(4.) And it is Covenanted, granted, concluded, The Uses.
declared and fully agreed, by and between all and every the Parties to these
presents, That the said Fine to be had and levied as aforesaid, shall be and
inure, and the said Cognizees therein to be named, and the Survivor of them,
his and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manors, etc.
to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter following: that is to say, to the
end, The Son and his Wife to have an Annuity during Fathers life.
intent and purpose, that the said C. B. and G. D. shall and may from and after
the said Marriage, for and during the Term of their natural lives, and the
natural life of the longer liver of them (if the said A. B. shall and do so
long live) lawfully and peacably have and receive out of the said Manors of,
etc. and all other the Premises, one Annual Rent or sum of Two hundred pounds
of lawful Moneys of England at two days or Feasts of the year: that is to say,
It the Feast of Th'annunciation of St. Mary the blessed Virgin, and of St.
Michael Th'archangel by even and equal portions: the said Rent to be paid at
or in the now dwelling House of the said A. B. situate and being in, etc.
aforesaid, and the first payment thereof to begin at such of the said Feasts,
as shall next and immediately happen, after the said intermarriage had and
solemnized. And that in Clause of Distress.
default of payment of the said yearly Rent, or of any part thereof, at either
of the Feasts or Days of payment aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of these presents: Then and so often it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said C. D. and G. and the Survivor of them, and their and either of
their Assigns, into the said Manors, Messuages, etc. to enter and distrain for
the said yearly Rent of Two hundred pounds per annum, or any part thereof, and
for the Arrears thereof (if any shall be) and the Distress and Distresses there
taken and had, to lead, drive, take and carry away, impound, detain and keep,
until they and every of them shall of the said yearly Rent of Two hundred
pounds per annum, and of the Arrearages thereof (if any shall be) be fully
satisfied and paid.

(5.) And as to, for and concerning the said Disposition of the Premises after
the Fathers death.
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments before mentioned, and
every part and parcel thereof. It is further Covenanted, concluded and agreed,
by and between the said Parties to these presents, That the said Fine shall be
and inure, and the said Cognizees therein to be Named, and the Survivor of
them, and his and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands and Premises, To the use and behoof of the said A. B. for and
during the Term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner
of Waste, and from and after the decease of the said A. B. to the use and
behoof of the said C. B. for and during the term of his natural life, without
impeachment of or for any manner of Waste, and from and after the decease of
the said A. B. and C. B. to the use and behoof of the said G. for and during
the term of her natural life (in case the said Marriage take effect, and she
shall happen to survive the said C. B.) in full satisfaction of Dower, (...)
whether this be good within the Stat. of 27 H. 8. because it may possibly take
no effect immediately after Husbands death: Vide Coke sur Lit. 36 b. Proviso,
to chang the use limited to Daughters; upon Portions paid.
etc. And after the deceases of the said A. B. C. B. and G. To the use and
behoof of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said C. B. on the Body of the said
G. lawfully to be begotten: and in default of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of the Heirs Females of the Body of the said C. B. on the Body of the said G.
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said A. B. lawfully to be begotten: and
for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said A.
B. for ever.

(6.) Provided always, That the said A. B. or any Heir Male of his Body (in
case the said C. B. shall happen to die, having no Heir Male of the Body of the
said C. B. on the Body of the said G. begotten, then living) shall pay or cause
to be paid unto the Daughter and Daughters of the said C. B. on the Body of the
said G. to be begotten: These several sums following of lawful Moneys of
England, viz. unto the Daughter of the said C. B. in case he has but one, the
full sum of One thousand and two hundred pounds, and in case he shall have more
Daughters then one by the said G. then to all the said Daughters of the said C.
B. the sum of Two thousand pounds, among and between them equally to be
divided: The said payments to be made at their respective Ages of Eighteen
years, or Days of Marriages, which of them shall first happen: Or if the said
A. B. or any Heir Male of his Body shall at any time or times by such Security,
as the said C. D. and E. F. or the Survivor of them shall direct in writing
under their Hands, or the Hand of the Survivor of them, sufficiently secure the
payment of the said sum or sums in manner aforesaid: That then and from
thenceforth the Estate, use and limitation of the Premises, to the Heirs
Females of the said C. B. on the Body of the said G. to be begotten; shall
cease and determine: And the said Fine and Fines shall be and inure, and the
said Cognizees and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized of all and singular
the Premises, from and after the death of the said C. B. and G. and payment
made or Security given as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of the Heirs Males
of the Body of the said A. B. and for want of such Issue, to the use and behoof
of the right Heirs of the said A. B. for ever. With usual Covenants, vide
Chapter 14.

(7.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of the one part: and C. D. and E. F.
of the other A Jointure made before Marriage with a Widow; with several useful
Covenants. Vide Chap. 5. Sect 21. The Uses.
part: Witnesses, that for and in consideration of a Marriage to be shortly
had and solemnized between the said A. B. and E. G. of -- Widow (late the Wife
of H. G. deceased) and for the future good and advancement of the said E. G.
and in testimony of the singular good will and affection, which he the said A.
B. has and bears unto the said E. G. and for other good Causes and
Considerations, him the said A. B. thereunto moving: He the said A. B. does
Covenant, etc. [Here put a Covenant with C. D. and E. F. to stand seized from
and after the said intermarriage of and in a Manor, ( a) etc.] To the only
use and behoof of the said A. B. and of the said E. and of the Heirs and
Assigns of the said A. B. for ever, for the Jointure of the said E. in case she
shall happen to survive and over-live the said A. B. and in full satisfaction
of Dower, etc. [ vide before Sect. 2. in this Chapter.

(8.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Covenants against Encumbrances.
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the
said C. D. and E. F. and either of them, their and either of their Executors
and Administrators by these presents, in manner and form following, that is to
say, That he the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall and will from time to time and at all times hereafter, well and
sufficiently save, defend and keep the said Manor, etc. and all other the
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, of and from all and all manner of
former and other Bargains, Sales, etc. [as in a Covenant against Encumbrances.]
And that the said Manor, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, now are
and be of the That the Manor is of such value. Further Assurance.
clear yearly value of One Hundred pounds per annum, over and above all Charges
and Reprises. And here also may be added a Covenant from A. B. for further
Assurance, etc. viz. for the better and more perfect assuring and sure making,
of all and singular the Premises to the said E. G. for term of her life only,
in form aforesaid, And that all and every Feoffments, Fines, Conveyances and
Assurances, to be had, made, knowledged, done, suffered or executed, of the
said Premises, or any part thereof, by the said A. B. during the life of the
said E. shall be and inure, to the uses, intents and purposes aforesaid, and to
none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. And further that she the said E.
To enjoy.
from and after the decease of the said A. B. (according to the intent and true
meaning of these presents) shall or lawfully may, during the term of her
natural life, have, hold and quietly enjoy the said Manor, etc. without any
lawful let, suit, eviction or interruption, of the Heirs or Assigns of the said
A. B. or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from
or under the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them.

(9.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors Not to intermeddle with his
Wives Childrens Portions.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E.
F. and either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators
by these presents, that he the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators shall
not at any time or times hereafter, have, receive, take, or any way intermeddle
with the Portion or Portions, Legacy or Legacies, or any part thereof
appertaining or belonging, given or bequeathed, due, or to be due to I. G. B.
G. and R. G. the Children of the said E. G. or any of them, or with the
increase or profits thereof, or by reason of the same arising, coming or
growing, or that hereafter shall arise, come or grow of the same, or any part
or parcel of the same increase, other than such parcel thereof, as by Covenant
hereafter, in these presents expressed, is yearly to be paid unto the said A.
B. or his Assigns, for and toward the charges of bringing up the said
Children, but shall permit and suffer the said C. D. and E. F. and the Survivor
of them, and the Executors or Administrators of the Survivor of them, to have
the ordering, putting forth and disposing of the said Portion and Portions,
Legacy and Legacies, sum and sums of Money, appertaining and belonging unto the
said Children, and every of them, and every part and parcel thereof, and of the
increase and profits arising by the said Moneys, and every part thereof, for
the benefit and advantage of the said Children respectively, according to the
appointment and direction of the said E. G.

(10.) And that he the said A. B. shall deliver, To deliver up all the
Specialties, which touch the Childrens Portions to the Trustees. To make
Letters of Attorney to su^ for Portions.
or cause to be delivered unto the said C. D. and E. F. or the survivor of
them, upon reasonable request by him or them to be made, all such Bonds,
Obligations and Specialties, wherein or whereby any person or persons are or do
stand bound unto the said E. for, touching or concerning the said Portions, or
Moneys of the said Children, or any of them, as shall come unto the hands or
possession of the said A. B. and shall also make, seal, and duly execute unto
the said C. D. and E. F. or the survivor of them, such Letter or Letters of
Attorney, for the better enabling them, or the survivor of them, to sue for and
recover the sum and sums of money contained in the said Bonds, Obligations, and
Specialties or any of them, as by the said C. D. and E. F. or the Survivor of
them, or the Counsel Learned of them, or the Survivor of them, shall be
devised, advised or required, for the use and benefit of the said Children. And
that the said A. B shall not release or discharge Not to discharge Specialties,
or release Suits.
the said Bonds, Obligations, or Specialties, or any of them, or any Suit,
Action or Actions, Judgment or Judgments, to be had or prosecuted upon the said
Bonds, Obligations or Specialties, or any of them, by force of the Authority to
be given as aforesaid, nor shall at any time hereafter release or countermand
the said Letter or Letters or Attorney, to be given as aforesaid, or any of
them.

(11.) And, that he the said A. B. shall and To permit his Wife to make a Will.
will permit and suffer the said E. to dispose by her last Will and Testament
in Writing, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, any sum or sums of Money, at
her pleasure (not exceeding in the whole the sum of Five hundred pounds) And
that he the said A. B. shall not any way countermand or revoke the same. And
that he the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators (in case he shall
happen to survive the said E.) shall and will well and truly satisfy, content
and pay, or cause to be satisfied, contented and paid, the Legacies in and by
the said Will of the said E. to be devised as aforesaid, or so much of them as
shall not exceed the sum of Five hundred pounds, according to the purport and
true meaning thereof, within one year next after the decease of the said E.
upon the lawful and reasonable demand of the several and respective Legacies,
to whom such Legacy or Legacies shall be given as aforesaid.

(12.) And the said C. D. and E. F. for them The Trustees to make yearly
allowance for the Childrens Maintenance.
and either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators, do
Covenant and grant to and with with said A. B. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That they the said C. D. and E. F. or one of them, their or
one of their Executors or Administrators, shall and will yearly, from and after
the said Marriage, so had and solemnized as aforesaid, and during so long time,
as the said Children, or any of them, shall be at the finding and providing of
the said A. B. well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. for
every of the said Children so sojourning with and being provided for, by the
said A. B. the sum of, etc. per annum, at the Feasts of, etc. by equal
portions, out of the increase and profit arising and accruing by their
respective Portions, as aforesaid. And that the said C. D. and E. F. and the
Survivor of them shall employ and bestow the residue of the said increase and
profit in such sort and manner as the said E. shall direct and appoint, for the
further benefit and advantage of the said Children. And that they To make
account to the Mother.
the said C. D. and E. F. and the Survivor of them shall from time to time,
when he or they shall be thereunto required by the said E. yield and make unto
the said E. a just, true and perfect account of the said increase or profit
arising or growing, from or by the said Childrens Portions or sums of Money.

In witness, etc.

(13.) This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. and E. his wife on the one part:
and C. Joyntures after Marriage, had.
D. and E. F. on the other part, witnesses, That for and in consideration of a
Marriage lately had and solemnized, between the said A. B. and the said E.
(Daughter of the said C. D.) and in performance and accomplishment of such
Articles and Agreements that passed and were made upon Consideration.
the Conclusion of the said Marriage: And for the making and assuring of a
competent Jointure to and for the said E. in case she shall happen to over-live
the said A. B. He the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E. F.
and either of them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents: That he the said A. B. and
E. his Wife, etc. [To levy a Fine to C. D. and E. F. sur Cognizance Covenant to
levy a Fine.
de droit come ceo, etc. of Messuages, Lands, etc.]

(14.) And it is the true intent and meaning of all the said Parties to these
presents: And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E. F.
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these presents,
That the said Fine so to The uses
be had and levied as aforesaid, of the said Messuages, Lands, etc. shall be
and inure, and the said C. D. and E. F. and the Survivor of them, his and their
Heirs shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof,
to the use and behoof of the said A. B. and his Assigns, for and during the
term of his natural life, and from and after his decease to the use and behoof
of the said E. for and during the term of her natural life, for her Jointure,
and in full For a Jointure and in satisfaction of Dower.
satisfaction of all such Dower as she the said E. may hereafter have or claim,
of, or out of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whereof the said A. B. now
is, or shall be at any time seized of any Estate of Inheritance, during the
Coverture between the said A. B. and the said E. And from and after the decease
of the said A. B. and E. and the Survivor of them, To the use and behoof of the
Heirs Males of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. lawfully
to be begotten, and for want of such Issue to the use and behoof of the right
Heirs of the said A. B. for ever: [with usual Covenant] Then add this Covenant:
And it is further Covenant to alter the use to the Wife upon her suit for Dower.
Covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by and between the said Parties to
these presents, That if the said E. after the death of the said A. B. (in case
she shall happen to over-live him) shall disagree to, and refuse to accept of
the said Messuages and Lands hereby settled on her, as aforesaid, for and in
name of her Jointure, and shall commence or sue any Action at Law, or Suit for
any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which were the Inheritance of the said
A. B. during the Coverture between them, for her Dower, or upon her Title of
Dower, That then and from thenceforth, from and after the commencement of such
Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, the Uses or Estates herein before limited,
shall cease, determine and be utterly void, and then and from thenceforth the
said C. D. and E. F. shall stand and be seized of all and every the Premises
aforesaid, to the use and behoof of the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever. This Indenture, or any thing herein before contained, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(14.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. Another after Marriage by way of
Feoffment to uses. Consideration.
of the one part; and C. D. E. F. and G. H. of the other part: Witnesses, that
the said A. B. for and in consideration of a Marriage heretofore had and
solemnized, by and between the said A. B. and E. his now wife, and for the
settling of a competent Jointure on the said E. if she shall happen to survive
and overlive the said A. B. and for the settling, assuring and conveying of all
and singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter
mentioned, with their and every of their Appurtenances, in the Name and Blood
of the said A. B. for so long time as it shall please Almighty God, and to the
several uses, intents and purposes, and in such manner and form, as hereafter
in and by these presents is expressed, mentioned and declared, and according
to, and in pursuance of a certain Agreement between the said A. B. and G. H. I.
K. etc. before the said intermarriage had and made, and also for diverse good
Causes and Considerations, him hereunto especially moving: Has granted,
aliened, released, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by The Feoffment
these presents does grant, alien, enfeoff, release and confirm unto the said
C. D. E. F. and G. H. All those his Manors of A. and B. etc. and the Reversion
and Reversions, Remander and Remainders thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof. To have and to hold the said Manors, etc. and all and singular other
the Premises hereby conveyed and assured, or mentioned, or intended to be
conveyed and assured, with their and every of their Rights, Members and
Appurtenances, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, unto the said C. D. E. F. and G.
H. their Heirs and Assigns for ever.

(15.) To the several uses, intents and purposes, and upon the Trust and
confidence, and The uses of the Manor of A.
under the several Provisions, Conditions and Limitations, hereafter in and by
these presents expressed, limited and declared, and to none other use, intent
or purpose whatsoever: that is to say, As to, for, and concerning the said
Manor of A. etc. To the use and behoof of the said A. B. for and during the
term of his natural life, without To A. B. for life, after to his Wife for
life, for a Jointure. To 1. 2. 3 etc. Sons in Tail.
impeachment of, or for any manner of Waste: And from and after his decease, to
the use and behoof of the said E. his Wife, and her Assigns, for and during the
term of her natural life, for her Jointure, and in lieu and recompense of her
Dower, and Title of Dower: And from and after the several deceases of them the
said A. B. and E. his wife, Then to the use and behoof of the first If they
have any Sons, time of the limitation, they are to be named.
Son of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the Body of such first
Son lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof of the second Son, of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said
E. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the Body of
such second Son, lawfully to be begotten, etc. [and so even to the Tenth Son.]
And for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of every other Son and Sons
of the Body of the said A. B. on the Body of the said E. B. lawfully to be
begotten, and of the Heirs Males of the Body of every such Son and Sons
lawfully to be begotten, according to their seigniority of Age, and priority of
Birth, the elder Son, and the Heirs Males of his Body, being always preferred
before the younger Son, and the Heirs Males of his Body: And for default of
such Issue, to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said A. B.
and for default of such Issue to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the
said A. B. for ever. And as to, for, and concerning the said Manor of B. etc.
and all other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, The uses of the Manor of B
Hereditaments and Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances,
whereof no Use or Uses is, or are before herein limited, To the use and behoof
of the said A. B. for and during the term of his natural life, without
impeachment of or for any manner of Waste, and from and after his decease, to
the use and behoof To A. for life, after to the Feoffees for years in trust.
of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Executors and Assigns, for and during
the term of one and twenty years, to commence immediately from and after the
decease of the said A. B. and from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, upon trust and confidence, and to the uses, intents and
purposes, hereafter in and by these presents expressed, limited and declared.
And The use limited after the term
from and after the end, expiration or other determination of the said term of
one and twenty years: To the use of such Person and Persons, for such Estate
and Estates, and in such manner and form as the said A. B. by his Deed or Deeds
in writing, sealed and executed in the presence of three or more credible
Witnesses, shall in his life time, declare, limit or appoint: And in default of
such Declaration, Limitation or Appointment: Then to the use and behoof of the
right Heirs of the said A. B.

(16.) And the true intent and meaning of The Declaration of the Trust.
these presents is, and the special Trust and confidence in them the said C. D.
E. F. and G. H. their Executors and Administrators hereby reposed, as to the
said Estate for years to them limited, as aforesaid is: That in case the said
A. B. shall depart this life, having at the time of his decease, one, two, or
more Daughter or To pay Daughters Portions.
Daughters of his Body, on the Body of the said E. lawfully begotten, then
living and unprefer'd in Marriage, or leaving the said E. with Child of one or
more Daughter or Daughters, who after shall be born alive: That then the said
C. D. E. F. and G. H. the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the Executors or
Administrators of the Survivor of them, shall and will out of the Rents, Issues
and Profits of the said Manor of B. and other the Premises so to them
limited, as aforesaid, for years, raise and levy so soon as conveniently may
be, for the Portion or Portions of such Daughter or Daughters, which he the
said A. B. shall leave at his decease, unpreferred as aforesaid, and with which
he shall leave with Child, the said E. as aforesaid, viz. If there be but one,
the sum of Two thousand pounds of good and lawful Money of England, to be paid
unto her at her Age of eighteen years, or Day of Marriage, which shall first
happen, or so soon as the said sum of Two thousand pounds can be raised, and if
there be two Daughters, the sum of One thousand pounds a piece, or if there be
three or more Daughters, the sum of Three thousand pounds in the whole, to be
equally divided between the said Daughters, share and share like: All and every
the said sums to be paid unto the said Daughters, severally and respectively,
at their several and respective Ages of Eighteen years, or their several and
respective Marriages, which of them shall first happen, or so soon as the same
can be conveniently called, as aforesaid; in which respect the elder Sister is
to be preferred in payment before the younger, unmarryed. And in case any of the
said In case any of the Daughters die, her part to go to the Survivors.
Sisters shall happen to die before her or their Marriage, or Age of Eighteen
years, That then such part or proportion, of the said Sister or Sisters so
dying, shall accrue and come unto the surviving Sister, if but one, and if more
then one survive, then unto the Sisters so surviving, to be equally divided
between them, share and share like. And upon this further trust and confidence,
that if it shall happen the said A. B. to die, leaving only one Daughter, or
two or more Daughters of his Body, on the Body of the said E. begotten, then
living, or afterward to be born as aforesaid: And that such Daughter or
Daughters shall all happen to die before she or How the sums shall be disposed
if all the Daughters die.
they shall be Married, or accomplish the several and respective Ages of
Eighteen years, as aforesaid, That then and in such case the said several sum
and sums of Money intended, for the Portion or Portions, Advancement or
Advancements of such Daughter or Daughters as aforesaid, or so much thereof as
shall be raised or ^evyed out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of all or any of
the Premises (all charges and expenses bring defrayed, wherein a full and
liberal allowance shall be made and given) shall be satisfied and paid unto
such Person or Persons, as the said A. B. by any writing under his Hand and
Seal, subscribed and sealed in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses,
shall limit and appoint, and in default of such Limitation and Appointment, to
the Executors or Administrators of the said A. B. And upon this further
Maintenance allowed to the Daughters until Portions paid.
trust and confidence, and to the end, intent and purpose, that the said C. D.
E. F. and G. H. and the Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Executors
and Administrators, shall out of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the said
Manor of B. etc. and Premises, so to them limited for raising of Portions no
aforesaid, with their and every of their Appurtenances, levy and pay, or cause
to be levied and paid to and for the maintenance of such Daughter and
Daughters as aforesaid, if there be but one Daughter, only, the sum of Fifty
pounds per annum, and if there be two or more Daughters, the sum of Thirty
pounds per annum a piece, until such Daughter or Daughters respectively, shall
attain to her or their Age or Ages of Eighteen years, or shall be Married, and
her or their Portions paid as aforesaid.

(17.) Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of all If A B. die without Daughters, the limitation for years to
cease.
the Parties hereunto, That if the said A. B. shall happen to depart this life,
without any Issue Female of his Body, upon the Body of the said E. begotten, or
without leaving the said E. with Child, of one or more Daughter or Daughters
that shall be born alive, That then the Estate so limited as aforesaid, to the
said C. D. E. F. and G. H. for one and twenty years, shall cease, determine and
be utterly void. Provided also, That from and immediately after such After the
Portions raised the Estate limited for years to cease.
time or times, as the aforesaid C. D. E. F. and G. H. their Executors or
Assigns, shall or might have levied and raised the said several sums for
Portions, and present maintenance of such Daughter and Daughters as aforesaid,
that then the said Estate for years limited, to them in trust as aforesaid,
shall cease, determine and be utterly void. And the said Manor of B. and all
and singular other the Premises, so to the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. limited
for years, in trust as aforesaid, shall immediately go and be to such Person
and Persons to whom the Reversion or Remainder of the Premises shall belong
and appertain.

(18.) Provided always, and upon this further The limitation to Wife, as to a
5th. part; to be altered upon her second Marriage.
Condition, and to the further use, intent and purpose, That if the said A. B.
happen to depart this life, leaving one Son or more of his Body, on the the
Body of the said E. lawfully begotten: And the said E. do him survive, and do
afterward intermarry, or take another Husband; That then, from and immediately
after such Marriage as aforesaid, As for and concerning one fifth part of the
said Manor of A. etc. (the whole in five parts being divided) before in and by
these presents limited and appointed, or mentioned to be limited and appointed
to and for the Ioynture of the said E. the use and Estate thereof limited and
appointed as aforesaid, to the said E. shall cease, determine and be utterly
void, and that then and from thenceforth the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand
and be seized of the said fifth part of the said Manor of A. etc. immediately
from and after the said intermarriage, to the use and behoof of the said Son
(or of the eldest Son, in case there be more) for and during the term of the
natural life of the said E. Any thing herein before contained, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Here may be added a Covenant to alter the
use to the Wife, in case of Usual Covenants.
her suit for Dower: vide Sect. 13. in this Chapter, and also Covenants that A.
B. is seized in Free, and has authority to assure the Premises to the uses
before, and to make further assurance: vide Chap. 14. and also a Power to A B.
to revoke all the uses, except what is limited to his Wife: vide Cap. 11.

(19.) This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. on A Rent settled on the intended Wife
for satisfaction of Dower. Consideration.
the one part, and C. D. and E. F. on the other part: Whereas a Marriage is by
the grace of God, to be shortly had and solemnized, between the said A. B. and
E. D. Daughter of the said C. D. Now witnesses this present Indenture, that
for the absolute and perfect Ioynture of her the said E. D. in case the said
Marriage take effect, and for and in recompense, bar, and full satisfaction
and discharge of all and singular the Dower, or Title of Dower, which the said
E. D. shall or may have or lawfully claim, of, in, or to the Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments of the said A. B. he the said A. B. has given, granted,
enfeoffed and confirmed, and does by these presents, give, grant, enfeoff and
confirm unto the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and The Feoffment.
Assigns for ever. All that, etc. To have and to hold the said Message, Lands,
Tenements and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and
every of their Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. and E. F. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever: To the uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned: that
is to say, To The uses; to charge the same with a Rent.
the use, end and intent, that the said E. D. (in case the said Marriage take
effect) may immediately, from and after the decease of the said A. B. if she
happen to survive him, have, perceive and take out of the said Message, Lands,
Tenements and Premises, for term of her natural life, One annual Rent, or
yearly sum of One hundred pounds per annum, of good and lawful Money of England,
at two days or Feasts in the year: that is to say: At the Feast of
Th^^nnunciation of St. Mary the blessed Virgin, and the Feast of St. Michael
Th^archangel, by even and equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin at
such of the said Feasts, as shall next and immediately happen, from and after
the decease of the said A. B. To have, perceive and enjoy the said Annuity, or
yearly Rent of One hundred pound per annum, from and after the decease of the
said A. B. unto the said E. and her Assigns, for and during the term of her
natural life: the first payment thereof to begin as aforesaid.

(20.) And further, to this use, intent and purpose, That if it shall happen
the said Annuity Clause of Distress.
or yearly Rent of One hundred pounds per annum, or any part thereof, to be
behind or unpayed, after either of the said Feast Days whereon the same ought
to be paid as aforesaid, That then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said E. etc. [to enter and distrain as in a grant of a
Rent] And as for touching and concerning all and every the said The use of the
Lands charged.
Message, Lands, Tenements and Premises, herein before mentioned, to be
granted, enfeoffed and confirmed unto the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs:
It is the true intent and meaning of all the Parties to these presents, That
the said C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, shall stand and be seized thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said
A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever: nevertheless the said Premises, to be charged and chargable with
the said Annuity or yearly Rent, as aforesaid.

CHAP. XVII. Containing several Covenants used upon Vide Chap. 4. Covenants
upon Settlements.
Marriages, and in Joyntures made.
(1.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the
other part: Witnesses, That it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed,
by and between the said Parties, in consideration of a Marriage to be had and
solemnized, between C. B. Son of the said A. B. and E. D. Daughter of the said
C. D. in manner and form following: Covenant to pay the Portion, after Marriage.
And first, the said C. D. does for him, his Executors and Administrators,
Covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That in case the said Marriage take effect, he the said C.
D. his Executors or Administrators, shall and will within one Month after the
said Marriage had and solemnized, pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A. B.
his Executors or Administrators, as the marriage Portion of the said E. the sum
of Five hundred pounds of lawful moneys of England, at or in the now dwelling
House of the said A. B. situate in, etc.

(2.) And the said A. B. does for himself, his To pay a sum if he refuse the
Marriage.
Executors and Administrators, Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D.
his Executors and Administrators, by these presents, That in case it shall
fortune that the said C. B. his Son, shall refuse or disagree to the said
Marriage, or that the said Marriage shall not take effect and be had and
solemnized within three Months next ensuing the Date hereof, through the
default, mislike, means or procurement of the said A. B. and C. B. or either of
them, That then the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, shall and will
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors or
Administrators, within six Months, next ensuing the Date hereof, the sum of One
hundred pounds of lawful Moneys of England, at one entire payment, to and for
the use of the said E. D. in case she the said E. shall so long live, and for
her advancement and preferment in Marriage, and as an augmentation of her
Portion and livelihood.

(3.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
Covenant and To maintain the young pair.
grant to and with the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators by these
presents, That in case the said Marriage shall take effect, according to the
true meaning of these presents, That then he the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators shall and will well and sufficiently maintain, provide for,
find, keep and sustain the said C. B. and E. his Wife, and all the Issue of
their two Bodies begotten, from time to time, and at all times, immediately
from and after the said Marriage between the said C. B. and E. so had and
solemnized as aforesaid, during the natural life of him the said A. B. with
sufficient and convement Meat, Drink, Lodging and House-room, according to
their quality and degree.

(4.) And further, that he the said A. B. shall To give or leave by Will 1000 l.
and will, either in the life time of the said A. B. or by his last Will and
Testament, leave, give, devise, assure or pay, or cause to be well and truly
contented and paid unto the said C. B. or to the said E. in case she shall
survive the said C. B. and the said C. B. shall happen to die during the life
of the said A. B. or to the Child or Children between them to be begotten, in
case the said C. B. and E. shall both happen to die in the life time of the
said A. B. to be equally divided between them, the sum of One thousand pounds
of lawful Money of England, to be paid within two years after the decease of
the said A. B. at the farthest, in case the same shall not be paid or
satisfied in his life time.

(5.) And that he the said A. B. shall and will To do further acts to ratify
these Covenants.
at any time or times, during the space of two years, next ensuing the Date
hereof, upon reasonable request, and at the cost and charges in the Law, of the
said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, make, do, seal, deliver and duly
execute, all and every such further Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Deed or
Deeds, Assurance or Assurances whatsoever, as shall be reasonably devised or
required by the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, or his or their
Counsel learned in the Law, for the ratifying, perfecting and sure making of
the Covenants, Grants, Payments and Agreements, before in these presents
expressed and declared, which on the part and behalf of the said A. B. his
Executors or Administrators, are to be kept, performed and accomplished,
according to the intent and true meaning of these presents. So that such Act or
Acts, Thing or Things, Deed or Deeds, Assurance or Assurances, extend no
farther, th^^ to the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, or the Goods
and Chattels of the said A. B.

In Witness.

(6.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors A Covenant for to permit
the Wife to make a Will.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E.
F. [the Trustees on the Woman's behalf] that if it fortune, the said E. (the
intended Wife) after the said Marriage had and solemnized, to die and decease
in the life time of the said A. B. That it then shall and may be lawful to and
for the said E. at her free will and pleasure to make, publish and declare one
Will and Testament in Writing under her Hand and Seal, and thereby to dispose,
will, give and bequeath, to any her Children, Servants or Friends, for their
preferment or advancement, any sum or sums whatsoever, (not exceeding in the
whole the sum of Two hundred pounds) of the Goods and Chattels which the said
E. shall be possessed of at the time of the said intended Marriage: and if it
fortune the said Goods or Chattels, after Marriage had, to be sold, or
otherwise disposed of by the said A. B. before such Will or Testament made by
the said E. Then of so much of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. as
shall amount to, or not exceed the said sum of Two hundred pounds, without any
let, disturbance or contradiction of the said A. B. and in as large and ample a
manner, as if the said E. were then a Feme sole and unmarryed.

(7.) And further that she the said E. shall Another to the same purpose,
or may at any time during the Coverture between her and the said A. B. without
any let or disturbance of the said A. B. or of any other by his means, make
and declare her Will and Testament, and thereby, or by any other Writing by her
to be subscribed, in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses, give,
bequeath, assign or appoint to any person or persons whatsoever, any sum or
sums of money, so as the same exceed not in the whole the sum of Two Hundred
pounds, of lawful moneys of England. And that if he the said A. B. do over-live
the said E. That then (and not otherwise) he the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators, shall and will within Six Months after the decease of the said
E. and after request to him or them to be made in that behalf, execute and
perform, or cause to be executed and performed the same her Will and Testament,
Gift, Bequest, Assignment or Appointment, to any value (not exceeding in the
whole the said sum of Two Hundred pounds) according to the intent and true
meaning of the said Will or Writing. That if the Lands settled in Jointure fail
of the value, the Fxecutors of the Husband to make it up.


(8.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E. F. their Executors and
Administrators by these presents, That in case the said E. shall survive the
said A. B. and shall be minded to let the Premises, before limited and
appointed to her for her Ioynture, to Farm for a yearly Rent, and shall make
offer so to do, to the Executors or Administrators of the said A. B. or any of
them, and that they shall upon such offer made, refuse to take the same to
Farm, at the yearly Rent of Thirty pounds per annum, of lawful money of
England, That then and in such case the said Premises shall be rated and
valued, by Four substantial men of the same Parish, where the said Message and
Lands are scitu^te and do lie, whereof the said Executors or Administrators are
to choose Two, and the said E. the other Two, at a certain yearly value,
according as other Lands of like quality and goodness are let within the said
Parish: And in case the said rate and value made and put upon the said
Premises as aforesaid, shall not amount unto the said sum of Thirty pounds per
annum, the said Executors or Administrators shall and will well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said E. so much lawful money of England, yearly
and every year, on the Feast Day of St. Michael the Archangel, as shall make up
the said yearly value or Rate of Thirty pounds per annum, until such time as
they can procure a good and sufficient Tenant to take the same, at the said
Rate of Thirty pounds per annum, under such Covenants and Agreements, as other
Lands are usually letten within the same Parish, and for the term of One and
Twenty years or more, determinable upon the death of the said E.

(9.) And further for and upon the Consideration To make up what shall be
evicted of the Lands settled in Jointure
aforesaid, he the said A. B. does for him the said A. B. his Executors and
Administrators, Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. and E. F. and
either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators, That if
the said E. his now Wife, shall happen to survive and over-live him the said A.
B. and shall at any time after the decease of the said A. B. be lawfully
evicted or put out of or from the said Message, and other the Premises,
limited to her as aforesaid for her Ioynture* or any part or parcel thereof,
That then the Executors or Administrators of the said A. B. shall well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said E. so much lawful money of England,
for the said Premises, or part thereof, being so evicted from the said E. as
aforesaid, as the same shall amount unto, at the Rate of Six years purchase,
for and according to the yearly value of the same, within Three months after
such eviction.

(10.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors To pay back part of the
Portion, if the Wife die, etc.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That in case the said E. shall
happen to depart this life, within Three years after the said Marriage had and
solemnized as aforesaid, without having any Issue of her Body, lawfully
begotten by the said A. B. then living, That then and in such case the said A.
B. his Executors or Administrators, shall and will, for and in respect of the
said sum of Five Hundred pounds, of lawful moneys of England, by him received
as aforesaid, as the Marriage-Portion of the said E. repay and satisfy, or
cause to be repayed and satisfied unto the said C. D. the sum of Three Hundred
pounds, of lawful moneys of England, at one entire payment, within Six months
next after the decease of the said E.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing the General words, commonly used for the passing of
Manors, Messuages, Lands, etc.
(1.) ALL that the Manor of L. with A Manor.
Th'appurtenances, in the County of M. And also all Messuages, Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Outhouses, Yards, Backsides, Orchards,
Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, ^eedings, Ways,
Wastes, Waste-grounds, Commons, Commodities, Moors, Marshes, Wood-grounds,
Woods, Underwoods, Waters, Watercourse, Ponds, Pools, Liberties, Fishings,
Rents, Reversions, Services, Fines, Amerciaments, Court-leets, Courtsbaron,
Views of Frank-pledge, and profits of Courts; and all that to Courts and Leets
belongs, Waifs, Estrays, Goods and Chattels of Felons and Fugitives, Customs,
Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Profits, Commodities, Advantages,
Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with Th'appurtenances, of whatsoever
kind, nature or quality, or by whatsoever Name or Names they are called or
known by, situate, lying and being, coming, renewing, arising or growing in L.
aforesaid, or elsewhere in the said County of M. to the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings and other the
Premises, or to every or any of them in any wise belonging or appertaining, or
incident thereunto, or as part, parcel or member thereof, or at any time
heretofore known, accepted, taken, used, demised or reputed, as part, parcel or
member thereof, or of any part thereof.

(2.) All that the Manor or Lordship of F. Another for a Manor.
lying and being in the Parish of F. with the rights, members and appurtenances
thereof, or thereunto belonging in F. aforesaid, in the County of M. And all
and singular Rents, Reversions, Services, Courts and perquisites of Courts,
views of Franck-pledge, Privileges, Franchises, Jurisdictions, Royalties,
Liberties, Profits and Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said
Manor, and other the Premises belonging, or in any wise appertaining,
situate and being, growing, arising and renewing, within the Parish of F.
aforesaid, in the County of M. And all that An Advowson.
Advowson, Donation, Nomination, Presentation, free disposition and right of
Patronage, of the Parish Church of F. aforesaid.

(3.) All that Message or Tenement, with A Message and Lands.
Th'appurtenances, commonly called or known by the Name of B. and all
Outhouses, Barns, Stables, Buildings, Yards, Backsides, Orchards, Gardens,
Curtilages and Appurtenances whatsoever, thereunto belonging, situate and
being in the Parish of C. in the County of M. And also all and singular those
several Closes, or parcels of Land, Meadow, Pasture and Arable, hereafter
particularly mentioned: that is to say, One Close or parcel of Pasture Ground,
called or known by the Name of D. Close, containing, by estimation, twenty
Acres, or thereabouts, be the same more or less, etc. [and s(...)e other Closes
with their Names and con^ents of Acts, and also put down the abutments of
them, in case they be dispersed or intermingled with other Lands] All which
said Closes, or parcels of Land do lie together, near unto the said Message or
Tenement, and are belonging to, or have been usually letten or occupied
together with the same, and are situate, lying and being in the Parish of C.
aforesaid, and now are, or late were, in the tenure or occupation of G. H. his
Assigns or under-Tenants: And all and singular Ways, Easements, Watercourses,
Fishings, Ponds, Commons, Common of Pasture, Heath, Turbary, Woods, Underwoods,
Profits and Commodities whatsoever, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, to the said Message, or Tenement and Premises belonging or
appertaining, or reputed to belong thereunto, or used or letten together with
the same.

(4. All that Message or Tenement, with A Message in London.
Th'appurtenances, situate and being in or near Fleetstreet, in the Parish of
St. Dunstans in the West, London, commonly called or known by the sign of the
Mirmaid, now in the tenure or occupation of G. H. his Assigns or under-Tenants,
Together with all and singular Shops, Cellars, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms,
Entries, Ways, Passages, Yards, Backsides, Edifices, Buildings, Gutters,
Watercourse, Easements, Profits, Commodities and Appu^teaances whatsoever, to
the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
therewith used, occupied or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed or taken, as part
parcel or member thereof.

(5.) All that great Message or Inn, commonly An Inn^.
called or known by the Name, or Sign of the George, situate and being in a
Street called B. Street, in the Parish of C. London, together with all Cellars,
Sollers, Rooms, Chambers, Stables, Haylofts, Ways, Passages, Courts, Yards,
Lights, Windows, Watercourse, Racks, Planks, Mangers, and all other
Apurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, or therewith used, occupied or enjoyed, or reputed or taken
as part, parcel or member thereof, which said Message or Inn is now in the
tenure or occupation of A. B. Inne-holder, his Assigns or Vnder-Tenants.

(6.) All that his Message, or Tenement A Brewhouse.
and Brewhouse, situate and being in a Street called B. Street, in the Parish
of, etc. London, with all the Stables, Edifices, Buildings, Ways, Passages,
Lights, Watercourse, Profits, Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever,
thereunto belonging, or therewithal now used, occupied or enjoyed: And also,
All and singular those Vessels, Furnaces, Coppers, and other Vtens^^s
whatsoever, to the said Brewhouse belonging, and now used together with the
same, being in a Schedule hereunto annexed, particularly mentioned.

(7.) All that his Water-grist Miln and A Watergrist Miln
Milns (being two grist Milns under one Roof) commonly called or known by the
name of B. Miln or Milns, with the Appurtenances, situate and being in the
Parish of, etc. sometimes in the tenure or occupation of one A. B. and now or
late in the tenure or occupation of C. D. or his Assigns or Under Tenants, and
all that parcel of ground, on part whereof the said Milns now stand, containing
by estimation one Acre or thereabouts, be the same more or less. And also all
that the The Suit to the Milns.
Suit of and to the said Milns, as well customary as conventionary, of all the
Tenants of the Manor of S. in the said County, and all the Toll and Custom,
for grinding of all the Corn and Grain of the said Tenants, and also all and
singular Head-Wares and Miln-Ponds, and the soil thereof, to the said Miln or
Milns belonging or appertaining. And all and singular Miln-Pools, Miln-Dams,
Stanks, Banks, Ponds, Streams, waters, Watercourse, Rivers, Fishings, Fishing
places, ways, Paths, Passages, Easements, Profits, Commodities, Advantages,
Emoluments and Appurtenances, to the said Miln or Milns, and other the
Premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof belonging or
appertaining, or with the same now or at any time heretofore used, occupied or
enjoyed.

(8.) All that his Water-grist Miln, commonly Another.
called or known by the name of B. Miln, situate and being in the Parish of C.
in the County of D. And all that parcel of ground, on part whereof the said
Miln now stands: And also all and singular Miln-Ponds, Miln-Dams, Banks,
Streams, Watercourse, Ways, Easements, Profits, Advantages, Commodities and
Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Miln and Premises belonging or
appertaining, now in the tenure or occupation of A. B. his Assigns or Under
Tenants.

(9.) All that the Prebend of B. in the A. Prebend.
County of C. with all and singular the Rights, Members and Appurtenances
thereof: And also the Advowson, Gift, Presentation, Collation and right of
Patronage of the said Prebend, which said Prebend one A. B. formerly had to him
and his Heirs for ever, of the Gift and Grant of the late King James, and by
mean Conveyances is since come unto the said C. B. And all and singular
Messuages, Houses, Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Woods, Underwoods, Parsonages, Chapels, Advowsons, Gleab-Lands, Tithes,
Oblations, Obventions, Pensions, Portions, Fruits, Profits, Commodities,
Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their Appurtenances, as well
spiritual as temporal, of what nature or kind soever the same be, or by
whatsoever name or names they be called or known, set, lying and being, coming,
growing or renewing in the Towns, Fields, Parishes or Hamblets of J. and S. in
the said County of C.

(10.) All that the Rectory or Parsonage of C. A Rectory.
aforesaid, and all and singular Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables,
Lands, Tenements, Ways, Passages, Wastes, Commons, Tithes of Corn, Grain, Hay;
Wool, Flax, Hemp, and all other Tithes whatsoever, as well great as small,
Oblations, Obventions, Fruits, Profits, Rights, Franchises, Privileges,
Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with
Th'appurtenances, of what nature, kind or quality soever the same be, lying and
be, or coming, growing, renewing or aris^ng within the Hamlets or Fields of C.
aforesaid, or any or either of them, to the said Rectory or Parsonage of C.
belonging, or in any wise appertaining.

THE Several FORMS OF INSTRUMENTS Relating to the AFFAIRS of MERCHANTS, AND
TRADERS: Very useful for Scriveners in LONDON, And other Maritim Towns, and
Places of Trade. The Particulars of which will appear in the TABLE, next
following. By T. B. Esquire;

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini 1674.

THE TABLE.
I. CHAP. Containing several Forms, of Charter Parties, viz. A Charter Party
where the Ship is to apply to several Parts, to discharge and relade. Sect. 1,
etc. Another where the Ship is to take in her first Lading, at several Ports.
Sect. 18, etc. Another where the Ship is let, and hired by the Month. Sect.
28, etc. Another between Partowners of a Ship, whereby the sharers of one
Moiety, lets to freight their Part, to the sharers of the other Moiety.
Sect. 39, etc. Another between the Owners of a Ship, and Merchant, for the
Lading thereof with Salt, and discharging the same in Ireland. Sect. 46, etc.
II. Chap. Containing several forms of Bills of Credit, of Adventure, of
Bottombrie, Assurance of goods, and Letters of license and composition from
Creditors to Debtors. A Bill of Credit. Sect. 1. A Bill of Adventure for a ball
of Cloth. Sect. 2, etc. Another for Money in a voyage to the East Indies. Sect.
5, etc. Another upon a Man of War. Sect. 8, etc. Another upon a Man of War, and
several Ships, taken into consortment with her. Sect. 11, etc. The Form of a
Bill of Bottomver, Sect. 13, etc. Another with Bond thereupon Sect. 21, etc. An
Assurance of goods outward bound: Sect. 28, etc. A Letter of license from
Creditors to a Debtor, and composition made. Sect. 30, etc. Another to a
Merchant remaining beyond the Seas, to come into England for a Year. Sect. 37,
etc. Another to a Debtor beyond Sea for six Months; paying six shillings eight
pence per Pound. Sect. 40, etc. Another in brief. Sect. 42, etc. Another to a
Debtor, resident in England, for a Years time. Sect. 43, etc. Another to have
free liberty to go to and from the Creditors to compound. Sect. 46. A Letter of
Composition for Debts. Sect. 50.
III. Chap. Containing several Forms of Co-Partner-Ships, and Covenants
incident thereunto. The Form of a Co-Partner-Ship, relating to Transactions, as
well foreign as domestic Sect. 1, etc. Another touching foreign and
domestic Merchandising. Sect. 49, etc. Another, between two Sale men, as to
matters in England only Sect. 67, etc. Another, between two Brewers. Sect. 93,
etc. Another, between a Pewterer and another Person, who puts in the whole
stock, and the Pewterer manageth the Trade. Sect. 110, etc.
IV. Chap. Containing several Forms of Instruments used between Merchants and
Traders, at and after the dissolution of Co-Partner-ship. An Indenture
containing several Covenants upon separation of Co Partner-ship. Sect. 1, etc.
Another Form, where one assigns his Part to the other, Sect. 10, etc. Another
being a Partition of Debts between a Co-Partner, and the Executor of the other.
Sect. 18, etc. Another, being a Partition of Debts and Goods after the
Dissolution of Co Partner-Ship. Sect. 29, etc. The Form of a Condition of a
Bond upon separation of Co Partner-Ship. Sect. 42, etc. Another like Form, for
one to discharge the other of Debts due upon a private account. Sect. 48, etc.
V. Chap. Containing some Presidents, relating to other matters between
Traders. Articles of agreement amongst Creditors for levying of Debts, Sect. 7.
Articles of agreement for erecting a Newbuilding in London, according to the
Act of Parliament for re-building of London. Sect. 19, etc.

THE Several FORMS OF INSTRUMENTS Relating to the Affairs of MERCHANTS, etc.
CAP. I. Containing the several Forms of Charter-Parties.
A Charter-Partie where the Ship is to apply to several Ports to discharge and
relade.
1. THIS Charter-Partie Indented made the, etc. Between A. B. Master of the
good Ship called the Flower de-Luce of London, of the burden of 200 Tuns, or
thereabouts, now riding at Ancor in the River of Thames, near London, on the
one Part: And C. D. of London Merchant on the other Part: Witnesses, That the
said A. B. has granted and letten the said Ship to freight, and the said C. D.
has hired The Grant to freight of the Ship.
the said Ship for a voyage, by Gods assistance, to be made with her as
hereafter is expressed.

(2.) That is to say, the said A. B. for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does Covenant, grant and agree to and with the said C D. his
Executors and Administrators, by these presents, that the said Ship, with the
first good Wind and Weather that God shall send, next after the 20th. When the
Ship shall begin her Voyage.
day of, etc. next ensuing the date above written, shall set sail and depart
from and out of the River of Thames aforesaid unto her said intended Voyage,
and before her said departure shall receive and take into her, all such Goods
and Merchandises, which she may conveniently and safely stow Her lading.
and cartie in her (over and above her victual tackle and apparel) as the said
C. D. his Factors or Assigns shall think fit to lade into her: And by Gods
assistance as Wind and Weather shall serve (the perils and dangers of the Sea
excepted) shall directly sail to and apply unto Nantz in Britanie, The first
Port to be applied to.
and there discharge and unlade the ^^d goods and merchandises our of her, and
there also to receive, relade, and take in unto and aboard her all such other
Goods and Merchandises (as she may conveniently stow and carry as aforesaid)
and as the said C. D. his Factors or Assigns shall appoint, and th^n (...) to
lade into her.

(3.) And then the said Ship, with the first good Wind and Weather, that God
shall send (the The second P^^t applied to.
dangers and hazards of the Sea excepted) shall directly sail and apply to the
Island of St. Michaels within the Dominions of the King of Portugal, and shall
there unlade and make a discharge of the said ^oods, and relade again,
according to the direction and appointment of the said C D. his Factors, or
Assigns, and with such goods, wates, and merchandises, as the said C. D. his
Factors or Assigns, shall think fit to lade into her, not exceeding the
proportion, that the said Ship can safely stow and carry, as aforesaid: And
then the said Ship with the first good Wind and Weather, that God shall send
(the perils and dangers of the Sea excepted) shall directly sail and apple The
third Port applied to.
unto the Island of Terceras and Fyall within the Dominions of, etc. and there
unlade and make discharge of the said Goods and Merchandises: And shall there
relade and take into and aboard her again all such Goods and Merchandises as
are there usually laden, according to the Order and Direction of the said C. D.
his Factors or Assigns, and which the said C. D. his Factors or Assigns shall
think fit to relade or cause to be reladen aboard the said Ship, and which she
may conveniently stow, and carry in her as aforesaid over and above her
victual tackel and appatel.

(4.) And then the said Ship so being laden The fourth Port applied to.
at the Island of Terceras and Fyal, as aforesaid, as Wind and Weather shall
serve, and the perils and dangers of the Sea excepted, shall with her said
burden sail, teturn and come back to the Island of St. Michael aforesaid, and
there unlade, and make a discharge of the said Goods and Merchandises, and
receive into and aboard her there such other Goods and Merchandises, as the
said Merchant his Factors or Assigns shall think fit, and please to lade into
and aboard her, and are there accustomed to be laden, and which the said Ship
can safely stow, and carry as aforesaid.

(5.) And then the said Ship, with the first The Ships return.
good Wind and Weather, that God shall afterward send (the perils and dangers
of the Sea excepted) shall directly sail and apply to Dartmouth, Plymouth or
the Isle of Wight, And the said Ship being arrived at one of the said places,
Notice to be given of Ships arrival.
he the said A. B. or such Person as shall be Master of the said Ship for the
Time being, shall from thence send express notice in Writing, to be given or
left to or for the said C. D. his Executors, Factors, or Assigns, at or in the
now dwelling house of the said C. D. situate in D. near Aldgate London: That
the said Ship and Goods are safely arrived at one of the said last mentioned
places, and at such place of arrival, the said Ship shall stay and abide the
space of ten days for Answer and Direction, to be returned and given by him
Notice of the next application to be made.
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators, Factors or Assigns, for the
sailing and applying of the said Ship unto Haverdegrace in France, or Amsterdam
in Holland, or to the Port of the City of London, the charge of sending a
Messenger, to give such intelligence as aforesaid, to be satisfied and paid by
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns.

(6) And according to such Answer and appointment shall, with the first good
Wind and The Ships discharge.
Weather that God shall sen^, the perils and dangers of the Sea excepted,
directly sail and apply either to Haverdegrace, or Amsterdam, or the Port of
London, which of the said places the said Ship shall be so ordered or appointed
to sail and apply unto: And within ten days after the arrival of the said
Ship, at the same Place so to be appointed, the said Ship shall make her right
discharge of the said Merchants goods, and Merchandises, and there to end and
finish her said intended Voyage (the petils and dangers of the Sea excepted.)

(7.) And it is further agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, that the said How long the Ship to stay at each Port.
Ship shall tarry and abide at Nantz the Island of St. Michael, and Tercera^
and Fyal before mentioned, for her several discharges and relading at the said
several Places as aforesaid the space of sixty Days in the whole, That is to
say, at Nantz twenty Days, at the said Island of St. Michael, twenty Days,
and at Terceras and Fyal aforesaid twenty Days. Within which several times
before limited and expressed, the said C. D. for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. his Covenant
to discharge, and relatie within the times limited.
Executors and Administrators, by these presents, to discharge and relade the
said Ship in manner and form aforesaid at the se^eral Places and Ports, of
Nantz, St. Michael, and Terceras and Fyal before (...).

(8.) And within the said space of ten Days before limited after notice of the
(...) of the said Ship, as aforesaid, a^ Darrmouth, Plymouth, or the (...) of
Wight, shall give order and direction to the said A. B. or the master of the
said Ship, for the time being, whether the said Ship shall sail to (...),
Amsterdam, or to the Port of the City of London, to make her right discharge,
and To unlade the Ship by a Tun at her last discharge.
shall at such Place, to be appointed, discharge or (...) to be discharged and
unladen the said Goods and Merchandises of the (...) Ship, within twelve Days
after the Arrival of the said Ship, at such appointed Place of discharge as
aforesaid.

(9.) And that the said C. D. his Executors, (...), Factors or Assigns, shall
(...) will well and (...) pay, or cause to (...) paid unto the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, How much to be paid for the freight.
freight for the said Ship, after the Rate of four pound the Tun, of lawful
Money of England, for every Tun of Goods and Merchandises, that shall be
unladen of and from the said Ship, at the several Ports and Places before
mentioned, accompring three Chests of Sugar to the Tun, etc. (and so put down
the several proportions that is reputed a Tun at the several Places) and then
add: and for other Goods and Merchandises according to the usual Custom.

(10.) And that all such sum and si^ks of Money, When and how paid.
that shall arise and grow due and payable for the freight and hire of the said
Ship, as aforesaid, shall be satisfied and paid unto the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns within six Days next after the discharge
of the said Ship at Haverdegrace or Amsterdam aforesaid, which of them shall be
appointed as aforesaid for the said Ship to make her discharge at, and the same
Moneys also to be paid according to the Course of the Exchange at such Place
to be appointed as aforesaid.

(11.) And it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, that
in case the said C. What to be paid for freight, if the Ship do not fully lade.
D. shall not fully lade the said ship at the Ports, and places aforesaid,
appointed for the Lading thereof or any of them; yet nevertheless, the said C.
D. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns shall well and truly pay, or cause
to be paid unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at
and after the Rate of four pound the Tun, for so many Tuns, as the said ship
can or may conveniently stow and carry, in manner and form aforesaid together
with average accustomed.

(12.) And it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, That
all Port-charges, Portcharges.
that shall arise and grow due to be paid, for and in respect of the said
Ship, in the said intended Voyage shall be satisfied and paid in manner and
form following ( viz.) Parts thereof by the said C. D. his Factors, or Assigns,
and Part thereof by the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns.

(13.) And it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents
(notwithstanding To stay over and above the Days limited at each Port.
any matter or thing herein before contained) that in case necessity shall
require, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. D. his Factors or
Assigns, or any of them, to keep the said Ship at Demorage at the several
places and Ports aforesaid, of Nantz, St. Michael, Terceras and Fyal, the space
and time of thirty Days, and no more, after the end and exspiration of the
said sixty Days, before limited, for the said ship to stay at the said places
and Ports: That is to say, viz. Ten Days at Nantz, ten Days at St. Michael,
and ten Days at Terceras and Fyal before mentioned, for every Day of which
Demorage over and above the said sixty Days: the said C. D. his Factors and
Assigns shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns the sum of three pound How much to pay
per Diem.
of lawful Moneys of England, and the said Moneys, that shall arise and grow
due for demorage as aforesaid, shall be paid, etc. (here set down the Day
when.)

(14.) And it is moreover agreed by and between The Master to have money paid
him in the voyage, etc.
the said Parties to these presents, that the said C. D. his Factors, or
Assigns shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said A. B. his
Executors, or Assigns, or such as shall be Master of the said ship for the time
being, all such sum and sums of Money, as he or they shall have occasion for at
the Island of St. Michael, and at Terceras and Fyal aforesaid, so that all the
said sum and sums of Money, so to be paid, as aforesaid, exceed not in the
whole the sum of, etc. Which said sum and sums of Money so to be paid, are to
be deducted upon the payment made for the freight of the said Ship in manner
and form aforesaid.

(15.) And it is agreed by and between the said Not to lade any goods except
the Merchants.
Parties to these presents, that the said Master his Factors or Assigns, shall
not lade or cause to be laden any Goods or Merchandises aboard the said Ship,
for any other Merchant and Person whatsoever, except the said C. D. save only
the quantity or proportion of five Tuns, which the said Master or his company
may lade for their own use at the time of Lading the said ship, at the several
Ports aforesaid, without allowance for the same, That the Ship is strong and
well apparelled, etc. and 20 men and a boy therein.
if occasion shall require.

(16.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors and Administrators does
covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his Executors Administrators, and
Assigns by these presents: That the said Ship at the time of her departure from
and out of the said River of Thames upon her said intended Voyage, shall be
strong and sufficiently victualled, tackelled, furnished and apparelled with
masts, sails, anchors, cables, ropes, cords, boat and Dars, twelve pieces of
Ordinance, guns, gunpowder, shot, tackle, apparel, ammunition and furniture,
meet and needful for the said Ship and Voyage, together with a Master, and
twenty men and one boy, which men and boy or so many of them The men and boy to
attend the Merchant, etc.
as shall be needful, shall be ready at all due and convenient times with the
said Ship-Boat, to serve the said Master, his factors, or assigns, to and from
the land, during the said Voyage and to discharge and relade the said Ship as
occasion shall serve.

(17.) And to the performance of all and singular the Covenants, Grants.
Articles, agreements The Parties mutually bind themselves in a penalty to
perform the Covenants.
and other things herein before contained by and on the part and behalf of the
said A. B. his executors, or administrators to be done and performed as
aforesaid, the said A. B. binds himself, his erecutors, and administrators, and
especially the said ship with her tackle, apparel and furniture, unto the said
C. D. his executors, administrators and assigns in the penal sum of One
thousand pound of lawful Moneys of England, by these presents to be well and
truly paid unto the said C. D. his executors, administrators or assigns, upon
the Nonperformance, or Non-observance of any of the said Covenants and
agreements, on his part to be done and performed according to the intent and
true meaning of these presents.

The like for the other Party, who is to bind himself, his Executors and
Administrators, and his Goods and Chattels in the like penalty of One thousand
pound to perform, etc.

In Witness, etc.

Another, where the Ship is to take in her first Lading at several Ports.
(18.) THis Charter-Partie Indented of Affreightment made the, etc. Between A.
B. Citizen and Alderman of London, and E. F. Citizen and Draper of London,
Owners of the good Ship called the P. of London, of the burden of 140 Tuns, or
there abouts, riding at this present on the River of Thames, within the Port of
London (whereof is Master under God for this Voyage T. W.) on the one Part, and
C. D. The grant to freight and hire of the Ship.
of London Merchant, on the other Part: Witnesses, That the said A. B. and E.
F. have granted and letten the said Ship to freight to the said C. D. and the
said C. D. has hired the said Ship for a Voyage to be made by Gods Grace in
manner and form following: That is to say,

(19.) The said A B. and E. F. for them, and either To stay so long in the
Toames before Lading.
of them, their and either of their executors and administrators do covenant
and grant by these presents to and with the said C. D. his executors and
administrators, and either of them in manner and form following, that is to
say, That the said Ship shall ride and ^arry within the River of Thames, in the
Port aforesaid, until the tenth day of, etc. next ensuing the Date hereof, and
shall receive into her all such goods; wares, and Merchandises, which it shall
please the said C. D. his factors or assigns, there to charge and To receive in
Lading.
lade into and aboard her before the said tenth Day of, etc. and not to receive
into the said Ship before her departure any of the goods or merchandises of any
other person or persons whatsoever (except the said C. D.) without the special
consent and agreement of the said C. D. his Factors or Assigns, first thereunto
had and obtained: except three Dacks of Merchandises freight-fee of the said E.
F.

(20.) That the said Ship with the first good Wind and Weather, that God shall
send next after The second place where the Ship is to receive more lading.
the said tenth day of, etc. shall depart and sail from the Port of the said
City of London with the said received Goods of the said C. D. (the perils and
dangers of the Sea excepted) unto Gore-End within the Realm of England, where
she shall tarry and abide the space of twelve days next ensuing her first
arrival there, at an anchor, there to receive into her freight Fee as much Corn
as she can safely stow and carry, over and besides her Victual, Tackle, Apparel
and Furniture, and over and besides the said Goods by her received at London,
as aforesaid.

(21.) And moreover that the said Ship with The place applied to for discharge
and reladeing.
the first good Wind and Weather, that God shall send, next after the end and
exspiration of the said twelve days shall directly sail (the dangers and
perils of the Sea excepted) from Gore-End aforesaid unto L. within the Realm of
P. as near to the said Town, as she may safely arrive, to make her right
discharge, where the said ship shall tarry by the space of forty days next
ensuing her first arrival there at an anchor, as well to discharge Time given
to discharge and relade.
the said Goods received into her within the said Port of London, and at
Gore-End, as aforesaid; as also to relade and recharge into her the said ship
140 Tuns in the whole of such goods, wares, and merchandises, as it shall
please the said Merchant his factors or assigns there within the said forty
Days to lade in and aboard the said ship before her departure, and not there
to receive any other goods of any other person or persons whatsoever, except
what shall be laded as aforesaid, accompting so much to every Tun: and here se^
down how much of each particular shall be accounted to the Tun: if it may be.

(22.) Nevertheless it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents: And the said A. B. and E. F. for them, and either of them, their and
either of their executors and administrators, do covenant and grant to and with
the said C. D his More days given to lade in, if the other suffice not
Executors and Assigns, by these presents: That if the said C. D. his factors
or assigns cannot within the said forty Days lade the said ship at L. as
aforesaid, that then the said ship shall there tarry and abide the space of
ten Days, next after the End and Expiration of the said forty Days.

(22.) And that the said ship being as is before mentioned, laden at L.
aforesaid, shall with The discharge of the Ship.
the first good Wind and Weather, that God shall send, next after the
Expiration of the said abiding Days, or so soon as she shall be laden,
directly sail from thence (the dangers and perils of the Sea excepted) and
apply to A. or London, or such of the said places, where it shall please the
said Merchant his Factors or Assigns, that the said ship shall make her
discharge.

(23.) And the said C. D for himself his Executors, To charge and discharge the
Ship within Time limited.
Administrators, Factors and Assigns, and for every of them, does Covenant and
Grant by these presents to and with the said A. B. and E. F. and either of
them, their and either of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that he
the said C. D. his Executors, or Assigns, shall and will within the said Ports
of London, and Gore-End charge and lade the said Ship, within the Times before
limited and appointed for the same, and shall and will discharge and relade the
said Ship at L. aforesaid, within the Kingdom of P. within the Times before
limited and appointed for the same: And shall and will discharge and unlade the
said Ship at London, or A. aforesaid, within the Time and Space of, etc. Days.

(24.) And also that he the said Merchant, his To give notic^ where to
discharge.
Factors, or Assigns shall and will within the said abiding Days, at L.
aforesaid, and so soon as the said Ship shall be there as is aforesaid laden,
give notice unto the said Master, or his Assigns, where the said Ship shall
make her right Discharge, that is to say, whether at A. or at London aforesaid.

(25.) And that the said C. D. his Factors or Assigns shall well and truly pay,
or cause to be Payment for freight of the Ship.
paid unto the said A. B and E. F. or one of them, their or one of their
Executors or Assigns for every Tun of the said Ships lading, that shall be
discharged at L. aforesaid, the sum of, etc of lawful Moneys of England, and
for every Tun that shall be discharged or unladen out of the said Ship at A. or
London aforesaid, the sum of, etc. of like Moneys: which said Moneys shall be
paid in manner and form following: That is to say, The one Moiety thereof
within ten Days next after the said Discharge of the said Ship at A. or London
as aforesaid: And the remaining Moiety thereof within one Month next after the
End and Exspiration of the said ten Days, together with Petie-loadmenage,
Primage, and Average, wont and accustomed.

(26.) And that the said C. D. his Factors or Payment for demorage.
Assigns, shall and will for every Day, that the said Ship shall tarry and
abide at L. aforesaid, over and above the said forty Days, truly pay or cause
to be paid to the said A. B. and E. F. or one of them, their or one of their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the sum of, etc. of lawful Moneys of
England, at the Day and Time, when the last Moneys payable for the freight of
the said ship is to be paid by the true intent and meaning of these presents.

(27.) And the said A. B. and E. F. do covenant That the Ship shall be able to
receive into her 140 Tun and be well furnished, etc.
grant and warrant by these presents, to and with the said Merchant, that the
said Ship shall be able to receive into her under-Hatches at L. aforesaid, over
and besides her Victual, Tackle and Apparel, the said quantity of 140 Tuns, and
that the said Ship is and shall be strong and stanch, and well and sufficiently
victualled, tackelled, apparelled and furnished, with Masts, Sails, Sailyards,
Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Cords, Gunshot, Gunpowder, Artillery, Tackle,
Apparel, Boat and Furniture, meet and convenient for such a Ship, and for such
a Voyage, together with an able Master, twenty six able men and a boy, which
men and boy (or so many of them as shall be useful) shall be ready at all times
convenient, during the said Voyage, with the cock, or boat of the said Ship, to
serve the said Master, his Factors or Assigns to and from the Land.

Here add their mutual obligation to perform the Covenants: vide Devant. pla.
Sect. 17.

Another, where the Ship is let for twelve Months, and the hire to be at a
certain Sum by the Month.
(28.) IN the Name of God, Amen: This Partowners.
Charter-Partie Indented of Affreightment, made the, etc. Between A. B. and E.
F. of, etc. Part-Owners of the good Ship called the D. of London, of the
burden of 200 Tuns or thereabouts, now riding at Anchor, in the River of
Thames, within the Port of the City of London, of which ship the said E. F. is
Master under God, on the one Part, and C. D. of London Merchant on the other
Part.

(29.) Witness that the said A. B. and E. F. have The ship let to freight by
the Month.
granted and letten to freight, and by these presents, do grant and let unto
freight the said Ship unto the said C. D. by the Month, for and during the
space of twelve Months to begin, and to be accounted from the departure of the
said Ship from Graves-End, outward bound upon her present intended Voyage, at
and for the Rate and Price of, etc. of lawful Moneys of England by the Month,
and for such and so long time after the Expiration of the said twelve Months
(not exceeding six Months more) as it shall please the said C. D. his Factors
or Assigns, to keep the said Ship in his service and ^^ployment, at and for the
Rate of the like sum of, etc. per Month, and so and after the same Rate and
Price for a lesser Time than a Month, accompting the Months as they shall fall
out in the Calendar: And that the said Master has accordingly hired and taken
the said Ship by the Month, after the Rate and Price aforesaid, for a Voyage by
Gods Assistance to be made with her, as is hereafter mentioned.

(30.) That is to say^ the said A. B and E. F. for The ship to be ready to
begin the Voyage by a time certain.
themselves, their Executors, and Administrators do jointly and severally
covenant and agree to and with the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, by these presents, that the said Ship upon or before the twentieth Day
of, etc. next ensuing the Date hereof (Wind and Weather permitting) shall be
ready to set sail and depart, from Graves-End aforesaid, upon her said intended
Voyage, and as Wind and Weather shall permit (the perils and dangers of the Sea
excepted) shall directly sail and apply unto the Streights of G. where the said
Ship may safely arrive, and lawfully trade, not exceeding the Latitude The
Voyage.
of thirty Degrees, and further to the South, as the said Merchant his Factors
or Assigns shall direct and appoint: and that the said Ship (the perils and
dangers of the Sea excepted) shall end her said Voyage in the Port of London.

(31.) And further that the said Ship before To take in the Merchants goods.
her departure from hence, and during the time that she shall be in the said
service and employment of the said C. D. his Factors, or Assigns, by virtue
hereof shall lade, receive and take into her, and also discharge and unlade out
of her, all such Goods, Merchandises and Lading, which she may conveniently
stow and carry in her, over and above her Victual, Tackle and Apparel, as the
said Merchant, his Factors or Assigns shall think to lade into and aboard her,
and to discharge and unlade out of her.

(31.) And the said C. D. for himself, his Executors That the Ship shall finish
her Voyage in eighteen Months.
and Administrators, does covenant and grant, to and with the said A. B. and E.
F. and either of them, their and either of their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns by these presents, That he the said Merchant his Factors or Assigns,
shall and will permit and suffer the said Ship with her Ordinance, Tackle and
Apparel, to be safely returned into the River of Thames, from the said Voyage,
and to be there discharged from and out of her said intended employment at the
Expiration of eighteen Months (at the farthest) to be accounted from the Time
of the said Ships entrance into Monthly Pay, as aforesaid (the perils and
dangers of the Sea, and necessary Use and Wearing of her Tackle, Apparel and
Furniture in the mean Time only excepted.)

(32.) And further that the said C. D. his Executors, The payment of the
freight.
Administrators and Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid unto the said A. B. and E. F. or one of them, their or one of their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in London, freight for the said Ship, for
the said intended Voyage, at and after the aforesaid Rate of, etc. of lawful
Moneys of England, Monthly (to be accounted as aforesaid by the Calendar) for
every Month, that the said ship shall remain and be in the service and
employment of the said Merchant, his Factors or Assigns by virtue of these
presents, and after the same Rate for a shorter Time then a Month: That is to
say, from the Time of the said ships Entrance into her monthly Pay, as
aforesaid, until she shall return into the said River of Thames from her said
intended Voyage, and be there discharged from and out of her said employment.

(33.) And that all the Moneys, which at and after the Rate aforesaid shall
arise and grow due The manner of payment for the freight and hire of the Ship.
to be paid for the freight of the said ship for her said intended Voyage
shall be well and truly paid to the said A. B. and E. F. or one of them, their
or one of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns in London, in manner and
form following, that is to say, the one or Moiety thereof, within ten Days,
next after the return and discharge of the said ship, in the said River of
Thame^, and the other Moiety or half Part thereof within three Months, next
following from and after the Determination and Expiration of the said ten
Days: together with Average, Primage, and Pettie-loadmenage accustomed.

(34.) Nevertheless it is concluded and fully Other Provision touching the
payment.
agreed upon, by and between the said Parties to these presents: That in case
the said Ship shall be out upon her said intended Voyage the space or time of
six Months, to be accomp^ed by the Kallendar, as aforesaid: And at the end of
the said six Months, shall be well and in safety in the service of the said C.
D. his Factors or Assigns: That then the said Merchant, his Factors or Assigns,
shall within three Months next after the Expiration of the said six Months
(true and certain Notice or Certificate of such the well being of the said
Ship, at the end of the said six Months being in the mean time given or let to
and for the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns at his now dwelling house in,
etc.) well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. and E. F. or
one of them, their or one of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, so
much for freight as at and after the Rate aforesaid, shall be due for the said
ship for six Months service: And further that if the said Ship shall be out
upon the said Voyage, the space or time of twelve Months to be accounted as
aforesaid, and at the end of the said twelve Months, shall be well and in
safety in the service of the said Merchant, his Factors or Assigns: That then
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall within two
Months, next after the end and exspiration of the said twelve Months (true and
certain notice and certificate of such the well being of the said Ship, at the
end of the said twelve Months, being in the mean time given or left in manner
and form aforesaid, to and for the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns) well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. and E. F.
or one of them, their or one of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in
London over and above the said first six Months freight, so much for freight as
at and after the Rate aforesaid, shall be due for six Months more.

(35.) And it is further agreed by and between What Payment in case the Ship
return within twelve Months.
the said Parties to these presents, That in case the said Ship shall be
returned within the River of Thames from the said Voyage, and be there
discharged of and out of her said intended employment, before the Expiration of
twelve Months to be accounted, as aforesaid, yet nevertheless the said C. D.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall pay and allow unto the said A.
B. and E. F. or one of them, their or one of their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns for the said Ship after the Rate aforesaid, for the full time of twelve
Months to be accounted, as aforesaid, any thing herein before contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(36.) And the said C. D. for himself his Executors, Allowance to the Master
during the Voyage.
and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. and E.
F. and either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators,
by these presents, That he the said C. D. his Executors, or Administrators,
shall furnish and deliver during the said Voyage unto the Master of the said
Ship, for the time being, all such Moneys, as he shall have occasion to use for
buying of Provision, and other necessaries and for payment of men's Wages not in
the whole exceeding the sum of, etc. sterling: which said Money shall be
deducted and allowed from time to time out of the freight or hire for the said
Ship, that shall respectively grow or become due for the said Ship by virtue of
these presents.

(37.) And the said A. B. and E. F. for them, their That the ship shall be
strong and well furnished.
Executors, and Administrators, do jointly and severally covenant and grant to
and with the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these
presents: That the said Ship at the time of her departure from Graves-End
aforesaid, shall be strong and stanch and well and sufficiently victualled,
tackelled, furnished and apparelled, with Masts, Sails, Sail-yards, Anchors,
Cables, Ropes, Boat, Boat-oars, 25 Pieces of Ordinance, Guns, Gunpowder, Shot,
Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, meet and needful for the said Ship and Voyage,
together with a Master, One Hundred and forty Men and a Boy, which Men Men and
Boy to assist the Merchannt.
and Boy, or so many of them as shall be requisite, shall be ready at all Time
and Times, with the Boat of the said Ship to serve and carry the said Merchant,
his Factors and Assigns, and Goods and Merchandises of the said Masser,
according to Custom to and from the Land, during the said Voyage.

(38.) And it is further agreed, by and between Portcharges how born.
the said Parties to these presents, That all such Port-charges, as shall arise
and grow due to be paid during the said Voyage, and all such Steringree, as
during the said Voyage shall be used in and about the said Ship, shall be
paid, born and sustained in manner and form following: That is to say, the one
Moiety or half Part thereof by the said Merchant, his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, and the other half Part thereof by the said Part-owners, their
Executors and Assigns.

Both to bind themselves to perform the Covenants on each Part to be performed.
Vid. Sect. 17. Another between Part-owners of a Ship, whereby the Sharers of
one Moiety, lets to freight their Part to the Sharers of the other Moiety.
(39.) THis Charter-Partie Indented of affreighiment made the, etc. Between A
B. and C. D. of London Merchants, Part-owners: That is to say, Owners of the
one Moiety, or half Part of a good Ship called the R. of London, of the burden
of 300 Tuns, with the like Moiety of all the Masts, Sails, Tackle, Apparel,
Furniture, Ordinance and Appurtenances thereunto belonging, now riding at
Anchor, in the River of Thames, within the Port of London, whereof the said C.
D. is Master under God, of the one Part: And E. F. and G. H. of London
Merchants, Owners of the other Moiety and Residue of the said Ship, with the
Masts, Sails, Tackle, Ordinance, Furniture and Apparel thereunto belonging, on
the other Part.

(40.) Witnesses that the said A. B. and C. D. The ^erting to freight the Ship.
have granted and letten to freight, and by these presents do grant, and let to
freight, All that their said Part and Moiety of the said Ship, and Premises,
unto the said E. F. and G. H. for a Voyage with her to be made, by Gods Grace,
in manner and form following.

(41.) That is to say, That the said A. B. and The first Voyage to unlade Part.
C. D. for them, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, do hereby
covenant and grant, to and with the said E. F. and G. H. for them, and either
of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators, by these
presents: That the said Ship being already laden, shall, with the first good
Wind and Weather that God shall send next after the Date hereof, by Gods grace
(the perils and dangers of the Sea excepted) directly sail from the said River
of Thames, and apply unto the Port of Ligorn in Italy, under the Dominion of
the Duke of Florence, and there shall discharge such Goods and Merchandises, as
shall be appointed there to be unladen by the said E. F. and G. H. or one of
them, their or one of their Factors or Assigns, And from thence shall sail and
take her direct course, as Wind and Weather shall serve with as much speed as
may be (the perils and The second place of application, to unlade and relade.
dangers of the Sen excepted) unto the Island of 1. in Grecia, under the
Government of the Seigniorie of Venice, and there shall stay and abide, by the
space of forty Working Days, next after her first Arrival there, to unlade
such Goods and Merchandises, as is or shall be there appointed as aforesaid to
be unladen, and within the said time, shall relade such Goods, Wares, and
Merchandises as the said E. F. and G. H. or either of them, their or either of
their Factors or Assigns, shall think fit to charge and relade, aboard and into
the said Ship, that is to say, so much as the said ship, can conveniently slow
and carry, over and above her Victual, Tackle, Ammunition, Apparel and
Furniture.

(42.) And that the said Ship with her said Her return, for her last discharge.
burden, shall with the first Good Wind and Weather, that God shall send after
the Exspiration of the said forty Days (the perils and dangers of the Sea
excepted) sail and come from the said Island of 1. unto the City of London, or
as near thereunto, as she conveniently may, for her right discharge.

(43.) And the said E. F. and G. H. for themselves, Payment for the freight and
^ire.
and either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators do
covenant, and grant to and with the said A. B. and C. D. and either of them,
their and either of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these
presents: That they the said E. F. and G. H or one of them, their or one of
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall and will truly pay, or cause
to be paid to the said A. B. and C. D. or one of them, their or one of their
Executors or Administrators, within the City of London, for every Tun of such
Wares and Merchandises as shall be laden and unladen in the said Ship, during
the said Voyage, the sum of, etc. [accompting so much to the Tun, etc.] for the
Part and Interest of the said A. B. and C. D. in the said Ship, and for and in
respect of the freight and hire of their Part of the said Ship; which said
Money is to be paid in manner and form following: That is to say, one third
Part thereof upon the right discharge of the said Ship; and one other third
Part thereof within the space of six Weeks, then next following and the other
remaining third Part thereof within the space of three Months next ensuing
after the end and determination of the said six Weeks.

(44.) And the said A. B. and C. D. for them, and That the Ship shall be strong
and well furnished.
either of them, their and either of their Executors and Administrators, do
covenant and grant to and with the said E. F. and G. H. their Executors and
Administrators by these presents; That the said Ship for their Part shall be
strong and stanch and well and sufficiently tackelled and apparelled with
sayls, sayl-yards, anchors, cables, ropes, Gunshot, Artillery, Gunpowder,
and all other Instruments, Tackle and Apparel, needful and necessary for such a
Ship, and for such a Voyage, together with an able Master, fifty six Men and a
Boy, and a Cock-boat; which Men and Boy shall be always ready at all due times
with the said Cock-boat of the said Ship to serve the said E. F. and G. H. or
one of them, their or one of their Factors or Assigns, to and from the land
during the said Voyage, and to discharge and relade Mutual Obligations to
perform Covenants.
the said Ship as occasion shall serve.

(45.) And to the Performance of all and every Covenants, Grants, Articles and
Agreements on the Parts and behalfs of every of the said Parties, truly to be
holden, performed and kept in all things as is aforesaid, the said Parties to
these presents do bind themselves one to another: That is to say, the said A.
B. and C. D. do by these presents bind themselves, and either of them, and
their several Executors and Administrators, and goods, and their Part and
Interest in the said Ship, with the Furniture thereof to the said E. F. and G.
H. and to their Executors and Administrators. And the said E. F. and G. H. do
in like manner bind themselves, and either of them, their and either of their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all their Goods, and their Interest
in the said Ship to the said A. B. and C. D. their Executors and Administrators
in the sum or penalty of One thousand Pound of lawful Moneys of England, by the
Party or Partys infringing the said Covenants, or any of them, to the other
Party or Parties observing truly to be paid by virtue of these presents.

In witness

Another between the Owners of a Ship, and a Merchant, for the Lading thereof
with Salt, and discharging the same in Ireland.
(45.) THis Charter-Partie Indented made the, etc. Between A. B. and C. D. of
London, Grossers, Owners of the good Ship called the D. of London, of the
burden of eighty Tuns, or thereabouts, whereof is Master for the present
Voyage I. N. on the one Part: And E. F. of Dublin in Ireland Merchant, on the
other Part: Witnesses, that it is covenanted, concluded, and agreed, by and
between the said Parties, in manner and form following.

(47.) That is to say, the said A. B. and C. D. The voyage to lade the ship.
for them, their Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, do covenant
and grant to and with the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and either of them, by these presents, That the said Ship within the space of
eight Days now next ensuing, or so soon after as Wind and Weather will permit,
shall at the charge and adventure of the said Owners, depart from and out of
the Port of London aforesaid, where she now rides at Anchor, and from thence
shall keep direct course, and shall fail, as Wind and Weather will permit [the
perils and dangers of the Sea excepted] toward some of the Bays for Salt
within the Kingdoms or Territories of France, Spain or Portugal. And that the
said A. B. and C. D. their Factors or Agents, at their or some of their costs
and charges shall there with all convenient expedition, fully freight and lade,
or cause to be laden the said Ship, with good and merchandable Salt.

(47.) And shall then immediately, as Wind To sail with the Ships lading to
Dublin.
and Weather shall serve, at their like Adventure and Hazard, as aforesaid,
depart from the said place of Lading with the said Ship, and her burden,
toward the Port of Dublin in Ireland, and that for the attaining to the said
Port of Dublin, the said Master and his Mariners, with all good Endeavor,
according to their Knowledge and Understanding, shall set and apply their
course without any fraud or covin.

(48.) And that, so soon as the said Ship To give notice of her arrival.
shall have finished her said appointed Voyage, and shall arrive in safety with
her said Lading in the Port of Dublin aforesaid, that then in the said Port the
said Ship shall ride at Anchor, in the Common Place of Anchorage there called
the Pool of Clumm-Turf, and that then within one Day next after the said
arrival there the said Master or Owners, or one of them, or some of their
Factors, Agents or Messengers shall signify and give notice of the said
Arrival of the said Ship, unto the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators,
Factors or Assigns, at the now dwelling house of the said E. F. in Dublin
aforesaid, and then and there shall be ready to deliver all the Salt laden into
the said Ship, which shall be seventy Tans at the least, after the Rate of four
Burdeux Hogsheads to every Tun, in measuring to be once shaken, and then being
full to be stricken To deliver the salt clear from former charges.
off: And then and there the said Owners, Factors or Assigns shall, in form
aforesaid, deliver the said Salt into the Port of Dublin aforesaid, to be
brought in the said Ship unto the said E. F. his Factors or Assigns, of and
from aboard the said Ship into their Loyter or Loyters to be brought and laid
close aboard the said Ship, the said Salt, being cleared and freed of and from
all and all manner of former charges of what kind or sort soever.

(49.) And the said E. F. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns does covenant Payment for the salt.
and grant to and with the said A. B. and C. D. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, by these presents that upon notice given unto the said E. F. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, of the said Arrival of the said Ship in
the said Port of Dublin, he the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators,
Factors, or Assigns, shall and will be ready to take and receive her said
Lading of Salt in manner and form aforesaid, with all reasonable and convenient
expedition. And within ten Days after the receipt thereof, shall at the
dwelling house of, etc. pay and content, or upon good and true account
according to the intent and true meaning of these presents allow to the said
Owners, their Factors or Assigns, the sum of ten shillings of lawful Moneys of
England, for every Hogshead of the said Salt, to be delivered to the said E. F.
his Executors, Factors or Assigns, as aforesaid.

(50.) And the said E. F. in Part of Payment Part of the hire before hand paid.
for the said Salt has at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, before
hand contented and paid, unto the said Owners of the said Ship, One hundred
pound of lawful Moneys of England, so to be reckoned, accounted and defalked at
the time of the Delivery of the said Salt: Which said sum of One hundred Pound,
they the said Owners do acknowledge, by these presents: That they have had and
received accordingly, and thereof and of every Part thereof, do clearly acquit
and discharge the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators, Factors and
Assigns, and every of Covenant to repay if Ship miscarry.
them by these presents. And do hereby Covenant and grant, to and with the said
E. F. That in case the said Ship, or Goods should fortune to miscarry in the
said Voyage, That then they will repay back again unto the said E. F. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns the said sum of One hundred Pound on, etc.

In witness.

CAP. II. Containing the several forms of Bills, of Credit, of Adventure, of
Bottombrie; Assurance of Goods; and Letters of License and Composition from
Creditors to Debtors.
A Bill of Credit.
(1.) THis Present Writing witnesses: That A. B. binds himself to pay what C.
D. shall entrust E. F. with.
I A B. of London Alderman, do undertake to and with C. D. of the City of Y.
Merchant, his Executors and Administrators: That if he deliver to E. F. of,
etc. or to his Assigns, to his use, any sum or sums of Money, not exceeding in
the whole the sum of Three hundred Pound of lawful Moneys of England: And shall
take a Bill under the hand and seal of the said E. F. for the same,
acknowledging, testifying and showing the certainty thereof: That then I the
said A. B. my Executors or Administrators, having the said Bill delivered to me
or them, shall presently upon receipt of the said Bill pay or cause to be paid
to the said C. D. his Executors or Assigns, all such sum or sums of Money (not
exceeding the said sum of Three hundred Pound) as shall be contained in the
said Bill: to which payment well and truly to be made, I bind my self, mine
Executors, and Administrators, firmly by these presents: In witness whereof I
have hereunto set my hand and seal the Day of, etc.

A Bill of Adventure for a Bale of Cloth.
(2.) TO all, etc. I A. B. of London Merchant Recital of the consignment of the
Cloth.
do send greeting: Whereas I the said A. B. did about two Months since consign
to C. D. Merchant in Ligorn in Italy three Bales of Suffolk Cloth of the
Number 1. 2. 3. which Bales were all laid on board the Ship called the Royal
Exchange of London of the barthen of Three hundred Tuns, or thereabouts;
whereof W. T. is Master under God, for the account of me the said A. B.

(3.) Now know ye, that I the said A. B. do Acknowledgment that the advent^re
of Part belongs to E. F.
hereby confess, acknowledge and declare, that one of the said Bales of Cloth,
that is to say, that which is marked with the Figure 3. does properly belong
unto E. F. of, etc. the Adventure whereof, the said E. F. is to bear out and
home.

(4.) And I the said A. B. do hereby for me, mine Executors, and
Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said E. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as well to make and give to him, them, or any of
them, a true To make a true account of the proceed.
and just Account of the Sale and Proceed of the said Bale of Cloth: number 3.
but also to pay to him or them, all such Money, Goods and Benefit, as by the
foot of any such Account, shall appear to be due and coming unto him, or them,
for or in respect of the said Bale of Cloth.

In Witness, etc.

Another for Money in a Voyage to the East Indies.
(5.) TO all, etc. I A. B. of London, etc. do The intended Voyage.
send greeting: whereas I the said A. B. do intend by Gods Grace to make a
Voyage unto the East Indies in the good Ship called the Pearl of London, being
now thither bound, whereof is Master under God C. D. And whereas E. F. of, etc.
the day of the date hereof has paid and delivered unto me the said A. B. the
sum The Money adventured.
of fifty pound of lawful Moneys of England, whereof I do hereby acknowledge
the Receipt, the Adventure of which said fifty pound, the said E. F. is content
and agreed to bear and stand to out and home.

(6.) Now know ye, that I the said A. B. do To employ it* to the best advantage.
covenant and grant, for me, mine Executors, and Administrators to and with the
said E. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That I
the said A. B. my Executors Administrators or Assigns, shall and will dispose,
convert and employ, the said fifty pound to and for the best and most benefit
and advantage of the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
according to the best of my skill and knowledge in the said Voyage.

(7.) And also that I the said A. B. mine Executors, To make account and pay
the profit of the adventure.
Administrators or Assigns, within thirty Days, after my return from the said
Voyage, or the Arrival and Discharge of the said Ship, within the Port of
London, which shall first happen, shall not only give and deliver unto the said
E. F. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, a just and true account of the
Disposition, and Management of the said Adventure; but also truly pay and
deliver, or cause to be paid and delivered unto the said E. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, all such Money and Proceed, as shall by the foot of
the said account, appear to be due and coming to him the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns.

In witness, etc.

Another upon a Man of War.
(8.) TO all, etc. I A. B. Owner of a fourth Owner of a fourth Part.
Part of the good Ship called the Mermaid of Pool of the burden or Portage of
One hundred Tuns or thereabouts, and also of a fourth Part of all the Tackle,
Apparel, Ammunition, Furniture and Artillery to the said Ship belonging, and
also of the one fourth Part of the Victual and Provision to and for her now
provided That the Ship is outward bound for a man of War.
and appertaining, do send greeting.

(9.) Whereas the said Ship called the Mermaid is now outward bound, for a Man
of War, by way of Reprisal, under the conduct, command and guidance of W. B.
Captain thereof. And whereas C. D. E. F. and G. H. of, etc. have paid and
delivered unto me the said A. B. forty pound sterling, to be adventured upon
gain and loss, upon the said fourth Part of the said Ship, Furniture The
adventure.
and Victual, in her next Voyage to Sea.

(10.) Now know ye, that I the said A. B. for That adventures shall have a due
proportion.
me^, mine Executors and Administrators do covenant and grant, to and with the
said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and every of them, their and every of their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents: That I the said A. B.
mine Executors and Administrators, shall and will from Time to Time hereafter,
not only come to a true and just account, with them the said C. D. E. F. and G.
H. or one of them, their or one of their Executors or Administrators, for all
such benefit, advantage, gain and increase, as shall from time to time be made,
or come, of, for, or in respect of the said forty pound, so adventured, as
aforesaid, but also, from time to time to satisfy and pay unto the said C. D.
E. F. and G. H. their Executors or Assigns, or to one or more of them, in the
behalf of the rest, such shares, parts, and proportions, as shall be made, or
grown of and for the said Ship, Furniture and Victual, as also of all prizes by
her to be taken, rateable and proportionable, according to the gradual rate of
a greater, or lesser sum, or share, that shall be had or received, by any other
Owner, or Part-owner or Adventurer, in or of the said Ship, Furniture and
Victual.

In witness, etc.

Another upon a Man of War, and several other Ships taken into consortment with
her.
(11.) TO all, etc. whereas I the said A. B. have Recital of the intended
voyage.
prepared, victualled and fitted to sail for a Voyage to the East Indies, as a
Man of War, in case of Reprizal, a good Ship called the Mary of London, and
certain other Ships by me, after to be taken into consortment with her, by and
under the power and virtue of a certain Commission to me made and granted by
and from, etc. constituting and appointing me Admiral and General of the said
Fleet, and for and toward the furnishing, fitting, victualling, arming and
setting forth to Sea of the said Ships, I the said A. B. before the ensealing
and delivery of these presents, have had and received of and from E. F. Of the
adventure.
of, etc. the sum of fifty pound sterling upon the adventure of the said Ship
and Ships, in the said Voyage: And the said E. F. is contented to adventure the
said sum of Money upon the said Ship and Ships, during the said Voyage, in the
same manner and form, as other adventurers do.

(12.) Now know ye, that I the said A. B. That the adventure shall have his
proportion.
have covenanted, granted and agreed, and do by these presents for me, mine
Executors and Administrators covenant, grant and agree to and with the said E.
F. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them: That he the said E. F.
his Executors and Administrators, for and in consideration of the said sum of
fifty pound so by him adventured as aforesaid, shall have and receive to his
and their own use and uses, such a ratable part, share and proportion, as other
Adventurers on the said Ship and Ships are to have, or shall have in all and
every such prize and prizes, goods, Jewels, Money and other things whatsoever,
which shall be had, taken, obtained, attached, achieved, or gotten, either by
Sea or Land, during the said Voyage, or by reason thereof, by or with the said
Ship, or by or with any other Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, that shall be
in consortment or fellowship with her, or by the means of them, or any of them,
in or during the said Voyage, or which shall be to the said Ship or Ships, or
any of them, by reason or means of the Voyage aforesaid, appertaining or
belonging, as according to the just rate and proportion of fifty pounds, the
same shall amount unto the due and necessary charges, pertinent and belonging
to the said Voyage, being out of the whole first deducted.

In witness, etc.

The Form of a Bill of Bottombry.
(18.) TO all, etc. I A. B. Owner and Master, of the good Ship, called the 1.
of London, of the burden of One hundred Tuns, or thereabouts, now riding at
Anchor, on the River of Thames, within the Port of London, and bound for a
Voyage to St. Mallows in France, The Voyage.
and from thence to return back to London to make her discharge, do send
greeting in our Lord God everlasting. The money entrusted upon the venture of
the Ship.


(14.) And whereas I the said A. B. at the ens^aling and delivery hereof am
necessitated to take up, upon the Adventure of the said Ship, the sum of fifty
Pounds of lawful Money of England, for setting forth the said Ship to Sea, and
for furnishing of her with provision and necessaries for the said Voyage, which
said sum of fifty pound C. D. of London Merchant, has at my request supplied,
and lent unto me, at ten pound for the said fifty pound during the said Voyage.

(15.) Now know ye, that I the said A. B. do The voyage
for me, mine Executors and Administrators, covenant, grant and agree, to and
with the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators by these presents: That
the said Ship shall with the first good Wind and Weather, that God shall send,
after the tenth Day of this present Month of May, depart from the said River
of Thames, and shall by Gods blessing directly, as Wind and Weather shall
serve, proceed and sail unto St. Mallows in France, and having there tarried,
until, etc. and the opportunity of a Convoy, or being sooner dispatched [which
shall first happen] shall depart from thence, and shall be Gods blessing, as
Wind and Weather ^erve, from thence directly sail, return and come back, to the
River of Thames to finish and end her Voyage.

(16.) And I the said A. B. do for the consideration To repay the Money lent.
aforesaid, bind my self, mine Heirs, Executors, Administrators, Goods and
Chattels, and namely the said Ship with the Freight, Tackle and Apparel of the
same, to pay unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the
sum of sixty pound of lawful Moneys of England, within one and twenty Days,
next after the return and safe arrival of the said Ship, in the said River of
Thames from the said intended Voyage. That he is Owner.


And I the said A. B. do for me, mine Executors and Administrators covenant and
grant to and with the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators by these
presents: That I the said A. B. at the ensealing and executing of these
presents, am true and lawful Owner and Master of the said Ship, and have power
and authority to charge and engage the said Ship, as aforesaid, and that the
said Ship shall at all times after be liable and chargeable for the payment of
the said sixty pound, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents.

(17.) And finally it is hereby declared and agreed, If the ship miscarry, the
sixty pound to be lost
that in case the said Ship shall be lost, miscarry or cast away, which God
forbid, before her next arrival on the said River of Thames, from the said
intended Voyage, that then the said payment of the said sixty pound, shall
cease and determine, and the loss thereof be wholly born and sustained by the
said C. D his Executors, and The Ship may be thus engaged for security, which
is the surer way.
Administrators, and that then, and from thenceforth, every matter and thing
herein before contained on the part and behalf of the said A. B. shall
determine and be utterly void, any thing herein before contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc.

(18.) And for the consideration aforesaid, and for the better performance of
all and singular the Premises, on my Part to be done and performed, according
to the true intent and meaning of these presents: I the said A. B. have
bargained and sold, and by these presents do bargain and self unto the said C.
D. his Executors and Administrators, all the said Ship, and the Tackle,
Ammunition, Ordinance, Apparel and Furniture thereunto belonging.

(19.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors That he is Owner.
and Administrators does covenant and agree to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents: that he the said A. B. at the
Time of the ensealing hereof, is the true and lawful Owner of the said Ship and
Premises, and that the same and every part thereof, now are and be, and so in
case any default of payment of the said sixty pound, or any part thereof,
contrary to the agreement aforesaid* shall from Free from former sa^es, etc.
henceforth for ever be free and clear, and freely and clearly discharged of
and from all and all manner of former, and other bargain, and sales, ti^les,
troubles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever. Proviso to make void upon
payment, etc.


(20.) Provided nevertheless and upon Condition, that if the said A. B. his
Executors or Administrators, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid
unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns the said sixty
pound, and every part thereof according to the intent and true meaning of these
presents, and likewise perform the Covenants herein before contained on his and
their Part to be done and performed: That then this present ba^gain and sale of
the said Ship and Premises, and every matter and thing therein con^eined, shall
cease and be void and of none effect to all intents and purposes: Any thing
herein before contained, to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding,
etc.

Aaother from of a Bill of Bottombry, with a Bond thereupon.
(21) TO all, etc. A. B. of, etc. Mariner, Master and Part-owner of the good
Ship, or Vessel called the F. of London, of the burden of two hundred Tuns, or
thereabouts, now riding at anchor on the River of Thames, within the Port of
London, do send greeting, in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas the said Ship is
now bound out upon a voyage from the said Port, unto the Island of Barbados,
and from The Voyage.
thence if occasion shall be to the Island of May, and so to return back again
to the said Island of Barbados, and from thence to London to end her Voyage.

(22.) Now know ye that I the said A. B. for me, mine Executors and
Administrators, do Covenant and grant to and with C. D. of, etc. (who The sum
delivered.
before the ensealing has paid and delivered unto me the said A. B. the sum
of one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, and is contented and agreed to
stand to and bear the adventure of the said sum upon the body of the said Ship,
during the said voyage) and to, and with his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, by these presents: That the said Ship, with the first good When to
begin and end her Voyage.
wind and weather that God shall send, from, and after the twentieth day of,
etc. next ensuing the date hereof, shall depart from the said River of Thames,
upon the said intended voyage, and that she shall by Gods grace (the perils and
dangers of the Sea, and restraint of Princes and Rulers excepted) be returned
unto the River of Thames from her said voyage before the expiration of fourteen
Months, to be accounted from the date of these presents: And that the said
Ship, in her said intended voyage, shall not sail or apply her self unto any
other Ports or places, Not to sail to other Ports than are mentioned.
than those that are before mentioned herein, unless she shall be necessitated
thereunto, by extremity of weather, or some other unavoidable accident.

(23.) That I the said A. B. mine Executors, Administrators of Assigns, shall
and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at, etc. the sum of one hundred and
thirty pounds of The payment of the freight, or hire, and how.
like lawful money of England in respect of the adventure aforesaid, if the said
Ship shall go from thence only unto the said Island of Barbados, and so from
thence return to London, to end her said intended voyage, and the sum of one
hundred and forty pound of like moneys, if the said Ship shall go from hence
unto the said Island of Barbados, and from thence to the said Island of May,
and so return again to the Island of Barbados, and from thence to London to
end her voyage. And that within one month, after the return of the Hull or Body
of the said Ship unto the River of Thames from the said Voyage.

(24.) Provided always nevertheless, and it Proviso, to make void repayment
etc. if this be lost.
is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of all the parties
hereunto, That if the said Ship, in this present intended. Voyage, shall happen
to be lost, miscarry, or be taken by Men of War or Pirates, which God forbid,
that then this present Writing or Deed, and every Covenant, payment, matter and
thing therein contained, on the part and behalf of the said A. B. to be done,
paid and performed, shall be utterly void and of none effect. And that then I
the said A. B. my Executors or Administrators shall not be any ways chargable,
or liable to pay the said several sums before mentioned, or either of them, or
any part of them to the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
but that he and they are to lose the same, and every part thereof. Any thing
herein before contained, to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(25.) And it is agreed by and between the Not to run any longer hazard than
fourteen months.
said Parties to these presents, That in case the said Ship shall not be
returned into the said River of Thames, from the said intended Voyage, at the
end of fourteen months, to be accounted from the day of the date of these
presents, and that at the end of the said fourteen months, there shall not be a
just proof made of her loss, happening within the time aforesaid: That then I
the said A. B. mine Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will within
twenty days, next after the end and expiration of the said fourteen months,
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at the place of payment aforesaid, the said sum of
one hundred and thirty pound, in case the said Ship shall not go unto the
Island of May aforesaid, and the said sum of 140 pound in case the said Ship
shall go unto the said Island of May as aforesaid: And that the said C. D.
shall not run the hazard and adventure of the said sum by him adventured, as
aforesaid, upon the body of the said Ship, any longer than fourteen months to
be reckoned and accounted as aforesaid.

The Condition of a Bond upon the same.
(26.) THe Condition of this Obligation is To perform Covenants, etc. in the
bill contained.
such, That if the above-bounden A. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall and do well and truly observe, perform, pay, fulfill and keep all
and every the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Payments and Agreements, and all
things which on his or their parts and behalves are, or ought to be observed,
performed, paid, fulfilled and kept, mentioned and contained in a certain
Writing, or Bill of Bottombry, or adventure, of the Date above written, made by
and from the said A. B. by the name of A. B. of, etc. Master and Part-owner of
the good Ship called the F. of London, of the burden of Two hundred Tuns or
thereabouts, now riding at Anchor in the River of Thames, unto the above named
C. D. in and by all things, according to the purport and true meaning of the
said Writing or Bill of Bottombrie, or adventure, that then, etc.

Or there may be a sale of the Ship, by a collateral Deed, for better security
with this following Proviso in it.

(27.) Provided always nevertheless: That To perform Covenants, etc.
if I the said A. B. mine Executors and Administrators shall and do well and
truly observe, perform, pay, fulfill and keep all and every the Covenants,
Grants, Articles, Payments, Agreements and other things, which on our or any of
our Parts, are or ought to be observed, performed, paid, fulfilled and kept,
mentioned and contained in a certain Writing or Bill of Adventure, of the Date
of these presents made by me the said A. B. unto the said C. D. That is to say
in and by all things according to the tenor and true meaning of the said
Writing, or Bill of Adventure: That then and from thenceforth this present
Writing, and the Grant, Bargain and Sale hereby made of the Premises, and every
Covenant, Matter and Thing herein contained, shall be utterly void and of none
effect. Any thing herein before contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

In witness whereof, etc.

An Assurance of Goods outward bound.
(28.) IN the name of God Amen, We it known What is assured.
unto all men by these presents: That I A. B. of London Gentleman, do by these
presents assure unto C. D. and E. F. the sum of Three hundred and fifty pound
sterling, being the full price and value of goods for and on the behalf of the
said C. D. and E. F. laden and to be laden aboard the good Ship called the
Elizabeth of London of the burden of One hundred Tuns, or thereabouts, the
Master of the said Ship being now T. B. or whosoever else shall go as Master of
the said Ship, and out of the Port of London To what Place.
unto the Island of, etc. in the Parts beyond the Seas, then the said Ship to
be arrived, and the goods discharged and laid on land in good safety: And that
this present writing of Assurance, shall be of as good force and strength to
all intents and purposes, as if I the said A. B. had been bound by Policy of
Assurance, either ordinary or extraordinary, made in the Office of Assurance in
the Royal Exchange London.

(29.) And I do hereby acknowledge my self Binds himself to bear the loss.
fully satisfied and paid for this Assurance by the hands of the said C. D.
after the rate of five pound sterling per cent. And therefore I the said A. B.
do bind my self, mine Executors and Administrators, firmly by these presents:
That if by any misfortune, which God forbid, the goods and merchandises
aforesaid, so laden or to be laden, outward bound in the said Ship should
perish in the said Voyage, in Part, or in all, to pay or cause to be paid unto
the said C. D and E. F. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the full
sum of Three hundred and fifty pound of lawful Money of England, or so much
thereof as shall be proved to be lost of the said goods, within the space of
six Months, after notice given and proof made of the said loss:

In witness.

A Letter of License from Creditors to a Debtor, and Composition made.
(30.) THis Indenture made between A. B. C. The Debt, and Estate to pay them.
D. and E. G. Creditors of E. F. late of, etc. on the one Part: And G. F. of
London Widow on the other Part. Whereas the said E. F. at and before the time
of his decease was indebted unto the said Creditors, in diverse and several sums
of Money: All which they the said Creditors have, hitherto, patiently forborne:
And whereas the said G. F. has since her said Husbands Death perused and
examined the estate of her said Husband: And finding, through diverse losses,
sicknesses, and other casual hindrances, which enforced her said Husband to
impair and lessen the same, that the same is far short to give unto the said
Creditors a full satisfaction, of Forborne Administration.
their just and due debts, has hitherto forborne to take forth Letters of
Administration of the goods, chattels and estate of her said Husband, as to her
properly did belong, according to the form and due course of the Laws of this
Realm, and the said G. F. having called the said Creditors together, and
acquainted them with the Premises, and with the weakness of her said Husbands
Estate.

(31.) They the said Creditors by and with Recital of what they accept in Part.
one assent and consent were and are willing, content and pleased, to accept of
ten shillings in the pound for their said Debts, upon security of her the said
G. F. and to be paid, at such Days and Times, and in such manner and form, as
hereafter is limited, expressed and declared: and thereupon Leave to administer.
have given and do by these presents give their full leaves, consents and
approbations, that she the said G. F. shall and may have and take out, in her
own name Letters of Administration of the Goods, Chattels and Personal Estate
of her said deceased Husband, and that without the interruption or disturbance
of them, or either of them.

(32.) Now this Indenture witnesses, That Covenant to accept bonds, at ten
shillings a pound.
they the said Creditors herein before named, do by these presents for them
severally and respectively, that is to say every of them, for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, and not jointly, nor one of them for the other,
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said G. F. her Executors,
Administrators and Assigns: That if the said G. F. her Executors or
Administrators, do or shall, upon or before the, etc. next ensuing the Date of
these presents, become bound in several Obligations, good and sufficient in the
Law, in several reasonable penalties unto the said several Creditors before
named, severally to be conditioned, for the payment unto them the said several
Creditors, their several Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of the sum of
ten shillings of lawful Moneys of England, for every pound or twenty shillings
of their due and principal Debts, by the said E. F. owing respectively as
aforesaid, not accompting any interest for the same, or any part thereof, at or
in [mention the place of payment] That is to say, on the, etc. and shall leave
the said several Obligations (being duly sealed and executed by the said G.
F.) and each of the said Bonds attested by two Witnesses, at the least, who are
to subscribe their names thereunto) safe and uncancelled at, etc. [mention with
whom to be left] unto or for the said several Creditors: That then the said
Creditors, to or for whom, the said Obligations shall be so made, and left, as
aforesaid, shall accept severally of the said Obligations, and Securities, as a
full satisfaction of all their several Debts, so owing unto them* by the said
E. F. as aforesaid.

(33.) And shall and will also, at the costs and To seal discharges.
charges of the said G. F. her Executors or Administrators, several seal, and
as their several acts and deeds deliver, unto or for the use of the said G. F.
several Acquittances and Discharges in writing, sufficient in the Law, thereby
acquitting and releasing, as well the said E. F. his Executors and
Administrators, as also the said G. F. her Executors and Administrators of all
Debts, Bonds, Bills, Claims and Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the
world, until the Day of the Date of these presents.

(34.) And the said Creditors severally and respectively If any do arrest or
molest they lose their Debts.
every one, by and for himself, his Executors and Administrators, and not
jointly nor one of them for the other, do covenant and grant, to and with the
said G. F. her Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these
presents, That if either the said G. F. her Executors or Administrators, or her
or their Goods, or Chattels, or the Goods or Chattels late her said deceased
Husbands, or any of them, shall at any time or times hereafter, until or before
the said Day of, etc. be arrested, attached, molested, or troubled by the above
named Creditors, or any of them, or by any other person or persons, by their or
any of their means or procurement, or in their or any of their right or rights,
for or by reason of any Debt or Debts, so to them, or any of them, owing by the
said E F. at the time of his decease: That then and from thenceforth she the
said E. F. her Executors and Administrators shall be acquitted, released and
discharged, against him or them, by whom she the said E. F. her Executors or
Administrators, her their, or any of their Goods, or Chattels, shall be so
arrested, attatched, molested, or troubled of and from all Debts, Actions,
Claims and Demands whatsoever, from the beginning of the world until the Day of
the Date of these presents, and that these presents to be pleaded, shall be a
sufficient bar and discharge in that behalf, against him or them of the said
Creditors, his or their Executors or Administrators, by whom or by whose means,
or procurement, or in whose right, she the said G. F. her Executors or
Administrators, her or their goods or chattels, or any of them, shall be so
arrested, attached, molested or troubled; contrary to the true and plain intent
and meaning of these presents.

(35.) Provided always, that if all the said Proviso, to make void, if all do
not seal.
Creditors, above named, do not, or shall not, at or before the, etc. sign,
seal, and as their Act and Deed deliver, in due form of Law, one part of these
presents, unto, or to the use of the said G. F. that then these presents, and
every matter and thing therein contained, shall be clearly void and of none
effect, as if the same never had been made.

(36.) And the said G. F. for her self, her Executors Covenant to seal the
bonds.
and Administrators does covenant and grant to and with the said Creditors, and
every of them, their and every of their Executors and Administrators: That in
case all the said Creditors shall in due form of Law, sign, seal and execute,
one Part of these presents, as aforesaid, unto or to the use of the said G. H.
on or before the, etc. That then she the said G. F. her Executors or
Administrators, shall and will in due form of Law make, or cause to be made,
and duly seal and execute, the said several Obligations, and leave the same at
the place aforesaid, to and for the said Creditors upon or before the, etc.

In witness, etc.

Another to a Merchant remaining beyond Sea, to come into England, etc. for a
Year.
(37.) TO all, etc. We, etc. [nameing all the Losses of the Debt^r.
Creditors of C. D. now commorant in the Parts beyond Sea] do send greeting.
Know ye, That we the said Creditors, being particularly sensible of the diverse
losses and impoverishments lately befallen upon him the said C. D. as well by
Sea, as by Land, whereby, as he affirms, he is disabled at present to make
payment unto us, of the several Debts and Sums of Money by him due and owing
unto us, respectively, In Consideration whereof, and at the special request and
desire of the said C. D. That some respit of time may be given him, for the
gathering in and recovering of his Debts, and the effecting of some means for
the payment of the several debts by him unto us severally due as aforesaid.

(38.) Have given and granted, and by these Power given for a year to come
hither and trade, etc.
presents, We and every one of us, for our and every of our Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, do give and grant unto the said C. D. his Executors
and Administrators full and free license and liberty, whereby the said C. D.
his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall and may freely and
quietly, at his and their liberties and pleasures, when and as often as it may
or shall please him or them, to go, pass, repass, sojourn, dwell and abide,
with all and singular the Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises, and other
things whatsoever of the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, in, by
and through the Realm of England, and the Cities, Towns, Places and Dominions
thereof, and elsewhere, to and for his and their, and every of their, most and
best advantage, commodity and profit, and to buy, sell, exchange, or by any
ways, means, or kind of Merchandising, or otherwise, employ, deal or trade,
for any manner of Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises, or other things
whatsoever, to him or them now belonging, or hereafter to be belonging, as
aforesaid, from time to time, during the space of one whole year next ensuing
the Date of these presents, without any let, sail, trouble, impediment,
arrest, attachment, prosecution, or impleading, or any other grievance, hurt or
vexation by or through us, or any of us, or by the Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, of us or any of us, in any wise to be done, procured or attempted,
against the said C. D. in his own person, or against his Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, or his, their or any of their Goods, Chattels,
Wares, Merchandises, Money, Debts, or any other thing whatsoever, or any part
or parcel of them, or any of them, for, touching, concerning, upon, or by
reason, or means of any Debt or Debts, Duty or Duties, Sum or Sums of Money,
now due or owing, by the said C. D. to us, his said Creditors, or any of us.

(39.) And further we the said A B. D B. E. F. etc. That they will not
prosecu^e or molest the Debtor, if so, he to be discharged against the
prosecutor.
and every of us, by himself, for his own Part, and for himself, his Executors
and Administrators, and every of them, does covenant and grant to and with the
said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, by these
presents: That if any suit, arrest, attachment, process, impediment, or other
grievance, hurt or vexation whatsoever, before the end or exspiration of one
whole year next ensuing the Date hereof, in any wise shall be brought, had,
done, procured, or effected, by or through us, or any of us the said Creditors,
or the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of us, or any of us, or by through
or with the will, procurement, commandment or agreement of us, or any of us,
our or any of our Executors, Administrators or Assigns against the said C. D.
his Executors, or Administrators, Sureties or Factors, or any of them, or
against his, their, or any of their Wares, Goods, Chattels, Merchandises,
Moneys, Debts or other things whatsoever, or any of them, or any part or parcel
of them, or any of them, for, touching, or in any wise concerning, or by means,
or by reason of, any Debt or Debts, Duty or Duties, Sum or Sums of Money
whatsoever now due or owing by the said C. D. to us, or any of us, his said
Creditors, that then immediately from thenceforth the said C. D. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall for ever be acquitted
and discharged, against him, or them of us his said Creditors, his and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, by whom any such
suit, occasion, arrest, process, attachment, trouble, impediment, or other
greivance, hurt or vexation whatsoever, shall in any wise be had, brought,
affirmed or prosecuted to or against the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or against his, their, or any of their Goods,
Chattels, Wares, Merchandises, Debts, Moneys, or other things whatsoever,
within the said one year, contrary to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, of and from all and singular such Debt and Debts, Duty and Duties,
and Sum and Sums of Money, and other thing and things whatsoever, due, owing or
demandable by or from him the said C. D. unto us, or any of us, our or any of
our Executors, Administrators or Assigns, that such account, suit, arrest,
process attachment, trouble, impediment, grievance or vexation shall cause,
procure, or willingly permit against the said C. D. his Execu^ors,
Administrators, Sureties, Factors or Assigns.

In witness.

Another to a Debtor beyond the Seas, for six Months paying six shillings eight
pence a pound.
(40.) TO all, etc. We, etc. [nameing the Creditors] Leave given for six Months
to come to and abide in England.
send greeting, etc. Whereas C. D. Merchant, now resident in the Parts beyond
the Seas, is indebted unto his Creditors whose names are hereunder written, in
several Sum and Sums of Money, and being unable to pay us our whole Debts, we
do hereby declare, that every one of us, who shall subscribe these presents
with his proper name or mark, shall and will give him free leave and license,
both for his person and goods to go, come, abide and be amongst us for the term
of six Months, to be computed from the Date hereof, without our or any of our
let, trouble, suit, arrest or disturbance.

(41.) And further that if the said C. D. his Exe^utors, If Creditors be
satisfied six shillings and eight pence a pound, to give a Release*
Administrators, or Assigns, shall within the space of six Months aforesaid to
be computed from the Date hereof, pay or cause to be paid unto us, for and in
respect, of the several Debts, owing severally unto us, six Shillings and eight
pence sterling by him to us severally owing [not accompting Interest for the
said several Debts to us owing, or for any Part thereof] That then we shall
accept, of the said six Shillings and eight pence the pound, in full of the
said Debt and Debts to us severally owing, and shall give unto him or them
thereupon (at his costs and charges) general Acquittances and Releases from us
and every of us; and in further declaration, of our leaves and license to him
given as aforesaid, we do promise to seal and subscribe unto him, a Letter of
License to be made according to the purport and true meaning hereof: Witness
our hands, this day of, etc.

Another in brief.
(40.) TO all, etc. We, or such of us, who have License given to come into
England and abide six Months without the trouble of the Creditors.
signed and sealed these presents, being Creditors of C. D. an English
Merchant, now reuding at F. in the Parts beyond the Seas, do send greeting.
Whereas the said C. D. is indebted to us, his said Creditors severally in
diverse Sums of Money, for which by reason of bad Debts and other casual
Hindrances, as well by Sea as Land, he is unable to give unto us present
satisfaction, and having desired, as well by s^veral of his own Letters, as by
Mediation of his friends here resident in England, for a time, without our or
any of our molestations, arrests, suits or interruption, to come over into
England and to reside here, as well to gather in, and recover the Debts to him
due here, as to make his true estate known unto us, and as much as in him
lies, to give us and every of us satisfaction, for the said Debts by him to us
particularly owing: Unto which request and desire of the said C. D. we do
hereby condescend, and are content that he shall come over into England, and
stay or abide in London or elsewhere within the said Kingdom, in peace and
quiet, and without the arrest, suit, trouble or molestation, of us or any of
us, for and during the space of six Months, to be computed from the Day of the
Date hereof.

In witness, etc.

Another to a Debtor (resident in England) for a years time.
(43.) TO all, etc. We A B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. of London Merchants, do send
greeting. Recit I of the Debts.
Whereas I. C. Citizen and Vintner of London (for and by reason of Commerce,
and diverse Contracts, Agreements and other causes, Between him and us the
abovenamed persons, severally passed and had) stands, and is indebted to us
the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. severally, in diverse and sundry great sums
of Money, as by several obligations and specialties, under his hand and seal
unto us severally made, it does and may appear.

(44.) Now know ye that we the said A. B. Liberty to Negotiate without
interruption.
C. D. E. F. and G. H. for diverse sundry good and charitable causes and
considerations, us hereunto especially moving, Have given and granted, and by
these presents do give and grant, full license and liberty unto the said I. C.
quietly and freely, to go about, attend and negotiate, as well his own private
affairs and businesses, as also all other matters and things whatsoever he
has, or shall have to do and prosecute, for any person or persons whatsoever,
as well within the City of London, as elsewhere within the Kingdom of England,
at all and every Time, and Times from henceforth, for and during the space of
Twelve months to begin and commence, from the day of the Date hereof, without
any manner of let, disturbance, stay, arrest or attachment of his person, or of
his Goods, Chattels, Money, Merchandises, or any other his Commodities, or
things whatsoever, by us the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. or any of us, or
by the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of any of us, on this side, or
within the space of Twelve months to be accounted as aforesaid.

(45.) And we are not only contented and agreed, The Debts released of such as
shall pursue, etc. contrary to this License.
to give and grant this our present License unto the said I. C. for and during
the Time aforesaid, within which space he the said I. C. does intend the
payment or satisfaction of all and every the said Debts, but also we, and every
one of us, for his part, does by these presents, agree and declare, that if it
shall happen the said I. C. in his person, Wares, Goods, or Merchandises, or
any of them, within the said time or space of Twelve months next ensuing the
Date hereof, by us or any of us the said Creditors, or by our or any of our
E^e^utors, Administrators or Assigns, or by any other person or persons by or
through the authority, com^andment, will, consent or procurement of us, or any
of us against the tenor, form and effect of these presents in any wise to be
arrested, sued, impleaded, molested or attached, that then he the said I. C.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators shall by virtue of these presents, for
evermore, be clearly acquitied and discharged against him, or them of us by
whom, or by whose authority, means or procurement, he the said I. C. his Goods,
Wares, Moneys or Merchandises shall be contrary to the form, effect and true
meaning of these presents to be vexed, molested, attached sued, arrested or
hindered, of all manner of actions, suits, debts and demands, whatsoever they
be, from the beginning of the world until the day of such arrest, suits,
attachment or molestation.

In witness, etc.

Another, to have free liberty to go to and from the Creditors to Compound, etc.
(46.) TO all, etc. We A. B. C. D. etc. Creditors of Recital of his inability
for present payment.
E. F. Citizen and Mercer of London do send greeting. Whereas the said E. F.
the Day of the Date hereof is indebted, and does owe unto us the said Creditors
severally, diverse sums of Money, which by reason of some losses happened unto
him, as he informs us, he is not able presently to satisfy and pay, as he
willingly would, but desires our favor and respit of time for the payment
thereof.

(47.) Therefore know ye that we the said Creditors License and liberty given.
abovenamed, moved with compassion, and the desire which the said E. F. has
to and for the satisfaction of our said debts, Have given and granted, and by
these presents do give and grant unto the said E. F. full and sure liberty and
freedom (as much as in us, or any of us lies) to go, come and resort unto us
and every of us his said Creditors, to compound and take order with us and
every of us, for our and every of our said several Debts, without any let,
trouble, suit, arrest, attachment or other impediment to be offered or done to
him the said E. F. his Wares, goods, or Merchandises: for and during the space
or time of two months next ensuing the Date of these presents.

(48.) And if it happen, that the said E. F. his He that sueth contrary to the
License to lose his debt.
Person, Goods or Chattels within the said space of two months by us or any of
us the said Creditors, our, or any of our Executors, Administrators or Assigns
to be arrested, sued, troubled, attached or molested, contrary to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, That then he the said E. F. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall for ever be acquitted and
discharged against him or them of us, his or their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, by whose authority, means or procurement, he the said E. F. his Goods
or Chattels shall be sued, arrested, attached or molested as aforesaid, of all
manner of actions, suits, debts and demands whatsoever, from the beginning of
the world until the day of the date of these presents. In witness, etc.

(49.) Or there may be Covenant from the Covenant not to molest the Debtor, etc.
Creditors not to sue or molest the Debtor [in manner following] And we the
said Creditors all and every of us, severally for himself, and for our and
every of our Executors and Administrators, do and does severally Covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said E. F. his Executors and Administrators
by these presents, That we the said Creditors or any of us, our or any of our
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any other Person or persons, by our or
any of our, their or any of their authority, assent, consent or procurement,
the said E. F. his Executors or Administrators, or any of his, their or any of
their Goods, Chattels, Debts, or other things shall not, nor will not in any
wise sue, arrest, implead, attach, imprison, condemn, trouble, seize or molest
for or concerning satisfaction or payment to be made to us or any of us, our or
any of our Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of or for our said several
Debts and Duties, or any of them, or any part or parcel of them or any of them,
or for any other matter or thing whatsoever which For finding Sureties.
we or any of us, can or may have, pretend or demand of or against the said E.
F. or to find or provide for us or any of us, our, or any of our Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, any other Sureties or Securities for the
satisfaction or payment of the said several Debts, and other things, or any of
them, or any part or parcel thereof, other then all or any of us now have, or
severally has for the same, during the Time aforesaid.

In witness, etc.

A Letter of Composition for half Debts.
(50.) TO all to whom, etc. A. B. C. D. etc. Creditors of E. F. etc. do send
greeting: Whereas the said E. F. the Day of the Date of Recital of the Debts.
these presents, is, and stands justly indebted, and does owe unto us the
several parties abovenamed, diverse and several sum and sums of Money: And by
reason of the many losses, great hindrances, and other damages happened unto
him, he is utterly unable, as he affirms, and as he has made appear unto us,
to give other satisfaction for his said Debts, than by and with such Goods and
Wares as are now remaining in his hands, and such Debt and Debts as are now at
present owing unto him: which we the said Creditors are unwilling to accept, or
in any wise to intermeddle with: but have rather resolved and made choice to
undergo a loss certain, and to accept of ten shillings per libram, or the one
half Creditors acceptance of half.
of the Debts by him owing unto us, to be duly paid in full satisfaction for
our said Debts in manner and form following, etc. [here set down the Manner and
Days of payment.]

(51.) Now know ye, that we the said Creditors Covenant (and obligations to be
entered into) for payment.
do Covenant and grant, and every of us for his own part, and for his own
Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said E.
F. his, etc. That if the said E. F. his, etc. or any of them shall well and
truly pay, etc. [here set down as before, the manner of payment] or for the
sure payment thereof in manner and form aforesaid, shall before the -- day of,
etc. next ensuing the Date of these presents, become bounden unto every of us
in several penal Obligations, in double the said sums to be contained in the
several Conditions thereof: And further that if the said Obligations and every
of them, shall be delivered to such person or persons as we shall appoint, duly
sealed and executed by the said E. F. at or before the, etc. next ensuing the
Date hereof, That then from and after such payment made as aforesaid, or the
said several Obligations made, executed and delivered as aforesaid, for the
several payments aforesaid, according to the intent and true meaning of these
presents, we the said Creditors and every of us, and the Executors, etc. shall
and will hold our selves well contented and satisfied for all such Debts as he
the said. E. F. did formerly owe unto us, or any of us before the sealing of
the said Obligations.

(52.) And that then also we the said Creditors, To Seal Releases.
and every of us, or the Executors, etc. within ten days next after such
payment made as aforesaid, or the sealing and delivery of the said Obligations,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, shall and will seal
and subscribe, and in due form of Law deliver unto the said E F. his, etc. one
or more general Release or Releases, Discharge or Discharges, of all Debts,
Duties and Demands whatsoever, by him the said E. F. unto us and every of us,
formerly owing or payable, from the beginning of the world until the days of
the Date of the said Obligations, so to be sealed and delivered by the said E.
F. his, etc. as aforesaid, as he the said E. F. his Executors or
Administrators, his or their Counsel learned in the Law, shall reasonable
devise, advise or require.

(53.) Provided always, That these presents These presents not to bind any
except all seal, etc.
or any matter therein contained, shall not be of any force or effect, to bind
or charge us, or any of us who have hereunto sealed and subscribed, unless and
until all and every the said Creditors abovenamed, shall and do likewise seal
and subscribe these presents, at or before the, etc. next ensuing the Date
hereof.

In witness, etc.

CAP. III. Containing several forms of Copartnerships, and Covenants incident
thereunto.
The form of a Copartnership relating to Transactions, as well foreign as
domestic.
(1.) THIS Indenture Quadripartite, made the, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. of the
first part, C. D. of, etc. of the second part, E. F. of, etc. of the third
part, and G. H. of, etc. of the fourth part: W^itnesseth that the Their
resolution to be Copartners.
said Parties, for the affiance, trust and confidence which each of them have
and do repose in the other of them, Have concluded and agreed to become
Copartners and joint Traders together, in such Trades and Merchandises, as well
within the Kingdom of England, as also in Holland and Brabant, in the parts
beyond Sea, and elsewhere, where the said Parties shall think fit, to Trade and
Merchandise for their most benefit, advantage and profit, and that for and
during the space of four years, to be computed For four years.
from the day of the Date hereof, and from thence next ensuing and fully to be
complete and ended.

(2). And to that end and purpose, the said The Stock.
Parties have added and put together a joint Stock, to be employed in and about
the said joint Trade, that is to say, the sum of twenty thousand pounds of
lawful Moneys of England, viz. the said A. B. for his part, five thousand pound
thereof. The said C. D. for his part another five thousand pound thereof. The
said E. F. for his part five thousand pound more thereof. And the said G. H.
for his part five thousand pound more, being the remainder of the said twenty
thousand pounds.

(3.) Which said Stock shall be occupied and How Gain and Loss is to be born.
employed together upon an account of Fourths, both in profit and loss, The
whole in four equal parts to be divided, whereof the said A. B. his Executors
and Administrators, is to have and bear, for his and their parts, one fourth
part thereof, both in profit and loss; The said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators one other fourth part thereof, for his and their part, both in
profit and loss; The said E. F. his Executors and Administrators the other
fourth part thereof, both in profit and loss; And the said G. H. his Executors
and Administrators the other fourth part thereof, both in profit and loss, for
his and their parts, according to the intent and true meaning hereof.

(4.) Which said Transaction, trade and business [for the consideration
hereafter mentioned] Division of the Trade.
is to be done and performed, as follows, That is to say, The said E. F.
during the said Copartnership, is to have the sole receiving, keeping and
charge of all the Cash and Money, and of all the Cloths, Bays and Stuffs, and of
all Bonds, Bills and Specialties, belonging to the joint account here in
England, and of all Goods and Wares to be received from beyond the Seas, for
and upon the said joint account: and also the charge of the writing, true
keeping and custody of the Books to be kept here in England, touching the said
joint account and business in Copartnership, within the dwelling house of the
said E. F. in London, for the time being. And the buying of the said Clothes,
Bays and Stuffs. and the selling of all Goods to be received from beyond the
Seas, and the receiving of Moneys, and the ordering and disposing of the same:
and the other joint business here in England, is to be equally acted and
performed by the said E. F. and C. D. And that the said G. H. shall have the
management and transaction of the Affairs relating to the said Copartnership,
and joint Trade, which are to be managed, done and transacted in the Parts
beyond the Seas.

(5.) Whereupon it is concluded and agreed, by and between the said Parties to
these presents; and each and every of the said Parties, by and for himself, his
Executors and Administrators does Covenant and grant to and with each and every
other of them, his Executors and Administrators by these presents, as hereafter
in manner That Copartnership shall continue four years.
and form follows. First, that the said Copartnership shall continue without
ceasing in form here-under declared, from the day of the Date hereof, until the
full end and term of four years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended. And that every of the said Copartners, in the several
businesses beforementioned Each to be diligent and faithful.
to be by them severally done and performed, and all other matters and things
touching the said Copartnership, shall and will from time to time, during the
said four years, perform and do his and their true and best endeavor, care and
diligence, for the most and best profit, C(...)modity and advantage of them the
said Copartners: And that each and every of them the said Copartners, shall be
faithful, just and true unto the other of them therein.

(6.) And that all gains and increase, arising, Gains losses and charges shall
be equally born and had.
happening or comeing of or by the said joynttrade and copartner-ship shall be
indifferently and equally parted and shared by and between the said Parties,
their Executors and Administrators, as is before prescribed and set down: And
that all Debts, Charges and losses, likewise arising, happening or growing to
be paid and born for or by reason of the said joynt-trade and copartner-ship,
shall be in like manner paid, born and sustained by and between the said
Parties, their Executors and Administrators in four equal Parts, as is before
mentioned, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

(7.) And that every of the said Parties shall For getting in Debts.
from time to time hereafter perform and do his and their best endeavor,
diligence and travail, as need or occasion shall require, to recover, obtain,
get in and receive such Debts, Duties and Sum and Sums of Money, as by reason
or means of the said trade or copartner-ship, shall be due or owing unto them
from any Person or Persons so speedily as may be from time to time: And shall
not, at any time or times hereafter without the consent of the rest, do or
procure, or cause to be done or procured, any act device or thing to prejudice,
hinder or retard the Recovery, obteyning or getting in, of the said Debts or
any of them.

(8.) And if it shall happen, that the said Parties, Trusting by either Party
against consent of any of the rest.
or any of them, shall trust or deliver out upon Credit or Confidence, any of
the Goods, Wares, Moneys or Merchandises, belonging to the said joint account
to any Person or Persons, whom any other of the said Parties, shall pray,
admonish or warn not to trust: that then and so often, such of them the said
Parties, which shall so trust and deliver out upon Credit, any of the said
Goods, Wares, Moneys or Merchandises, to any such Person or Persons; shall and
will within three Months, next ensuing, answer and satisfy unto the said joint
stock, so much lawful Money of England, as the Goods, Wares, Money or
Merchandises, so to be trusted, or delivered out as aforesaid, shall amount
unto [in case in the mean time full satisfaction shall not be made for the same
by the Person or Persons, which shall be so trusted, as aforesaid] and that in
such case, such of the said Parties, so making satisfaction therefore, shall
and may have and enjoy the sole benefit, of the said Goods, Wares, Moneys and
Merchandises or things, so by him trusted, and for which he shall have made
satisfaction, as aforesaid.

(9.) And that every of them the said Parties To take advise of each other.
[if necessity require and conveniently it may be] in all his and their buying
and selling, dealings and doings touching and concerning the said joint trade,
shall desire and take the advice and direction of the rest of the said Parties,
or some or one of them.

(10.) And that all such detriments and losses, Losses by negligence of
servants how to be born.
as shall without fraudulent Practice of any of the said Copartners, happen or
come to the said partible account, by the falsehood, absence or neggligence, of
any Servant or Servants, Apprentice or Apprentices, which shall serve or dwell
with any of the said Parties, shall be born and answered to the said joint
account, by the Master of such Servant or Servants, by whom the same shall be
done or permitted.

(11.) And further, that none of them the said Not to diminish the joyntstock.
Parties shall or will, at any time or times hereafter, charge the account of
the said Copartner-ship, with any other, or more Debts, than only such, as
shall be pertinent to the same, and with such charges only, as shall be
necessarily and justly disbursed for and about such Goods, Wares, Commodities
or Merchandises, as shall be occupied or employed in or about the said joint
Trade or Copartner-ship, and for and about the Recovery, getting in and
obteining of such Debts, as shall be due and owing unto them by reason thereof:
Nor at at any time hereafter during the said Not to diminish the joynt-stock.
space or time of four years shall withdraw or take from the said joint stock
and account, any Sum or Sums of Money, or other things, other than such as
shall be disbursed for recovery and getting in of such debts incident to the
same, as are before expressed and mentioned: and that without fraud or covin.

(12.) Saving, That it shall and may be lawful, In what cases they may diminish.
to and for every of them the said Parties yearly during the said
Copartner-ship to have and take out of the said stock, belonging to their joint
Trade and Copartner-ship, for every of their particular, and private expenses
and occasions, as follows: That is to say, To the said To each Party two
hundred pound a Year.
A. B. the Sum of Two hundred pound of lawful Moneys of England, to the said C.
D. the like Sum of Two hundred pound, of like Moneys, to the said E. F. the
like Sum of Two hundred pound, of like Moneys, and to the said G. H. the like
Sum of Two hundred pound of like Moneys:

(13.) And saving also, that it shall and may An overplus to E. F. of one
hundred and fifty pound a Year.
be lawful, to and for the said E. F. during the said Copartner-ship, in
respect of his house Rent, wherein it is agreed, one Part of the business of
the said Copartner-ship shall be acted and performed here in England, and for
the extraordinary Pains of him, and his Servants to be taken and performed, in
and about the said joint Trade, and for his Expenses upon, and entertainment of
Cloathiers yearly to charge upon the said partible Account, and be allowed out
of the same, the Sum of One hundred and fifty pound a Year of lawful Moneys of
England, over and besides the said Two hundred pound a Year allowed unto him,
as aforesaid.

(14.) Saving also for the said C. D. in respect of the extraordinary Pains of
him, and his The like Overplus to C. D.
Servants to be taken in and about the said joint trade, and his Expenses upon
and entertainment of Cloathiers, as aforesaid, and for his house-Rent, wherein
it is also agreed, that one Part of the joint business aforesaid, shall be
acted and performed, to charge to the said partible Account, and be allowed
upon the same the like Sum of One hundred and fifty pound yearly, of like
Moneys, during the said Copartner-ship, over and besides the said Two hundred
pound yearly, to him allowed as aforesaid.

(15.) And saving also that it shall and may be An overplus of One hundred
pound a year to G. H.
lawful to and for the said G. H. in respect of his extraordinary Pains to be
taken, in and about the said joint business, and for his dwelling in the said
Parts beyond Sea, where it is agreed he shall be employed in and about the said
joint trade and business, during the said Copartner-ship, there to charge* to
the said partible Account, and to be allowed the same here in England, the Sum
of One hundred pound yearly of like lawful Moneys of England, during the said
Copartnership, over and above the said Two hundred pound a Year to him allowed
as aforesaid.

(16.) Also the Wages and Allowances of any Charges of Servants and Apprentices.
Servant or Servants, to be sent over, or of any Apprentice or Apprentices,
where any shall be sent over, and employed in the said business* into the Parts
beyond Sea, [an equal number of Apprentices, of each of them the said C. D. E.
F. and G. H. being employed in the said joint business] and also the charge of
any Pack-house* or Packhouses, to be taken or used beyond the Seas, for the
said joint business: and the wages and allowance of one Servant agreed to be
hired by the said E. F. and C. D. for the managing and writing of the books of
Account to be kept here in England, concerning the said joint trade, and
^usiness, is hereby agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents to
be paid and allowed out of the joint stock of this Copartner-ship.

(17.) And the said G. H. for himself his Covenants of him who deals beyond Sea.
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, does Covenant and grant
to and with the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. and every of them, their and every
of their Executors and Administrators by these presents, in manner and form
following, that he the said G. H. shall not, nor will, at any time or times
during this Copartnership, leave, transfer or commit the business, trade or
employment of or concerning the said joint Trade and Copartnership, in any
place or places beyond the Seas, where he shall have full charge Not to commit
his trust to any, but by agreement of the rest.
and disposing, nor any Bills or Specialties concerning the same, to any person
or persons whatsoever, other than such as shall be thought fit, by the said A.
B. C. D. and E. F. or the survivors or survivor of them, and their special
consent and agreement in writing under their hands in that behalf for the same,
first had and obtained.

(18.) And further, that he the said G. H. shall To keep books of account.
from time to time hereafter, during the said Copartnership, keep or cause to
be kept, in such place and places beyond the Seas, where he shall continue to
be employed, just and true book and books of Accounts and reckonings of all and
every his dealings, doings, buyings and sellings, and employments, touching and
concerning the premises, in such ample sort, manner and form in every respect,
as Merchants of the said Trade commonly use to do.

(19.) And shall not only send and consign weekly (if it conveniently may be)
unto the To give notice and account of all his Transactions.
weekly (if it conveniently may be) unto the said E. F. and C. D. true Copies
of his weekly journal, and particulars of all Clothes and Wares received and
sold, Goods sent and Moneys paid and sent by Exchange, and other his dealings
whatsoever, touching the said joint account: but also at the end of every six
months, next ensuing each other, to be reckoned and accounted from the Day of,
etc. next ensuing the Date of these presents, during the said Copartnership,
consign and send over unto them the said E. F. and C. D. as aforesaid, a true,
plain and perfect general Account in writing under his hand, of all his
Receipts, payments, buyings, sellings, dealings, doings and employments
whatsoever, then before by him passed or done, touching or concerning the said
joint Account and Copartnership, particuralizing therein all the Charges laid
out, and Clothes, Wares and other things then remaining in his hands.

(20.) And shall and will, during the continuance To bear his Charges.
of this joint Trade, at his own proper and particular Charges (for the
consideration aforesaid) bear and pay all the Costs of his own Diet, Lodging,
Entertainment and Accommodations, in the parts beyond the Seas.

(21.) And further, that it shall and may be His liberty for the rest, to
peruse the Accounts of G. H.
lawful to and for the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. or any of them, or any of
their Executors, Administrators, Servants or Assigns, at his and their free
wills and pleasures, to have free liberty of ingress, egress and regress, into,
out of, and from the Counting house, or Room of the said G. H. for the Time
being, in the parts beyond the Seas, and shall and may freely, as occasion
shall require, as well view and peruse the said Books of Accounts, and all
Bands, Bills and Specialties whatsoever, as also, all Wares, Goods and
Merchandises, and other things whatsoever in the parts beyond the Seas,
relating to the said joint Trade, in the Hands, Custody or charge of the said
G. B.

(22.) And moreover, that he the said G. H. To send the proceeds of what he
shall receive.
shall and will, with all convenient speed he may, from time to time hereafter
during the said joint Trade, consign, remit and send over to the said E. F. and
C. D. from the said parts beyond the Seas, in Money by Exchange, and in Wares
and Merchandises, the proceeds of all Wares, Clothes and other things, that
shall be by him received, and in his disposing, touching and belonging to the
said joint account.

(23.) And further, that he the said G. H. shall To take up Moneys to advance
the trade.
and will from time to time hereafter, during the said Copartnership, endeavor
what he may, the taking up such Moneys, in the said parts beyond the Seas, for
the said joint account, as shall be needful, and otherwise advance and benefit
the same what he may: And also its agreed by and between all the said Parties,
that if the said G. H. shall at any time or times hereafter, take up or The
rest to be equally bound to pay.
borrow at interest, or otherwise, any sum or sums of Money for the said joint
account, that then the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. and every of them, their and
every of their Executors and Administrators, shall by these presents be liable
for the payment of the said sum and sums of Money, and every of them, as fully
in every respect, as the said G. H. his Executors or Administrators: And also
if in case the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. or any of them shall at any time or
times hereafter, take up, or borrow at interest, or otherwise, any sum or sums
of Money, for the said joint account, that then the said G. H. his Executors and
Administrators, shall be by these presents liable and engaged together with the
said A. B. C. D. and E. F. for the repayment of the said sum and sums of Money,
and every of them, as fully in every respect, as the said A. B. C. D. and E. F.
or any of them, their, or any of their Executors or Administrators. The
particular Covenants of E. F. To keep the books of Account of the trade in
England


(24.) And the said E. F. for himself his Executors and Administrators, and
every of them, does Covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. C. D. and G.
H. and every of them, their and every of their Executors and Administrators by
these presents, in manner and form following, that is to say, That he the said
E. F. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the
said Copartnership, manage and keep, or cause to be managed and kept by such
Servant ^ or Book-keeper, to be hired or entertained as aforesaid, just and
true Book and Books of Account and Reckoning, Iournal and Leiger, of all and
every the Receipts, Dealings, Payments, Buyings, Sellings and Employments of
the said E. F. and the said C. D. concerning the premises here in England, in
such Every 6. Months to give the rest a balance of the account.
ample manner and sort in every respect, as other Merchants of the said Trade
commonly use to do, and at the end of every six Months, that is to say, The
last Day of June, and last Day of December, yearly, during the said
Copartnership, perfect the said Books, and give to each of the other Partners a
true balance thereof.

(25.) And further, that it shall and may be Liberty for the rest to view the
Accounts of E. F.
lawful to and for the said A. B. C. D. and G. H. and every of them, their and
every of their Executors, Administrators, Servants or Assigns at convenient
times, at their and every of their free wills and pleasures, to have free
liberty of ingress, egress and regress into, out and from the dwelling house of
the said E. F. and his Counting House and warehouse there, and shall, and
lawfully may, freely, as occasion shall require, view and peruse all Books of
Account, and all Bonds, Bills, Writings and Specialties, Goods, Wares and
things whatsoever there, in the hands, custody and charge of the said E. F.
touching the said joint Account.

(26.) And the said C. D. for himself, his Executors The particular Covenants
of C. D.
and Administrators, and for every of them does Covenant and grant, to and with
the said A. B. E. F. and G. H. and every of them, their and every of their
Executors and Administrators by these presents, in manner and form following,
that is to say, That he the said C. D. shall and To keep Accounts.
will during the said Copartnership, keep or cause to be kept true Accounts in
writing of all his Receipts, Payments, Buyings, Sellings, Dealings and Doings
touching and concerning the said joint account, and shall and will from time to
time, produce and show forth the same unto the To show them to E F. etc.
said E. F. and his Servants, and the said Servant to be hired as aforesaid,
whereby the said E. F. or the said Servants, or one of them may be enabled to
keep the said Books and Accounts, Iournal and Lieger, of all business
whatsoever touching the said joint Trade, or Account, here in England, in
manner and form aforesaid.

(27.) And further, that he the said C. D. shall To assist E. F. etc.
and will, during the time of the said Copartnership, be equally aiding and
assisting, in all the managing and keeping of the said Books and Accounts, to
be managed and kept as aforesaid, for the said joint account here in England,
within the said dwelling house of the said E. F. as aforesaid.

(28.) And also, that it shall and may be lawful, To suffer the rest to view
Accounts, etc.
to and for the said A. B. E. F. and G. H. and every of them, their and every
of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at their and every of their free
wills and pleasures, at convenient times to have free liberty of ingress,
egress and regress into, out of and from the Dwelling House, Counting House and
warehouse of the said C. D. for the time being, and shall and may freely as
occasion shall require, view and peruse all Books of Accounts, and all Goods,
Wares, Merchandises and other things touching the said joint Trade, in his
custody and charge.

(29.) And the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. do Covenant A. B. C. D. and E. F. to
bear their own private charges
and grant, each of them for himself, his Executors and Administrators, to and
with the other of them his Executors and Administrators, and every of them by
these presents, That they the said A. B. C. D. and E. F. shall and will
respectively during the said joint Trade, for the consideration aforesaid, bear
and defray their own private and particular Charges and Expenses, both for
themselves and their particular Servants and Families and likewise the
particular Rents for their Houses and Warehouses.

(30.) And that the said E. F. and C. D. shall Contracts, Bonds, etc. in whose
names.
and will make or cause to be made, all bonds, bills, specialties and contracts
whatsoever, by them respectively to be taken and made, concerning the said
joint account, here in England, in the joint name^s of the said C. D. and E. F.
for the use of them the said E. F. and C. D. and of the said A. B. and G. H.
and that the said A. B. and G. H. their Executors and Administrators, shall by
force of these presents be jointly interested in and engaged for and concerning
the same.

(31.) And further it is covenanted, granted, Money lent by Copartners to the
stock.
concluded, condiscended, and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these
presents, and each and every of them, by and for himself, his Executors, and
Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the other of them, his
Executors and Administrators, in manner and form following: That is to say,
Chat if any of them, the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. shall at any time or
times hereafter, during the said Copartner-ship lend unto the said joint
Account any sum or sums of Money (over and above their present stock, put in as
aforesaid) into stock to be used and employed to and for the use of the said
Copartnership, and joint Trade, during the continuance thereof, or for so long
time thereof, as he or they so lending the same, or his or their respective
Executors or Administrators, shall think good: That then it shall and may be
lawful, to and for such of them the said Copartners, their Executors or
Administrators, upon three Months warning to have, receive and take forth, out
of the said joint Account, Stock and Gains, in ready Money, such principal Sum
and Sums of Money, by them the said Copartners respectively lent to the said
joint Account, or such Part thereof, as he or they, lending the same shall
think fit. And also that it shall The Interest to be allowed.
and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. or any of
them respectively lending any sum or sums of Money, as aforesaid, for and
during so long time, as the said Sum or Suins of Money, or any Part thereof
shall remain or continue, in the account of this Copartner-ship, and not paid,
or taken from thence, unto or by him, or them so lending the same, to take out
of the said Account, Stock and Gains of this Copartner-ship, and be allowed the
same, after and according to the Rate of six pound the hundred yearly, for the
Interest and Use of every hundred pounds, to be lent as aforesaid; and so after
and according to the same Rate of six pound sterling the Year, for longer* or
lesser time than a Year (or for a greater or lesser Sum) as the said principal
Money lent, or any part thereof shall remain and continue, in and upon the
Account of this Copartner-ship as aforesaid: The same allowance of six pound
the hundred to be taken out, by every or any the said Copartners, respectively
leading any Sum or Sums of Money to the said joint Account, as aforesaid, half
yearly without any let or impediment whatsoever. Not to engage themselves
without consent.


(32.) And further that none of them the said Copartners, shall at any time or
times hereafter, during this Copartner-ship, without the special license or
agreement of the other of them first had and obt^ined in Writing in that
behalf, enter into Bond, or become Bail or Surety to or for any Person or
Persons whatsoever, for any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, not being for
the proper use and account, of this Copartnership, above the Sum of One hundred
pound, which shall be owing, or undischarged at any time.

(33.) Nor that any of them the said Copartners, Not any of them to use any
single trade.
shall at any time or times hereafter, during the said term, covertly or
apparently, directly or indirectly, use or exercise any kind of Merchandise, or
Trade whatsoever, to or for his, or their own private or particular use or
behoof, with any Person or Persons whatsoever, The gains whereof shall not or
may redound to the said Copartners, their Executors or Administrators, or the
Survivors or Survivor of them, in case any of them, shall happen to decease,
before the Exspiration of the said Term of four Years, rateable and
proportionable, according to the intent and true meaning of these presents.

(34.) And further, that none of the said Parties Not to consign goods beyond
Sea without consent.
shall or will, at any time or times hereafter, during this Copartner-ship,
consign or send over beyond Seas any Goods, Wares or Merchandises whatsoever
belonging to the said joint Account, to any place or places there whatsoever,
other than what the greater number of the said Copartners shall conclude and
agree upon. Differences during the Copartnership, how concl^ded.


(35.) And that all differences arising in, about, or concerning the said joint
trade, and the managing thereof, which shall from time to time, during this
Copartner-ship arise or happen, shall be decided and concluded according to,
and by the advice and direction of the Major Part of them the said Copartners.

(36.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors Covenants by A. B.
and Administrators, and for every of them, does covenant and grant to and with
the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. and every of them, their and every of their
Executors and Administrators, by To assist in the taking up of Money.
these presents, in manner and form following: That is to say, That the said A.
B. shall and will from time to time upon request, during this Copartner-ship,
be aiding and assisting, what he may unto the said C. D. and E. F. in and for
the taking, borrowing and advancing of any Sum and A. B. in regard the rest are
to transact the whole affair to allow, etc.
Sums of Money, for the said joint Account here in England by Bond or otherwise.

(37.) And also, that he the said A. B. in consideration that the said joint
business, is to be wholly acted and performed here in England, by the said C.
D. and E. F. and beyond Seas, by the said G. H. and by such other Person or
Persons, as for the time being shall be hired and employed, by the said
Copartners, in the said Parts beyond the Seas; where none of the said
Copartners, except the said G. H. is to reside, shall and will, out of his own
proper, private and particular estate, and not out of the said Account, over
and above the payments and allowances by him to be paid, and allowed as
aforesaid, well and truly pay and allow yearly, during the said Copartner-ship,
unto the said joint Account the Sum of, etc. of lawful moneys of England, to be
paid altogether, at the end of this Copartner-ship, or at the decease of the
said A. B. in case he shall happen to decease in the mean Time.

(38.) Provided always, and it is further covenan^ed, How he Part of such as
dye during the four Years shall be disposed.
granted, concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, and each and every of them, by and for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, covena^teth and geanteth to and with each and every of the
other of them, his Executors and Administrators, by these presents, severally
and respectively, that in case any of the said Copartners shall happen to
decease, before the Expiration of the said term of four years, and within three
Months, next after the Account shall be ageeed upon, and balanced between the
said Copartners, or Survivors of them: That then the Survivor or Survivors of
them the said Parties, in full of the Part and Proportion of him, or them so
dying in and to the said stock of Twenty thousand pounds, and the gains,
benefit and increase, thereby then gotten and arisen (Moneys lent to the joint
Account excepted) shall and will only be liable to pay, and shall and will pay
unto the Executors or Administrators of the Party so dying* within the said
term of four Years, and within three Months, after balance of the said Account
(the said Executors or Administrators first making good to the said joint
Account the charge of him so deceased) so much lawful Moneys of England, as by
the last balance of Account (then before made up and agreed upon between the
said Copartners) shall be due and coming to such of them the said Copartners
respectively dying as aforesaid, within six Months after such decease (the said
Executors Allowance for desperate Debts, etc.
or Administrators respectively there out allowing and abating to the surviving
Copartners, for and toward the losses that may happen to the said surviving
Copartners by desperate and bad Debts due to the said joint Account, so many
times fifty pound of lawful Money of England, as half years or six Months of
this Copartner-ship shall remain then unexspired, at the time of such decease.)
And further, that in case any of the said Copartners shall decease before the
End or Exspiration of the said term of four Years and full three Months after
balance of Account as aforesaid: That then the Part of him, or them so dying,
shall run on upon Account, and be employed by the Surviving Copartners in the
said joint Trade, until the next ensuing Time agreed by these presents for
ballancing of the Account: And that the Surviving Copartners, in full of the
portion, part and share, of him or them so dying of, in and to the said
joynt-stock of Twenty thousand Pound, and the benefit and increase thereby then
gotten and arisen (Money lent to the said joint Account excepted) shall and
will only be liable to pay, and shall pay, upon such decease, within six
Months, after the Account balanced and made up, unto the Executors or
Administrators, of such of them the said Copartners (dying within the said Term
of four Years, and after full three Months balance of Account) the same
Executors or Administrators first, respectively making good to the said joint
Account the charge of him or them respectively Deceased, so much lawful Moneys
of England, as by the said next balance of account to be made up by the
survivors of them the said Copartners, shall justly and truly appear to be due
and coming to such of them the said Copartners so deceasing, as fully as if the
Parties were living: the said Executors or Administrators, respectively
thereout allowing and defalking unto the said surviving Copartners, for and
toward the losses that may happen to the said surviving Copartners, by and
through desperate and bad Debts, due to the said joint account, so many times
fifty pound of lawful monys of England as half years, or six months of this
Copartnership shall remain then unexpired, at the time of such decease.

(39.) And also, that such of them the said To save harmless Executors of Party
dying.
Copartners surviving, shall and will save and keep harmless and indempnified,
the Executors or Administrators of such of them the said Parties so deceased,
of and from all Bonds, Bills, Debts and Engagements, wherein and for which the
Party so deceasing, at the time of his decease stood bound or engaged by virtue
of this Copartnership.

(40.) And it is further Covenanted, concluded The remaining Stock to proceed,
etc.
and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents, and each and
every of them, by and for himself his Executors and Administrators, Covenanteth
and grants to and with the other of them, his Executors and Administrators
respectively, by these presents in manner and form following: that is to say,
That if any of them the said Parties shall decease, as aforesaid, within the
said Term of four years (satisfaction for his Stock, part and share being made
as aforesaid) that then the remaining Stock, with all other the said joint
Trade and Account, shall run on and continue during the residue of the said
term of four years, by and between the survivors of them the said Copartners
and each of them to have a ratable part and proportion of the same, and of all
gains and loss thereby arising.

(41.) And further, that at the end and expiration of the said Copartnership,
and term of four years, or within three months next ensuing, To make a perfect
account and division, at the end of the Copartnership.
the said Copartners being all living, or the survivors, in case any of them
shall be deceased, shall and will meet and come together here in England, and
adjust and make a true and perfect account, at or in the Dwelling House of the
said E. F. for the time being, or where for the time being the said joint Trade
shall be chiefly used here in England, by and between all the said Parties or
survivors of them, as well for and concerning all their several dealings and
charges, for and about the said joint Trade and account of all such Moneys,
War^s, Goods, Merchandises and Debts, that then shall be due, ^wing or
appertaining to the said joint Trade and Account, and unto them the said
Parties by reason thereof* and of, for and, concerning all and every the gains,
losses, profits and cha^ges, of or by the said joint Trade arising, growing,
happened or sustained, in such particular manner, as it may appear what the
true state of the same then shall be, and what proportion and how much, to
every of them the said Parties shall be them due, belonging or appertaining,
and shall and will also within the said time or space of three Months Division
of the Wares.
next ensuing the expiration of this Copartnership by equal lots, or other
dividend divide all Clothes, Wares and Merchandises between them, then
remaining unsold or disposed of, and belonging to the said joint account,

(42). And, that immediately, and with all Debts to be paid or secured.
convenient speed then afterward, all and every Debts and sums of Money due by
the said joint account, or by them the said Parties by reason thereof, shall be
duly paid, satisfied and discharged, or otherwise equally secured by the Bonds
of them the said Copartners or survivors of them, in case the said Debts cannot
in convenient time be paid, as aforesaid.

(43.) And as for and concerning the remainder Division of the Debts, and ready
Money.
of the said Stock of twenty thousand pound, and all gains, profit and
advantage by the Stock accruing, whether the sams shall consist in Debts or
ready Money, or both (the Moneys lent and added to the said Stock, by any of the
said Copartners, with the interest thereof then due, being first paid and
satisfied) the said remaining Moneys and Debts, being divided into equal parts
and proportions, according to the number of the said Copartners, or such of
them as then shall be living; the same shall by Lots cast, or some other way,
as they shall think fit, be distributed to the said Copartners, or such of them
as shall be then living, whereby each of them may have a ratable part and
proportion of the said Stock* and of all clear gains and profit thereby arising.

(44.) And also, that every of the said Parties, Power to Recover Debts.
his Executors and Administrators, for the better recovery of such Debts and
sums of Money, as at the end and determination of the said term of four years,
shall be due and owing by reason or means of the said Copartnership: and as
shall happen, or fortune to be allotted or divided, for or toward the parts or
portions of the other of them: shall and will at any time, upon the reasonable
request, and at the cost and charges of such others of them, to whom such Debts
shall be allotted, as aforesaid, make o^ cause to be made unto him or them such
sufficient Letter and letters of Attorney for and touching the Recovery and
receipt of the said Debt and Deb^s, and every part thereof to the proper use
and behoof of him and them to whom the same shall be so allotted and divided as
aforesaid, as by such of the said Parties to whom such Debts or sums of Money
shall be allotted or divided, his or their Executors or Administrators, or his
or their Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or
required.

(45.) And it is expressly condescended and agreed No respect to be had to
Survivorship.
by and between the said Parties to these presents, and each and every of them,
by and for himself, his Executors and Administrators does Covenant and grant to
and with each and every of the other of them, his Executors and Administrators,
by these presents, in manner and form following: that is to say, That no right
of survivorship shall take place or effect, or be put in ure, in or for any
matter or thing, touching or concerning this joint Trade, or occupying against
any other of them, or any of their Executors or Administrators, but that it
shall and may be lawful, to or for any of the said Parties, to leave, devise
and bequeath, in and by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise, all his said
part, portion and share, of and in the said stock and gains, according to such
dividend as is aforesaid, and the true intent and meaning of these presents.

(46.) And moreover, that if any ambiguity, Determination of Controversies.
doubt, question or controversy, at any time or times hereafter, shall happen
to arise or grow between the said Parties, his or their Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, for, touching, or concerning the said
Copartnership, or any matter or thing in these presents contained, or otherwise
howsoever touching the same, that then and so often, each and every of the said
Parties, his Executors and Administrators, for his and their parts upon
request, to each of them, his or their Executors or Administrators to be made,
by the Party or Parties grieved, shall and will from time to time, commit the
ordering, hearing and deciding of such ambiguity, doubt, question or
Controversy, to such indifferent men, being Merchant-Adventurers, as shall be
named by the said Parties: that is to say, Each of them one* down in the
premises in writing under their hands and seals, within one month next after
notice of any such doubt, ambiguity, question or Controversy unto them made or
given: And if such persons cannot agree nor make and set down any such order
and direction, within such time as is before limited, that then and so often in
every such case, each and every of them the said Parties his Executors and
Administrators shall and will stand to and abide such order and direction,
touching and concerning such ambiguity, doubt, question or controversy, as by
the Governor of the Company of Merchant-Adventurers here in England, for the
time being, shall be made and set down within three Months next after such
time, as Petition or Suit, by the said Parties or any of them, to the said
Governor in that behalf shall be made.

(47.) And further, it is condescended, concluded None to be chargable for
another offense
and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents: and their true
intent and meaning is, That none of the said Parties, nor the Executors or
Administrators of any of them, shall at any time or times be charged or
chargable by virtue of these presents, or any Covenants, matters or things
herein contained, further than that every of them the said Parties, his
Executors or Administrators shall stand or be charged, for his and their own
proper offense and breach of Covenant, and not for the offense, or breach of
Covenant of any other of the said Parties, his Executors or Administrators, any
thing before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

(48.) And finally, that none of them the None to do any act to defeat the true
meaning hereof.
said Parties, nor any of their Executors or Administrators, shall or will, at
any time or times hereafter, make, do, commit, or omit to be done, wittingly or
willingly, any act, deed device or thing whatsoever, to the end or intent to
defeat or defraud in part, or in all, the true intent and plain meaning of
these presents.

In witness, etc.

Another form of Copartnership between four Citizens, touching Merchandising:
foreign and domestic.
(49.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. on the first part, C.
D. of, etc. on the second part, E. F. of, etc. on the third part, and G. H. of,
etc. late Servant of the said A. B. on the fourth part: Witnesses, that the
said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. in consideration of the Their conjunction in
Copartnership.
trust, confidence and good opinion, which every one of them the said Parties
formerly had, and yet has and reposeth in the other of them: Have joined
together to be Copartners in the Trade of Merchandising: that is to say, In
buying, selling, uttering, vending and retayling of all sorts of Wares, and
other kind of Bussness to the Trade of a Merchant, incident, belonging or
appertaining. And the said Copartnership to Time of continuance. Several Stocks
put into a Schedule, consi^^ing in Wares, Moneys, etc.
continue between them, from, etc. for and during the term and space of three
whole years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended (if
all the said Parties shall so long live.)

(50.) And to that end, intent and purpose, they the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and
G. H. have before the day of the Date of these presents, delivered into Stock
[to be used and employed in the said trade of Merchandising, as well in the
Territories of England, as elsewhere in several places in the parts beyond the
Seas] in Money, Cloth. Wares, Debts, Merchandises adventured abroad and here in
England, such several Stock and Stocks, and sum and sums of Money, as are
specified and expressed in a Schedule Incented to these presents annexed, of
the peculiar and proper Stock severally put in by, and severally belonging to
each one of the said Parties, for their several quantity and proportion being
in the said Schedule severally and distinctly set down, mentioned and declared
as by the same more fully does appear.

(51.) It is now Covenanted, granted, concluded To continue Copartners during
the time.
and fully agreed, by and between all the said Parties to these presents: And
each one of the said several Parties for himself respectively, and for his
several Executors and Administrators, do and does severally and not jointly,
nor one of them for the other, Covenant and grant to and with each and every
other of the said Parties, and their several Executors and Administrators by
these presents, in manner and form following: that is to say, That every and
each of the said Parties, shall from time to time, during and b^ all the said
space of three years (if all the said Parties shall so long live) continue and
abide together, as joint occupyers and Copartners, and that every and each of
the said Parties shall from time to time, during all the said term (if they
shall so long live) do their and every of their reasonable endeavors and
diligence, by all the ways, labors To use their b^st endeavors to advance the
Stock.
and means that each of them can to the uttermost of his power, wit, skill and
knowledge, to and for the benefit, profit and advantage of the said Copartners,
with all or so much of the said Stock as shall in any manner of wise come, or
be committed to each one of their several charges, dispositions and Government,
and the gains and increase thereof.

(52.) And it is agreed by and between all the Divisi^n of the Trade
said Parties to these presents, and their true intent and meaning, is, That
the sa^d C. D. shall manage the business and affairs for, etc. [naming the
places] in the parts of Spain, during the good liking of the said A. B. and
there for the most part reside and have his continuance and being. And that the
said G. H. shall manage the business and affairs for Stoad, Germany and those
parts, during the good liking of the said A. B. and there he for the most part
to reside, and have his continuance and being: and the said A. B. and E. F.
shall manage the business and affairs for England.

(53.) And it is covenanted, granted and agreed To have equal Part of loss and
gain.
by and between all and every the said Parties to these presents: That all such
gains, profit and increase, as God shall send, and as shall grow and arise by
reason of their said Trade, and joint occupying, as aforesaid, shall be from
time to time, during the said joint occupying, equally and indifferently parted
and divided in manner following: That is to say, to every one of the said
Parties, their Executors and Administrators, a just equal and rateable Part and
Proportion, in and upon every hundred pounds, rateaby and proportionably
according to the quantity of eath ones several stock, by them severally put in,
and appearing in the said schedule, for his and their Part, of the gains,
profit and increase that the same shall amount unto, and also of all such hurt,
loss and detriment, as shall happen by the said joint occupying, by evil
debtors, loss of Adventures, or otherwise, which shall be equally born and
sustained, without fraud or covin, by the said Copartners in their several
Parts and Proportio^s of the said Stock, according to the manner and for^, of
the Dividend of the gains aforesaid.

(54.) And it is covenanted, granted and agreed The keeping of the Books of
Account.
by all and every of the said Parties to these presents, and each one of the
said Parties respectively for himself, his Executors and Administrators, do and
does severally and not jointly, covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with
every and each other of the said Parties, his and their several Executors and
Administrators, by these presents, That there shall be had and kept from time
to time during all the time of their joint occupying, and Copartnership
together, as aforesaid, as well for the Account and Affaris here in England, as
likewise for the several Accounts and Affairs, severally beyond the Seas,
perfect, just and true Books of Accounts, and Reckonings, of all the said whole
Trade and Dealing, as much as is in each ones power and charge severally, or in
the power of two jointly, and as relating to and concerning that place or
places, and the business and affairs thereunto applying, wherein or whereunto
he or they shall be used or employed, or which shall be had used, or occupied,
by reason of the said joint Tradeing: And that the said A. B. and E. F. shall
have the custody and keeping of the Books of Account for England, and of all
things concerning the trade for, or in England: And the said C. D. shall have
the custody and keeping of the Books of Account, for and concerning the said
Trade in Spain: And that the said G. H. shall have the custody and keeping of
the Books of Account concerning the trade in Sto^d and Germany: And that every
of the said Books shall be according to each ones Power, justly and truly kept,
and therein entered and set down all Manner of Goods, Wares and Merchandises
whatsoever, either bought or sold, by means or reason of the said
Copartnership, and joint occupying, with all Debts thereof, or therefore from
time to time to be made, together with all the gains, profit and increase, that
God shall send, and shall come or arise of, from, or by reason of the said
joint occupying, and also of all costs, charges, l^sses and expenses, as are or
shall be expended, disbuised, said forth, had or suffe^ed, by any ways or
means, by reason of the said joint occupying, which said Books shall be used in
Common, to and for the use and behoof, of every and each of the said several
Parties, their and every of their several Executors and Administrators to have
free Access and Recourse unto, without the let or interruption of each other,
or the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of each other.

(55.) And also that every and each of the said To make each other privy to all
the affairs.
Parties shall from time to time, during all the time of their said joint
occupying and Copartnership together, as aforesaid, show and make privy unto
the other, and such of the Servants and Apprentices of each other, that shall
attend upon the said Trade, the Particulars of all the affairs and dealings of
the said Trade, or that are needful and necessary thereabouts to be made known
and manifest.

(56.) And also that every and each of the said To account every year.
Parties twice in every Year, yearly during the said Term, or oftener, if need
require, at or upon the reasonable request of any of them unto the other, shall
and will to the best and uttermost of each ones power and knowledge, and as much
as in them, or any of them lies, make, yield, render and perfect unto every and
each other, or to the Executors and Assigns of every and each other, at or in
the City of London, a just true and perfect Account and Reckoning, of all the
said Stock and Stocks, in the said schedule mentioned, of all such Goods,
Wares, Merchandises, and ready Money, as at any time hereafter, during the said
joint Trade and occupying, shall come to any of their several hands, occupying,
custody or governance, or to the hands of any other Person or Persons, to their
or any of their several or joint uses, or by their or any of their several or
joint deliveries or appointments, or by the delivery or appointment of any the
Factors, or Servants of them, or any of them, by reason of the said joint
occupying: and also of all the Gains, Profit and Increase that God shall send
of the same Stock and Stocks, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, and ready Money, or
otherwise, by reason of the said joint occupying: And also of all such debts
and duties, as shall be owing to the said Parties, or any of them, and b^ them,
or any of them, to be owing to any Person or Persons, by reason of the said
joint occupying, and that upon the perfecting and finishing of every such
Account, all the said Parties, their Executors and Administrators, shall
subscribe their Names to the same; Witnessing, each ones Consent and Agreement
thereunto, for avoiding of all Doubts and Questions, which otherwise might
happen to ensue.

(57.) And further, That it shall and may Free recourse to the Books of account.
be lawful to and for every and each of the said Parties, and the Executors,
Administrators, Servants, Factors, and Assigns of them, and every or any of
them, at all convement and seasonable Time and Times, during all the time of
their joint occupying, at the Liberty and Pleasure of any of the said Parties,
their or any of their Executors, Administrators, Factors or Assigns, to have
Access, and Recourse, to the Books of Account and Reckoning, and to the Notes
and Remembrances appertaining to the same, any wise touching or concerning the
said Trade and joint Occupying, and to search, peruse and examine the same for
the better trial and finding out and discovery, how and in what sort and
condition, the said Trade and joint Occupying does and shall from Time to Time
proceed and stand.

(58.) And it is further Covenanted, concluded Bills and Contracts beyond Sea,
in whose name.
and agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, and every one of
the said Parties before-named, for himself respectively, and for his several
Executors and Administrators, do and does severally and not jointly, promise,
grant and agree, to and with the other of them, his and their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That no Bill, Writing, Contract
or Bargain shall be made at any time, during their said joint occupying
together in the parts beyond the Seas, for any matter touching the said joint
Tra^e, otherwise than in the name of the said A. B. if the same with reasonable
convenience may be done: And that there shall no private No private Trade to be
permitted.
occupying or trade of Buying or Selling be had, used or occupied by any the
said several Parties, their Factors, Servants and Apprentices, or any o^ them,
or by any other, to or for their or any of their uses, benefits or behoofs, in
any wise or condition whatsoever, at any time or times during the time of their
said Copartnership, to the hurt or injury of the said joint trade, other than
such, as that the gains, Commodity, advantage and profit thereof, shall equally
be to the use of them the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. proportionably,
according to the rate and proportion of their several Stocks beforementioned:
saving that it shall and may be lawful to Exception.
and for the said A. B. at his liberty and pleasure, with his overplus of Stock
at any time or times during this Copartnership to use a trade to and for the
East Indies: And saving that it shall and may be lawful, to and for all the
said Parties, during the term of their said joint Trade to deal with and for
other men, with whom they shall in no wise have any Partnership: and which
shall not hinoer or any way prejudice the said joint Trade: and to receive the
Factorship for such their dealing to their own proper uses: any thing herein
before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

(59.) And it is further Covenan^ed, granted Account to be made at the end of
the Copartnership.
concluded and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents: And
each one of the said several Parties for himself respectively, and for his
several Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do and does interchangably, and
respectively, and not jointly, Covenant, grant and agree to and with the other
of them, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That
they the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. their, and every of their Executors
and Administrators, shall and will within the space of three Months, next
ensuing the end, determination or dissolution of the said Copartnership,
whether the same be by expiration of the said term of three years, or by the
death or decease of any the said Purties, which soever of the same shall first
happen, at the request of every or any of them unto the other, or the Executors
or Administrators of any of them, unto the other, make, yield, render and
perfect every one of them unto the other, at the now dwelling house of the said
A. B. situate in, etc. a just, true, perfect and final account and reckoning,
in writing, to the uttermost of every and each man's power, and knowledge of all
and every the said Stock and Stocks mentioned in the said Schedule, and of all
the gains and increase loss and damage, which God shall send, and which shall
grow or be to the same; and of all Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Commodities,
before that time, had, bought, sold, or dealt in, with the said Stock and
Stocks, and gains aforesaid: and of all Debts, made and being due, sum and sums
of Money, received and paid out by means, or in respect of the said joint
Trade; and generally of all Buying, Bargaining, Selling, Trading and
Merchandising by the said Parties, or any of them, with the said Stock and
Stocks, and gains and increase thereof aforesaid.

(60.) And, that then upon the perfecting and Dividend to be made.
finishing of the said final account, so, as aforesaid, to be made and done
[the Debts, Duties and other Charges to be then owing or payable by the said
Parties, or any of them, for, and in respect of the said joint Trade, being
then first and before all things there-out, paid, deducted and allowed, and
likewise the losses, if any be, to be in like proportion born and sustained]
all and every the Stock and Stocks in the said Schedule mentioned, then
remaining, and the Gains and Increase, which God shall send, and shall appear
to become and growing thereof, or by reason of the Trade aforesaid, whether the
same shall consist in Money, Wares, Debts or otherwise, shall be indifferently
parted, shared, paid and divided, to and amongst the said Parties, their
Executors and Administrators in kind proportionably and ratably, without fraud,
deceit or diminishing in that full measure, as each ones several Part shall
justly and truly, in a true reckoning and computation thereof arise and amount
unto upon every hundred Pounds, thereof, according to the quantity of each ones
several Stock and Stocks in the said Schedule appearing and mentioned, and
according to the plain true intent and meaning of these presents.

(61.) And that such Part and Portion of the Debts due how to be disposed.
said Stock and Gains, as shall upon the perfecting of the said final Account
appear to be and consist in Debts and Duties due and owing to the said Parties,
or any of them, shall also from time to time, as the same or any of them shall
be recovered or gotten in by the said Parties, or any of them, be also parted,
shared and divided to and amongst the said Parties, according to the like
Order, Rate, Division and Proportion, as is before herein expressed and set
down: And that Each to do his best endeavor and bear a ratable part in the
charge, for getting in of Debts.
the said Parties, and every of them, their Executors and Administrators,
immediately upon the perfecting and finishing of the said final account,
partition and divisson, as aforesaid, shall and will do their, and every of
their Endeavors, by all the lawful ways and means, that they or any of them,
may or can, for the more speedy recovery and getting in of all and every the
said several Debts and Duties, from time to time to be due or owing to them, or
any of them, as part of the Gains, and Stock aforesaid: and that the charges of
suing for and getting in of the said Debts and Duties, from t^^^e to time,
shall be born and paid, by all the said Parties rateably, according to the
quantity of their several Stocks and Gains aforesaid.

(62.) And that if it shall happen, any of the No right of Survivorship to take
place
said Parties, to dye or depart this life, during the said Copartnership: That
then in any such case, no right of S^rvivor or Survivorship, shall hold or take
place, or be b^ them, or any of them challenged, claymed or demanded in any
wise, but that they the said Parties, and every of them, shall and may lawfully
give. dev^se, dispose and distribute his and their Parts and Portions of the
said Stock and Stocks, ^ains and Increase to them severally and properly to
belong, and be due and belonging by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, by their or any of their last Wills and Testaments, or by any other
guile or device, as fully and amply, as they or any of them could or might do,
of their own proper Money or Goods, not pertinent to this joint Trade or
Account: And likewise that the Executors and Administrators of every such
Person and Persons so dying may have and enjoy his and their sull rateable Part
and Portion of the Stock and Stocks aforesaid, and of the Gains and Increase
thereof according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, without any
let, trouble, hinderance or interruption of any other of the said Parties
surv^ving: any Usage, Law, Custom, or other impediment to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

(63.) And that all and every the said Parties To assist each other in
obteining their Parts.
before mentioned, their Executors and Administrators, at all times d^ring the
continuance of the said Copartnership, and afterward until the end of the
whole bussiness shall be fully finished, and brought to perfection by all the
good ways that they possibly can, shall be a^ding and assisting unto each other
their Executors and Administrators, for the ob^eining and speedy getting of
every and each ones private and particular Part and Portions, to him or them to
be due, upon the Partition or Division aforesaid, and that without fraud or
covin.

(64.) And each of the said Parties for What to be allowed upon the joint
stock, What not?
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with
the other of the said parties his and their Executors and Administrators, by
these presents, That it shall not be lawful, for the said Parties, at any time
during the said Copartnership, or any of them, to take out or diminish any Part
of the said joint Stock, or any the Gains or Increase thereof, other than such
Sum and Sums of Money, as hereafter in and by these presents, is licensed and
allowed: And that no charge shall in any wise be put to the Account of the said
Copartnership, but such as shall be for the merchandising in Trade and
occupying of the Stock and Stocks aforesaid, and the Gains and Increase that of
and concerning the same shall come, arise or increase [unless it be for
convenient House-room, and Warehouse-room in the parts beyond the Seas, and for
the suing for, and getting in of Debts and Duties belonging to the said joint
Trade, and other necessary Charges belonging to Merchandise behooveful for
their joint occupying, which are to be born by the general account of the said
joint Trade.] And that the Charges of Warehouse-room, Diet, Lodging, and such
like, for the time any of the said Parties shall be within the City of London,
during the time of the said Copartnership, shall be upon the particular and
sole Charge of the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators.

(65.) And it is Covenanted, granted, concluded Allowance to Copartners.
and agreed by and between all the said Parties to these presents, and each one
of the said Parties for himself respectively, and for his several Executors and
Administrators, do and does Covenant and grant by these presents, that he the
said C. D. by way of further Recompense, his Executors and Administrators shall
every year, for and during all the time of the said Copartnership, be allowed
out of the said joint Stock, and general account, the sum of One hundred eighty
four pounds per annum, of lawful Moneys of England, over and above all other
his gains and allowance herein beforementioned: One hundred pound yearly
whereof, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. D. to take out of
the said joint Stock, to use, spend, bestow and convert, at his own free will
and pleasure, and that he the said C. D. shall leave yearly the residue, being
the sum of Eighty four pounds, to rest, remain and run to and in use, to and
with the said general Stock, during the said Copartnership, the profit and loss
of which said Eighty four pounds to be divided to and amongst the said
Copartners in like manner, according to the division and proportion of their
several Stocks aforesaid: and the said Eighty four pounds yearly, together with
so much of the said yearly sum of One hundred pounds not formerly taken out, at
the end and determination of the said Copartnership shall be to the said C. D.
his Executors and Administrators, fully satisfied and paid, or otherwise by
him the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, out of his account to be
deducted and defalked: and that the said G. H. his Executors and
Administrators, by way of further recompense yearly, and every year, for and
during, etc. pro ut supra for C. D. [and so for the rest.] Any matter or thing
before in these presents contained, to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. The manner of composing differences.


(66.) And finally, it is Covenanted, granted and agreed by and between all the
said Parties to these presents, That if it shall fortune any variance, suit,
difference, doubt, controversy, discord or contention to happen, grow or be
moved, by and between the said Parties or any of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of them or any of them, for, upon or by reason of the said
Trade, and joint occupying, or any matter or thing thereupon depending, or upon
or by reason of any matter or thing in these presents contained or expressed,
That then and so often from time to time as the same shall happen, and before
any suit, arrest or trouble, shall be attempted or begun by them or any of
them, against the other, All and every the said variances, differences,
strifes, doubts, controversies and contentions, shall from time to time be
referred and submitted to the hearing, order, award and determination of four
honest Persons, being of the Company of Merchant-adventurers of England for the
time being, whereof one shall be chosen by the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators, one other by, etc. [naming the rest] as Arbitrators, in and for
all and every the premises, if they shall be content to undertake the
variances, strifes and contentions so to them to be referred within the space
of one month next after such reference and submission to them made: And
further, that they the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. and every of them,
their and every of their Executors and Administrators respectively, for their
several and particular parts, shall and will from time to time stand to* abide,
obey, perform, fulfill and keep all and every such end and ends, determination
and judgment, as by the said four Persons so, as aforesaid, to be chosen, shall
from time to time be had, made and given in writing, for and in behalf of the
said Parties, as touching any the variances or differences aforesaid.

In witness, etc.

Another form of Copartnership between two Sales-men, as to matters here in
England only.
(67.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of
the other part: whereas the said A. B. is p^ssest by Leas^ One lets part of his
house to the other.
for diverse years ye^ to come, of, and in all that Message, or Tenement, with
th'appurtenances, called by the name of Kings-Axms, situate and being in
Birching-lane, London, now in the occupation of the said A. B. And whereas the
said Parties are agreed to be Copartners in the An or Trade of a Salesman, and
in buying and selling of Apparel, and other things belonging to the said Trade.

(68.) Now witnesses these presents, that By way of Covenant.
the said A. B. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does
Covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, that he the said C. D. shall
have, hold and enjoy the several Rooms hereafter mentioned, being part and
parcel of the said Message: That is to say, etc. [naming the Rooms] And also
free liberty of ingress, egress and regress to and from the said Rooms, and
premises, at all convenient and seasonable times, for the term of three years,
commencing from the Feast day of St. Michael Th'archangel next enli^ing the
Date of these presents: yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said A.
B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the yearly sum of Ten pound of
lawful Moneys of England, at four usual Feasts or terms in the year, that is to
say, etc. by even and equal portions. And the said C. D. for himself, his
Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with Liberty to
view the reparations.
the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the
said C. D. shall and will from time to time, during the said term, permit and
suffer the said A. B. and all those of whom he holds the said Message, their
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and their workmen to enter, and come into and
upon the several Rooms aforesaid, to view, search and see the estate of the
same.

(69). And this Indenture further witnesses, Covenant to be Copartners for
three years.
That the said A. B. and C. D. for the good liking and opinion, and special
trust and confidence which each of them has and reposeth of, and in the other
of them, and for the advanceing of their Estate, are contented and agreed, and
do by these presents Covenant, grant and agree, each of them to and with the
other of them, his Executors and Administrators, that they the said Parties
shall be and continue Copartners together, and joint dealers in the Art or
Mystery of a Salesman, and the making and selling of all sorts of Apparel for
Men and Women, and in the buying and selling of all things thereunto incident
and belonging, from the Feast day of Saint Michael Th'archangel, next ensuing
the Date of these presents unto the end and term of three years, from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended (if the said Parties shall
both of them so long live:) the said Copartnership to be kept and used in the
Shop and Warehouse belonging to the abovenamed Message.

(70.) And for the better managing of the said The Stock to be brought in by
each.
joint Trade, they the said Parties to these presents, have agreed to make up,
bring in, and put together the sum of Four hundred pounds of lawful Moneys of
England: of which said Stock, the said A. B. is agreed for his share and part,
to bring in the sum of Two hundred pounds of lawful Moneys of England; and the
said C. D. is agreed to bring into the said Stock for his part and share of the
said joint Stock, the like sum of Two hundred pounds of like lawful Moneys of
England, being the residue of the said Four hundred pounds, and they the said
Parties shall and may bring, and put into the said joint Trade, such further
addition of Stock, as they the said Parties shall think fit. It is now
therefore Covenanted, granted and agreed, by and between the said Parties to
these presents, and each of them by and for himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does Covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with the other
of them by these presents in manner and form following: that is to say, That
each of them the said Parties shall and will, on or before the sixth day of,
etc. now next ensuing, bring and put into the said joint Stock and Trade, each
the sum of Two hundred pounds a piece, as aforesaid, being his said respective
part and share of the said joint Stock.

(71.) And that the said joint Stock of Four Employment of the Stock.
hundred pound, and such further addition of stock as they the said Parties
shall bring and put into the said joint trade, and all the proceed, gains and
increase, which shall be acquired or gotten, by reason or means of the
employment of the said joint stock, and additional stock in the said joint
trade: (except a weekly allowance of Thirty shillings to each of them the said
Parties for their particular Household expenses, to be taken out of the said
gains) shall be from time to time, during the said Copartnership, continued,
used and employed i^ the said Copartnership and joint Trade, to and for the
use, benefit and behoof of both the said Parties to these presents, as is
here-under mentioned, and shall not be taken out, converted, used or employed
by either of the said Parties, to or for any other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever.

(72.) And, that each of them the said Parties Both to endeavor to advance the
Trade. Where the Trade shall be used. Each to be true and faithful to the
other. Each to have thirty shillings a Week. All transactions to be in both
their names.
shall from time to time, during the said Copartnership, diligently apply and
endeavor himself in the managing of the said joint trade, and to advance the
same, and the gains and increase thereof, for the equal benefit and advantage
of both the sai^ Parties:

(73.) And that neither of them the said Parties, shall use the said Trade in
any other place, but only in the said Message, during the said Term, nor shall
use or exercise the said Trade, with any other Stock, but only for the benefit
of both the said Parties: And that each of the said Parties shall be true, just
and faithful to the other of them, in all his Buyings, Sellings, Dealings,
Doings and Employments, in and about the said joint Trade, and that each of the
said Parties shall and lawfully may take out of the said joint Stock and Gains,
and have the weekly Sum of thirty shillings for his particular charges of
Housekeeping.

(74.) And that the said joint Trade shall be managed and driven, and all
Buyings, Sales, Receipts, Payments, Bills, Bonds, Specialties and other
Assurances to be had, made or taken for any matter or thing touching the said
joint Trade shall be from time to time, during the said Copartnership, entered,
had, made and taken in the joint names of both the said Parties to these
presents.

(75.) And that neither of them the said Parties Neither to become bound with
any other Person.
shall at any time during the said Copartnership, become bound or bail, or
surety, or otherwise engage himself with or for any other Person or Persons,
for any Debt or Duty, Matter or Thing not concerning this Copartnership,
without the license or consent of the other of the said Parties first had in
that behalf in Writing under his hand: Nor shall at any Time during the said
Copartnership compound, release or discharge any Debt or Duty, which shall be
due or owing to the said joint Trade: without the consent of the other Nor to
release Debts, etc. without the others consent. The stock not to be attached
for particular debts of either.
of them the said Parties first had in that behalf: Other than so much thereof
as shall be brought into the said joint Stock, within four Days next after
such Release made or given for the same.

(76.) And that the joint or additional Stock aforesaid, or any of the Gains or
In^^ease thereof, shall not at any Time, during the said Copartnership, be
attached, seized, extended, or taken in execution, for or in respect of the
private or particular Debt or Debts, Duty or Duties of either of the said
Parties not concerning this Copartnership: But that such private and particular
Debt and Debts, Duty and Dutys shall be paid and satisfied by him or them the
said Parties whose Debt or Duties the same is or shall be out of his own
particular State not included in the said Copartnership.

(77.) And that neither of the said Parties Not to retain Apprentices without
consent.
shall at any time during the said Copartnership, retain or keep any Servant or
Apprentice to be employed in the said joint Trade, without the consent of the
other of them the said Parties first had and obtained in that said behalf.

(78.) And that if either of the said Parties Not to sell upon trust without
consent
shall at any time hereafter, sell or deliver upon Trust or Credit, any Wares
or Commodities, of or belonging to the said joint Trade, without the Co^s^nt of
the other of the said Parties, then such of them the said Parties, which shall
sell or deliver the said Goods or Wares shall within six Months next after such
Sale or Delivery made, pay in unto the said joint Stock so much of lawful
English Money, as each and every such Parcel of Wares shall be sold for, if the
Person or Persons to whom such Sail or Delivery shall be made, shall not in the
mean Time pay and satisfy for the same.

(79.) And further it is agreed by the said A B. Discharge of Assessment for
the Message.
that he the said A. B. shall and will from time to time during the said
Copartnership, at his own costs and charges bear pay and discharge, all Tithes
or other Duties due and payable to the Parson for the aforesaid Message, and
all Assessments for relief of the Poor of the Parish, so that the same
Assessments exceed not more than the said A. B. now payable and is assessed for
the same. And moreover it is mutually condescended and agreed The dividend of
the stock and gains.
by and between the said Parties to these presents: and each of them for
himself, his Executors and Administrators does covenant and agree to and with
the other of them, his Executors and Administrators by these presents: That
each of them the said Parties shall from time to time, during the said
Copartnership, have a several and equal Part, Right, Title and Interest in and
to the said joint Stock, and Proceed of the same, and in and to all and every
the Gains and Increase, which shall be made, raised or gotten in, by reason or
means of the said joint trade: That is to say, the said A. B. in and to the
moiety, or one half Part thereof, and the said C. D. in and to the other
Moiety, or one half Part thereof: And that each of them the said Parties, his
Executors and Administrators shall and may at and upon the Dissolution of the
said Copartnership have, receive and take his said respective Share and Part of
all the said Premises, to his and their proper use and behoof for ever, in such
manner as hereafter in these presents is mentioned No advantage by Survivorship.
and set down, without any let or interruption, of or by the other of them the
said Parties, his Executors or Administrators: and without any benefit or
advantage to be taken by Survivorship, or by either of the said Parties
surviving the other of them: any Law, Usage or Custom of Survivorship to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

(80.) And that all Debts and Duties which Losses equally born, and charges.
shall be owing by them, the said Parties, touching the said joint Trade, and
all Losses by bad Debtors [other than such as shall be trusted by either of
them, without the consent of the other of them the said Parties] Decay in
Wares, or any other inevitable accident, and all charges and expenses for
repairing of the said house and shop, and all other charges necessarily arising
for any matter or thing touching the said joint Trade: shall be from time to
time during the said Copartnership, born, sustained and paid by and between
the said Parties to these presents, equally out of their said joint Stock and
Gains.

(81.) And moreover, That they the said Parties To keep shopbooks.
shall from time to time during the said Copartnership, at their own charges
provide, have and keep sufficient and competent Books of Account and Reckoning
in writing to be always remaining in the said Shop: Wherein they the said
Parties shall from time to time, write down and enter, or cause to be written
down and entered, the true Particulars of all such Goods, Wares and
Merchandises, that shall be bought or sold, brought in or delivered out, in or
touching the said joint Trade, and of all Sum or Sums of Money, that shall be
received or paid, together with the names of all Persons, unto or from whom
any such Goods, Wares or Moneys, shall be received or paid, and all other
circumstances of Time and Place any ways conducing to the manifestation of the
State and Proceeding of the said Trade: And that each of them the said Parties
shall and may from time to time, during the said Copartnership, have free
Access and Recourse unto the said Books of Account, to read, peruse, examine
and copy out the same at his Will and Pleasure.

(82.) And further, That they the said Parties, Every year to perfect the
account.
shall yearly and every year, during the said Copartnership in the Month of
September join in Account together at the said shop: and then and there to
make, cast up, and fully finish a true, just, plain and perfect Account and
Reckoning in writing of, for and concerning the said joint Trade; and of and
for all Moneys, Wares, Goods, Debts, and other Estate whatsoever, which shall
be then in Copartnership between the said Parties, or jointly owing or
belonging to them, and upon the finishing of every such yearly Account, they
the said Parties shall write and enter, or cause to be written down, and entered
into two several Books of Account, the true Particulars of every such Account,
and shall subscribe their Names in the said Books, at the foot of every such
Account entered therein: and upon the subscription of their Names, as aforesaid,
each of the said Parties, shall and may have and take to his own use one of the
said Books subscribed as aforesaid.

(83.) And furthermore, that at the end of the The final account.
said Term of three years, if they the said Parties shall be both then living,
they the said Parties, shall join in Account together at the Shop aforesaid,
and shall then and there make, cast up and fully finish between them a true,
plain, perfect, and final Account and Reckoning in ^riting, of, for and
concerning the said joint Trade, and of, and for all Moneys, Wares, Goods,
Debts and other Estate whatsoever, which shall be then in Copartnership between
the said Parties, or jointly owing or belonging to them, by reason or means of
the said joint Trade: And of all Debts and Duties, which they the said Parties
shall then owe to any Person or Persons.

(84.) And upon finishing of the said account, To pay Debts, and divide the
remainder.
they the said Parties shall forthwith satisfy or take order for the speedy
satisfying of all and every the said Debts and Duties, so by them owing: and
shall also thereupon make a just and equal partition, allotment, assignment and
division between them the said Parties, of all the then residue and remainder
of their said partible or joint Stock and Estate, and increase thereof: [That
is to say, One moiety or half part thereof unto the said A. B. to his own
proper use, and the other moiety or half part thereof unto the said C. D. to
his own proper use.] Neither to release a Debt assigned to the other, etc. Each
to authorize the other to sue, etc If either die during the three years; the
Survivor to take all; paying for a moiety to the Executors of the other.


(85.) And after such partition, division, assignment and allotment so made,
neither of the said Parties, his Executors or Administrators, shall, without
the consent of the other of them, receive, release, compound or discharge any
debt or duty, which is or shall be assigned or allotted to the other of them
respectively, but that each of them the said Parties, his Executors and
Administrators, shall from time to time sufficiently authorize the other of
them the said Parties, his Executors or Administrators, upon his or their
request to sue for, recover, receive and take to his and their own proper use,
all and every the debts and duties, which shall be allotted to him or them the
said Parties, his Executors or Administrators respectively, making such request.

(86.) And further, that if either of the said Parties shall happen to decease
before the end of the said three years, and after any yearly account shall be
made between them the said Parties, touching the said joint Trade, That then
the Survivor of them the said Parties* shall have and take to his own proper
use, all the Moneys, Goods and Wares, which shall be belonging to the said
joint Trade and Copartnership, at the same rate and price the same Goods and
Wares did cost, and also all Debts and Duties which shall be then d^e and owing
to the said joint Trade (except such of them as were trusted by the said
deceased Party, without the consent of the said Survivor:) And in consideration
thereof, the said Survivor, his Executors or Administrators, shall pay, or
cause to be paid to the Executors or Administrators of the Person so first
dying at the Shop aforesaid, so much lawful Money of England as the part and
share of the Party deceasing, of, and in all the said Debts that shall be then
owing to the said jont Trade, that were accounted good and spirate Debts: and
of, and in all the Moneys, Goods and Wares of the said joint Trade, did, or
shall clearly come and amount unto, by and upon the said yearly Account made
between the said Parties, next before such decease (the Debts owing by the said
joint Stock being allowed for, and defalked out of the said whole Estate:) The
same Moneys to be paid to the Executors or Administrators of the said Party
deceased, as follows: That is to say, One third part thereof at the end of
four Months, next after such decease, one other third part thereof at the end
of eight Months, nert after such decease, and the remaining third part thereof,
at the end of twelve Months next after such decease.

(87.) And, that the said Survivor, his Executors How the Moneys shall be
secured.
or Administrators, shall within twenty Days next after such decease of the
other of them the said Parties, become bound in a penal Bond, sufficient in the
Law, of double the Principal, and with sufficient Sureties to the Executors or
Administrators of the person so first dying, as well for the true payment of
the said three several sums, in manner and form aforesaid, as also for the
saving harmless, and keeping indempnified, of the Executors and Administrators,
Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of the said first Security against joint
Debts.
de^easing Party, of, and from all and every the Debts and Duties, which were
jointly owing by them the said Parties at the time of such decease, of, for and
concerning the said joint trade, and of and from all Accounts, Suits,
Judgments, Executions and Demands, for, touching or concerning the same.

(88.) In consideration whereof, the Executors The Executors of the Party
deceasing to release all demands.
or Administrators of the said deceased Party, shall upon receipt of the said
Security, sufficiently and in due form of Law, remiss and release unto the said
Survivor, his Executors and Administrators, all the part, share, right, title,
interest, claim and demand whatsoever, which they the said Executors and
Administrators o^ the deceased Party, and every or any of them, have or has,
or may, can, might should or ought to have in, to or out of all and every, or
any of the Stock Estate, Money, Goods, Wares and Debts which were in or
belonging to the said joint Trade, or Copartnership, at the decease of the
Party so Except desperate Debts which are to be divided.
first dying, or at any time before, except such Debts as were accounted
desperate, which by the agreement of bath the said Parties to these presents,
for them, their Executors and Administrators, are to be equally divided between
the Survivor and the Executors and Administrators of the deceased Party, as
they or any of them shall be received or gotten in.

(89.) And it is further covenanted and agreed How the Estate is to be divided,
if either die before account made.
by and between the said Parties to these presents: That if either of the said
Parties shall happen to depart this life before any yearly Account shall happen
to be made between the said Parties touching the said joint Trade, that then
the surviving Party, his Executors and Administrators shall have and take to
his and their own use and b^hoof, all the Moneys, Goods, Wares, Debts and other
Estate whatsoever, in or belonging to the said joint Trade, at the time of such
decease, and shall satisfy the Debts jointly owing by the said Parties, as
aforesaid, at the time of such decease, and shall truly pay unto the Executors
or Administrators of the first deceased Party, within one year then next
ensuing, so much lawful English Money, as the Stock that then shall be brought
into the said joint Trade by the Party so deceasing did come and amount unto,
and that such security shall be given for the same, and for the saving harmless
of the Executors or Administrators of the deceased Party, of and from the
Debts and Duties jointly owing by the said Parties as aforesaid, as is above
mentioned to be given for the like purposes, in Case the decease of the Party
so first dying had happened after the making of an yearly Release.
Account, as aforesaid: And that then also the like Release shall be made and
given by the Executors or Administrators of the first deceasing Party to the
surviving Party, his Executors and Administrators, as is above mentioned.

(90.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Touching the Message if A. B. do,
etc.
Executors and Administrators does covenant and grant to and with the said C.
D. his Executors and Administrators by these presents: That if the said A. B.
shall happen to decease within the said term of three years, that then the
Executors or Administrators of the said A. B. shall within twenty Days, next
after his decease, demise and grant unto the said C. D. (if he shall be then
living) his Executors and Administrators, all the said Message or Tenement
above mentioned, for and during the then Residue of the said Term of three
years at, for and under the yearly rent of twenty three pound of lawful Moneys
of England to be by the said demise reserved quarterly to be paid, and with
such Covenants to be inserted in the said Demise on the Part and behalf of the
said C. D. his Executors Administrators and Assigns to be performed and kept,
as are contained in the Lease, whereby the said A. B. holds the same, so that
the said C. D. do upon the Sealing and Delivery of the said Lease, seal and
deliver the Counter-Party thereof, as his act and deed unto the Lessor or
Lessors therein named.

(91.) And it is covenanted, concluded and agreed How to compose differences.
by and between the said Parties to these presents, for them, their Executors
and Administrators: That if any Variance, Strife, Difference or Controvers^e,
shall at any Time hereafter, during the said Copartnership, or at the end
thereof happen to grow, arise, or be between the said Parties, to these
presents, their Executors or Administrators, or any of them, upon, touching or
concerning their said joint Trade or any their buyings, sellings, accounts,
matters or things relating thereunto, or for, or touching any Covenant, Matter
or Thing in these presents contained: That then and so often they the said
Parties to these presents, their Executors or Administrators shall upon
reasonable request made by either or any of them unto the other of them before
any Suit shall be commenced for, or touching the same, elect, name and choose
two indifferent Persons to hear and determine the same differences and matters
of difference, one of which Arbitrators the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators Arbitrators.
shall choose and name. And the other of the said Arbitrators the said C. D. his
Executors or Administrators shall name and choose: And that each of the said
Parties his Executors and Administrators shall respectively stand to and abide,
perform and keep such award, order, determination and judgment, which the said
two Arbitrators shall make and give in writing under their hands and seals unto
the Parties subject by these presents thereunto, upon and touching the said
differences and matters in difference, so that the said award be made and
given, as aforesaid in writing, within thirty Days next after the Choice and
Nomination of the said Arbitrators in that behalf. And in case the said
Arbitrators shall not make and give forth their said award as aforesaid; within
time before limited for the doing thereof, then each of the said Parties Umpire.
his Executors and Administrators shall and will stand to, abide, perform and
keep such Award, Order and Vmperage, as such one Person Vmpire to be elected
and chosen by the said Arbitrator shall make and give forth in Writing, as
aforesaid, under his hand and seal upon and touching the said differences and
matters in difference within twenty days next after the end of the said thirty
Days: And in case the said Vmpire shall not make and give forth, as aforesaid,
his said Award and Vmpirage, within the time above limited for the doing
thereof, that then each and every of them the said Parties, his Executors and
Administrators shall and will for his and their Parts stand to, abide, perform
and keep such Master and Wardens of the company, etc.
Award, Order, Determination and Judgment as the Master and Wardens of the
Company of Merchant-Taylors in London, or the major Part of them shall make and
give forth, as aforesaid, in writing under their hands and seals, upon and
touching the said differences and matters in difference within two Months next
after the end of the said twenty Days.

(92.) Provided nevertheless, and it is covenanted, If either prove unfaithful,
Copartnership to cease.
concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these Presents for
them, their Executors and Administrators: That if either of the said Parties
shall be untrue, unjust or unfaithful unto the other of them, in any buyings,
sales, receipts or payments belonging to, or concerning the said
Copartner-ship: That then or at any times afterward, upon notice of dislike
given thereof by either of them to the other of them the said Parties, and
desire thereupon signified that the said Copartnership shall determine: The
said Copartnership and joint Trade shall cease, determine and be dissolved: And
that the like Account, Partition and Division shall be made between the said
Parties to these Presents, their Executors and Administrators, of the said
joint Stock and Proceed thereof, and shall do all other things concerning the
said joint Trade, in such manner and form, to all intents and purposes in every
respect, as they are to do at the end of the said three years. And that from
and after the end and dissolution of the said Copartnership, in manner and form
aforesaid, the said Term and Interest granted unto the said C. D. of and in
Part of the said dwelling house and shop in manner aforesaid, shall likewise
cease, determine and be void.

In witness.

Another between two Brewers.
(93.) This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. Re^ital that they are jointly
seized of a Brewhouse, etc.
of the one Part; and C. D. of the other Part: whereas the said A. B. and C. D.
do stand jointly interested and possessed of and in one Message or Tenement
with the Appurtenances, and of and in one Brew House, situate in, etc. (late
in the occupation of E. F.) for diverse years yet enduring, and also of and in
one Copper and diverse and sundry brewing Vessels, Goods, Implements, and
household stuff, by virtue of one Lease bearing Date, etc. made between the said
E. F. on the one Part, and the said A. B. and C. D. on the other Part: And
whereupon the yearly rent of, etc. is reserved to be paid: and likewise are
possessed of, and interessed in a certain parcel of ground, stables, hay-lofts,
and other Rooms now used with the said Brewhouse, as Part of and appertaining
to the same, for certain years also yet enduring by virtue of one other Lease
to them made by the said E. F. bearing date, etc. under the yearly Rent of,
etc. as by the said two several Indentures of Lease, relation being thereunto
had, more fully and at large it does and may appear.

(94.) Now witnesses, that the said parties Their joining in Copartnership.
to these presents, out of love and affection which they have unto each other,
and confidence and trust in each other reposed, and to the end that the said
parties may, by Gods blessing, increase in Stock, and be the better enabled to
maintain themselves and their Families, Have concluded, condescended and agreed
together, and by these presents, do conclude, condescend and agree to be
Copartners and joint Dealers in the mystery or trade of brewing of Beer and Ale
in the said Brew House, immediately from and after the day of the Date hereof,
for and during the time and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully
to be complete and ended (if both the said parties shall and do so long live.)

(95.) And to that intent and purpose, the said Stock put in.
A. B. for his part and portion of the Stock to be employed in the said joint
Trade, has put in the sum of Two hundred pounds of lawful Moneys of England,
and likewise the said C. D. for his part and portion of the said Stock, has
put in the like sum of Two hundred pounds of like lawful Moneys of England, to
be likewise used and employed in the said Copartnership and joint Trade.

(96.) It is now Covenanted, granted and To have equal parts.
agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, And ^ither of them
for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, does
Covenant and grant to and with the other of them, his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns by these presents, that they and either of them, their several
Executors and Administrators, shall be alike interessed, and have, retain and
assume to their own several uses: equal shares parts and portions, of, in and
to the said several Stocks, by them severally put in, to be employed in this
Copartnership, and of all and every such other sum and sums of Money, as
thereunto shall hereafter be by them added or put, and of, in and to all the
gains, profits and increase to come or grow thereof, or of any part thereof, or
by any advantage arising by the said Partnership.

(97.) And, for the sure and more effectual proceeding To be faithful in, and
industrious for the advancement of the Trade.
in the said Copartnership, to the best benefit and advantage of the said
several parties to these presents, either of the said parties for himself, and
for his several Executors and Admininistrators respectively, does Covenant,
promise and grant to and with the other of them, his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, in manner and form following: that is to say,
That each of them shall and will from time to time during the said
Copartnership, be true and faithful to the other of them, in every thing, in,
about and relating to the said Trade and mystery of Brewing, and all other
things which shall any ways concern the said Copartnership, and shall do and
perform his and their best endeavors from time to time, during the said
Copartnership, to the best of their wit, knowledge, power and skill in Brewing
of Ale and Beer, or either of them in the said Brew House, and in uttering and
selling of the same, and in all other things necessary and convenient to be put
in ure, touching or concerning the said Copartnership and joint occupying, for
the bringing in of gains, and as much as in them or either of them lies, for
the avoiding and preventing of loss.

(98.) And that all losses and damages Losses, charges, etc. to be equally
born.
which shall happen, or come in the said joint trade and management thereof,
either by evil or bad Debtors, or other Casualties howsoever (so as it be not
through the wilful negligence or deceit of either of the said Parties) and that
all Subsidies, Taxes, and other Impositions to be charged and imposed upon the
said Parties, or either of them; by reason of this Copartnership, and joint
trade or stock; and all other charges for Rent of the said Brew House, and the
said Message or Tenement, and other Houses and Grounds, which are and shall be
used with the said Brew House* and all charges of Reparations to be done by the
Covenants in the said several Leases; or either of them contained; and all
other necessary Charges to be expended in Housekeeping at the said Brew House,
and all payments and necessary Charges of Corn, Coals, Hops, Vessels, Vtens^ls,
Servants wages* Candles, Drays, Horses and other necessary charges whatsoever,
in and about the said trade of Brewing, during this Copartnership; shall be
equally and indifferently sustained, born, paid and discharged by and between
the said Parties, out of their several parts of the Gains or Stock, part and
part, like as Copartners:

(99.) And also, it is mutually agreed by and None to take out of the Stock and
Gains, without the others consent.
between the said Parties to these presents, that neither of them shall at any
time or times, during the said Copartnership, withdraw; or take out or from the
said principal Stock, or the gains thereof, any sum or sums of Money, other than
for the necessary uses aforesaid, without the mutual consent and agreement of
the other of them first had, and obtained: and such of them as by such consent
as aforesaid, shall at any time take out of the same, shall immediately enter
into a Book for that purpose to be kept, the quantity so taken out, to the end
that the other of the said Parties, may thereby take notice thereof.

(100.) And it is further Covenanted, granted, Books of Account to be kept.
concluded and fully agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents,
that they and either of them, shall, as near as they may, from time to time,
keep, or cause to be kept, true, just and perfect Books of Account and
Reckoning in writing to the uttermost of their several knowledge, of all the
Payments, Receipts and Debts, to or from them due or owing, and of all Gains,
Losses, and other things touching their joint trade and dealing in this present
Copartnership: which Books shall be extant from time to time, and at all times
convenient, for the said Parties, or their Assigns, to peruse and examine.

(101.) And, that once every quarter of a year To Account once a quarter.
at the least, during the said Copartnership: that is to say, At the Feasts of,
etc. or within twenty days next after every of the said Feasts (or oftener if
need shall be) upon request made by one of the said Parties unto the other of
them, they the said Parties shall join in reckoning together, and make and
deliver either of them to the other of them, to the best of their several
knowledge, true, perfect and plain Account or Accounts in writing, of, for, and
concerning the said principal Stock, and all other things in Partnership
between them, and of the Gains and Losses thereof, or thereby arising; and of
all Debts to them due or owing, and by and from them to be due and owing to any
person or persons, and of all the Receipts, Payments, Dealings and Doings, in
or concerning the said Brew House, or otherwise touching or concerning this
their joyn^ trade or dealings, without any voluntary concealment, withdrawing
or unjust deteyning of any part of the said principal Stock; or of any gain,
profit or Commodity, which should or ought in any wise come to the equal share
of the said Parties to these presents, by the true intent and meaning of these
presents.

(102.) And moreover, it is agreed between How Money ^ound in either of their
hands, etc. shall be disposed of.
the said Parties, that whatsoever sum or sums of Money, at or upon the foot of
any Account or Accounts, concerning this Copartnership, shall be found to be
remaining in the hands of any Clerk or Clerks, or in the hands of any of the
said Copartners, or of their Assignee or Assigns, not expended about the
business of the said joint trade and Copartnership, and before not accounted
for by the said Copartners, the same shall be forthwith, from time to time,
equally and indifferently divided between the said Copartners, part and part
like: or run and be continued in Stock, as the said Parties can best agree
concerning the same.

(103.) And it is Covenanted, granted and No advantage by Survivorship.
fully agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents, for them,
their Executors and Administrators respectively, that if it shall fortune that
either of the said Parties shall die or decease, during the time of this
Copartnership, before any separation or division shall be made between them of
the said Stock, and common Dealings (the other of them surviving) that in such
case no advantage by the survivor of the said Parties, in right, or in respect
of his Survivorship, shall hold or take place, or be by him or them challenged,
taken or demanded, but that such part and portion of, in, and to the said
principal Stock, and the gains and increase thereof, and also of the aforesaid
Messuages or Tenements, which is, or shall be due or belonging to such of the
said Parties so deceased, at the time of his death shall come and be paid to
the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the said deceased Copartner, in
such like, and in so large, simple and beneficial manner, as the same should or
ought to have grown due, to be paid or satisfied unto the said deceased
Copartner himself, if he had been living at the su^cease or determination of
this Copartnership.

(104.) And moreover it is covenanted and agreed Division to be made at the end
of the Copartnership.
by and between the said Parties to these presents, and either of the said
Parties for himself, his Executors and Administrators respectively covenanteth
and grants, to and with the other of them, his Executors and Administrators
by these presents: That within the space of six Months next after the end* or
giving over of this Copartnership, be it upon the exspiration of the said Term
of six Years, or by the decease of either of the said Parties, or otherwise
howsoever, the said Parties if they be living, or if either of them shall
happen to be deceased, then the Survivor of them, and the Executors or
Administrators of the deceased Copartner, shall consent and agree together, and
shall upon reasonable request to be made by the one to the other Four men to
appraise the goods.
of them, make choice and election of four indifferent men, whereof two shall
be chosen by the said A. P. his Executors or Administrators, and the other two
by the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, to make and set down an
indifferent Appraisement and Valuation of all and singular the Goods,
Implements and Chattels, which then shall be and remain in Partnership between
them (if otherwise between themselves they cannot agree therein) the Goods,
Coppers, Brewing Vessels, Implements and Household Stuff, which are expressed in
the Schedule* or Inventory annexed to the said Indenture of Lease only
excep^ed: and that upon and after Appraisement thereof, the said Copartners, or
the Surviving Copartner and Executors or Administrators of the deceased
Copartner (if either of them shall happen to die) shall make and cast Lots
between them, to take or refuse the said Goods so to be appraised, as the same
shall be valued: And that he or they of them, to whose Lot the said Goods shall
happen to fall, his or their Executors or Administrators, shall accept, receive
and take the same: And also shall within six Months then next following,
satisfy and pay, or cause to be satisfied Lots cast which of them shall have
the goods, and pay a Moiety to the other. Division of debts.
and paid, unto the other of them the said Copartners, his Executors or
Administrators, the Moiety or half Part of all such Money, as the said Goods
shall be valued and appraised at: at or within the Brew House before mentioned,
without any fraud or covin. And shall also then make equal division between
them of the Money then belonging to the said Copartnership, and also of the
debts then owing to the said Copartners, for or in respect of the said partible
Stock or Trade: and of all and singular other the things, now intended or
expressed by these presents to be partible and divided between the said Parties
to these presents in respect of the said Copartnership: or otherwise thereof to
deal and dispose as then they shall find to be most behooveful for them.

(105.) And further, that within convenient Another way of account and division.
time after the giving over, ending or determination of this Copartnership,
intended by these presents: the said Parties or the Survivor of them, his
Executors and Administrators shall and will upon reasonable request therefore
to be made, the one of them to the other of them [if they be both living] or if
either of them shall be deceased, then to the Executors and Administrators of
the said Party deceased, a true, plain, and perfect Account in writing of the
said whole Stock, Gains, Debts, Credits, and all other things which shall be
then in Copartnership between them, or belonging to the said partible Stock and
Trade, and within six Months after the end, determination or expiration of the
said Copartnership (be it howsoever) shall make an equal and indifferent
separation and division of all the said partible Stock, Gains, Debts, and other
the said premises, intended or expressed to be in Copartnership: and assign,
allot and allow, or cause to be assigned, allotted and allowed, one of them to
the other of them the said Parties, ^r if either of them be deceased, then to
the Executor^^, Administrators or Assigns of the deceased Copartner, the moiety
of the aforesaid Messuages or Tenements: and so much of the said whole part and
portion of the said Stock and Gains, and of all and singular other the
premises which are expressed or meant to be in Copartnership, as to any of the
said Parties shall be due and appertaining, or of right belonging for his port,
property and portion, of, and in the same, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents (first deducting and defalking so much as shall and
may satisfy all the Debts, which they the said Parties, or any of them shall
owe, or be indebted for, or in respect of the said partible trade or dealing.)

(106.) And that the Survivor of the said Survivor to gather in debts.
Parties, his Executors and Administrators, shall do his and their best
endeavor to collect and gather in all the Debts, which were or shall be owing
to the said Copartners, or any of them in respect of the said partible Stock or
Trade: and after defalcation made of so much either in goods, stock, money, or
otherwise, as shall suffice to satisfy and pay the Debts which shall be then
truly owing by them or either of them, in respect of the said partible Stock,
Trade or Dealing, shall as the said Debts, or any part thereof shall be had or
received, make payment of one half part thereof (necessary Charges in suing
for, and getting in of the same, being first deducted and allowed) to the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of such of the said Parties as shall first
happen to decease. To assign to Executors of Party dying part of the Debts, etc.


(107.) And, that the said Survivor, his Executors and Administrators, if it be
requested of him or them, for all the residue of Debts and things whatsoever,
which are or shall be owing or belonging to them or any of them, according to
the true meaning of these presents, in respect of the said intended
Copartnership, whereof the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the said
Copartner first deceased, as is aforesaid, shall not have had and received, his
and their part, shall and will make and deliver to the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of the first deceased Copartner, at his and their own
proper Cost and charges, such assignment, conveyance and assurance of such part
thereof, as to the Executors or Administrators of such Copartner so first
deceasing, in truth ought to belong, as by the Executors, Administrators or
Assigns of the said first deceased Partner, or the learned Counsel in the Law,
of them or any of them, shall be reasonably devised or advised.

(108.) And moreover, it is Covenanted, All things transacted to be in both
their Names.
granted and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents, That
all such Malt, Hops, Coals, Beer, and other thing and things whatsoever, which
at any time or times hereafter shall be bought or sold, used or employed, in or
about the said joint trade, or occupying, shall be had and done by the joint
consent of the said Parties (if the same conveniently may be done) and not
otherwise. And that all and every person and persons, that shall hereafter
become Debtor or Debtors, to or for the said principal Stocks, or any part
thereof, or for any Beer or other things that shall arise, come, grow or
increase thereby, or be sold out of, or for the same, or the proceed thereof,
shall be made debtors to both the said Parties for the same, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents: And that all Bonds, Bills,
Assurances and Securities, that shall be made or taken for any Beer, or other
Debts: or for or concerning the true or good service of any Clerk or Clerks, or
other Servant or Servants, which shall be put in trust to serve in the affairs
of the said Brewhouse, or joint Trade, shall be made and taken to both the said
Parties, and in both their Names, and shall be delivered and safely kept to
both their uses: And, that neither of the said Parties, without the consent of
the other of Acquittances.
them, his Executors or Administrators, shall make, seal or deliver any
Acquittance or Acquittances, Release or Releases, Discharge or Discharges
whatsoever, to any person or persons, their Executors or Administrators (which
is, or shall be Debtor or Debtors) for the said stock, or any part or parcel
thereof, or for any Money thereunto to be added or put to the increase thereof,
or that thereupon, or by means thereof shall arise, come or grow, of, for, or
concerning any Bond or Assurance, as aforesaid, to be taken in the Names of the
said Parties for the said partible use, or for any thing appertaining, or which
shall appertain to the said Copartnership, whereby to defeat or defraud the
other Copartner, his Executors or Administrators, of his or their just part, or
of any part thereof, or for any lesser or smaller sum or sums of Money, than the
person or persons so indebted shall truly owe, or stand charged to pay
(reasonable Compositions and Abatements, of, and for Debts, due and to be due,
owing and appertaining to the said Parties, in respect of their said joint
trade, for leaking, or return of musty Beer, or naughty Beer, and such like, to
be made without fraud or covin, and no further disadvantage or profit of the
one Copartner than the other, his Executors or Administrators only excepted)
But that either of them the said Parties shall do his best endeavor for the
Recovery and getting in of the same, and after the same so recovered, shall
deliver the moiety thereof (all reasonable costs and charges deducted,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents) to the other of
them, his Executors or Administrators.

(109.) And forasmuch as the said Parties to Determination of Controversies.
these presents, are minded and intended to be Brewers, and the knowledge of
all matters concerning the said Trade and Mystery, is best acquainted to men of
the same Trade, they the said Parties do Covenant, conclude and agree, for
them, their Executors and Administrators by these presents respectively, that
if at any time or times hereafter, any controversy or debate shall happen to
arise or grow between them the said Parties, for or touching the premises, or
any part thereof, or any thing herein contained or specified, that then and so
often the said Parties, their Executors and Administrators, and every of them,
shall show the cause of such controversy (before any suit at Law shall be
commenced touching the same) unto four honest and discreet men of the same
Trade or Mystery, whom they shall nominate, appoint and make choice of, to hear
and determine such variances, doubts and controversies as shall happen to arise
between them: And shall stand to, abide, perform and keep all and every such
award, order, final end and judgment, as in that behalf shall be set down by
the said four Men, so to be nominated, chosen and appointed between them, to
have the hearing and determination of such controversies, so as they do order,
judge and give up their award thereupon in writing unto the said Parties
subject thereunto, within forty days next after such reference, as aforesaid,
made unto them.

In witness, etc.

Another form of Copartnership between a Pewterer and another person, who puts
in the Stock, and the Pewterer manageth the Trade.
(110.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of
etc. Pewterer, of the other part: Witnesses, That whereas the said A. B. for
and in respect of the love and good affection The Stock put in by one; and how
to be employed.
which he bears unto the said C. D. and for his better preferment and
advantage in his trade and profession, before the ensealing and delivery
hereof, has disbursed and delivered unto the said C. D. the sum of Three
hundred pounds of lawful Moneys of England, to be used, laid out and employed
by the said C. D. in the said Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer, in buying
of Pewter, and other things needful to be used in and about the said Art or
Trade, and in duying, casting, soldering, vending and selling of all such
Wares, Goods and Merchandises (incident to the said Art, Trade or Profession of
a Pewterer) as by the said A. B. and C. D. shall be thought meet and convenient
in a Shop for that purpose, to be made ready at the cost and charges of the
said C. D. in or about the now Message, Tenement or Yard of the said C. D.
situate and being in, etc. from the day of the Date of these presents, unto
the full end and term of Ten years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, if the said C. D. do and shall so long live.

(111.) In consideration whereof, the said C. To do his endeavor to advance
the Trade.
D. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, grant and
agree, to and with the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner and form following:
that is to say, That he the said C. D. shall and will at all times hereafter,
and from time to time during the said term of ten years (if the said C. D.
shall so long live) diligently and carefully employ himself, and do his best
endeavor, to the uttermost of his power and skill, in and about the buying,
selling, casting, soldering and finishing of all such Works, Wares, Goods and
Merchandises, as are incident or belonging to the Art, Trade and Profession
aforesaid, and in doing, executing and performing of every other thing which
shall be necessary to be done and put in ure, in, about or concerning the said
Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer, for the raising of Gain, and, as much
as in him lies, for preventing of Loss.

(112.) And, that all such gains, profit and Gains and increase divided.
increase, as shall come, grow, arise, or be had gotten or received by the said
C. D. his Servants or Assigns, by reason or means of using or exercising the
said Trade or Profession of a Pewterer, or by buying, selling, casting or
soldering of Pewter, new or old, or any other Wares, Goods and Merchandises
belonging to the Art, Trade and Profession aforesaid, shall be equally shared,
parted and divided in halves between the said parties, their Executors and
Assigns, in such manner and form following, as is hereafter mentioned: that is
to say, The said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall have and
receive the one moiety or half part thereof: and the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall have and receive the other moiety or half part
thereof.

(113.) And, for the better and more effectual Neither to take from the Stock
without the others consent.
proceeding in the said affairs and businesses before specified, to the mutual
benefit and advantage of the said Parties to these presents, their several
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, either of the said Parties for himself,
and for his several Executors and Administrators respectively, does Covenant,
promise and grant to and with the other of them, his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, in manner and form following: that is to say,
That they, nor either of them, shall not at any time or times, dating the term
of years before specified, withdraw, or take any sum or sums of Money, or any
Goods or Merchandises whatsoever, out of, or from the said Stock of, etc.
abovementioned, or out of, or from any sum or sums of Money, which shall be
thereunto hereafter added or put, without the consent and agreement of the
other of them, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns first thereunto had and
obtained, and that such of them, as by such consent as is aforesaid, shall at
any time or times take any thing out of, or from the said Stock, or other sum
or sums of Money thereunto to be added or put, or the proceed thereof, shall
immediately enter into a Book for that purpose to be kept, the sum or quantity
by him or them so taken out, and the day and year when they took the same, to
the end that the other of the said Parties, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, may take notice thereof.

(114.) And also, that all such sum and sums Charges and losses equally to be
divided.
of Money as shall be from time to time hereafter, during the said term or space
of ten years, be laid out or disbursed by the said A. B. and C. D. or either of
them, in, about or concerning the buying and providing of Coals, or any other
fiting, to be spent only in and about the Trade and Profession aforesaid, and
that all such charges and expenses, as shall be expended or laid forth, in and
about the keeping and maintaining of any Servant or Servants, Horse or Horses
to be employed only about the Art, trade or profession aforesaid, for the
equal benefit and advantage of the said Parties to these presents, shall be
equally paid, laid out and disbursed, by and between the said A. B. and C. D.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, part and part like: And, that
losses and damages which shall happen to come or grow, either by evil or bad
Debtors, or by any other casualty whatsoever (so as it be not through the
wilful negligence or deceit of either of the said Parties, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns) and all Taxations, Impositions, and other Duties, to
be charged and imposed upon the said Parties, or either of them, or either of
their Executors or Assigns, by reason or means of this their joint trade or
dealing; shall be equally and indifferently born, paid and discharged, by and
between the said, A. B. and C. D. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
out of their several parts of the gains and profits, hereafter from time to
time to be gotten, by means of using the Art; Trade or Profession aforesaid,
part and part like.

(115.) And also, that they the said A. B. and To keep true Books of Account.
C. D. and either of them for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, does Covenant, grant and agree, to and with the other o^
them, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, in manner
and form following: that is to say, That they and either of them, shall and
will, so near as they may or can* from time to time, during the term of years
beforementioned, keep, or cause to be kept, just and perfect Books of Account
and Reckoning, in writing, to the uttermost of their several knowledge, of all
the Payments, Receipts and Debts, to or from them due or owing, and of the
Gains, Losses, and all other things touching or concerning this their joint
trade or dealings: which Books shall be extant from time Free access to them.
to time, and at all convenient times, for the Parties aforesaid, or their
Assigns, to peruse and examine at their and either of their free wills and
pleasures: And that once in every quarter of Once every quarter to account
together.
a year (upon request to be made by one of the said Parties to the other of
them) during the said term: that is to say, at the Feasts of, etc. or oftener if
need shall be, they the said Parties shall join in Reckoning and Account
together, and make and deliver up either of them to the other of them, to the
best of their several knowledge, true, plain and perfect Account or Accounts in
writing, and concerning the said sum or stock of, etc. and all such other sum
and sums of Money, as shall be thereunto hereafter added or put, and of all
other things in joint trade and dealing between them, and of all Gains and
Losses arising thereby, and all Debts to them due or owing, or by or from them
due or owing: and of all Receipts, Payments, doings or dealings, in, or
concerning their said joint trade or dealing, without any voluntary
concealment, withdrawing, or unjust detaining of any of the said principal
Stock, or of any other sum or sums of Money thereunto to be put, or of any
gains, profit or Commodity, which should, or in any wise ought, to arise or
come to the equal uses of the said Parties, by the true intent and meaning of
these presents.

(116.) And, that upon every such Account and Accounts, so from time to time,
in form aforesaid, The clear Gains to be divided upon the account.
to be made and passed, all the clear gains, profit and increase which shall be
found upon the foot of any such Account or Accounts, shall be immediately
shared, parted and divided in equal halves between the said Parties, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns: that is to say, The said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall have and receive the one moiety, or
half part thereof, and the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
shall have and receive the other moiety or half part thereof.

(117.) And it is further Covenanted and agreed, No advantage by Survivor.
by and between the said A. B. and C. D. And either of them does severally and
respectively Covenant, grant and agree, for himself, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to and with the other of them, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, That if it shall fortune either
of the said Parties to die, or depart this life, during the term of years
above-specified, before any separation or division shall be made between them,
of their said joint dealings (the other of them surviving) that in such case no
advantage by the Survivor of the said Parties, his Executors or Administrators,
in right or in respect of his Survivorship shall hold or take place, or be by
him or them taken, challenged or demanded, but that such part and portion of,
in, and to the said principal Stock, and the gains and increase thereof, which
is, or shall be due or belonging to such of the said Parties so deceasing, at
the time of his death, shall come and be paid to the Executors, Administrators
or Assigns of the said deceased Party, in such like, and so large, ample and
beneficial manner and form, as the same ought to have grown due, or been paid
or satisfied, unto the said deceased Party himself, if he had been living, at
the time of the surceasing or determination of the said Copartnership.

(118.) And the said C. D. for himself, his To be faithful.
Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said A.
B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, in manner and
form following: that is to say: That he the said C. D. shall and will at all
times hereafter, during the term of years before specified, or continuance of
this Copartnership, deal uprightly, truly and faithfully with the said A. B.
his Executors; Administrators or Assigns in all respects, touching and
concerning the using and exercising of the Art, Trade or Profession aforesaid.

(119.) And further, that he the said C. D. Not to take up, or lend upon Credit
without the others consent.
shall not at any time or times hereafter, during the term of years
before-specified; or continuance of this Copartnership, take up upon Credit, or
for Time, any Goods, Wares or Merchandises to be used or employed in, or about
the said Art, Trade, or Profession of a Pewterer, without the consent and
agreement of the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, first
had and obtained in that behalf: Neither that he the said C. D. or his Assigns,
shall at any time or times hereafter, during the term of years aforesaid, or
continuance of this Copartnership, lend or credit out to any person or persons
whatsoever, any Wares, Goods or Merchandises, which shall belong or be incident
to the said Art, Trade, or Profession of a Pewterer, and shall be belonging to
their said joint dealings, without the like consent and agreement of the said
A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns first had and obtained in that
behalf.

(120.) And furthermore, that he the said C. The final Account.
D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns; shall and will, at the end and
expiration of the said term of ten years, or other sooner determination of this
Copartnership, not only make or cause to be made unto the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, a true, just, perfect and general Account
and Reckoning in writing, of his whole Dealing, buying and selling, whilst he
shall have the use of the said sum or Stock of three hundred pounds, or of any
other sum or sums of Money thereunto, by the said A. B. to be added or put: and
also of all gains, profit and increase that shall come and arise, by reason of
using and exercising the said Art, trade and profession of a Pewterer, and not
before accounted for and satisfied: But also upon the Deliver up Tools and
Stock, and half the gal^s.
same Account making, shall and will well and truly deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all
such Moulds and Tools, as shall be then belonging to their said joint Trade:
And shall and will then also truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said A.
B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said sum or stock of Three
hundred pounds, and all such other sums of Money as shall be thereunto added or
put by the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, and the moiety, or one
half of all the gains, profit and increase that shall be so risen or grown by
using the said Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer, and which shall not
before that time have been accounted for, and satisfied for, as aforesaid.

(121.) And moreover, that he the said C. D. To instruct the other in the Trade.
shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time, during the
continuance of the said Copartnership, at and upon the reasonable request of
the said A. B. after the best manner that he can or may, to the uttermost of
his knowledge and skill, teach and instruct the said A. B. perfectly to do and
execute every thing, which in any wise belongs to his said Art, Trade or
Profession of a Pewterer.

(122.) Provided always, and it is Covenanted, To give over the Copartnership
upon warning.
granted and mutually agreed upon, by and between the said Parties to these
presents. And the said C. D. for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
does Covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said A. B. his Executors and
Administrators by these presents, That if it shall happen at any time
hereafter, during the said term of ten years, that the said A. B. shall grow in
dislike, or shall be minded to give over and discontinue his joint trading and
dealing with the said C. D. And that the said A. B. do or shall give one half
years warning, of such his determination and purpose, unto the said C. D. in
the presence of two or three Witnesses at the least: That then and from
thenceforth, all the Covenants, Covenants to be void.
Grants and Agreements herein contained, on the part and behalf of the said A.
B. his Executors and Administrators, to be performed and kept, shall cease,
determine and be utterly void, to all intents* constructions and purposes in
the Law whatsoever. And that then also, he the said C. D. shall and will, at
the end of the said To account.
six Months, so limited, to be given for warning, as aforesaid, make and give
up unto the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators, such a true, just,
perfect and general account, as is abovementioned: and also, upon and after the
said Account made, shall and will well and truly deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all
such Moulds, and other Tools, as shall be then belonging to their said joint
trade and dealing, and shall and will then also truly pay, or cause to be paid,
unto the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, To pay the stock, and half
the profits.
the said sum or stock of three hundred pounds, and all such other sums as
shall be thereunto hereafter added or put, by the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, and the moiety, or one half of all the gains, profit
and increase that shall be so arisen and grown, by reason of using the said
Art, trade or profession of a Pewterer: and which shall not before that time
have been accounted for and satisfied, as aforesaid.

In witness, etc.

CAP. IV. Containing several forms of Instruments used between Merchants and
Traders; at, and after the dissolution of Copartnership.
An Indenture containing several Covenants upon the separation of Copartnership.
(1.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between Recital of former Copartnership, and
Debts arising thereby.
A. B. of the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Whereas the said Parties
to these presents have been of late Copartners together in the Trade of, etc.
which they used, and by reason of the same joint trade and dealing, diverse
Debts have been incurred and made, and are yet still due and owing upon the
sale of Goods and Wares: and also the said Parties are, and stand engaged and
indebted at present unto diverse of their Creditors, in diverse and sundry sums
of Money.

(2.) And whereas also, the said Parties, Recital of the separation.
upon diverse good considerations, them thereunto moving, have concluded and
agreed to separate themselves from the said Copartnership, and joint trade and
dealing together, and he the said A. B. is contented and pleased, for the
consideration herein after mentioned, to assign and set over unto the said C.
D. all the Debts which are yet un-answered and un-payed, due and owing unto
them, and likewise the said C. D. has undertaken to discharge and pay all the
Debts, sum and sums of Money, which they the said Parties, or either of them, do
owe at this present, upon and in respect of their said joint trade to their
said Creditors.

(3.) Now witnesses these presents, That the Assignment by one to the other of
Debts.
said A. B. does, for the consideration hereafter in these presents expressed,
by these presents, as much as in him lies, grant, assign and set over unto the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and singular such
Debts and sums of Money as are owing to them jointly, or either of them
severally, for or concerning their trade or Copartnership aforesaid, and also
all his right, title, interest, property and benefit, of, in and to the same
Debts, and every of them, and also all and singular Bills, Bonds, Specialties.
Leases and Books, for and concerning the said Debts, and the late Copartnership
between them: All which Debts are mentioned and expressed in a certain
Schedule, interchangably subscribed with the hands of the said A. B. and C. D.
as by the said Schedule more at large appears. To have, hold and enjoy all
and every the said Debts, Books and Specialties unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his and their own proper use and
benefit, without any manner of account or reckoning, to be thereof yielded,
made or given unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
any of them.

(4.) And the said A. B. does by these presents Power given to get in the Debts
assigned.
give and grant to the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
full power and authority in the name of the said A. B. to ask, levy, recover
and receive, by all such lawful ways and means, as shall be thought requisite
by the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all and singular
the said Deb^s and sums of Money, expressed in the said Schedule, for and to the
only use and behoof of the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, without any account to be made, yielded, had or given for the same:
And that he the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and
will at all times hereafter, quietly permit and suffer the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in his, their, or any of their Name of
Names, to sue for, recover, take, and enjoy to his and their own use, without
any Account to be rendered, all the aforesaid Debts and sums of Money, and every
of them, and every part thereof in the said Schedule mentioned, by all such
lawful ways and means as to him or them shall be thought meet, without any let,
trouble, interruption, acquittance, release or discharge, of, or by the said A.
B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or by his or their means, assent,
default or procurement.

(5.) And further, that if the said A. B or his To make satisfaction for Debts
discovered to be released, etc.
Assigns, or any person or persons, by force or virtue of any power or
authority derived from him or them, have at any time formerly, or since the --
day of, etc. received, released or discharged any of the said Debts or sums of
Money expressed in the said Schedule, or otherwise alienated them, other than
such Releases and Discharges as have been by the consent of the said C. D. that
then upon notice given by the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, to the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators, he the said A. B.
his Executors or Administrators shall within thirty days, next after such
notice and lawful warning given to the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators, satisfy and recompense the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, of, and for the same, without fraud or covin.

(6.) And, that he the said A. B. his Executors Not to hinder recovery of the
Debts assigned.
or Administrators shall not at any time or times hereafter, willingly do or
suffer any act or thing whereby to let or hinder the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, of, or in the recovery, getting in or obtaining the
said Debts, or any of them, without the consent of the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first had and obtained in writing.

(7.) And moreover, That the said A. B. his To make further Letters of Attorney.
Executors and Administrators, shall and will, upon reasonable request to him
or them made by the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, make,
seal and deliver to him, or them, such other sufficient Letter and Letters of
Attorney, for the Recovery and getting in of the said Debt and Debts, and sum
and sums of Money, as by the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or his or their Counsel Learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
advised, devised or required: which said Letter and Letters of Attorney, and
advise touching the same, is to be at the proper charges of the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns.

(8.) In consideration whereof, the said C. D. To procure releases from the
Creditors.
for him, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators, in manner and form
following: that is to say, That he the said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and will at or before the -- day of, etc. procure and
obtain unto and for the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators sufficient
general Releases, and other discharges in the Law, all those their Creditors
whose Names are written in the said Schedule here-unto annexed.

(9.) And also, that he the said C. D. his Executors To save harmless against
Debts, etc.
and Administrators, shall and will at all times for ever hereafter, save, and
keep harmless and indempnified the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators,
against all and every person and persons whatsoever, which they the said
Parties to these presents, or either of them, are indebted unto, touching or
concerning their said Copartnership: and of and from all such Actions, Suits,
Costs, Damages, Charges, Troubles, Judgments, Executions and Demands
whatsoever, as shall from time to time hereafter arise, or be had or procured
against the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of his or
their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels, or any of them, or
any part thereof, by any manner of person or persons whatsoever, touching their
said Copartnership, for or concerning any Debt or Debts, by them, or any of
them owing, or for or upon any Bill, Bond, Specialty, Promise, Contract or
Reckoning touching the same, or any of them: and also of and from all such
Costs and charges, losses and damages, as shall be awarded or judged against
the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, for or upon any Suit or
Nonsuit, which hereafter shall happen to come or arise, for or concerning the
said Debts, or any of them, or any part thereof.

In witness, etc.

Another form, where one assigns his part to the other.
(10.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. Recital of tho Copartnership.
B. on the one part, and C. D. on the other part, Whereas the said A. B. and C.
D. by their Indenture of Copartnership, bearing date, etc. for the
consideration in the said Indenture specified, did condescend, conclude and
agree, to become and continue joint dealers and Copartners together in the Art
and Mystery of, etc. in buying, selling and uttering of, etc. and all other
Wares, Commodities and Merchandises, belonging or commonly used to and with the
said Trade, for the term of, etc. from the Feast Day of, etc. if the said A. B.
and C. D. should so long live, and unless they the said A. B. and C. D. should
otherwise agree together, as by the said Indenture of Copartnership, relation
being thereunto had, more fully and at large it does and may appear.

(11.) And, whereas the said A. B. and C. D. The dissolution of it.
by their mutual consent, free will and agreement, and for very good causes and
considerations, them thereunto moving, have thought fit to d^ssolve and break
off the said Copartnership, and from henceforth to become no Copartners
together.

(12.) Now this Indenture witnesses, That The one assigns his part to the
other.
it is Covenanted, concluded and fully agreed, by and between the said Parties,
for and concerning the Premises in manner and form following: And the said A.
B. for and in consideration of a certain sum of Money, to him in hand paid at
the ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said C. D. the Receipt
whereof he the said A. B. does hereby acknowledge, Has granted, assigned,
set-over, remised and released, and by these presents does grant, assign,
set-over, remise and release unto the said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators, all and every such part, portion and share, as he the said A.
B. has, may, might or ought to have, of, in and to all and singular the Goods,
Chattels, Household Stuff, Wares, Merchandises, Debts, Books, Obligations,
Specialties, Bills obligatory, sum and sums of Money, and other things
whatsoever incident or belonging to the said late Copartnership or joint
dealing, in any manner of wise. And also all his Estate, Interest, Right and
Demand therein, or in or to any part thereof together, with all such benefit
and commodity, as he the said A. B. might, or ought to have had taken or
received, upon, for or by reason of the said Bills, Bonds, Books, Obligations
or Specialties, belonging or relating to the said Copartnership.

(13.) And the said A. B. does by these presents, To enjoy.
for himself, his Executors and Administrators, Covenant and agree to and with
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to have, keep, receive and enjoy, to his and their own use, as well all and
every the Goods, Chattels, Household Stuff, Wares and Merchandises, belonging to
the said late Copartnership, as also all and every such Debts, Duties, sum and
sums of Money, as shall be had, received, obtained or gotten by virtue of the
said Books, Bills, Bonds, Obligations or Specialties, or any of them, or any
Suit, Judgment, Process or Execution thereupon to be commenced, pursued, had or
taken, without the let, trouble or contradiction of the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, and without any account thereof, or of
any part thereof, to be rendered or yielded to the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them.

(14.) And further, that he the said A. B. has Not to receive or release Debts.
not received heretofore, any sum or sums of Money belonging to the said late
Copartnership, other than such as are already allowed upon account, nor has
released or discharged, nor that he, his Executors or Administrators, shall or
will hereafter receive, release, discharge or make frustrate, all, or any of
the said Debts, Duties, sum or sums of Money, Bonds, Specialties or Demands, due
or to be due by virtue of the said Bills, Books, Specialties, Obligations or
Agreements, or any of them (other than such as are allowed upon account as
aforesaid) without the consent or agreement of the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, first had and obtained in writing under his or their
hands.

(15.) Nor shall voluntarily or willingly Not to discharge, etc. any Action.
discontinue, disavow, suffer to be nonsuited, or make any retraxit, or
otherwise discharge, hinder or delay any Action, Suit or Plaint whatsoever,
which he the said C D now has, or shall at any time commence, presecute or
pursue in the Name of the said A. B. or in the Names of the said A. B. and C.
D. for the recovery or obtaining of the Debts, Duties, sum or sins of Money, or
Demands, or any of them, belonging to the said joint trade or dealing.

(16). But that he the said A. B. his Executors, To justify Actions brought.
Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, upon the reasonable request, and at the Costs of the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, justify, maintain, avow and allow all
and every such Actions, Suits, Plaints and Arrests, as he the said C. D his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall conunence, sue or prosecute, or
cause to be commenced, sued or prosecuted for the recovery, levying, obtaining,
or getting in of all or any the Debts, and sum and sums of Money belonging to
the said late Copartnership: ratifying and confirming all and every lawful
acts, matters and things whatsoever, which he the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns shall commence or prosecute, for the recovery,
getting in and obtaining of the said Debts, Duties, sum and sums of Money, or
any of them.

(17.) And the said C. D. for himself, his Executors To save harmless, etc.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, well and sufficiently acquit and discharge, and save harmless
and indempnified the said A. B. his, etc. of and from all and all manner of
Troubles, Damages, Arrests, Costs, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, which
shall or may arise or happen to be had, recovered or obtained against the said
A. B. for, by reason or means of any Action, Suit, Process or Plaint, which the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns now has, or shall or may
hereafter commence or prosecute, or cause to be commenced or prosecuted,
against any person or persons, for the recovery, getting in or obtaining any of
the said Debts, Duties or Demands aforesaid, or for any Debts, Duties, sum or
sums of Money, or any thing whatsoever touching the said Copartner-ship, now
owing, or which shall hereafter be due or payable by the said C. D. and A. B.
or either of them, to any person or persons whatsoever, for or by reason of any
Wares taken-up upon Credit by him the said C. D. and not charged upon the said
partible account, wherewith or whereby the said A. B. shall or may be charged
or chargable.

In witness whereof, etc.

Another, being a Partition of Debts between a Copartner, and the Executors of
the other.
(18.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. Recital of the former
Partnership.
of the one part, and C. D. of, etc. Son and Heir of E. D. late Citizen of
London deceased, and Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said E. D.
on the other part: Whereas the said A. B. and E. D. in the life time of the
said E. D. did deal and trade together, as joint Partners and occupyers in the
Trade of, etc. and other Merchandises, and in buying, selling and
Merchandising, and by reason thereof diverse and sundry sum and sums of Money, by
diverse and several persons, became due and payable to them jointly, as Debts
jointly owing unto them the said A. B. and C. D. And whereas the said A. B. and
E. D. in the life time of the said E. D. by agreement between them, did sever,
part, and divide between them diverse Debts, due and owing Debts formerly
divided and received.
unto them in such manner and form, as in and by a certain pair of Indentures,
bearing Date, etc. [and certain Schedules thereunto annexed] made between the
said A. B. of the one part, and E. D. of the other part, more plainly it does
and may appear: since which time diverse of the said Debts have been received
and compounded for, as well by the said A. B. and E. D. in the life time of the
said E D. as also by the said C. D. and A. B. since the decease of the said E.
D.

(19.) And whereas diverse and sundry sums of Recital of remaining Debts unpaid.
Money remained then, and are yet, unpaid and compounded for: And for the better
recovery thereof, and for the continuance of Peace and amity between them, They
the said A. B. and C. D. have equally divided those Debts yet remaining unpaid
or compounded for: as in and by two Division of them.
several Schedules thereof made (the one called the first Schedule, wherein the
Debts, Duties, sum and sums of Money and Demands, yet due and unsatisfied now
allowed and appointed unto the said C. D. are contained and mentioned) and the
other called the second Schedule, wherein the Debts, Duties, sum and sums of
Money, and Demands yet due and unsatisfied, and now appointed unto the said A.
B. are likewise contained and mentioned, as by the said Schedules hereunto
annexed, it does and may appear.

(20.) Now this Indenture witnesses, That it is Covenanted, granted, concluded
and fully agreed by and between the said Parties for and concerning the
Premises, in manner and form Assignment of Debts by A. B. to C. D.
following: And first, the said A. B. for him, his Executors and
Administrators, does by these presents grant, assign, and set-over, remise and
release unto him the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, all and every
the Debts, Obligations, Bills obligatory, and several sum and sums of Money in
the said Schedule annexed to this present Indenture, called the first Schedule,
mentioned and expressed, and all his part, portion, interest, right and demand
therein, or thereto, with all such benefit and commodity, as the said A. B. can
or may lawfully take or receive, upon, or by reason of the said Obligations,
Bills* Debts or Demands, contained or mentioned in the said first Schedule,
allotted as aforesaid unto the said C. D.

(21.) And further the said A. B. does by these Makes assignee Attorney to sue.
presents, constitute and appoint, in his place and stead put the said C. D.
during his life, and after his death, the Executors or Administrators of the
said C. D. to be lawful Attorney or Attorneys irrevocable, for and in the name
of the said A. B. during his life, and after his decease, for and in the name
of his Executors and Administrators, to ask, take, sue for, recover and
receive, all and every the said Debts in the said first Schedule mentioned, of
the particular Parties therein mentioned, or any of them, their or any of their
Executors or Administrators.

(22.) And the said A. B. for him, his Executors Power given to recover.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said C. D. during his life, and to and for the Executors or
Administrators of the said C. D. after his death, at the only Costs and Charges
of the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, in the Name of the said A.
B. during the life of the said A. B. and after his death in the Name or Names
of the Executors or Administrators of the said A. B. to commence and prosecute*
any Action or Actions, Suits or Plaints, for the recovery and getting in of all
or any the Debts, Duties or Demands in the said annexed Schedule, called the
first Schedule, mentioned or contained against all or any the Debtors therein
named, their or any of their Executors or Administrators, and the same at the
Cost and charges of the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, to
prosecute and pursue, until Judgment and Execution thereupon shall be had and
taken. And all such sum and sums of Money, that shall upon, or by reason of any
Suit or Suits, Plaint or Plaints, happen to be recovered, had, levied and
received, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said C. D. his Executors
and Administrators, to have and take to his and their own use and uses, without
any account to be thereof yielded or rendered to the said A. B. his Executors
and Administrators, or any of them: ratifying, and by these presents confirming
all and every action and actions, act and acts, thing and things, which the
said C. D. his Executors or Administrators shall lawfully make, do, commit or
execute, or cause to be made, done, committed or executed in and about the
premises, for and touching the said Debts in the said first Schedule mentioned.

(23.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors Not to Release.
and Administrators, does by these presents Covenant and grant to and with the
said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, That he the said A. B. has not
heretofore released or discharged, nor that he, his Executors or
Administrators, shall or will hereafter, release or discharge, all or any the
Debts, Duties, sum or sums of Money, or Demands in the said Schedule, called the
first Schedule mentioned, without the consent or agreement of the said C. D.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first had and Not to discontinue any
Action.
obtained in writing, under his or their hands in that behalf. Nor voluntarily
or willingly discontinue, disavow, or be Nonsuited in, or make any retraxit or
other discharge to hinder or delay any Action, Suit or Plaint which the said C.
D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at any time commence, sue or
prosecute for the Recovery, getting in or obtaining the said Debts and sums of
Money in the said Schedule, called the first Schedule mentioned and contained,
or any of them.

(24.) But, that he the said A. B. his Executors To justify Actions.
and Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, justify, maintain, avow and allow, all and every such Actions,
Suits, Plaints and Process, which he the said C. D. his, etc. shall at any time
hereafter, commence, sue forth or prosecute (at the cost and charges of the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns) against any person or
persons, for the recovery, or getting in of all or any of the said Debts, and
sums of Money in the said Schedule, called the first Schedule, annexed to these
presents contained and expressed.

(25.) And the said C. D. for him, his Executors To discharge, etc. the other.
and Administrators, does by these presents Covenant and grant to and with the
said A. B. his Executors and Administrators: That he the said C. D. shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, sufficiently acquit,
discharge and save harmless the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, of, and from all and all manner of damages, troubles, suits,
arrests, costs and charges whatsoever, which shall be taxed upon, or happen to
be had, brought, recovered or obtained against the said A. B. his Executors or
Administrators, Goods, Chattels or Lands, for or by reason of any Action, Suit,
Plaint, Process, Judgment, Arrest or Execution, which the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall hereafter bring, commence, pursue or
prosecute, or cause to be brought, commenced, pursued or prosecuted against any
person or persons in the said Schedule, called the first Schedule, mentioned or
contained.

(26.) And the said C. D. for the consideration Assignment of Debts by C. D. to
A. B.
aforesaid, does grant, assign and set-over, remise and release unto the said
A. B. his Executors and Administrators, all and every the Debts, Obligations
and Bills obligatory, and several sums of Money, Duties and Demands, in the said
Schedule, called the second Schedule (annexed to this present Indenture, and
allotted to the said A. B. as aforesaid contained and expressed) and all
Writings and Specialties whatsoever, touching, or in any wise concerning the
same, or any of them, and all his part, portion, interest and demand, of, in
and to the same, or any part or parcel thereof, together with all such benefit
and advantage, as the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, can or may
lawfully have, take or receive, upon or by reason of any of the said Debts,
Duties or Demands, contained or expressed in the said Schedule, called the
second Schedule, annexed to these presents: And that all and every the said
several sums of Money in the said Schedule, called the second Schedule,
mentioned and contained, shall be, and remain fully and wholly, and to the sole
and proper use of the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
without the let, trouble or contradiction of the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, and without any account to be rendered or yielded
unto the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for or in respect
of the same.

(27.) And the said C. D. does Covenant, promise Not to release the Debts, etc.
and grant, for himself, his Executors and Administrators, to and with the said
A. B. his Executors and Administrators by these presents: That neither the said
E. D. in his life time, nor the said C. D. since his decease, have not
heretofore received, released or discharged: nor that the said C. D. shall or
will at any times hereafter, receive, release or discharge the said Debts,
Duties, sum or sums of Money, and Demands, or any of them in the said Schedule,
called the second Schedule mentioned, and allotted unto the said A. B. for his
part, as aforesaid, of the premises, without the consent of the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first thereunto had and obtained, in
writing under his or their hands: nor shall or Not to delay any Suit.
will voluntarily or willingly discharge, hinder or delay any Action, Suit or
Plaint whatsoever, which the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall at any time hereafter commence, sue or prosecute for the
Recovery, getting in, or obtaining of all or any the said Debts, or sum or sums
of Money, or Demands in the said Schedule, called the second Schedule, mentioned
or contained.

(28.) And whereas the said Debt Books, Covenant to deliver up the Bonds etc.
and show forth the Shop-Books.
and other Books, Bills, Bonds, Obligations and Specialties, wherein the Debts,
Duties and Demands beforementioned, and wherein or whereby any Wares or
Merchandises were sold or delivered to the persons in the said last mentioned
Schedule named or contained, are now in the hands or possession of the said C.
D: He the said C. D. does Covenant for him, his Executors, and Administrators,
with the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that he the said
C. D. his Executors or Administrators, shall and will within two Months after
the da^e of these presents, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said A.
B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, safe, whole and uncancelled, and
unde^aced, all and every the Bonds obligatory, Bills and Specialties herein
beforementioned, to be assigned unto the said A. B. and whereby any of the
Debts in the said second Schedule mentioned, are or shall become due and
payable: and shall and will also upon reasonable request unto him the said C.
D. his Executors or Administrators to be made by the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, produce and show forth unto the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or to, or before such person or persons
as he or they shall appoint or direct: The said Books, called the Debt Books,
and all other Books and Writings which remains in the hands, custody or
possession of the said C. D. wherein the said Debts, Duties and Demands, or any
of them (contained in the said Schedule, called the second Schedule) are
contained, or whereby or wherein any Wares or Merchandises, touching or
concerning the same, which were sold or delivered to any person or persons in
the said second Schedule contained, an mentioned or does appear, whereby the
said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, may have and take the
view, benefit and use thereof, to be showed or produced forth in any Court or
Courts of Record, or elsewhere, for the declaring, proving or manifesting of
any the Debts in the said Schedule, called the second Schedule, contained, or
for any other reasonable occasion whatsoever.

In witness, etc.

Another, being also a Partition of Debts and Goods: after the dissolution of
the Copartnership.
(29.) THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. Recital of their dissolution of
the Copartnership.
of the one part, and C. D. of the other part: Whereas the said Parties for and
by the space of certain years now last past, have had, held and occupied a
partible Stock, and have continued Copartners in the Trade of buying, selling
and retayling Linen Cloth, and other Merchandises: and now have resolved and
agreed together from henceforth, absolutely to all intents, to dissolve,
determine and break off the said Copartnership, of, and in the Premises. And
have further concluded and agreed to divide Their intention to divide the Stock.
the said partible Stock, and all Debts and Credits thereof, and thereby
arising and being: and each of them to hold and retain his several part and
proportion, to and by himself, in severalty, to his own use and profit, and not
in common or jointly,

(30.) It is therefore Covenanted and agreed, Covenant to dissolve.
by and between the said Parties to these presents, and either of them for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with
the other of them, his Executors and Administrators by these presents, in
manner and form following: that is to say, That the said Copartnership, and all
other Partnerships and joint tradings, now, or at any time before the Date of
these presents, had, used or exercised by and between the said Parties to these
presents do, and shall from henceforth, immediately cease, determine and
clearly end and have no further continuance, or being to any effect or purpose
whatsoever: any Covenant, Covenants, or other matter, agreement, promise or
thing to the contrary thereof, had, made, concluded or promised by and between
the said Parties to these presents in any wise notwithstanding: And that all
such former Covenants, promises and agreements as have been passed or made, by
or between the said Parties, touching any further continuance or prolonging of
any such Copartnership, or Partnerships, to be had or holden between the said
Parties, shall, by virtue of these presents, be deemed and adjudged to be void
and of none effect.

(31.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors The one to have all the
Goods and ready Money.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators, for his and their part of the said partible
Stock, and other the Premises, shall have, take and enjoy from henceforth, to
the sole proper use and behoof of the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, all the Linen Cloth, Wares, Merchandises, and ready Money
whatsoever, now remaining in stock of the said Copartnership, or being any part
or parcel thereof, or ^elating thereunto: which by estimation is now rated and
valued to the sum of One thousand pounds of lawful Moneys of England, the same,
and every part thereof to be, remain and continue from henceforth to the said
C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, discharged and acquitted, or
else upon reasonable request, saved and kept harmless by the said A. B. his
Executors or Administrators, of and from all manner of Interests, Judgments,
Charges, Forfeitures, Titles and Encumbrances, had, made or suffered by the
said A. B. or by any other in his Right or Title, or lawfully claiming by, from
or under him, them or any of them.

(32.) And the said A. B. does by these presents, Assignment thereof.
grant, assign, release and put-over to the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all the Right, Interest, Claim and Demand of him
the said A. B. of, in and to all the said Linen Cloth, Wares, Merchandises and
ready Money, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof.

(33.) And moreover, it is Covenanted, granted The other to have all the Debts.
and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents: And the said C.
D. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to
and with the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators by these presents,
That the said A. B. for his part and share of the said partible Stock, and
other the premises, shall have, take and enjoy to his own proper use and
behoof for ever, without any let, disturbance or interruption of the said C. D.
his Executors or Administrators, or any other lawfully claiming, from, by or
under him: All and every such Debts, and sum and sums of Money, which are now
due and owing, or to be paid to the said Copartners jointly, or by reason or
means of the said Copartnership, and which are particularly mentioned and
expressed in a Schedule indented, annexed to these presents, together with all
Bills, Bonds, Specialties and Books concerning the said Debts, or any of them.

(34.) And the said C. D. does by these presents Assignment of the Debts.
clearly and absolutely, as much as in him lies, release, assign and set-over
unto the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and every
the said Debts, and sum and sums of Money, owing as aforesaid: and all Bonds,
Bills, Specialties and Books whatsoever, touching or concerning the same, and
all his Right, Title, Interest, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of, in and to the
same Debts, and every part and parcel thereof: and of, in, to all and every the
said Bonds, Bills, Specialties and Books which touch or concern the said Debts,
and sum and sums of Money, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof.

(35.) And the said C. D. for himself, his Executors That the Assignee of the
Debts, shall enjoy without account.
and Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, in manner and form
following: that is to say, That he the said C. D. his Executors and
Administrators, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter
permit and suffer, That be the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, to his and their own use, shall and may demand, require, collect,
receive, gather and levy by all lawful ways and means, all and every the Debts,
and sum and sums of Money in the said Schedule mentioned or expressed, and every
part and parcel thereof, without any let, denial, gainsaying or interruption
of the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, or any of them: and the same
shall or may retain and hold to his and their own proper use, without any
account thereof, or of any part thereof, to be made o^ ^endred to the said A.
B. his Executors or Administrators, or any of them.

(36.) And that he the said A. B. his Executors, Power given to sue.
Administrators or Assigns, shall and may commence, sue or prosecute any
Action, Suit or Plaint, for the Recovery, getting in or obtaining of the said
Debts, in the said Schedule mentioned, or any of them, at the Costs and charges
of the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in the Name or
Names of the said C. D. or of the said A. B. and C. D. or either of them,
their, or either of their Executors, or Administrators, without any discharge,
revocation or stay of the said Action or Actions, Suits or Plaints, or any of
them, to be caused or suffered by the said C. D. his Executors or
Administrators: so as the said A. B. his Executors or Administrators shall from
time to time, upon reasonable request, to him or them to be made in that behalf
by the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, save, defend and keep
harmless the said C. D. his Executors and Administrators, and every of them,
of, and from all Losses, Costs and Damages which he the said C. D. his
Executors or Administrators shall or may sustain or be at, by occasion or means
of any such Action, Suit or Plaint to be prosecuted as aforesaid.

(37.) And that he the said C. D. has not heretofore, Not to release any
Debts; if he do, himself to make satisfaction.
nor that he his Executors or Administrators shall hereafter receive, acquit,
release or discharge the said Debts in the said Schedule mentioned, or any of
them, unless it be by the special consent and agreement of the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first in that behalf had or obtained in
writing: but in case the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators shall
he^eafter release, acquit or discharge any of the said Debts in the said
Schedule expressed, without such consent and agreement of the said A. B. his
Executors or Administrators, as aforesaid, That then he the said C. D. his
Executors or Administrators, within six weeks after every such Release and
discharge of any of the said Debts, in the said Schedule expressed, shall and
will truly pay and satisfy, or cause to be paid and satisfied to the said A.
B. his Executors and Administrators, the full proportion of all and every such
Debt and Debts, in the said Schedule expressed, which he the said C. D. his
Executors or Administrators shall so release or discharge without fraud or
covin.

(38.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors The one to pay part of the
Debts by them owing.
and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the said A. B. his
Executors or Administrators, shall and will well and truly satisfy and pay, to
a^^ among the Creditors of the said A. B. and C. D. in respect of their said
Copartnership, the sum of 500 l. of lawful moneys of England, toward the
payment and satisfaction of such Debts and sums of money, as to the said
Creditors are due and owing, out, of, or in respect of the said partible stock,
copartnership or joint occupying, in manner following, viz. etc.

(39.) And the said C. D. for himself, his Executors The other to pay the other
part of the Debts
and Administrators, does covenant and grant to and with the said A. B. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, That he the said C. D. his
Executors or Administrators, shall and will well and truly satisfy and pay, to
and among the said Creditore, toward the payment and satisfaction of such
Debts and sums of money, as to the said Creditors are due and owing, out, of,
or in respect of the said partible stock, and joint dealing, the sum of 400 l.
of lawful moneys of England, in manner and form following, v^^. etc.

(40.) And it is agreed by and between the Private Debts.
said parties to these presents: And each of the said parties severally for
himself, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant and grant, to and with
the other of them, his Executors and Administrators by these presents, That if
any privy Debt, charge or cause of action, be growing or depending, by reason
or occasion of the said Copartnership, unto which the said Copartners are
become subject and liable unto, other then and except such known Debts, charges
and causes of action, as are mentioned or specified to be owing, due or arising
in and by their common Book of Accounts kept between them, That then and in all
such cases, such of the said parties to these presents, in whose default, or by
whose act and procurement such Debt, charge or cause of action, did grow or
arise, shall within convenient time fully satisfy and pay the same, and
thereof discharge, acquit, and save harmless, the other of the said parties,
his Executors and Administrators.

(41.) And moreover it is agreed by and between Variances arising how to be
decided.
the said parties for them, their several Executors and Administrators, That if
any variance or cause of Suit at any time or times, hereafter do or shall
happen to grow or arise between the said parties, or the Executors or
Administrators of them or either of them, by, for, upon, or concerning any
Covenant, clause, matter or thing, in these presents expressed or contained, or
for or in respect of the said Copartnership, or joint trading; That then and so
often the party in that behalf grieved, shall make declaration thereof unto,
etc. unto whose order, determination and judgment, for, touching and concerning
the same, or any part thereof, for time to time, the said parties, and either
of them, for their several parts, and for their several Executors and
Administrators, do wholly submit themselves by these presents, so as their
order and judgment concerning the same, be made or given up in writing, under
their hands and seals, within three Months, next after such declaration to them
made, as aforesaid: and during the said three Months neither of the said
Parties shall directly or indirectly, bring, pursue or prosecute any Action,
Suit or Plaint against the other of them, his Executors or Administrators,
touching the same. And they the said Parties do bind themselves, their several
Executors and Administrators, to stand to, abide and perform all and every such
order, judgment and determination, as the said, etc. shall within such time, as
aforesaid, make and give-up, as aforesaid, for and touching the Premises
referred to them.

In witness whereof, etc.

The form of a Condition of a Bond, upon separation of Copartnership.
(42.) THe Condition of this Obligation is Recital of former Partnership, and
Debts contracted.
such, That whereas the within bounden A. B. and the within named C. D. have
for diverse years, now last past, occupied together as Copartners in all things,
as well touching and belonging to the Trade of Woollen-draper, as in such Wares
and Commodities, as during the said Copartnership, they have otherwise traded
and dealt in. In which time of their Copartnership, and by reason thereof,
there are diverse and sundry Debts and sums of Money owing unto them, and
likewise diverse several Debts are owing by them to several Persons, by reason
of the said Copartnership, which are by them the said Parties to be equally
born and paid, The several particulars of which said Debts, as well to them
due and owing, as by the^ due and owing are mentioned and comprised in two
several Schedules, subscribed with the hands of the said A. B. and C. D.
whereof the one remains in the custody or hands of the said A. B. and the
other remains in the custody or hands of the said C. D.

(43.) And forasmuch as the said A. B. and C. Their desire to dissolve the
Copartnership and to divide the Debts, etc.
D. have between themselves agreed, not to continue or proceed any farther in
Copartnership together, but are willing and minded to take out their several
Stocks, and to separate and divide asunder from their former joint trading, and
for that it is the full meaning of each of the said Parties, that for the Debts
to them due and owing, as Copartners, and in respect of their said joint
dealing (after the Debts owing by them, which were contracted during the said
joint Trade, and by reason of the said Copartnership are satisfied and paid)
should be equally divided between the said A. B. and C. D. part and part like.

(44.) If therefore the said A. B. his Executors, To give notice of Receipts.
Administrators or Assigns, shall and do from time to time, within one Month
next after he or they shall have at any time or times hereafter, received any
part or parcel of the Debts, Duties, or sums of Money mentioned in the said
Schedule or Writing, to be to them jointly due and owing in respect of the said
Copartnership, do give just and true knowledge unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of every such particular Receipt* so from
time to time to be had and received.

(45.) And do also then make just payment unto To pay a moiety to his Fellow.
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of the one moiety, or
full half part of every such sum and sums of Money, so by the said A. B. his
Executors or Assigns, to be received or had upon their joint account. And
further, that if the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators or To pay the
other moiety to Creditors.
Assigns, within convenient time after such particular Receipt, as aforesaid,
do from time to time pay, or cause to be paid, unto and amongst the joint
Creditors of the said A. B. and C. D. for and toward the payment of their
joint Debts, growing by their said Copartnership, the other moiety or half part
of such sum and sums of Money, as shall from time to time be received, as
aforesaid, until such time as their said Debts shall be fully satisfied.

(46.) And further also, if neither the said A. B. Not to compound without the
others consent.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, nor any of them, at any time or
times hereafter, shall or do make any composition for the said Debts, Duties,
sum or sums of Money, or any of them, with any of the Debtors owing the same, or
any of them, without the special license, consent or agreement of the said C.
D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first thereunto had and obtained
in that behalf.

(47.) And further, if the said A. B. his To assist the other.
Executors or Administrators, do and shall from time to time, use his and their
best endeavor for the ayding and assisting of the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for the better and speedier obtaining and recovery
of his and their parts of every of the said several Debts, Duties, sum and sums
of Money to them, in regard of their Copartnership aforesaid, due or owing, and
that without fraud or covin: Then this Obligation to be void, and of none
effect, or else, etc.

The like to be made by the other Party: but I think it best in both, to alter
the five and fortyeth Section; and to make the one moiety of what shall be
received to be paid in discharge of Debts: and the half of the residue, to be
paid to C. D. etc. mutatis mutandis.

Another form of a Condition, upon separation of Copartnership: for one to
discharge the other of Debts due upon a private account.
(48.) THe Condition of this Obligation is Recital of Copartnership, and
particular debts accruing during the same.
such, That whereas the within named C. D. and the within bounden A. B. have
for diverse years last past, occupied together as Copartners in all things, as
well touching and belonging to the Trade of a Wollen-draper, as in such other
Wares and Commodities, as during the said Copartnership they have otherwise
traded and dealt in. In which time of their Copartnership together, each of the
said Parties are become indebted to diverse and sundry persons of their own mere
particular and private account, not properly belonging to the partible account
of Copartnership: or wherewith either of the said Parties, in respect of their
mutual and joint occupying together, are charged.

(49.) And, forasmuch as they the said Parties Their intent to separate, and
that neithers Debt charge the other.
to these presents, are now by mutual agreement separating from further dealing
in Copartnership together, and it is the full intent and meaning of both the
said Parties, that all Debts, Duties, and sum and sums of Money, as the said A.
B. in the time of the said Copartnership together with the said C. D. was, or
is any way indebted, as touching his private, proper and single account, shall
not in any wise touch or charge the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators,
with the payment of the same, or of any part thereof.

(50.) If therefore the said A. B. his Executors To discharge his F^llow from
the private Debts.
or Administrators, do and shall at all and every time and times hereafter,
clearly and absolutely acquit, discharge and save harmless the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators, and his and their Goods and Chattels, against all
and every person or persons whatsoever, not only of and from, all and every
such Debt and Debts, and sum and sums of Money, due heretofore, made and
contracted by the said A. B. in the time of the said Copartnership, which
belonged not unto, or any way concerned the joint or partible account between
them, as Copartners, but only, solely and singly unto the said A. B. his
Executors and Administrators, but also of and from all actions, suits, arrests,
costs and damages, which may arise or come, for, touching, or in any wise
concerning the said private and single Debt and Debts of the said A. B. unto
the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, or with which he shall or may
in any wise be chargable with. Then this Obligation to be void and of none
effect, or else, etc.

The like from C. D. to A. B. mutatis mutandis.

CAP. V. Containing some Presidents relating other matters: between Traders.
Articles of agreement concerning Factorship, between a Trader in the Country,
and his Factor in London.
(1.) ARticles of agreement had and made Recital of the Contract.
the, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. Clotheir of the one part, and C. D. of
London, etc. on the other part: Whereas the said A. B. has contracted with the
said C. D. to employ him as a Factor in London, for him the said A. B. for the
venting, selling and uttering of all such Ilmister and Chard Kersies, as he the
said A. B. shall consign and send unto him the said C. D. to his now dwelling
house in Lothbury London, for and during the term and space of two years, to be
reckoned and accounted from the day of the Date hereof.

(2.) Whereupon it is Covenanted, granted, To utter Wares sent.
concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties: and either of them the
said Parties, by and for himself, his Executors and Administrators, does
Covenant and grant to and with the other of them the said Parties, his
Executors and Administrators, in manner and form following. Imprimis, That he
the said C. D. shall and will not only accept and take into his house, charge
and custody, all such Ilmister and Chard Kerseys, as the said A. B. shall upon
his account, or which shall belong unto him, send and consign unto the said C.
D. to London to be vented and sold, but also shall do his best endeavor in the
vending and selling of the same, to and for the only use and benefit of the
said A. B. in the best manner that he the said C. D. can or may perform, and
that from time to time, for and during the space of two years, to be reckoned
and accounted, as aforesaid.

(3.) Item, That he the said C. D. shall not To keep true Accounts, and to make
true payments.
only keep, or cause to be kept, just and true Book and Books of account and
reckoning in writing, of all such Cloth and Kerseys, as the said A. B. shall
from time to time, during the said space of two years, to be reckoned as
aforesaid, consign unto the said C. D. and shall so come to his charge, and
also to whom, and at what Rates and Prizes, and at what time and times the same
shall be sold and vented, but also make true payment and delivery unto the said
A. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of all such Moneys,
Specialties, and other things as shall come unto the hands of, or shall be
received by the said C. D. for the said Kerseys, during the term aforesaid,
together with such Kerseys, as before the same account shall appear to be
received by the said A. B. and not sold at the end of the said term.

(4.) Item, That he the said C. D. shall be To be faithful, etc.
true and faithful unto the said A. B. in all his said sales to be made, and
not defraud or defeat the said A. B. in any of the Premises, wilfully, or to
his knowledge, but shall endeavor to vent the said Kerseys unto able men, for
the smallest and shortest time of payment, and for the best prizes, so far
forth, as he conveniently can or may perform or procure without fraud or covin.
And that the said C. D. shall not during the said two Not to be Factor for any
other, etc.
years, deal or trade as Factor, for any other person or persons, for the
buying or selling of any Ilmister or Chard Kerseys, but only for him the said
A. B. and as his agent or Factor, as before is specified.

(5.) Item, In consideration of which Factorship, The Recompenc^ for the Factor.
so to be done and performed, as aforesaid, by the said C. D. he the said A. B.
does for him, his Executors and Administrators, Covenant and promise to pay
unto the said C. D. his Executors or Administrators, the sum of, etc. per
annum, and also the sum of, etc. per annum, for Hallage, Portorage, and other
like Charges.

(6.) Item, That the said A. B. shall not at Not to consign any other but his
own Kerseys.
any time, during the said two years, consign or send unto the said C. D. any
of the said Kerseys, that shall belong t^ any other person or persons, but such
that shall properly belong unto him the said A. B.

In witness, etc.

The form of Articles of agreement amongst Creditors, for levying of Debts.
Articles Tripartite Indented of agreement, made the, etc. Between the
Creditors of M. F. late Citizen and Mercer of London, deceased, whose Names,
together with their Debts severally to them owing, are specified in a several
Schedule to every part of these presents annexed, on the first part: C. D. of,
etc. a Creditor also of the said M. F. on the second part: and E. F. of, etc.
Widow, late Wife of the said M. F. on the third part* in manner and form
following: That is to say,

(7.) IMprimis, The said Creditors, and every Who to take Administration of the
Debtors Goods, etc.
of them have agreed, and by these presents do agree with the said C. D. and E.
F. that the said C. D. shall and may have and take the Administration of all
the Goods, Chattels and Credits, which were of the said M. F. deceased,
according to the Laws of this Realm: thereof to dispose and administer,
according to the tenor of these present Articles, and not otherwise.

(8.) Item, That in consideration of such pains as the said C. D. shall take
about the said What allowance the Admininistrator is to have.
Administration, the said C. D. upon his true and reasonable account thereof
made, before such auditors as the said Creditors, or the greater part of them
shall assign to take the said account, shall have allowance of all his
reasonable Cost and charges, as well by Suits of Law or otherwise, by him to be
defrayed and expended about the said Administration, and moreover six pence for
every twenty shillings in value that he shall Administer: And also that the
said C. D. at every dividend making, shall and may retain for his own Debt,
owing by the said M. F. in equal proportion, with what he shall divide and pay
to the other Creditors according to the quantity of their several and
respective Debts.

(9.) Item, That the said C. D. shall before What proportion the Debtors Widow
shall have.
any dividend, pay or cause to be paid to the said E. F. for satisfaction of
her Title of Dower in the late Mansion house of the said M. F. situate in,
etc. the sum of forty pounds of lawful Moneys of England, or shall deliver unto
her, so much of her said late Husbands Goods, as shall amount to that value
(according to a reasonable estimation) and likewise, for the Funeral charges of
the said M. F. ten pounds of like Moneys: And also shall deliver to her the
said E. F. to her own use, or suffer her to detain and keep to her own use and
behoof, all her Apparel and Ornaments belonging to her Body, and such other
things as she and the Creditors have agreed: as may appear by writeng under
their hands.

(10.) Item, That the said C. D. so soon as An Inventory to be made of the
Goods.
reasonably may be, after the said Letters of Administration to him granted,
shall with and by the consent, and in the presence and oversight of, etc. or
three of them, cause all the Goods, Chattels and Debts, within the Realm of
England, which were belonging to the said M. F. at the time of his decease, to
be viewed and appraised by indifferent Persons, and a true Inventory thereof to
be made, according to the usual custom, in such cases used within the City of
London.

(11.) Item, That the said E. F. for her part The Widow to discover the Goods.
shall and will use all her best endeavor, to discover and make known all and
singular the Goods, Chattels and Debts of the said M. F, to the said C. D. and
the other persons beforementioned, without any concealment, default or delay
in her behalf.

(12.) Item, That after the Goods, Chattels The Debts to be satisfied.
and Credits of the said M. F. shall be so viewed and appraised, and an
Inventory thereof made and taken, as aforesaid: That then as well for the
satisfying and payment of what is to be first satisfied and paid, in manner and
form aforesaid, as toward the equal payment of the said Creditors, the said C.
D. shall by the consent and oversight of the said, etc. or any two of them,
make such speedy sale, at the best rates that he can, of all the Goods and
Chattels which were of the said M. F. within the Realm of Cngland, other than
such as be appointed for the said E. F. as aforesaid, and make such speed to
gather in and obtain such Debts as were owing unto the said M. F. at the time
of his decease, as he reasonably can or may do: and then after the satisfaction
and payment beforementioned, to be first satisfied and paid, being first had
and made: shall from time to time proportion and divide all the rest that shall
come to his hands, of the Estate of the said M. F. unto every of his said
Creditors, rate and rate like, according to the quantity of their several
Debts, from time to time, and as often as he the said C. D. shall have any
thing whereof such dividend may be made, until all the said Creditors shall be
paid and satisfied their said Debts, if the Goods, Chattels and Debts of the
said M. F. will extend or amount thereunto.

(13.) Item, That R. H. one of the Creditors Debts beyond Sea, etc.
in the said Schedule mentioned, shall enjoy all such Goods and Debts, which
were of the said M. F. and which the said R. H. has now attached beyond the
Seas, toward the payment of such Debts, as the said M. F. did owe there to
him, and thereof the said R. H. so soon as conveniently may be, to show the
account to the said C. D. and four or three of the said Creditors at the least:
and if more be recovered beyond the Seas by the said R. H. of the Goods and
Debts late of the said M. F. than the Debt which the said M. did owe, to be
paid there to the said R. H. That then he the said R. H. shall accept of the
overplus in part of payment of his Debt, owing unto him by the said M. F. here
in England.

(14.) Item, That none of the Parties aforesaid, Not to commence or prosecute
any Suit in prejudice of these agreements.
shall or will do or procure any thing to be done by any Suit, Plaint, Action
or Attachment against the said C. D. or any other within the Realm of England,
whereby the performance of these present agreements, or any of them, shall or
may in any part be impeached, troubled or let: and that every of them shall
acquit and relinquish all and every former Suits and Attachments whatsoever,
had or made, which shall or may in any wise let or prejudice the true
performance and fulfilling the said agreements, contained in these presents, or
any of them.

(15.) Item, The said C. D. does hereby agree To take upon him Administration,
to discharge the Debts, etc.
to take upon him the said Administration, and thereof to administer truly and
faithfully, according to these present Articles, and if there shall come
su^ficient to his hands to satisfy all the Creditors of the said M. F. and any
thing shall remain to him over and above what will satisfy, according to the
true meaning of these presents, That then upon reasonable request to him made,
and discharge thereof to him given, by the said E. F. her Executors or
Administrators, he the said C. D. shall and will well and truly pay, or cause
to be paid, the remainder thereof unto the said E. F. her Executors or
Administrators, she or they putting in reasonable security to the said C. D. by
her or their own Bond to re-pay the same, or so much thereof, as shall be
lawfully and truly recovered, by any other Creditor of the said M. F.

(16.) Item, If any Creditor or Creditors I^ Debts be recovered by Creditors,
not Parties hereunto; then all to Contribute.
of the said M. F. not Party to these presents, do at any time commence any
Action or Suit against the said C. D. as Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of the said M. F. and that the said Creditor, or Creditors of the said
M. F. shall thereby lawfully, without practice, fraud or covin, recover their
Debts, or any of them, against the said Administrator: Then it is further
agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, That the Creditors
aforesaid, Parties to these presents, whose Debts shall be paid in part or in
whole, according to this agreement, shall out of their several dividends,
allow, satisfy and pay part and part like unto the said C. D. so much of their
parts and proportions so received, as aforesaid, and according thereunto, as
will satisfy and discharge the said Debt or Debts, and Damages and Costs of
Suit for the same, the said C. D. likewise contributing according to his Rate
toward the same.

(17.) Item, It is further agreed, That if To give notice of Suits.
any Creditors of the said M. F. not Parties to this agreement, shall or do
commence any Suit or Suits, against the said C. D. as Administrator of the said
M. F. Then the said C. D. shall thereof give notice and warning unto the said
Creditors, Parties to these presents, or to three of them at the least, to the
end that they may join with the said C. D. in defense of the said Suit, for the
best and common Commodity and advantage of the said Creditors, Parties to these
presents.

(18.) All and every which Agreements aforesaid, All Covenant to perform the
Articles.
and every Article and Clause thereof, every one of the Parties aforesaid, on
their several behalves, and for their several Executors and Administrators, do
Covenant, grant and promise to and with all and every the other of the Parties
aforesaid, and their several Executors and Administrators, well and faithfully
to hold accomplish and perform, without any fraud or deceit.

In witness, etc.

Articles of Agreement for erecting a New building in London, since the great
Fire: according to the Act of Parliament for rebuilding London.
Articles of Agreement made the, etc. Between A. B. Citizen and Fishmonger of
London, of the one part; and C. D. of the parish of St. Andrews Holborn, in the
County of Middlesex Carpenter, and E. F. of the same parish Bricklayer, on the
other part, as follows: That is to say,

(19.) Imprimis, The said C. D. and E. F. for To build a Message.
themselves jointly and severally, and for their and each of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, do Covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with
the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as follows: that is
to say, That they the said C. D. and E. F. their Executors, Administrators,
Workmen or Assigns, shall and will for the consideration after mentioned, at
their or some of their proper Cost and charges, and with their, or some of
their own Materials, in good firm and workman-like manner, erect and build, or
cause to be erected and built, one Message or Tenement upon a Toft, piece or
parcel of ground, situate on the Northside of the street within
Newgate-Market, London, formerly called Newgate, containing in breadth on the
front fifteen foot, or thereabouts, and in depth one and forty foot, or
thereabouts, lying between the Message in the occupation of I. B. on the
East Side, and the Message in the occupation of K. L. on the Westside.

(20.) Which said Message shall contain, one The Rooms therein to be contained.
Celler with a partition about the middle part thereof, and a door therein, and
a Shop over all the said Celler, three Rooms over the said Shop: that is to
say, A Fore-room, a Backroom, and a little Buttery in the Kitchen next the
Stairs: three Rooms over the said last mentioned Rooms, and three Rooms over
them of the like dimensions: with two Garrets over them: and the same shall do,
complete and finish, or cause to be done, completed and finished in good,
strong and workman-like manner: and with good, strong and sound Bricks, Mortar,
Timber and Materials: with all the Bricklayers work, Tilers work, Carpenters
work, Smiths work, Plommers work, Plaisterers work, and Glasters work
whatsoever, that is or shall be needful and convenient for the building,
completing, and making habitable the said Message or Tenement.

(21.) Item, That they the said C. D. and E. F. To pursue the Act for builing.
their Executors, Administrators, Workmen and Assigns, shall and will do and
perform all the said Bricklayers and Tilers work, and Carpenters work, and
other works aforesaid, with such Materials, of such proportions, dimensions and
scantling, and in such manner and form, as is directed, limited and appointed,
in and by an Act of Parliament, made in the Nineteenth year of his now
Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for rebuilding the City of London, and the
Scheam thereunto annexed, for houses of the first sort of building, to be
builded and erected, or as is directed by any other Act of Parliament since
made.

(22.) And shall sink, and make the Cellar under The Cellar.
all the said Message Eight foot deep, and shall in such convenient place in
the said Cellar, as the said A. B. or his Assigns shall direct, dig, An House
o^ Office in the Cellar.
and make a Vault six foot square every way, or cleanse, repair and amend the
old Vault there, and make the old Vault of the same largeness, in case it be
not so: and from the same new or old Vault, shall make and carry up a
sufficient Brick Funnel into the Cellar for an House of Office, and make a
convenient seat thereunto: And shall make good and substantial Cellar-windows
to Cellar Windows. Pav^ment. Stairs.
the said Cellar, out of the street, with good and substantial Iron-bars to the
same Windows: The said Windows, to be of such largeness and form as the said A.
B. or his Assigns shall direct. And shall Pave the said Cellar with good
Bricks, and make a good strong pair of Stairs out of the street thereunto, with
good dry Elm Planks, about three foot and a half wide, with a good strong Plank
and door to the said Stairs, and strong Iron-bolts to the said door: And shall
in such convenient place, in the first Room or Shop over the said Cellar, as
the said A. B. or his Assigns shall appoint, make a good pair of Stairs, of two
foot and eight inches wide at the least, with Elm boards, into the said Cellar,
and a Door well framed, plained and hung at the head of the said Stairs, with
an Iron-latch and catch thereunto: And shall make and prepare a L^aden Gutter.
place for a Leaden-Gutter, to be laid in the most convenient place, between
the said Shop and Cellar, for carrying the Water from the Kitchen and Yard
belonging to the Premises, and from the Sink of the said A. B. next to the
Street.

(23.) Item, That they shall make the first or The Street Door.
Street Door to the said Message, with two leaves of good, whole, dry Deal,
well framed and lined, hung with good Hinges, with a good upright Bar and
Staple to it, with a Flap, and two strong Iron Bolts, over the same Door.
Shop-Windows.
And shall make good and substantial Shop-Windows, of good, whole, dry Deal,
well glued, battered, and lined, with slit Deal, with good and sufficient Bars,
Hinges, Staples, and Pins fitting to the same, of such form as the said A. B.
or his Assigns shall direct. And shall carry The Staircase.
up a Staircase through the said House, with an open Newel-light, the Sky
light over the Newel to be well glazed, leaded and cemented. The Stairs to be
of such wideness, and placed in such convenient places, and in such form, as
the said A. B. shall direct. The said Staircase to be made with Rails,
Banisters, Balls and Pendents. And shall make strong, handsome Doors to the
Chamber.
and sufficient Partitions and Doors to every upper Room or Chamber, with Iron
Latches, Catches and Hinges to every Door, the same Doors to be made of good
dry Deal glued and battered. And also one convenient Chimney to Chimneys.
every of the said upper Rooms, of such dimensions, depth and wideness, and
place the said Partitions, Doors and Chimneys, in such places, sort and manner,
as the said A. B. or his Assigns shall direct. And shall make a handsome
Back-Window to the Shop.
transom Window to the back part of the Shop, with two Iron Casements therein,
and well glazed, with good Shutts to the same, of whole Deal, glued, lined,
battered and hinged, with good and substantial Hinges. And an handsome A
Backdoor.
strong Door into the Yard, of whole Deal, well smoothed, glued, battered and
hinged, with good Bolts to the same; and a glass Window over the said Door,
with good Iron Bars, the same Windows to be of such largeness and dimensions,
as the said A. B. or his Assigns shall direct.

(24.) Item, That they shall put one good Lock to the fore-Door.
strong Lock with a Key, to the fore-Door of the said Message, of eight
shillings price at the least, and make and put up in the Front even with the
fore-Chamber over the Shop one fair Belcony, ten foot long, of good wrought
Iron, Belcony.
and not cast Iron. And shall make one handsome pair of Doors, of Oak, four foot
wide at the least, with a handsome glass Window on the top of the said Doors, to
go into the said Belcony. And on each side of the said Belcony-Window, a
convenient two-light transom Window, and shall Windows Pediment for a Sign.
Chamber-Windows.
make an handsome Pediment in the Brickwall over the Belcony to place a Sign in,
as the said A. B. or his Assigns shall direct. And shall make in the two next
Stories forwards, a transom Window to each Room, of four foot and a half wide,
or thereabouts, of a proportionable depth: and on each side of the said Window,
make a twolight transom Windom, uniform with the Windows underneath. And to all
the back-Chambers, a six light transom Window in the rear of every Chamber, and
a four light transom Window, on the East Side of every of the said back-Rooms.
The Frames of all the said Windows to be good, dry, oaken Timber, well wrought
and placed, as the said A. B. or his Assigns shall direct. And shall make a
good strong Iron Casement to the third Story-Window to the Front, with a good
strong Lock to the same, and an Iron Rod in the middle thereof, the same
Casement to be of such largeness every way, as the said A. B. or his Assigns
shall direct. And shall make a good Iron Casement to such of the said two-light
transom Windows, in the said third Story on the Front, as the said A. B. or his
Assigns shall direct. And shall also make a good Iron Casement to the four
light Window in the fourth Story to the Front, and to every Window in the rear.
All the Windows to the Front-Rooms up one pair of Stairs, to have sufficient
and substantial Iron Bars. And shall make one good clear Story three light
luthern Window to the fore-Garret, and a three light clear Story Window to the
back-Garret, the Frames to be of Oak, with an Iron Casement in each
Garret-Window.

(25.) Item, That they shall Plaster and Plaistering and Ceeling.
Ceel in workman-like manner with good Lime and Hair, all the Walls, Partitions,
and Ceelings of every Room of the said House, and in every other place
necessary except the Cellar, and shall lay all the Floors with good, whole, dry
Flooring
Deal, smoothed and close joynted: and shall cover the uttermost Rooms
backward, or back-Garret, Covering.
with good Lead, which Lead shall weigh ^ight pound and a half the foot at the
least, and make a Brick Wall on the back part, and on each side of the said
Leads three foot high: and cover the said Wall with a Coping or Campshot of
good sound Oak Timber: and shall cover the fore-Garret of the said House with
good plain Tiles: and make convenient Gutters of Lead, to carry Leaden Gutters.
the water from the said Roof and Leads into the street, and bring the same
with a convenient Pipe to the ground: and shall raise the ground-Floor Raising
the Floor
of the said Message, a convenient height above the street, so that there may
be a stone-Step of seven inches high or more, as shall be convenient at the
street-Door, and raise every other Story proportionable, according to the Acts
of Parliament in that behalf. And shall build The Front. Roof. Painting
the Front of the said House with good rubbed Brick, and carve off the Roof
with Cantilavers and Cornishes: and shall paint all the Window-Frames,
Window-Casements, out-Doors, and Door-Cases, Cantilavers and Cornishes of the
said House, and all out-places necessary, Glasing.
with good Colors well laid in Oil. And glaze all the Windows of all the
Front, upper Rooms or Chambers, and Front-Garret, and the back Windows of the
Shop, with good square Glass, well leaded, and all the rear and back-Windows,
except the Shop, with Quarries well leaded.

(26.) Item, The said C. D. and E. F. for Time of finishing the House.
themselves and either of them, their and either of their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, do by these presents Covenant, promise and grant,
to and with the said A. B. his Executors Administrators and Assigns as
follows, viz. That the said House, and all and every the premises, shall be
in all things as aforesaid, fully and wholly done, completed and finished, by
or before the twenty ninth day of September now next ensuing. And if it shall
happen the said work, or any part thereof, shall not be completed and
finished, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, by the
twentieth day of October next also ensuing, That then and Forfeiture* if not
finished.
from thenceforth they the said C. D. and E. F. their Executors and
Administrators, shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid, unto the
said A. B. his Executors Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of ten shillings
sterling by the day, for every day which the said Work and Building, or any
part thereof, shall so remain, and be unfinished and uncompleated.

(27.) And that they the said C. D. and E. F. To save harmless from the Acts,
touching Building
their Executors and Administrators, shall and will from time to time and at
all times hereafter, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and
indempnified the said A. B. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every
of them, and the said Message, and all and every his and their other Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, of and from all fines, pains,
penalties, punishments and forfeitures whatsoever, contained in the said Acts
of Parliament, or any of them, for or by reason of any irregularity which shall
happen in the said Building, or any part thereof, contrary to the said Acts of
Parliament, or any of them, for or touching the rebuilding of the City of
London, and of and from all such Actions, Suits, Charges, troubles and damages,
which he the said A. B. his Executors Administrators or Assigns may happen to
incur, or be put unto, or sustain for or by reason thereof.

(28.) In consideration of which said Work, Payment for the Building
Materials and Buildings, to be done and performed in manner and form
aforesaid, the said A. B. for himself, his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, does Covenant and promise to pay and satisfy unto the said C. D. and
E. F. their Executors Administrators and Assigns, after the rate and price of
sixty four pound the square, for every square of the said Building, the said
money after the rate aforesaid to be paid as follows, that is to say, When
the Floor over the said Cellar is laid, fifty pound thereof: when the next
Floors up one pair of Stairs are laid, fifty pound more thereof: when the next
Floors over that up two pair of Stairs are laid, fifty pound more thereof, etc.
(as to the rest) and when all the said Work and Building shall be wholly done
and finished in all things, according to the true meaning of these presents,
all the remaining money that shall be due for the same, at the rate of sixty
four pound the square, as aforesaid.

In witness.

FINIS.
A Table of the several Chapters and Sections contained in this Book.
CHAP. 1. Observations touching Conveyances in general, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. Chap. 2. The forms of setting forth the Grounds and Considerations of
a Conveyance or Settlement, etc. Money in part paid, and in part secured, Sect.
1. Barring an Estate Tail, Sect. 2. Natural life, Preferment of Children, Sect.
3, 4. Settlement on collateral Heirs, Sect. 5. A Marriage to be had, and
settlement of a Jointure, Sect. 6, 7. Performance of an Agreement, Sect. 8.
Payment of Debts, Sect. 9.
Chap. 3. Containing several Covenants. To levy a Fine by Husband and Wife,
Sect. 1, 2. By several Persons severally interessed, Sect. 3. In the County of
Lancaster, Sect. 4. Of Chester and Lancaster, Sect. 5. In ancient Demesne Court,
Sect. 6. With a Render for years, Sect. 7. With Render of a Rent, Sect. 8. A
Fine sur concessit, Sect. 9. To sue forth a Recovery, with double Voucher,
Tenant of the Precipe being made by Fine, Sect. 10. By Bargain and Sale, Sect.
12, 13, 14. A Recovery of Lands in several Counties, Sect. 15. A Recovery in
London, Sect. 20. In ancient Demesne Court, Sect. 21. A Recovery with single
Voucher, Sect. 16, 17. By a Man and his Wife, Sect. 18. By Tenant for life, and
be in Reversion, Sect. 19. To make Assurance of Lands, Sect. 23. That Tenants
shall Attorn, Sect. 24. To produce Writings in defense of the Title, Sect. 25.
To pay back Purchase-money upon Eviction, Sect. 26. To pay back the
Purchase-money paid, in case the Purchaser dislike, etc. and if he like, then
to pay more, Sect. 27. Not to claim Dower, with a Release of Dower, Sect. 28.
The form of Covenants, jointly and severally, Sect. 29. By Baron and Feme,
Sect. 30.
Chap. 4. Provisoes to make void Estates. Upon Non-payment of Purchase-money,
Sect. 1. Upon discharge of a Surety, Sect. 2, 3. To make void a Rentcharge
upon payment of money, Sect. 4. To abate part of an Annuity upon money paid,
Sect. 5.
Chap. 5. The forms of introducing Uses upon Fines, Recoveries, and other
Conveyances. Upon a Fine to be levied, Sect. 1, 2, 3. Upon a Fine already
levied, Sect. 4. Upon a Recovery to be had, Sect. 5, 6, 12. Upon a Recovery
already had, Sect. 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. A Release of Errors in the
Recovery, Sect. 9. Upon a Fine and Recovery to be had, the Fine being of one
thing, the Recovery of another, Sect. 15, 16. The like upon Fine and Recovery
already had, Sect. 17. Upon a Fine, Recovery, and other Conveyances to be had,
Sect. 18. Upon a Feoffment past and executed, Sect. 20, 24. Upon a Covenant to
stand seized, Sect. 21. Upon a Bargain and Sale, and Grant of the Reversion,
Sect. 22.
Chap. 6. The several forms of indorsing Livery and Attornment, Sect. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. Form of Attornment by Deed, Sect. 8. Chap. 7. The several forms of
limitation of Uses. For Life: For Lives of Husband and Wife, and longer liver,
Sect. 1. To Husband for life, after to Wife for life for a Jointure, Sect. 2.
With Proviso to make the limitation to her void upon her claim of other Lands,
Sect. 3. Upon parting with her Estate, Sect. 4. For years. Use for years
determinable upon life, Sect. 5. Use for years to pay Daughters Portions, Sect.
15. In Tail, to 1, 2, 3, etc. Sons, in remainder after an Estate for life,
remainder to all other Sons in Tail, according to seigniority, etc. Sect. 6.
Another to Sons already born, by name, in Tail, with like remainder, Sect. 7.
To the Father for life, remainder to Son for life, remainder to Sons Wife for
life, in satisfaction of Dower, *the remainder to their 1, 2, 3, etc. Sons in
Tail, remainder to the several Sons of the Grandfather in Tail, remainder to
the Heirs of the Body of the Grandfather, remainder to Grandfathers right
Heirs, with a Proviso to preserve Estates in Tail to Children, en ventre sa
mere, Sect. 8, 9. To the use of A. B. and Heirs Males of his Body, remainder to
C. B. his Brother, and Heirs Males of his Body, with like remainders to his
other Brothers, remainder to the right Heirs of A. B. Sect. 10. Other
limitations in Tail, with remainder to the Heirs Males of the Body of Feoffors
Father, remainder to the Heirs Males of the Body of Feoffors Grandfather,
remainder to the right Heirs of the Feoffor, Sect. 11. An Use to the Heirs of
the Body of the Wife by the Husband begotten, with remainder over to the
Husband, Sect. 13. In Fee determinable upon a Marriage had, Sect. 12. An Use
limited to one, until the Heir in Tail come to full age, in case the Father die
while he is within age, and after to the Heir, Sect. 13. Another with direction
for disposing the Profits in the mean time, Sect. 14. The form of a limitation
to preserve contingent Uses, in case the particular Estate determine before
they come in Esse, Sect. 15. Contingent Uses, Sect. 16.
Chap. 8. Power given to cestuy que Use for life, to make Joyntures, Leases,
etc. To make Joyntures to future Wives, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. To settle Lands
in certain upon a future Wife for life, reserving a Rent, Sect. 7. The like of
a third part, without Reservation, Sect. 8. Provision made for future Wives, by
way of limitation of Use, Sect. 9. To make Leases for lives, or years
determinable upon lives, or for 21 years, with or without reservation of Rent,
Sect. 10. To make Leases for such Terms, and under such Rent as Lessor
pleases, Sect. 15. For cestuy que Use for life, or his Issue-male to make
Leases, so as they be not without impeachment of waste, and that the present
Rent be reserved, Sect. 11. Like power for them to make Joyntures, Sect. 12. To
Lease the Lands settled on the Wife for a Jointure, at a Rent mentioned in the
Schedule, the Wife being made party, Sect. 13. Another to make Leases, so as
Wife be party, Sect. 14, 16. To make Leases at the ancient Rents, chargable
nevertheless with the Rents before in the Deed limited, Sect. 17. Power to two
cestuy que Uses for life, to make Leases successively, Sect. 19. A Use limited
briefly to such persons, to whom cestuy que Use for life shall make Leases,
Sect. 20, 21.
Chap. 9. Rents, Annuities and Portions, assured out of the limitation of Uses.
An Annuity for charitable Uses, Sect. 1, 2. Another of a Rent for life, with
Clause of Distress, and a limitation of the Land unto the Party, upon failer of
payment of the Rent, Sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A limitation of the Land to several
Uses, chargable with the Rents after mentioned, and after, the Rents are
appointed with power to distrain, Sect. 8, 9. Portions for Daughters to be
raised out of Leases made by cestuy que Use for life, according to power given
him, Sect. 10. A Use for years limited to Cognizees to pay Portions, with
directions over if Daughters die, Sect. 11, 12, 19. Money yearly to be allowed
to the Daughters until Portions paid, Sect. 13. A limitation for years to be
void if Feoffor die without Daughters, or after Portions paid, Sect. 14, 15. A
limitation to Daughters (for want of Issue-male) to be void upon Portions paid,
or secured by him in the next remainder, Sect. 16, 17. Daughters Portions to be
raised out of a Rentcharge, with cestuy que Use for life, has power given him
to grant, Sect. 18, 19, 20, 21.
Chap. 10. Provision taken for payment of Debts, Legacies, etc. in the
limitation of Uses. A limitation for years to the Cognizees, for payment of
Cognizors Debts, discharge of Sureties, payment of Annuities to Servants, and
then to surrender the Estate, Sect. 1. A limitation to Cognizees and their
Heirs, for payment of Cognizors Debts (by sale) and discharge of Sureties, and
to restore the overplus, etc. but if next Heir pay the Debts, etc. within a
year, then the Cognizees to convey to him, Sect. ^. To make sale and pay Debts
mentioned in a Schedule, with direction for the overplus, and Cognizor to enjoy
until sale, Sect. 3. A limitation after Cognizors death, to Cognizors Executors
for years to pay Debts, etc. Sect. 4. For performance of Cognizors Will, Sect.
5. A Use limited to such persons as Cognizor shall appoint to pay a sum in
certain, Sect. 6.
Chap. 11. The form of alteration of Uses upon Acts done. Upon settling other
Lands on Cognizors Wife, the Use limited to her to cease, with a limitation
over, S. 2. A Use altered and limited to a person, to whom a Rent is appointed
upon default of payment, S. 3, 4, 5. A Use made void, and a limitation over, if
cestuy que Use marry without Fathers consent, S. 6, 7, 8. A limitation to the
Wife to cease, and a limitation* over, upon her claiming of Dower, S. 9, 10. A
Use altered upon Non-payment of a sum in gross, S. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. To alter
a Use upon payment back of a Marriage-Portion, in case the Marriage take none
effect, S. 16.
Chap. 12. Power given to Revoke Uses, and limit new. S. 1, 2, 3, 4. To Revoke
Uses, with exception of Leases to be made by force of a power given in the same
Deed, S. 5, 9. To Revoke old Uses and limit new, as to particular persons, S.
6, 7. Another, as to one particular Manor, S. 10. To Revoke old Uses and limit
new, with consent of Cognizees, S. 8. Chap. 13. The forms of Deeds of
Revocation, and limitation of new Uses. A short form, S. 1. Another with
recital of the power of Revocation, S. 2, 3. Another with a Feoffment added, S.
4. Another of a Use settled by Covenant to stand seized, S. 5. Another pursuant
to power given upon having of Issue, S. 6.
Chap. 14. The several forms of settlements of Estates. By Covenant to levy a
Fine, and declaration of Uses, with power to make Joyntures, grant Rents, and
make Leases, S. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Another by Uses declared upon a Fine and
Recovery, with provision for payment of Debts, S. 6. Another by declaration of
Uses of a Recovery, as to several Manors severally, S. 7, 8. The Use of a
Recovery for life, with remainders over in Tail, S. 9. Use of a Manor in Trust
to be sold, and Appointment for the disposition of the money, S. 10. Proviso to
make void a particular Use, upon payment of money, and a limitation over, S.
11. Another to give power to make Leases of a particular Manor to pay
Portions, S. 13.
Chap. 15. The forms of several Covenants, used upon settlements of Estates to
Uses. To stand seized to the Uses beforementioned, in case the Conveyance
prove deficient, S. 1, 2. That he is owner and has power to settle, S. 3, 4,
5. That the thing is free from encumbrances, S. 6, 7, 8. To enjoy, S. 9, 10.
Not to do any Act to impeach the settlement, S. 11. For further Assurance, S.
12, 13. For settlement of Lands to be purchased, S. 14. To permit Lands to
descend, S. 15.
Chap. 16. The several forms of Joyntures, before and after Marriage. Before
Marriage, mutual Covenants that each party shall marry the other, S. 1. A
Jointure by way of Covenant to stand seized to Uses, S. 2. Another by Covenant
to levy a Fine to Uses, S. 3. Uses upon a Fine, to the end that the young pair
shall receive a Rent, during Fathers life, S. 4. And a limitation of a Use
after, as to the Manors, Lands, etc. S. 5. With a Proviso to cease a
limitation to Daughters, upon Portions paid, S. 6. Another upon Marriage with a
Widow, with several Covenants relating to the Widows Children, and power given
to her to make a Will, S. 7, 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. A Rent limited to the intended
Wife in satisfaction of Dower, with a limitation over of the use of the Lands,
S. 19, 20. After Marriage, by Covenant to levy a Fine to the use of Husband for
life, after of the Wife for life in satisfaction of Dower, with remainders in
Tail, and a Covenant to alter the Use upon her claim of Dower, S. 13, 14.
Another by way of Feoffment to Uses, as to several Manors severally, with a
limitation for raising of Portions, S. 15, 16, 17. A Proviso to cease the
limitation to the Wife, as to part, if she marry again, S. 18.
Chap. 17. Containing several Covenants used upon Marriages and Joyntures made.
To pay the Marriage-Portion, S. 1. To pay a sum upon refusal of the Marriage,
S. 2. To maintain the young pair, S. 3. To give or leave a sum by Will to them,
S. 4. To do further Acts to ratify Covenants, S. 5. To permit the Wife to make
a Will, S. 3, 6, 7. If the Lands settled in Jointure fail of the value, then the
Husbands Executors to make it up, S. 8. To make satisfaction for what shall be
evicted, S. 9. To repay part of the Portion if the Wife die within three years,
without Issue, S. 10.
Chap. 18. Containing general words commonly used for passing Manors, Lands,
etc. For a Manor, S. 1. A Manor and Advowson, S. 2. A Message and Lands, S.
3. A Message in London, S. 4. An Inn, S. 5. A Brew House, S. 6. A Watergrist
Miln, S. 7, 8. A Prebend, S. 9. A Rectory, S. 10.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the Matters contained in this Book.
ATtornment: A Covenant that Tenants shall Attorn, Chapter 3. Sect. 24. The form of
indorsing Attornments, Chapter 6. Sect. 5, 6, 7. Of Livery and Attornment. Sect. 9.
An Attornment by a Collateral Deed, Chap. 6. S. 8. Annuities and Rents: Secured
by way of use, Chap. 9. Sect. 1, 2, 3. vide after in this Table, Title Rents.
Bargain and Sale of Lands: To make one Tenant to a Precipe for suffering of a
Recovery, Chapter 3. Sect. 13. Baron and Feme: Covenant by them to levy a Fine, C.
3. Sect. 1, 2. 7, 8, 9. To suffer a Recovery, Chapter 3. S. 10, 11. 18, 19, 20. The
form of Covenants by Baron and Feme, Chap. 3. Sect. 30. Power given to Baron
and Feme to revoke Uses and limit New, Chapter 12. S. 6, 7. Charitable Uses: An
Annuity settled for the use of Poor people, Chap. 9. Sect. 1. Condition, vide
Title, Proviso, in this Table. Consideration, of a Settlement or Conveyance:
Money in part paid, and in part secured, Chap. 2. Sect. 1. Barring of an Estate
Tail, etc. Chapter 2. Sect. 2. Natural love, raising Portions for Children, Chapter 2.
S. 3, 4. To settle on Collateral Heirs, Chapter 2. S. 5. Marriage, and for a
Jointure, Chapter 2. S. 7. Performance of Agreement, Sect. 8. Payment of Debts, S.
9. Settling in Name and Blood, Chap. 2. Sect. 7. Chapter 14. S. 1. Covenants: The
form of Joint and Several Covenants, Chapter 3. S. 20. To levy a Fine sur
Cognizance de droit, etc. by Husband and Wife, Chapter 3. S. 1, 2. By several
persons severally interessed, Chapter 3. S. 3. in the County of Lancaster, Sect. 4.
of Chester and Lancaster, Sect. 5. in Ancient demesne Court, Sect. 6. To levy
a Fine with a Render, of an Estate for years, Chapter 3. S. 7. Of a Rent, S. 8. A
Fine sur Concessit, Chapter 3. S. 9. To sue forth a Recovery, with double Voucher,
Chapter 3. S. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Chapter 14. S. 8. Of Lands in several Counties, Chapter
3. S. 15. in London, S. 15. 20. in Ancient demesne Court, Chapter 3. S. 21. in
Court Baron, S. 22. To sue forth a Recovery, with single Voucher, Chapter 3. S. 16,
17, 18, 19. To make assurance of Lands, Chapter 3. S. 23. For settlement of Lands
to be purchased, Chapter 15. S. 13. To permit Lands to descend, Chapter 15. S. 15. That
Tenants shall Attorn, Chapter 3. S. 24. To produce Writings in defense of the
Title, S. 25. To pay back purchase Money upon eviction, Chap. 3. S. 26. upon
dislike of the Purchase; but if he like, to pay more, S. 27. Not to claim
Dower, Chapter 3. S. 28. To stand seized to Uses, Chapter 5. S. 21. To permit the Wife
to make a Will, Chapter 16. S. 11. C. 17. S. 6, 7. To alter the Use limited to a
Wife, upon her claim of Dower, Chapter 16. S. 14. That he is Owner, and has power
to convey, Chapter 15. S. 3, 4, 5. That the thing is free from Encumbrances, Chapter
15. S. 6, 7, 8. To enjoy, S. 9, 10. Not to do any act to impeach a Settlement,
Chapter 15. S. 11. for further assurance, Chapter 15. S. 12, 13. To pay a Marriage
Portion, Chapter 17. S. 1. To pay a sum upon refusal to Marry, Chapter 17. S. 2. To
maintain the Young pair, S. 3. To give or leave a sum to them by Will, Chapter 17.
S. 4. That if a Jointure fail of the value, it shall be made up, S. 8. To make
satisfaction for what shall be evicted, Chapter 17. S. 9. To pay back part of the
Portion, if the Wife die within three years, without Issue, S. 10. Debts: A Use
limited for years to pay Debts, Chap. 10. Sect. 1. Chapter 14. S. 6. Use limited in
Fee (after Cognizors death) to make sale for payment of Debts, etc. Chapter 10. S.
2, 3. Chapter 14. S. 10. A limitation to such as shall be Executors to pay Debts,
Chapter 10. S. 4, 5. Dower: A Use limited to the Wife in recompense of Dower, Chapter
14. S. 6. Chapter 7. S. 2. etc. Fcoffment: Uses declared upon a Feoffment, Chapter 5.
S. 20, 24. Chapter 16. S. 14, 15, 16. Fine: Covenants to levy a Fine, see before in
this Table, Title Covenants: The forms of introducing Uses upon a Fine, Chapter 5.
S. 1, 2, 3, 4. General Words: Used for passing of Manors, Messuages, Lands,
etc. viz. a Manor, Chapter 18. S. 1. A Manor and Advowson, S. 2. A Message and
Lands, S. 3. A Message in London, S. 4. An Inn, S. 5. A Brewhouse, Chapter 18. S.
6. A Water-grist Miln, S. 7, 8. A Prebend, S. 9. A Rectory, S. 10. Joyntures:
Joyntures settled before and after Marriage, vide the other Table in Chapter 16.
Covenants used in Joyntures, vide the other Table in Chapter 17. vide also in this
Table, Title, Powers. Livery and Seisin: The forms of indorsement of Livery and
Seisin, Chapter 6. S. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Livery and Attornment together, S. 9. Portions
for Children: A Use limited for years, in case of failer of Issue-male, for
raising Portions for Daughters, Chapter 7. S. 15. Limitation for years to the
Cognizees of a Fine to pay* Daughters Portions, Chapter 9. S. 11, 12. Moneys to be
paid yearly for Daughters maintenance, until their Portions paid, Chapter 9. S. 13.
A Use limited to the Cognizees, until Daughters Portions paid or secured, and
after to them in remainder, etc. Chapter 9. S. 18, 19, 20. A Use limited to
Daughters to be void, upon payment of their Portions, or Security given for
them, by the Heirs males in remainder, Chapter 9. S. 16, 17. Power given to cestuy
que Use for life, to make Leases to raise Portions for Daughters, Chapter 9. S. 10.
To grant a Rentcharge for raising of Portions, Chapter 9. S. 21. A Portion to a
younger Son, secured by limitation of the Use in the Land to him, in case it be
not paid, Chapter 11. S. 13. Powers given to cestuy que Use for life. To make a
Jointure to a future Wife, Chapter 8. S. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Chapter 14. S. 3. To
settle a Rent for a Jointure; Chapter 8. S. 5, 6. To make Leases for lives or
years, with or without reservation of Rent, Chapter 8. S. 10. That he and his
Issue-male may make Leases under the present Rent, Chapter 8. S. 11. For two to
make Leases successively under the ancient Rent, Chapter 8. S. 19. To grant Rents
and make Leases to younger Sons, Chapter 14. S. 3. To grant a Rentcharge to raise
and make up Portions, Chapter 9. S. 21. Power given to revoke Uses and limit new,
vide in this Table, Title, Revocation. Provisoes to make void an Estate upon
Non-payment of the Purchase-money, Chapter 4. S. 1. Upon discharge of a Surety, S.
2, 3. To make void a Use limited for a Jointure, upon her claim of Dower, Chapter
7. S. 2, 3. Chapter 11. S. 9, 10. To make void a Use limited to her in Land, in
case she go about to depart with it, Chapter 7. S. 4. To make void a limitation for
years to pay Daughters Portions, if the Feoffor die without Daughters, or after
Portions paid, Chapter 9. S. 14, 15. Another upon payment of the Daughters, or
Security given for the payment of them by him in the remainder, Chap. 9. Sect.
17, 18. To make void a Limitation of a Use to a Daughter upon her Marriage,
without the Fathers consent, and a Limitation over, Chapter 11. Sect. 6. To make
void a Use limited to the elder Brother, if he pay not a sum to the younger,
and a Limitation over to the younger, Ch 11. S. 13. To make void a particular
Use limited, as to a particular Manor upon payment of a sum to Cestuy que use,
and a limitation over, Ch 14. Sect. 11 To make void a Rent Charge upon payment
of Money, Chapter 4. S. 4. To abate part of a Rent Charge upon payment of Money, C 4.
S. 5. To transfer a Use limited in Tail to the Heir, until be arrive to full
Age, if the Ancestor die while he is within Age, and after the Heir comes to
Age, then to him, Chapter 7. S. 13. To alter a Use upon Non-payment of Money, Chapter 9.
S. 12, 13. To alter a Use upon a Portion given in Marriage, paid back, if the
Marriage take not effect, Chapter 11. S 10. vide after in this Table, Tit. Uses:
Proviso, that Cestuy que use for life, shall have power to make a Jointure to
future W^ves, Chapter 8. S. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. To make Leases, Ch 8 S. 10
for him and his Issue Male to make Leases, Sect. 11. To grant a Rent Charge,
Chap 8. Sect. 10. vide before in this Table, Title Powers. Recoveries: Covenant
to sue forth a Recovery with double Voucher, Chapter 3. S. 10, 11. Chapter 14. S 8. Ch
3. sect 12, 13, 14. vide before in this Table, Tit. Covenants. For the form of
introducing Uses upon a Recovery, and other Conveyances, vide the former Table,
in chap. 5. Releases: A Release of Errors in a Common Recovery, c 5. sect 9.
Release of Dower, chap 3 sect 28. Rents: A power given to Cestuy que use for
life, to settle a Rent on future Wife or Wives, for a Jointure, chap. 8 sect 5,
6. To grant a Rent to raise Portions, and making up of Portions unpaid, chap. 9
sect. 21. A use limited to the end a Rent may be paid, and in default, the Use
is limited to the Party that should have the Rent, chap. 9 sect. 3, 4, 5, 6. A
use of Lands first limited, chargable with Rents, after mentioned; and then the
Rents are mentioned, and power given to distrain, chap 9. sect 8, 9. c. 14. s.
2, 3, 4. That a Rent settled on a Daug^ter is cease, upon her Marriage without
Fathers consent, chapter 11. s. 2. 8. Reservation of Rent, to one and his Heirs
Males, and after to others in Remainder, chap. 13 sect 1. Revocation: Power
given to revoke Uses and limit new, chapter 12. sect. 1. by Deed or last Will,
sect. 2. To revoke Uses raised by Covenant to stand seized, Chap. 12. Sect. 3,
4. Another, with exception of Leases and Charges to be made pursuant to a power
in the same Deed given, chap. 12. sect 5. 9. To Revoke Uses (with exception of
some of the Uses) by consent of Cognizee^, sect. 8. Another, as to one Manor,
sect. 10. Another, as to particular Uses, chapter 12. s. 6. 7 The form of a short
Deed of Revocation, chapter 13. s. 1 Another, with recital of the Power of
Revocation, ch 13. s. 2, 3. Another, with a Feoffment added, sect. 4: Another,
of Uses settled by Covenant to stand seized, chapter 13. s. 5. Another, made upon
having Issue pursuant to power given, s. 6. vide the former Table, in chap 12,
13. Settlement of Estates; vide, the former Table, in chap. 14. The form of
several Covenants used in the settlement of Estater* See the former Table, in
chap. 15. Tenant to the Precipe (in a Recovery) made by Fine, chapter 3 s. 10, 11.
by Deed of Bargain and Sale, sect 12 the form of the same Deed, sect 13. Tail:
Uses limited in Tail, vide the former Table, chap. 7. 14* Trusts: To pay
Daughter, Portions, and allow maintenance until paid, chap. 9 sect. 10, 11. To
raise Portions, ch 14. s. 13. That he shall permit him in remainder to enjoy
the Land, until Portions paid to Sons and Daughters by him in Remainder; but
after default to enter, and raise the Portions, and then to surrender his
Estate, chapter 9. s. 19, 20. A limitation for years to Executors in Trust, to pay
Debts and Legacies, chapter 10. s. 4. To perform a Will, sect. 5, 6. A limitation
for payment of Debts and Legacies, ch 14. s 6. 10. ch 10 s 1 To sell the Lands
to pay Debts, and restore the surplus; but if the Heir pay the Debts, within a
year of Fathers death, Then the Trustees to convey to him, ch 10. s. 2. To sell
and dispose the Money as it is appointed, chapter 14. sect 10. Uses: The forms of
introducing Uses upon Fines, Recoveries, etc. vide the other Table in chap 5.
The several forms of limitation of Uses. See the other Table in chap. 7. That
Feoffees and Cognizees shall stand seized to the use of such Persons, in whom
an Estate for life shall be settled by Cestuy que use for life, according to
power to him given, and after to other uses, chap. 8. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. A
Use limited, after a determination of a particular Estate (made according to
Power given by the Deed) to others therein named, ch 8. sect. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. 18. 19. 22. As to several Manors, several Uses chapter 14 sect 6.
A Use limited to such Persons to whom Leases shall be made, according to power
given by the Deed, Chapter 8. Sect 20, 21. Chapter 9. S. 10. Chapter 14. Sect. 5 A Use
limited, to the end a Rent may be paid, with clause of Distress, and a
Limitation over of the Use of the Land, chargable with the Rent, Chapter 9. S. 3,
4, 5, 6. Use of the Land to several persons, chargable notwithstanding with the
Rents after mentioned, C 9* S. 8, 9. Chapter 14. S. 2, 5. A Use changed upon non
payment of an Annuity, Chapter 9. S 2, 3. A Use limited to Daughters, in default of
Heirs Males to cease, upon payment of their Portions by him in remainder, and
the Use then is limited to him, Chapter 9. S. 16, 17. A Use li(...)ed to the
Cognizors Wife to cease, upon settlement of other Lands on her, with a
Limitation over, Chapter 11. 8. 1. A Use limited to persons to whom a Rent is
appointed, upon default of payment, Ch 11. S. 4, 5. A Use to cease if Cestuy
que use marry without Fathers consent, and a Limitation over, Chapter 11. S. 6. A
Use limited to a Wife altered upon her claim of Dower, Chapter 11. S. 9. Use
altered upon non payment of money, Chapter 11. S. 12. Uses limited to pay Portions
to Children, A Use to Cognizees to pay Portions, and allow maintenance until
paid, C. 9. S. 11, 12, 13. If Feoffor, etc. die without. Daughters, or after
the Portions paid, the Limitation to be void, with remainder over, Chapter 9. S.
14, 15, 18, 19, 20. Ch 14. S. 13. For payment of a Rent to raise Portions, Ch
9. S. 21. Uses limited to pay Debts: A Use limited for years to pay the
Cognizors Debts and Annuities by him granted, Chapter 10. S. 1. Use limited, that
the Land shall be sold to pay Debts, Chapter 20. S. 2, 3. A Limitation for years to
Cognizors Executors to pay Debts, S. 4. And Legacies, ibid. To perform the
Cognizors W^ll, S. 5. Chapter 14. S. 6. A Use of a Manor to be sold, etc. Chapter 14.
S. 2. A Use limited to such persons as the Cognizor shall appoint by Will,
until a sum raised, etc. with a Limitation over, Ch 10. S. 6. Power given to
revoke Uses, and appoint new: See the former Table in Chapter 12. The forms of
Deeds of Revocation: See the former Table in Chapter 13. See also before in this
Table, Title Revocation. Writings and Evidences: A Covenant to produce them, in
def^nce of the Title, Chapter 3. S. 25. Waste: A Limitation for life without
impeachment of waste, and power to commit waste, Chapter 7. S. 7, 8. Without
impeachment of waste as to Woods, etc. S. 2. etc.
Arcana Clericalia: Or, THE MYSTERIES OF CLERKSHIP.
CAP. I. What a FINE is.
A FINE is that which is accounted of all kind of Assurances the highest and
most forcible, and although it be but fictio Juris, yet it is called a Fine
quia finem litibus imponit, and is also said to be exceptio peremptoria, and
therefore not only esteemed A micab^lis compositio but finalis concordia, the
latter of which it is deservedly said to be, quia finem ponit negotio, adeo ut
neutra pars litigantium ab eo de cetero possit recedere. It is an Instrument or
Assurance containing a final Agreement (commonly made by the consent of
persons, sometimes by force of a Suite in Law upon some Covenant for the
levying thereof) concerning Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Rent, or other
things, wherein the Kings License must be duly had and obtained, It must be
acknowledged by the Cognizor, Deforceant, or he that parts with his right in
the ^ands contained in the Fine, upon a writ of Covenant (most commonly, but
sometimes upon a) Quid juris clamat, per quae servicia, de rationabilibus
divisis, de Recto patens, de Recto clausum, warantia Cha^tae, etc. as the case
requires, before the Justices of the Common Pleas, or such other persons
thereunto authorized by Commission out of Chancery, and lastly, it must be
engrossed upon Record in the same Court, there to remain for ever for the
ending and composing of all differences and controversies as well between the
parties and privies to the same, as all strangers not claiming in due time.
Although a Fine is now become a formal Assurance of common use from the result
of a feigned difference, yet anciently it was the composure of a real
controversy, and the end of a Suite indeed. For after the parties had
contended by suite in law about the thing in question, by agreement a fine was
levied of it, and so the difference was ended. This of all other is esteemed
the best Assurance, and is much of the nature of a Feoffment with Livery and
Seisin executed thereupon, but of greater efficacy, and therefore called a
Feoffment upon Record. By this Lands may be conveyed in Fee-simple, Fee-tayl
for life, or for years, and rent thereby also reserved, And lastly to sum up
all in the words of the Sages of the Law -- There neither is, nor can be
provided by the Laws of the Land, any greater or more noble Security, by which
any person may make his Estate more secure, or produce a Testimony of the
highest Nature for confirmation of his Estate, then a Fine levied in the Kings
Court upon Record: which is therefore called a Fine, because it ought to be the
Complement, and end of all proceedings and differences.

CAP. II. Of the several kinds of a Fine.
OF Fines there be four kinds. The first whereof is called a Fine sur
Cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de son done. which is single, and called
also a Fine sur Release. The second is a Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo
que il ad de son done, which is double, and properly called a Fine sur done
grant and render. The third is called a Fine sur Cognizance de droit tantum,
which is sometimes single, sometimes with Grant, and then it is called a Fine
sur done grant. And the fourth a Fine sur concessit.

A Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo que A Fine sur Cognizance de droit
come ceo, etc. what it is?
il ad de son done is the best, most principal, and surest of all kind of
Fines, by which an Estate passes absolutely to the Cognizee, without rendering
any thing back again to the Cognizor; and therefore is said to be single. It is
levied with Proclamations according to the form of the Statute 4 H. 7. Cap. 24.
It is said to be executed, viz. such a Fine whereby the possession in Law of
the lands contained therein is immediately transferred to, and v^sted in the
Cognizee without the help of a writ of habere facias seisinam; so that he may
enter: for that the Estate is thereby (in law) in the Cognizee, that is to say,
to such uses as are declared in the deed leading the use of the Fine; for take
this for a maxim, That unless it be declared by deed (or otherwise) to what
use the Fine was levied, the Fine shall be and inure to the use of the Cognizor
that levied the Fine.

A Fine sur done grant and render, is that which is A Fine sur done grant and
render, what?
called a double Fine, being in a manner two Fines (that is to say, A Fine sur
Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. and a Fine sur Concessit) formed into one,
whereby the Cognizee (after Release and warranty made to him by the Cognizor of
the lands contained therein) does grant and render back to the Cognizor the
lands, etc. or some part thereof, and many times limitting thereby Remainders
to persons that are Strangers, and not named in the writ of Covenant. This fine
is partly executed, partly executory, and has Proclamations, and is ( quoad
partem priorem) absolutely of the same Nature with a Fine sur Cognizance de
droit come ceo, etc. but as to the second part containing a Grant and render
(as aforesaid) it is taken in law to be rather a private Conveyance or Charter,
then to have the force of a Fine, which (as we have before expressed) is
declared to be a Feoffment upon Record. With this agrees the Lord Cooks
exposition in 5. Rep. fo. 38. where speaking of a Fine with Render he has
these words. The Cognizance of a Fine, and a Grant and render therein; shall be
expounded and taken as a Charter, or other Conveyance between party and party,
and not as a Writ or Judgment upon Record.

A Fine sur Cognizance de droit tantum, ove Fine sur done grant, what?
grant (which is also called a Fine sur done grant) is levied without
Proclamations, executory, and much of the Nature of a Fine sur Concessit, and
is used commonly by Tenant for life to make a surrender of the Lands contained
in it, to him or them that have the Reversion or Remainder thereof, and so you
will find it used Chap. 10. Sect. 1. and 5. of this Treatise. And sometimes it
is expressed by such Fine, that the particular Estate is in another, and that
the Cognizor wills that the other shall have the Reversion, or that the land
shall remain to the other after the particular Estate spent. West. Symb. part.
2. Dyer 216. Plowd. 265. Coke 3. 86. and 7. 12. Crook 1. last published fo.
693.

A Fine sur Concessit, is where the Cognizor is Fine sur Concessit, what?
seized of the Lands contained therein, and the Cognizee has no Freehold
therein, but it passes by the Fine, it is without proclamations and executory,
for the Cognizee or Cognizees therein must enter, and have a writ of habere
facias seisinam, according to their several cases, for the obtaining of the
possession, if the parties at the time of levying such Fine sur Concessit be
not in possession of the thing granted, but if they be in possession at such
time, there needs not any such Writ or any Execution of the said Fine to put
them into possession; for then the Fine will enure by way of Extinguishment of
Right, and does not alter the Estate or right of the Cognizee, however
perchance it may better it.

CAP. III. Of the parts of a Fine.
THe parts of a Fine are five, viz. The writ of Covenant. 2. The Composition,
or the Kings license to alienate. 3. The Concord. 4. The Note of the Fine. 5.
The foot of the Fine. And if it be a Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo,
etc. it is requisite that a sixth be added, viz. Proclamations, as a necessary
adjunct thereunto.

(1) The writ of Covenant is the original writ Writ of Covenant.
taken out by the Cognizee or Cognizees against the Cognizor or Cognizors to
the Fine: for without ^his a Fine cannot be levied: And a Fine may be levied
upon any writ of Right, or other writ whereby Land is demanded or may be
recovered.

(2) The Composition or Kings License to alienate, Composition.
for which the (...) has a Fine or sum of money, which is called the Kings
Silver, and is paid in when the Land reposeth.

(3) The Concord, or Agreement between the Concord.
parties that intend the levying of the Fine, wherein is declared how and in
what manner the things contained in the writ shall pass; and as the writ of
Covenant is the foundation, so this is the substance of the Fine. For if the
Kings Fine be entered and indorsed upon the writ of Covenant by the Clerk of
the Kings Silver, although the Cognizor dye before the Fine comes to the
Chirographer, yet is the Fine good, for the Note, and foot of the Fine, are but
Abstracts taken out of this by the Chirographer.

(4) The Note of the Fine, which is an Abstract Note of the Fine.
taken out of the writ of Covenant, and Concord, by the Chirographer before it
be engrossed, and begins thus, ss. Inter A. B. quer. and. C. D. deforcientem.

(5) The foot of the Fine includes the whole Foot of the Fine.
Fine, the parties to the same, the thing granted, the day year and place, and
before whom the Concord was made; and this is called the foot because it is the
last part of the Fine. And when this is done the Fine is engrossed of Record,
and the Indentures made by the Chirographer, and delivered to the party to whom
the Cognizance is made, and then the Fine is said to be engrossed.

The Proclamations made upon a Fine, which although they be not the essential
parts of a Fine, yet as is said before are requisite to a Fine sur Cognizance
de droit come ceo, etc. for they do make a Bar according to what does pass.

CAP. IV. Who may be Cognizors and Cognizees in Fines, and by what names they
may give and take in a Fine.
SVch persons Male or Female, or bodies sole or Who may be Cognizors in Fines.
Corporate that are capable of granting by deed may be Cognizors in Fines. And
so an Infant, Feme covert, an Idiot, mad or Lunatic person, one non sane
memory, or that has a Lethargy, or a doting old person that wants discretion,
a man that is drunk, or one born blind, deaf, and dumb, a Bastard, an outlawed
person, or one Attainted of Treason, or Felony, or persons that are compelled
thereto by threats and Menaces to lose their lives, or members, or to suffer
Imprisonment: and a Fine levied by them may be good. But the Judges or
Commissioners before whom Fines are to be levied by such persons, ought not to
admit such unfit persons to acknowledge Fines, as Madmen, Lunaticks, Idiots,
doting persons, men that have the Lethargy, or are drunk, Infants, Fe^e
Coverts, and such as are forced to it by threats or Imprisonment, neither ought
such as are born blind, deaf, and dumb, persons attainted of Treason or Felony,
and such like to be received to levy Fines. But if any of these be admitted
Cognizor in a Fine, and such Fine be thereupon levied in due form of law, The
Fine in most cases will be good and unavoidable. Coke 12. 124. Lit. Sect. 731.
fieri non debet, sed factum valet.

A Fine may also be levied by a Mayor and Commonalty, and such other
Corporations Civil, and bodies Politic as have an absolute Estate in their
possessions belonging to their Corporations, if it be done together, and by the
joint consent of the body Corporate; For no one of the Corporation, no not the
head of the Corporation by himself, nor any of the Members (though the greatest
part of them consent thereto) without the general consent of the whole
Corporation, may Levy a Fine, for that shall not be good. Corporations
Spiritual, as Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Heads and Fellows of Colleges, and
the like, are forbidden, and restrained by diverse Acts of Parliament from
levying any Fine of their lands belonging to them at this day: but of the lands
such persons have in their own Right, they may levy Fines as other persons may
do.

A Fine levied by one Ioyntenant, Tenant in Common or Partner of Lands so held
by him, to a Stranger, another Ioyntenant, Tenant in Common or Partner, will be
good.

And lastly take this general Caution concerning Cognizors in Fines, That they
must be such, and have such an Estate in the Lands intended to be granted by
Fine, as they are not prohibited by any Law to levy the Fine, otherwise the
Fine will be void. And hence it is, That Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Prebends,
Parsons, Vicars, and the like may not levy a Fine of any Ecclesiastical Lands
in which they have any Estate of Freehold in right of their Churches, Houses,
etc. for if they do, it will be void after their lives, Coke 11. 78. Plowd.
575. 538. 375. 21 Edw. 4. 13. And hence it is that he that has an Estate Tail
of the Kings gift of provision may not levy a good Fine of it to bind the King,
or the Issue in Tail, by 32 H. 8. Cap. 28. And that a Fine levied by the heir
that is an Intruder upon the Kings possession, is void, 1 H. 7. 5. 24 Edw. 3.
65. And hence it is that he that has an Estate in Fee-simple of lands in the
Right of his wife, may not levy a Fine thereof without her, and if he do, she
or her heirs, or other person to whom the right may come, may avoid it after
her death. 32 H. 8. Cap. 28. 12 Edw. 4. 14. Coke 6. 55. Brook Fines 121.

Concerning Cognizees in Fines, you are to W^o may be Cognizees in Fines.
know, That any person that is capable of being a good Grantee in a Deed, may
be a good Cognizee in a Fine, and may thereby have and take the thing granted
by it. And so any man or woman, Sole or Covert, of full age, or under age, any
mad or Lunatic person, Idiot, or man de non sane memory, any person in, or
out of prison, or beyond Sea, any person attainted of Felony or Treason, or
outlawed in a personal Action, a Bastard, a Clerk convict, an Alien, any one of
these may be a Cognizee, and take by a Fine as well as by a Deed. And a Fine
levied to any such person is good. 50 Edw. 3. 9. 3 H. 6. 42. 24 Edw. 3. 62.

So Corporations Spiritual and Temporal, Civil or Corporal, may be Cognizees in
Fines, and Fines levied to them will be good. But before the Engrossing of such
a Fine, there goes always a Writ to the Justices of Common Pleas, Quod
permittunt Finem illum levari.

Note that a Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. may not be levied to
any person, but one that is party to the writ of Covenant. Except the Cognizee
be a Demandant in a writ of Entry; And so a Fine levied by the Demandant to the
Vouchee (who is supposed by the Law to be Tenant to the land) or from the
Vouchee to the Demandant is good, and yet they are not Parties to the Writ. But
a Fine levied by the Vouchee to a Stranger is void. Coke 3. 29. 7 Edw. 4. 13.

Care must be taken in Fines that Cognizors and By what names Cognizors and
Cognizees may give and take in a Fine.
Cognizees must be named in Fines by their right names of Baptism, and Surname:
except they be Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, or Barons,
which are admitted without any surname, as Jacobus Rex Angliae, Carolus
Princeps Walliae, Johannes Dux Lancastr. etc. But for Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen (which be names of Worship, and Honor) their Christian name, and
Sur-name are always expressed, together with their Additions. And as for the
Additions of Bishop, Dean, Parson, etc. they are admitted in Fines rather out
of Courtesy, then necessity, for the Fine may be good without them. Brownlow
1. part. 30. 7 H. 4. 22. 1. Ass. pl. 11. 14 H. 6. 15. 21 Edw. 4. 8. 1. Ass. pl.
11. But if there be two of one name it is best to distinguish them by Seniori,
Juniori, or the like. Brownlow 1. part. 30. So if it be a Corporation or
Fraternity to be named in the Fine care must be had, that it be done by the
very true name of the Corporation, as it is named in the Charter and Foundation
of it. 11 H. 4 44. 14 H. 4. 20. 7 H. 6. 27. 37 H. 6. 29.

CAP. V. Of what things Fines may be levied, and ^ by what Names, and how the
Parcels are to be placed therein.
A Fine may be levied of all things whereof a Of what things Fines may be
levied.
Precipe quod reddat lies, or of which a writ of Entry may be brought. It will
be good of all things Ecclesiastical or Temporal, that are inheritable, and in
Esse at the time of the levying of the Fine. So a Fine may be levied of an
Honor, Manor, Island, Barony, Castle, Message, Cottage, Mill, Toft,
Curtilage, Dov^house, Garden, Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood, Underwood, Chapel,
River, Parsonage, Rectory, Advowson, Vicaridge, Tithes impropriate, ^stovers,
Foldage, Corrody, Office, Fishing, Warren, Fair, Mine, View of Frank-pledge,
Waif, Stray, Felons goods, Deodand Hospital, Furzes, Heath, Moor, Rent, Common,
Hundred, Way, Ferry, Franchise, Seignory, Toll, Tallage, Picage, Pontage,
Services, Portion of Tithes, Oblations, and the like. But a Fine levied of
Ancient Demesne Lands will not be good. Stat. 32 H. 8. Cap. 7. Coke 8. 145.
West. Symb. 2. part

Anciently in levying a Fine of a Manor, it was By what Names things may be
levied in Fines. Manerium.
usual to add to it, or explain it by the words, Demesns, Rents, Seigniories,
Courts, Pleas, etc. And such Generals whereof it consisted, but this way is
altered, and now it passes by the name of Manerium cum pertinentiis. 3. Inst.
513.

That things passed in Fines must be set down by their Nature, and quality, as
Land, Meadow, Pasture, etc. and by the place where they lie; there must be apt
words used to express the thing named to pass by the Fine. For a Fine levied de
tenemento, or de hereditamento, or de duobus tenementis, for the uncertainty of
the thing and unaptness of the words, is void or voidable at least for Error,
Crook 1. 196. Leon. Rep. 188. for the proper word to express a Tenement or
Hereditament in a Fine, Messuagium.
is Mesuagium, and a Fine levied de uno mesuagio, or duobus mesuagiis is good.

That one Manor may be parcel of another Manor, and pass by the name of that
Manor. 20 Ass. pl. 54.

That a Castle, Honor, or Hundred may be parcel Castellum^ Honor-Hundredum.
of a Manor, and pass by the name of the Manor whereof it is parcel. Or it
may pass by its own proper name, as de Castello de S. cum pertin. or de
Hundredo de S. cum pertin. or de Honor de S. 20 Ass. pl. 54. 2 Edw. 3. 36. 1
Edw. 3. 4.

That the County, City, Town, Parish, Hamlet, and Endship, wherein the things
lie that are to pass by the Fine ought to be certainly named. And therefore if
there be two Towns Walton and Street in the parish of Street, and a Fine is
levied of such Lands in Street, in this case Lands in Walton will not pass by
this Fine, Walton being a distinct Town or Ville by it self; and although
Street the Parish comprehend both, yet in the Fine the lands in Walton shall
not be said to be comprised, unless Walton had been an Hamlet of Street, and
that the Fine had been levied of lands in the Parish of Street, then all would
have passed well enough. Crook 2. 120. Stock and Foxes Case. So if a Manor
extend it self into diverse Towns, as into A. B. C. it is safe and best to
express all the Towns or none of them at all. For happily the Fine may be good,
if the Manor be only named, and be not said in what Town it does lie; As de
Manerio de S. cum pertin. but otherwise it must be de Manerio de S. cum pertin.
in A. B. and C. for if any one of the Towns be omitted, none of the Manor in
that Town so omitted will pass. 9 Edw. 4. 6.

That where diverse Manors be of one name, with distinction of North and South
to it, as South S. North S. and the like, There it is safe to express in the
Original writ, and all the proceedings of the Fine, which of the Manors is
intended to be passed by the Fine. And yet perhaps the Fine may be good to pass
the Manor intended to be passed without this distinction. Crook 1. 196. 200.
9 Edw. 4. 6. Brook Fines 44. 91. 12 H. 7. 6.

That when a Fine is but for the Presentation Presentation, Parsonage,
Vicaridg, Rectories, etc.
to a Church only it must be de Advocatione Ecclesiae de S. and not cum
pertin. And a Vicaridge endowed must be de Advocatione Vicariae Ecclesiae de S.
and not cum pertin. And where the Vicaridge is not endowed, it must go under
these words, de Advocatione Ecclesiae de S. And Parsonages, Rectories,
Advowsons, Vicaridges, and Tithes impropriate pass not by the words de
Advocatione Ecclesiae, but de Rectoria Ecclesiae de S. cum pertin. West. Symb.
2 part. Title Fines and Concords.

A Fine was levied de Advocatione Ecclesiae de Advowson and Rent reserved. *
Rectory and Rent reserved. Wood. Houseboot, etc. Chapel or Hospital. Mesuage.
C. ac de quat^or Librat. reddi^. cum pertin. in S. C. and B. Coke 3. 45.

A Fine was levied of a Rectory out of which a Rent of 30 l. per Annum was
rendered. Coke Lillingtons Case.

High-wood, and Underwood pass under the general denomination of Wood.

Houseboot, Hayboot, and Plowboot by the name of Estovers.

A Chapel or Hospital will pass by the name of a Mesuage. 13 Ass. pl. 2.

So by the name of a Mesuage with the Appurtenances may pass an House, with a
Shop, Curtilage, Garden, Orchard (and as some say, a Dovehouse, and Mill) as
parcel thereof.

That by the name of a Cottage, a Toft, Chamber, Cottage.
and Celler will pass.

That part of an entire thing may pass by the Part of entire things.
words, de medietate, de tertia part, de quarta part, etc. (as the Case
requires) or de duabus partibus in tres parts dividend. or de medietate omnium
decimarum granorum, and feni ac terrae vocat. le Blackland^ cum pertin. in H.

But if an entire thing, as a Manor or Mesuage be parted, as if the Manor of
S. be divided into two parts, and the division be so made as that the Manor
for that part be not extinct, and a Fine is ^ be levied of a part of it, it
must pass by the name ^f the whole; As de Manerio de S. So if a Mesuage and 23
acres of land be parted, the part divided may pass by the name of one Mesuage
and ten ^ctes of land, and not de medietate ^nius Mesuagii and viginti and
trium acrarum terrae.

And Note that it is usual in Fines to comprehend more number of acres then are
intended to pass, yet in such Case no more shall pass, then what is intended
and agreed upon between the Parties. Popham Rep. 105.

^ed. ss. PRaecipe Thomae Snagge Armigero and Rado Precipe quod teneat, or
Abstract of the writ of Covenant. Order of placing the parcels.
Snagge generoso quod just, etc. teneant Roberto Yarway generoso Manerium de
Kempston Dawbney, alias Kempston S. John's cum pertin. in Kempston, Et nisi,
etc. AC de duobus Mesuagiis (or de uno Capitali Mesuagio) duobus Salinis,
vocat. Witch-houses alias Salt-houses, duobus Shopis, duabus Cameris, ^^o
Stabulo, sex Cottagiis, uno Curtilagio, duobus Toft is, quatuor horreis, uno
Molendino aquatico (or uno Molendino aquatico granatico) uno Molendino
ventritico, or uno Molendino Fullonico, uno Columbar. december Gardinis, december
Poma^iis, Centum acris terrae (or terrae aqua coopertae) riginti acris Prati,
december acris Pasture, sexdecim acris Bosci (or Subbosci, or de quatuor virgat.
Bosci) viginti acris Saliceti, viginti acris Jamp^orum and Bruere, viginti
acris More, duabus acris Turbariae, octo acris Mosset. sex acris Juncar. december
acris Marisci frisci (or Marisci salsi) duabus acris Alneti, quadraginta acris
Arundin. december acris Ruscar. or de Rectoria Ecclesiae parochialis de C. ac de
decimis Garbarum granorum and feni eidem Rectoriae spectan. or de decimis
Garbarum ad Ecclesiam de C. qualiter cunque spect. or de Rectoria impropriat.
de R. cum pertin. or de Rectoria de K.

Or de Advocatione Ecclesiae de K. cum pertin, or de Advocatione Ecclesiae de
K. or de Advocatione, Presentatione, Donatione, Libera dispositione, and Jure
Patronatus Ecclesiae de K.

Or de Rectoria de K. Ac de Advocatione Vicariae de K. or de Advocatione
Ecclesiae de K. alternis vicibus cum acciderit.

Or de proficuis granorum, feni, Lane, and Agnorum, Ac de omnimodis aliis
decimis cum pertin. in K.

Or de quadam portione decimarum aut pensione in S. or de decimis garbarum
granorum and feni cum pertin. in A. and B. Necnon de decimis Lane, Agnorum
Oblationum, Obventionum and Emolumentorum, Ac de omnibus aliis decimis
quibuscunque provenien. crescen. seu renovan. in W. or de omnibus and omnimodis
Oblation. decimis garbarum, granorum, feni, Lane, Lini porcellorum, ancarum,
Agnellorum, etc. Et aliis Emolumentis quibuscunque spectan. pertinen. crescen.
sive existen. cum pertin. in H.

Or de Communia pasture pro omnibus and omnimodis Averiis, or de pastura pro
trescentis ovibus cum pertin. in parochia de Dale, or de Communia pro omnibus
Animalibus ( or pro omnibus and omnimodis Animalibus) or pro december ovibus,
december equis, vaccis, porcis, spadonibus, etc. or de Communia pasturae quam
praedictus A. habet and habere solebat pro omnibus Averiis suis in Centum acris
pasturae ipsius A. in S.

Or de libera Warrena sua in D. or de una Wharfa, or de seperal. Piscaria in
Aqua de S. or de liberis Piscariis in Aquis de B. C. and D. or de Piscaria, or
de liberate unius Faldagii and cursu ovium, or de liberate Faldagii, or de
liberate Faldagii pro viginti ovibus, or de libero Faldagio ovium, or de
libera Falda, or de Gurgite, or de Cursu aquae currentis a loco vocat. H. intra
and per terras vocat. M.

Or de Nundinis de B. singulis Annis ad Festa de N. B. ibidem tenend. or de
Market. de B. or de quieto and libero passagio ultra aquam de S. or de Chimino.

Or de viginti libra^. viginti solidat. december de^r. uno Obulo and quadrant.
Reddit. or de december ^arcat. reddit. or december Marcis reddit. or de ^eddit. unius
libre piperis, unius Clavi Gariophil^, or unius Rose rubre, or unius quarter'
hordei, ^ de reddit. Centum Gallinarum, or de duobus ^^ch. Caponum, or de
reddit. unius par Cheirodecarum, unius libre Cere, unius libre Cumini, ^ de
reddit. Centum Gallorum, or de viginti so^dis annualis redditus exeun. de
Manerio de D.

Or if it be of parts of things whereof the Fine is ^^ be levied, they must be
thus named, de Medieate Manerii de D. cum pertin. de tertia part du^um
mesuagiorum, or de duabus partibus in tres ^rtes dividend. octo acrarum terrae,
or de tertia part tenementorum in C. in tribus partibus divi^^, or de
Medietate december Mesuagiorum, or de ^^rcia part Rectoriae Ecclesiae de K. cum
pertin^^ de Medietate omnium decimarum granorum, bladorum, garbarum and feni de
terra vocat. F. cum pertin. in L. or de tercia part Vic' Franc' pleg' cum
pertin. bonorum and catallorum, waiviat, felon. fugitivorum, utlagat, in
exigendo posit. felon. de se, Deodand. and Thesaur. invent. cum pertin. in D.
or de tercia part quinque librarum cum pertin. exeun. de Manerio de H.

And lastly for your better instruction of placing the parcels in a Fine,
observe these following Rules, ^s 1. That the worthy things must be put first,
so a Mesuage must be named before Land, a Manor before a Mesuage, a Castle
before a Manor, Arrable before Meadow, etc. Plowd. 168. 7 H. 6. 39. 2. Things
general before special things; as land (being the genus, therefore) is to be
placed before Meadow, Pasture, Wood, Heath, Marish, etc. and Boscus must
precede Alnetum, Salicetum, etc. as wood is the genus to Wood-ground. 3. Entire
things are to be set down before parts of things: de Manerio de. A. de
Medietate Manerii de B. etc. 4. Parts of the things excepted must follow the
things themselves out of which they are excepted. And if there be diverse
parcels in the Writ, that thing out of which the exception is made must be put
last of all, thus, after all the rest, de Manerio de B. cum pertin. in C.
except. uno Mesuagio, duabus acris terrae and Advocatione Ecclesiae de B. etc.
Regist. Orig. so. 6. 5. The thing excepted must be certainly named, and in this
there needs not the Addition of the words cum pertin. as are used after the
things granted. 6. The Exception must always be of such a thing as will lie in
a Writ, and of such a thing as is comprehended in the writ, as Precipe A. quod
just, etc. ten. B. Conventionem, etc. de uno Mesuagio, duabus acris terre,
december acris prati, and Centum acris pasture cum pertin. except. una acra prati
in L. Et est Concordia talis, scilicet, quod praedict. A. recogn. tenementa
praedicta cum pertin. (except. preexcept.) esse jus, etc. 7. Where the Original
writ is of many things, if of eight things, as a Manor, House, Rectory, etc.
they are thus expressed; first, De uno Manerio: secondly, Ac de Rectoria:
thirdly, Necnon de Mesuagio, etc. and for the fourth thing Aceciam: for the
fifth, Praeterea: for the sixth, Ac ulterius: for the seventh, Aceciam: and for
the eight, Ac insuper. And if there be more then to begin again.

CAP. VI. Observations in Drawing the forms of Concords.
TWo things are chiefly to be considered in the drawing of Concords of Fines.
As first, the Precipe, which is the Recital of the contents of the writ of
Covenant and is called the Title or head of the Concord or Agreement, The form
whereof is thus; Midd. ss. Precipe A. B. quod just, etc. teneat C. D.
Conventionem, etc. de december Mesuagiis, Centum acris terrae, and sexaginta acris
Pasturae in Isllington, Et nisi, etc. This Praecipe is to express the things in
particular whereof the Fine is to be levied, in the same order and words as
they are mentioned in the Original writ, in which also the names of the
parties, with their Additions must be inserted, as Precipe F. Comiti B. quod
just, etc. ten. H. F. Armigero, etc.

That therein the parcels must be named according to the directions before set
down in the fifth Chapter, which must always be according to the Rule in the
Register, comprehended in the ensuing verses:

Mes.^gium, Tossed.um, Mol.endinum, Col.nmbare, Gar.dinum, Terr.a,

Pra.tum, Pas.tu^a, Bos.cus, Brue.ra, Mora.

Junca.ria, Maris.cus, Alne.tum, Pis.caria, Red.ditus, Sectare priora.

Secondly, The Concord it self, as to which we are to observe that the
particulars (or parcels) ought not to be recited as fully in the Concord as
when they were first named in the writ of Covenant (or other original writ
pertinent to a Fine) or as they are expressed in the Precipe; but instead of
naming of every particular over again it will be sufficient to say thus, Et est
Concordia talis scilicer quod praedictus A. recogn. tenementa praedicta cum
pertin. esse jus ipsius H. etc. where note that by the word tenementa any
number or quantity of distinct things, or parcels, will be well enough and
aptly expressed, except the Precipe be of entire things by themselves, as
Precipe, etc. quod ten. Conventionem, etc. de Manerio, or Maneriis cum pertin.
in A. here in this case the Concord must be, quod recogn. pred. Manerium, or
pred. Maneria cum pertin. Neither will Mesuages named by themselves in a
Precipe pass by the word Tenementa in the Concord; So an Honor, Castle,
Island, Barony, Hundred, Borough, Knights Fee, the Site of a Manor, a Park, a
Prebendry, Rent, Common, a Warren, Fishing, Rectory, Tithes, Oblations, Toll,
Stallage, Pontage, View of Frank-pledge, a Liberty, Franchise, Office,
Bayliwick, Fair, Market passage, the Moiety or part of any entire thing,
Wreccum Maris, Advowsons of a Church, or portions of Tithes, must be
particularly named in the Concord, as well as in the Precipe, otherwise the
Concord will not be good.

Although there be diverse Cognizees in a Concord the right shall be limited to
one of them, As where A. is Cognizor, B. and C. Cognizees, The Concord shall be
quod praedictus A. recogn. praedicta tenementa cum pertin. esse jus ipsius B.
ut illa quae iidem B. and C. habent de dono praedicti A. and illa remisit, and
quiet. clam. de se, and heredibus suis prefat. B. and C. heredibus ipsius B.
imperpetuum.

But where a Fine is from diverse Cognizors, the Release and Warranty must be
from all the Cognizors and their heirs, thus expressed in the Concord where A.
B. are Cognizors and C. Cognizee* ss. quod predicti A. and B. recogn. predicta
tenementa com pertin. esse jus ipsius C. ut illa que idem C. habet de dono
predictorum A. and B. and illa remisit, and quier. clam. de ipsis A. and B. and
heredibus suis pred. C. and hered. suis imperpetuum. Et predictus A. concessit
prose, and heredibus ipsius A. quod ipsi warant* prefat. C. and heredibus suis
tenementa predicta cum pertin. contra predictos A. and heredes suos
imperpetuum. And the like Waranty from B. But if the Fine be of Gavel-kind it
is otherwise. Coke 5. 38.

It is usual for diverse persons that have made several small distinct purchases
in one County to join together in one Fine (for saving charges:) And that the
writ of Covenant be brought by all the Vendees against all the Vendors, and
every one of them Warants for himself and his heirs, against him and them
only. West. Symb. 2. part.

CAP. VII. Before whom, and how, Fines are to be levied; with the manner of
drawing a Fine at Bar by the Sergeants at Law.
THe persons before whom Fines are to be levied are such as either take
Cognizance of Fines ex Officio, and by virtue of their Office, or such as are
appointed and authorized thereunto. Those that do it ex Officio are the Lord
Chief Justice for the time being of the Court of the Common Pleas, who has
power to receive and certify the Acknowledgment of all manner of Fines without
any kind of Commission, as well in any place out of the Court, as in the Court.
And so any two of the Justices of the same Court may do it in open Court.

Those that take Cognizance of Fines otherwise then ex Officio, are such as do
it by virtue of some Commission General or Special granted unto them by the
King out of Chancery.

The first sort of those that take and certify Cognizances of Fines by virtue
of Commission are Justices of Assize, who, although they may do it by the
general words of their Patent, yet they do not use to certify them without a
special writ of Dedimus potestatem.

Secondly, the Judges of both Benches and Barons of the Exchequer, who do
usually first take the Cognizance of Fines without Dedimus potestatem, and
afterward Certify the same upon a Dedimus potestatem to warrant and justify
their proceedings therein.

The third sort are certain, discreet, honest, and understanding Gentlemen in
the Country or place where the Cognizors which are to acknowledge the Fine
reside, who have always a special writ of Dedimus potestatem directed unto
them, whereby they have power to do such things therein, as the Chief Justice
does daily ex Officio, upon surmise that the parties that are to acknowledge
the Fine are not able to travel to Westminster for the doing thereof. And by
this Writ upon such surmise power may be given to any Sergeant at Law, or to
any Knight or Gentleman together to take the Cognizance of the persons that are
to be Cognizors in the Fine: And this they may take from them either altogether
at once, or asunder at several times, and in several places as they please.

But herein great care must be had by the Commissioners in executing their
Commission, least they commit some notorious error to make void the Fine. As
if the Dedimus potestatem be to two Jointly to do it, and one of them does it
alone, or if the same be to three Jointly to do it, and two of the three only
do it, or the like, this will be Error. So if one of the Cognizees be one of
the Commissioners, and he himself take the Cognizance of the Fine, this
likewise will be Error. F. N. B. 146, 147. Dyer 220. 11 H. 6. 21. Crook 1.
249. Form. been placitandi Tit. Erros Assigns.

The Judges and Commissioners empowered to take Cognizance of Fines, are to be
careful of whom they take such Cognizances for Fines before them: That they
know the Cognizors, and so do not suffer one person to make Cognizance in the
name of another, nor take any Cognizance from persons prohibited by Law, and
such as are unfit to be Cognizors, as Infants, Mad men, Drunken men, and the
like. And if husband and wife be Cognizors, the wife ought to be examined
solely and secretly, whether she be content of her own free will to part with
her right in the land, or whether she do it by the menace and threats, or out
of fear of her Husband* and then the contents of the Fine must be read
distinctly to her; And if the Judge doubt of her age, he may examine her upon
oath, and so may Commissioners, which being done, and the Fine read to the
Cognizors they are to put their hands to the Concord. And then the
Commissioners are to certify the Cognizance of the parties the same day and
year when it was taken, and so return the Dedimus, with the Concord, into the
Court of Common Pleas, within a year after it is taken at farthest. And upon
any of the Commissioner's refusal so to do, the party grieved may by Certiora^i
compel him that has it in his Custody, his Executor, or Administrator to
certify it.

How to sue out a Fine before the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
You are first to draw your Precipe in paper, after this manner: ss. Precipe T.
S. Armigero and A. uxori ejus quod just, etc. teneant. R. S. Armigero
Conventionem, etc. de Maneriis de K. and S. cum pertinentiis ac de december
Mesuagiis, viginti Cottagiis, december Tostis, and Centum acris Pasture in M. Et
nisi, etc. which done ingross it fairly in Parchment with the Concord
(according to the Instructions, and Presidents in this Treatise:) And then go
with the Cognizor or Cognizors to the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas at
his Chamber, and deliver your Parchment, if it requires have, to the Clerk of
the Fines who will cause the Caption to be writ underneath the Concord on the
left hand (if it be not done before you come thither) thus, Capt. and cognit.
primo die Maii, Anno regni domini nos^ti Caroli secundi nunc Regis Anglie, etc.
vicesimo, coram me, and also see that the Cognizors subscribe their names to
the Concord on the right hand, and inquire of him that comes with the parties
to the acknowledgment of the Fine, if he knows them, and see that he subscribes
the Fine accordingly at the bottom, thus, A B. cogn. paries, which done he will
get the Lord Chief Justice his hand to the Caption of the Concord engrossed in
Parchment, And also to a Copy thereof fairly written in paper which is to
remain with the Cleck of the Fines: But the Concord in Parchment you are to
carry to the Cursitor of the County where the lands lie, and there get your
writ of Covenant made, which you are to carry before it be Sealed to the
Alienation Office in the Temple, and there compound it; and get it entered, and
indorsed: which done, you are to carry it back to the Cursitor who will get it
Sealed; and that being done, you are to make your Warant of Attorney for the
Fine in this manner.

Bed. ss. R. S. Armiger. Po. lo. s^o W. B. Attorn. suum ad prosequend. breve de
Con. versus T. S. and A. uxorem ejus de Maneriis, terris and tenementis in M.
etc. When you have made this Warrant of Attorney, you are to file it with the
Clerk of the Warrants, who will sign the Writ of Covenant with a Stamp for that
purpose. Then file the writ of Covenant, and the Precipe and Concord together,
and carry them to Mr. Jones his Office in the Middle Temple, who returns the
Writ of Covenant, and Signs the same with his Stamp; After this the Custos
Brevium is to have it to make his entry thereof upon the Roll, and indorse upon
the Writ when the Proclamations are to be made, from whom you must carry it to
the Clerk of the Kings Silver, who will perform what belongs unto it there;
(And being once dispatched that Office, it is then a Fine in force of Law)
Afterward carry it to the Chirographer whose Office is in the Middle Temple,
and there the Clerk that deals for that County where the lands in your Fine do
lie will make the Indentures of the Fine, and then it is finished.

A Fine is acknowledged at the Bar after this manner.
First an Attorney must deliver the Writ of Covenant Sealed, with the Precipe
and Concord engrossed in Parchment as above to one of the Sergeants at Bar,
where the Cognizors are to be present.

Then the Sergeant must desire the Chief Justice to record the appearance of
the Cognizors which being granted by him, The Sergeant says,

den^ers le Roy. Then answers the second Prothonotary, or his Clerk,

que donera? Then the Sergeant shall answer thus,

Cestuy que avera. Then the second Prothonotary, or his Clerk, shall answer
again, thus;

trahes la paix. Then the Sergeant must say, Ove vostre conge la paix est ti^l
scilicet, etc. reciting in French the Concord so delivered unto him, as
aforesaid by the Attorney, with relation to the particulars of the lands
contained in the Precipe; And that being done, the Sergeant must, if any one of
the Cognizors be a Feme-covert, tell her that she must go up to the Puisne
Judge to the Bench to be examined of her consent, which Judge takes the
Concord so written in Parchment, as aforesaid, and examineth her apart
privately, and then delivers it to the Prothonotary to be recorded.

Then take the Precipe and Concord, when the Court has recorded it, and file
it to the writ of Covenant, and paying the Fees of Court, pass it through the
several Offices as you are before directed in the acknowledgment before the
Lord Chief Justice.

The manner of acknowledging and levying a Fine before Commissioners.
Any Judge of the Common Pleas, Kings Bench, or Baron of the Exchequer (as is
before declared) may take the Caption of a Fine before the Dedimus potestatem
be sued out, which you may sue out afterward, and carry it under Seal to him
that took the Cognizance of the Fine, and he will return the same.

A Fine may also be taken by special Commission in the Country; to do which,
you must deliver to the Cursitor the Commissioners names, one whereof must be a
Knight, by which with the Concord the Cursitor will make the Dedimus
potestatem, and get it sealed for you.

Then deliver the Dedimus potestatem to the Commissioners with the Precipe and
Concord engrossed in Parchment, with wax and seals unto it; and when the
Cognizance is taken by them they must return the Dedimus potestatem in this
manner: Executio istius Commissionis patet in quadam Schedula huic Commissioni
annex. And then file the Concord to the back of the Dedimus potestatem, and let
the Commissioners set their seals to the Concord, and their hands to the return
of the Dedimus: The Caption of the Concord must be thus,

Capt. and cognit. apud Villam B. in Com. B. decimo octavo die Augusti, Anno
Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Anglie, etc. vicesimo secundo
coram nobis A. B. C. D. E. F. Then when you have returned up your Dedimus
potestatem, carry it to the Cursitor, who will make you the writ of Covenant.
And then pass the Fine as before is directed; only in this case if one of the
Commissioners that takes the Caption be not a Knight, you must draw up a
Certificate upon the back of the Concord, and carry it to a Judge of the Common
Pleas for his Allocatur.

The form of the Certificate is thus:
A B. gent. one of the Commissioners in the Writ of Dedimus named, makes Oath,
that this Fine was duly executed, the Cognizees of full Age, and the Feme
Covert (being secretly and apart examined) willingly consented.

A. B.

CAP. VIII. Of Fines sur Cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de son done;
their Forms, etc.
Sect. I. A Fine levied by One to Two Joint Purchasors.
Midd. ss. PRecipe A. B. quod just, etc. teneant C. D. and E. F. Conventionem,
etc. de uno Mesuagio, uno Cottagio, and december acris Pasture cum pertinentiis in
B. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus A. recogn. predicta tenementa
cum pertinentiis esse jus ipsorum C. and E. ut illa que iidem C. and E. habent
de dono predicti A. Et illa remisit* and quiet clamavit de se and heredibus
suis, predictis C. and E. and heredibus suis imperpetuum. Et preterea idem A.
concessit pro se and heredibus suis, qood ipsi warant* predictis C. and E. and
heredibus suis predicta tenementa cum pertin. contra predictum A. and heredes
suos imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. II. A Fine Levied by One to Two, and the Heirs of one of them.
Bed. ss. PR. A. B. quod just, etc. teneant. W. G. and R. Y. Conventionem,
etc. de duobus Mesuagiis, duobus Toftis, Centum acris Terre, and septuaginta
acris Pasture cum pertin. in K. W. and S. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus A. recogn. predicta tenementa
cum pertin. esse jus ipsius W. ut illa que iidem W. and R. habent de dono
predicti A. Et illa remisit and quiet clam. de se and heredibus suis predictis
W. and R. and heredibus ipsius W. imperpetuum. Et preterea idem A. concessit
pro se and heredibus suis quod ipsi warant. predictis W. and R. and heredibus
ipsius W. predicta tenementa cum pertin. contra predictum A. and heredes suos
imperpetuum, Et pro h^c, etc.

Sect. III. A Fine Levied by Baron and Feme to Two, of four Mesuages only.
Kanc. ss. PRecipe J. L. and A. uxori ejus quod just, etc. teneant W. P. and
R. B. Conventionem, etc. de quatuor Mesuagiis cum pertin. in C. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti J. and A. recogn. Mesuagia
predicta cum p^rtinentiis esse jus ipsius W. ut illa que iidem W. and R. habent
de dono predictorum J. and A. Et illa remiserunt and quiet clam. de ipsis J.
and A. and heredibus ipsius J. predictis W. and R. and heredibus ipsius W.
imperpetuum. Et preterea iidem J. and A. concesserunt pro se and heredibus
ipsius J. quod ipsi warant. praedictis W. and R. and heredibus ipsius W.
predicta Mesuagia cum pertinentiis, contra predictos J. and A. and heredes
ipsius J. imperpetuum. and pro hac, etc.

Sect. IV. A Fine Levied by Baron and Feme to an Archbishop and another.
Kanc. ss. PRecipe Johanni Lancaster generoso and Jane uxori ejus, quod just,
etc. teneant Reverendissimo in Christo patri ac Domino, Domino Gilberto
Providentia divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopo, totius Anglie Primati, etc. and
Georgio Lowndes Armigero Conventionem, etc. de Manerio de B. cum pertin. ac de
quatuor Mesuagiis, quatuor Tostis, december Cottagiis, uno Molendino aquatico
granatico, december Gardinis, quingentis acris Terre, quadringentis acris Prati,
and quadringentis acris Pasture cum pertin. in O. A. and L. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scil. quod predicti J. L. and J. uxor ejus recogn.
Manerium and tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Archiepiscopi, ut
illa que iidem Archiepiscopus, and G. L. habent de dono predictorum J. L. and
J. uxor is ejus E^ illa remiserunt and quiet clam. de ipsis J. L. and J. uxore
ejus and heredibus ipsius J. L. prefat. Archiepiscopo, and G. L. and heredibus
ipsius Archiepiscopi imperpetuum. Et preterea iidem J. L. and J. uxor ejus
concesserunt. pro se and heredibus ipsius L. quod ipsi warant. Manerium and
tenementa predicta cum pertinentiis predictis Archiepiscopo, and G. L. and
hered. ipsius Archiepiscopi contra omnes homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. V. A Fine Levied of most kind of things that can be named.
Ebor. ss. PRecipe A. M. Baronetto quod just, etc. teneant J. B. Militi
Convent. etc. de Honor de M. Castro and Vicecomitat. de B. cum Hundred.
Membris and pertinentiis suis, Insula de L. Baronia de S. Hundred. de A. Burgo
de A. Scitu, ambit. and precinct. nuper Monasterii de E. Manerio de A. cum
pertinentiis, Scitu Manerii de A. Grangia de A. Parco de A. Prebend. de A. uno
Capitali Mesuagio, duobus Mesuagiis, duobus Toftis, duobus Cottagiis, uno
Collumbari, uno Molendino ventritico, uno Molendino aquatico granatico, uno
Molendino Fullonico, quinque Horreis, septem Gardinis, december Pomariis,
octingentis acris Terre, quingentis acris Prati, Mill acris Pasture,
septingentis acris Bosci, Mill and sexcentis acris, Jampnorum and Bruere,
ducentis acris More, quadraginta acris Juncarie, Centum acris Marisci salsi,
and quadraginta acris Marisci frisci, viginti acris Alneri, quinquaginta acris
Turbarie, december acris Mosset. viginti acris Terre aqua cooperte, Communia
Pasture pro omnibus averils, libera Warena, libera piscaria in aqua de C.
liberate Faldagii pro trescentis ovibus in terris de C. and Centum solidat.
reddit. ac reddit. duorum librat. Piperis, u^ius libre Cere, quinque
quarteriorum Frumenti december quarter. Hordei, quadraginta Caponum, viginti
Gallorum, and december Galli^arum cum pertin in C. Ac de omnibus and omnimodis,
Oblationibus decimis garbarum granorum, Feni, Lane, Lini, Canabis and Agnorum
cum pertin. Necnon de Tolneto, Stallagio, Picagio, Pontagio infra Burgum de C.
Aceciam de Gurgite and cursu aque currentis a loco vocat. B. in per and trans
cujusdam L. S. Armigeri ad Molendinum vocatum G. and preterea de Wera sive Veda
in S. ac de Visu Franc. pleg. Libertat. and Franches. in C. ac de Custod. sive
Officio Custod. de S. Custod. Parci and Forreste de C. ac de Officio
Senescalsie de C. Balliva sive Officio Ballivat. de C. Ac ulterius de Nundinis
de C. singulis Annis ad Festa A. and M. ibidem tenend. Market. de A. quiet.
sive libero Passagio ultra aquam de A. Rectoria de E. Advocatione, present at
lone, donatione, libera dispositione, and jure Patronatus Ecclesiae de E.
quadam portione decimarum sive Pensionum in E. Aceciam de Medietate Manerii de
E. cum pertin. and de tertia part tenementorum de C. in tribus partibus divis.
Exceptis and omnino reservatis Patronagio una cum Advocatione Vicarie Ecclesie
de E. and Capelle eidem Rectorie annex. ac omnibus decimis granorum Vis. Franc.
Pleg. ac omnibus que ad Vis. Franc. Pleg. pertinent, catallis Felonum,
Fugitivorum, Utlagariorum, Attinct. cum terris and tenementis Utlagat. and
Waviat. quibuscunque, Feriis, Mercatis, Wrecco Maris, ac tot and tantis
Juribus, Jurisdictionibus, Privilegiis, Franchesiis, and Libertatibus,
tenementa praedicta aut aliquod eorum concernen. and eidem A. M. and heredibus
suis ut de Manerio de A. spectan. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus A. recogn. predicta Honorem,
Castrum, Vicecomit. Insulam, Baroniam, Hundredum, Burgum, Scitum Manerium,
Parcum, Prebend. tenementa, reddit. Communiam pasture, liberam Warrenam,
liberam Piscariam Rector. Decimas, Oblationes, Tolnetum, Stallagium, Picagium,
Pontagium, Gurgitem, Vic. Franc. Pleg. Libertates, Franchesias, Custod.
Officium Senescal. Ballivat. Nundinas, Mercatas, Feriam, Passagium, Wreccum
Maris, Medietatem, and tertias parts cum pertin. Ac Advocationes,
Presentationes, Liberam dispositionem, jus Patronatus, Portionem and Pentionem
predictas (except. preexcept) esse jus ipsius J. ut illa que idem J. habet de
dono predicti A. Et illa remisit and quiet. clam. de se and heredibus suis
predicto A. and heredibus suis imperpetuum. Et preterea idem A. concessit pro
se and heredibus suis quod ipsi warant. predicto J. and heredibus suis predict.
Honorem, Castrum, etc. (ut supra) contra predictum A. and heredes suos
imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. VI. A Fine Levied to a Corporation.
Oxon. ss. PRecipe J. P. vidue and E. P. generoso quod just, etc. teneant. W.
E. Presidenti Collegii Sancti Johannis Baptiste in Acedemia Oxoniensi, and
Scholasticis ejusdem Collegii Conventionem, etc. de Scitu and Precinctu domus
Collegii vulgariter nuncupat. the White Friars in suburbiis Civitatis
Oxoniensis cum pertinentiis ac de sex Mesuagiis, sex Gardinis, sex Pomariis,
quinque acris Terre, duobus acris Prati, and sex acris Pasture cum pertin. in
Suburbiis Civitatis predicte. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti J. and E. recogn. tenementa
predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsorum Presidentis and Scholasticorum, ut illa
que iidem Presidens and Scholastici habent de dono predictorum J. and E. Et
illa remiser. etc. de se and heredibus ipsius E. prefat. Presidenti and
Scholasticis, and Successoribus suis imperpetuum. Et preterea iidem J. and E.
concesserunt pro se and heredibus suis quod ipsi warant. prefat. Presidenti and
Scholasticis, and Successoribus suis predicta tenementa cum pertin. contra
predictos J. and E. and heredes ipsius E. imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. VIII. A Fine Levied in the County Palatine of Lancaster, or Chester.
Lancastr. ss. HEC est finalis Concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud
Lancastr. die Lune in quinque Septimana Quadragesime Anno regni Caroli Dei
gratia Anglie, Scotie, Francie and Hibernie, Regis, fidei defensoris, etc.
undecimo coram A. S. Mil. and C. L. uno Servientium domini Regis ad legem
Justic. domini Regis apud Lancastr. and aliis dicti domini Regis fidelibus tunc
ibi presentibus inter A. R. querentem and T. S. and E. uxorem ejus deforcientes
de duobus Mesuagiis, duobus Toftis, tribus Gardinis, quinquaginta acris Terre,
viginti acris Prati, and sex acris Pasture cum pertin. in T. unde placitum
Conventionis sum. fuit inter eos scilicet quod predicti T. and E. recogn.
tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus, etc.

Cestr. ss. HEc est finalis Concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud Cestr.
die Lune septimo die Maii Anno regni domini Caroli secundi dei gratia Anglie,
etc. Regis fidei defensoris, etc. decimo quarto coram A. B. and C. D. Justic.
domini Regis apud Cestr. and aliis, etc. (ut supra.)

CAP. IX. Of Fines sur Cognizance de droit tantum ove grant, sur Concessit, and
sur done Grant and Render, their forms, etc.
Sect. I. A Fine sur Cognizance de droit tantum, with grant of a third part in
Reversion by a Copartner.
Leic. ss. PRecipe A. M. and C. uxori ejus quod just, etc. teneant. F. V.
Conventionem, etc. de tertia part trium Mesuagiorum, trium Toftorum, trium
Gardinorum, ducentarum acrarum Terre, sexaginta acrarum Prati, and Centum
acrarum Pasture cum pertinentiis in H. B. and M. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti A. and C. recogn. ter^iam
partem predictam cum pertinentiis esse jus predicti F. Et concesserunt quod
eadem tertia pars cum pertinentiis (quam R. T. vidua ^enet ad terminum vite sue
de hereditate ipsius C. die quo hec Concordia facta fuit, and que post mortem
ejusdem R. T. ad ipsos A. and C. reverti debuit) reman. prefato F. and
heredibus suis imperpetuum Tenend. etc. Et preterea iidem A. and C.
concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius C. quod ipsi Warant. prefato F. and
heredibus suis tertiam partem predictam cum pertinentiis sicut predictum est,
contra se and heredes ipsius C. imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. II. A Fine sur Done, etc. with Render of five shillings Rent, and the
best Beast in the name of an Herryot after the death of every Tenant, with
Clause of Distress.
Rotel. ss. PRecipe N. M. quod just, etc. ten. H. S. Conventionem, etc. de
Manerio de L. etc. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus N. recogn. Manerium and
tenementa predicta cum pertin esse jus ipsius H. ut illa que idem H. habet de
dono predicti N. Et illa remisit and quiet clamavit Release.
de ipso N. and heredibus suis predicto H. and heredibus suis imperpetuum. Et
preterea idem N. concessit pro se and heredibus suis quod ipsi Warant. Manerium
and tenementa predicta cum Waranty.
pertin. prefato H. and heredibus suis contra ipsum N. and heredes suos
imperpetuum. Et pro hac Recognitione, Remissione, quiet clam. warant. Fine and
Concordia idem H. concessit predicto N. quandam Annuitatem sive annualem
redditum quinque solidorum exeun. de Manerio and tenementis predictis cum
pertin. and illam ei reddidit in eadem Curia, Habend. and percipiend. eidem N.
and heredibus Fine sur Concessit. fo. 1.
suis ad festa sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and Nativitatis sancti Johannis
Baptiste per equales portiones, Ac solvend. post decessum cujuslibet tenementi
Manerii and tenementorum predictorum obien. seisit in feodo simplici vel feodo
talliato suum optimum animal nomine Herriot. Et si contingerit predictam
Annuitatem sive annualem redditum aretro fore in part vel in toto post aliquod
festorum predictorum in quo ut prefertur solvi deberet, non solut, aut Herriot.
predict. cum acciderit in solut. quod tunc been licebit predicto N. and
heredibus suis in Manerium and tenementa predicta cum pertinentiis intrare, and
distringere, districtionesque sic ibidem capt. and habitas licite asportare,
effugare, abducere, and penes se retinere, quousque tam de predicta Annuitate
sive Annuali redditu quinque solidorum cum arreragiis ejusdem si que fuerint,
quam de Herriot. predicta sic insolut. plenarie fuerit satisfact. and persolut.

Sect. III. A Fine sur Done with grant and render in Tail, with diverse
Remainders over.
Leic. ss. PRecipe F. B. generoso quod just, etc. teneat W. N. Conventionem,
etc. de Manerio de S. cum pertin. etc. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet ( recitando le Release, and Waranty ut prox.
supra usque) Et pro hac Recognitione, etc. idem W. concessit predicto F.
predictum Manerium cum pertin. and ill. etc. habendum and tenendum eidem F. and
heredibus quos idem F. procreaverit de corpore Marie tunc uxoris ejus tenend.
de Capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servitia que ad predictum Manerium
pertinent. Et si contigerit quod idem F. obiret sine heredibus per ipsum de
corpore ipsius M. procreat. tunc post decessum ipsius F. predictum Manerium cum
pertin. integre reman. predicte Marie tenend. etc. tota vita ipsius M. Et post
decessum ipsius M. predictum Manerium cum pertin. integre reman. rectis
heredibus predicti W. tenend. etc.

Sect. IV. A Fine sur Done with Grant and Render of the fourth part of an House
for a Month, the Remainder to a stranger.
North't. ss. PRecipe J. M. quod just, etc. ten. J. S. and P. uxori ejus
Conventionem, etc. de quarta pa^te unius Mesuagii in A. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet ( Release and Waranty, ut supra) Et pro hac
Recogn. etc. predicti J. S. and P. concesserunt prefato J. M. quartam partem
predictam, and illam ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia. habend. and tenend. quartam
partem predictam prefato J. M. and assign. suis a die quo hec Concordia facta
fuit usque finem unius Mensis integri, and immediate post expirationem inde
quarta pars predicta integre remanebit cuidam W. B. habend. sibi and heredibus
suis imperpetuum. Tenend. de domino feodi illius pro tempore existen. per
servicia, etc.

Sect. V. A Fine, sur Cognizance de droit tantum, with a grant of a Remainder
(by him in the Remainder in Tail) to the King.
North't. ss. PR. R. H. quod just, etc. teneat Domino Regi Conventio^^m* etc.
de Manerio de H. cum perti^. ^c de viginti Mesuagiis quatuor^ ecim Toftis, uno
Molendino Vent^itico, tribus Columbar. viginti Gardinis, duabus Mill acris
Terre, Mill acris Prati, and Mill and quingentis acris Pasture cum
pertinentiis in P. H. R. T. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus R. recogn. Manerium and
tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Domini Regis, Et concessit pro
se and heredibus suis quod predictum Manerium and tenementa cum pertin. (que L.
H. tener sibi and heredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreat. die quo
hec Concordia facta fuit, Et que post decessum ipsius L. fine heredibus
masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis, ad predictum R. and heredes
masculos de corpore suo legitime procreat. and ad rectos heredes T. H. si idem
R. obierit fine heredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis, remanere
debet post decessum ipsius L. fine heredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime
procreatis) integre remanebit predicto domino Regi heredibus and Successoribus
suis imperpetuum. Et predictus R. and heredes sui warant. predicto domino Regi
heredibus and Successoribus suis predicta Manerium and tenementa cum
pertinentiis sicut predictum est contra se and heredes suos imperpetuum. Et pro
hac, etc.

Sect. VI. A Lease for a term of years granted by Fine sur Concessit.
Buck. ss. PRecipe W. W. and T. uxori ejus quod just, etc. teneant R. C.
generoso Conventionem, etc. de duobus Molendinis, Centum and sexaginta acris
Terre, sexaginta acris Prati, and quinquaginta acris Pasture cum pertinentiis
in A. alias A. L. ac de omnibus decimis granorum exeun. de tenementis predictis
cum pertin. necnon de omnibus decimis Lane and Agnorum provenientibus de
trescentis ovibus depasturantibus super terras decimales Manerii de A. alias A.
L. Et nisi, etc.

ET est concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti W. and T. concesserunt
tenementa and decimas predictas cum pertinentiis prefato R. and ill. eis
reddiderunt in eadem Curia, Habend. and tenend. eidem R. a primo die R. ult.
preterit. usque finem and terminum nonaginta and novem annorum ex tunc prox.
sequen. and plenarie complend. Reddend. inde annuatim predicto W. and heredibus
suis duos solidos legalis monete Anglie ad festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli,
and Annuntiationis beat Marie Virginis, per separales portiones annuatim
solvend. toto Termino predicto si petatur. Et predicti W. and T. and heredes
ipsius W. warant. predicto R. tenementa and decimas predict. cum pertinentiis
(sicut predictum est) contra ipsos W. and T. and heredes ipsius W. Et contra
omnes alios clamantes per predictum W. toto termino predicto: Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. VII. A Fine levied by Tenants for life of their Term.
Buk. ss. PRecipe G. W. and M. uxori ejus quod just, etc. teneant W. W.
Conventionem, etc. de uno Mesuagio, Centum acris Terre, sexaginta acris Prati,
octoginta acris Pasture, Centum acris Bosci, Centum and viginti acris Jampnor^m
and Bruere, and communia Pasture pro omnibus Averiis, cum pertinentiis, in A.
alias A. B. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti G. and M. concesserunt prefato
W. predicta tenementa and Communiam Pasture cum pertin. actotum and quicquid
iidem G. and M. in predictis tenementis and Communia Pasture cum pertin. ad
terminum vite ipsorum G. and M. and eorum alterius diutius viven. habent. Et
ill. eidem W. in eadem Curia reddiderunt: Habend. and tenend. eidem W. tota
vita ipsorum G. and M. and eorum alterius diutius viven. Et predicti G. and M.
warant. prefato W. predicta tenementa, and Communiam Pasture cum pertinentiis
sicut predictum est contra predictos G. and M. tota vita ipsorum G. and M. and
eorum alterius diutius viven. Et pro hac, etc.

Of Fines sur Cognizance de droit tantum, ove Grant, sur Concessit, and ove
grant and Render, etc.
Sect. VIII. A Fine sur Concessit, wherein the Term of 99 years is granted to
the Cognizee in the premises (if the Cognizors shall so long live.)
Buck. ss. PRecipe S. T. genesis and K. uxori ejus quod just, etc. teneant T. Y.
Conventionem, etc. de Manerio de L. L. alias L. D. cum pertinentiis ac de octo
Mesuagiis, uno Columbar. quadringentis acris Terre, sexaginta acris Prati,
quinquaginta acris Pasture, Centum acris Bosci, Centum acris Jampnorum and
Bruere, quadraginta solidat. reddit. cum pertin. in L. L. necnon de Rectoria de
L. L. cum pertin. Aceciam de omnibus and omnimodis decimis quibuscunque
provenien. crescen. seu renovan. in L. L. and nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti S. and K. concesserunt predicto
T. Manerium, tenementa, Rectoriam, and decimas predictas cum pertin. Habend.
and tenend. prefato Thome Executoribus and Assign. suis a Festo Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli ult. preter it. usque ad plenum terminum Nonaginta and
novem Annorum extunc prox. sequen. and plenarie complend. and finiend. (si
predicti S. and K. aut eorum alter tam diu vixerit vel vixerint) reddend.
proinde predictis S. and K. and eorum superviventi unum granum Piperis annuatim
solvend. ad Festum Annunciationis beat Marie Virginis durante toto termino
predicto (si petitum sit) Et preterea iidem S. and K. warant. predicto T.
Executoribos and Assign. suis predicta Manerium tenementa Rectoriam and decimas
predictas cum pertinentiis (sicut predictum est) contra predictos S. and K. and
Heredes and Assign. suos duran. v^t is ipsorum S. and K. and vita eorum diutius
viv^n. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. IX. A Fine sur Done, Grant, with render to one of the Cognizors part of
the Premises for a Month, remainder to J. and R. Strangers for their lives,
remainder to the Son of J: for life, reserving Rent with Clause of Distress for
non-payment, with grant of the Reversion to two other of the Cognizors.
Summers. ss. PRecipe Johanni Farmer Millti, and Matilde ^xori ejus, and Roberto
Hoskins quod just, etc. teneant Thome Park and Johanni Kent Conventionem,
etc. de duobus Mesuagiis, uno Gardino, uno Pomario, viginti and duobus acris
Terte, sex acris Prati, and quinquaginta and octo acris Pasture cum
pertinentiis in Mudford. Et nisi, etc.

ET ^st Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti Johannes and Matilda, and
Robertus recogn. tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Thome ^t illa
que iidem Thomas and Johannes Kent habent de dono predictorum Johannis Farmer
Militis and Matilde, and Roberti, and illa remiserunt, and quiet clamaverunt
de ipsis Johanne Farmer Milite and Matilda, and Roberto, and heredibus suis
prefat is Thome and Johanni Kent, and heredibus ipsius Thome imperpetuum; Et
preterea iidem Johannes Farmer, Matilda, and Ro^ertus concesserunt pro se and
heredibus ipsius Johannis Farmer, quod ipsi warant. tenementa predicta cum
pertin. prefat. Thome and Johanni Kent, and heredibus ipsius Thome contra omnes
homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac Recogn. etc. iidem Thomas and Johannes Kent
concesserunt predicto Roberto sex acras Terre, tres acr acras Prati, and
quadraginta sex acras Pasture de tenementis predictis cum pertin. and illa ei
reddiderunt in eadem Curia habend. and tenend. eidem Roberto pro termino unius
Mensis jam prox. f^tur. and post terminum illum fi^it^m eadem sex acre Terre,
tres acre Prati, and quadraginta sex acre Pasture cum pertin. integre reman.
cuidam Johanne modo uxori, cujusdam Rogeri Newman, and cuidam Richardo Newman,
filio eor undem Rogeri and Johanne, Habend. and tenend. prefat. Johanne and
Richardo tota vita eorundem Johanne and Richardi, and eorum alterius diutius
viven. Et post decessus eorundem Johanne and Richardi Newman eadem sex acre
Terre, tres acre Prati, and quadraginta sex acre Pasture cum pertin. integre
reman. Johanni Newman, filio predictorum Rogeri, and Johanne uxoris ejus,
Habend. and tenend eidem Johanni filio tota vita ejusdem Johannis filii,
Reddendinde annuatim p^edi is Thome and Johanni Kent, and heredibus suis Centum
and octo solido^, and december denarios ad Festa Annunciationis beat Marie
Virginis, and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per equales portiones annuatim
solved* Et si con^ingat annualem redditum Centum and octo solidorum and december
denariorum, vel aliquam inde parcellam aretro fore in part, vel in toto, post
aliquod Festorum predictorum, in quo sive quibus ut prefertur solvi debeat, non
solut. quod tunc been licebit prefatis Thome and Johanni Kent, heredibus and
Assign. suis* tam in tota vita naturali predictorum Johanne and Richardi
Newman, modo uxoris predicti Rogeri, and eorum alterius di^tius viven. quam
tota vita predicti Johannis filii in predictas sex acras Terre, tres acr^s
Prati, and quadraginta sex acras Pasture cum pertin. and in quamlibet partem
parcellam and inde intrare and distringere, districtionesque sic ibidem capt.
licite abinde, abducere, essugare, asportare, and penes se retinere, quousque
de predicto annuali redditu Centum and octo solidorum, and december denariorum,
and de qualibet inde parcella una cum arreragiis ejusdem (si que fuerint) eis
plenarie fuerint satisfact. and persolut. Et ulterius iidem Thomas and Johannes
Kent concesserunt predicto Roberto Hoskins, duo Mesuag. unum Gardinum, unum
Pomarium, sexdecim acras Terre, tres acras Prati, and duodecim acras Pasture
resid. tenementorum predictorum. Et ill. ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend.
and tenend. eidem Roberto pro termino unius Mensis, and post terminum illud
finit. eadem duo Mesuagia, unum Gardinum, unum Pomarium, sexdecim acras Terre,
tres acras Prati, and duodecim acras Pasture resid. integre reman. cuidam
Richardo Newman patri predicti Rogeri Newman, ac predictis Rogero Newman and
Johanne uxori ejus, Habend. and tenend. elsdem Richardo, Rogero and Johanne,
rota vita ipsorum Richardi, Rogeri and Johanne, and eorum alterius diutius
viven. Reddend. inde annuatim predictis Thowe and Johanni Kent, and heredibus
suis tresdecim solidos legalis monete Anglie ad predicta Festa Annunciationis
beat Marie Virginis, and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per equales portiones
annuatim solvend. Et si contingat redditum predictum annualem tresdecim
solidorum, aut aliquam inde parcellam aretro fore in part, vel in toto, post
aliquod Festum festorum predictorum in quo u^prefertur solvi debeat, non solut.
quod tunc been licebit prefat. Thome and Johanni Kent in predicta duo Mesuagia,
unum Gardinum, unum Pomarium, sexdecim acras Terre, tres acras Prati, and
duodecim acras Pasture resid. cum pertinentiis, Et in quamlibet inde parcellam
intrare, and distrin^^^e, districtionesque sic ibidem capt. abinde abd^cere,
effugare, asporta^e, and penes se retinere ^uousque de predict. annuali redditu
tresdecim so^^dorum, unacum arreragiis ejusdem si que sunt ^^enarie f^erunt
satisfact. and persolut. Concesser. (...) presati Thomas and Johannes Kent
predictis Jo(...)i Farmer, and Matild^, revertionem omnium and (...) ^^n
tenementorum predictorum cum pertinentiis, and omnes redditus predictos
superius reservat. Et illa eis reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend. and tenend.
eisdem Johanni, and Matilde, and heredibus ipsius Johannis imperpetuum, Tenend.
de Capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servicia que ad predicta tenementa cum
pertin. pertinent imper petuum.

Sect. X. A Fine sur done Grant, with render back of certain Coal Mines
belonging to the Premises unto the Cogniz^rs, and the Heirs of one of them for
ever.
^erb. ss. PRecipe Georgio Hastings Armingero, and Dorothee uxori ejus, Thome
Stanhope Armigero and Margarete uxori ejus, quod just, etc. teneant Radolpho
Brown and Willielmo Newton Conventionem, etc. de quadraginta acris Terre, cum
pertin. in Stanley and Spowdon. Et nisi, etc.

Et est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti Georgius, Dorothea, Thomas, and
Margareta recogn. tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Radolphi, ut
illa que iidem Radolphus and Willielmus habent de dono predictorum Georgii,
Dorothee, Thome and Margarete, and illa remiserunt and quiet clam. de ipsis
Georgio, Dorothea, Thoma and Margareta, and heredibus suis predictis Radolpho
and Willielmo, and heredibus ipsius Radolphi imperpetuum. Et preterea iidem
Georgius, Dorothea, Thomas, and Margareta concesserunt pro se and heredibus
ipsarum Dorothee and Margarete, quod ipsi warant. tenementa predicta cum
pertin. prefa^. Radolpho and Willielmo, and heredibus ipsius Radolphi contra
predictos Georgium, Dorotheam, Thomam and Margaretam and heredes ipsius Thome
imperpetuum. Et pro hac Recogn. Remissione, quiet. clam. warant. fine and
Concordia, predicti Radolphus and Willielmus concesserunt predictis Georgio and
Dorothee omnes Mineras Carhorum ( Anglice vocat. all Mines of Coals) existen.
in quodam Campo. parcel. tenementorum predictorum vocat. Stanley Field, Necnon
liberum ingressum and egressum iii and a predicto Campo ad sodiend. in Mineris
illis pro Carbonibus ibid. and ad abcar^and. ill. sic soss. ac libertatem
fodiendi in terris illis pro Carbonibus illis omni tempore Anni ad libitum
ipsorum Georgii and Dorothee and heredum ejusdem Do^othee: Et illa omnia eis
reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend. Carriand. and percipiend. predictas Miner as
ingressum and egressum, ac libertatem predictam cum pertin. prefat. Georgio and
Dorothee, and hered. ipsius Dorothee imperpetuum.

Sect. XI. Fines with Release and Waranty (where the Waranty is divided) some
of the Cognizors waranting one part of the Premises, and some another part,
none of them waranting all as in other Fines.
Essex. ss. PRecipe Henrico Kent and Johanne uxori ejus, Johanni Turner
Gene^oso and Katherine uxori ejus, quod just, etc. teneant Richardo Green
Conventionem, etc. de uno Mesuagio, uno horreo, uno Gardino, quadraginta ac^is
Terre, and quatuor acris Pasture. cum pertinentiis in Maplestede. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti Henricus, Johanna, Johannes and
Katherina recogn. tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Richardi, ut
illa que idem Richardus habet de dono predictorum Henrici and Johanne, Johannis
and Katharine, Et illa remiser. and quiet clam. de ipsis Henrico and Johanna,
Johanne and K^tharina, and heredibus suis prefato Richardo and heredibus s^is
imperpetuum. Et preterea iidem Henricus and Johanna, Johannes and Katherina,
concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius Johannis, quod ipsi warant. duas
parts tenementorum predictorum cum pertin. in tres parts dividend. prefat.
Richardo and heredibus suis contra omnes homines imperpetuum: Et pro hac, etc.

Essex. ss. PRecipe Thome Burgeant generoso and Agneti uxori ejus, Gabrieli
Bush generoso and Margarete uxori ejus, Waltero Newman and Marie uxori ejus,
quod just, etc. teneant Christofero Bland Clerico Conventionem, etc. de tribus
Mesuagiis, tribus Horreis, tribus Gardinis, uno Pomario, quinquaginta acris
Terre, december acris Prati, triginta acris Pasture, and december acris Bosci cum
pertin. in Walden and Wealway. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predict. Thomas and Agnes, Gabriel and
Margareta, Walterus and Maria, recogn. pred tenementa cum pertin. esse jus
ipsius Christoferi, ut illa que idem Christoferus habet de dono predictorum
Thome and Agnetis, Gabrielis and Margarete, Walteri and Marie; Et illa
remiserunt and quiet clamaverunt de ipsis Thoma and Agnete, Gabriele and
Margareta, Waltero and Maria, prefat. Christofero and heredibus suis
imperpetuum. Et preterea iidem Thomas and Agnes concesser^nt pro se and
heredibus ipsius Thome, quod ipsi warant. unum Mesuag. unum Horreum and unum
Gardinum, parcel. tenementorum predictorum in Walden predicta, prefat.
Christofero and heredibus suis, contra predictos Thomam and Agnetem, and
heredes ipsius Thome imperpetuum. Et insuper iidem Gabriel and Margareta
concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius Gab^ielis, quod ipsi warant. alterum
Mesuagium, unum Horreum, unum Gardinum and predictum Pomarium, and predictas
quinquaginta acras Terre, december acras Prati, triginta acras Pasture, and december
acras Bosci, parcel. tenementorum predictorum in W. predicta prefat.
Christofero and heredibus suis, contra ipsos Gabrielem and Margaretam, and
heredes ipsius Gabrielis imperpetuum. Et ulterius iidem Walterus and Maria
concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius Walteri, quod ipsi warant. unum
Mesuagium, unum Horreum, unum Gardinum, resid. tenementorum predictorum in W.
predicta predicto Christofero and heredibus suis contra predictos Walterum and
Mariam; and heredes ipsius Walteri imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. XII. A Fine sur done Grant, with render of a Rent in Recompense of Dower.
North' c. ss. PRecipe Willielmo Palmer Armigero and Marie uxori ejus, quod
just, etc. teneant Edwardo Bolnest generoso, and Roberto Dix generoso,
Conventionem, etc. de Manerio de T. cum pertin. ac de duodecim Mesuagiis, uno
Molendino aquatico, uno Molendino ventritico, tribus Columbar* quadraginta
acris Terre, Centum acris Prati, duodecim acris Pasture, viginti acris Bosci,
and Centum acris Bosci, and Centum acris Jampnorum and Bruere cum pertin. in C.
alias B. and D. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predict. Williemus and Maria, recogn.
Manerium and tenementa predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Edwardi, ut illa
que iidem Edwardus and Robertus habent de dono predictorum Willielmi and Marie:
Et illa remiser. etc. (ut in aliis.) Et preterea iidem Willielmus and Maria
concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius Willielmi, quod ipsi warant. Manerium
and tenementa predicta cum pertin. prefat. Edwardo and Roberto, and hered.
ipsius Edwardi contra omnes homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac Recogn. Remissione,
quier. clam. Fine and Concordia, iidem Edwardus and Robertus concesserunt
predicte Marie quandam Annuitatem, sive annualem redditum duodecim librarum
exeun. de predict. Manerio and tenementis cum pertin. Habend. and tenend. and
annuatim percipiend. predictum annualem redditum duodecim librarum prefate
Marie and Assign. suis ad Festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, vel Annunciationis
beat Marie Virginis prox. and immediate sequen. post mortem predicti
Willielmi, pro and durante vira naturali ejusdem Marie, ad duos Anni terminos,
viz. Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and Annunciationis beat Marie Virginis, per
equales portiones Annuatim solvend. in plena Recompensatione totius talis
Juncture, sive dotis que iidem Marie contingere debeat de aliquibus terris and
tenementis predicti Willielmi Palmer. Et si contingat predictum Annualem
redditum duodecim librarum, vel aliquam inde parcellam aretro fore post aliquod
Festum festorum predictorum, in quo sive quibus ut prefertur solvi deberet, and
per prefat. Willielm. insolut. quod tunc and toties been licebit eidem Marie
and Assign. suis in predicta Maneria and tenementa cum pertin. sive in aliquam
parcellam inde intrare and distringere, districtionesque sic ibid. capt. licite
abducere, effugare and penes se retinere, quousque de predicto annuali redditu
duodecim librarum; ac de qualibet inde parcella, una cum arreragiis ejusdem (si
que fuerint) plenarie satisfact. fuerint and persolut. Et ulterius iidem
Edwardus and Robertus concesserunt predicto Willielmo Maneria and tenementa
predicta cum pertin. and illa ei reddiderunt, in eadem Curia Habend. and
Tenend. predictum Manerium and tenementa cum pertin. prefato Willielmo and
^eredibus suis imperpetuum. Tenend. de Capital. dominis feodi illius per
servicia que ad predictum Manerium and tenementa pertinent imperpetuum.

Sect. XIII. A Fine sur done Grant, with render of the Premises to one of the
Cognizors for 21 years to Commence after the death of Tenant for life, the
Reversion to the other Cognizees and their Heirs.
Essex. ss. PRecipe Willielmo King and Katharine uxori ejus, and Simoni Smith,
quod just, etc. teneant Johanni Smith, and Thome Hill, Conventionem de tertia
part unius Mesuagii, unius Horrei, unius Gardini, quadraginta acrarum Terre,
duarum acrarum Prati, and trium acrarum Pasture cum pertin. in H. M. Et nisi,
etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predict. Willielmus King and Katharina,
and Sim^ recogn. tertiam partem predict. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Johannis,
ut illa que iidem Johannes and Thomas habent de dono, etc. ( Release and
Warranty ut supra.) Et pro hac, etc. iidem Johannes and Thomas concesserunt
predicto Simoni tertiam partem predictam cum pertin. and ill. ei reddiderunt in
eadem Curia Habend. and tenend. eidem Simoni a Festo Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli, vel a festo Annunciationis beat Marie Virginis, quod prius and
prox. contigerit, vel erit post mortem cujusdam Elizabethe modo uxoris
Willielmi T. and nuper uxoris Richardi S. defunct. usque ad finem and terminum
viginti and unius Annorum, extunc prox. sequen. and plenarie complend. and
finiend. reddendo inde annuatim predictis Thome and Johanni and heredibus
ipsius Johannis duodecim denarios, ad festa Annunciationis beat Marie
Virginis, and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, per equales portiones solvend. Et si
contingat predictam Annuitatem, sive Annualem redditum 12d. in part vel in
toto post aliquod Festum festorum predictorum ( recite the clause of Distress,
ut supra usque satisfact. and persolut.) Et ^lterius concesserunt predicti
Johannes and Thomas Hill, predictis Willielmo King and Katharine Reversionem
tertie partis predicte, cum pertin. and redditum predictum superius reservat.
Et illa eis reddiderunt in eadem Curia, Habe^d. and tenend. eisdem Willielmo
King and Katherine, and heredibus ipsius Katharine imperpetuum. Tenend. de
Capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servicia que adinde pertinent imperpetuum.

Sect. XIV. A Fine sur Concessit, by Baron and Feme (she being Tenant for life)
where the Lands are granted during the life of the Woman to the Cognizee.
Lincoln. ss. PRecipe Richardo Smith generoso and Katherine uxori ejus, quod
just, etc. teneant Thome Herd Conventionem, etc. de uno Mesuagio, qua^^or
acris Terre, tribus acris Prati, and sex acris Pasture cum pertin in E. Et
nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod cum predicti Richardus and Katherina
habent and renent ut in jure ipsius Katherine, pro termino vite ejusdem
Katherine, tenementa predicta cum pertin. revertione inde post decessum dicte
Katherine, Marie Royden and heredibus suis spectan. ^idem Richardus and
Katherina concesserunt predicto Thome Herd tenementa predicta cum pertin. Et
totum and quicquid in predictis tenementis cum pertin. habent in eadem Curia
reddiderunt, Habend. and ^enend eidem Thome and assign. suis durante tota vi^a
dicte Katherine, tenend. de Capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servicia que
adinde pertinent imperpetuum. Et predicti Richardus and Katherina warant*
predicto Thome and Assignatis suis renementa predict. cum pertin. sicut
predictum est contra omnes homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac, etc.

Sect. XV. A Fine sur Cognizance de droit, of Lands which the Cognizee has
part in Possession, and are granted to him in Fee for ever, the residue being
in Lease for life, the Cognizor grants to him the Reversion (after the death of
Tenant for life.)
Lincoln. ss. PRecipe Henrico Headlam quod just, etc. teneat Arthuro Calverly
Conventionem, etc. de uno Mesuagio, quatuor Cottagiis, quatuor Toftis, uno
Collumbar. tribus Gardinis, Centum and quatuor acris Terre, quadraginta acris
Prati, viginti acris Pasture, duabus acris Bosci, viginti acris Jampnorum and
Bruere, and viginti acris Marisci cum pertin. in Scawby, etc. ac de libera
Piscar. in aqua de Antolne. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus Henricus recogn* tenementa
predicta cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Arthuri, de quibus idem Arthurus habet
unum Mesuagium, duo Cottagia, duo Tosta, unum Gardinum, octoginta acras Terre,
viginti quatuor acras Prati, viginti acras Pasture, duas acras Bosci, viginti
acras Jampnorum and Bruere, and viginti acras Marisci, parcel. tenementorum
predictorum cum pertin. de dono predicti Henrici; Et illa remisit and quiet.
clam. de se and heredibus suis prefato A. and heredibus suis imperpetuum: Et
concessit pro se and heredibus suis quod duo Cottagia, duo Tofta, duo Gardina,
sexaginta acras Terre, and sex acras Prati, tenementorum predictorum resid. cum
pertin. (que Elizabetha B. uxor Thome B. tenet ad terminum vite sue de
hereditate predicti Henrici die quo hec Concordia facta fuit. Et que post
decessum ipsius Elizabethe ad prefatum Henricum and heredes suos debuerunt
reverti) post decessum ipsius Elizabethe integre reman. prefat. Arthuro and
heredibus suis Tenend. simul cum tenementis and Piscar. predictis de
Capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servicia que ad eadem pertinent
imperpetuum Et predict. Henr. and heredes sui, warant. praefato Arthuro and
heredibus suis tenementa and Piscar. predict. cum pertin. sicut predictum est
Contra omnes homines imperpetuum, etc.

Sect. XVI. A Fine sur Cognizance de droit tantum, levied by way of Release to
confirm the Cognizees Estate in certain Lands whereof he is possessed, and
whereunto the Cognizor has but a bare Right.
CArolus Dei gratia Anglie Scotie Francie and Hibernie Rex fidei defensor, etc.

Omnibus ad quos presents litere nostre pervenerint Salutem Sciatis quod inter
Recorda ac pedes Finium cum Proclamationibus inde factis secundum formam
statuti in hujusmodi Casu nuper edit. and provisi coram Justiciariis nostris de
Banco apud Westminster. De Termino Pasche Anno regni nostri Octavo Continetur sic
Bed. ss. Hec est finalis Concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud Westminster. a
die Pasche in quindecim dies Anno Regnorum Caroli Dei gratia Anglie Scotie
Francie and Hibernie Regis sidei defensoris, etc. A Conquestu Octavo Coram
Roberto Heath Richardo Hutton Francisco Harvie Justi^. and aliis domini Regis
fidelibus tunc ibi presentibus Inter Radolphum Snagge Armigerum and Ann^m
uxorem ejus deforcientes de Maneriis de Kempston alias Kempston Dawbney and St.
John's cum pertin. Ac de december Mesuagiis viginti Cottagiis december Toftis uno
Columbar. triginta Gardinis viginti Pomariis 300 acris Terre 20 acris Prati 300
acris Pasture 250 acris Bosci 400 acris Jampnorum and Bruere cum pertin. in K.
M. M. W. and parochia Sancti P. in Villa Bedford. Unde placitum Conventionis
sum. suit inde inter eos in eadem Curia scilicet quod predicti Thomas and Anna
recogn. predicta Maneria and tenementa cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Radolphi Et
illa remiserunt and quiet. clam. de ipsis Thoma and Anna and heredibus suis
predicto Radolph, and heredibus suis imperpetuum Et preterea iidem Thomas and
Anna concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius Thome quod ipsi warant. predicto
Radolpho and hered. suis predicta Maneria and tenementa cum pertin. contra
predictos Thomam and Annam and heredes ipsius Thome imperpetuum Et pro hac
Recogn. Remissione quiet. clam. Warantia fine and Concordia idem Radolphus
dedit predictis Thome and Anne Octingentas Libras Sterlingorum In cujus rei
Testimonium Sigillum nostrum ad brevia in Banco predicto sigilland. deputat.
presentibus apponi secimus Test R. Heath apud Westminster. decimo octavo die Aprilis
Anno regni nostri supradicto.

Blake.

Sect. XVII. Lands granted in Tail with diverse Remainders over, by Fines sur
Concessit.
HEc est finalis Concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud Westminster. a die sc.
Michaelis in tres septimanas Anno, etc. coram, etc. Inter Thomam Holley and
Isabellam uxorem ejus querentes and Richard. Kent and Johannam uxorem ejus
desorc. de tribus Mesuagiis and quadraginta and duabus acris terre cum pertin.
in W. unde placitum Conventionis sum. fuit inde inter eos in eadem Curia
scilicet quod predicti Richardus and Johanna uxor ejus Concesserunt predictis
Thome and Isabelle uxori ejus tenementa predicta cum pertin. Et illa eis
reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend. and tenend. eisdem Thome and Isabelle and
heredibus de Corporibus ipsorum Thome and Isabelle exeunt. de Capitalibus
dominis feodi illius per servioia que ad predicta tenementa cum pertin.
pertinent imperpetuum Et si contingat eosdem Thomam and Isabellam uxorem ejus
obire sine heredibus de Corporibus suis exeunt. tunc post decessum ipsorum
Thome and Isabelle predicta tenementa cum pertin. integre reman. heredibus
ipsius Thome de corpore suo procreat. Tenend. de Capitalibus dominis, etc. ut
supra imperpetuum Et si nullus here is de corpore ipsius Thome fuerit procreat.
tunc predicta tenementa cum pertin. integre reman. heredibus ipsius Isabelle
uxoris predicti Thome de corpore suo procreat. Tenend. etc. Et si nullus here is
de corpore predicte Isabelle uxoris predicti Thome fuerit procreat. tunc
predicta tenementa cum pertin. reman. Johanne Agneti Matilde Margerie and
Elizabethe Sororibus ipsius Isabelle uxoris predicti Thome and heredibus de
corporibus ipsarum Johanne Agnetis Matilde Margerie and Elizabethe exeun.
Tenend. etc. Et si contingat quod eedem Johanna, Agnes, Matilda, Margeria and
Elizabetha obierint sine heredibus de corporibus suis exeunt. tunc post
decessus ipsarum Johanne, Agnetis, Matilde, Margerie and Elizabethe predicta
tenementa cum pertin. integre reman. rectis heredibus predicti Thome Tenend.
etc. Et pred. Richardus and Johanna uxor ejus and heredes ip^ius Johanne
warant. predictis Thome and Isabelle uxori ejus and heredibus suis predictis
and heredibus ipsi^s Thome predictis (si iidem Thomas and Isabella uxor ejus
obierint sine heredibus de corporibus suis exeunt.) and heredibus ipsius
Isabelle uxor is ipsius Thome predictis (si nullus here is de corpore ipsius
Thome sit procreat.) and predictis Johanne, Agneti, Matilde, Margerie and
Elizabethe and heredibus suis predictis (si nullus here is de corpore ipsius
Isabelle uxor is predict. Thome fuer it procreat) and etiam rectis heredibus
predict. Thome (si eedem Johanna, Agnes, Matilda, Margeria and Elizabetha
obierint sine heredibus de corporibus suis exeunt. predicta tenementa cum
pertin. contra omnes homines imperpetuum Et pro hac Concessione redditione
warantia fine and Concordia iidem Thmas and Isabella uxor ejus dederunt
predict. Richardo and Johanne uxori ejus viginti Marcas Argenti, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predictus Franciscus recogn. Maneria
tenementa and reddit. predict. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius Willielmi, etc.
Release and Waranty contra omnes homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac Recogn. etc.
idem Willielmus concessit prefato F. Maneria tenementa and reddit. predict. cum
pertin. Et illa ei red^iderunt in eadem Curia habend. and tenend. eidem F. and
hered. quos idem F. procreavit de corpore M. nunc uxoris ejus de Capitalibus
dominis feodi illius per servicia que ad predict. Maneria tenementa and reddit.
predict. pertinent imperpetuum Et si contingat quod idem F. obierit sine
heredibus per ipsum de corpore ipsius Marie procreat. tunc post decessum ipsius
F. predict. Maneria tenementa and reddit. cum pertin. integre reman. prefato M.
and hered. ipsius M. quos predictus F. procreavit de corpore ipsius Marie
tenend. de Capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servicia, etc. Et si contingat
quod eadem M. obierit sine heredibus per predict. F. de corpore ipsius Marie
procreat. turc post decessum ipsius Marie predict. Maneria tenementa and
reddit. cum pertin. integre reman. rectis heredibus prefati Willielmi Tenend.
de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servicia que ad predicta Maneria
tenementa and redditus pertinent imperpetuum.

Sect. XVIII. A Fine sur done, Grant, with render for life of the Cognizor,
Revertion to the Cognizees.
Buck. ss. HEc est finalis Concordia, etc. inter Edwardum Hastings Militem and
Mariam uxorem ejus querentes and Oliverum Man Militem deforc. de Manerio de
Stoke, etc. cum pertin. ac de 50 Mesuag. 2000 acris Terre, 100 acris Prati,
1000 acris Pasture, 100 acris Bosci and 50 librat. reddit. cum pertin. in Stoke
unde placitum Conventionis sum. fuit inter eos in eadem Cur. scilicet quod
predictus Oliverus recogn. Maneria tenementa and reddit predict. cum pertin.
esse jus ipsius Marie ut illa que iidem Edwardus and Maria habent de dono
predict. Oliveri Et illa remisit and quiet. clam. de se and heredibus suis
predict. Edwardo and Marie and heredibus ipsius Marie imperpetuum Et pro hac,
etc. iidem Edwardus and Maria concesser. predicto Olivero predicta Maneria
tenementa and reddit. cum pertin. Et illa ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend.
and tenend. eidem Olivero de predictis Edwardo and Maria and hered. ipsius
Marie pro termino vite naturalis ipsius Oliveri Reddend. inde annuatim unam
Rosam ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptiste pro omnibus serviciis
consuetis and exaction. ad predict. Edwardum and Mariam and heredes ipsius
Marie imperpetuum Et faciend. inde Capitalibus dominis feodi illius pro
predictis Edwardo and Maria and heredibus ipsius Marie omnia alia servicia que
ad predicta Maneria and tenementa pertinent. tota vita ipsius Oliveri Et
predicti Edwardus and Maria heredes ipsius Marie warant. predicto Olivero
predicta Maneria tenementa and reddit. cum pertin. contra omnes homines tota
vita ipsius Oliveri and post decessum ipsius Oliveri predict. Maneria and
tenementa cum pertin. integre reverterint ad predictos Edwardum and Mariam and
heredes ipsius Marie quiet. de heredibus predicti Oliveri renend. de Capital.
dominis feodi illius per servlcia que ad predicta Maneria and tenementa
pertinent imperpetuum.

Sect. XIX. Grant and render of a Rent Charge, and Lease for years.
Essex. ss. PRecipe Thome M. and Marie uxori ejus and Thome S. quod just, etc.
teneant Thome Parker generoso and Johanni Kent Conventionem, etc. de Manerio de
B. cum pertin. ac de uno Mesuagio, uno Columbari, duobus Gardinis, ducentis
acris Terre, viginti acris prati, sexaginta acris Pasture, quinquaginta acris
Bosci, and viginti solidat. reddit. cum pertin. in B. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia talis, scilicet quod predicti Thomas and Maria and Thomas S.
recogn. Maneria tenementa and reddit. predict. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius T.
P. ut illa que iidem Thomas Parker and Johannes habent de dono predictorum T.
M. and T. S. Et illa remis. and quiet. clam. de ipsis T. M. and T. S. and
heredibus suis prefatis T. P. and J. and heredibus ipsius T. imperpetu^m Et
preterea iidem T. M. and T. S. concesserunt pro se and heredibus ipsius T. quod
ipsi warant. Manerium tenementa and reddit. predict. cum pertin. prefatis T. P.
and J. and heredibus ipsius T. P. contra omnes homines imper petuum Et pro hac
recognitione remissione quiet. clam. warantia fine and Concordia iidem T. P.
and J. concesserunt eidem T. M. quandam Annuitatem sive annualem redditum december
librarum exeun. de Manerio tenementis and reddit. predictis cum pertin. Et ill.
ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia habend. and percipiend. eidem Marie pro termino
vite ejusdem Marie ad Festa Annunciationis beat Marie Virginis and Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli per equales portiones solvend. primo tamen termino
solutionis ejusdem Annuitatis sive annualis redditus incipiente ad idem Festum
festorum predictorum quod prius and proxime contingerit post mortem predict.
Thome M. and non antea Et si contingat predict. Annuitatem sive Annualem
redditum december librarum aretro sore in part vel in toto post aliquod Festum
festorum predictorum post mortem ejusdem Thome quibus ut prefertur solvi debeat
quod tunc been licebit prefate Marie durante vita sua in predicta Maneria and
tenementa cum pertin. intrare and distringere Et districtiones sic ibid. capt.
abducere, asportare, effugare and penes se retinere quousque de predicta
Annuitate sive Annuali redditu una cum arreragiis ejusdem (si que forent) sibi
plenarie satisfact. fuerint and persolut. Concesserunt etiam prefati T. P. and
J. predicto Thome Man Maneria tenementa and reddit. predict. cum pertin. Et
illa ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend. and tenend. eidem Thome and
assignatis suis a Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli jam ultimo preterito usque
ad finem termini triginta Annorum extunc proxime sequen. and plenarie complend.
Reddend. inde annuatim prefatis Thome Parker and Johanni and heredibus ipsius
Thome Parker pro primis quinque Annis predictorum triginta Annorum unum granum
Piperis ad Festa sei. Michaelis, etc. (si petatur) annuatim solvend. necnon
reddendo annuatim prefatis T. P. and J. and heredibus ejusdem T. pro primis sex
decim Annis tantum tunc prox. sequen. parcel. residui predictorum triginta
Annorum quadraginta solid. legalis Monete Anglie ad duo Festa Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli and Annunciationis beat Marie Virginis per equales portiones
annuatim solvend. Et si contingat predictam annualem reddit unius grani Pipe^is
aut predictum annualem reddit. quadraginta solidorum vel aliquem eorum vel
aliquam inde parcellam aretro fore non solut. in part vel in toto post aliquod
Festum festorum predictorum in quo* ut prefertur solvi debeant quod tunc been
licebit prefat. T. P. and J. and heredibus ejusdem T. in predict. Maneria,
tenementa and reddit. cum pertin. intrare and districtiones sic ibid. capt.
licite abinde abducere, effugare, asportare and penes se retinere quousque de
predictis reddit. unius grani Piperis, and quadraginta solid. sic aretro
existen. una cum arreragiis eorum (si que fuerint) plenarie fuerint satisfact.
and persolut. Concesser. etiam prefat. T. P. and J. predicto T. M. Revertionem
Manerii tenementorum and reddit. predict. and omnes reddit. eis superius
reservat. Ac ill. ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia Habend. and tenend. eidem T. M.
and heredibus suis imperpetuum Tenend. de Capital. do^. feodi illius per
servicia que ad Maneria tenementa and reddit predict. pertinent imperpetuum,
etc.

CAP. X. Instructions for bringing Writs of Error to Avoid Fines, wherein all
the Proceedings are set forth.
The Writ directed to the Chief Justice.
REgina, etc. dilecto and fidelissimo E. A. Militi salutem Quia in Recordo and
Processu ac etiam in levatione cujusdam finis in Cur. Dom. Edwardi 6. nuper
Regis Angl. etc. de Banco apud Westminster. de Termino S. Hillarii anno Regni sui
sexto coram E. M. Mil. and Sociis s^is tunc Justic. ipsius nuper Regis de Banco
pred. inter W. B. and Ja. V. quer. and Jo. L. deforc. de Manerio, etc. cum
pertin. in L. in Com. E. error interven. manifestus ad grave dampnum R. W. and
J. ux. ejus consanguinee and hered. Ja. V. genesis sicut ex querela sua accepimus:
nos Errorem si quis fuerit modo debito corrigi and eisdem Rich. and Jane plenam
and Celerem Justitiam fieri volentes in hac part vobis mandamus, quod Recordum
and processum finis pred. cum omnibus ea tangen. que in Custodia vestra
existunt ut dicitur nobis sub sigill. vestro distinct and aperte mittas and
hoc breve Ita quod ea habeamus in Crastino animarum ubicunque tunc fuerimus in
Anglia ut inspectis Recordo and Processu prod. ulterius inde pro errore illo
corrigend. fieri faciamus quod de ^ure and secundum legem and consuetudinem
Regni nostri Angl. soret faciend. Test, etc*

A Writ to the Custos brevium to certify the Foot of the Fine.
REgina, etc. Dilecto suo J. L. Ar. Custodi brevium Nostr. de Banco salutem
Quia in Recordo and processu ac etiam in Levatione cujusdam sinis in Cur. etc.
(ut supra) ad grave damp. R. W. and J. ux. ejus consanguinee and hered. etc.
Nos Errorem (si quis fuerit) etc. Vobis mandamus quod transcriptum pedis Finis
pred. Cum omnibus ea tangen. que in Custodia vestra existunt ut dicitur nobis
sub sigillo vestro distinct and aperte mittas and hoc breve ita quod ea
habeamus in Crastino animarum ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia ut inspect.
transcripto pedis Finis pred. ulterius inde pro errore illo corrigend. fieri
faciamus quod de jure and secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Anglie
soret faciend. Test, etc.

The Writ to the Cyrographer.
DIlecto suo T. C. Ar. Cyrographario suo de Banco salutem Quia in Recordo and
processu ac etiam in Levatione cujusdam Finis in Curia, etc. Error intervenit
manifestus ad grave dampnum R. W. and J. uxoris ejus consanguinee and hered.
etc. sicut ex querela sua accepimus nos errorem (si quis fuerit) modo debito
corrigi and eisdem Rich. and Jane plenam and celerem Justitiam fieri volentes
in hac part vobis mandamus quod Recordum and processum note finis pred. cum
omnibus ea tangen. que in Custodia vestra existunt ut dicitur nobis sub sigillo
vestro distinct and aperte mittas and hoc breve Ita quod illa habeamus in
Crastino animarum ubicunque etc. Test, etc.

Super Fine in le Common Bank.
Domina Regina mandavi^ dilecto and fideli suo E. ^. Milit. brev. s^^m Clausum
in hec verba, etc.

The Record certified by the Chief Justice.
REcordum and processus finis de quibus in brevi pred. fit mentio sequuntur in
hec verba Respons. E. A. Militis infra nominat.

Placita apud Westminster. coram E. M. Milite and Sociis suis Justic. dom. Regis de
Banco de Termino S. Hillarii Anno, etc. Rot. xxj^.

Essex. ss. W. B. and J. ux. ejus dant Dom. Regi xxx. solidos pro licentia
concordandi cum J. L. de placito convent. de Manerio de, etc. Respons. E. A.
Mil. infra nominat.

Mandavit etiam eadem Domina Regina dilecto suo J. L. Ar. Custodi brev. suorum
de Banco brev. suum Clausum in h^c verba, etc.

Transcript. pedis Finis pred. una cum omnibus Finem pred. tangen. sequitur in
hec verba Respons. J. L. Custod. brevium pred.

The Foot of the Fine.
Essex. ss. PRecipe Johan. Law quod teneat W. B. and J. Conventionem, etc. de
Manerio de, etc. cum pertin. in, etc. Et nisi, etc.

ET est Concordia tails, scilicet quod pred. J. L. Recogn. Manerium tenementa
and Reddit. pred. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius J. V. ut illi que iidem J. V. and
W. habent de dono pred. J. L. Et illi remiser. and quiet. clam. de se and
hered. suis predict. J. V. and W. and hered. ipsius J. V. imperpetuum Et pro
hac recogn. remissione quiet. clam. fine and Concordia iidem J. V. and W.
concesser unt prefat. J. L. Manerium tenementa and Reddit. pred. cum pertin.
and ill. ei reddiderunt in eadem Curia habendum and tenendum eidem J. L. and
hered. suis imperpetuum de Capitalibus dominis feodi illius tenend. Et preterea
iidem J. V. and W. concesserunt pro se and hered. ipsius J. V. quod ipsi
Warantizabunt prefat. J. L. and hered. suis Manner. tenementa and Reditum pred.
cum pertin. contra ipsos and hered. ipsius J. V. imperpetuum, etc E. M.

Hec est finalis Concordia facta in Cur. dom. Regis de Banco apud Westminster. in
Octabis S. Hillarii Anno, etc. coram E. M. H. B. J. H. W. C. Justic. and aliis
Dom. Regis fidelibus tunc ibi presentibus inter W. B. and J. V. quer. and J. L.
deforc. de Manerio, etc. cum pertin. in L. etc. Unde placitum Conventionis sum.
fuit inter eos in eadem Curia Scil. quod predict. Jo. L. recogn. Manerium
Tenementa and Reddit. predict. cum pertin. esse jus ipsius J. V. ut illa que
iidem Johannes and Willielmus, etc. Et pro hac, etc. Et illa ei reddiderunt in
eadem Curia Habend. and tenend. eidem J. L. and hered. suis de Capitalibus
dominis feodi illius per servicia que ad predictum Manerium and tenementa, etc.
pertinent. imperpetuum Et predicti J. V. and W. concesserunt pro se and
heredibus ipsius Johannis quod ipsi Warrant predicto J. L. and hered. suis
predict. Manerium and tenementa cum pertin. contra predictos J. V. and W. and
hered. ipsius Johannis imperpetuum.

The Proclamations.
Essex ss. SEcundum for mam Statuti prima Proclafacta fuit sexto die Febr.
Termino Sancti Hillarii Anno septimo Regis infra script.

Secunda Proclamatio facta fuit octavo die Febr. eodem Termino.

Tertia Proclamatio fact. fuit decimo die Febr. edem Termino.

Quarta Proclamatio fact. fuit decimo quarto die Febr. eodem Termino.

Quinta Proclamatio fact. fuit sexto die Maii Termino Pasche Anno septimo Regis
infra script.

Sexta Proclam. facta fuit nono die Maii eodem Termino.

Septima Proclam. facta fuit duodecimo die Maii eodem Termino.

Octava Proclam. facta fuit decimo quinto die Maii eodem Termino.

Nona Proclam. facta fuit decimo quarto die Junii Termino S. Trin. An. septimo
Regis infrascript.

Decima Proclam. facta fuit decimo sexto die Junii eodem Termino.

Undecima Proclam. facta fuit decimo nono die Junii eodem Termino.

Duodecima Proclam. facta fuit vicesimo primo die Junii eodem Termino.

Decima tertia Proclam. fact. fuit vicesimo tertio die Novembris Termino S.
Michaelis Anno primo Marie Regine, etc.

Decima quarta Proclam. facta fuit vicesimo tertio die Novembris eodem Termino.

Decima quinta Proclam. facta fuit vicesimo quinto die Novembris eodem Termino.

Decima sexta Proclam. facta fuit vicesimo octavo die Novembris eodem Termino.

The Return of the Writ to the Cyrographer and Note of the Fine.
MAndavit insuper eadem Dom. Regina dilecto sibi T. C. Cyrographario suo de
Banco breve suum Clau sum in hec verba, etc. (breve, ut supra) Transcript. Note
Finis pred. and brevis de conventione cum omnibus ea Tangen. sequuntur in hec
verba inter W. B. and J. V. quer. and J. L. deforc. de Manerio, etc. unde
placitum Conventionis sum. fuit inter eos scilicet quod pred. J. L. recogn.
pred. Manerium and Tenementa, etc. esse jus etc. ( ut supra) Et pred. J. V. and
W. concesserunt pro se and hered. ipsius J. quod ipsi Warrant. etc. ( ut supra)
contra predict. J. V. and W. and hered. ipsius J. imperpetuum. de Octabis S.
Hill. Anno Regni, etc.

The Writ of Covenant.
REX, etc. Vic. E. salutem Precipe J. L. quod just and sine dilatione teneat
W. B. and J. ux. ejus conv. inter eos factam de Manerio, etc. Et nisi fecerit
and pred. W. and J. ux. fece^int se secur. de clamore suo prosequend. tunc.
sum. per bon. sum. predict. J. Law quod sit coram Justic. nostris apud Westminster.
in Octabis S. Hillarii ostens. quare non fecerit Et habeas ibi sum. and hoc
brev. T. etc. pro viginti solid. solut. in Hannapario pleg. de pros. Johannes
D^vn and Richardus Fenn per H. 6. Edw. 6. Rot. 21. Sol. xx. solid. T. C. T. P.
Miles Vic. Tho. Crompton. Cyrographari^s.

Errors Assigned.
POstea scilicet die Martis prox. post Octabas Purificationis beat Marie isto
eodem Termino coram Domina Regina apud Westminster. Ven. pred. J. W. and Jana ux.
ejus per M. D. Attorn. sum. Et dicunt quod ante levationem finis predict. scil.
(tali die and Anno) quidam Johannes Vawdy in fine predicto nominat. fuit
seisitus in dominico suo ut de feodo de and in Manerio and tenementis predict.
cum pertin. in fine predicto ^entionat. quousque W. B. and Johan. V. in fine
predicto nominat. predicto (tali die and Anno) supradict. in tenementa predict.
cum pertin. in fine predict. mentionat. intraverunt and ipsum Johan. Vawdy inde
disseisiverunt and pred. tempore levationis finis pred. ^^ tempore concessionis
and recordationis ejusdem fuerunt seisiti de Manerio and Tenementis predict.
cum pertin. in eodem fine mentionat. per dis^eisinam.

Et ulterius iidem Richard. and Joan. dicunt quod in Recordo and processu pred.
ace^iam in levatione finis pred. manifest est Erratum.

An Error Assigned that one Proclamation was made after the Term.
PRo eo videlicet quod ubi juxta legem and consuetudinem Reg. Dom. Regine nunc
Anglie super quendam finem in Curia dict. dom. Regine coram Justic. dicte
domine Regine apud Westminster. levat. and Recordat. essent sexdecim Proclam. infra
unum annum tunc prox. sequen. post recordationem finis illius. Et quod quelibet
earundem Proclam. fienda and Proclam. essent in dicta Cur. dict. Dom. Regis
coram Justic. ipsius Dom. Regis apud Westminster. in plena and aperta Cur. infra
Terminum ibidem diversis and separalibus diebus Judicibus infra Terminos illos
in quibus eedem Proclamationes essent fact and habit Et ubi per Recordum
predictum apparet quod pred. quarta Proclamatio facta fuit coram Justic. dict.
Dom. Regis apud Westminster. pred. tertio decimo die Februarii pred. Termino S.
Hillarii predicto Termino S. Hillarii Annis, etc. in hoc videlicet quod tertius
decimus dies Febr. ejusdem Terminii S. Hillarii non fuit dies Juridicus
infrapred. Terminum S. Hillarii sed proximus dies post finem Termini illius. Et
pro eo quod eadem Proclam facta fuit sine die manifest est Erratum.

Another Error that one Proclamation was made upon a Sunday.
ETiam in Recordo and processu predictis Ac etiam in levatione finis predicti
Manifest est Erratum pro eo videlicet quod ubi per Recordum predictum apparet
quod Octava Proclam. fact. fuit predict. decimo quinto dic Maii^ in dicto
Termino Pasche Anno, etc. supradicto in hoc videlicet quod idem 15 dies Maii
Anno septimo supradicto fuit dies Dominicus and non dies Juridicus ejusdem
Termini Pasche quo quidem die aliqua Proclam. per legem terre fieri non debet
superius constat de Recordo.

Another Error Assigned for that two Proclamations were made in one day.
ET ulterius in Recordo and processu predictis ac etiam in levatione finis
pred. manifest, etc. similis Error pro undecima Proclam. Denique in Recordo
and processu predictis ac etiam in levatione finis pred. manifest est Erratum
Pro eo videlicet quod ubi per recordum predictum apparet quod predicte 13. and
14 Proclam. fact. fuer. pred. 23. die Novem. in predict. Termino S. Mi^haelis
Anno, etc. supradicto in hoc videlicet quod eedem 13. and 14 Proclam. fact.
fuerunt in Cur. pred. eodem 23. die Novem. quo die eedem Proclam. per legem and
terre fieri non deberent pro^t supe^ius scilicet constat de recordo, etc.

The Plaintiff suggests the Cognizor is dead and pray's a Scire facias against
his heir.
ET super hoc iidem Richardus and Jana dicunt quod pred. Johannes Law in fine
pred. nominat. mortuus est quodque Elizabetha Law est filia and here is predict.
Johannis Law cui stat. in feodo simplici de and in Manerio and Tenementis
predictis cum pertin. per finem pred. concessus fuit. Quodque eadem Elizabetha
est modo uxor Alex. Page Et pet. brev. domini Regis ad premuniend. predictos
Alex. and Eliz. essendi coram domino Rege auditur. Record. and processum
predict. and ei conceditur, etc. Ideo precept. est Vic. Essex. quod per probos,
etc. scire fac. pred. Alex. and Eliz. quod sint coram domino Rege apud Westminster. A
die Pasche in quindecim dies ubicunque, etc. auditur. Recordum and processum
pred. si, etc. Et ulterius, etc. Idem dies dat. est prefat. Richardo and Jane
ibidem, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westminster. ven. pred. Richardus
and Jana per Attorn. suos pred. Et Vic. videlicet A. B. modo mand. quod ipse
virtute brevis predict. sibi inde direct. scire fecit prefat. Alex. and
Elizabethe essendi coram dict. domino Rege apud Westminster. ad diem and locum
predict. prout sibi per brev. pred. precept fuit per M. R. and J. D. probos,
etc. qui quidem Alex. and Elizabeth sic premuniti and quarto die placiti
solempnit. exact. per J. B. Attorn. suum similiter ven. super quo pred.
Richardus and Jana ut prius dicunt quod in Recordo and processu pred. acetiam
in levatione finis predict. manifest est Errat. allegando Errores predict. per
ipsos in forma pred. allegat. Et pet. quod finis pred. ob errores illos and
alios in Recordo and processu predict. compertos revocetur adnulletur and
penitus pro nullo habeatur. Et quod ipsi ad omnia que ipsi occasion finis
pred. amiser. restituantur, etc. H. 26 Eliz. Rot. 93. in Banco Regis.

CAP. XI. The Charges of a Fine acknowledged either before the Lord Chief
Justice at the Bar, or before a Judge of Assize or Commissioners in the
Country by Dedimus Potestatem.
Sect. I. The Charges of a Fine acknowledged before the Lord Chief Justice are
as follow:
s. d. DRawing the Precipe and Concord 0 3 4 Acknowledging thereof before the
Chief Justice 0 11 8 Writ of Covenant 0 3 0 Imposition upon the Writ of
Covenant 0 0 6 For the Kings Fine according to the value of the Land.
Imposition thereupon accordingly. The several Fees at the Alienation Office 0 2
4 Warant of Attorney, making and filing 0 0 4 Paid at the Inrollment Office 0 2
0 To the Custos Brevi^m 0 3 8 To the Kings Silver-Office in Term time 0 0 10 If
out of the Term 4d. more, if taken before the Chief Justice; but if by Dedimus
you pay 0 1 8 To the Chirographer in Term time and 6d. more after. 0 5 8 For
the Indentures to the Chirographers Clerks for the first warranty 0 3 6 For
every Warranty afterward 0 0 6 Attorneys Fee 0 6 8

Sect. II. The Charges of a Fine acknowledged at the Bar.
l. s. d. TO a Sergeant at Bar 0 3 4 To the second Prothonotary, or his Clerk
in Court, for Recording the Fine 0 1 4 Fees paid in Court to the Box, and
Officers 0 0 6

In all things else the Fees are the same of a Fine acknowledged at Bar, as if
it had been taken before the Lord Chief Justice*

Sect. III. The Charges of a Fine acknowledged before Commissioners in the
Country by special Dedimus potestatem.
TO the Cursitor for the Dedimus with Imposition 1 4 8 To a Judge for his (hand
or) Allocatur, in case a Knight be not present at the Caption 0 4 0 But when a
Knight is present you need not a Judges hand.

The rest of the Fees are the same in this Case, as when acknowledged before
the Lord Chief Justice.

Sect. IV. The Charges of a Fine taken before a Judge of Assize.
s. d. IN this case the Charges are the same, as when acknowledged before the
Lord Chief Justice, the Fee for the Caption being also 0 11 8 Only you pay to
the Cursitor for a Dedimus potestatem 0 9 6

The rest of the Fees are as Sect. the first.

ARCANA CLERICALIA: OR A Treatise OF Common Recoveries UPON WRITS of ENTRY IN
le Post; WITH Notes and Observations thereupon, AND A TABLE of Fees.

Printed Anno Dom. 1673.

Arcana Clericalia: OR A Treatise OF Common Recoveries UPON Writs of Entry In
le Post.
A Common Recovery defined.
A Common Recovery is only fictio Juris, or a Conveyance by consent used for
the better assuring of Lands and Tenements upon any man, wherein the Recovery
in value, the supposed Recompense for him which loses his land, is but a
fiction in Law. And this Recovery by assent is now by custom become a Common
Assurance and Conveyance, upon which Uses may be limited and raised. Coke 1
part. Sir William Pelhams Case 14. But there is a great difference between a
Recovery by assent, and a Recovery without assent of the Parties. Vide 14. El.
Cap. 8.

The former definition explained.
IF any person have a desire to render himself capable of disposing of Lands or
Tenements which are intayled upon him, and would be enabled to sell, give, or
bequeath them as he pleases, the course is to procure some friend to bring a
Writ against him for this Land; or in case where he does sell the Land, perhaps
he that buyeth it, or is to have it settled upon him, shall bring the Writ
against him that is to make the Assurance of the Land, if it be with a single
Voucher. And in this case the Demandant (being Plaintiff in this Action) does
suppose that the Tenant (or he against whom the Writ is brought) has no right
to the Land, but that he only ( viz. the Demandant) has right thereunto, and
that the Tenant came to the Land wrongfully by means of one Hugh Hunt a
stranger therein named. And to this Writ the Tenant does appear either by
Attorney or in person, and then does enter into defense of the Land: but in
Pleading does vouch to warant such a man, from whom, or his Ancestors, the
Lands in question are supposed to come to him or his Ancestors, the Ancestor of
which third person obliging himself and his heirs by Conveyance, to warant and
make good the Title to him or them to whom it was Conveyed: and thereupon he
prays that this Vouchee (or third person) may be called into Court to defend
this Title, whereupon being called he does appear, and seem to defend the
Title, denying that the Tenant came to the land wrongfully by means of the
aforesaid Hugh Hunt, upon which he takes Issue, or put himself upon the
Country, whereupon the Demandant prays a further day to imparle or confer
about the matter, which being granted unto him by the Court, at the day
appointed the Vouchee, or third person aforesaid, by Agreement and consent of
the Parties comes no more into Court, but makes default, whereby judgment is
given and awarded by the Court to the Demandant that he shall recover against
the Tenant the Lands in question, and that the Tenant shall recover over so
much Land of the third person as is sufficient to recompense him for the Land
recovered from him, which the said third person, or Common Vouchee, ought to
have waranted and defended but suffered to be lost. And this is a Recovery in
value or pro Rata. But if the Recovery be with a double Voucher, or treble
Voucher, then the third person upon his appearance is to call or vouch to
warant a fourth person (who must be the Common Vouchee) and to allege in the
same manner as the Tenant does, and pray that such fourth person may come in,
who thereupon must appear, and make default in such manner as before is
mentioned of the third person in the Recovery with single Voucher. And so if
there be more Vouchers. And then there must be several Recoveries over in value
against every one of them. But he that is last vouched or called to waranty is
always Common Vouchee, who is usually Bag-bearer to the Custos Brevium of the
Court of Common Pleas, and has not any Land to render in value upon the
supposed warranty. And by this means grounded upon the strict Principles of Law
the first Tenant does willingly let go the land for the assurance of the
Purchasor, and yet in truth has no recompense over because the Vouchee has no
Land to render in value.

Of what a Writ of Entry may be had, and by what Names.
A Precipe quod Reddat lies de Castro, Manerio, Mesuagio, Tofto, Molendino,
Columbari, Gardino, de Terra, Prato, Pastura, de Bosco, de Jampnis and Bruera,
de Mora, de Juncariis, de Marisco salso and frisco, de libera Piscaria in Aqua
de E. de redditu, de communia Pasture pro omnibus averiis, de communia
Estoveriorum, de Pannagio pro Porcis, de Visu Francii Plegii, de Rectoria de L.
cum pertin. de quibusdam portionibus decimarum provenien. crescen. seu renovan.
in K. de Advocatione Ecclesie de W. de Advocatione Vicarie Ecclesie de S.

It lies also, de Terra Aqua cooperta, de passagio ultra Aquam, de Balliva, de
Officio, de quarta part decimarum, de omnibus and omnimodis decimis,
Majoribus, mixtis and minutis infra Villam sive Hamlett. de B. infra Parochiam
de A. quoquomodo crescen. contingen. ac annuatim renovan. etc. de Tofto and
situ Molendini, de Hundredo de C. and de Ballivato de B. de Pastura ad sex
Boves, de roda Terre, de medietate unius rode Terre, de Shopa, de Wharfa, de
Keia.

Of what things a Writ of Entry lies not.
IT is said in the Practical Counselor, fo. 196. that a Writ of Entry may not
be de Piscaria, Estoveriis, de Gardino; and in the Complete Solicitor printed
this present year 1672, fo. 62. that a Precipe quod Reddat. lies not de
Piscaria de Estoveriis, nec de communia Pasture, nor of a Garden. And so it is
said in the Attorneys Guide, fo. 129 All which you will find to be otherwise by
the Precedents of Recoveries in this Treatise. And certainly it is a very great
mistake for any person that treats publicly of Recoveries, to say that a Writ
of Entry lies not of a Garden, the opinion being so directly contrary to the
Rule of the Register, by which it evidently appears that the word Gardinum is
always used in real Actions, as Writs of Entry in le per cui and post de
placito Terre, either for a Garden, or Orchard, as you will find by the ensuing
Precedent.

Et predictus M. per A. L. Attorn. suum ven. and petir indicium de brevi
predicto, Qua dicit quod breve illud viciosum est in se and non impetrat.
versus eundem M. secundum cursum Registri seu secundum formam and naturam
brevis domine Regine de ingressu super disseisinam in le per seu alicujus al.
brevis domine Regine de placito Terre, quia in eodem brevi apparet quod
predictus J. (inter alia) petit versus ipsum M. unum Pomarium modo and forma
sequen. videlicet Precipe M. T. Ar. quod just, etc. reddat J. D. unum
Mesuagium, unum Gardinum, unum Pomarium, etc. cum pertin. (inter alia) in G,
etc. ubi secundum cursum and formam Registri hoc verbum Pomarium in aliquo
brevi de placito Terre secundum naturam ejusdem brevis nunquam ponitur, quia
hoc verbum Gardinum secundum cursum and formam Registri semper comprehendit in
se Pomarium, undo ex quo, etc. New Book of Entries, entitled Formule been
placitandi, Title Abatement.

A Writ of Entry therefore cannot be brought de Pomario for the Reasons above:
nec de Fossato, Stagno, nec de Advocatione, decimarum unius Curucat. Terre, nec
de Homagio and fidelitat. nec de serviciis faciendis. nec de bovat. Marisci,
nec de Selione terre for the incertainty, because a Selion, which is a land,
contains sometimes an acre, sometime half an acre, sometimes more, and
sometimes less; it cannot be had of a Croft, nor of a yard land virgata Terre,
nec de Fodina, de Minera, nec de Mercatu, for they lie not in demesne but gain,
nec de superiori camera, 3 H. 6. fo. 1.

A Writ of Entry ought not to contain the same thing twice, as a Mesuage and an
House parcel of the same Mesuage. 3 Ed. 4. fo. 28. 46 Ed. 3. fo. 26. nor to
name a Town, and a Hamlet within the same Town, 22 Ed. 3. fo. 11. 41 Ed. 3. fo.
22. but the Practice is otherwise at this day.

Of Common Recoveries upon Writs of Entry in le Post. Their Forms, etc.
ss. Midd. ss. PRecipe Roberto Bellingham generoso A Precipe to be entered upon
the Remembrance. Single Voucher.
and Cornelio Bellingham generoso quod j^ste, etc. reddant Alexandro Houghton
generoso, december Mesuagia, december Tofta, unum Columbare, december Gardina, Centum
acras Terre, quadraginta acras Prati, and septuaginta acras Pasture cum pertin.
in A. C. L. N. and B. que clam. etc.

Write thus in the Margin. ss. Tenentes in propriis personis voc. ad War.
Edmundum Clent.

ss. Kanc. ss. PRecipe Jacobo Heart generoso, quod The like. Double Voucher.
just, etc. reddat Isaaco Burdet generoso, unum Mesuagium, tres acras Terre,
tres acras Prati, and viginti acras Pasture cum pertin. in Deptford, alias
Detford, alias West Greenwich, que clam, etc.

ss. Tenens in propria persona vocat ad War, Humfridum Mumford generosum qui
presens vocat Edmundum Clent. Ad. Barram.

ss. North't. ss PRecipe Obadie Kentiso Juniori generoso The like. Treble
Voucher. Whereby you may understand how to place the parcels according to the
Method used in the Register.
and Michaeli Aldridge generoso quod just, etc. reddant Josepho Allen Armigero
Manerio de S. K. E. and D. cum pertin. ac quadraginta Mesuagia, viginti and
quatuor Tofta, sexdecim Molendina, viginti Columbaria, quadraginta Gardina,
duas Mill acras Terre, tres Mill acras Prati, quatuor Mill acras Pasture,
tres Mill acras Bosci, december Mill acras Jampnorum and Bruere, quinque Mill
acras More, duas Mill acras Marisci salsi, Mill acras Marisci frisci, and
quatuor librat. reddit. ac reddit duarum librarum and dimid. unius libre
Piperis and unius grani Piperis cum pertinentiis in R. L. G. S. G. J. H. and E.
Necnon Advocationem Ecclesie de K. que clam. etc.

ss. Tenentes in propriis personis vocant ad War. Johannem Grantham Sen.
generosum qui presens in propria persona vocat. ad War. Galfridum Weston
generosum qui similiter presens in propria persona vocat. Edmundum Clent.

ss. Mes.^^gium, Toft.nm, Mol.endinum, Col.nmbare, Gar.dinum, Terr.^. Nota. If
you place your parcels in Precipes according to these Verses you will never
err. The Exemplification of a Recovery with double Voucher, where the Parties
appear in person at Bar.


Pra.tum, Pas.tura, Bos.cus, Brue.ra, Mora.

Junca.ri^. Maris.cus, Alne.tum, Pis.caria, Red.ditus, Sectare priora.

ss. CArolus Dei gratia Anglie, Seotie, Franc^e and Hibernie Rex, fidei
defensor, etc. Omnibus ad quos presents litere nostre pervenerint salutem.
Sciatis quod inter Placita terre irrotulata apud Westminster. coram Thoma Richardson
Milite and Sociis suis Justic^ postris de Banco de Termino S. Michaelis Anno
Regni nostri tertio Rotulo vices^mo continetur Sic Hertf. ss. C. R. genesis and J.
R. genesis in propriis personis suis petunt versus G. C. genesis unum Mesuagium, etc.
And so set forth the whole Recovery verbatim according to the Precedent next
following of a Recovery with single Voucher unto the end of these words. Prout
per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc. And then conclude it thus: Que omnia
and singula ad requisitionem predict. A. tenore presentium duximus
exemplificand. In cajus rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum ad Brevia in Banco
predicto sigilland. Deputat. prefentibus apponi fecimus Test Thoma Richardson
apud Westminster. vicesimo octavo die Novembris Anno Regni nostri tertio.

You must Test your Exemplification after the Nota.
return of the Writ of Seisin; But if there be not fifteen days between the
return of the Writ of Entry or the Writ of Summons, and the End of the Term,
Then must the Writ of Seisin be returnable Indilate; And the Exemplification
must bear Test the last day of the Term, in which the Writ of Entry or Summons
came in.

Observanda.
In every Recovery four things are principally to be regarded, viz.









In a Recovery with double Voucher, you must either by a Fine sur Cognizance de
droit come ceo, etc. or by a Deed of Feoffment, or Bargain and Sale enrolled,
or Lease and Release make him (you intend to be) Tenant at the time of the Writ
of Entry brought: For every Writ of Entry must always be brought against him
that must be a perfect Tenant of the Freehold of the Land demanded at the
return of the Writ: Because the Estate of the Tenant in Tail (which is the
Vouchee) is barred in respect of the Asse^z only which are or may be recovered
in value, and of Execution sued by the Tenant against him.

If Tenant to a Recovery have but an Estate for life, or be Tenant in Dower or
by the Courtesse of England, it is requisite for the strengthening of his
Recovery that he make a Conditional The form of which Surrender see at the end
of this Treatise.
Surrender of his Estate to him in the Reversion or Remainder, to the end he
may be a present Tenant of the Inheritance, and then to bring the Writ of Entry
against him, and after that the Recovery is executed, the particular Tenant for
breach of the Condition may enter and enjoy his term notwithstanding such
Surrender.

ss. Hertf. ss. C. R. generosus and J. R. generosus in A Recovery with single
Voucher.
propriis personis suis petunt versus G. C. generosum unum Mesuagium, unum
Toftum, unum Molendinum, unum Gardinum, triginta acras Terre, viginti acras
Prati, ^uadraginta acras Pasture, and Centum acras Bosci cum ^ertin. in H. ut
jus and hereditatem suam, and in que id^^ Galfridus non habet ingressum nisi
post disseisi^^m quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio fecit ^esatis
Carolo and Johanni infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dicunt quod ipsimet
fuerunt seisiti de te^mentis predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo u^ de feodo
and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc capiend. inde exples. ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producunt sectam, etc.

Et predictus Galfrid. in propria persona* sua venit defendit jus suum quando,
etc. Et voca^ inde ad warantizand. Edmundum Cl^nt qui presens est hic in Curia
in propria persona sua, Et gratis tenementa predicta cum pertin. ei War. etc.
Et super hoc predicti Carolus and Johannes petunt versus ipsum Edmundum
tenentem per warant. suam tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta,
etc. Et unde dicunt quod ipsimet fuerunt seisiti in dominico suo ut de feodo
and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc capiend. inde explesias ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producunt sectam, etc.

Et predictus Edmundus tenens per Warantiam suam defend it jus suum quando,
etc. Et dicit quod predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefatum Carolum and Johannem
de tenementis predictis cum pertin. prout iidem Carolus and Johannes per breve
and narrationem sua predicta superius supponunt, Et de hoc ponunt se super
Patriam, etc. Et predicti Carolus and Johannes petunt licentiam inde
interloquendi, Et habent, etc. Et postea iidem Carolus and Johannes reven. hic
in Curia isto eodem Termino in propriis personis suis Et predictus Edmundus
licet solempniter exactus non reven. set in contemptum Curie recessit, and
defaltum ^ecit, Ideo consideratum est quod predicti Carolus and Johannes
recuperent seisinam suam versus prefatum G. de tenementis predictis cum
pertinentiis, Et quod idem G. habeat de terr* predicti Edmundi ad valentiam,
etc. Et ide^ Edmundus in misericordia, etc. Et super hoc i^^em Carolus and
Johannes petunt breve domini ^egis Vic. Com. predicti dirigend. de habere
f^^end. eis plenariam seisinam de Tenementis redictis cum pertin. Et eis
conceditur retorn ^ile hic a die Sancti Michaelis in unum Mense^, etc. Ad quem
diem hic ven. predict. C. and J. in ^ropriis personis suis, Et Vic. videlicet
G. H. Bar modo mand. quod ipse virtute brevis predict. sibi direct. 26. die
Nov. Ult. preterit. habere fec. prefat. C. and J. plenar. seisinam de
tenementis predictis cum pertin. prout per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

Observanda.
Although this is called a Recovery with single What a Recovery with single
Voucher is.
Voucher, yet you will find two Recoveries included therein, The first by the
Demandant against the Tenant which in the form next above is thus, Ideo
consideratum est quod predicti Carolus and Johannes (which are the Demandants)
recuperent seisinam suam versus prefatum Galfridum (the Tenant) de tenementis
predictis cum pertin. And the second Recovery is by the Tenant against the
Common Vouchee, in these words in the precedent next above, Et quod idem
Galfridus habeat de terra predicti Edmundi (the Common Vouchee) ad valentiam,
etc.

The intent of a Common Recovery with single What is intended by a Recovery
with single Voucher.
Voucher is to bar the Tenant and his Heirs of such only Estate-tayl which
then is in him, to destroy the Estates which others have of any Reversion
expectant, or Remainder dependant upon the same, and of all Leases and
Encumbrances derived out of such Reversions or Remainders.

ss. Hanc. ss. ISaacus Burdet generosus in propria A Recovery with double
Voucher.
persona sua petit versus Jacobum Heart generosum, unum Mesoagium, tres acras
Terre, tres acras Prati, and viginti acras Pasture cum pertinentiis in Deptford
alias Detford, alias West Greenwich ut jus and hereditatem suam Et in que idem
Jacobus non habet ingressum nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste
and sine Judicio fecit prefato Isaaco infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dicit
quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de tenementis predict. cum pertin. in dominico suo
ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc capiend. inde
exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predict. Jacobus tenens per War. suam defendit jus suum quando, etc. Et
vocat inde ad war. Humfridum Mumford qui presens esthic in Curia in propria
persona sua, Et gratis tenementa predicta cum pertin. ei war. etc. Et super hoc
predictus Isaacus petit versus ipsum Humfridum Tenen. per war. suam tenementa
predicta cum pertinentiis in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet
fuit seisitus de tenementis predictis com pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo
and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc capiendo inde exples. ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus Humfridus tenens per warantiam suam defendit jus suum quando,
etc. Et ulterius vocat inde ad warantizand. Edmundum Clent qui similiter
presens est hic in Curia in propr. persona sua and gratis tenementa predicta
cum pertin. ei war. etc. Et super hoc predictus Isiacus petit versus ipsum
Edmundum tenentem per warantiam suam tenementa predicta cum pertinentiis in
forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de tenementis
predict is cum pertinentiis in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis
tempore domini Regis nunc capiendo inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que,
etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus Edmundus tenens per warantiam suam defendit jus suum quando, etc.
Et dicit quod predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefatum Isaacum de tenementis
predictis cum pertinentiis prout idem Isaacus per breve and narrationem sua
predicta superius supponit Et de hoc ponit se super patriam, etc. Et predictus
Isaacus petit licentiam inde interloquendi Et habet, etc.

Et postea idem Isaacus revenit hic in Curia isto eodem Termino in pro pria
persona sua, Et predict. Edmundus licet solempniter exactus non revenit set in
contemptum Curie recessit, and defaltum facit; Ideo consideratum est quod
predictus Isaacus recupe^et seisinam suam versus prefatum Jacobum de tenementis
predictis cum pertinentiis, Et quod idem Jacobus habeat de terra predicti
Humfridi ad valentiam, etc. Et quod idem Humfridus ulterius habeat de terra
predicti Edmundi ad valentiam, etc. Et idem Edm. in misericordia, etc. Et super
hoc predictus Isaacus petit breve domini Regis Vic. Com. pred. dirigend. de
habere faciend. ei plenariam seisinam de tenementis predictis cum pertinentiis,
and ei conceditur retornabile hic a die Sancti Martini in quindecim dies, etc.
Ad quem diem hic venit predictus Isaacus in propria persona sua Et vicecomes
videlicet A. S. Armiger modo mandat quod ipse virtute brevis illius sibi
directi vicesimo quarto die Novembris ultimo preterito habere fecit prefato
Isaaco plenariam seisinam de tenementis pre* dictis cum pertinentiis prout per
breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

Observanda.
In a double Voucher, three Recoveries are mentioned, What is meant by a
Recovery with double Voucher.
that is to say, one where the Demandant has judgment to recover the land
against the Tenant, another where the Tenant has likewise Judgment to recover
in value against the Voucher, and lastly, where the first Voucher has also the
like Judgment to recover in value against the (second or common) Vouchee.

Now the intent and scope of a Common Recovery The intent and scope of a
Recovery with double Voucher.
with double Voucher is to bar the first Voucher and his Heirs of every such
Estate as at any time was in the same Voucher, or any of his Ancestors whose
Heir he is of such Estate, and all other persons of such right to a Reversion
or Remainder as was thereupon at any time expectant or dependant, and of all
Leases, Charges, and Encumbrances derived out of any such Revertion, or
Remainder, and that will be also a perpetual bar of such Estate, whereof the
Tenant was then seized in Reversion or Remainder, expectant or dependant upon
the same.

ss. Essex. ss. JOsephus Allen Armiger in propria persona A Recovery with
treble Voucher.
sua petit versus Obadiam Kentish Juniorem generosum and Michaelem Aldridge
generosum Maneria de S. K. E. and D. cum pertinentiis ac quadraginta Mesuagia
viginti and quatuor Tofta sexdecim Molendina, viginti Collumbaria, quadraginta
Gardina, duas Mill acras Terre, tres Mill acras Prati, quatuor Mill acras
Pasture, tres Mill acras Bosci, december Mill acras Jampnorum and Bruere,
quinque Mill acras More, duas Mill acras Marisci salsi, Mill acras Mari^ci
frisci, and quatuor librat. reddit. ac reddit. duarum librarum and dimidii
unius libre Piperis, and unius grani Piperis cum pertinentiis in R. L. T. S. G.
J. H. and E. Necnon Advocationem Ecclesiae parochialis de K. ut jus and
hereditatem suam Et in que iidem Obadias and Michael non habent ingressum nisi
post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio fecit prefato
Josepho infra triginta annos, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de
Maneriis tenementis and reddit. predict. cum pertinentiis in dominico suo ut de
feodo and jure Ac de Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis
tempore domini Regis nunc capiendo inde explesias ad valentiam, etc. Et in que,
etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predicti Obadias and Michael in propriis personis suis venerunt and defend.
jus suum quando, etc. Et voc^nt inde ad warantizand. Johannem Grantham Seniorem
generosum qui presens est hic in Curia in propria per sona sua, Et gratis
Maneria tenementa and reddit. predict. cum pertin. ac Advocationem predictam ei
war. etc. Et super hoc predictus Josephus petit versus ipsum Johannem tenentem
per war. suam Maneria tenementa and reddit. predict. cum pertin. ac
Advocationem predictam in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit
seisitus de Maneriis tenementis and Reddit. predictis cum pertin. in dominico
suo ut de feodo and jure, Ac de Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and jure
tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc capiendo inde explesias ad valentiam,
etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus Johannes tenens per war. suam defendit jus suum quando, etc. Et
ulterius vocat inde ad war. Galfridum Weston generosum qui presens est hic in
Curia in propria persona sua, Et gratis Maneria Tenementa and reddit. predict.
cum pertin. ac Advocationem predictam ei war. etc. Et super hoc predictus
Josephus petit versus ipsum Galfridum tenentem per war. suam Maneria tenementa
and reddit. predict. cum pertinentiis ac Advocationem predictam in forma
praedicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de Maneriis tenementis
and reddit. predictis cum pertinentiis in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure ac
de Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis
nunc capiendo inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit
sectam, etc.

Et predictus Galfridus tenens per war. suam defendit jus suum quando, etc. Et
ulterius vocat inde ad war. Edmundum Clent qui similiter presens est hic in
Curia in propria persona sua, Et gratis Maneria tenementa and reddit. predicta
cum pertin. ac Advocationem predictam ei war. etc. Et super hoc predictus
Josephus petit versus ipsum Edmundum tenentem per war. suam Maneria tenementa
and reddit. predicta cum pertin. ac Advocationem predictam in forma predicta,
etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de Maneriis tenementis and
reddit. predictis cum pertinentiis in dominico suo u^ de feodo and jure ac de
Advocatione predicta ut de seodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis
nunc capiendo inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit
sectam, etc.

Et predictus Edmundus tenens per war. suam defendit jus suum quando, etc. Et
dicit quod predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefat. Josephum de tenementis
predictis cum pertinentiis prout idem Josephus per breve and narrationem sua
predicta superius supponit Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam, etc.

Et predictus Josephus petit Licentiam inde interloquendi Et haber, etc. Et
postea idem Josephus revenit hic in Curia isto eodem Termino in propria persona
sua, Et predictus Edmundus licet solempniter exactus non revenit set in
contemptum Curie recessit and defaltum facit, Ideo consideratum est quod
predictus Josephus recuperet seisinam suam versus prefatos Obadiam and
Michaelem de Maneriis tenementis and reddit. predictis cum pertin. ac de
Advocatione predicta, Et quod iidem Obadias and Michael habeant de terra
predicti Johannis ad valentiam, etc. Et quod idem Johannes ulterius habeat de
terra predicti Galfridi ad valentiam, etc. Et quod idem Galfridus ulterius
habeat de terra predicti Edmundi ad valentiam, etc. Et idem Edmundus in
misericordia, etc. Et super hoc predictus Josephus petit breve domini Regis
Vicecomit^ Comitatus predicti dirigend. de habere faciend. ei plenariam
seis^nam de Maneriis tenementis and Nota.
reddit. predict. cum pertin. Et ei conceditur Seisin awarded retornable
indilate. The Demandant comes into C^urt the last day of the Term, and the
Sheriff retorns that Seisin was delivered three days before.
retornabile hic indilate, etc. Postea scilicet duodecimo die Februarii isto
eodem Termino ven. hic in Curia predictus Josephus in propria persona sua Et
Vic. videlicet Andreas Eateman Miles Balnei modo mand. quod ipse virtu^e brevis
illius sibi directi nono die Februarii ult. preterito habere fecit prefato
Josepho plenariam seisinam de tenementis predictis cum pertinentiis prout per
breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

The Writ of Seisin must be retornable at the least fifteen days after the
retorn of the Writ of Entry, but if the Writ of Entry be retornable toward the
latter end of the Term, so that there be not fifteen days between the retorn
of the Writ of Entry and the end of the Term, then the Writ of Seisin must be
retornable (Indilate) as in the Entry next before, And the Writ of Seisin must
always bear Test of the return of the Writ of Entry. And so it is also if
the Recovery come in by Summons, the Writ of Seisin must have the like
proceedings after the Writ of Summons.

Observanda.
In a Recovery with treble Voucher are included What a Recovery with treble
Voucher is.
Four Recoveries: The first, by the Demandant against the Tenant; The second,
by the Tenant against the first Vouchee; The third, by the first Vouchee
against the second Vouchee; And the fourth, by the second Vouchee against the
Common Vouchee.

The scope of a Common Recovery with treble The scope and intent of a Recovery
with treble Voucher.
Voucher is to make a perpetual Bar of the Estates of the Tenant, and of every
such Estate of Inheritance as at any time had been in the first or second
Vouchee, or any of them, or either of their Ancestors, whose Heirs he or they
are, of such Estate, and as well of every Reversion thereupon dependant; as
also of all Leases, Estates, Charges, and Encumbrances derived out of any such
Reversion or remainder.

ss. CArolus secundus, etc. Rex Vicecomiti S. salutem A Writ of Summons to
Warranty.
Sum. per bonos Sum. W. L. quod sit coram Justic. nostris apud Westminster. a die
Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas ad war. E. G. tria Mesuagia cum pertin. in
Villa S. que J. J. in Curia nostra coram Justic. nostris apud Westminster. clam. ut
jus suum versus presat. E. per breve nostrum de Ingressu super disseisinam in
le Post, Et unde idem E. in eadem Curia nostra voc. predictum W. sum. in Comtuo
ad War. versus eum, Et habeas ibi sum. and hoc breve Test Jehanne Vaughan apud
Westminster. decimo die Junii Anno regni nostri vicesimo ter^io.

Observanda.
The Writ of Summons must be retornable ^ive Retorns, inclusive, after the
retorn of the Writ of Entry (as for Example) If the Writ of Entry be 17 Ca. 1.
cap. 6. before which Statute there ought to have been nine Reterns between the
Test and return of every Writ.
retornable Quindena Pasche, then the Writ of Summons must be retornable Cras.
Ascensionis, being the fifth retorn inclusive from Quindena Pasche. And you are
to observe that Crastin. Ascensionis domini, was no retorn which could be used
as to Recoveries, or any other real Action, until by the said Statute (17 Ca.
1. 6.) it was made a good and perfect Retorn.

So if the Writ of Entry be retornable Crastino How the Writ of Summons must
bear Test.
Martini, the Writ of Summons must bear Test from that retorn of Crastino
Martini, and be retornable five Retorns after Inclusive (that is to say)
accounting Crastino Martini for one of the five Retorns, and Quinden. Hillarii,
which is the fifth Retorn after Crastin. Martini for another; And the How the
Writ of Seisin must be retornable and bear Test.
Test of the Writ of Seisin must be the Test day of that fifth Retorn, and be
retornable Indilate, because there are not fifteen days within Hillary Term
after. Then the Writ of How to return the Writ of Seisin.
Seisin may be returned, that Seisin was delivered by virtue thereof to the
Demandant by the Sheriff of the County where the Lands lie, upon any day not
being Sunday, between the Test and the end of the Term, from which day and the
end of the Term by possibility the Sheriff might come from the land to
Westminster before the rising of the Court.

If a Recovery be with single Voucher the Precipe Notanda. Upon a Recovery with
single Voucher.
must be brought against the Tenant in Tail, in possession, and he to Vouch the
Common Vouches.

If with Upon a Recovery with double Voucher. Entry of a Wr^^ of Summons to
Warranty.
double Voucher, a Writ of Covenant must be brought against the Tenant, and a
Writ of Entry against the Cognizee of the Fine who must Vouch the Tenant in
Tail, then the Writ of Covenant must be Test and retornable before the Writ of
Entry; and this is called a double Voucher.

ss. J. J. in propria persona sua petit versus E. G. Armigerum, tria Mesuagia,
tria Gardina, quadraginta acras Terre, quinquaginta acras Prati, sexaginta
acras Pasture, quadraginta acras Bosci, and Centum acras Jampnorum and Bruere,
cum pertin. in R. vt j^s and hereditatem suam, Et in que idem E. non habet
ingressum nisi post disseisin^m quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and fine judicio
fecit prefato J. infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit
seisitus de tenementis predictis cum pertinentiis in dominico suo ut de feodo
and jure, tempore pacis, tempore domini Regis nunc capiendo inde explesias ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus E. per C. D. Attornatum suum venie and defendit jus suum quando,
etc. Et vocat inde ad warantizandum W. L. sum. in Comitatu predicto habeat eum
hic a die Sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas per Auxilium Curiae, etc. idem
dies datus est partibus predictis hic, etc.

Salop. ss. J. J. in propria persona sua Pet. versus Entry of a Recovery with
double Voucher by Summons*
E. G. Armigerum, tria Mesuagia, tria Gardina, etc. cum pertin. in R. ut jus
and hereditatem suam, Et in que idem Edwardus non habet ingressum nisi post
disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and fine judicio fecit prefato Johanni
infra triginta Annos, etc. Et predictus Edwardus per C. B. Attorn. suum venit,
Et alias vocat inde ad War. W. L. qui modo per sum. ei in Comitatu predicto
factam per C. G. Attorn. suum fimiliter venit* Et gratis Tenementa predicta cum
pertin. ei War. etc. Et super hoc predictus Johannes pet. versus ipsum W.
tenen. per War* suam tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc. Et
unde dic. quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de tenementis predictis cum pertin* in
dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc
Capiend. ^nde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit
sectam, etc.

Et predictus Willielmus Tenens per War. suam ven. and defend. jus suum quando,
etc. Et ulterius voc. inde ad War. E. H. qui similiter presens est hic in Curia
in propria persona sua, Et gratis tenementa predicta cum pertin. ei War. etc.
Et super hoc predict. Johannes petit versus ipsum Edwardum Tenen. per War. suam
tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod
ipsemet fuit seisitus de Tenementis predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de
feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus Edwardus H. Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
dic. quod predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefatum Johannem de tenementis
predictis cum pertin. prout idem Johannes per breve and narrationem sua
predicta superius supponit, Et de hoc pon. se super patriam, etc.

Et predictus Johannes petit licentiam inde interloquendi, Et habet, etc. Et
postea idem Johannes revenit hic in Cu^. isto eodem Termino in propria persona
sua, Et predictus Edwardus licet solempniter exact. non reven. Set in contempt
Cur. recessit Et defalt. fac. Ideo consideratum est quod predict. Johannes
recuperet seisinam suam versus prefatum E. G. de Tenementis predictis cum
pertin. Et quod idem E. G. habeat de terra predicti Willielmi ad valentiam,
etc. Et quod idem Willielmus ulterius habeat de terra predicti E. H. ad
valentiam, etc. Et idem E. H. in misericordia, etc. Et super hoc predictus
Johannes petit breve domini Regis Vic. Com. predicti dirigend. de habere
faciend. ei plenariam seisinam de Tenementis predictis cum pertin. Et ei
conceditur retornabile hic a die Sancti Michaelis in unum Mensem, etc. Some add
3. or 4. days before the return.
Ad quem diem hic ven. predictus Johannes in propria persona sua Et Vic. viz.
J. T. Armiger modo Mand. quod ipse virtute brevis illius sibi directi vicesimo
quarto die Octobris ult, preterito habere fecit prefato Johanni plenariam
seisinam de Tenementis predictis cum pertin. prout per breve illud sibi
preceptum fuit, etc.

Ebor. ss. T. W. and R. M. Armiger in propriis personis Entry of a Writ of
Summons upon a Recovery with treble Voucher. Nota. The Writ of Entry was
returnable. Quind. Martini. The Tenants appear this Term in person at Bar.
suis pet. versus G. R. Armig. and W. B. Generos. Manerium de R. cum pertin.
etc. ut jus and hereditatem suam, Et in queiidem G. and W. non habent ingressum
nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio fecit
prefato T. W. and R. infra triginta Annos jam ultimo elapsos, etc. Et unde
dicit quod ipsimet fuerunt seisiti de Manerio and Tenementis predictis cum
pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis
nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producunt
sectam, etc.

Et predicti G. and W. in propriis personis suis ven. and defend. jus suum
quando, etc. Et voc. inde ad War. A. C. vid. habeant eam hic in Octabis Sancti
Martini Et sum. in Com. predicto per Auxilium Curie, etc. Idem dies dat. est
partibus predictis hic, etc. A Warrant of Attorney for the Tenants.
Et super hoc predicti Geo. and Willielmus po. lis. suis C. B. and E. G.
Attornatos suos conjunct^m and divis^m versus prefatum W. and R. de predicto
placito, etc.

Nota.
Although the Tenants appeared in person at the acknowledgment at Bar, yet if
they appeared not also at the return of the Summons in person there must be a
warrant of Attorney for the Tenant, And the same must be entered upon the first
Summons Roll ( prout prox. supr.) and upon the remembrance under the Precipe
for the Writ of Entry of the same Recovery, and make the Warrant of Attorney
for the Tenants thus:

Ebor. ss. G. R. Armiger and W. B. generosus po. locis The form of a Warrant of
Attorney for the Tenants.
suis C. B. and E. G. Attorn. suos conjunct. and divisim versus T. W. and R. M.
Armigerum de placito terre.

At the return of this Summons, being Octabis Nota.
Martini, if the second Vouchee appear by Warrant of Attorney, you must make
another Writ of Summons for the latter Vouchee Returnable the fifth Return,
after the return of the first Summons, and Test of the return of the first
Summons, for one Writ will not serve for both. The Warrant of Attorney for the
first Vouchee must be thus:

Ebor. ss. A. C. vidua quam G. R. Armiger and W. B. Warrant of Attorney for the
first Vouche^.
generosus voc. ad War. po. loco suo J. D. and T. W. Attorn. suos conjunctim
and divis^m versus T. W. and R. M. Armiger. de placito terre.

And for the second thus:

Ebor. ss. G. H. Generosus quem A. C. vid. voc. ad Warrant of Attorney for the
second Vouchee.
War. po. loco suo T. W. and H. M. Attorn. suos conjunctim and divisim versus
T. W. and R. M. Armigerum de placito terre.

Capt. and Cognit. xiij. die Martio Anno regni Regis Caroli Secundi Anglie,
etc. decimo septimo coram me T. T.

ss. ALias prout patet Termino Sancti Michaelis Entry of the Summons of the
first Vouchee, with a Warrant of Attorney for the Tenants.
Anno regni domini Regis nunc decimo octavo Rot. lvj. Continetor sic ss. Ebor.
ss. T. W. and R. M. in propriis personis suis per. versus G. R. Armigerum and
W. B. generosum Manerium de R. cum pertin. ac december Mesuagia, viginti acras
Terre cum pertin. in R. ut jus and hereditatem suam, Et in que iidem G. and W.
non habent ingressum nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt injuste and sine
judicio fecit praefato T. W. and R. M. infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dicit
quod ipsimet fuerunt Seisiti de Manerio and tenementis predictis cum pertin. in
dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc
Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit
sectam, etc.

Et predicti G. and W. in propriis personis suis ven. and defend. jus suum
quando, etc. Et voc. inde ad War. A. C. vid. habeant eam hic in Octabis S.
Martini Sum. in Com. predicto per Auxilium Curie, etc. Idem dies dat. est
partibus predictis hic, etc. Et super hoc predicti G. and W. po. locis suis C.
B. and E. G. conjunctim and divisim versus prefatum T. W. and R. de predicto
placito, etc. Et modo hic ad hunc diem scilicet predictas Octabas S. Martini
ven. tam predicti T. and R. in propriis personis suis quam predicti G. and W.
per C. B. Attorn. suum predictum, Et predict. A. sum. etc. per J. D. Attorn.
suum ven. and gratis Manerium and tenementa predicta cum pertin. eis War. etc.
Et super hoc predicti T. W. and R. pet. versus ipsam A. Tenen. per War. suam
Maneria and tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic.
quod ipsimet fuer. seisit. de Manerio and Tenementis predictis cum pertin. in
dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc
Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produci^
sectam, etc.

Et predicta A. Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius
voc. inde ad War. G. H. generosum habeat eum hic in Crastino Purificationis
beat Marie Sum. in Com. predicto per Auxilium Cor. etc. idem dies dat. est tam
prefat. T. R. G. and W. quam prefat. A. hic, etc.

ALias prout patet Termino S. Hillarii Anno regni Entry of a Recovery, treble
Vouche^^ two Summons and Warrants of A^torny for the Tenants.
domini Regis nunc decimo octavo Rotulo xxxix. continetur sic, Alias prout
patet Termino S. Michaelis Anno regni domini Regis nunc decimo septimo Rotulo
lvj. continetur. sic Ebor. ss. T. W. and R. M. in propriis personis suis pet
versus G. R. Armigerum and W. B. Generosum Manerium de R. cum pertin. Ac december
Mesuagia, and viginti acras Terte cum pertin. in R. ut jus and hereditatem
suam, Et in que iidem G. and W. non habent ingressum nisi post disseisinam quam
Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio fecit prefat. T. W. and R. infra
triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dicunt quod ipsimet fuer. scisit. de Manerio and
Tenementis predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore
pacis tempore domini Regis nunc, Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in
que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

ET predicti G. and W. ven. and defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et voc. inde ad
War. A. C. vid. habeant eam hic in Octabis S. Martini Sum. in Com. predicto per
Auxilium Curie, etc. idem dies dat. est partibus predictis hic, etc. Et super
hoc predicti G. and W. po. locis suis C. B. and E. G. conjunctim and Warrant of
Attorney.
divisim versus prefat T. W. and R. de predicto placito, etc. Et modo hic ad
hunc diem scilicet predictas Octabas S. Martini ven. tam predicti T. W. and R.
in propriis per sonis suis quam predicti G. and W. per C. B. Attorn. suum
predictum Et predicta A. sum. etc. per Attorn. suum similiter ven. Et gratis
Manerium and Tenementa predicta cum pertin. eis War. etc. Et super ho^ predicti
T. Wentworth and R. pet. versus ipsam A. Tenen. per War. suam Manerium and
Tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicunt quod
ipsimet fu^r. seisiti de Manerio and Tenementis predictis cum pertin. in
dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc
Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producunt
sectam, etc.

Et predicta A. Tenens per War. suam defend. See the Summons above mentioned.
jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius voc. ^usque ^^nem del Summons verbatim) les
Summoners Crastin. Purif. Ad quem quidem Crast. Purificationis beat Marie hic
ven. tam predicti T. Vic. W. and R. in propriis personis suis quam predicti G.
and W. Et predicta A. per Attorn. suum predictum. Et predictus G. modo sum.
etc. per T. W. Attorn. suum similiter venit. Et gratis Manerium and Tenementa
predicta cum pertin ei War. etc. Et super hoc predicti T. W. and R. pet. versus
ipsum G. Tenen. per War* suam Manerium Et tenementa predicta cum pertin. in
forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicunt quod ipsimet fuer. seisit. de Manerio and
tenementis predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore
pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in
que, etc. Et inde producunt sectam, etc.

Et predictus G. Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius
voc. inde ad War. Edmundum Clent qui similiter presens est hic in Curia in
propria persona sua Et gratis Manerium and Tenementa predicta cum pertin. ei
War. etc. Et super hoc predicti T. W. and R. Petunt versus ipsum E. Tenen. per
War. suam Manerium and Tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc.
Et unde dic. quod ipsimet fuerunt seisiti de Manerio and Tenementis predictis
cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore dom,
Reg. nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde
producunt sectam, etc.

Et predictus Edwardus Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
dicit quod predict* Hugo non disseisivit prefat. T. W. and R. de Manerio and
Tenementis predictis cum pertin. prout iidem T. W. and R. per breve and
narrationem sua predicta superius suppon. Et de hoc pon. se super patriam, etc.

Et predicti T. W. and R. petunt licentiam inde interloquendi, Et habeant, etc.
Et postea iidem T. W. and R. reven. hic in Curia in propriis personis suis Et
predictus Edmundus licet solempniter exact* non reven. set in contemptum Cur
recessit Et defalt. fac. Id. consid. est quod predict. T. W. and R. Recuperent
seisinam suam versus prefatos G. and W. de Manerio and tenementis predictis cum
pertin. Et quod iidem G. and W. habeant de terra predicte A. ad valentiam, etc.
Et quod eadem A. ulterius habeat de terra predicti G. ad valentiam, etc. Et
quod idem G. ulterius habeat de terra predicti Edm. ad valentiam, etc. Et idem
Edmundus in misericordia, etc. Et super hoc predicti T. W. and R. petunt breve
domini Regis Vic. Com. pred. dirigend. de habere faciend. eis plenariam
seisinam de Manerio and Tenementis predict. cum pertin. Et eis conceditur
retornabile hic a die* Paschae in quindecim dies, etc. Ad quem diem hic ven.
predicti. T. W. and R. in propriis personis suis, Et Vic. viz. T. L. Miles modo
Mand. quod ipse Virtute 3. or 4. days before the Return.
brevis illius sibi directi quinto decimo die Martii ultimo preterito habere
fecit prefat. T. W. and R. plenariam seisinam de Manerio and tenementis
predictis cum pertin. prout per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

ALias prout patet, etc. usque quando, etc. in Entry of a Summons with an
Adjornment of the Term before the Stat. 17 Car. 1. Cap. 6.
linea continuat. Et vocat inde ad War. S. H. Genesis habeat eum hic in Octabis S.
Michaelis Et sum. in Com. predicto per auxilium Cur. etc. Idem dies dat. est
partibus predictis hic, etc. Ad quem diem Loquela predicta adjornata fuit per
breve domini Regis de Communi Adjornamento apud Westminster. in Com. Midd. usque a
die S. Michaelis in unum Mensem tunc prox. sequen. Ad quem diem Loquela
predicta ulterius Adjornat. fuit per aliud breve dicti dom. Reg. de Com.
Adjornament. a Westminster. predict. usque villam dict. dom. Regis de R. in Com.
Berks usque ad hunc diem scilicet in Crast. Animarum tunc prox. seqen. Et modo
hic scilicet apud predict. Villam dicti dom. Regis de Reading ad hunc diem
scilicet predict. Crastin. Animarum ven. tam predictus H. (pet.) in Propria
persona sua quam predict. G. (Ten.) per Attorn, suum predictum Et predict. S.
H. sum. etc. per R. C. Attorn. fuum similiter ven. and gratis Tenementa
predicta cum pertin. ei War. etc. Et super hoc predictus H. pet. versus ipsum
S. Tenen. per War. suam Tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc.
Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de Tenementis predictis cum pertin. in
dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore dom. Reg. nunc Capiend.
inde exples. Ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus S. Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius
voc. inde ad War. B. D. habeat eum hic a die Pasche in quindecim dies Sum. in
Com. predicto per Auxilium Cur. etc. Idem dies dat. est tam prefat. H. etc.
Adjornment of the Term from Reading to Westminster.
quam prefat. S. hic, etc. Ante quem diem loquela predicta Adjornata fuit per
aliud breve domini Regis de Communi Adjornamento A predicta Villa dicti domini
Regis de Reading in Comitat. Berks. usque ad Westminster predict. in Com. Midd. usque
ad a die Pasche in quindecim dies.

Ebor. ss. R. M. Armiger and W. E. generosus in propriis Entry of a Recovery
(with single Voucher) of a Castle, Tenements and Advowson where the Parties
appear in person..
personis suis pet. versus T. W. Castrum de H. cum pertin. ac duas Mill acras
Terre, 700 acras Prati, 100 acras Pasture cum pertin. in R. Necnon Advocationem
Ecclesie de H. ut jus and hereditatem suam Et in que idem T. non habet
ingressum nisi post disseismam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio
fec. prefat. R. and W. infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsimet
f^er. seisiti de Castro, Maneriis and Tenementis predictis cum pertin. in
dominico suo ut de feodo and jure Ac de Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and
jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc.

Et predictus T. W. in propria persona sua ven. and defend. jus suum quando,
etc. Et voc. inde ad War. Edmundum Clent qui presens est hic in Cur. in propria
persona sua Et gratis Castrum Maneria and tenementa predicta cum pertin. ac
Advocationem predictam eis War. etc. Et super hoc predicti R. and W. petunt.
versus ipsum Edmundum Tenen. per War. suam Castrum Maneria and Tenementa
predicta cum pertin. ac Advocationem predictam in forma predicta, etc. Et unde
dicunt quod ipsiment fuer. seisiti de Castro, Manerio and Tenementis predictis
cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure ac de Advocatione predict. ut
de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples.
ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam. etc.

Et predictus Ed^und. Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
dic. quod predict. Hugo non disseisivit prefat. R. and W. de Castro Maneriis
and tenementis predictis cum pertin. ac de Advocatione predicta prout predicti
R. and W. per breve and narrationem sua predicta superius suppon. Et de hoc
pon. se super patriam, etc.

Et predicti* R. and W. pet. licentiam inde interloquendi Et habent, etc. Et
postea iidem R. and W. reven. hic in Cur. isto eodem Termino in propriis
personis suis Et predictus Edm. licet solempniter exact. non reven. set in
contemptu Cur. recessit Et defalt. facit ideo consideratum est quod predicti R.
and W. recuperent seisinam suam versus prefat. T. W. de Castro Maneriis and
Tenementis predictis cum pertin. Ac de Advocatione predicta Et quod idem T. W.
habeat de terra predicti E. ad valentiam, etc. Et idem E. in misericordia, etc.

Et super hoc predicti R. and W. pet. brev. domini Regis Vic. Com. predicti
dirigend. de habere faciend. eis plenariam seisinam de Castro Maneriis and
Tenementis predictis cum pertin. Ac de Advocatione predicta Et eis conceditur
retornabile, etc. Postea scilicet tertio die Junii isto eodem Termino ven. hic
in Cur. predicti R. and W. in propriis personis suis Et Vic. videlicet A. R.
Miles modo Mand. quod ipse virtute brevis illius sibi directi tricesimo primo
die Maii ultimo preterito habere fecit prefat. R. and W. plenariam seisinam de
Castro Maneriis and Tenementis predictis cum pertin. Ac de Advocatione predicta
prout per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

Glouc. ss. S. S. Generosus in propria persona sua Entry of a Recovery of a
Manor, Mesuages, Mils, Dove-houses, Gardens, land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood,
Rent, Common of Pasture, of a Rectory, Tithes, and of an Adv^wson of a
Vicaridge.
pet. versus R. N. Armigerum and W. S. Armigerum Manerium de Stonehouse cum
pertin. Ac viginti Mesuagia, december and quinque Molendina, tria Columbaria,
viginti Gardina, 300 acras Terre, Centum acras Prati, 300 acras Pasture, 330
acras Bosci, sexaginta solidat Reddit. Communiam Pasture pro omnibus Averiis
cum pertin in Stonehouse, etc. Necnon Rectoriam de Leonard cum pertin. Ac etiam
quasdam portiones Decimarum annuatim provenien. Crescen. seu renovan. in K. Ac
Advocationem Vicarie Ecclesie de S. ut jus and hereditatem suam, etc. Et unde
dic. quod ipsemet fuit seisit. de Manerio Tenementis Reddit. Communia Pasture
and Rectoria predictis, Ac de portionibus Decimarum predictarum in Dominico suo
ut de feodo and jure Ac de Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and jure tempore
pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. etc. Et inde produc.
sectam, etc.

Et predicti R. and W. in propriis personis suis ven. and defend. jus suum
quando, etc. Et voc. inde ad War. E. S. Generosum qui presens est hic in Cur*
in propria persona sua. Et gratis Manerium Tenementa Reddit. Communiam pasture
and Rectoriam predicta cum pertin. and Porciones Decimarum Et Advocationem
predictas eis War. etc. Et super hoc predictus S. pet. versus ipsum E. Tenen.
per War. suam Manerium, Tenementa Reddit. Communiam Pasture and Rectoriam
predictam cum pertin. and porciones Decimarum ac Advocationem predictam in
forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet, etc. ut supra, etc.

Alias prout patet, etc. usque quando, etc. in linea Entry of Summons in a
Recovery with treble Voucher, by Alias prout patet, with three Adjornments,
before the Statute of 16 and 17 Caroli primi cap. 6. Whereby the Retorns of
Octab. Mich. and quinden. Mich. are taken away.
Continuat. Et voc. inde ad War. S. H. Genesis Sum. in Com. pred. habeat eum hic
in Octabis S. Mich. Et Sum. in Com. predicto, per auxilium Curie, etc. idem
dies dat. est partibus predictis, etc. Ad quem diem loquela predicta Adjornata
fuit, per brev. Domini Regis de Communi Adjornamento, hic scilicet apud Westminster*
in Com. Midd. usque a die S. Michaelis, in unum Mensem tunc proxime sequen. Ad
quem diem loquela predicta ulterius Adjornata fuit per aliud brev. dict. Domini
Regis de Communi Adjornamento a Westminster. usque Villam dict. Domini Regis de
Reading in Com. Berks, in Crastino Animarum tunc proxime sequen: Et modo hic
scil. apud predictam Villam dict. Domini Regis de Reading ad hunc diem scil.
predictum Crastinum Animarum ven. tam predictus H. in propria persona sua quam
predictus G. per Attorn. suum predictum Et predictus S. modo Sum. etc. per. R.
Attorn. suum similiter ven. and gratis Tenementa predicta cum pertin. eis War.
etc. Et super hoc predictus H. pet. versus ipsum S. Tenen. per War. suam
Tenementa predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dicit quod
ipsemet fuit seisitus, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc.

Et predictus S. Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius
voc. inde ad War. P. D. habeat eum hic a die Pasche in quindecim dies, Et Sum.
in Com. predicto per Auxilium Curie, etc. Idem dies dat. est tam prefat. J. and
v. quam prefat. S. hic, etc. Ante quem diem loquela predicta ulterius Adjornata
fuit per aliud breve dicti domini Regis de Communi Adjornamento a predicta
Villa dict. dom. Regis de Reading in Com. Berks usque ad Westminster. in Com. Midd.
usque ad eandem Quinden. Pasch. etc.

Michaelis xij^. Caroli Secundi rotulo 182.
Westmerl. ss. JOhannes Lowther Miles and Baronettus Entry of a Recovery of a
Manor, Tenements, Tithes, Free-^is^ing and the* Advowson of a Vicaridge.
and Thomas Darcey Miles in propriis personis suis pet. versus Robertum Newman
Generosum and Thomam Lee Armigerum Manerium de Warcopp cum pertin. ac
septuaginta sex Mesuagia, quatuor Molendina, sexaginta Gardina, quadraginta
acras Terre, Centum acras Prati, Trescent. and quadraginta acras Pasture,
viginti acras Bosci, Sexcentas acras Jampnorum and Bruere, Sexcentas acras
Morae cum pertin. in War^opp, Buttingill, Sandforth, Flesholme, Blaytorne,
Winder, Wath and Cliburne, Ac decimas Garbarum and granorum annuatim provenien.
crescen. seu renovan. in Warcopp, Buttergill and Blaytorne, Necnon liberam
Piscariam in Aqua de Eden, Ac etiam Advocationem Vicarie Ecclesie de Warcopp ut
jus and hereditatem suam Et in que iidem R. and T. non habent ingressum nisi
post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt injuste and sine judicio fec. prefat. Joh. and
Thome Darcy infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsimet fuer. seisiti
de Manerio, tenementis decimis and Piscaria predictis cum pertin. in dominico
suo ut de feodo and jure, Ac de Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and jure
tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam,
etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predicti Robertus and Thomas Lee in propriis personis suis ven. and defend.
jus suum quando, etc. Et voc. inde ad War. Rich. Brathwaite Armigerum qui
presens est hic in Cur. in propria persona sua Et gratis, Manerium, Tenementa,
decimas and Piscariam predicta cum pertin. Ac Advocationem predictam eis War.
etc. Et super hoc predicti Johannes and Thomas Darcey pet. versus ipsum
Richard. Tenen. per War. suam Manerium, Tenementa, decimas and Piscariam
predictam cum pertin. Ac Advocationem predictam in forma predicta, etc. Et unde
dic. quod ipsimet fuerunt seisiti de Manerio tenementis decimis and Piscaria
predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure, Ac de Advocatione
predicta ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiendo
inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus Richardus Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
ulterius voc. inde ad War* Georgium Humston qui similiter presens est hic in
Curia in propia persona sua, Et gratis Manerium Tenementa decimas and Piscariam
predicta cum pertin. ac Advocationem predictam ^i War. etc. Et super hoc
predicti Johannes and Tho. Darcey pet. versus ipsum Georgium Tenen. per War.
suam Manerium tenementa decimas and Piscariam predicta cum pertin. ac
Advocationem predictam in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsimet
fuerunt scisiti de Manerio tenementis decimis and Piscari^ predictis cum
pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure, Ac de Advocatione predicta ut de
feodo and jure tempore pacis, tempore domini Regis nunc capiendo inde explesias
ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde producit sectam, etc.

Et predictus Georgius Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
dic. quod predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefat. Johannem and Thomam Darcey de
Manerio, Tenementis decimis and Piscaria predictis cum pertin. ac de
Advocatione predicta prout iidem Johannes and Thomas per breve and narrationem
sua predicta superius suppon. Et de hoc pon. se super patriam, etc. Et predicti
Johannes and Thomas Darcey pet. licentiam inde interloquendi Et habent, etc. Et
postea iidem Johannes and Thomas reven. hic in Curia is^o codem Termino in
propriis personis suis, Et predictus Georgius licet solempniter exact. non
reven. set in contemptu Cur. recessit and defalt. fac. Ideo consideratum est
quod predicti Johannes and T. D. recuperent seisinam suam versus prefatum R.
and T. Lee de Manerio tenementis decimis and Piscaria predictis cum pertin. Ac
de Advocatione predicta, Et quod iidem R. and T. D. habeant de Terra predicti
Richardi ad valentiam, etc. Et quod idem Richardus ulterius habeat de terra
predicti Georgii ad valentiam, etc. Et idem Georgius in misericordia, etc.

Et super hoc predicti Johannes and Thomas Darcey pet. breve dom. Regis Vic.
Com. predicti dirigend. de habere faciend. eis plenariam seisinam de Manerio
tenementis decimis and Piscaria predictis cum pertin. Ac de Advocatione
predicta Et eis conceditur Retornabile hic indilate, etc. Postea scilicet
vicesimo Octavo die Novembris isto eodem Termin^ ven. hic in Curia predicti
Johannes and Tho. D. in propriis personis suis Et Vic. videlicet A. domina C.
Comitissa Dotissa Pembriae and Montgomer. modo Mand. quod ipsa Virtute brevis
predicti sibi directi Vicesimo Seisina indila^ e^
primo die Novembris ult. preterito habere fecit prefat. Johanni and Thome
Darcey plenariam seisinam de Manerio Tenementis, decimis and Piscaria predictis
cum pertin. Ac de Advocatione predicta pr^ut per breve illud sibi preceptum
fuit, etc.

Michaelis xij^. Caroli Secundi Regis Rot. 182.
Cumbr. ss. JOhannes Lowther Miles and Baronettus and Entry of a Recovery a
Manor and Tenements and of a Moiety of a Manor and Tenements.
Thomas Darcey Miles in propriis personis suis petunt versus R. N. Generosum
and Tho. Lee Armigerum Maneria de Emelton Bockery and Morethwaite cum pertin.
Ac septuaginta and sex Mesuagia, duo Molendina Aquatica, Granatica, unum
Molendinum Fullonicum, sexaginta Gardina, ducentas acras Terre, quadraginta
acras Prati, ducentas acras Pasture, sexcentas acras Jampnorum and Bruere, and
sexcentas acras Morae cum pertin. in Emelton, Dockery, Morethwait in Wigton,
Necnon Medietatem Manerii de Wyethborne alias Wyethb^tham cum pertin. Ac
triginta and duorum Mesuagiorum, quinquaginta acrarum Terre, viginti acrarum
Prati, Centum acrarum Pasture, Centum acrarum Jampnorum and Bruere, and
Trescentarum acrarum M^re cum pertin. in Wyethborne, Armeboth, Smathwaite and
Noddew ut jus and hereditatem suam Et in que iidem Robertus and T. Lee non
habent ingressum nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine
judicio fecit prefat. J. and T. D. infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dic. quod
ipsimet fuerunt seisiti de Maneriis Tenementis and Medierate predictis cum
pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis
nunc Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc.
sectam, etc.

Michael. xij^. Caroli Secundi Regis Rot. 183.
Oxon. ss. RIchardus Blanshard generosus and Robertus Entry of a Recovery for a
Manor, Tenements^, Rent, view of Franck-Pledge, Goods, and Chattels of Felons
and Fugitives, Goods and Chattels waived, Estrayes, Deodands, a Rectory,
Advowson, and Moiety of a Manor, Mesuages, etc.
Blanshard generosus in propriis personis suis petunt versus Christopherum
Chatford generosum and Thomam Gritten generosum Manerium de Yeardington alias
Yarnton cum pertin. Ac viginti and unum Mesuagia, unum Columbar. quinquagint.
acras Terre, Trescentas and viginti acras Prati, Octingentas and viginti acras
Pasture, Septuaginta and quinque acras Bosci, Triginta and septem Solidat. and
Octo denariat. Reddit. Vic. Franc. Pleg. and quicquid ad Vic. Franc. Pleg.
pertinet, bona and Catalla felon. and fugitiv. Felonum de se bona and Catalla
Waviat. Extrahur. and Deodand. cum pertin. in Yeardington alias Yarneton,
Kidlington, Cassington, Bladon, Godstone and in parochia S. Thome alias S.
Nicholi prope Civita^em Oxon. Necnon Rectoriam de Cromarsh Gifford cum pertin.
Ac etiam Advocationem Ecclesie de Bogbrook al. Bagbrook, Ac Advocationem
Vicarie Ecclesie de Yardington al. Yarnton Necnon Medietatem Manerii de
Bogbrook al. Bagbrook cum pertin. Ac etiam trium Mesuagiorum, ducentarum
acrarum Terre, quinquaginta acrarum Prati, Centum acrarum Pasture, and
quinquaginta acrarum Jampnorum and Bruere cum pertin in Begbrook al. Bagbrook
ut jus and hereditatem suam, Et in que iidem Christopherus and Tho. non habent
ingressum nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio
fecit prefat. Richardo and Roberto. infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dicunt
quod ipsimet fuer. seisiti de Manerio Tenementis Reddit. Vic. Franc. Pleg. and
quicquid ad Vic. Franc. Pleg. pertinet bonis and Catallis felon. and
fugitivorum, felonum de se, de bonis and Catallis Waviat. Extrahur. Deodand.
Rectoria and Medietate predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and
jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc, Capiend. inde exples. ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc.

Michael. xij^. Caroli Secundi Rot. 184.
North't. ss. RIchardus B. generosus and Robertus B. Entry of a Recovery of a
Manor, Tenements, Common of Pasture, and of Estovers, Pannage for Hoggs, view
of Frank-Pledg, and of an Advowson.
genesis in propriis personis suis pet. versus Christopherum Cratford generosum
and Tho. Gritten Manerium de Whafield cum pertin. Ac tresdecim Mesnagia, unum
Molendinum Aquaticum, ducentas and octoginta acras Terre, sexdecim acras Prati,
Centum acras Pasture, Communiam Pasture pro omnibus Averiis, Communiam
Estoveriorum Pannagium pro Porcis, Et Vic. Franc. Pleg. cum pertin. in
Whitfield, Haselborough and Foresta de Whittlewood, Necnon Advocationem
Ecclesie de Whitfield alias Whitefield, Syrensam alias Syresham alias Sisam, ut
jus and hereditatem suam Et in que iidem T. and C. non habent ingressum nisi
post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine judicio fecit prefat.
Richardo and Roberto infra triginta Annos, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsimet fuer.
seisiti de Manerio Tenementis Communiis Pannagio and Vic. Franc. Pleg.
predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure, Ac de Advocatione
predicta ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend.
inde Exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc. (
ut in aliis.)

Et super hoc iidem Richardus and Robertus pet. breve domini Regis Vic. Com.
predicti dirigend. de habere faciend. eis plenariam seisinam de Manerio
Tenementis Communiis Pannagio and Vic. Franc. Pleg. predictis cum pertin. Ac de
Advocatione predicta, Et eis Conceditur Retornabile hic in Crastino S. Martini
Ad quem diem hic ven. predicti Richardus and Robertus in propriis personis
suis, Et Vic. videlicet Henri^us Benson Armiger. modo Mand. quo^ ipse virtute
brevis illius sibi directi sexto die Novembris ult. preterito habere fecit
prefat. Richardo and Roberto plenariam seisinam de Manerio tenementis Communiis
Pannagio and Vic. Franc. Pleg. predictis cum pertin: Ac* de Advocatione
predicta prout per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

DOminus Rex Mand. Justic. suis hic breve suum de Mittimus The Preamble to the
Entry of a Mittimus and Dedimus.
Clausum unacum tenore Cujusdam brevis de Dedimus potestatem de War. Attorn.
recipiend. and retorn. ejusdem, Necnon War. Attorn. inde recept. in hec verba;
Carolus secundus Dei gratia Anglie Scot. Franc. and Hibern. Rex fidei Defensor.
etc. Et sic Recite verbatim le Mittimus and Dedimus.

Mich. xxii Caroli secundi Regis rot. 185.
Ebor. ss. THomas Thompson generosus and Richardus Entry of Summons where the
Tenants appear by warrant of Attorney and Vouch over.
Solkry in propriis personis suis pet. versus Henricum Dickenson genesis Georgium
Hesletyne genesis and Thomam Hesletyne genesis Novem Mesuagia, Novem Gardina,
Octoginta acras terre Octoginta acras prati Centum and Octoginta acras prati
pasture and Triginta Acras Bosci, Ducentas and Viginti acras jampnor. and
bruere, and Communiam pasture pro omnimodis Averiis cum pertin. in Stamsover,
Whitby, Leathes, Anseleby and Hansker alias Hansworth, ut jus and hereditatem
suam. Et in que iidem Henricus: Georgius and Thomas Hesletyne non habent
ingress. nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde injuste and sine Judicio
fec. prefat. Thome Thompson and Richardo infra Triginta annos, etc. Et unde
dic. quod ipsimet fuerint seisiti de Tenemen. and Communia predictis cum
pertin. in Dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore Domini Regis
nunc Capiend. inde Exples. Ad valenciam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc.
sectam. etc.

Et predicti Henricus, Geo. and Tho. Hesletyne per Tho. Langley Attorn. suum
ven. and defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et voc. inde ad War. Robertum Norison
genesis Sum. in Com. predicto habeant eum hic in Octabis Sancti Martini per
A^^ilium Curie, etc. idem dies dat. est partibus predictis hic, etc.

Mich. xij^. Caroli secundi rot. 185.
Ebor. ss. THomas Thompson Sen. and Richardus Solkry Entry of a Recovery
thereupon after Summons, two Vouchers where the Tenants appear by Warrant of
Attorney.
in propriis personis suis pe^. versus Henr. Dickenson genesis Geo. Hesletyne and
Tho. Hesletyne genesis Novem Mesuagia, novem Gardina, Octoginta acras terr',
Octoginta acras prati, Centum and Octoginta Acras pusture Triginta acras bosci,
ducentas and viginti acras Jampnor. and bruere and Communiam pasture pro
omnimodis Averiis cum pertin. in Stamsoker, Whitby, Leathes, Anseleby, Hawsker
alias Hansgarth ut jus and hereditatem suam. Et in que iidem Henricus, Geo. and
Tho. Hesletyne non habent ingressum nisi post disseisinam quam Hugo Hunt inde
injuste and sine judicio fec. prefat. Thome Thompson and Richardo infra
triginta Annos, etc.

Et predicti Henricus, Georgius and Thomas Hesletyne per Thomam Langley Attorn.
suum ven. and defend. ^us suum quando, etc. Et alias voc. inde ad War. Robertum
Norison genesis qui modo per sum. ei in Com. predicto factam per Williel. Migdley
Attorn. suum similiter ven. and gratis Tenementa and Communiam predicta cum
pertin. prefat. Henrico, Georgio and Tho. Hesletyne War. etc. Et super hoc
predicti Thomas Thompson and Richardus pet. versus ipsum Robertum Tenen. per
War. suam Tenementa and Communiam predicta cum pertin. in forma predicta, etc.
Et unde dic. quod ipsimet fuer. seisiti de Tenementis and Communia predictis
cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini
Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. Ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde
produc. sectam, etc.

Et predictus Robertus Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
ulterius voc. inde ad War. Georgium Humston qui similiter presens est hic in
Curia in propria persona sua Et gratis Tenemen. and Communiam predicta cum
pertin. ei War. etc. Et super hoc predicti Thomas Thompson and Richardus pet.
versus ipsum Georgium Tenen. per War. suam Tenementa and Communia predicta cum
pertin. in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic quod ipsimet fuer. seisiti de
Tenementis and Communia predictis cum pertin. in dominico suo ut de feodo and
jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. Ad
valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. and inde produc. sectam, etc.

Et predictus ^eorgius Tenens per War. suam defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et
dic. quod predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefatum Thomam Thompson and Richardum
de Tenementis and Communia predictis cum pertin. prout iidem Thomas and
Richardus per breve and narrationem sua predicta superius suppon. Et de hoc
pon. se super patriam, etc.

Et predict. Thomas Thompson and Richardus pet. licentiam inde interloquend. Et
habent, etc. Et postea iidem Thomas Thompson and Richardus reven. hic in Curia
isto eodem Termino in propriis personis suis, Et predictus Georgius licet
solempniter exact. non reven. set in Contemptum Curie recessit Et defalt. fac.
Ideo consideratum est quod predicti, Thomas Thompson and Richardus Recuperent
seisinam suam versus prefat. Henricum, Georgium and Thomam Hesletyne de
Tenementis and Communia predictis cum pertin. Et quod iidem Henricus, Georgius
and Thomas Hesletyne habeant de terra predicti Roberti ad valentiam, etc. Et
quod idem Robertus ulterius habeat de Terra predicti Georgii Ad valentiam, etc.
Et idem Georgius in misericordia, etc. Et super hoc predicti Thomas Thompson
and Richardus pet. breve domini Regis Vic. Com. predicti dirigend de habere
faciend. eis plenariam seisinam de Tenementis and Communia predictis cum
pertin. Et eis conceditur Seizen awarded returnable Indilate.
retornabile hic indilate Postea scilicet vicesimo Octavo die Novembris isto
eodem Termino ven. hic in Curia predicti Thomas Thompson and Richardus in
propriis personis suis, Et Vic. videlicet Robertus Walters Armiger modo Mand.
quod ipse Virtute brevis illius sibi directi Vic^simo sex^o die Novembris ult.
preterito habere fecit prefatis Thome Thompson and Richardo plenariam seisinam
de Tenementis and Communia predictiis cum pertin* prout per breve illud sibi
preceptum fuit, etc.

Mich. xij^. Caroli Secundi Regis rot. 187.
ALias prout patet Termino S. Trinitaiis ult. preterito Rotulo xij*. Continetur
sic:

York. ss. WIlliam Sympson Gent. in his proper Entry of a Recovery by Alias
prout patet after Summons for Lands in two Towns where two are Vouched, one for
Lands in one Town, and the other for Lands lying in another Town.
person demands against William Savage and William Birley one Mesuage,
thirteen acres of Land, four acres of Meadow, thirteen acres of Pasture and
Common of Pasture with th'appurtenances in Sheffeild in Brightside as his right
and Inheritance and into which the said William Savage and William Birley have
not Entry but after the disseisin which Hugh Hunt thereof injustly and without
Judgment made to the said William Simpson within thirty years, etc. And
whereupon they say That they were seized of the Tenements and Common aforesaid
with th'appurtenances in their Demesne as of Fee and Right in the time of peace
in the time of the now Lord the King, Taking the profits thereof, to the value,
etc. And into which, etc. And thereof he brings Suit, etc.

And the said William Savage and William Birley by William Lamb their Attorney
come and defend their Right when, etc. And as to one Mesuage, ten acres of
Land, two acres of Meadow and ten acres of Pasture and Common of Pasture with
th'appurtenances in Brightside parcel of the Tenements and Common aforesaid
above-demanded Vouch to Warrant James Rawson, and as to three acres of Land,
two acres of Meadow and three acres of Pasture and Common of Pasture with
th'appurtenances in Sheffeild residue of the said Tenements and Common
above-demanded the said William Savage and William Birley Vouch to warrant
Richard Burrows and Mary his wife to be Summoned respectively in the County
aforesaid Let them have them here from the day of Saint Michael in one Month by
the Aid of the Court. etc. the same day is given to the Parties aforesaid
here, etc. Et modo hic ad hunc diem scilicet ad predictum Mensem S. Michaelis
ven. tam predictus Willielmus Sympson in propria persona su^ quam predicti
Willielmus Savage and Willielmus Birley per Attorn. suum predictum.

Et predictus Jacobus Sum. etc. per Williel. Crashaw The first Vouchee warants
one part in one Town.
Attorn. suum, Et predicti Richardus and Maria Sum. etc. per Johannem Bellamy
Attorn. suum similiter ven. Et predictus Jacobus gratis Tenementa and Communiam
predicta cum pertin. in Brightside predicta de tenementis and Communia
predictis cum pertin. superius petit, unde ipse superius vocabatur ad War.
eisdem Willielmo Savage and Willielmo Birley War. etc. Et super hoc predictus
Willielmus Sympson pet. versus ipsum Jacobum Tenen. per War. suam eadem
Tenementa and Communiam cum pertin. in Brightside predicta in forma predicta,
etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsemet fuit seifitus de eisdem Tenementis and Communia
cum pertin. in Brightside predicta in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore
pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde exples. Ad valentiam, etc. Et in
que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc.

Et predicti Richardus and Maria gratis Tenementa The second Vouchee warants
another part in another Town.
and Communiam predicta cum pertin. in Sheffield predicta de Tenementis and
Communia predictis cum pertin. superius petit. resid. unde ipsi superius
vocabantur ad War. eisdem Willielmo Savage and Willielmo Birley War. etc. Et
super hoc predictus Willielmus Sympson pet. versus ipsos Richardum and Mariam
Tenen. per War. suam eadem Tenementa and Communiam cum pertin. in Sheffield
predicta in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de
eisdem Tenementis and Communia cum pertin. in Sheffield predicta in dominico
suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde
Exples. Ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc.

Et predictus Jacobus Tenens per War. suam de Several Demands against the
Common Vouchee for two parts.
eisdem Tenementis and Communia cum pertin. in Brightside predicta de
Tenementis and Communia predictis cum pertin. superius petit. unde ipse
superius vocabatur ad War. defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius voc. inde
ad War. Georgium Humston qui similiter presens est hic in Cur. in propria
persona sua, Et gratis eadem Tenementa and Communiam cum pertin. in Brightside
predicta ei War. etc. Et super hoc predictus Willielmus Sympson petit versus
ipsum Georgium Tenen. per War. suam eadem Tenementa and Communiam cum pertin.
in Brightside predicta in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsemet fuit
seisitus de eisdem Tenementis and Communia cum pertin. in Brightside predicta
in dominico suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc
Capiend. inde exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc.
sectam, etc.

Et predicti Richardus and Maria Tenen. per War suam de eisdem Tenementis and
Communia cum pertin. in Sheffeild predicta de tenementis and Communia predictis
cum pertin. superius petit. resid. unde ipsi superius vocabantur, ad War.
defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et ulterius voc. inde similiter ad War. predictum
Georgium Humston qui similiter presens est hic in Cur. in propria persona sua
Et gratis eadem Tenementa and Communiam cum pertin. in Sheffeild predicta eis
War. etc. Et super hoc predictus Willielmus Sympson petit versus ipsum Georgium
Tenen. per War. suam eadem Tenementa and Communiam cum pertin. in Sheffeild
predicta in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic. quod ipsemet fuit seisitus de
eisdem Tenementis and Communia cum pertin. in Sheffeild predicta in dominico
suo ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc Capiend. inde
exples. ad valentiam, etc. Et in que, etc. Et inde produc. sectam, etc.

Et predictus Georgius Tenens per War. suam de Tenementis and Communia
predictis integris cum pertin. defend. jus suum quando, etc. Et dic. quod
predictus Hugo non disseisivit prefatum Willielmum Sympson de eisdem Tenementis
and Communia cum pertin. prout idem Willielmus Sympson per breve and
narrationem sua predicta superius Suppon. Et de hoc pon. se super patriam, etc.

Et predictus Willielmus Sympson petit licentiam inde interloquend. Et habet,
etc. Et postea idem Willielmus Sympson reven. hic in Cur. isto eodem Termino in
propria persona sua, Et predictus Georgius licet solempniter exact. non reven.
Set in contemptum Curie recessit Et defalt. fac. Ideo Consideratum est quod
predictus Willielmus Sympson Recuperet seisinam suam versus prefat. Willielmum
Savage and Willielmum Birley de Tenementis and Communia predictis integris cum
pertin. Et quod iidem Willielmus Savage and Willielmus Birley habeant de terra
predicti Jacobi ad valentiam Tenementorum and Communie predictorum cum pertin.
in Brightside predicta superius versus eum ut Tenen per War. suam petit, Et
quod idem Jacobus inde ulterius habeat de terra predicti Georgii ad valentiam,
etc. Et quod iidem Willielmus Savage and Willielmus Birley habeant de terra
predictorum Richardi and Marie ad valentiam Tenementorum and Communiae
predictorum cum pertin. in Sheffield predicta superius versus eos ut Tenentes
inde per War. suam petit. Et quod iidem Richardus and Maria inde ulterius
habeant de Terra predicti Georgii Misericordia.
ad valentiam, etc. Et idem Georgius in Misericor. etc. Et super hoc predictus
Willielmus Sympson perit breve domini Regis Vic. Com. predicti dirigend. de
habere faciend. ei plenariam seisinam de Tenementis and Communia predictis
integris cum pertin. Et ei conceditur retor nabile hic in Octabis Sancti
Martini, etc. Ad quem diem hic ven. predictus Willielmus Sympson in propria
persona sua, Et Vic. videlicet Robertus Walters Armig. modo Mand. quod ipse
Virtute brevis predicti sibi directi Nono die Novembr. ultimo preterito babere
fecit prefat. Williel. Sympson plenariam seisinam de Tenementis and Communia
predictis integris cum pertin. prout per breve illud sibi precept. fuit, etc.

Gulston PAsche xiij. Caroli Primi Rot. 33. Cum alias Entry of a Challenge to
the Sheriff for that he is Tenant in the Recovery, and thereupon a Writ of
Seizen Awarded to the Coroners.
prout patet Mich. xij. Caroli Rotulo 27. In Misericordia, etc. Et super hoc
predicti G. and K. dic. quod predictus Johannes Ramsden est Vic. Com. predicti,
Et ea de causa petit breve domini Regis de habere faciend. eis plenariam
seisinam de Manerio, etc. cum pertin. Coronator. Com. predicti dirigend, Et
quia satis constat Curie hic per Retorn. brevium Com. predicti hic in Curia
residen. quod Allegatio predicta vera Constitit, Ideo preceptum est
Coronatoribus Com. predicti quod habere fac. prefat. G. and R. plenariam
Seisinam de Manerio, etc. cum pertin. Et qualiter, etc. iidem Coronatores
constare fac. hic indilate, etc. Postea scil. vicesimo secundo die Maii, isto
eodem Termino Ven. hic in Cur. predicti G. and R. in propriis personis suis, Et
quatuor Coronatores domini Regis Com. predicti vide licet R. L. E. D. F. G. and
J. B. modo Mand. quod ipsi Virtute brevis predicti sibi directi xvj. die Maii
ultimo preterito habere fecerunt prefatis G. and R. plenariam Seisinam de
Manerio, etc. cum pertin. prout per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

ss. TRin. 22 Car. 2. rotulo 136. ss. G. G. genesis in propria Recovery with
single Voucher in a Writ of Right of an Advowson.
persona sua petit versus C. H. Advocationem Ecclesie de B. quam ei injuste
deforc. etc. Et unde dicit quod ipsemet fuit seisit. de Advocatione predicta ut
de uno grosso per se ut de feodo and jure tempore pacis tempore domini Regis
nunc, etc. Et sic inde seisit. ad Ecclesiam illam vacan. presentavit quendam T.
C. Clericum suum qui ad presentationem ipsius G. fuit admissus institutus and
inductus in eadem tempore pacis tempore domini Regis nunc capiend. inde exples.
ut in grossis decimis, minutis decimis oblationibus and Obventionibus ad
valentiam, etc. ut in jure Ecclesie sue predicte Et quod tale sit jus suum
offert, etc.

ss. Et predictus C. per R. G. Attorn suum ven. and defend. jus predict. G. and
seisinain suam quando, etc. Et totum, etc. Et quicquid, etc. Et maxim de
Advocatione predict. ut de feodo and jure, etc. Et voc. inde ad War. E. Clent
qui presens est hic in Curia in propria persona sua Et gratis Advocationem
predictam ei War. etc. Et super hoc predictus G. petit versus ipsum E. tenen.
per War. suam Advocationem predictam in forma predicta, etc. Et unde dic. quod
ipsemet fuit seisit. de Advocatione predict. ut de uno grosso, etc. ut supra
usque offert, etc.

ss. Et predictus Edmundus tenens per war. suam defend. jus predicti G. and
seisinam suam quando, etc. Et totum, etc. Et quicquid, etc. Et maxim de
Advocatione predicta ut de feodo and jure, etc. Et pon. se in magnam Assisam
domini Regis nunc Et petit Recognitionem inde fieri utrum ipse majus Jus habeat
tenendi Advocationem predictam sibi and hered. suis ut tenens inde per war.
suam an predictus G. habend. Advocationem predictam ut illam superius pet. etc.

ss. Et predictus G. petit licentiam inde interloquendi and habet, etc. Et
postea idem G. reven. hic in Cur. isto eodem Termino in propria persona sua Et
predictus E. licet solempniter exact. non reven. set in contempt. Cur.
recessit, and defalt. fac. Ideo cons. est quod predictus G. recuperet seisinam
suam versus prefat. C. de Advocatione predict. tenend. eidem G. and hered. suis
quiet. de predicto C. and hered. suis acetiam de predicto E. hered. suis
imperpetuum Et quod predictus C. habeat de terra predict. E. ad valentiam, etc.
Et idem E. in misericordia. Et super hoc predictus G. pet. breve Misericordia.
domini Regis Vic. Com. predict. dirigend. de habere faciend. ei plenariam
seisinam de Advocatione predict. and ei conceditur retornabile hic indilate,
etc. Postea scilicet vicesimo secundo die Junii islo codem Termino ven. hic in
Cur. predictus G. in propria persona sua Et Vic. videlicet T. G. Ar. modo mand.
quod ipse virtule brevis illius sibi directi 18. die Junii ult. preterit.
habere fec. prefat. G. plenar. seisinam de Advocatione predict. prout per breve
illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc.

ss. Trin. 22. Car. 2. rot. 137. Devon. ss. Similis Recuperatio super brevi de
Recto de Advocatione, Nota.
de Medietate Advocationis portionis de Pit in Ecclesia de Tiverton.

ss. If the Vrit of Entry be retornable so late in Recovery indorsed upon the
Label.
the Term, that the Writ of Seisin cannot come in, retornable the same Term,
but that it must be retornable the next Term, Then observe after the retorn of
the Writ of Seisin in the Exemplification to break off, and conclude with Quae
omnia and singula, etc. And indorse upon the Label, Ad quem diem hic ven.
predictus (petens) in propria persona sua Et Vic. videlicet A. B. Miles modo
mand. quod ipse virtute brevis illius sibi direct. primo die Junii ult.
preterit. habere secit prefat (petenti) plenariam seisinam de tenementis
predictis cum pertin. prout per breve illud sibi preceptum fuit, etc. But in
the Roll there is not any such distinction.

A Writ of Summons and Retorn.
CArolus Secundus Dei gratia Anglie, Scotie, Francie and Hibernie Rex, fidei
defensor, etc.
Vic. Eborum salutem
Sum. per bonos Summonitores Willielm. Cotterel and Johannem Cotterel
(Vouchees) quod sint coram Justic. nostris apud Westminster. a die S. Trinitatis in
quindecim dies ad War. Willielmo Payler and Richard^ Payler (les Tenants)
Manerium de A. etc. ( recitando omnes parcellas nominatas in brevi de Ingressu)
que Willielmus Satherwaite and Willielmus Burrowes (les Demandants) in Curia
nostra coram Justic. nostris apud Westminster. clam. ut jus suum versus prefatos
Williel. Payler and Rich. Payler per breve nostrum de Ingressu super
disseisinam in le Post, Et unde iidem Willielmus and Richardus in eadem Curia
nostra voc* predictos Williel. Cotterel and Johannem sum. in Co^a. tuo ad War.
versus eos ( les Demandants) Et habeas ibi sum. and hoc Breve. Test, etc.

Retorn. inde Sum. Johannes Den Johan. Ramsden, Miles Vic. Richard. Fen

Note, That the Writ of Summons must bear the Test of the Return of the Writ
of Entry.

A Writ of Seizen.
CArolus Secundus, etc.
Vic. H. salutem
Scias quod J. P. in Cur. nostra coram Justic. nostris apud Westminster. recuperavit
seisinam suam versus A. B. de uno Mesuagio, etc. per breve nostrum de Ingressu
super disseisinam in le Post: Ideo tibi precipimus quod prefat. J plenariam
seisinam de tenementis predictis cum pertin. sine dilatione habere fac. Et
qualiter hoc preceptum nostrum fuer is execut. constare fac. Justic. nostris
apud Westminster. indilat^ (vel in Crastino Trin.) Et habeas ibi hoc breve.

Test, etc. Retorn. inde Virtute isi ius brevis mihi directi 16 die Maii Anno
infrascripto habere feci infra nominato J. plenar. seisinam de tenementis infra
sp^c. cum pertin. pr^ut interius mihi precipitur.

R. F. Ar. Vic.



The Form of a Surrender or Lease to make a Tenant to the Precipe.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses that whereas the said A. B. does hold
for the term of his life, One Mesuage, etc. in D. in the County of E. the
immediate Reversion or Remainder whereof does belong to the said C. D. and his
Heirs, or to the Heirs of his body, lawfully begotten, for ever: Now the said
A. B. for the perfecting of some Assurance shortly to be made of the same
Mesuage, etc. by way of Common Recovery has granted and surrendered, and by
these presents does grant and surrender unto the said C. D. and his Heirs, upon
the Condition herein after-mentioned, All that the said Mesuage, etc. And all
the Estate, Right, Title and Interest of him the said A. B. therein, To have
and to hold to him the said C. D. and his Heirs upon Condition That if the said
C. D. do not pay, or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. the sum of One
Thousand pounds of lawful money of England, upon the first day of, etc. next
ensuing the Date hereof, That then and from thenceforth this present Grant and
Surrender shall be utterly void and of none effect, and that then also it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. into the said Mesuage, etc. to
re-enter and the same to have again, re-possess and enjoy, as in his former
Estate and Right, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc.

The Form of Drawing a Recovery at the Bar, by the Sergeants at Law.
ONe of the Sergeants retained for this purpose must speak to the Chief Justice
upon the Bench, and say demaundes, and show the Tenant.

After leave given by the Court the Sergeant counts by the Prothonotaries
Remembrance, according as the Writ is there entered in this manner, by the first
Sergeant, viz.

Ceo vous monstre Jean at Oaks, que Jean at 1 Sergeant.
Style a tort luy desorce de l'Mannor de Sale ovesque les appurtenances en le
County de M. (and so recite all the Lands as they are expressed in the
Prothonotaries Remembrance delivered unto him) Et pur ceo a Tort entan^ que est
son droit and son inheritance d'ount il mesm' fuit seisie en son demesne come
de Fee and droit en temps la peace en temps la Reign nostre Seigniour le Roy
que ore est, and les esplees ont prist Come en faucher de blees amountant al
value de demie Mark and plus, and en quel le dit Jean at Style n'ad pas enter
si non puis disseisin quel Hugh Hunt de ceo torciousment and sans judgment ad
fait al dit J. O. deins 30 ans darrein pass, Et si le dit J. S. ceo voile
dedire vous aves cy le dit J. O. que ont ad port son Suit bon.

Then the Sergeant of the Tenant must say chus;

Vous aves cy le dit J. S. que defend le tort and 2 Sergeant.
force and vouch a garanty A. B. Et pry que il soit s(...)on deins le County
avaunt dit per le aid de cest Court.

Then the Sergeant of the Vouchee must desire 3. Sergeant.
the Judges to Record the appearance of the Vouchee (if it be with a double
Voucher, and so of every Vouchee, unless it be the Common Vouchee) which done,
he must say, Vous aves cy le dit A. B. que cy est prist d'entre en la Garantie,
and pry que le demandant counteroit envers luy.

Then the first Sergeant must say, Autiel Count 1 Sergeant.
mutatis mutandis.

Then the Sergeant of the Vouchee (being the 3. Sergeant.
third Sergeant) must say thus;

Autiel defense mutatis mutandis, vous avez cy le dit A. B. que vouch a Garanty
Edmund Clent, Et pry que il soit summon en la County avaunt dit per le aid de
cest Court.

Then the fourth Sergeant must say, Vous avez 4. Sergeant.
cy le dit Edmund Clent que cy est prist d'entre en la Garanty, Et pry que lei
demandant Counteroit envers luy.

Autiel Count mutatis mutandis. 1 Se^g.


Autiel defense mutatis mutandis, vous avez cy 4 Sergeant.
le dit Edmund Clent que le dit Hugh Hunt ne disseise pas le dit J. O. si come
le demandant per son brief and Count suppose, Et sur ceo luy mitta sur la pais.

Ove vostre conge nous voilumus imparle. 1 Sergeant.


NB. The Demandant uses not to come to the Bar, but only he that is Tenant to
the Precipe quod reddat, and the Vouchees in person (unless by Warrant of
Attorney as before) There must be one Sergeant for the Demandant, one for the
Tenant, and a several Sergeant for every several Vouchee.

DIRECTIONS For Sueing out RECOVERIES Together with the Usual FEES Incident
thereunto.
DRaw your PRECIPE in Pape^ in the same manner as you are directed in the
beginning of this Treatise, which being drawn you must carry it to the Cursitor
of that County wherein the Lands lie, who will thereby make you a Writ of Entry
sur disseisin in le Post. When your Writ of Entry is made, you must carry it to
the Alienation Office (now in the Inner Temple) and their compound it with one
of the Commissioners, then pay the Fine to the Receiver, who there attends to
take it, and then you must get the Writ of Entry entered into the Commissioners
Book, and there Indorsed with Mr. Crew's (the Doctors) hand, with the hands of
two of the Commissioners unto it. Then carry it back to the Cursitor to be
Sealed, from whence you must carry it to the Kings Attorney General for his
hand.

Then, in case the Tenant in your Writ of Entry does appear in person so that
your Recovery may be taken at the Bar, you must ingross your Precipe in a large
hand in that Prothonotaries Office in which you enter according to this form.

Midd. ss. PR. Willielmo Herne quod just, etc. reddat Johanni Adams genesis unum
Mesuagium and december acras Pasture Tenens in propria persona vocat Edm. Clent.
cum pertin. in Enfield. que clam. etc.

In this manner you are to enter a Precipe for a single Voucher upon the
Remembrance, but if it be for a double or treble Voucher it must be still the
same except in the Margin of the Precipe: If it be for a double Voucher you
must say, Tenens in propr. persona vocat Henr. House qui presens vocat Edmundum
Clent. And if it be with a treble Voucher say thus, Tenens in propria persona
voc. Henr. House, qui presens voc. Thomam Green, qui presens vocat Edmundum
Clent.

Then when you are ready to have your Recovery taken at the Bar, having your
Tenant and Vouchees ready, the Court being at leisure deliver the Remembrance,
on which your Precipe is entered to one of the Sergeants at the Bar, who with
two more of his brethren, if it be a single Voucher; three more if it be a
double Voucher; or four Sergeants more if it be with a treble Voucher will soon
dispatch you: which being done carry back the Remembrance to the Prothonotary
sitting in Court who will mark it, Ad Barram, in the Margent of the Precipe,
and pay the Fees in Court. All which being done, then draw your Recovery, enter
it upon a Plea Roll, which the Prothonotary will give you for that purpose;
Then make an Exemplification thereof for your Clyent, then make your Writ of
Seisin, and return the same together with your Writ of Entry according to your
Precedents in such cases; Then examine your Recovery with the Prothonotary
(having first perfected the Precipe in the Remembrance according to the Test
and Retorn of your Writ of Entry) then docket your Recovery, which done the
Prothonotary will sign your Exemplification and Writ of Seisin, both which you
must get Sealed; Then carry your Writs of Entry and Seizin to the Inrollment
Office in the Temple to be Enrolled, and lastly file your Writs of Entry and
Seizin, with the Custos brevium of the Common Pleas, who also keeps his Office
in the Temple.

Note, You may pass your Recovery at the Bar before you sue out your Writ of
Entry for the better dispatch of your Clyent, and so is the Common use.

Note, If your Clyent be a Nobleman, you must place him in the middle of the
Bar, between the Kings Sergeants or the two other eldest Sergeants in their
absence.

Note, The Demandant in any* Recovery need not appear at the Bar.

But if your Recovery be with a single Voucher, and the Tenant to the Precipe
do not appear at the Bar, in such case you may sue out a Dedimus Potestatem
from the Cursitor directed to Commissioners to take the Caption, having ready
Iugrossed your Precipe quod reddat, and Warrant of Attorney, as your Precedent
directs; then having your Dedimus Potestatem executed and returned from the
Commissioners, carry the Caption back again to the Cursitor, who will make you
a Mittimus and Transcript of all your proceedings, which you must enter in a
small hand upon a Plea-Roll (taken from the Prothonotary) beginning with the
Mittimus which is the least of the two Writs, and filed backwards; which having
Recorded verbatim and litteratim; then in one continued Line begin and go on
with the annexed Writ of Dedimus, and do the like to the end; and then about a
thumbs breadth distance, begin underneath and make an entry of your Recovery in
great hand on the same Roll.

But if your Recovery be with a double Voucher (which is most usual) and the
Tenant to the Precipe do not appear at the Bar, then your proceedings are as
follows: You must sue out a Writ of Summons against the Tenant, together with
a Dedimus Potestatem, as before directed; and at the fifth Return, inclusive
from the Writ of Entry, accounting that of the Writ of Entry for one, the Writ
of Summons returned, together with a Transcript of the Entry of the Summons
being fairly Engrossed, and a Transcript of the Caption, being (as before) made
by the Cursitor, being all fixed together you may so pass it at the Bar. And in
case the Vouchee do not appear at the Bar at the Return of the Summons; then
you are to make out another Writ of Summons against the Vouchee, and to proceed
as before; and having all your Writs and Transcripts fixed together, you are to
deliver it to a Sergeant to be past at Bar.

But if your Tenant do appear at Bar, then you must have a Writ of Summons
against the Vouchee, and so against every Vouchee, if it be with more Vouchers,
and proceed therein as before directed.

Note, You must make due Entries upon Record of all your proceedings as they go
on.

Note, That Captions may be taken before a Judge of Assize, and Certified
without a Dedimus.

Note, You having Engrossed your Summons in Parchment, may examine it by the
Roll with the Prothonotary: In like manner you may pass it at Bar, by the
return of the Caption, before you have a Transcript thereof from the Cursitor,
as well as afterward.

Note, You must carefully file all your Warrants of Attorney with the Clerk of
the Warrants, and all your Writs whatsoever with the Custos brevium.

Note, If your Clyent will be at the Charge, you By the Stat. 23. El. Cap. 3.
an Office was erected for the Inrollment of Writs of Entry and Seisin, and
Writs of Covenant; and it is thereby Enacted that the Exemplifications of such
Writs shall have the same force and power as the Writs themselves.
may have both the Writs of Entry and Seizin exemplified with their Returns,
for fear of any miscarriage in filing them, which Exemplifications are usually
had at the Inrollment Office, now kept by Mr. Sergeant in Brick-Court in the
Middle Temple.

Note, The most proper way to find out a Recovery formerly past is to search
with the Clark of the Warrants, who uses to take Notes out of all the Plea
Rolls of all the Prothonotaries Offices, and enters them all distinctly and
fairly into a Register-book, every Office by it self, and also the number Roll.

The Charge of a Recovery with single Voucher where the Tenant appears at Bar.
l. s. d. FOr drawing the Precipe 0 2 6 For taking it into the Remembrance 0 1
0 To the Cursitor for the Writ of Entry 0 2 6 New Imposition for the Seal 0 0 6
The Kings Fine rated by the Commissioners According to the value of the Land.
New Imposition According to the Rate. To the Receiver 0 0 6 For Mr. Crews hand
Entering and Indorsing in Term time 0 1 2 For drawing it at Bar, to three
Sergeants 0 10 0 To the Box 0 0 6 Common Vouchee 0 0 4 To the Attorney General
for signing the Writ of Entry 0 10 0 The Secondary in Court receives 0 2 6
Return of the Writ of Entry 0 2 0 For drawing the Count and Judgment 0 2 6 For
Exemplifying it and Parchment 0 7 6 To the Prothonotary for the Entry thereof 0
10 6 For Sealing thereof 0 2 2 Imposition 0 7 6 For the Writ of Seizin and
Retorn 0 4 0 For the Seal thereof, and Imposition 0 1 1 For filing the Writs of
Entry and Seizen, with the Custos Brevium and Common Vouchee 0 2 4 Attorneys
Fee 0 6 8 But if your Recovery be with double Voucher, the Prothonotary will
have of you for the Entry thereof 0 14 6 And for every treble Voucher 0 18 6
And to the Clerk for every Voucher more 0 2 0

The Charge of a Recovery by Summons, Warrant of Attorney, and Dedimus.
l. s. d. FOr drawing the Precipe and Warrant of Attorney 0 3 4 Dedimus
Potestatem 1 4 2 Cursitor for the Transcription of the Return and Imposition 0
11 0 For making the Writ of Summons 0 2 0 Sealing thereof with the Imposition 0
1 1 Entry of the Summons to the Prothonotary 0 4 6 If with a Warrant of
Attorney, then 0 6 6 To the Clerk for drawing and engrossing the Summons 0 2 6
To the Clerk for entering the Summons with Mittimus and Dedimus on the Roll 0 5
4 For making and filing every Warrant of Attorney 0 1 4 For Return of the Writ
of Summons 0 2 0 For filing thereof 0 1 0

Charges Extraordinary if the Recover under the Great Seal of England.
l. s. d. For the Certiorari 0 13 4 For the allowance thereof 1 9 6 For the
Clark for his pains 0 6 8 For the Exemplification, every Skin 1 6 8 And to the
King for the first Skin for Imposition 2 0 0 And for every other Skin
Imposition 1 0 0 For the Seal 1 0 6

FINIS.

