A TREATISE OF THE NOBILITY Of the Realm.

COLLECTED OVT OF THE BODY Of the Common Law, with mention of such Statutes as
are incidet hereunto, upon a debate of the Barony of Aburgavenny.

With a Table of the heads contained in this Treatise.

LONDON, Printed by A.N. for Mathow Walbanke and Richard Best, and are to be
sold at their shops at Grayes-Inne gate. 1642.

The Table.
OF Barons Page 3. The definition and description of a Baron Page 37 Of the
name Baron Page 40 The Antiquity of the Dignity of Barons, and the uses of
the Name. Page 43 If a Baron by Tenure grant the Honor holden by Barony,
whether shall the Grantee have the Dignity or otherwise? Page 68 Certain Cases
wherein a Baron has no privilege Page 127 Noblitie and Lords in reputation,
only Page 131 Noble Women. Page 132 Honorable Women of three sorts Ibid.
^adyes in Reputation. Page 140 The Hypothesis or particular question, Page 143
The Barony of Aburgavenny, a Barony by Tenure, and an ancient Honor. Page 145
The Line of the Hastings, owners of the Castle of, and Barons of Aburgavenny
Page 149 The Descent. Page 156 The family of Beauchampe L. Aburgavenny Ibid.
A Treatise of the Nobility of the Realm according to the Law.
Question. Whether the Barony of Aburgavenny, with the title and dignity be
descended unto the Lady, being the Daughter and Heir of the Honorable Hen.
Nevill, the late Baron of Aburgavenny, or unto the special heir male, unto
whom the Castle of Aburg being anciently the head of hat Barony is descended.
WHerein are three things considerable.

1. First this general Thesis, whether within the Realm of England, there be
any Baronies by Tenure, And whether Baronia sit dignitas annexa ^odo (vizt.)
whether the heir male ha^ing the Castle holden per Baroniam shall have the
title, or the heir general which has not the Castle.

2. The second is Hypothesis, whether by former presidents it may be showed
that this Barony of Aburg. has been guided by the lawful descent of the
Castle of Aburgavenny, or whether the same has gone to the heirs generals
sundred from the Castle.

3. The third is, that it is not to be doubted whether the dignity of Baron
may descend to the heir female (for where such Castles, and is holden per
Baroniam, and does descend unto the heir female. There likewise the title,
etc. as in many Noble houses of this Realm is most evident) but The Question
is whether the title of Baron or Baroness may descend to the heir female,
whereas that fee holden by Barony, is descended to the Heir male or no, and
whether the fee to support the dignity may be severed from the dignity.

A Treatise of the Barons of this Realm.
IT is true of Vlpian Public interest quod ordinum familiarumque solva sit,
Lib. O sed si F. de ventre inspiciend. Baldwin in la sacraledge divinis
rescript Ante Nobilit. cap. 6.
Which duly considered, is cause that the special heir male of the late Baron
deceased without any affection of honor or humor of ambition desires to make
known what things former times observed, he has now found to have been
considered in such like Quaeries; Nevertheless with all humility and loyal
duty he submits himself to the princely pleasure of the Queens most
excellent Majesty, ^n whom is the fountain of all Nobility, and unto the
censure of the right Honorable the Earl Marshall of England, unto whom the
jurisdiction and Cognizance of the same cause by office appertains.

But before proof be produced, 1. By what law this Quer. is to be determined.
it shall not be amiss to consider two principal things, what manner of
proof in these causes is most pregnant, and by what law this controversy
might best be determined. 3. 2. Touching the state ofour B^renies.
Some things are requisite to be delivered before in general manner touching
the state of the Baronies within the Realm, whereby the Querie in hand may be
the better apprehended, and receive the more easy resolution.

As touching the first, it is to be observed, that the dignity of a Baron, and
that name given to a degree of Nobility, was not usual any where, until
near the declination of the Romans Monarchy, and therefore those parts of the
civil Law, which contain the ancient Roman laws do afford small proof of
the deciding of this kind of controversy, otherwise then prechance now and
then there are inserted some general sentences or axioms of the law of
nature, which may be particularly applied as the occasion serves.

Therefore in those times upon the sundry invasions of those Northern people,
Goths. Vandalls.
which hastened the ruin of the Roman estate, when Tenures and it which they
call Feuda, had their first original, diverse new dignities of Nobility were
devised, and drawn from the service of the field, whereof some of them
formerly had been but names of Offices, as may appear in the second book de
feudis, in the title Quis dicatur dux Marchio, etc.

He that would not have the controversies moved within the Realm concerning
this kind of Dignities to be deterined by the Common law, and yet would that
the common custom of our Country should direct the same, speaks in my
understanding contrary things, for it is a general Maxim, 7. H. 6. Martin. 9.
Ed. 4. and 38 H. 8. Custom. B. 59
that the Common custom of the Realm, is the common law of the Realm.
Therefore to affirm that the common usage of the Country should direct the
controversy, and to deny that the common Law should determine it is contrary
to it self.

That the common Law does determine this kind of Controversy, it cannot seem
strange to him that considers the general division, whereby the said law is
distributed into parts, Bracton, lib. 1. cap 5. and 2 de justo and jure.
Est autem jus publicum, and jus privatum. Jus publicum, Bracton disposes it,
Est jus quod ad statum Reipub. pertinet and consistit in sacris Sacerdotibus
and Magistris. Others give a more large scope to this division, Ioachimus Hosp.
de juris art, lib. 2. de rebus humanis sive de jur' civil.
distributing jus publicum into three parts into Jus civil, jus fecile, and
jus questortum.

The first part jus civil, though it be the general name of the whole Law,
yet in this division thye do understand thereby, that part of the Law wherein
consideration of many things are had, tending chiefly to the public good, and
wherein persons of men are considered diversely; Dividumtur quinque formae
modis, pro loco, pro facultate, pro ordine, pro jure, pro dignitate. Under that
division which is in respect of Order, all degrees of persons, Noble and
ignoble are comprehended, and under the division, in regard of dignity the
Prince, Magistrate, Pro ordine.
Officers of all kinds are contained. Pro dignitate.
The consideration therefore of all degrees of Nobility is a part of the Law
practiced in every Kingdom, under that division which respects public
justice, and therefore in regard of persons sub ordine debito, this is now
apparently perceived if we apply our thoughts to the regard of jurisdiction in
general, which respects the fountain of justice from whom it springs.

All Justice is either commutatiue or distributive. Commutative Justice
determines debates growing upon contracts, inheritance, or chattels, and those
be real or personal, which suites are commenced ad instantiam partis, by
Plaint, Bill, or Writ, in the ordinary Court of Justice within the Realm.
Distributive Justice is twofold, for either it does ordain punishment for such
crimes as do fall within the correction of the laws, or else it does
distribute a reward for virtues. That kind of Distributive justice that
inflicts punishment proceeds in some cases ad instant. partis, as in appeals
of Murder, Rape, Robery, etc. That most usually Ex officio, and that either by
indictment or presentment. That kind of Distributive justice which concerns
the advancement of virtue in bestowing of honor, which is the proper guerdon
of virtue, In Camer. stellat. 39. El. z inter Commit. Kanc. and Rotherom.
remains with the highest Sovereign, annexed to the Imperial Crown of the
Realm, for as virtue is the gift of none but God from heaven, so the reward of
virtue with honor for her Majesty, Gods substitute on earth within, etc.

But when honor and arms (being the ensigns of honor) be once bestowed on
any, or possessed by any, if there shall arise contention between competitors
for the same, pretending several challenge thereto the ancient policy of the
Realm, has ordained an especial Court, The proper Court of honor and arms.
the jurisdiction whereof is immediately derived from the Crown, and whereof
the Judges have been right honorable personages, The Lord high Constable, and
the Earl Marshall, and in later times the Judge thereof is the Right
Honorable the Earl Marshall, the jurisdiction of which Court consists in the
execution of that part of Distributive Justice, which concerns the
advancement and support of Virtue.

The Court wherein, and the Judges by whom these controversies are to be
determined by that which is above. said may partly appear. The Laws whereby
the same are to be decided, are the Laws of God, the general conclusions of
the laws of Nature, Did. lib. 10. cap 4. Com. 304.6.
and of the law of Nations, together with the customs and usages of statutes
and Ordinances of our Country in like cases heretofore, either observed, or
provided, or which are the primary grounds, and chief principles of the laws
of this Realm. And if no Cause heretofore has happened that might be a
president to determine such future Controversies, then in the judgment of such
doubts, that resolution is to be embraced, which is most correspondent to our
government agreeable with the disposition of our people, and so especially as
that the new judgment (so it be promulged) do not in any matter of
consequence impeach, infringe, or infeeble any old or former received Law, or
usage then in force. The law therefore of our Country so branched into
several Courts, though the several Jurisdictions aforesaid, 8. Ed. 4. per
Yelverton, Bract. lib. 1. Cap. 2.
ought to determine all civil and criminal Causes with the body of this
Realm concerning whatsoever Causes.

Nevertheless, some men there are not duly considering of what principles and
parts the Laws do consist, have labored to prove that the Quae. of Nobility
and Arms should not be determined by the laws of the Realm, framing unto
themselves many Arguments to prove their Assertion, the chief of which
arguments are here proposed and answered.

descent of dignity are not determinable by the laws of the Realm.

To this Argument may be answered, Resolve Bract. li. 2. Cap. 4 fol. 10 and
li. 2. ca. 5 fol. 13. Coment. 170.
that there are diverse inheritances, some of things corporal, as lands,
tenements, etc. some of incorporall framed, not by nature, but by man's policy,
and therefore called Iura: the first sort do lie in Livery, the other are such
as do lie in grant. Of the later sort there are diverse kinds, some matters of
preceptible profit, as Offices common, etc. Some others are matters chiefly of
ease, as ways and passages over the land of others; Some other concern matter
of profit and pleasure, as Forests, Parkes, Chases, Warraines, etc. Others of
jurisdiction, as the grant of Courts, others of Privileges and immunities, as
a getter to one and his heirs, to be quit of Subsidies, Dizmez, Quinzems, etc.
Others matter of honor, as the dignity of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount,
or Baron, granted to one and his heirs general, or to him and the heirs of
his body.

Inheritance concerning matters of honor, Cap. 1. Praeterea de prohibita feodi
alienatione per Frederes.
being things in their nature, participating of superiority and eminency, are
not partible in any equality among many, and therefore must of necessity
descend unto one, and that is unto the eldest Daughter inheritable, where there
are no heirs males lawfully to challenge the same. 23. H. 3. Fitz. Com. 8.


There was a Judgment in the time of H. 3. touching the descent of the
Earldom of Chester, after the death of the Earl, who died without issue
male, his Sisters being his heir, which Judgment was, that the said Earldom
should be divided as other lands, and not to the eldest, But this Judgment was
holden erroneous then. For Bracton, a learned Judge of that age, Braction, lib.
7. fol. 76 de Cosercen.
thus seems to write thereof (viz.) De hoc autem quod dicitur quod de feodo
milit. veniunt in divisione capital. Messuagia, and inter cohaeredes
dividuntur; Hoc verum est nisi capitale Mess. sit caput Comitat. propter jus
gladii quod dividi non potest, vel caput Baroniae castrum vel aliud aedificium,
and hoc ideo ne sit caput in plures particulas dividatur, and jura Comitat. and
Baroniar' deveniant ad nihilum per quod deficiat regnum, quod ex Comitat. and
Baronibus dicitur esse constitutum. si autem plura sunt aedificia quae sunt
capita BAroniae dividi possunt in Cohaeredes facta electione, salvo jum assuet.
quia cum plura ibi jura sunt quod liber per se poterit inte gre observari, quod
autem non est in uno ut praedoct' est licet a qui busdam dicatur. Quod in alijs
Regionibus aliquando de consuetudine dividatur, sed quod nunquam dividi videtur
in Anglia debeat, nec visum fuit contrar', and erit consuetudo regionis
observanda ubi haereditas est quae petitur, and personae nascuntur quae petunt;
Et unde si dicatur quod in regno Angl. aliquando facta fuit partitio, hoc fuit
injustum. Vermon liver d'antiquities a placitio, 290 ad placiumt. 301.
It is therefore evident that Baronies, etc. do by the laws of the Realm
descend unto the eldest Copercener, and Judgment given once to the contrary.
Thereof Bracton does rightly account to be unjust, his reason is notable; For
in as much as the Honor and Chivalty of the Realm does chiefly consist in the
Nobility, reason will not that such dignities should be divided among
Coperceners, whereby through multitude the reputation of honor in such
succession, Pet. Greg. de repub. lib. 7. cap. 5.
and so divided might be impaired, as the strength of the Realm being drawn
into many hands with decrease of livelihood by such partition should be
infeebled. In which resolution Britton the Baroned Bishop of Hereford, Britton,
187. de herit. devis.
who compiled this Book in the name, and by the commandment of Ed. 1.
accords, who delivered this as a special Caveat; En tous cases sont les
droits des espees (that which Braecton calls Ius gladij) gardes de sole miss
and dismembres, he calls it Ius gladij, because Dukes, Earls be at the time
of their creation, Cinguntur gladijs gladius autem significat defensione,
reginae and patriae; But howsoever that judgment was given, or whenever, it
was nevertheless very evident that it was soon redressed, for if it were
given upon the death of Ranulph, the last of the name E. of Chester, who died
about 17. H. 3. the Writers about that time do testify, that the Earldom of
Chester came wholly to John Scot, the son of David Earl of Huntington, and
Anguish and of Maude the eldest Sister of the said Ranulph. If it were given
upon the death of the said John Scot, who died without issue about 24. H. 3.
(for in the reports of the Law, the difference of a year is no great matter)
yet notwithstanding the said Judgment stood not in force, Math. Paris Monast.
Sancti Albani Chron. 36.
for that the said King assumed the said Earldom into his own hands upon
other satisfaction made to the Sisters Coparceners of the said John Scot ne
tanta haered tas inter Colos deduceretur. M. 6. H. 8.


That the descent of Dignities and Offices of Honor are determinable by the
Common law is made manifest by the great cause concerning the office of the Lo.
high Constable of England challenged tempore H. 8. by the Duke of Buckingham,
and determined by the resolution of the Judges, as by a note of that Case
extant, Dyer, 285.
whereof my Lord Dyer in his Reports has a memorial is most evident where the
Case ws that Humph de Bohun Earl of Hertford and Essex, held the Manor of
Hatfield Newnham, and Whiting hurst, in com' Glouc' du roy pur service de eant
hault Constable d' Anglque mor' tyent issue 2 files que font particion de mesme
les Manners, and part le office eant servic' pur reason de tenureque descent' al
ambu files de^e exercise pur lour sufficient deputy (dum sole' vixerint) mez
aprez lour marriage, and fuit de^e exercise solement pur le Baron el'eigne, Mes
quia Hen. de Bullingb. Ca'ps H. 4.) que ad espouse le puisne a que le man' de
Whittenhurst de eant part' de terr' iss' ten' fuit allot' pur sa pur port.
Another Querie was moved, whether by the unity of parcel of the tenancy in
the King the said Office, were not determined, or whether this were in the
other Sister, which the Justices resolved that the Office had its continuance
in the eldest Sister and her heirs, of whom the said Duke was descended, but
because the exercise of the said Office was a service in respect of tenure, the
said Judges further resolved that the King might refuse to have the said office
exercised, as any Lord may refuse the homage of his Tenant; All which
resolutions the two chief Justices did signify unto the King, according to
the names of themselves and the rest.

etc. do marry with a Knight, Esquire, or Gentleman, then nevertheless she
retains her name of honor, whereas the Common Law does otherwise determine
thereof, and therefore they conclude that the common Law does not determine
this kind of controversy concerning the title, names and dignities Noble.

There must be made a dis-Junction between the strictness of Law, Resolu.
and courtesy of Ladies at the Court, 14 H. 6.2. and 8. a.
for it is a rule in Law, as it is the same law of Chivalry, and in that point
so is, and should be known among the Heralds, for as much as a report of law
in that case does acknowledge it to be taken out of the books of Heralds, 5.
Mar. bre. Br. 546. and nosme 69. Fortescue, 100.
that Quando mulier nobilis nupserit igncb. etc. Of the which Fortescue
sometime chief Justice of England yields a notable reason, Cod lib. 10. de
incolis leg. sinal.
Mulieres honor maritorum, etc. sin autem minoris ordinis verum? For if she
be honored with any title in respect of her Husband, it is reason that after
his death she marrying with an inferior sub cujus potestate vivet, that she
should be of like quality and reputation as is her said Husband. For as she
was enabled by the one, so must she be content to leave that Nobility by
strict course of law for live of the other, so that in this point the law is
one way, and the honor and courtesy of Ladies another. And as the Civilian
says in the like case, 6. E. 3.7. E 6.79. 3 Eliz 23.69.
Aliud est jus, aliud Privilegium. Nevertheless, the books of our law do make
mention of that Courtesy, and allow of it as a Courterie though not as the Law.

With these do agree the law of Nation, with which concordeth also the Civil
law, Foeminae nuptae clarissimis personis clariss. personarum appellatione
continuentur. But of the other side clariss ^oeminarum nomine senator. Filiae,
nisi quae viros claeriss. sortitae sunt, non habentur. Foeminis enim dignitat.
clariss. mariti tribuunt. Parents vero donec plebeis nuptijs fuerint
copulaetae. Cod de dignit. leg 12.
tamdiu igitur clariss. foemina erat quaemdiu Senatori nupt. est. vos clariss.
aut separat. ab eo alij. inferioris dign. non nupserit.

Nevertheless, Jacob Rebuff ind^ct. leg. 1. lib. 12. Cod de dignitat.
in Kingdoms this holds not place in the blood Royal, for Si filia Regis
nubat alicui Duci vel Comiti dicitur tamen semper Regalis.

Likewise, the said first rule touching the Nobility of Women married unto
persons ignoable does fail where they inherit those dignities. For if a
Dukedom, Earldome, or Barony descend unto any woman, who takes an ignoble man
to husband, that husband shall not debase the wife, having such Dignities
descended, but rather he in her right shall bear the title of such dignities
especially if he be entitled by the Courtesy.

etc. that the heir apparent of such Earl, etc. shall after such Creation of
his Father bear the title of the Barony, etc. but this is not usual by the
course of the Common law: therefore the descent of such Dignities not to be
guided by the Common Law.

The common law does not disallow any such usage, Resolu.
for it being the custom of the Realm, is the law of the Realm. Howbeit the
Common Law does put a difference between such Heirs apparent as carry those
Titles lawfully in respect of the usage, and such others as have them by
Creation or otherwise, for such Heir apparent is no Peer of the Realm as
those by Creation, or such as have the Earldome, etc upon descent after the
death of his Auncestor, and therefore as when the Lord Hen. Howard, Earl of
Surry, Son and Heir apparent to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, An Earl by Nativity.
was attainted his Trial was by Jury of Knights and Gentlemen, not by Barons,
etc. for that he was an Earl by Nativity, which in respect of trial the Law
does not allow. The like trial chanced to the Lord Gray, who 33. H. 8. was in
B. K. arraigned of treason, and appointed to be tried by a Jury of Knights and
Gentlemen, and not by Peers, Causa qua supra; but he confessed the Indictment
and the Jury were dismissed, yet such shall hold precedence of place at Court,
and in the presence of their Sovereign, as is usual in that behalf.



of creation, Earl pur autre vie 31. H 6.29. pur Danby.
wherein the name is appointed at the pleasure of the Sovereign, for one may
be Earl during the life of another, if the Creation be so.

Vea. leg. Edgar regis de Consil. Lamb. 80. n. 5.
for that they did further the administration of Justice in the County whereof
they were Earls or Aldermen, they likewise had their Deputies under them, the
Sheriff an Officer, yet containing the name of his substitution in Latin
Vicecomes. Camden. 107.
These Earls in recompense of their travailes received a Salary name by the
third penny of the profits of the said County, which continued long after the
Conquest, and was inserted as a princely benevolence in the Patent of Creation,
as by diverse ancient Charters may appear, which afterward were turned into
Pensions, H 3. dedit Haber^o de burgo 40 pro 3. deno. Com. Cant. de quoeund
creavit commit. habe^d. sibi, and haered. de corpore Marger. uaeor Alexand. reg.
Scotiae. 13. H 3. in turr. Land. 33 H. 6.29.6 H. 8. Die. 2.
for the better maintenace of that honor, and as appears by a book case
upon the pleading of the Patent, whereby H. 6. Created that worthy Knight, Sir
John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, which Pension is so annexed unto their
Dignity, as that by any means of alienation it cannot be severed, and
therefore in respect of such Pensions which were the third part of the profits
of the County, or other sum in lieu thereof, some have not without
probability imagined, Quod Comites nominabant capiend. fisco Regis socij and
Comites fido participes essent Lamberd. etc.

Of the single Ear. and not Palentine with Engl there have been principally
two kinds, but every one of them again subdivided into several branches, for
either they take their names of a place, or hold their Title without any place.
Those that take their names of a place, are of two kinds, for either the same
place is a County which is most usual, or else some other place and no County,
as a Town, Castle, or honor, etc. of which later sort some are more ancient,
having their original even from the Conquest, or shortly after: as the
Earldom of Richmond in Yorkshire. Clarence in Suff. Arundell in Essex, all
which had their original in the time of the Conquerours by donation of those
Castles, etc. The Earledomes of Bath temp. H. 7. and H. 8. erected in the
family where now it remains, and the Earldom of Bridgewater, whereof Sir
Giles Dawbeney was Created Earl, temp. H. 7. Earledomes which have their
titles without any place, are likewise of two kinds, either in respect of
office, as is the Earl Marshall, for it is granted in this or the like manner.
Officium Commit. Marescal' Angl' with further words, (vizt.) A.B. etc. Commit.
Marescallum Angl. creamus, ordinamus, etc. by which it appears that the very
office is an Earldom. Earl by birth.


The second sort are Earls by birth, and so are all the Sons of the Kings of
England, if they have none other dignity bestowed upon them, and therefore it
is said that John afterward King of England, in the lifetime of his Father H.
2. was called Count sans terre, before he was affied unto Alice, the Daughter
of the Earl of Morton in France.

37. H. 6.36 37. H. 6.
forasmuch as our books do acknowledge them to be determined by course of the
Civil law.

It is true, Resol.
that the manner of performance of those several kinds of Combats is very
different, and although the combat for Honor, or upon the Appeal for treason
be performed within England, according to the custom of foreign Nations in
some respects, although not altogether so, that almost every particular
Country has a particular manner, by means whereof some men seeing the
difference betwixt those and the ordinary course of observance of Combats for
land in the Writ of right, or for life in the Appeal of felony, have therefore
imagined that the proceeding in Combat before the Lord Constable or Lord
Marshall in the Appeals of treason, or in causes of Honor betwixt such
persons, Paris de Putio Johannes de delignatio Iac. de Castilio And. Assiatus.
Iul. Herret. Anthon. Mosseus, Cod. lib. 21. gladiatus lege unica. Dig lib 9. ad
legem aqualiam, leg. 7. Justus Lipsius de gladiatoribus.
as by the law may wage the same, should be according to the course of the
Civil law, yet nevertheless it must been certain that the Civil law of the
Romans, is so far off from giving any allowance thereto, as that it seems
to forbid it. For that law of the Christian Emperor Constantine is most
notably alleged to this purpose by most of the learned Doctors of the Civil
law, that have written De duello, the words of which law are these, Cruenta
spectacula in otio civili and domest. quiet non placent. And that which for
disputation sake is alleged to the contrary. Si quis in collustratione vel
pancratio vel pugiles dum inter se exercenturs alius alium occideret. Si quidem
in publico certamine alius alium occiderit cessat, equalia, quia gloriae causa,
and virtutis non injuriae gratia vitetur damnum datum, is understood rather of
Justs and such like plays de gladiatoribus, as were usual among the Romans,
all which were abrogated by this law of Constantine. I. de Lignano de Duel. a
5. Inlius Ferret. de duel. n. 20.5. Andr. Ascicus de du^ll, cap. 4. de legibus
Congobard, ^it de Monarchijs, n. ^ Iul. Ferre^ de duel^o. 17. ^et Gregor. lib.
48. cap 161. n 8.


Nevertheless among these warlike Nations that invaded the Roman Empire this
kind of single Combat has been again exercised in diverse Kingdoms,
according to the custom of every several Country. Among the Lumbards it, was
permitted in 19 cases; Their weapons being nothing else but the Shield and the
Baston. And yet of the use, or rather abuse therreof, the King Katharius
seems to complain, purposing to have abrogated the some. Quia incerti sumus
de judicio dei, and multos audivimus per pugnam sine justa causa suam causaem
perders, sed propter consuetua. gentis nostre Longobardor. legem impiam vetare
non possumus In the several Kingdoms of Cicilie in Spain, it has been
allowed in some Cases; Likewise in France by the constitution of Philip le
Beau. Anno 1306. Likewise the Emperor Frederick did permit it in certain
cases expressed in the Treatise De consuetud. feodorum in the title De Pace
tenenda and ejus violatoribus si quis hominem, si quis alium, si quis Miles,
etc. In some places of Italy the battle has been allowed upon less
occasion, De pugn. cern. cap. 4. in fine.
of the which Alciatus makes mention with some detestation.

Hereof it is evident that the order, manner, and causes of single Combat are
different in diverse Countries, and every Country: that people following their
own Customs and usages being their peculiar Law: and in this our Realm, it
was a trial much more frequented in ancient times near the Conquest then
succeeding ages, for it is evident by some ancient Records and Plea rolls yet
extant of King Steven, Wager of battle in personal causes.
H. 2. R. 1. and King John, that it was permitted to be waged in personal
occasions in cases wherein men now commonly wage their law, 37. H. 6. fol
36.37. H. 6. fol. 20. Glan. lib. 8. cap 8. Que battalle partee gage en ascun
case en vn' bre. de fac. Judgment.
and therefore in 37. H. 6. and 37. H. 6. fol. 20. Needehams opinions are much
more agreeable to the truth, where both do affirm that such waging of battle
before the Lord high Constable and Earl Marshall, is by the Laws of this
Realm, although it be determined before them, and so great a Sympathy is
between that Court and others of common Justice, as that the Judges shall take
notice of the proceedings before the Lord Constable and Earl Marshall upon
occasion offered rising in debate before them.



I the trial of matters in fact, Resolu.
the common law does not always proceed by a Jury, for although they most
properly lie in the Conusance of the Jury, 8. Ed ^^ trial 94. 9 Ed 2. Judge
me^t, 231.
yet in other matters the Law has ordained some other manner of trial, as
they gage others by Witnesses, as if a Wife bring a Writ of Dower, supposing
her Husband to be dead, and the tenant says that he is alive, whereupon they
arer at issue, this shall be tried by Witnesses only, and not by Jury. 33. H.
6.9. 35. H. 6.47
So likewise if land be recovered by default, and after brings a Writ of
discript, for that he was not lawfully summoned in the former action, upon
which they are at issue, 13. Ed. 1.36.37. 13. H 7. vill 43.47. H. 3 15. Ed 2.
Coron 385. Vill. 3^.19. H. 6.32.
this shall be tried by examination and depositions of the summoners, etc. and
not by the Jury. In a Write de Nativo habendo, whereby the Plaintiff claims
the Defendant to be his villain, the Defendant says he is a freeman, and
thereupon they are at issue, this shall not be tried by a Jury, but by
Witnesses, namely such males as be of the blood and kindred of the Defendant
and not otherwise. 48. Ed. 3. n. 34. H 2. 46. E. 3.


Some matters of trial in fact are tried by view and inspection of the Court,
8. Account. 121.
and not by a Jury as the Nonage of the Plaintiff or defendant alleging
himself to be within the age of twenty one years.

And the like trial is of a Maykem, 21. H. 7 33. 39. E. 3.32. 7. H 4.24. 38 E.
3 27. 18 E. 4 36. 2 H 4.17. 22. H 6.27.
wherras in an Appeal of Maykem the parties be at issue, whether the hurt be
a Maykem or no, sometimes the Courts of the ordinary of some other Judge or
Officer, as in matters spiritual by Certificate thereof from the ordinary,
etc. And concerning matters done beyond the Seas in the Kings Army, or
concercerning Combat for honor, arms, etc. by Certificate of the Lord
Constable or Earl Marshall, 3 H 6.6. 48 E. 3.3.
etc. whereby appears the weakness of the former Argument, but in cases
usual the law allows the trial by Witnesses without Jury; And therefore in
the Lord Constable and Earl Marshals Court matter in fact concerning Honor
and Arms (which lie not in the knowledge of the vulgart sorz) the the Common
Law grounded upon the best reason would it should be tried by witnesses or
matters of Record, as the cause shall require, and not that the same should be
tried by the conscience of the vulgar people, 22. Assess. pl. 24.
being matters whereof they have no knowledge sufficiently to discern.

Hitherto have I wandered of purpose, to show that our homebred Law is
sufficiently able, and ought to try all causes civil (other then Marine) such
as are rising with the body of the Realm (and not in foreign parts) whereby
appeared the excellency of the Common Law, which maintains the particular
jurisdiction of every particular Court. For it is the common Law (through the
sundry Writs of prohibition which it uses) which keeps every Court within
the compass of his proper sphere, and upholdeth the jurisdiction of the Court
of the Earl Marshall. By that therefore which has been said, two things may
sufficiently appear.

and primarily to determine matters of controversy concerning Chivalry,
Dignity, Honor and Arms, and some other things acknowledged to belong to the
said Court by the Laws and Statutes of our Country.

Howbeit by a consequent but not originally, some other Courts of ordinary
justice may, as the case shall require, determine likewise such like
controversies touching honor, etc. but not (ease or in sua) but rather by an
adjunct, as by this example may appear. If there be two competitiours of a
Barony, and during the time that their cause is litigious, the one of them is
impleaded at the common Law by original Writ Cap. alz and plures in a
personal action, and thereupon an exigent is awarded, whereupon insueth an
Outlary, the party outlwaed brings a Writ of error, and assigns for error,
that he having such a Castle to him descended, etc. holden per Baroniam,
whereupon his Ancestors have been Barons, anp he himself Baron, no Cap.
ought to be awarded against him, but in very special cases only, therefore
the outlary erroneous. This matter of error alleged, the Court cannot
consider without due determination of the title of the Barony, wherein if the
Court of the Earl Marshall should adjudged one way by any foreign Law in the
same question depending there, and the Court of B.R. adjudge another way by the
common law of the Realm: upon this Writ of error, there would ensue thereof a
great confusion and inconveniencie in the Commonwealth, which the law will
rather eschew then any other mischief whatsoever.

Country not disagreable to former presidents answerable to all good learning
is the undoubted common law of the Realm, which knowledgeth no other Author
but God and nature, and whereof the Iuges in all ages have ever thought it
honorable to receive all good helps from every faculty of literature in the
ending of difficulties questioned before them.

The proof therefore in this controversy to be produced shall be arguments of
reason, What manner of proofs are to be used in your Controversies.
allegations of authority, presidents of time drawn out of Records,
Histories, ouncient Monuments, Laws and customs of our own country and
furnished with such other matters of necessary knowledge as may tend to the
better explanation.

It follows somewhat to speak in general of the dignity and degree of a
Baron, The 2. matters before proposed.
whereby the Qu. in hand may be the better conceived and be reduced to a more
clear determination, which for order sake I will reduce to the consideration
of these principal heads.

1. The definition or description of a Baron. 2. The Etimologie of the name of
Baron. 3. The antiquity thereof, and the diverse use of the name. 4. The
division and consideration of the several Kinds of Barons. 5. The
determination of certain, Qu. and difficulties tending to the more
manifestation of the natures of the several Kinds of Barons. 6. And lastly a
declaration of the diverse and sundry privileges allowed by the laws of this
Realm unto the Barons and Nobility of the same wherein the vulgar, etc. has
no participation.
Which things being discovered there will be laid open (as I do conceive) a
plain way to the final conclusion and resolution of the question in hand.

The definition or description of a Baron.
IT is a rule of Law that Om nis definitio in jure periculosissima. Dig. l. 51.
de regulis juris 203. omnis defifinitio.
Rarum est enim ut non subverti possit. And therefore I do not often see any
definition or description of a Baron. Baldus thus describes a Baron, Baldus
Canotus de sectionibus.
vt sit quisquis merum mixtumque imperium in aliquo Castro opidove concessione
principes habeatur, But his seems rather particular to some then general to
all, and therefore Alciatus uses these words Nobis alia est sententia quia
sciamus et in Germania, Andr. Alciatus de duello, c. 32. Refer. Pet. Greg. in
reg jur. H. 6. capire 10.
et Gallia solum Barons dici quibus super opidorum jurisdictionem haec
dignitas specialiter concessa est. Some think they are those which are meant
under the name of Valvasores majores and Capitanei. In the second book De
feodis de titulo Quis dicatur dux, etc. And some others would have the dignity
of a Baron to contain every noble dignity under the Earl. Grand de supplenda
neglig. plator. in Sexto.
Some common Lawyers there are which extol the dignity of a Baron before that
of the Earls, by reason of a subcription to a decretall epistle directed
Baronibus and Commit. regin Portugal. They not considering that in another place
in the same decretals it is more orderly placed, Nullus Imperator seu Rex
Romanus aut alius Imper. aut Rex, princeps Marchio, Dux, Comes aut Baro, etc.
Other some do equal the Baron with the Earl, Baro. de Tan. Berg. refer. Hyard.
in Leuxiris.
affirming that Comiti Baro. prorsus equiparatur, etc. nullaque differentia
nisi quod de Comitat. non sit investtitus, etc. haud quicquam Comite censeatur
inferior. And thus every one of them have written conformably to the customs
of his particular Country.

But in this our Commonwealth of England (me thinks) a Baron may be described
in a generality answerable to every of the special kinds thereof in this
manner. A Baron described.
A Barony is a dignity of Nobility and honor next under the Viscount, and
above the Banaret and Vavasour with the title of Lordship holding the same
place with us as did the Patritij or Senator under the Romans. For the better
understanding whereof consider that Nobilitas generally signifies matter of
note, but specially it is applied to express the reward of virtue in
honorable measures. Sc. generis claritatem of which there are two kinds
Nobilitas major (viz) a Lord at least, and Nobilitas minor: but our english
tongue expresses the higher kind. A Barony therefore is a dignity of nobility
and honor. A dignity of Nobility to exclude all other kinds of dignities, of
honor, to exclude the lesser kind of Nobility wherein Gentlemen are
comprehended. Dignities of Nobilities are with us of two kinds has but a
Barony only, it is not requisite to make him Baron, which in all other
Dignities being parcel of the name is otherwise most curiously observed, 8. H.
6.10. 32. H. 6.30 Littlet.
otherwise the Writ shall abate; Thus much of the Dignity of a Baron, now of
the Etimologie of the Name.

2. The Etimologie of the name Baron.
MAny Writs have labored to yield the Etimologie of the name wherein following
their own fancy there has been bred much variety of opinion, some men
inducing the Greek, importing Gravity, others have sought a Latin Author to
father it upon, Lib. 5.
alleging Cicero ad Atticum, where they find printed in some Copies these
words, Apud Patronem and reliquos Barons te in maximam gra^ positum, where in
other Copies in lieu thereof is read Barrones, Alciat. lib. 5. cap. 16. and 32.
and so by others the same is acknowledged to be nothing but a corruption
whereof Alciatus speaks, etc. And therefore Rasius calls the word Vanasors
and vassallos, among the which they intended Barons to be included, Sim.
Shaldus in lexico juris, Ptol. lib 2. cap. 6. Io Brekins de consuetud. gallorum.
Vocabula illota. Others would derive the word from a certain warlike
ancient people inhabiting some parts of Spain, called Barons; or as Strabo
and Ptolomy do name them Barons, whose habitation was situate upon the
West Side of the River Euberus, who guarded the persons of the Roman
Governors, as the Switzers are now used for the guarde of certain Princes.
Others derive the name from the manner of building of those houses that were
given to Barons to be holden and were the head of their Baronies, Petr. Gregor.
Syntax. lib. 6. c. 10.
Quod erant ejusmodi domus undique occlusae and substructis turribus and
barris. Some think it to be an Hebrew name signifying mercenary soldiers,
some would fetch it merely from the Latin, Barons tanquam pures homines; But
the most probable derivation is drawn from the Northern peoples language,
which invaded the Roman Empire, among whom a Baron signified a man of
strength, as by the laws of the Lombards, and as by the words yet remaining
without much variation in every one of the said three tongues, The word Varon
and Baron, Tit. 8 in all. lib. tit. 9. Tit. 60.54.
is used in stead of the Latin word Vir, and with this agrees parcel of the
ancient law of Canutus, Quod est summa census diversarum dignitatum si minoris
Vironis, id est, Baronis duae librae: si majoris 4. etc. And therefore in the
Lombards laws, compiled by K. Rotharis the word Baron is thus used si quis ex
Baronibus nostris ad nos voluerit venire, securus veniat and illaesus ad suos
revertatur. And in those old laws called, Repnaria si quis hominem regni
tabularium tam Barone qui foeminam abstulerit, etc. Where the word does
signify the same that the word Vir does in Latin; Vir leges salvos: Bracton.
lib. 2. c. 8.
Therefore Bracton not unfitly uses it sunt and alij potentes sub rege qui
dicuntur Barons (hoc est) robur belli.

The Antiquity of the dignity of Barons and the sundry uses of the name.
IT seems that the dignity was more ancient then the name for in the
ancient constitution feudall of the Lombards, Lib 2 feud. titulo. 10. lib
feud. 1.16. lib. 1. feud 1.7.
there is not mention made of the name of Baron, howbeit the learned
Interpreters understand that dignity to be comprehended under Valvasores
minores, or Valvasini, or Valvasores minimi, being another kind inferior to
Valv. majores, which were also called Capitanei (Barons.) The like Dignity
before the Conquest, Lamb. de regimine Saxonum, fol. 71.
of whom is mention made in the Laws of K. Ethelston, and of this there were
two kinds Thani Regis and Thani aliorum, Lamb. de regimine Saxon. fol. 71.
and therefore in the Records of Doomesday in the deseription of Hertfordsh.
and therein of the Manor of Brackins it is thus written; Record of Doomes-day
Hertfordshire.
Hoc maner' tenuel 2. taggas horum unus homo regis Edw. and alter Asgari
steleri. This word Thani was diversely used by the ancient Saxons; Sometimes
they signified thereby a Noble man, as by the Baron, sometimes a freeman,
sometimes a Magistrate, sometimes a servant attendant upon a man's person, which
they signified by the subscription of the ancient regal Charters by the word
Minister, as Ego minister A. B. praesens auscultavi or interfui, or in inspexi
of the Kings Thanis. I find thus much written in the same Records, Thanis vel
Miles Regius dominicus moriens pro relevamento dimittebat regi omnia arma sua,
and equum unum cum Cella, and alterum sine cella. quod si essent ei canes vel
accipitres presentabunt regi ut si vellet acciperet. That the like was done
also by the Thanis of others, as of Noblemen, Earls, and others, appears by
an ancient Saxon Testament of one Arfrie an Earl, which is brought to light by
Master Lambert, in the description of Mephem in the preambulation of Kent in
those times. The Thanis were for the most part deemed Noble, and held one and
the same dignity, as the Barons do. The word Thanis being usual in that
sense, not only among our English Saxons, but also with the Scots and Danes,
as concerning the Scots Hector Poet writes, Malcolmum regem titulo Comitatum
honestasse, And as touching the Dane; the Thanis among them are yet in use, as
liberi Domini, such as are the Barons, by this it may appear, that the name of
Baron was not usual amongst the ancient English Saxons, for that in the
subscription unto the graunts of Kings, whereunto with the sign of the X were
subscribed the names of all noble personages, as well temporal as spiritual,
the said word Baron cannot be heard of, but in an ancient Charter made in the
name of Zolpher, sometimes King of Mercia, unto the Church of Peter-borough,
having these words; Praecipimus quod praedict. Monast. and dona sua sint
habenda, etc. ab omni diminutione and exact. comitum, etc. Likewise to this
effect have I seen in an old book belonging to the Monast. of West. Edg. Rex
concilio habito infra basilicum Westminster. presidente eo cum filio suo Edw. and
Dunstano Archiepiscopo, and universis Episc and Baronibus suis dicta^ Ecclesia^
de Westminster. renovavit. Nevertheless, the name of Baron was not much used within
the Realm until the Norman Conquest, after which it grew very frequent. In
which time the notable cases, etc. of the Realm were debated before him and
his Barons, and by them adjudged as by diverse Monuments extant may appear,
Doomes-day in Canterbury.
whereof one is in this manner in the Record of Doomes-day, 21. E. 3.6.
Quidam Preposit Brumanus eo tempore R. Edw. coepit consuet. de extraneis
mercatoribus, etc. Also 21. Ed. 1. does set forth by exemplification an act of
Parliament made in a cause between the Abbot of Saint Edmondsbury, and Arfast
sometimes Bishop of Thetford, which See was afterward translated by Herbert to
Norwich concerning the Visitation of the said Monastery, which Parliament was
holden by the said King, the Archbishop of Cant, Barkshire.
and all other the Bishops, Earls, etc. appears. Moreover in the Record of
Doomes-day, in the description of Donesh is declared, that at the time of the
said Record there were at Warham of certain Barons lands twenty houses
standing and seventy destroyed, by which appears that both name and dignity
of a Baron was sufficiently known in the time of the Conquest, and as touching
the use of the name the word Baron seems to be frequented among the Norman
Conqu. of this Realm. In lieu of the word Thane among the Saxons, for as they
in a large signification did sometime use the same to the sense, etc. of a free
man borne of free parentage, etc. and so did the Normans use it, and therefore
called their free Citizens of their best esteemed Cities and Burgesses, etc. by
the name of Barons, Bracton 272.
and therefore the Citizens of London were called Barons Land. in diverse
ancient Monuments, of whom also Bracton writes, Per Barons Land. etc. So
also there are diverse Charters wherein mention is made of such like Barons as
the Barons of Warw. in Doomsday, and in our time the Burgesses of the five
ports are called Barons, and diverse of the Nobility of Barons as well
spiritual as temporal, did in ancient time set in the Exchequer in
judicature. Moreover as our Saxons had two kinds of Thanis; Fleta, lib. 2. cap.
24. the judges of that Court have been from ancient times, and yet are called
Barons of the Exchequer.
the like has been observed of Barons among the Norman Conqu. for the Kings of
this Realm have had their immediate Barons being the Peers of this Realm: so
certain other Noblemen, especially the Earl Palatine and Earl Marchers,
whose Counties have confined upon the coasts of the enemy, have had under them
a kind of Barons, as namely under the County Palatine of Chester were these
Barons, the Barons of Hatton, Monbatte, Mulbanke, Shipbrooke, Malpas, Masy,
Kingderston, Stockport, etc. The Earle-dome of Pembrooke, being first erected
by Arnulphus Mountgomery, 7 H. 6.35. 17. E. 3. inter placita. 18. E. 2. Assis.
30. Camois.
that conquered some part of the County, and therefore the Earl thereof being
an Earl Marcher had also under him his Barons, for it appears by the
Parliament rolls 18. E. 3. that the Baronies of Haverford, Cammois, Rochie,
and Castlegoton, were anciently belonging to the Jurisdiction of the Earldom
of Pembrooke, and had their Chancery and Scals as other Barons upon the Marches
used to have. Hereof also it followed not only in this Realm, but also
elsewhere, that Earls had under them such as they called their Barons, who
held under them lands in Knights service and in the defense of their Lords, and
therefore in the Register of the Monast, of Saint James of Northampton, it is
found that Simon Ea. of Northampton, did get and confirm unto the said Abbey,
Omnia dona, etc. quae Barons sui, etc. infra burgum and extra North. illis
dederunt. Many old Charters also are extant, whereby it appears which now time
has worn out of memory, and yet the knowledge thereof serves to good
purpose, namely to reconcile the different opinion of some men concerning the
law, 20. E. 3. Ass. 122.
for 20. E. 3. Thorpe holds opinion that none can hold per Baron. but of the
King only, and that no subject can aliene his land to another to hold of such
alienor per Baroniam, which some Sergeants denied, to the which opinion of
Sergeants Wilby and other judges agreed, 2. E. 3. Ass. 124. Prerog. cap 7.
Adding further, that before the statute of Prerog. Regis, those that held per
Baroniam might aliene some parcel thereof to be holden by other, since which
is evident (says he) in this that the ancient Baronies do consist most of
services which began by occasion of such suites as aforesaid. The assertion of
both the said Judges is good law, for none can hold per Baroniam but of the K.
Qu. etc. Monarchs of the Realm, And again it is true that in some kind of
feme a man may hold per Baron. of a subject but diversis respect. ergo,
distinguendu^ est. None can hold per Baroniam as a Peer of the Realm, and in
course of perfect Nobility but of the Crown only. For of this Bar. Bracton
understands when he says it is the strength of the Realm, and these Barons
according to the law Senderl, are these, Capitanei or Valvasor. Majores there
spoken of: for Qui a principe vel ab aliqua potestate de plebe aliquare per
feudum and vestitus, Lib 2. feudall. tit. 10
is Capitane us appellatur qui proprie Valvasor. majores olim appellabantur,
and of the question arising concerning these Baronies, the Monarch of the
Realm or the Judges, for that those Barons are immediate a Rege in feudali, as
for others they be Barons ex similitudine, and therefore those which in the said
laws feudall are called Valvasores and Valvasini, for the words are these,
Bract. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Qui vero a Capitaneis antiquitus beneficium tenent Valvasores sunt, Qui autem
a valvasorib s feudum quod a Capitaneis habebatur, similiter acceperint
Valvasini, id est, valicas minores appellantur, The use of this division within
England, has been in no other manner then this, The Valv. majores may be
understood to be our Barons and Peers for in such manner the Interpreters of
the law feudall have expressed the same. The second sort is the Valv. proprie
of which degree Bracton also speaks: sunt and alij qui dicuntur Valvasores
magni dignitat. Valvasor melus dici poterit quia vas sortitum ad valetudinem.
Howbeit the Civilians do give another Etimologie in this manner, Valvasor.
quasi ad valvas stantes, Shand Lexico in verb va^ve Pet. Greg. lib. 6. ca.
11.13 E. 3. Chal 115.
id est, tanquam ad valvas tentorij dum sunt in bello excubantes ad quamlibet
injuriam propulsandam; And of these valvasi, which are properly the Valvasi
indeed, mention is made 13. E. 3. For they may be impannelled in a Jury among
the Kinghts where a Baron is party. The third sort called Valvasini inspecial
name we have not in use, Nevertheless they are in nature the same that we call
Lords and proprietors of Manors, who also in respect of their Tenants were
oftentimes in ancient remembrances called Barons, but (abusive) and their
Courts, Court-Barons, for of these Glanvill speaks, Glan lib. 8. cap. 10. fol
64.
Praeterea Record. habeant minores Cur. de his quae in eis facta sunt, etc.
hence it is that these diverse degrees have been observed in foreign
Countries; By the French Constitution it is ordained, that Si quis aut Vicecom.
aut Baro voluerit fieri comes, necessariu^ ducu^t eum habere in sua ditione. 4.
Baronias and tres castella. quaru^ quaelibet habeat saltem 10. Pet. Ger. in
lib. 6. cap 9. Ex edito regis gall. 17. Angl. 1579
Nobiles sibi subdit os qui eum comitari possunt. Again, in tit. commit. nullus
transeat nisi habeat 2. Baroneas, and 3. Castellaneas aut saltem, i. Baroniam
and 6. Castellaneas vnitas and nomine feudi Possessat and investitas a rege sub
uno titulo. Jac Mercant. Fland. 16. cap 1 de Alosto.
In Flanders which was an Earldome of regal constitution there was in ancient
time an Earldom the Ea. whereof was entitled Comes Alestanus the Earl of
Elston, who although his jurisdiction was particular to himself from the
Emperor, yet had he under him five Barons, the memory of which does remain;
It has been heretofore a common received opinion, that every Earldome in
times pasT had under it ten Barons, and every Baron seven Knights fees holden
of him, and some are of opinion, that those which had fourteen Knights fees
were usually Barons, but of that more hereafter.

It rests now for the more explanation of the use of the name Baron, that we
call to remembrance that which is before spoken, that the Custom of our
Country is, that if a Baron be created an Earl; the eldest son of the said
Earl, in the life of his l'ather, takes upon him the title of the Barony,
although he want the privileges belonging to a Baron. Lastly, that is not to
be omitted, that by the general name of the Barons of the Realm, we do
understand the whole body of the Nobility, and hence it is that the civil
war concerning the liberties granted in the great Charter, both in the time
of King John, and H. 3. prosecuted by the whole Nobility some few excepted,
are called the Barons wars; Thus much of their antiquity, etc.

Having before showed the several uses of the word Baron, The true use of the
name.
we are now to adhere only to the proper signification thereof, whereby there
is denoted to us an Honorable personage next under the Vicount, and therefore
we are to set forth a division.

Barons honorable are of three kinds, 3. kinds of Barons.
by Tenure, by Writ, by Creation or Patent, as for the Baron by prescription
they are all one with the Barons by tenure, or those who anciently, and time
out of mind have been called to the Parliament by Writ, and otherwise none.

Barons by tenure are those which do any honor, Barons by tenure 2. kinds.
etc. as the head of their Barony, per Baroniam, which is called Graund
Serjeanty; These are of two sorts spiritual and temporal.

The Barons spiritual per Tenure, Spiritual.
are and were those Ecclesiastical persons, which held the principal part of
their spiritual living per Baron. and such were also of two kinds; first, the
Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, who do hold the principal part of
their temporalties per Baron. Secondly, such Abbots, Priors, etc. which were
extinguished by coming to the Crown by the Statute.

Barons temporal are such as hold the chiefest part of their possessions,
Temporal.
as some honor, Castle, etc. per Bar. of the Crown, all which honorable
Barons of holding their Baronies of the Crown were in ancient time in respect
of these their tenures called by the Monarch of this Realm to assist him in
counsel in Parliament.

But first it shall be requisite to prove every part of the division, namely of
Barons by tenure, and first of spiritual.

It is evident, that the Archbishops and Bishops of the Realm in the Saxon
days, as well during the time that it was divided into diverse kingdoms, as
also after the uniting of them into one Monarchy were called to the Parliament,
not so much in respect of their tenure (for it was then by Frankalmoigne) but
especially for that laws are then most commendable, when they are grounded
upon the law of God, Hist. Inguelf. Ab. de Croland. in subscrip. Chartre
Bertofli regis, fol. 490 ibid. 492.
and therefore our wise Ancestors called to their general Counsel or
Wittenaymot or Court of wise men, as they called it those principal persons of
their Clergy, which by their profession, etc. might advise them to frame their
lives answerably, etc.

Nevertheless, shortly after the Norman Conquest, the Conqueror altered
tenures, being before Frankalm. not without some complaint and grief of the
Clergy of which Matthew. Paris thus writes An. 1070. which prove that Bishops
then held per Baroniam. Matt. Paris, fol 6.


In the Constitution held at Clarindon tempore, H. 2. Anno 1164. which
constitutions certain recapitulations of the prerogative of the King and his
people then sought to be infringed by the Pope and his Clergy, Called the
Assis. of Clarindo^ in old Writers.
it is thus expressed in the 11. Article, Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, and
universa persona regni qui de rege ten' in Cap. habeat possession. suas de Rege
sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant Justiciarijs, etc. Regis and faciant omnes
consuet. regias, and sicut caeteri Barons debeant interesse judicijs curiae
Regis cum Baronibus quousque. perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel mortem.
10. E. 4.6. De Rot. Parliament. 11. R. 2. an no 9 in turr. London.
Here we see the presence of the Bishops in the Parliament in respect of their
Baronies, Quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem, etc. For ever unto our times
when question is had of any attainder of any Peer in Parliament, they depart
the higher house, and make their procurators, for by the Decrees of the Church,
they may not be judges of life and death.

Of the Baronies of Bishops, Lib 9. fol. 66.
and of their homage for the same; Thus writes Glanvill, who tempore R. 1. was
chief Justice, Episcopi vero consecrati homagium facere non solent Domino regi
etiam de Baronijs suis sed fidelitat. cum jurament. interposit. ipsi praestare
solent; Elect. vero in episcopos ante consecraetione^ suam homag. sua facere
solent. Of these also Bracton says, St autem terra data fuit Ecclesiat.
Cathedral. vel conventurae non jacebit assisa utrum quamvis in habitam, etc.
Eleemosinam. Of the which he recites a Judgment, P. 15. H. 3. which was
given in a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in Eire between the Prior of Jews
and Gilb. de Aquila, Bract lib 4. cap. 2.287.
and he yields the reason thereof.

Again, Bract. lib. 5. cap. 23. fol. 4.27.
he in another place, searching out the reason why the certificate
Excommunicat. spiritualium, any spiritual Judge other then the Archbishops and
Bishops of this Realm is not by any Law to be admitted, he yields this
reason so, that none of those other spiritual Judges are compellable to admit
the action as are the the Archbishops and Bishops, Quia rex in episcopis
coercionem habet propter Baroniam, Meaning thereby that upon their contempt the
King does seize their temporaltie. Likewise, about 46. E. 3. the Bishop of
Chichester Leased for life a Manor parcel of his B^rony with license of the
King, 46. E. 3. forf. 8.
this alienation was a forfeiture because parcel of his Barony.

Many more authorities might be cited out of Records and books of Law, 13. E.
3. Chal. 115. enquest. 43.29. E. 3.42.
in regard whereof they have in ancient time been named Peers of the Realm,
and have enjoyed other the privileges that Peers do the trial by Peers
(only in matters of Treason or misprision, etc. excepted) whereof Stamford
gives the reason, Non ratione Nobilitatis sed ratione officij. 39. E. 3.30.
31. E. 3.94. 21. E. 4 77 27. H. 8. 27. H. 8. ^nqust. 99. 2. Mar. 46. 35. H. 8.
Trial. 142. Stan. 1536. 1. H. 4.13. H 8 11.
Another reason why Bishops are not tried by Peers as other Peers, because
they cannot pass upon the life of any man, being thereunto forbidden by etc.
and therefore the Peers cannot try them, for that this kind of trial should
be mutual if the offense give occasion, insomuch that their censure is upon
their honor without oath, etc.

The like of those Abbotts, 21. E. 3.88 36. H. 6. 7. H. 6.108. 7. H. 4.2. 26.
H. 8.7. 21. E. 3. n. 50.
Priors, etc. which held some part of their land per Bar. who were also called
Peers of the Realm, therefore no Capias against them, and therefore some of
them that held not per Bar. being summoned to the Parliament upon their
petition were discharged, whereof there are some presidents extant.

The Abbot of Saint James near North^mpton, in 12. E. 3. was summoned to the
Parliament, which was the same year holden at York, who because neither he
nor his predecessors were summoned, and because he held only by Frankalm. he
by his Procurator exhibited his petition to the Lord Chancellor a monument
whereof I have seen in this manner, Abbas Sancti Iacobi North, Irrotul. de novo
in Cancel. dom. Regis inter citand. ad Parliamentum and non tent per Baroniam
nec de rege in Capite sed tantum in pura, Out of the Register book of St.
James of Northampton.
etc. Eleemosina and nec ipe nec predecessor. sui unquam in Cancellaria
irrotulat. fuerunt nec ad Parliamentum cita. huc vsque unde idem Abbas petit
remedium. Ad cujus billam execut. Dominus Cancellar. cum suo Consilio de
Cancel. ordinavit quod nomen praedict. Abbatis a registro Cancel. deleretur
and ita pluribus circumspect. idem Abbas est absolutus; facta est haec
excusatio per visum Domini Iohannis de Oath. Episcopi Elien. Cancil. domini
regis, domini Willielmi Dirmins tunc cust. rotulorum and al'.

A like Petition was made by the Abbot of Leicester unto K.E. 3. and thereupon
obtained a Writ of discharge in this form; Ex. rot. Patent. 26. E. 3. pars. 1.
M. 22. in turri London.
Edwardus Dei gratia etc. Salut. supplicavit nobis dilect. nobis in Christo
Abbas de Leycest. in Abbatia sua predict per Robert. Fits, Roberti de Mellent
dudum Com. Leyc. fundata fuisset in pura^ eleemosinam, and advocat.sibi
preornat. ad manus Domini Hen. quondam regiae Angl. proavi nostri per
forisfacturam, Simon. de Monte forte tunc Com. Leyc. and proin ejusdem darent,
idemque Abbas alijque terras sive tenta de nobis per Baron. sive ali^ modo non
tenuit per quod ad Parliamentum venire^ teneatur, nec aliquis predecessorum
suorum ante 49 annum Domini proavi nostri part. forisfacturam dicti Simonis quo
anno omnes Abbat. and Priores regni nostri ad parliamentum, proavi nostri tunc
tenturum and voluntary summoniti fuerunt summonit. extiterit velimus ipsum
Abbat. de hujusmodi adventu ad Parliamentum facere exonerari, and quia visis
chartis and confirm. de terris, and tentis eidem Abbati dat. and concessis in
Rot. Cancel. nostri irrotulat. compertum est quod dicta Abbat. praedict.
Roberti Fitzs Robert Com. Leyc. fundat. erat in pura elemosina, and non
invenimus quod praedict. Abbaes aliquas terras de nobis tenuit. per Baron. etc.
nec quod predecessor. sui adalia parliamenta progenitorum nostrorum ante
praedict. 49. Annum dicti proavi nostri, aut post modum continue, sed vicibus
interpellatis summonit. fuerint nolentes ipsum Abbat. indebite sic vexari
Concessimus pro nobis, etc. quod idem Abbas. etc. de veniendo ad Parliamentum,
etc. quieti sint; Ita semper quod dictus Abbas, etc. in procurator. ad
hujusmodi parliamenta per clerum mittenda consentient, and ut moris est
expensis contribuant corundam In cujus rei Test. etc. 15. Febr. Anno 26. and
Franc. 13. per Petition. parliament. Whereby it appears, that Barons by
tenure are summoned in respect of their tenure.

As touching the temporal Barons by tenure mention is often made of them in
the yeare-booke Records, Glan. 9. c. 6
etc. as Glanv. lib. 9. cap. 6. Baroniam retinet rex donec haeres, etc. Which
relief for Baronies was at that time incertaine, and rentable at the Kings
pleasure, but such incertainty of relief was brought to certainty by the
Statute of Magn. Chart. si quis, Mag Char. cap. 2.
etc. de Comitat. integro per C.1. haeres Baron. per C. mercas, haeres Mil. per
feodo mil. C. solidos. Thus much of the temporal Baron and his relief.

In 3. H. 3. there was agnized an ancient perogative belonging to the Crown
and usual from the Conqu. in these words and so reported by Fitz-Herb. Quod si
aliquis Baron. obijsset, and non h^beret haere^em nisi filias and primogenit.
filia marit. sit in vita patris Rex daret post natum filium quod remaneret in
haereditat patris, Bract lib. 5 Tract. 2. cap. 2. fol. 337.
etc. Bracton writing of essoignes delivers this learning, that if any Baron
that holds per Baroniam has his absence excused by essoigne, he which
casts such essoigne ought to find surety that it is true, but in the case of
common persons that shall rest upon credit, and the integrity of the
Essoigner; His words be these, Ideo ne essoniator, etc. by which appears that
there are temporal Bar. by tenure.

Now let us descend to the other authorities Sir Ralph Everdon Knight, 48. E.
3.30.
being one of the Barons of the Realm tempore E 3. was impannelled in a Jury
to their privilege, and therefore for his exemption procured a Writ directed
to the Judges of C.B. before whom the Jury was impannelled, by which they were
commanded to discharge the said Sir Ralph, Reg. 179.14. and. 15. H 8.35. H.
6.46.
whereupon Belke chief Justice of C.B. examined him whether he held per
Baroniam or no, etc. and whether he had come to the Parliament as a Baron, to
which he answered that he held by a certain part of a Baron. and that his
Auncest. had likewise so done upon good advice, by means whereof he was
discharged, in which case is proved that there are ^arons by tenure, and that
they in regard of their tenure ought to be summoned.

In the Parliament 23. H. 6. there was a controversy between W. E. of
Arundell, Inter. rot. Parliamen, 27. H. 6.
and Tho. E. of Devon. for their places in the Kings presence as well in the
Parliament, etc. whereupon there were diverse writings, etc. declared between
them in the said Parliament; the consideration whereof was committed by the
King to certain Lords of the Parliament to decide the said title with all
incidents thereto belonging. Nevertheless it being not accordingly performed
and the said controversy remaining undecided in the next Parliament 27. H. 8.
the said K. was pleased that the Judges should examine the said matter, who
having considered the allegations of either part, and also an act of Parliament
made 11. H. 6. concerning the same in the behalf of John E. of Arundell
decided; his Ancestors they certified, first, that the controversy was never
matter of Parliament 2. that the said act whereby it was ordained that the said
John should have his seat in the Kings presence a^ well in Parliament as
els-where as E. of Arundell there was no mention made of his heirs but of
himself. 3. That to the castle, etc. of Arundell the name, etc. of Earl then
was, and time out of mind had been united and annexed, and by reason thereof
the said E. did hold that name and not by creation, all which being so
certified it was enacted that the said W. E. of Arundell should retain his
prehemience by reason of the eastle as worshipfully (for so are the words of
the act) as any of the E. of Ar. above the E. of Devon, etc. saving always to
the said E. of Devon his lawful suite to the King in his high court of
Parliament for his right, by which President we do plainly see that the
dignity of that Earled. was annexa feode, and an Earldome by tenure, in regard
of which the Earls thereof have had their place in Parliament, from whence may
be deduced that the like may be observed of Baronies by tenure as of this E. by
tenure I would wish those that deny Baronies by tenure to consider the statute
of West. 2. cap 42. where the Fees of the E. Marshall and Lord Chamberlain are
expressed, which are to be taken by them upon the homage of every Baron by
tenure where he holds by a whole Barony or by less, And lest any should
think that this ordained by the Statute should concern any other Marshall or
Chamberlain, Fleta will put him out of doubt, Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 5.
which applies them to this purpose.

But ere we proceed further there a rises a Quere.

If a Baron by tenure grant the hononr holden by Barony. whether shall such
grantee have the said dignity or otherwise?
Argument ex part neg. 10.2. ca 1. Qu. ^mp. terrar.
but that was per Baroniam: the refore. And if such Grant be made to persons
ignoble, they then should be Noble which were absured. Ratio 1.


per Baron. are now in the tenures of mean Gentlemen, who may not dare to
challenge it.

etc. and yet retain their dignity, and have been, and are summoned to
Parliament notwithstanding. Distinctions considerable.


For the better anser, it shall be convenient to exhibit certain necessary
distinctions and thence to draw infallible distinctions, and then Authorities
and Presidents.

First therefore if a Baron by tenure do aliene the same, Distinct 1
either he does it without license, or else with license obtained. If without
License, The conclusion.
then the Conclusion is certain that it is forfeited, and to be seized to the
King, and the Dignity extinguished in the Crown from whence it was derived.

The reason is out of Bracton, because Baronies are the strength of the
Kingdom, and if they should be aliened without consent of the Soveriagne, base
persons innobled without desert, etc. for where the thing so aliened is an
Honor, it differs much from the ordinary tenure in Cap. whereof if the
Tenant make alienation without license, 50. E. 3 c. 10.
he is only to make a fine by the Statute. For authority. Glanvill says,
Mag. Char. cap 31. Glanv. l. 7. cap. 1.
Notandum est quod nec Episcopus, nec Abbas quia little Baroniae sunt de
Eleemosina Regis non possunt de Dominicis suis aliquam partem dare ad
remanenciam sine assensu, and consensu Domini Regis.

In 20. E. 3. certain land being parcel of the Baronie of Brenbur was aliened
by W.de Bruce, 20. Ass. 1 8 20 E. 3. Ass. 122. and 224.
the Baron thereof without license, and in the argument of a Case concerning
the same, Green said that parcel of a Baronie, etc. held in chief, cannot
be aliened without his License. Again, 46. E. 3. it was found by Office, that
W. Bishop of Chester had Leased for life to Io. Peston a Manor, 46. E. 3.
Forf. 18.
parcel of the Baronie without License, and resolved that it was forfeited,
but by mediation of the said Counsel, the Bishop submitted and made a fine,
and several Scire faec. issued against the perceptors of the profits to answer
the King. Distinct. 2.
Thus much of Alienation without License.

But of the other part, if a Baron by tenure does aliene by License we must
distinguish, for it is either made for the continuance of his Barony, etc. or
else for some other consideration.

That if any such Alienation be made for the continuance of the Barony in the
name, then have the issue male with the Castle, etc. retained the Dignity of a
Baron, and hereof have the Heirs general, or next Heirs females been
excluded; And for proof of this assertion many ancient Presidents may be
produced, seeing they have happened almost in every age for three hundred
years space, of which some certain do ensue.

Barony of Grooby in Com. Leycest.
Willielm.dr Ferariis Co. Derbie obiit anno 38.H.3
Margaret Com. Derb and Domina deGrooby


Robeitus de Ferariis Comes de Derbie.
VVil De Ferariis Dom De Grooby ex Do. Mris


Johannes de Ferariis Dominus de Cartley
Will. de Ferariis Do. Minus de Grooby


family tree Barons of Grooby

It appears by an Office found after the death of William, de Ferarijs, Lord
of Grooby 23, H. 6. that Margaret Lady of Grooby, gave to William Ferarijs her
second son in tail the Manor of Grooby, by virtue whereof he and his
Heirs we Barons of Grooby.

The Barony of Kelp^cke Com Hereof. Temp. E. 1.

VVillelm. Baro de Kelpecke.


Rob. VVallero Baro de Kel. obit si neprod^^. F.1
Alicca Nuptal Laynec.


VVilielmus VValleion.


A^anus ^ Laynet Baro de Kelp. ra io. Don.


Robertus VValleron Prox Hae-res.


family tree

Robertus Walleron, Baron of Kelpecke died, 1. E. 1. without heir of his body,
and Robert Son of William, Brother of the said Robert, was his next Heir,
yet he gave to Allen Playnell the Lordship of Kelpecke, etc. in tail, by force
whereof he was Baron, and summoned to the Parliament, and he died Anno 27. E. 1.

The Barony of Plankenoy in Com. Lincoln. Temp. E. 2.

John Dreyn. court.


tam: D^e^n court Ba^on of Bla^knoy obiit, ^o E.2
VV.Dreyne. ba. of Blank. ^ntayled o-biit 38.E.3.
John Dreyn-court.


Edmond Dreyncourt.
VVillielm. Dreyncourt obiit ante ^atrem.


Isabell his next heir.
William Dreyncourt baron. of Blanknoy


family tree

The King to all, Pat. Anno 10 E. 2. part 2. number. 13.
etc. greeting; Know ye, that whereas lately our welbeloved Edm. Dreincourt
considered, that both his surname, and also his Arms after his death in the
person of Isabel Dreincourt should be quite blotted out of memory, most
earnestly desired, etc. To whose request in consideration of service to our
Father and our self by our Letters Patents do grant so much as in us lies to
the said Edm. to dispose to whom he pleases.

By virtue whereof he gave them to William son of John Dreincourt in tail,
Esch. 22. E. 3. S^m. Parl. 7. E. 3. Claus. dors. part. 25.
the said Edm. died ult. Ed 2. and tempore E. 3. William was summoned to the
Parliament by virtue of that gift till his death, which was Anno 38. E. 3.

The Barony of Holgate Com. Salop.
Philip Barnell baron of Holgate


Edward Barnell baron of Holgate
John Lovell ^he first Husband.
Maude Barnell heir to her brother
John Hand-lowe the scond hus-band


John Lord Lovell.
Nicholas Handlowe Baron of Holgate


John Lord Lovell.
Hugh Handlowe alias Bunnell Baron of Holgate


Iocosa Vxor Tho^nae Ed-dington
Margery uxor Ed-wardi Hungerford.
Paterina ux-or Iohannis Talbot.


family tree

It appears by diverse officers in the time of Ed. the third, that John
Handlowe in the right of Maude his wife, was seized of the Manor of Holgate.
Acton Burnell, etc. for life, the remainder to Nic. Handlowe (alias) Burnell,
son of the said Maude and John by a fine in Court, And that John Lovell was
next heir of the said Maude and her first borne son by her first Husband.
And afterward the said Nicholas was summoned among the Barons of this Realm
to the Parliament by reason of the fine aforesaid. And not the said John Lovell
that was next heir.

Thomas de Beauchampe, Esch Anno 43. Ed 3.
the elder Earl of Warwick, by a fine levied 18. E. 3. intayled the Manor
and Castle of Warw. with diverse other possessions to himself for term of his
life, the Remainder thereof to Guy his eldest son, and to the heirs males of
his body issuing, and for want of such Heirs, the Remainder to come to Tho.
Beauchampe brother to the aforesaid Guy, and to the Heirs males of his body,
etc. And after the said Guy died without Heirs males of his body, leaving two
Daughters and Heirs living. Afterward the said Earl died, and the said Thom.
the son entered into the Castle, and Manor aforesaid with other the
premises and was E. of Warw. by reason of the intaile aforesaid,
notwithstanding that Katherine Daughter of Guy next heir to the said Tho. the
elder was living thirty years after his death.

Richard Earl of Arundell by a fine levied 21. Ed. 3. intayled the Castle
town, Esch. Anno 9. H. 5.
etc. of Arund. to him and the Heirs males of the body of Elinor his wife, by
virtue whereof John Matravers was E. of Arun. after the death of Tho. the
Earl, who died without issue male although his Sisters possessed diverse lands
whereof he died seized in fee.

Thomas the elder, Lord Barkeley, Esch. 5. H. 5.
was seized in Fee of the Castle of Barkely and manor, etc. And by a fine
levied in 23. E. 3. he intayled the said Castle, etc. to himself for life, the
Remainder to Maurice his son in tail with other Remainder as before, which
said Maurice had issue Tho. Lord Barkley and Sir John, which John, died in the
life of his Brother, leaving James his Son and heir living, after the said
Tho. died 5. H. 5. leaving Elizabeth his daughter and heir married to Richard
Earl of Warw. after whose death James the Nephew entered into the said Castle,
Some Parliament. 9 H. 5. Esch. 5. H. 6.
etc. and was summoned to the Parliament as Lord Barkley.

Tho. Lo. de la Ware died seized in tail by reason of a fine levied in the
time of his Ancestors, of the Baronie de la Ware with diverse other lands in
other Counties and died 5. H. 6 without issue; And Reginald West, Knight of the
half blood was next Heir, Some. Parliament. An 7. H. 6
by reason of the intaile, And was summoned to the Parliament by the name of
Regin. Lo. de la Ware Knight, although John Griffeth was heir of the whole
blood.

John de Vere, Esch. 9. H 6 and 20. H. 6.
E. of Oxford, seized in his demesne as of fee tail to him and to the Heirs
males of his body issuing of the Honor and County of Oxford, with diverse other
lands Ao. 18. H. 8. died without Heirs of his body, and his three sisters
(viz.) Elizab. Vrsula and Dorothy, were his next heir general, but John De
Vere next heir male, was E. of Oxford, by reason of the said intaile, and none
of the said three Heirs obtained the dignity.

William, Lord Paget, of Bewdsert, Esch. Anno 11. Eliz.
was seized in fee of the Baronies of Longden and Haywood, and of, and in the
Manors of Bewdsert Longden, etc. and being so seized by fine, 1. Mar. intayled
the Mannours and Baronies aforesaid, to him and the Heirs males of his body
issuing, and after anno 5. Eliz. died leaving Hen. his Son next heir male,
which Hen. entered into the Baronies and lands aforesaid, by virtue of the
aforesaid fine and died thereof seized 11. Eliz. leaving Elizabeth his only
Daughter and heir, after whose death Tho. Paget, brother and heir male of the
said Hen. entered into the Baronies and Manors aforesaid, and was summoned to
the Parliament by virtue of the aforesaid fine.

Robert le Ogle intayled the Manors of Bothall and Ogle, Esch. 6. Eliz.
with diverse other Manors, etc. Com. Northumb. to himself for life, the
Remainder to the Heirs males of his body, and took to his first wife Dorothy
Witherington, by whom he had issue Robert his eldest son, and Margery his
daughter married Gregory Ogle of Chippington, and the said Rob. after the death
of his first wife married Johan Ratliffe, Brother of the half blood.
by whom he had issue Cuthbert his second son and died, after whose death
Robt. the Son was Lord Ogle, and from him to Cuthbert brother of the half
blood, by virtue of the intaile, and not unto Marg. nor Cuthbert her son of
the whole blood.

Moreover thirdly, 3. Conclusion.
if a Baron by tenure does Aliene by License to a mere stranger upon
consideration, or, etc. if such Alience be nobly descended in such cases, after
such alienations, such Alience has borne the name and dignity of a Baron, in
respect of such Barony so aliened; And if he had no Dignity before, he in
respect of that has been summoned to the Parliament, and enjoyed the Barony
hereof, are Presidents extant.

Maude, Esch. 22. Ric. 2.
Countess of Angiers and Northumb. Heir of the Barony of Cockermouth, after
the death of Lucy her Brother, who dyed without issue intailed the honor, etc.
of Cocker-mouth to her self, and to Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, then
her Husband, and to the Heirs males of their bodies, upon condition that that
should bear the Arms of the said Earl which are, Arms given.
Or a Lion rampant 6. quartered, with the Arms of Lucie (viz.) Gules 3. Lucies
argent, bearing the said Arms, so often as they shall appear, and afterward,
viz. 22. R. 2. died without issue.

Nevertheless the said Earl, and after him the said Hen. Percy his Son were
Barons of the said Honor by the said assurance, and Sir William Melton Knight,
Cousen and next Heir of the said Countess never had the said Arms.

Amongst the Parents in the Tower, Chart patent. in 41. H 3.
Anno 41. H. 3. it appearth that one Herward de Marisco and Rameta his wife did
grant unto Simon de Mountfort, then Earl of Leycester, the Barony of Elinden
in the County of Northampton, which descended to the said Rameta from John de
Vescount, which Grant seems to be with License, for that the said King does
by his Patent confirm the same, and further gave to the said Earl and his
Heirs diverse privileges there.

Also, Exchange of a Barony.
this ancient Charter following concerning the exchange of a Barony with the
King, is worthy memory, which is, K. John ao. 7. granted unto Robert de
Newbergh Fordington, for the honor of Burstocke in exchange, and granted that
it should be the head, and the chief of the Baronship, as Burstock was
aforetime, and that all Knights and others should attend upon him, and his
lands in Fordington as chief of his Baronship, as they aforetime were
attendant upon Robert Burstock.

By these Presidents appears, that Barony by tenure is annexa feodo. So that
the former questions are fully satisfied and answered (viz.)

1. That by alienation without License, the Barony is ferfeited. 2. The heirs
Males have enjoyed them, and the Females excluded. 3. That the Alience of such
a Barony (nobly descended) is Baron.
But if such alienation with License be made to any person ignoble, Nora. 1.
though the burden of the tenure does remain on him for the K. best advantage,
yet he may not take upon him the Dignity without the Kings special favor
upon his merit.

Upon consideration therefore of these assertions all the former objections are
answered, and as touching the first, it is answered by that which is last
specified, that an ignoble Alience may challenge nothing as a Baron by tenure.

In 11. H. 4.2.6. in a Case concerning a Distress, it is agreed that a Baron,
11. H. 4.2.6.
etc. are not contributary for such lands parcel of their Barony, but for
other lands they are; but there is question made, if one which is not Baron
purchase a Barony, whether he shall be discharged, which was not worthy the
questioning, if such a purchaser challenge by reason of his purchase place in
Parliament; For as land holden by villein service, does not make the owner a
villein which does purchase the same, although by tenure he must do villein
service; So land holden by Baron service does not make the ignoble noble,
though the charge of such tenure lay upon him. Yet if the King will give to any
man ignoble in recompense of service any Castle, etc. to be holden per
Baroniam, he is forthwith noble, because he draws this Nobility from the
fountain without other Creation.

But a question by the way what yearly revenue is sufficient for a Baron. Qu.


Diversity of times has brought forth diverse determinations as touching the
French constitution, R.
there is an old Pamphlet wherein are these words; Summon. debeant omnes Commit.
and Barons, and eorum pares (viz) qui habent terras and reddit. ad valentiam
Commitat. vel Baron. integre, Modus tenend. parliament.
viz. 20. feod. Milit. quolibet feod. comput. ad 12. librat. quae faciunt
librat. vel ad valenc. 13. feod. Milit. and 3. part. Vnius feodi Milit.
quolibet feod. computand. ad 20. librat. quae faciunt in toto 400. mercas, and
nulli minores laici sommon. debeant ad Parliament. ratione tenur. nisi eorum
praesentia alijs de causis fuerit necesse (cap. du Laicis.) The revenew of a
Baron.
Camden in Britann.
Others have esteemed it to be fourteen Knights Fees, but that does rest
wholly in the pleasure of the King to judge.

per Baroniam, are now in the hands of men ignoble, but the reason and means
whereby such Manors should thus come to the hands of meaner personages are
twofold; etc.

etc. and yet retain the degree, I answer, that it is true, yet it proves
nothing against the former resolution, therefore consider that they be either
originally Barons by Writ or by tenure; By Writ are of two kinds, for either in
such Writ whereby they or their Ancestors were at first Summoned, they were
named only by their own names; or else addition was given them from the
principle place of their abode, either for some distinction to sever them from
some Honor of the same surname, or to give them such honorable title by
addition of the place which was not holden per Baroniam, therefore if they
allene it away, he may yet retain the title because it was not holden per
Baroniam but was given by this Writ of summons; Thus much of Barons by Writ.

But if Baron by tenure aliene to one ignoble by license, and after the alienor
be called by Writ, he is not any more a Baron by tenure but by Writ and may
retain the name of a Baron. Now of Barons by Writ.

A Baron by Writ is he to whom a Writ of summons is directed by the King to
come to the Parliament to treat, etc. of the affairs of the Realm, Barons by
Writ.
the form of which is, Rex, A Writ of Su^mons.
etc. A. B. etc. de salut. quia de avisamento consilij nostri pro quibusdam
arduis et vrgentibus nos statum and defensionem regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernent quoddam Parliament. nostrum apud, etc. die,
etc. teneri ordinavimus ac ibidem vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus, and proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium habere and tractare
vobis in fide and legiantia vestra quibus nobis tenemini. firmiter injungend.
mandamus quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and periculis
imminentibus cessante quacunque excusatione dictis die, and loco personaliter
intersitis nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis Magnat. ac Proceribus praedict.
superdict. negotijs tractatur est urumque co^siliu^ impensari, and hoc sicut
nos and honorem nostrum and salvationem and defensionem regni and Eccle.
praedict. expeditio neque dictorum negotiorum deligitis nullatenus omittatis;
Which kind of Writ is as well directed to Barons by tenure and creation, as
others which are only Barons by Writ, which thereupon are to enjoy the
dignity, because thereby they be associated in Counsel with the King, etc.

Touching their antiquity and their first institution I find little or no
mention before H. 3. his time, Antiquity of Barons by Writ.
and therefore I conceive that either the first, or at least the first frequent
use of Barons by Writ was 49. H. 3. in case of necessity and upon lamentable
occasion of civil war about the great Charter, of which rebellion Simon then
Earl of Leycester was ringleader; And therefore after diverse fields fought at
Northampton, Rochester, Jews, etc. that of all was the (...), of that tragedy
finished at Evesham where the said Earl was slain and those Rebellious Barons
overthrown; whereupon presently issued the Parliament at Winchester, and after
at Westminster, where the said Barons were to be attainted; Wherefore forasmuch
as much as the number of the Barons which had continued faithful was small, it
was holden a necessary policy to supply the number, etc. upon summons by Writ
where were called all Abbots, etc. which held not by Barony, as others of the
most worthy of the laytie not holding by Barony.

Note further, these Writs in form of their directions are diverse, Diverse
manners of directions of summons.
some directed by special name of a Baron, as Rex Baroni de Staff. de
Greystock. de Dudley others by the name of the party, with addition of the
place, as Rex Iobanni de Strange, de Knocking, Chr. Edm. Gray de Ruthen, Chr.
Edw. Gray de Grooby, etc. Naming the chief Castle, etc. of such Baron. some
others are named in this manner with the title of Lord, as Iohanni Beauchamp
Domino de Beauch. Milit. Iohanni domino de Clinton; Hen. Percey, domino de
Poynings; To others without additions, as William de Lourt Milit. Scals.
Devereux.

But the nature and quality of other Barons by Writ is aptly discovered by
debate of a question concerning the continuance and descent of a Barony by
Writ, which I divide.





jure uxoris.



Argument. ex part negat. Nobility and honor given in respect of wisdom,
etc. which are gifts of God, and personal cannot extend to others, for
privilegium personale personam sequitur and extinguitur cum persona, but such
is the dignity of such a Baron, therefore, etc.

of that Nobility. For admit some defects of nature in the heir as leprosy
Ideocy, Frenzy, etc. he is made incapable, and thereupon they conclude that it
shall not descend.

Argument. ex part affirm. Of the contrary part the affirmative is proved
thus, etc. while he lives, but also a memorable reward thereof to his
posterity; see Tully, Cicero pro Sextio.
Therefore this kind of honor is patrimoniall.



Some think it is not descendable unless the Heir be likewise called by
Writ, and that then its an inheritance, but this is repugnant to the nature of
a descent, which commonly carries the patrimony descendable (by act in law)
upon the death of the ancestors (to the heir) or not at all, Wherefore diverse
presidents prove that this does descend, and there needs not any word of heir
in the Writ of Summons, only there is a speech of a special Writ sometimes
directed to Sir Henry Bromflet, Test Rege apud West. 24 Iun. 27. H 6.
when he was called Lo. Vescy by H. 8. in 27. year of his reign, wherein
there are these words inserted, Volumus tamen vos and haeredes vestros masculos
de corpore vestro legitime exeuntes Barons de Vescye. Wherefore it is ever true
that the heir of such a Baron when he is called to the Parliament, that his
descent of honor is thereby established and approved by the gracious Judgment
of our Sovereign: so it is also true that if it shall stand with her highness
pleasure that such heir shall not be summoned at all (for none come to so high
a Council except he be called) then that Nobility is much impaired and in
manner extinguished in the censure of all men, for that it had no other
original, but by writ of Summons, for the which in the Judgment of the
supreme Sovereign, he is secluded. And thus much as concerning the first
Article or point touching the descent in general of this kind of Baronie.

As for the second principal Point, The second point.
whether the Barony by Writ may descend to the heir Male, it shall not be
amiss likewise to view the reasons of each part, that by the conflict of
Argument the truth may the better be discerned.

Those which do maintain the affirmative part do reason after this manner;
Ratio 1. On the affirmative part.
In reason the sex of the Heir female ought no more to bar her of the
dignity then the nonage of the Heir male ought to bar him, although during
his nonage he be not able to do the service; But as the service of the one is
forbearing for the time; So the sex of the other may at all times be supplied
by the maturitie and sufficiency of her husband. Ratio. 2.


Offices of Honor which do much import the public weal being possessed by
inheritance to descend to the heir female, if there be no Neeces heir male,
as the office of high Constable of England, which descended unto the Daughter
of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, as before declared, the office
of Lord Steward, descended unto Blanch Daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster, in
whose right John of Gaunt her Husband enjoyed the same. The like may be said of
the Office of Earl Marshall which descended by an Heir female unto the house
of Norfolk. All which Offices are as unfit to be exercised by a woman, as it
is unfit for a woman to be summoned to the Parliament as a Baron by Writ. And
yet notwithstanding the Law does allow the Husband of such a woman to exercise
the Office of the one; And therefore by the same congruitie of reason such
Husband is likewise by law enabled to perform the other. Ratio 3.


Many Noble houses in England do support, and lawfully bear the Dignity of
Baronage unto them descended by women, Renatus: Cap nus de dom. cap. H. 7. and
8.
of the which many are by Writ. Moreover, in France the dignity to be a Peer
of the Realm (as Opimus by many examples proves descends to the heir
female for want of heir male.

The dignity of Nobility descends likewise in Spain unto the female for
want of Heir male which custom not being only current in our neighbor
countries, but with us in an evident proof in the case in question. Ratio 1.
on the Negat.


The adverse part object that the writ of summons, etc. by which the Baron has
his original, is to call him to be one of the members of that right high
assemby of Parliament there to determine life and member, plea and right of
land, etc. but these things are convenient only for the quality of men, not
to the other sex, Ergo, it not to descend to the heir female. Ratio. 2.


If it be answered that such heir female be unfit in her own person, yet may
she marry one fufficiently able to excecute the same, this answer will neither
satisfy nor salve the inconvenience, for admit she were at age at the death of
her Ancestors unmarried being in her own choice, the great causes of the
Realm should be subject to her will in the choice of her Husband which were
inconvenient.



but sure it is that such Marriage gave occasion to the Summons, and such
Husbands and their posterities bear the dignity of the wives Ancestors, for
by this controversy we purpose not to question the right of such Noble houses.

Rodulph Lord Cromell being a Baron by Writ died having two Coheires, Barony of
Cromwell.
Eliz. married to Sir Thomas Nevill, and Joan the younger to Sir Humfrey
Bourchier, the said Sir Humphrey was called to the Parliament as Lord Cromwell,
and not Sir Thomas Nevill, who had married the eldest Sister.

Early Marshall signified to the Queen, as upon the Petition of the Sister, and
Heir of Gregory late Lord Dacres, deceased may appear; In whose Pedigree it
appears, that Thomas Lord Dacres, Barony of Dacres.
had issue Thomas his eldest Son, Ralph his second, and Humphrey his third;
Thomas died in the life of his Father having issue Jone his Daughter and heir,
married to Sir Richard Fines, after Tho. the Grandfather died, whereupon H. 6.
by Patent 7. November. Anno 37. declares the said Richard Fines to be Lo. Dacres,
but tempore E. 4. the said Humf. Dacres after the Attainder of the said Ralph
and himself by Parliament 1 E. 4 and after of the said Ralph and reversall of
the said act in 12. E. 4. the said Humf. challenged the Baronie, whereupon
after it was controverted in Parliament, they submitted themselves to the
arbitrament of E. 4. for performance whereof they entered bond, whereupon the
King awarded under the privy Seal, Award by King E. 4.
8. April Anno 13. that the said Richard Fines should be reputed Lo. Dacres,
and that he and his Heirs of the body of the said Richard should retain the
said place in Parliament, which the said Tho. Lo. Dacres used, And that the
heirs of the body of the said Tho. should enjoy the Manor of Holbeck. And
that the said Humf. Dacres should be reputed, named, and called the Lo. Dacres
of Gillesland, And that he, etc. should keep the place in Parliament next
beneath the said Richard Fines, etc. And that the heirs of the said Tho.
Dacres should have the Manor of Fethington, etc. in Tail. Nota.
And so note that Gillestand the ancient Barony remained to the heir male.

etc. by which an heir female enjoys the inheritance of the said Baron, such
heirs females have been called to the Parliament, and not the husband or
issue male of of such heir female, and this appears by a notable
controversy Tempore H. 7. between Sir Robert Willoughbie Lo. Brook, and
Richard Nevill Lo. Latimer, Barony of Latimer.
for the Barony of Latimer, which in effect was, The said Lo. Brook challenged
the said Barony as cosen and heir of Eliz. his great grandmother, who was
sister and heir to John Nevill Lo. Latimer, who died without issue, And
hereupon exhibited a Petition to H. 7. in Parliament, whereunto Richard then
Lo. Latimer was called to answer, who agreed the descent (viz.) that the said
Eliz. was married unto Sir Tho. Willoughbie, second Son to the Lo.
Willoughbie, but H. 6. because the said John died without issue, and that the
next heir was female, did therefore call to the Parliament Sir George Nevill,
second son of Ralph Earl of Westmerland to be Lo. Latimer, which George was
grandfather of the said Richard, namely Father of Hen. father to the said
Richard, in debate of which cause our Question, viz. whether a Barony by Writ
may descend unto heirs females was debated, and in the end adjudged with the
said Rich. which Presidents do afford us 2. Judgments in the point.

Dacres, may be objected to encounter this conclusion: for whereas the heir
female married to Sir Rich. Fines, he was Baron of Dacres, and Raynolph and
Humf. the heirs males placed below the said heir female by H. 6. and E. 4.

H. 6. did declare him Lo. Dacres. yet Rand. being heir male bare also the
title of Lo. Dacres, and by that name was attainted 1. E. 4

Wherefore the Reason why the heir male could not be regarded was the
attainder, Ratio.
and when this was reversed E. 4. to satisfy both competitors thus orderd it.
And thus much concerning the second point whether a Barony by writ may descend
unto the heir female.

Concerning the third point admitting such descent to their female, The third
Article.
when no male can claim it, for then does this question take place whether her
husband should enjoy that dignity in her right or no, something has been said
hereof in the last question,

But for satisfaction we are to insist upon a resolution in the very point
tempore H. 8. When Master Wimbish took upon him the style of Lord Talbois,
jure uxoris having no issue by her, The King assisted both by civil and
temporal Lawyers gave sentence, Resolution ^cmp. H. 8.
that no husband of a Baroness should use her style until he had by her a
child, whereby he should be entitled by the courtesy to her inheritance.





And thus much concerning the nature, quality, and estate of the Baron by
Writ, and for resolution of the several points and articles of the question
proposed may suffice, only note the Case in 13. E. 3. where William de Clinton
having married the Countess of Huntington, 13. E. 3. Brief 259.
they joined in an Assise of Nuisance for levying a Market, etc. Exception was
taken, because he did not name himself, but it was overruled, because having
it Jure Vxoris, by the Law he may not use the same title, having no other title
thereunto.

Now come we to Barons by Patent.

A Baron by Creation, Barons by Patent.
is he or she to whom the King has conferred Baronies by his Letters Patents.

The usual words are, Considerantes itaque generis claritat. vel grata
obsequia quae A.B. Mil. nobis praestiterit, etc. Sciatis nos, etc. praefat.
A.B. adstatum, gradum, dignitat. and honor. Baronis te ereximus praefecerimus
and creavimus eidemque A.B. nomen, etc. Baronis de T. imposuimus, etc. Ac per
patentes damus, etc. habend. praefat. A.B. and Haer. etc.

This kind of Dignity shall be of such continuance, as shall be limited in
the Habend. sometimes for life, sometimes pur auter vie, as some hold opinion
in 32. H. 6. 32. H. 6.296
It may be in the special or in the general. And this kind of Patent was
usual before the Statute of 2. as it apeareth by the Patent, Pat. 13 H. 3. in
turre, p. 2.
whereby Hugh de Burga was made Earl of Kent, in the time of H. 3. which was
Habend. sibi and haered. suis de corpore Margaret uxoris suae sororis Alexandri
Regis Scociae procreat. and pro defectu talis exitus reman. Rici^s haered.
dicti Hugonis etc.

The manner of the Solemnity used in the Creation of Barons by Patent, The
form of Creation of a Baron.
is much after this form; The Baron newly to be Created, is presented unto the
Queens Majesty sitting in her Chair of state; After this order he is
apparelled; In his Surcote with the hood, a Baron bearing the mantle before
him, and two Barons in their Parliament robes, on each hand one leading him.
The principal King at Arms bearing the Patent, and the Officers at arms
proceeding on before him; when they come in presence of her Majesty, they make
their solemn obeisance three times; And the Baron to be Created kneeleth down
before the Chair of Estate, the said King at Arms delivers the Patent of
Creation to the Lord Chamberlain, who humbly presents the same to her
Majesty, who delivers the same to the principal Secretary to be read, who
reading the same with a loud voice at the word Creavimus, the Baron which
carries the Mantle, presents the same to her Majesty, who puts it on the
new Baron, whereby he is Created, and then is the Patent read out to the end,
and delivered to the Queen, who delivers it to the Baron so Created, who
after most humble thanks given to her Majesty, he rises up, and they depart
in like solemn order, as they came with the Trumpets sounding before them. The
particular and more full knowledge of these Solemnities I do refer to the
College and Corporation of Heralds, to whom the knowledge of these things
does most specially appertain.

For the better explanation of this kind of Dignity, the resolution also of
certain questions shall be very requisite.



The case of the Lord De la Ware received a resolution some what answerable to
this Question, De laware, 11. Rep. Look fol 1. E. 3 6.
The Lord De la Ware 3. E. 6. being in sore displeasure, which William West his
Nephew and heir, who was father to Tho. now Lord De la Ware procured an act of
Parliament, by the which the said William West was during his natural life
only, clearly disabled to claim, demand, or have any manner of right, Title,
or interest by descent, remainder, or otherwise in, or to the Manors, Lands,
tenants, or hereditaments, title or dignity of Tho. Lo. de la Ware his uncle,
And after the said Tho. Lo. De la Ware died and the said William West in the
time of Qu. Mary was attainted of treason by verdict, 2. and 3 Ph. and Mary. 5.
Eliz.
and afterward pardoned by Q. Mary, and after by Parliament in the time of the
O. Marestie that now is. And after in 8. Eliz. was created Lo. De la Ware by
Patent, and had place in the Parliament according to his creation, For that by
the said act of Parliament in the time of E. 6. he was excluded to challenge
the sormer ancient Barony, and after died, whether the now Lo. De la Ware
should take his place according to the Baron by Writ, or according to his
creation was the question. The opinions of the Qu. Council being her Majesty's
Attorney general, and Solliciter were that the acceptance of the new creation
by the said William West, could not extinguish the ancient dignity, for he had
not that ancient Dignity in him at the time of his Creation, but that Dignity
was at the time of his Creation by the Act of E. 6. in abbeyance, suspense or
consideration of law, and he thereby utterly dis-inabled to have the same
during his life only, so as his acceptance could not extinguish that dignity
which he then had not nor could conclude his heir, who was not disabled by the
said act of 3. E. 6. to claim the ancient Barony, which opinion of theirs was
soon allowed by the resolutions of the Lo. chief Justice of Engl. and Lord
chief Baron, and so signified to the Lord Keeper. But this to be noted by the
reasons made for the said resolution, That if the said Sir William West had
been Baron, and entitled, Nota.
or in possession of the ancient dignity when he accepted the creation, the
law perchance might have been otherwise, but that remains as yet unresolved.

ought to be named by the name of his dignity, in every Writ to be sued by
him, or against him.

The books of law do make difference herein between Duke, Marquess, 8. H.
6.10. 30 H. 8.30
Earl, Viscount, etc. which are allowed names of Dignity and the Baron, for
they affirm that such Baron needs not to be named Lord or Baron by his Writ,
but the Duke, Marquess, Earl or Viscount, ought to be named by their Names or
Dignities; Nevertheless I do take these books to be understood of the Barony
by tenure, or Barons by Writ only, for the title of a Baron by Patent in his
Letters Patents under Seal adorned, and named by the name of Status, gradus
and dignitas, and therefore is requisite to be named, and such dignities are a
parcel of the name of the possessor, as well as the Title and Style of Duke,
Marquess, Earl, Viscount, etc.

And although there may be conceived this difference last mentioned between
the Baron by tenure or Writ, and the Baron by Patent, yet they being all
members of the higher house of the Parliament, they are thereby equally made
Noble, Honorable, and Peers of the Realm, as they are Barons only, without
any other distinction that I have observed. And thus much concerning the three
degrees of Barons within this Realm may suffice to be said in general upon
this occasion, for the better understanding and resolution of the controversy
in hand. The privilege of Barons.


There rests last of all in this Treatise of Baronage that I would express
some certain of the sundry privileges that the Laws do allow unto Barons,
and the Nobility of the Realm ingenerall, in regard of that favor, which all
good policy in every wel-governed Commonwealth does bestow and yield to the
Noble and Honorable, wherein I shall content my self only with certain of
those privileges which I find mentioned in the Laws of this Realm, purposely
omitting such as either the Civil, Common, or the laws of foreign Countries
do afford, referring them to a fit place in an intended Treatise of Nobility.
Privilege.


First therefore it is a privilege that the Peers and Nobility of the
Parliament do enjoy, namely to be tried in the cases of Treason, Felony, Mag.
Char. 29 10. E. 4.6.20. H. 6. cap. 9
and such like by their Peers.

The antiquity and original of this kind of trial has (as some men do
think) his ground from the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 29. beginning that
Nullus liber homo, in these words, Nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittimus
nisi per legale judicium Parium suorum. But I take it to be more ancient,
Trial by Peers Where allowable De consuet. feudorum.
as brought into this Realm with the Conqueror, being answerable to the
Norman and French laws, and agreeable with the customs several, where almost
all controversies arising between the Sovereign and his Peers are tried, per
judicium Parium suorum.

This Trial in ancient time was very often had in Parliament as may be
collected by the Statute of 15. E. 3. cap. 6. 15. E. 3. cap. 6.
1. H. 4.1. 13 H. 8.11
But nevertheless the same may as well be performed by Commission under the
Lord Steward of Eng. the form, manner, and Solemnity whereof is expressed in
the books of Law.

This privilege has some restraint, as well in regard of the person, The
restraint of the praviledge.
as in the manner of proceedings. As touching the person.

27. H. 8. Br. Inquest. 100 Trial 142. Fine 2. Stamf. 153
namely for as much as the Archbishops and Bishops cannot pass in the like
cases upon the trial of any other of the Peers, for that they are prohibited
by the Ecclesiastical laws to be judges of life and blood, reason would that
the other Peers should not try them: for this trial should be mutual
forasmuch as it is performed upon their Honor without any oath taken.

38. H. 6. Br. Treason.
none but Lords of the Laytie being Lords of the Parliament, 38. H 8. Case Leo.
Gray en le^ Con.
shall have this kind of Trial. And therefore hereout are excluded the eldest
Son and heir apparent of a Duke, in the life of his Father, though he be
called Earl and bear that title, Likewise, the eldest Son and Heir
apparent of an Earl, though he be only a Lord, or Baron, or bear such Title.

Ireland, 19 and 20. Eliz 36.6.
if upon the like offense committed in Engl. if they chance to be apprehended
in Engl. they shall not be tried herein by their Peers, For the Lords of the
Parliament of England are not their Peers, but the Lords of the Parliament in
Ireland.

And thus much concerning the Restraints of the said privileges in respect of
the person.

As touching the manner of Proceeding the Nobility of this Realm do enjoy
the privilege of trial by their Peers in Course of Indictment only, 33. H
8. Br. Jurors, 48. Trial. 142. 10 E. 3.6. Stam 152.
which is a kind of proceeding ex officio between the Qu. highness and them,
But in any case of Appeal of felony, which is in the suite of the subject,
they shall not have the same, but shall be tried by a Jury of 12. men upon
their oaths. And thus much concerning this privilege at this place, and upon
this occasion may suffice.

Likewise this privilege the Nobility of this Realm do enjoy, Privilegiu^
secundum. 48. E. 3.30 48. Assis. 6. 35 H. 6.46 22. H. 8.22 Reg. 1 79. 15 Eliz.
315.
That they are not so to be inpannelled in any Jury or inquest, to make trial
or inquiry upon their corporal oaths between party and party, And if they
be impannelled contrary thereunto, they may have a writ out of the Chancery
repeating this privilege directed to the Justices, before whom such noble
personages are impannelled, commanding them to dissmisse him or them, that were
so impannelled out of the said Pannell.

This privilege has restraint in two cases, Restraint. 1.
first if he inquire concerning the King and Commonwealth in any necessary and
important Decrees, as business of this Realm, then this privilege is not
allowed, nor takes place. And therefore diverse Barons of the Marches of Wales,
were impa^nelled before the Bishop of Ely, and other Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, to inquire of notable outrage committed by Gilbe^t de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, against Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Pereford and Essex, and his
suits in Wales in the 20. year of E. 1. where John de Hastings, Edmond de
Mortimer, Theobald de Verdune, and other of the Barons of the March^s of Wales
challenged their privileges aforesaid, and much insisted upon the same, but it
was afterward answered by the Court, as by the words of the appears, 20 E.
1. Rel. 14. Camera. Scar.
Eo quod res is it a dominum Regem and coronam and dignitatem suos tangit deinde
fuit ex part domini Regis Ioha^nt Hastings. and omnibus alijs magnat.
supranominat. quod pro statu and jure regnt, and Pro conservatione dignitatis
Coronae, and pacis suae opponant manum, ad librum, ad faciend. etc. quod eis ex
part Domini Regis injungentur, etc. The Barons aforesaid nevertheless did
persist in their Challenge, and in the end both the said Earl, between whom
the said outrage had heene perpetrated, submitted themselves to the Kings
grace, and made their Fines.

Secondly, Restraint 2
this privilege has no place in case of necessity, where the truth can no
otherwise come to light, for the Writ is, Regist. 179.
Quia Barons in Assissis jurat. etc. poni non consuerunt. ut dicunt nisi eorum
Sacrament. adeo sit necessarium quod sine illis verit as in qua non possit,
tibi praecepimus, etc.

In many Cases the Protestation of honor shall satisfy in Noblemen, Privileg.
3. Bract. l. 5. cap. 9. fol. 352.8.3.1. H. 4.1.13 H. 8.1 3 H. 6.48. Cook 6.53
as in trial of their Peers, they proceed upon their honor, not upon their
oath. And if a Nobleman on an action of debt upon an Account, in case where the
Plaintiff is to be examined upon oath, upon the Statute of 5. H. 4. cap. 8. it
shall suffice to examine his Attorney, and not himself upon his oath.

Yet if a Nobleman will give evidence to a Jury, reason would that he should
be sworn, for they are not bound to believe him upon such protestation
otherwise then they think in their conscience to be conformable unto truth.

Privileg.
whereupon he conceives fear of his safeguard, 35 H 6. Sub-paena 20 V. 14. E.
3.
and prays a Supplicavit in the Chan. directed unto the Justice of peace, or
Sheriff to take bond, etc. such Writ which otherwise is ordinary, but the Lord
Chancellor shall award a Sub-paena in stead thereof, and when he appears in
stead of surety, he shall only promise upon his Honor to keep the peace,
which the Law has allowed in this point a Caution sufficient.

A nobleman is not to be arrested by any Capias, Privileg. 5. 21. E. 3.39. 43.
E. 3.33. 8 R 2 7. H. 4 2. 11. H. 4.15 1. H. 5.14. 14. H. 6.2. 22 H. 6.226. 26.
H 8.7. 14. Eliz 115. Restaint.
and therefore cannot be outlawed in any civil Action, but only in Criminal.

And by the same reason lies no Attachment against him, as it was ruled in
Parliament, 14. Eliz. in the Lord Cromwells Case.

But if he make any notable contempt against the proceedings, of the Law, then
cease this privilege, for Frustra legis auxilium invocat, qui in legem
peccat. As if in a Writ de homine replegiando, he will not permit the Sheriff
to execute the Writ or Essoigne the party, or upon a Rescousse a Capias has
this privilege notwithstanding.

So in cases Criminal, 27. H. 8.14 15. H. 7.1.
a Capias and an Exigent may be awarded.

The like privileges does the Court of equity allow in cases of conscience,
Chanc. nomine Sub-paena.
for the Lord Chancellor does not award any Sub-paena, but sends his Letters
missive in lieu of other ordinary Process.

In the prosecution of any Action personal, Privil. 6. 14 E. 3.22. 15 E. 3.21
22 E. 3.9. 27. E. 38. 41. E 3.31 27 H. 8.22
the Plaintiff may pray Jour de grace, but against a Peer of the Realm, it
shall not be allowed, although it be allowable against other persons.

If any Lord Spiritual or Temporal be party to any Action, Privileg. 7. 13.
E 3.^^ Chal. 115.^ 22. H 8.22 Dyer. 107.3. and 4. Elize 24 9. and 10. Eliz. 26.
there ought to be one Knight at the least, to be impannelled in his Jury, with
other the most sufficientest Esquires in the Country, otherwise he may
challenge the Array, but if there be no Knight in the County, the Pannell shall
be made of the most sufficient Vavasours and Esquires there inhabiting.

But if one bring an Action against another, and the Sh^riffe impannell a Jury,
where there is not any Knight, 14. and 15. Eliz. 318.
and before the Trial the Plaintiff or Defendant is Created a Baron, or, etc.
and he do challenge the said Jury, such challenge shall not be allowed, for
at the time of the enquest made, he was not so reputed, as in the Case of
Reginald, late Earl of Kent may appear.

If the King grant an Annuitie or Rent, to a then created Baron, Privileg 8.
for the support of his Degree, 6. H. 6.2.
which they call creation money, this is so annexed to the Dignity, that by no
manner of alienation it can be severed.

If the King upon such Creation give land, etc. until he shall be advanced to
some other living, and upon Eviction to have the value, if he be impleaded of
this land by Scire facias, 21. E. 3.47
etc. he shall have aid of the King.

If a Baron be party to a suite, Privileg. 9. Pract. l. 5. fol 337. and 351.
and would be essoigned, he that casts the essoigne out, to put in sureties to
prove the cause which is not usual in case of common persons.

In all cases where he is to be amerced his amerciament is not less then a
hundred shil^ings by the Statute o^ Magna Charta 14. and it was to be affirmed
by hi^ Peers. Privil. 10.16 E. 3 ^m. 14 38 E. 3 31 1. H. 6.7.9 H. 6 2 32. H. 6
30 19. E. 3.9.21. E 4 77 Fleta. lib. 2.
But for that it were troublesome to assemble Barons for so small matter, such
amerciaments in time past have been obtained by the Barons of the Exchequer,
who were sometimes Barons of the Realm.

Whereas by the Statute 32. H. 8. no subject might keep in his family above
four Strangers borne, Privil. 11. Br. fol. 116 Co^ke 8 39. Stat. 32 H. 8.16.
Privil. 12
yet by a Proviso every Baron may keep six.

If a Lord of the Parliament having place and voice there, Stat 1. E. 6. cap.
13.
be convicted of Felony, wherein Clergy is allowed, upon request, alleging
that he is a Baron, etc. and clayming the benefit of his Clergy, although he
cannot read without burning in the hand, loss of Inheritance or corruption of
blood, he shall for the first time be deemed a Clerk convict, and may have
purgation.

Also, Privile. 13.
whereas it is ordained that the Justice of the Peace named of the Quorum,
shall be resident in his Shire, Stat. 2. H 5 cap. 4.
by a Proviso, the Peers of the Realm are exampted.

By the ancient Laws before William the Conquerors time, Lemb. perambul. de
Kent. 21. Britt. cap. 29. Marlb. cap 10.
every man above 12. years should be sworn to the King, which we observe now
in the veiw of Francke-pledge, Courtleete. But noble men, etc. are neither
bound to attend the Leete nor take the oath.

If an Error be brought in Parliament upon a Judgment in B. R. the upper house
alone without the Commons, Postaat. 20.
are to examine the errors.

In 11. H. 6.2. in a case concerning distress taken for expenses and fees of
the Knights of the Parliament. 11. H 6.2.
It was agreed that the Barons are not contributorie for Lands, parcel of the
ancient Barony, but for other lands: but there is a question made whether the
purchaser of such an ancient Barony should enjoy the said privilege, which
question was not worthy the questioning, for as lands holden by Villains
service does not make the free purchaser a Villain, though he be bound to do
such Villain service: so does not such Purchase ennoble him that purchases.

By the Stat. of 5. Eliz. cap 1. all Burgesses of Parliament shall take the
oath of supremacy, Sta^. 5 Eliz cap. 1.
so shall Citizens and Barons of Cinqueports, But there is a Proviso in that
Stat. that forasmuch as the Qu. is otherwise sufficiently assured of the faith,
etc. of the temporal laws; Therefore this act shall not compellany of, or
above the degree of a Baron to take this oath, nor to incur any penalty
limited for the refusal.

By the Stat. of 5. R. 2. cap. 12. the King defends the passage of all manner
of People in every Port, Stat. 5. R. 2. cap. 12.
etc. upon the Sea Coast upon pain of forfeiture of all their goods, except
Lo. and other great men, and true and notable Merchants, and the Kings
soldiers and all others shall forfeit, etc. But because the Statute is
abrogated by 4. Iacobi, c. 2. I do not set this down for one of the privileges
at this day; But Philip Earl of Arundell, Son of Thomas Duke of Norfolk,
Cromptons Iurisd. 31.
was taken upon the Sea passing into France about 30. Eliz. and was fined in
the Star chamber, because he took not sh^pping at one of the Ports mentioned
in that Statute.

In the Privilege before mentioned of his Clergy, it shall be allowed him for
breaking a house by day or night, for robbing upon the highway, and in all
other cases excepted in the Stat. of 1. E. 6.12. saving in wilful murder and
poisoning, But in all other cases, wherein Clergy is taken away, he is in the
same degree with a common person, but the Court will not give him the benefit
of this Statute, if he requires not the same. If a Lord does confess his
offense upon arraignment or abjure, or is outlawed for felony, in these cases
it seems he may have the benefit of this Statute, viz. his Clergy, for that
by the Statute of 18. Eliz. cap. 81. he nor any other need to make purgation,
Stat. 18. Eliz. cap. 18.
but shall be forthwith delivered out of prison by the Justice. Sed quaere
Bolton 202. by the Imperial constitution, Nobiles non torquentur in casibus,
in quibus plebei torquentur nec suspenduntur, sed decapitantur. Which form by
favor of the Prince is allowed in England; Iurisd. Br. 48.
Yet Thomas Fines, Lord Dacres, of the South. in the 37. H. 8. and the Lord
Sturton 4. Mar. were hanged.

By the Staute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. for uniformitie of Common prayer, 1. Eliz
cap. 1.
there is a proviso, that the Baron shall be tried per Pares, and not by any
Ecclesiastical Courts, read the Statute at large.

At the Common law it was lawful, for any to retain as many Chaplains as he
would, but by the Statute of 21. H. 8 13. a restraint was made, viz. to every
Archbishop, and Duke, six Chaplains, with dispensation to keep two Benefices
with Cure, to every Marquess or Earl five, with the like privilege; To the
Lord Chancellor, every Baron and Knight of the Garter three, with the same
privilege. If a Bishop be made an Archbishop, or a Baron an Earl, yet can
they have but Chaplains as Archbishop or Earl, because though there be diverse
Dignities, yet the service is to be done, but to one person; so if he be
removed from his Office, in this case he cannot be Non-resident without he
procure a non obstante.

So if a Baron retain a Chaplain, and before he is advanced, his Lord is
attainted, Cook rep. 4.117. Actons Case.
as the Earl of Westmerland was, he cannot accept a second Benefice.

Those that are first retained, shall only have privilege in case, etc.

By the Statute of 2. H. 5.8. that gives authority to the Sheriff to raise
Posse Comitat. Nevertheless, may he not command the person of a Nobleman to
attend that service, but if the Sheriff upon a supplicavit against him, return
that he is so puissant that he dare not arrest him, the Sheriff shall be
grievously amerced for such return, for the Writ is to all Archbishops,
Bishops, Dukes, Earls, etc. and to all liege men of the County to to be ayding
to him, therefore by intendment none will resist the execution.

The words of Charta de forest. cap. 11. are every Archbishop, Bishop, Earl,
or Baron, coming to us at our commandment and passing by our forests may take
one beast or two by the view of the forester if he be present, or else he shall
cause one to blow an horn that he seem not to steal our Dear. In this Stat.
though a Duke, Marquess, or Viscount, being Lord of the Parliament being
commanded, etc. shall have the same privilege, so if the King send for him
letters missive, Messenger or Sergeant at arms, or by writ of Sub-paena, to
appear in Chanc. they shall have the benefit of this Statute because they came
at the Kings commandment so in case of Scire facias out of the Chancery or D.
R.

But if such Process go out of the C. B. to appear before the Justices or
the Barons of the Exchequer he shall not have the benefit of the Statute,
because the Statute is Veniens ad nos, and in those Courts they are, Quod coram
nobis, etc. So of the Star Chamber. Also Lords that come to visit the new
King, though not sent for, shall have the privilege: and so note this Statute
is a Warrant dormant and is to be understood of their returning homeward
Manwood, cap. 13. Crompton Iuris, Nota.
D. 167. note the Statute does give license to kill or hunt in the Kings
Parkes, though the Letter be Transiens per forrestam nostram. Note that in
certain Cases the Law does give privilege to the sons or brethren of
Noblemen, though they be not of that degree, Stat. 21. H. 8.13. etc. 7. E. 6.
cap. 5.

Certain Cases wherein he has no Privileges.
IF the King commit a Baron to prison Durante been placito, he cannot be
discharged by Bail or mainprise, or by the common Writ De homine replegiando.
And by the same power it is if a noble person be committed by the Kings
Council, for they are incorporated to his Highness, and do command, as with
the Kings mouth: and the same law is, if a Nobleman be committed to prison by
the absolute Commandment of the Kings Judges, sitting in their place of
Judicature, Stam. lib 2. cap 18. fol. 72.
Stamf. lib. 2. cap. 18. fol. 72. as you have before, when the Prince himself
by the chief Justice sitting in the Kings Bench, and was not bay leable. Also
a Capias and an Exigent may be awarded upon an Indictment of a felony.

This Statute of Praemunire, cap. 1.16. R, 2. cap. 1. upon which Statute an
Abbot which was Lord of the Parliament, being impleaded, did pray privilege to
appear by attorney, Et per Curiam, could not for a Cessavit lies against him.

Upon contempt of Peers a Capias may be awarded, 1. H. 5. ult. 27. H. 8.22.

If he depart the Realm as Ambassador, etc. and return not at the Kings
commandment, the King may seize his lands and goods, Dyer 108.176. The Duchess
of Suffolkes case, if he imprison any man in his house, whereupon there is a
writ De homine replegiando, if he convey him from the Sheriff the Court will
award a Withernam to arrest, 11. H. 4.15
and imprison him till he deliver the prisoner.

All Lords are compellable to take the oath mentioned in the Statute 3. Iacobi,
and see the Statute of 7. Iacobi, 3. Iac. ca. 4. 7 Ia. cap. 6.
who have eauthoritie to administer it unto them.

Being arraigned of felony in an Appeal, he shall not be tried by his Peers,
as in case of Indictment, in which case he may not challenge any of the Triers,
either peremptorily or upon causes which is permitted to all other common
persons.

The Judgment is the usual Judgment given against common persons, and though
the King pardon all but the loss of his head, that is of special grace not ex
debito.

By Attainder the blood is corrupted and he and his posterity made ignoble,
Stam. lib. 3. cap. 34.
and cannot be restored by the Kings pardon, but only by authority of
Parliament.

And note that Nobility is not a thing substantial, but merely accidental
present or absent without corruption of his subject, for experience shows that
honorable titles are restrained by exorbitant crimes, when the nature in the
mean while cannot be thrust out with a forke, wherefore though we term
extinguishment of Nobility in cases of Attainder, yet this phrase is not used
as though Nobility were essentially in the humor of the blood more then any
other hereditary faculty; But because the right of inheritance which descends
by communication of blood, is by that means determined, and also in regard of
the detestation of the crime, it is called corruption of blood, 16. Eliz. Dyer
332. The Lord Charles Flowards case, if one be made a Knight by a foreign
King, he is so to be styled in all legal proceedings in this Realm, But if he
be created by the Emperor an Earl, it is other wise, Coke 7.16.

If the King Create the son a Duke, etc. and the father dies, he within age
shall be in ward, but if he had bin made a Knight in his f^^hers life, he should
not be in ward, neither for the lands descended, nor marriage, Coke 74.
Drueries Case, though he be within age.

Nobility and Lords in reputation only.
THere be other Lords in reputation and appellation, who nevertheless are not
Iure, neither can they enjoy the privileges of those of the Nobility of the
Parliament (viz.)

The Son and heir of a Duke, during the life of his father, is only by
courtesy called an Earl, and the eldest son of an Ea. a Baron, but not in
legal proceedings Br. Treason 2. Coke 8-16.
But the King may create them in the life of their Ancestors Lords of the
Parliament.

A Duke or other of the Nobility of a foreign Nation being named Duke in
Letters of safe conduct, that makes him not Duke to be sued by that name in
England, but a foreign King ought so to be styled, though he has not merum
imperium out of his own Kingdom Cok 7.15. etc,

All the younger Sons of the King of England are Earls by birth without
other creation, and only Lords by reputation,

A Lord of Ireland or Scotland, though he be post-natus, is but only Lord in
reputation.

Noble Women.
ALthough Noble Women may not sit in Parliament in respect of their Sexes, yet
are they in Law Peers of the Realm, and may challenge all, Coke 8.53.
or most of the former Privileges.

But the opinions of some have been, Crompt. Just de peace 85.
that they cannot maintain any Action upon the Statute of 2. R. 2. cap. 2. de
Scand. Magnat. because the Statute speaks only of other Sexes.

If any of the Kings servants within in the Checkroll conspire the death of any
Noble woman, that is not felony within the Statute of 3. H. 7.13.

Honorable women of three sorts.
By Creation, Descent, Marriage.

H. 8. Created Anne Bullen Marchioness of Pembrooke, and King James Created
the Lady Compton, Wife to Sir Thomas Compton, Countess of Buckingham, in the
life of her said Husband without any addition of honor to him. And formerly by
Patents openly read in Parliament without any other investure did Create Mary
sole Daughter and heir of the late Baron of Aburgauen. Camden 63.6.
Baroness de le Spenser.

etc. or those whose Ancestors were summoned to the Parliament, by this an
Inheritance does accrue to their posterity.

Fortescue, fol. 100.

Question has bin made whether the Dignity of one su^moned to the Parliament
dying without issue male may descend to the female, but this may appear by the
former Treatise.

Concerning the title of Honor descendable to the Heir female, it is clear
that such offices being of estate of inheritance do descend, as the office of
the high Constableship of England, challenged tempore H. 3. by the Duke of
Buckingham was adjudged to descend to the Daughter of Humfrey Bohun Earl of
Hereford. So the office of Earl Marshall descended to the house of Norfolk,
all which offices are as unfit to be exercised by their sexes, as unfit for
them to be summoned to the Parliament.

And if such Title come in competition, the issue shall be tried by record,
and certified by the Kings Writ, and not by Jury, Coke 6.5 3.7. part 15.

Though all Daughters be Coperceners, and make but one Heir, yet in descent of
Dignities it is otherwise, for they be things entire, participating of
superiority, therefore descendable only to the eldest. And so is the Civil
Law, yet there was a Judgment tempore H. 3. touching the descent of the
Earldom of Chester, Obijt. 17. H. 3.
the Earl dying without issue, leaving his Sisters his Heirs; The Judgment
was that it should be divided equally among Coperceners; But this Judgment was
held erroneous in that very age, Vide Bract. li. 2. cap. 34, fol. 76. hoc fuit
injustum, etc. His reasons are, because the honor of Chivalrie, chiefly
consisting in the Nobility may not be divided: for by multitude of partitions,
the reputation of Honors in such succession must be impaired, and the
strength of the Realm being drawn into many hands by such partition much
infeebled. In which resolution Britton by commandment, and in the name of E. 1.
accorded fol. 187. The former Judgment was given about 17. H. 3. And the
Writers of that time testify, that it came holy unto John Scot, Son of David
Earl of Huntington, and Anguish and Maude the eldest Sister of the said
Randolph, if it were given upon the death of John Scot, who died without issue
about 24. H. 3. yet it stood in force, because the King assumed the Earldom
to himself upon other satisfaction to the coperceners, Mat. Par. 366. tamen
vide Mills 75. and Guillem 28.

Hugh Lupus the first Earl of Chester, was by the Conqueror his uncle created
into that dignity, Mills 74.75. Coke 35.7 part 15.
habend. fibi, etc. adeo libere per gladium sicut Rex ipse tenuit Angliam per
Coronam, etc. he died without issue, and the Earldome divided among his 4.
sisters. If she be noble by birth, though she marry under her degree, she
remains noble, but those innobled by marriage, and after marry with a man of
meaner degree, utterly lose her former dignity, Fortescue 100. Cook
6.33.4.118.

It was the case of Ra. Howard Esquire, husband of the widow of the Lord Powes
against the Duchess of Suffolk, the Writ naming her Lady Anne Powes, Dyer 79.
so also in Qu. Maryes times when the Duchess of Suffolk married Stokes bre.
Bro. 146. digest lib. 1. Tit. 9. for the dignity accruing by marriage is but in
fait and not by any record, Coke 6.53. Coke 4.117. Cawells instit. lib. 1. Tit.
10.15.

So long shall a Dukes wife be called Duchess, and an Earls Countess, and
enjoy all honors appertaining to that estate, with tasting, kneeling, serving,
etc. And a Baroness and Knights wife saluted Lady, Quamdiu matrimonium aut
viduitas vxoris durant, except she elope, for as then every woman shall lose
her dower, so being advanced by titles of dignity by that husband by such
elopement loses them.

If a Lady which is married come through the forest, she has no privilege
by the Statute, but a Duchess or Countess during the time she is unmarried
may, Crompt. Juris dict. 167.

Such Ladies whether they be married or sole upon Indictment, shall be tried
per Peers by the Statute of 20. H. 6. cap. 9. it being a declaration of the
common law. Coke 6.52.


By the Civil Law, Si filia Regis nubat alicui Domino, vel Commit. dicetur
tamen semper Regalis.

Among Noble women there is difference of degrees, and according to their
qualities, the law gives special privileges as follows by the Stat. of 25.
of E. 3, 2. it is high Treason to compass or imagine the death of the Queen,
or to violate the Kings companion.

The Kings Spouse is a sole person in law to purchase, etc. plead and be
impleaded, Coke 4.23.6. Theboal lib. 1. cap. 4 24 E. 3.3.8. Bract. 363. And of
such acts of Parliament as concern her, the Judges ought to take notice,
Coment. 231. a Coke 8.28. In some cases she shall have Prerogative as the King
himself. See the case of Wardship 5. E. 3.4. Stamf. prerog. cap. 2.

The Qu. Wife to the King, or widow, shall not be amerced if she be nonsuited,
whereas all other subjects shall, for she shall participate with the Kings
prerogative, Coke 8.62. but not in all cases, for the subject shall not sue to
her by Petition as to the King, 11. H. 4 67. Stamf. prerog. cap. 22.

Against the King, Nullum tempus occurrit, otherwise of the Queen 18. E. 3.2.
Philippa Regina Angl. Ibid. fol. 1. and 13. Stam. prerog. 18.

In 21. E. 3.6. A Protection was allowed against the Queen.

In a Writ of dower against Isabel Qu. of England mother to the then King, the
Judges were of opinion that she was not to answer to any Writ, but said they
to the plaintiff it behooves you to go to her by Petition, to whom the
Demandant Dixit graits, and prayed the court for a continuance of the action
until she might speak with the Queen; But they nor the Queens Council
would agree that, the Qu. should be accepted as answerable 10. E 3.379.

The Wife of the Kings eldest Son has some prerogative not communicable to the
Wives of other Noblemen, for by the Statute of 25. E. 3. It is high Treason to
violate her.

Dutchesses also and Countesses have special honor appertaining to their
estates, as kneeling and tasting, which things I leave to the Heralds.

The Statute of 7. Iac. cap. 6. entitled an Act for the administering the oath
of Allegiance requires those of 18. years or above to take the said oath. The
title is for administration of the Oath, etc. and reformation of married women
Recusants.

Ladies in Reputation.
THe Wife or Widow of the son, and heir of a Duke or Earl, in the life of
his Father, is a Lady by Courtesy, and takes place according to the ancient
time, as they have been permitted by their Sovereign Prince, and allowance of
the Herald. But in legal proceedings they are not to have such Privilege.

If a Noblewoman of Spain come into England by a safe conduct, or, etc. And so
styled in the said Letters, yet is she but a Lady in reputation.

And English woman borne, takes to Husband a Spanish or French Duke, though
he be made Denizen, yet shall she not bear the title of Dignity in legal
proceedings.

A German woman is married to the Marquess of Northampton, or, etc. unless
she be made Denizen, she cannot claim the privilege or title of her Husband,
no more then she can claim Dower or Jointure.

An English woman does take the Earl of Kildare in Ireland to her Husband, or
if a Lord in Scotland, though he be post natus, etc. their wives shall not
aprticipate their Husbands Dignities.

But if the King Create one of his Subjects naturalized by Parliament to be
Viscount Rochester within England, and after summon him to the Parliament by
Writ, and assign him place there, by this is he made Peer of the Realm, and
partakes with them of all Privileges, and by consequence his Wife, Widow and
Children after him, E. of Angus in Scotland.
34. E. 3.35. Gilbert Humfrevils case.

But if an English man be made by the Emperor, Earl of the Empire, his Wife
shall not bear that title, either according to law or reputation.

All Daughters of Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, are (by custom long used in
the Kings Palace) to be named Ladies, and to have precedencie according to the
degrees of their parents, and of this custom the Law takes notice.

But nevertheless in the Kings Courts of Justice, they bear not this title of
Honor, no more then the Sons of such noble personages. Brothers to such Ladies
may do.

The Hypothesis or particular Question.
WHether the Dignity of Aburgavenny, Sit conjuncta feodo, and such as ought to
descend to the special Heir male seized of the Castle, bearing the head of
that Barony, and of the lands that make that Honor.

Or whether the Dignity, Name and Style, to be Baron of Aburgaven. ought to
descend to the general Heir male, who is not interessed in the said Castle or
honor.

For the more orderly proceeding herein to avoid confusion, and that every
thing appear concerning his question in his proper person. There shall be
showed,

First, that the Barony is a Barony by by tenure, a very ancient Honor, and no
Barony by Writ only, whereof will ensue by the former Declaration in the
treatise of Barony; That the dignity and name de jure ought to go and descend
with the Castle and Honor so holden, as long as the same shall or may continue
in the name, blood, and line of such as are nobly descended, and may support
the same. There shall be Proved

Aburgav. and the name, title, and dignity of Lord, and Barony of Aburg. de
facto has come and descended with the Castle, which make the honor of by the
space of 300. years last past, in their noble Families in the blood of the
Hastings. 2. In the time of Beauchampe, and the time of Nevill, where the name
by the Grace of God does now, and long may continue, every which family having
right to the said Castle and honor, did lawfully bear the name and title of
Lord Aburgav. and had place in Parliament accordingly. And therein shall be
answered the objections made to the contrary.

That the Barony of Aburgavenny is a Barony by Tenure, and an ancient Honor.
AFter the Normans had conquered this Land, it was carefully observed by them
as a matter of much moment, and a point of special policy to place upon the
confines or borders of the Britains or Welsh, not then subdued, men of much
matter, not only sufficiently able to encounter the inrodes and invasions of
the enemy, but also willing to make onset on them, and to enlarge the
conquest. These men thus placed were of high blood, credit, and continuance
among them, countrymen to the Normans, and in whose faith, and prowes the
Conquerors reposed special confidence and trust. And therefore in the
territories given unto them to hold, the tenures were devised to be very
special and of great importance, and their Honors enriched with many
privileges, 7. H 6.35. 18 E 2. Assisis 382 Fol.
The Earl of Chester for the North border of Wales erected a County Palatine;
And the Barons of the middle part of the South Marches were adorned i a manner
with a Palatine Jurisdiction, having a Court of Chancery, and Writs only among
themselves pleadable, to the intent that their attendance, might not thence be
driven, for the prosecuting of Controversies or quarrels in the Law. And as for
the other part of the South Marches, they seemed sufficiently fenced with the
River of Severne and the Sea.

The Castle of Aburgavenny takes his name from the River of Gevenny, whereon
it is situate, and the British word Abber, which signifies a Mouth, and is
interpreted the Mouth of Gevenny, because the Castle and Mouth of Aburgavenny
is built near the place where the said River of Gevenny does open it self to
the end of the Uske; It is an ancient Fortress of old foundation: there or
near unto the place (as learned men do probably, and upon many good
circumstances conjecture) where the Romans builded their Gabonium. It is the
chiefest Towns of the County, called the higher Guent, by the Romans called
Ventum Gallinum, now parcel of the County of Monmouth.

This Castle, etc. was first given to be holden Per Baroniam sive grand
Serjantie, the service whereof is of great importance, as appears by this
Record following.

Inquisitio capt etc. At Aburgavenny, Ex bu^delle Esch 6. E 2. Mar. Wall.
6. E. 2. upon the death of Jobn Hastings found quod idem Johannes tenuit
castrum, etc. De Rege in Capite per servicium homagij wardi maritag. cum
acciderit, and si (...) fuerit inter Regem Angl. and Principem Walliae dictus
Johannes debet custodire patriam de Operwent sumptibus proprijs.

Inquisitio capt. apud Hereford upon a Writ of ad quod damnum, Ex Bundell.
Esch. 25. E. 3. Ex rot. Patent. 4. E. 1. number. 36.
found quod non est ad damnum Regis nec, etc. si Rex conce^at Priori, etc. de
Aburg. quod ipse duas acr. prat. vocat Weldelham, etc. quas de Lorentio de
Hastings nuper Commit. Pembrooke post Statutum de Mortmaine retinere possit sibi
and Successoribus suis, and dicunt quod praed. 2. acr. fuerunt de dominicis
praedicti Commit. and tenentur immediate de Rege ut parcella Castri quod tenetur
de eo, and de nullo alio.

Also, that this Barony was of a very large Seignorie, and had petty Barons or
Baronets holding thereof appears by Writ, 1. E. 1. for the more speedy
gathering of 15th which was granted to him, toward his charge to the Holy
land, which Writ is directed to the Tenants of the said Barony, that they
should pay their part to Gremball Poneefote, and Henry de Bray appointed
Collectours, directed in this manner.

Rex Abbatibus Prior. Baron. Mil. liberis hominbius and omnibus alijs
Tenentibus de honor. Aberg. Salut. Cum Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbat. Prior.
Mil. and omnes alij de regno 15th. de bonis suis, qnibusdam tamen rebus
exceptis nobis liberaliter concesserunt and benign ad exonerationem debitorum
in quibus diversis mercatoribus de tempore quo moram in terra sancta gessimus
obligamur, Nos, etc.

Observatio secunda, that the Title of Aberga. de facto has descended with the
Castle, etc.

William Conqueror gave the County of higher Guent, Hamline de Backlune.
unto Hamline de Backlune, the Son of Drugo de Backlune a Norman, which
builded the Castle and Priory of Abergavenny, and after assured the same to
Brian de Wallingford, Son of Eudo Earl of Britain, Son of Lucie younger
Sister of the said Hamline, by whom it was conveyed to Walter second Son of
Miles of Gloucester, tralt. of Glou. Brewes.
Earl of Hereford, from him it came to his Brother Henry, and thence to the
Families of Brewes Barons in the Marches of Wales, and from them to Cantelupe,
Barons in the said Marches. Cantelupe.


The the line of Hastings, owners of this Castle, and in respect thereof
entitled, Barons of Aburgavenny.
GEorge de Cantelupe Baron of Aburgavenny and Cant. the last of that name died
without issue having two Sisters, Hastings.
Joan the eldest married to Henry Hastings and Milliscent, married to Eudo la
Zouch. Henry Hastings by his had issue John, and because he did adhere to the
Barons tempore H. 3. he was imprisoned for seven years, Ed. Kelen Article 35.
Rot. Cart. H 3.
during which time he died. And that Barony being in the Kings hands, he gave
it to Peter de Sabandia in exchange for the Manor of Baydenhall parcel of the
Honor of Richmond which the said King had given him; So that this Barony came
now to the Earl of Richmond, Esc 8. E. 3. In Suffex. Ex rot. claus. 2. E. 1
indoes. memb. 12.
as by an office found after the death of John Britton Earl of Richmond,
tempore E. 3. appears.

The said John Hastings at the time of the death of Henry his Father, and Joan
his mother, both which died in the life of the said Geo. Cant. as also at the
time of the death of the said Geo. his Uncle was within age, and in ward to E.
1. during whose minority, there was a partition between the said Milliscent
his Aunt, and the said John, by which the Castle, etc. of Aberg. then extended
to the yearly value of two hundred pounds, eighteen shillings and three
pence, as also Kill Garren, St. Clear, and other lands in England and Wales.
And unto the said Milliscent were allotted the Castle of Totnes in Devon, etc.
Eyton in the County of Bedford, and Farringworth, etc. with diverse other lands.

The said John came to full age, the first John Hastings, Baton of Aberg.
11. E. 1. and did his homage, and had his Livery as appears by Record, but
by the same Record appears, that the Barony of Hastings was never redeemed
according to the Edict Kellenworth, but granted to Peter de Sabandia, Claus 11.
E. 1. Mem. 6.
as aforesaid.

This John did lawfully bear the Title of Lord Abergavenny, by this partition.

The said John being one of the Competitors for the Crown of Scotland, with
the rest submitted himself 19. E. 1. to the determination of the said King as
Supreme Lord of Scotland, which Commission was framed in these words:

A tout crus, In magno Rot. Sca^r.
etc. Florence Commit. de Holland, Robert de Bruise, seigneur de Vasdaum. Io.
Balioll Seigneur de Badenaw, Patrick de Dumbar, Comite de la March, Ia. de
Vascye pur son pier Nich, de Seules, Gulielm. de Rosse: Salus en dieu cum nous
entendomus daver droit en Roylme de Escoce, and cel duel jure chalenger and
avouer devant ceoque pluis de pouer, jurisdiction and reason eist de trier
nostre droit. Et le noble Prince Seig. Edward, etc. nous syant inform per bo.
and sufficient reasonque a luy come aver droit Sovereign Su^r se^ du dit
Roylme de Escoce, and la Conusance d'oyer trier and determine. nostre droit,
nous ne nostre volunt sans null manner de force ou distress de droit devant luy
come Sovereign Su^r de la terre, etc. l'an de grace, 1291.

Scotland unto the said E. 1. until he should determine the controversy.

E. 1. for John Balioll, who afterward adhered to the French against England.

Whereupon Ed. 1. prosecuting war against Scotland, the Pope intermedling, a
Parliament was proclaimed to be held at Lincoln. 29. E. 1. where it wass
agreed that the King should write to the Pope touching his right to that
Crown, and the wrong offered him. And that the Nobility should write, that
they neither could, nor ought to suffer, Nota
that the King of England should refer the same to the Popes sentence, they
subscribing their names and titles of Honor, among which was the said John
Hastings name in this manner, Johannes Dominus de Aburgavenny.

E. 1. the King purposing to go to France, Ex Rot. mal. 17. E 1. in dors.
charged the Lords Marchers of Wales to be resident upon their Baronies,
fearing the invasion of the Welsh. and Anno 17. in the Rebellion of Rise ap
Meredocke the King being in France, directs his Writ unto the said Marchers
under the Test. Edmundi fratris sui. And among other the Barons there named as
Ed. de Mortimer, Roger Mortimer, Pet. Corbet. Roger le Strange, Fulk
Fitzwarren, Galfrid de Canmyl, William Mortimer, Guy de Brian, John de
Hastings, Ra. de Tony, William de Bruise, John Tregouse, Bogok Nevill, Ric.
Fiz-Allen, and Io. Fitz-Reginald, and all Barons Marchers.

E. 1. When therer was a great quarrel between Gilbert de Clare, 20. E. 1.14
in recept. Scacar.
Earl of Gloucester and Hereford, and Humfrey de Bohum, late E. of Hereford
and Essex, whereupon murders, etc. had been committed in their lands in
Brecnocke.

A Commission was awarded to the Bishop of Ely, William de Valence, the Kings
uncle, Io. de Mettingham one of the Judges, and unto Robert de Hereford, to
hear and determine the same. In which Commission the said John Hastings was
one In which the Commissioners would have had the said Barons to have been
sworn to make presentment thereof, which they refused, standing upon their
privilege, and therefore the Enquest was impannelled of others.

P. 23. E. 1. The said John was summoned ot the Parliament, Some. Parliamen.
Anno 24. E. 1. Some. Parl. a. 35. E. 1.
which was to be holden the Sunday next after the feast of St. Martin, as also
to a Parliament at Carlisle, 35. E. 1.

It will be objected that John his father was summoned in 49. H. 3. and
therefore in regard thereof and not in respect of this Barony was this John
summoned.

It is true that Henry Hastings was summoned it 49. H 3. he was Captain of the
Cast of Killingworth, Respon.
and held it against the King, and beheaded the Kings Messenger sent unto him,
for the which fact was the said imprisonment before spoken of; Ed. Kenel. act
34. Cron. Holens.
And the Barony of Hastings descended not to the said John. Therefore in the
letters to the Pope, and in his claim to Scotland he writes himself Johannes
Hastings, etc. and not Dominus Hastings which if that title had belonged to him
he had expressed it.

Dominus Abergav. as Dominus Proprietarius, and not as Dominus Honorarius.

The same may be said of the other Competitor, and the Letters to the Pope
which were ridiculous.

In the Summons 23. E. 1. ^e is named Io. Hastings Mil. and not Johannes
Dominus Hastings, therefore, Respon.
etc.



Now to the Descent.
THis Iolin died, Continuance of the descent.
6. E. 2. having issue John, who died 18 E. 2. And in the Diem eligit extremum,
he is styled Johannes Hastings, Dominus de Abergav. and Earl of Pembrooke,
tempore E. 3. he died 12. E. 3. having issue John his Heir, Ex bundel. Esc.
18. E. 2.
Earl of Pembrooke, and Lord of Abergav. who died 49. E. 3. having issue John
Earl of Pembrooke, etc. who died by reason of a wound received at a Just at
Woodstocke about 13. R. 2. he was the last of that name, Baron of Aburgavenny.

The Family of Beauchampe. Lord Aburgavenny.
AFter the death of the said John, Peauchamp Lord of Aberg.
Reginald Gray, Lord Richyn, Son of Elizabeth Sister of the said John the
great Grandfather of him that last died, claimed this Barony, and thereof had
Livery. And thereupon grew a contention concerning the bearing of the Arms of
Hastings without difference between the Lo. Gray of the whole blood, and Sir
Edward Hastings of the half blood, which was adjudged for the Lord Gray in the
Earl Marshalls Court.

A like contention was between the Lord Gray and William Beauchampe, third
son of Thomas the elder Earl of Warwick, who claimed this Barony against
the said Lord Gray by virtue of an intaile from the said John the elder, which
proved, and upon Composition the said Reginald 15. R. 2. levied a Fine to, M.
15. R. 2 and recordat. Term. H. prox.
etc. whereby he acknowledged the right of the said Castle, to the use of the
said William Beauchampe, as by an old Msss remaining with the Earl of Kent may
appear, Vid. the Earl of Kents book.
as also by a partition of the said Lands.

FINIS.

