Hen: Do: Carry Baro de Leppington Comes Monmouthensis, et Honmi Ord: Balniae
Eques.
DEO CARI NIHILO CARENT
portrait of Henry Earl of Monmouth Guil: Faithorne fe:



CAROLVS D.G. MAGNAE BRITANNIAE FRAN: ET HIB: REX
portrait of King Charles I

MARIA D.G. MAG: BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBER REGINA
portrait of Queen Mary

AN HISTORY of the Civil Wars of ENGLAND between the two howses of
Lancaster and York

The original where of is set down in the life of Richard ye second; their
proceedings in ye lives of Henry ye 4th Henry ye 5th and 6th Edward ye 4th and
5th Richard ye 3d and Henry ye 7th in whose days they had a happy period.

Englished by ye Right Honble Henry Earl of Monmouth in two Volumes

Imprinted at London for John Benson and are to be sold at his shop in St
Du^stans churchyard 1641



AN HISTORY OF THE Civil VVarres OF ENGLAND, Between the two Houses of
Lancaster and York.

The original whereof is set down in the life of Richard the second; their
proceedings, in the lives of Henry the fourth, the fifth, and sixth, Edward the
fourth and fifth, Richard the third, and Henry the seventh, in whose days they
had a happy period.

Written in Italian in three Volumes, by Sir Francis Biondi, Knight, Gentleman
of the Privy Chamber to his Majesty of Great Britain.

Englished by the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of MOUNMOUTH, in two Volumes.

THE FIRST VOLUME.

Imprinted at London by T. H. and I. D. for John Benson, and are to be sold at
his shop in Saint Dustans Churchyard, 1641.

THE TRANSLATORS EPISTLE TO THE READERS HIS COUNTRYMEN.
THat Translations are at the best but like the wrong side of Hangings, is
granted. Yet he who cannot get to see the right side, may by the other guess
at the Story therein represented. This of mine may yet seem to be of a worse
condition; as only the reducing back to our own Language that which has
been collected from our home Stories, and published in a foreign Tongue; so
as it may almost be termed the turning into English what was turned out of
English. But the Author has had his end: the making the valor and honor of
our Kingdom known to his own Countrymen; for which we owe him a National
thanks. I have chosen this way to pay mine, by affording you all a means how
to acknowledge yours, and thus I have part of my end likewise. The remainder
being my observance of his desires, and the shunning of spending my time worse
The Italian says, Chi non puo quel che voule, quel che puo voglia. If I could
coin any thing out of my own Brain, worthy of my Countrymen, they should
have it: since not, let them accept of this Piece of Gold changed into Silver,
and therein of the good will of their

Compatriot MOUNMOUTH.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the High and mighty Monarch, CHARLES, King
of great BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND.
I Was of opinion, Sir, that the eminent condition of Princes did require from
such as serve them, actions answerable to the greatness of their thoughts, and
that otherwise they would prove contrary to the dignity of the one, and duty of
the other. But upon better advice, I found that Princes make use of men as they
do of metals, which though not all of a like worth, yet are they all adapted
to proper uses; so as iron and lead, (though of mean esteem) are not to be
slighted in things where gold and silver are of no use. I, Sir, that am the
meanest of all your Majesty's metalls, having undertaken to write the story of
the Civil wars of England, was in some dispute with my self touching the
Dedication. And though in all reason I was to dedicate it to your Majesty (as I
most humbly do) yet the thread of my discourse wanting the mentioned
proportion, I have labored to persuade my self to offend rather against it
then against my duty; not that I ever imagined my lead could be any ways
servicable unto your Matie, but that I feign would hope your Majesty through
Royal clemency will be pleased to approve of my resolution occasioned by the
leisure times your Majesty's liberality causes me to enjoy.

The reason, Sir, why I write it not from its beginning, is my not being sure
to finish it. To make therefore an entire story, I have chosen that part
thereof which is to be handled under one title and object. And I have written
it in this language, for that Italy, though rich in science and history, is but
meanly furnished with this story, having had no light at all thereof save by
Polidore Virgill, who by writing it in Latin, has made only for the learned,
and by making it so succinct, has afforded me field room to make it for all
men, and to add many things to the much, which perhaps (for lack of time) was
by him omitted.

I know not Sir, whether the freedom I take in giving my opinion upon the
passages herein, be to please all men, but a bare story seemed to me to be like
a naked body, which exposed to the injury of air, grows infirm, and being
seen by others is ashamed. Some are of opinion that all things ought to be
represented in their original purity, that so the liberty of giving judgment
might be left unto the reader; yet the best both of ancient and modern writers
have done otherwise. But a whole piece of cloth being presented to the Readers
view, he cannot judge whether all the threads be of equal goodness, unless
the weaver, who knows from whence he had them give him a true information; not
thereby taking from him the liberty of giving his judgment, but rather
affording him a double freedom therein, for to the examination of the story he
adds the power of examining the historians opinion: I praise goodness, and
blame vice, but in the second Volumne I do not praise the soft unsinnowy
goodness of Henry the sixth. Xenophon decyfering a perfect Prince in the
person of Cyrus, amongst exercises prescribes him hunting; not that by the
custom of seeing blood shed he should become cruel, but that by not
commiserating delinquents, he might become just; and not abhorring the sight of
dead beasts, warlike; otherwise contaminated with a womanish pity, he would at
the same time have made him incapable both of scepter and sword. Goodness
though feminine by name is of masculine effects; and fixing its undazled eyes
upon God its primary end, ought to become void of folly, scruples and fears.

I am sorry, Sir, I was so late in undertaking this affair, since I am too
late aware that contemplative sciences do in their universal objects produce
particular ends, bring delight and glory to the understanding, no profit; that
truth may sow the seeds, but opinion reap the harvest, that we are not wise,
save when we know, we know nothing, which is that learned ignorance so
ingeniously handled by the Cardinal of Cusa; I place not here divine
knowledge^ she has two real foundations to be esteemed such; prophesies,
miracles, and histories take from this number. But since we are taught to know
no more then is behoovefull, and that with sobriety, and according to the gift
we are endowed with all, I see not that we are necessitated to busy our selves
therein, unless there be a lawful vocation, whilst we ought to content our
selves with the knowledge of God, by the general way of the worlds harmony and
order, and by the particular way of faith.

The true cause then, Sir, which has moved me to this undertaking, is the
having considered that the end of civil life, being to live well and happily,
and that there is no happiness without knowledge, nor knowledge without
science, since those of contemplation do not, it must be the moral sciences
which do produce it: the which appears manifest unto me, for that nature
has imprinted in us the principalls thereof, to make it the more easy unto
us, to the end that without contemplation or learning, the learned and
unlearned may be equally capable thereof, agevolated by their object, the which
is either familiar in us, as are affections, or has dependency upon us, as
have actions. As soon as we are borne, by the traditions of our parents, and
such as have the care of our bringing us up, we learn to love virtue, and hate
vice; being become men, to govern our family; grown more mature, to rule the
weal public: and if we meet not with so much of facility in the last, as in
the other two, it happens for that moral and Oeconomicall virtues are but
the Columns, whereas the practice of States, the knowledge of Princes, and how
to manage people, are the true structure of this edifice, upon the model
though of past events. For as wits though never so excellent express no other
conceits then what have formerly been expressed (sine they cannot exceed the
bounds wherewith knowledge in general is limited) so adventures, though
casual, happen not but by way of Analogy to what has already happened;
depending upon the constant causes of former orders, the which though diverse
in time, are, notwithstanding at all times like unto themselves, if not equal.
So as since we are wanting in the practice of present affairs, the knowledge
of what is past is necessary, the which not being to be had but by history, it
follows that history be the safest way to this happiness, worthy to be with
all diligence frequented, not by me alone, but by the very best. This, Sir, is
the occasion of my present labors; which I consecrate unto your Majesty not so
much for that they appertain unto you (containing the Acts of your most
glorious predecessors) as that your Majesty possessing all such discipline as
does become a great King, will together with the work accept the devoted good
will of the workman, who boasts himself of nothing more then of the honor he
has to be

Your Majesty's most hmble and faithful servant Giovanni Francisco Biondi.

THE GENEALOGY OF EDWARD THE THIRD, Who had Five Daughters, and seven Sons.
1. IZabella, who married Ingheran Lord of Cousi, by whom she had two
daughters, 1. Mary, married to Henry of Bar. 2. Philippa, married to Robert
Vere, Duke of Ireland, afterward repudiated.

2. Ioane, married to Alfonso 11. King of Castile and Leon. 3. Blanch, who dyed
young. 4. Mary, married to John Montford, Duke of Britany. 5. Margaret, married
to John Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, who dyed without issue.
1. Edward Prince of Wales, who married Ioane daughter of Edmund Earl of Kent,
brother by the fathers side to Edward the second, by whom he had Richard the
second, who succeeded his Grandfather in the Kingdom, and dyed a violent death
without issue. 2. William of Staifield. 3. Lionel, Duke of Clarence. 4. John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. 5. Edmund of Langley, Duke of York. 6. William of
Windsor. 7. Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Gloucester. The two Williams both dyed
young without issue. The Genealogies of the four other are hereafter set
down.
The Genealogy of Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son of Edward the third.
Lionel duke of Clarence married Elizab. daughter of Will. Burgh earl of
Vister. by who^ he had Philippa, who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
and had by him Roger, Earl of March. declared by Richard the second successor
to the Kingdom the year 1387 who married Elizabeth, sister to Thomas Holland
Duke of Surrey, and had issues Edmund Earl of March, who died in Ireland
without issue, the third year of Henry 6. Roger, who died young. Anne, who
married Richard Earl of Cambridge, son to Edward Duke of York; she
afterward laid pretense unto the crown. Eleanor, who dyed without issue.

Edmund. John, beheaded in the third year of Henry the sixth. Elizabeth,
married to the Lord Pearcy, surnamed Hotspurre. Henry, the second Earl of
Northumberland, who was stain in the first battle at St Albans, who by
Eleanor daughter of Ralph Nevil, first Duke of Westmerland, had Henry, the
third Earl of Northumberland, who was slain siding with Henry the sixth,
against Edward the fourth.

Philippa, who had three husbands, but no issue.


The Genealogy of John Duke of Lancaster, fourth son of Edward the third, from
whom came 4. Kings, viz. Henry the 4. 5. 6. 7. Of 3. wives he had 8. children,
what Sons, what Daughters.
By Blanch, daughter to Henry Duke of Lancaster, grandchild to Henry Earl of
Lancaster, and great grandchild to Edmund, second son to Henry the 3. Henry
the 4. married to Mary daughter to Humfrey of Bohun, Earl of Hertfora Essex,
and Nottingham, Constable of England, by whom he had Henry the 5. marriea to
Catherine of France; by whom he had Henry the 6. who married Margerit, daughter
to Regnald Duke of A^ou, King of Si^ily from whom came Edward, Prince of Wales
slain by Edward the 4.

who all died without issue.
Thomas, duke of Clarence, John, ^uke of Bedford. Humfrey, duke of Gloucester.
Blanch, married to the Elector Palatine. Philippa, married to the King of
Denmark.

Philippa, married to John King of Portugal, from whom came the successors of
that Crown. Elizabeth, married to John Holland, Duke of Exeter, beheaded at
Chester. Richard Holland, who dyed young. John, Duke of Exeter, who had two
wives, viz. Anne, daughter of the Earl of Stafford, by whom Henry Holland,
Duke of Exeter, dis-inhe^ited by Act of Parliament the first year of Edward
the fourth, and found ^ad the thirteenth year between Dover and Caleis.
Anne, daughter to Ioh. Montacute earl of Salisbury, by whom Anne, married to
Thomas Nevil, brother to the second Earl of Westmerland. Ralph Nevil, 3. Earl
of Westmerland

Edward, who died without issue.



By Constance, daughter to Peter, King of Castile, Catherine, married to Henry,
son and heir to John King of Castile and Leon, from whom descended the heirs
of those Kingdoms.
By Catherine Roet, daughter to a King of Arms, by whom he had before he
married her, and who were after made legitimate by the Popes authority and Act
of Parliament, John Beaufort, Marquis of Sommerset and Dorset, who married
Margerit, daughter to Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent. Henry, who dyed young.
John, first Duke of Sommerset, who married Margerite daughter to Sr. John
Beauchamp. Margerite, married to Edward Adham earl of Richmond. Henry the 7.
who married Elizabeth daughter to Henry the 4.

Edmund, Duke of Sommerset, slain in the ^attell at S. Albans, who married
Elenor, daughter of Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick. Henry, Duke of
Sommerset, beheaded, an. 1462. Charles Sommerset Earl of Worcester, bastard.
Edmund, Duke of Sommerset, beheaded, Anno 1471. dying without heyrs. John,
slain at the battle of Teuksbury.

Thomas. Ioane, married to James the first, King of Scotland. Margerite,
married to Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire. Thomas, E. of Devonsh.
beheaded. Henry, beheaded. John, slain at Teuksbury.



Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, Cardinal of St. Eusebius, and
Chancellor of England Thomas Beaufort, Earl of Dorset, Duke of Exeter, and
Chancellor of England. Ioane Beaufort, for whose issue look the next lease.

Jane Beaufort, married to Ralph Nevill, Earl of Westmerland. Richard Nevil,
Earl of Salisbury, beheaded, who married Elenor, daughter to Thomas Montigue,
Earl of Salisbury. William, Lord of Faulkenbridge Edward, Earl of Abergaveny.
George, Lord Latimer. Robert, Bishop of Durham. Cuthbert. Henry. Thomas.
Richard Nevil, Earl of Salisbury and Warwick, surnamed, The great, he married
Anne, daughter of Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick. Isabel, wife of George
Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, brother to Edward the fourth, drowned in a But
of Malm^y. Edward, Earl of Warwick, last heir male of the Plantagenet, he was
beheaded. Margerite, Countess of Salisbury, wife to Richard Poole, beheaded
the 13. year of Henry the 8. she was mother to Cardinal Poole.
Anne, wife to Edward, Prince of Wales son to Henry 6. he was slain by the
Duke of Gloucester, who after married the said Anne. Edward Prince of Wales, who
died before his Father.
John, Marquis Montigue, who married the daughter of Sr Edward Engelthorpe.
George, Archbishop of York, and Chancellor of England. George Nevil, Duke of
Bedford, degraded together with his father, for not having left sufficient
means to maintain their honor. Luce, first married to Sir Thomas
Fitz-Williams, then to Sir Anthony Brown, by whom William, Earl of
Southampton. St Anthony Brown.


Jane, married to Will. Fitz-Allen, Earl of Arundel. Thomas Fitz-Allen, Earl
of Arundel. William Earl of Arundel.
Elenor, wife to Thomas Stanley Earl of Darby. George, Baron Strange Thomas,
Earl of Darby.
Edward, Lord Mounteagle. James, Bishop of Ely.

Catherine, wife to John Moubray, second duke of Norfolk. John, duke of
Norfolk married to Elenor, daughter of the Lord Bourchier. John, duke of
Norfolk married to Elizabeth, daughter to Geo. Talbot, 1. earl of Shrewsb.
Anne, wife to Richard, Duke of York second son of Edward the fourth.

Elenor, wife to Henry Pearcy, second Earl of Northumberland slain in the
service of Henry 6. in the first battle at Saint Albans. Henry, the third
earl of Northumberland, slain in the like service, who married Elenor,
daughter to Richard, Lord Poinings. Henry, the fourth Earl of Northumberland,
slain by the people, for leavying a tax imposed by Henry the seventh, and the
Parliament, he married Maudlin, daughter to the earl of Pembrocke. Henry, the
fifth earl of Northumberland. William. Allen, a Bishop. Iocelin. Elenor,
married to Edward Stafford, duke of Buckingham. Anne, wife to William
Fitz-Allen, Earl of Arundel.


Anne, wife to Humfrey Staffo^d, first Duke of Buckingham, slain in the first
battle at Northhampton. Humfrey, Earl of Stafford, slain in the first battle
of St Albans; he married Margerite, sister to Edward Beaufort Duke of
Sommerset. Henry, second Duke of Sommerset* beheaded by Richard 3. he married
Catherine, sister to Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers. Edward, Duke of
Buckingham. Henry of Wiltshire, both beheaded by Henry the 8.

John Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire, married to Constance, daughter to Sir Henry
Green. Edward Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire. Catherine, wife to George Talbot,
Earl of Shrewsbury. George, E. of Shrewsbury, married to Anne, daughter to the
Lord Hastings. Francis, Earl of Shrewsbury. Margerite, married to Henry
Clifford, Earl of Cumberland.


Sicely, of whose issue see the next leaf.

Sicely, married to Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, who waged war with
Henry the 6. as lawful pretender to the Crown, he was slain in the battle
of Wakefield. King Edward the 4. who married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard
Woodville, Earl Rivers. King Edward the 5. Richard, duke of York. Both slain
in the Towe^ by their uncle Richard 3 Elizabeth, married to Henry the 7.
Arthur, prince of Wales. Henry the 8. Catherine, married to William Courtney,
earl of Devonshire. Henry, Earl of Devonshire, and Marquis of Exeter,
beheaded by Henry the 8.
Edmund, who died in the battle with his Father. George, Duke of Clarence,
drowned in a But of Malmsey in the Tower, he married Isabel, daughter to
Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick. Edward, Earl of Warwick, beheaded under
Henry the 7. Margerite, Countess of Salisbury, married to Sr Richard Poole,
beheaded under Henry the 8. Henry, Lord Montigue, beheaded under Henry the 8.
Reginald Poole, Cardinal. Vrsula, married to Henry Lord Stafford, son and
heir to Edward, last Duke of Buckingham.


Richard, Duke of Gloucester, by tyrannical usurpation, called afterward
Richard the 3. who married Anne, daughter to Richard Nevil, Earl of Salisbury
and Warwick. Edward, Prince of Wales, who died during his fathers life.

THE INTRODVCTION.
MY intention is to write the story of England, for as much as concerns the
C^vill Wars of that Kingdom, from their first rise, to their happy period.
Events, which the less they be known forth of those Climats, the more worthy
are they of others knowledge. Civil knowledge accounts not him wise who
applies himself only to what concerns his own Country, but who enlarges his
understanding to the universal knowledge of all Nations. Such as are
unexperienced and too passionatly g^ven to the love of their own Country do*
usually misprise foreign occurrences; whilst alteration in governments does
vary those virtues in them by which they acquired a name above others. The
Assyrians, Medes, and Persians, the Macedonians Greeks, and Romans, do
witness this unto us; people ought not to boast of what they were, but (if
there be any occasion of ostentation) of what they for the present are.
Barbarism is not so general in the now present times, as in times past: of as
many Nations as are, there is not any one who at this day can vaunt her self
to be the lawgiver unto others. What is wanting in some one is peeced up by the
advantages which some others have not. This discipline of war, learning, the
liberal sciences, arts mechanical, and civil comportment are so diffused, as
those who last embraced them, are like to cisternes, which do more abound with
water then do the house tops and gutters, from which they did at first fall.
There was a time when the Grecians had presumption enough to repute the Romans
barbarous; their condition shows us how much they were deceived. The Vandalls,
Lombards and Goths were civilized at the cost of the Roman Empire. Where
luxury and vice increase, their dominion decreaseth, and together with the
rigor of the mind, civility it self; which is not defined by ceremonial
complements, but by the strong effect of a judicious understanding. England,
then Albion, and now Britain, a Country not fully known before Cae^ars time:
from the entry of the Romans fell to be one of the most noted, and most
glorious Monarcnies of the world. She did not send multitudes of people abroad:
for abounding in whatsoever is requisite to nature (and that in some
perfection) she haa no need of other Colonies, nay her own abundance and
fertility was such, as invited her being oppugned; whilst divided, and under
the command of many, she remained a prey to them that did assail her. I intend
not to speak of her beginning; so long a work suits not with so short a life
as is mine. I will take my rise from her Civil wars, which will show unto us
what evil effects states divided within themselves do produce; and how that
nature to render this people valiant, took from them the apprehension of
death, the only thing which makes men base and cowards; not that an
inclination to peace be not to be numbered amongst the greatest hapinesses of
mankind, but for that the world being what it then was, and what it will be to
the end, humbleness and meekness ought only to be accounted amongst
individual virtues: So as if people be not of themselves fierce, they shall
always be subject to the neglect and injuries of such as esteem a pleasing
behavior no virtue, but a weakness of nature. The praise of mansuetude in one
or a few, is not incompatible with valor, but in a whole nation it is as much
to be blamed as it is the occasion of harm. For virtue or vice are not judged
by Moral or Theological terms, but by the good or bad effects which from
thence may ensue. The Brittans were not subject to such defects; and though
they made trial of many, ebbes of fortune being miserably enforced (if we may
believe Gilda) to invoke the Roman assistance, it was for that they were
divided in their forces and inclinations. But being brought under one absolute
King, they appeared to be all members of one solid body, of force not to be
conquered, and of mind alternatly disposed, either to preserve their
reputations or dye. They have obtained famous victories, though fewer in number
by two thirds. The battle of Cressi and Poictiers witness this unto us; but
more particularly those that we are to meet withal in this our story: their
minds were at first wholly set upon liberty, so as free from foreign fear,
they oftentimes would boggle at their own kings, who though they were absolute,
bad not withstanding their Monarchy so well upheld by the Laws, that they
could hardly fall from regal power to oppression. And though the jealousy of
this libertyhath sometimes been very great in these people, even to the making
of them headstrong and seditious, yet inconveniences which do incidently
happen, ought not to be of power enough to take from the substance of that
government, the title of a well governed Commonwealth. And though it be not
void of faults (heaven being the only perfect Monarchy) yet not such as are
cause of mischief. They are not taxed or oppressed; without grievance or new
impositions. And whereas the Country people in other parts walk bare foot and
bare legged, with tattered clothes, and lean looks: beer well clothed and
well liking, they in substance are, and in apparel seem to be honorable and
wealthy Citizens. But it is plainly seen by them that men are weary of well
doing. For ignorant of other men's miseries, when they want their wonted wars,
and triumphs, they think themseves miserable, whilst in comparison of as many
as I know, they are the happiest nation in the world. Nor is the authority of
their kings lessened by this liberty: when they are virtuous and frugall, or
else esteemed of for their victories and Trophies; they have done with their
people even what they pleased. The two Henry's the 5. and the 7 in this our
story (not to make use of any out of it) are examples of this. Nor do their
mean revenues in comparison of those excessive ones of other Kings make them
less rich; for free from the extortion of great men, from maintaining of
Citadell, Garrisons, borse, confines: not troubled with Switzers, dependences,
correspondencies, spies (all necessary expenses, be it for the preservation of
ones own, or the pretending to what is another) they need not have any more.
They are secure at home, having no dependency but on the King: for abroad, the
Sea is their ditch, their Citadell, their Bul-warke; and their ships though
their chiefest charge, yet ordinarily are of no vast expense. Besides, upon any
extraordinary occurrence, their treasure is locked up in their subjects purses,
from whence it is drawn by the usual way of Parliament, without oppression or
injury to any one: and what by this means is raised, does not (as in many
other states) remain a continual revenue to the Prince. By the testimony of
Philip de Comines, the revenue of France in Charles the sevenths time, did not
exceed one hundred and fourscore thousand pound sterling. Under Lewis the
leventh, they came to four hundred and seventy thousand pounds sterling; the
year 1608. under Henry the fourth, three millions one hundred thousand pound
sterling. and at this present time under Lewis the thirteenth (if the relation
be not false) it amounts to four millions and five hundred thousand pounds
Sterling, or more. Hence I infer that the Kings of England walk in the
eclyptique line of their government, ruled by two just counterpoises, regal
authority, which makes them be obeyed; and the Laws, a just weight, equally
fitted to shape forth a well constituted Aristodemocraticall government The
people enjoy their liberty provided for by the Laws: The Nobility such Honors
and Offices as become their quality: and the King his will in making war or
peace: All confiscations and power of pardoning, the Laws not having debarred
him of anything which appertains to an absolutely juridicall Prince. I
thought good to touch upon these few things, for that necessary foreknowledge
which may be needful to this our History: And if they may appear strange to
such as are borne under Princes who know no other Law then their own will,
they ought not to think it strange, that governments to be good, ought (as all
other sublunary things) to be composed of more elements then one; and that
their contrariety produeeth the unity which nature requires. The Gentiles did
not without some great mystery feign their Gods to be bound by fate, and by
their swearing by the Stygian waters. For Princes are these Gods, their oaths
by the Stygian waters, the oaths which at their Coronation they take for the
good of the people: which would not be necessary for good Princes (for
goodness is a Law unto it self) but as necessary for those who may happen not
to be such, as are the soul and sense to a living body: nor ought they for
this to think themselves ere a whit the less firmly rooted: for as God is the
more potent for the impotency he has to sin, so their potency is more
solid, whilst incorporated into the Laws it becomes impeccable: otherwise if
they stood only upon their own legs, hatred and fear, their natural
enemies, were borne coetaneans with them, to ensnare them. These my praises of
this Nation may perchance appear not to be true to him who shall consider the
beginning of our story, since that passing over the relation of so many
glorious Kings, I take myrise from the unfortunate reign of Richard the
second, who coming to the Crown at eleven years of age, does prove the
miserable condition of such States as are governed by an intant King. But
virtue and vice change together with the times; a necessary vicissitude in
governments, not in a proper respect, but in respect of the general; for if it
were otherwise, people endowed with equal generosity, would either
reciprocally destroy themselves, or else they would all fall under the command
of some one who were more eminent in virtue then all the rest. Man has his age
prefixed, so have Kingdoms: to die of decrepite age is not usual, of disorders
usual: Kingdoms perish more by disorders then by decrepit age: so as the
people members of the King their ^ead, cannot but languish when he languisheth.
I conclude, that the end of these my slight endeavors are, to represent as in
a looking glass, to Princes moderation, to subjects obedience; for that
violent changes draw after them slaughter, misery and destruction.

Errata. In the life of R. 2. of H. 4 and H. 5.
Page. 1. Line 10. Read Cressy. ibid. 25. This. 3. 4. Leon. ibid. 36.
attestate. 10. 38. Dukes. ibid. Flanckers. 18. 2. keys. Ibid. 28. seize. 20.
2. to much wisdom. 31 6. not the nearness. 38. 9. Berkely 41. 14. incapable.
44. 1. the. 50. 21. who. 52. 26. Cor^eri. 53. 27. unprovided. 45. 22. lands.
55. 32. felled. 58. 2. King Richard had concluded for 30. years. ibid. if it
had been. ibid. 46. illegal. 59. 6. a tree watered. ibid. 32. but under.
ibid. 48. heir to Richard. Glendour, using. 69. 22. the oar. 70. 43. who. 74.
47. covering. 76. 45. Corbeil. 77. 6. might have been; if of. ibid. 18.
Bourges. 79. 29. Mowb^ay. ibid. 26. bolder resolves: revenge being. 82. 1.
intending. ibid. 39. and, in another. 89. 10. contumacy. ibid. 35. Angoulesme.
90. 24. Suburbs St. Ma^ceau. 91. 12. was only. 101. 9 that the injury. 105. 7.
a Carthusian. ibid. 13. Du Main. ibid. 20. examine whether the late. 106. 19
Meroveus were the son of Clodian. 107. 1. Clotharius. 110. 42. Malcolme. 111.
12. more peace nor less trouble. 113. 14. undertaken. ibid. 41. rewarder. 114.
3. Richard the third. 115. 19 Seine. ibid. 37. resolved. 116. 44. Eu. 118. 22.
puffed up. 119. 48 the arrows. 120. 31. Bornonville. ibid. ead. Hembert
d'Agincourt. ibid. 39. little less. 126. 37. Valentiana. 127. 48. Touque. 130.
34. to. 131 3 streets were (to. ibid. 5. Burgondy. ibid. 13. others sex for.
132. 9. Archery. ibid. 35. many. 143. 25. by the Duke. 145. 44. Montague. 146.
21. bloody hands and Crocodiles tears. 148. 11. Bride. ibid. 15. Charenten.
149. 19. Villa nova. ibid. 27. rather to hinder the enemies. ibid. 47. mine.
152. 35. leaving. ibid. 37. that. ibid. 47. passion, which in. 154. 24. beset
with jewels. 155. 37. Sw^ton. 157. 4. i^ is he that. ibid. 8. any. ibid. 14.
price. ibid. 17. Earl of Mortaigne. ibid. 24. Thiam. 158. 16 Marne invironing.
ibid. 41. besiegers. 159. 35. Montague. ibid. 42. went to her. 160. 23. Senlis.
162. 18. arms, his.

Errata, in the life of Henry 6.
Page 7. Line 24. Read, John the fifth. 10. 31. (being armed and in march). 11.
24. fortune. 15. 4. Iaqueline. 18. 8. Gough. 24. 6. Touraine. 29. 47. Amadeus.
30. 21. not to loose. ibid. 42. Ioyeuse. 38. 23. Argentres. Hall. 39. 42. a
Dukedom. 42. 33. overburdened. 43. 35. This is worthy. 48. 21 yet are. ibid.
32. once. 56. 21. Hubbub. 57. 33. to the second. 67. 33. maugre those. 68. 18.
Huts. 69. 29. Ioane. 72. 11. mission. 79. 13. river Soame, confining. 92. 29.
Eugenius the 4. 104. 30. together all. 105. 41. Bruges. 106. 20. might serve.
107. 29. not but. ibid. 36. Roxborough. 112. 13. Iaquelina. 113. 18. haven.
114. 24. cultivated. ibid. 39. Henry. At the same time Longueville. ibid. 42.
Charles his obedience; playing. 115. 17. Toulouse. ibid. 46. when. 117. 34.
unto him his. 119. 18. Duchies. ibid. 31. enmity. 120. 21. Lewis. 121. 11. not
able. 122. 1. Town. ibid. 26 whomsoever. ibid 30. England. These were. 123.
33. environed with enemies. ib. in marg. 1443. 124. 26. a separation. 125. 43.
not acknowledge God. 128. 12. humble, devout. ibid. 43. men and together with
them the Queen, perceiving. 129. 20. a lover of his. 130. 48. Fougeres. 131. 9.
did not approve. ibid. 29. would not fail. ibid. 35. Louviers. 132. 14.
emborsed by them. ibid. 42. The Count of Dunois. 133. 22. by Charles to the.
^bid. 36. of the same Castle. ibid. 43. Argenion. 134. 26. Fresnoy. ibid. 42.
towers. ibid. 46. slaughter was greater of. 136. 48. the 8 of December. 137.
22. whence. ibid. 25. Bresse Lord high Marshall of Normandy, and. 138. 10.
Guenne went handsomely forwards, though. ibid. 11. fast as. ibid. 12. Guis^in.
ibid. 17. (...). 138. 23. 60. ibid. 44. Fresnoy. 139. 7. Sir Matthew Gough,
etc. up. ibid. 10. Formigni. ibid. 16. among which were T^el Mowbray and Sir
Thomas Dr^w: Vere and Gough, with the. ibid. 23. that they. ibid. 41. Castres.
140. 48. Cheriburg. Bricquebec, Valonges. 141. 11. was very strong. ibid. 13.
conceal. ibid. 42. that the. 142. 6. Falaise. 145. 28. They. ibid. 42. the.
148. 2. kinsman. ibid. 24. retire. 149. 31. with. ibid. 35. of some who shund.
150. 14. Eeden. 151. 35. 10000. 152. 15. found. 153. 42. he. 154. 19. sects,
the one does not believe the other. 155. 9. State. ibid. 14 but. 156. 16. get.
161. 12. forbear not. ibid. 26. esteemed; so much the less to be. ibid. 48.
Sudley. 162. 33. not notwithstanding. 166. 11. this. ib. 22. bestead. 169. 1.
inhibit. ib. 7. he. 170 49. but to restore. 172. 39. he should. 176. 45. were
upon. 177. 4. cruelty.

The Reader may do himself a pleasure, and me a courtesy, if, with his pen,
he will correct these Errata before he read the Book; which if it take so well
as may give encouragement for a second Impression, I will take care the like
shall not be committed.

THE CIVIL VVARRES OF ENGLAND. Richard the 2.

FRom four Edwards did Richard the second descend: of which the first three
were succeeding Kings; the fourth, Prince of Wales, furnamed the Black Prince,
who dying before his Father Edward the third, did not attain the Crown.
England could not boast of braver Princes, nor Europe of more gallant
Commanders, then were the latter two; they brought home renowned victories; the
black Prince, not yet fully sixteen years old, was victorious in the battle
of Cresses, his Father being present, who denied him succor, only looking on
whilst he with bare two thirds of 8500. men fought with little less then
90000. to the end that that worth which before its accustomed time did bud
forth in him, might produce early fruits, watered by the Rivolets of glory and
honor: and not many years after, being fewer by three fourths then were his
enemies, he in the battle of Poictiers took King John of France prisoner,
environed by all the Princes and Nobility of that Kingdom: but dying not long
after in the full growth of his glorious achievements, he left behind him
this Richard, which did succeed his grandfather, the year 1377.

Edward the third had seven sons; four whereof dyed during his life time:
the first, as has already been said; the second and sixth without issue: and
the third which was Lonel Duke of Clarence, left no other issue save Philip
married to Edmond Mortimer, Earl of Marsh, of whom came Roger, and of Roger,
Anne, the innocent cause of mischief to that kingdom; for being married to
Richard Plantaginet, Earl of Cambridge, second son to Edmund Duke of York,
she enriched that Family by her just pretenses to the Crown, much more then by
her portion, whereof her successors to the prejudice of the whole kingdom, did
afterward make use. For though the laying private claims to Estates be always
lawful to the pretender, yet is it not always expedient for the public; nor
are they easily obtained, but by unjust and cruel ways. John Duke of
Lancaster, Edmond and Thomas, the fourth, fifth, and seventh, were only those
who did outlive him. The latter two whereof were afterward by their Nephew
created Dukes; the one of York, the other of Gloucester. I will not here set
down their posterity, the reader may betake himself to the Genealogicall
tables prefixed, by means whereof any whosoever (be he not brutishly ignorant
both of the law of nature and kingdoms) may give his judgment of the right or
wrong of those who reigned: and if therein you shall not meet with the to be
commiserated number of those of the blood Royal, who either through the
obstinacy of hatred, or incivility of civil wars came immaturely to their
end, the occasion will be, for that being descended of women, by former
marriages expatiated into other families, cruelty would triumph in the
diversity of spoils, and begird her temples with a Crown partly composed of
the blood of many, who by their deaths reduced the blood Royal of England to a
small number; the which whether it were expedient or not, and whether the
multiplicity of pretenders be of use, or the contrary, to Kingdoms, let it be
a dispute referred to the argumentation of good wits; though extremes being in
all things bad, that seems less harmefull which consists in the weaker breath
of a few, then what in the violent whirlewindes of many; their authority and
designs being able to dissolve, their oppositions and jealousies able to raze
whatsoever well founded Monarchy.

Richard was by nature endowed with amiable conditions, for being of a comely
personage, and of a liberal and generous mind, he was likely to have proved
like unto himself, had he had the fortune to have arrived at the maturity of
his judgment under the guidance of his Grandfather, or father: but being freed
from the authority of such as might have sweetened the asperity of his years,
the fruits of such hopes as were conceived, were before their maturity
corrupted; for infatuated by the soothing of his flatterers, and enforced by
his servants affections (to which Princes through a malign influence are
usually subject) he hated all such counsels as did oppugn his mind; he
rewarded such as did not contradict him, and being growneolder, he through
woeful experience found, that his undoing was occasioned by his having equally
offended kindred, Clergy, Nobility, and people.

Of the three Dukes, he of York was of a sweet condition, given to pastime,
void of ambition, a hater of business, nor did he trouble himself with any,
but for formalities sake; being thereunto constrained by his quality. The other
two, Lancaster and Gloucester, both of them ambitious, and turbulent, did
notwithstanding differ in this; that whereas the former endeavored the
increase of his authority, by making himself to be feared, the other aspired
to the like end, but by contrary means; Lancaster declaring himself from the
beginning to be an enemy to the people; Gloucester if not by inclinations, by
cunning, profestly popular.

First, Richard did much apprehend Lancaster, those who for their own
particular interests did sooth him in his youthly desires, endeavored to
persuade him that Lancaster, who was an obstacle by them reputed too difficult
for their designs, would have plots upon his person; but being gone into
Spain (his thoughts being fixed upon the Kingdoms of Castile and Lions, to
both which in the right of his second wife Constance he did pretend) he left
Gloucester to inherit these suspicions; who opposing himself in all actions
against his Nephew, after having provoked him by injuries, and by detractions
vexed him, for his reward lost his life.

It is not my purpose to write all the acts of this King, a great part whereof
I pass over; as the rebellion of the pesants, with intention to extirpate
together with the Nobility, himself; his expeditions in France in the pursuit
of his Grandfathers and Fathers designs; in Flanders in the favor of Urban
the sixth against Clement, who called himself Pope in Avignon: in Ireland to
tame the savagenesse of that people; in Scotland to repress inroades, and his
marrying the sister of Winces^us the Emperor; I will only treat of such
things as caused his ruin, after having reigned 22. years.

Certain men were at the first deputed unto him as well for the government of
his person, as estate; whose plural authority ensuing to be more of burden
then benefit, it was reduced to the person of Thomas Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick, chosen to this charge by the unanimous consent of Parliament; but the
King herewithall not contented (being by reason of his years unfit to govern,
and by reason of his bad Council not apt to be governed) began to alter this
ordination, in the person of Richard Scrope, formerly by the Parliament chosen
Chancellor of England, a man so void of blame in all his actions, as he was
very worthy of the charge imposed upon him. The King amongst the most
considerable jewels of his Crown, has one thereunto inchased by the Laws;
that those whose fathers dye in the nonage of their sons, fall under his
tuition till the one and twentieth year of their age; all their revenew
redounding from the aforesaid time to the King, save the third part which is
reserved for their education: it now so fell out that by virtue of this
prerogative, Richard enjoyed the income fallen unto him by the death of the
Earl of Marsh, and diverse others; he in lieu of making use thereof himself,
gave them as donatives to many; such gifts being of no validity without a
testate of the great Seal, the Chancellor would not give way thereunto, as
well in consideration that the Kings debts being great he ought himself to
make use thereof, as likewise those on whom he did bestow them being men of no
use nor merit, were altogether unworthy of such rewards; at which Richard being
offended that his profuseness (which by those who received the benefit thereof
was termed liberality) should be questioned by an Officer, he forced him to
relinquish the office, suspending the nominating of another in his place, that
he himself might by the great seal which now remained in his custody,
authorize it; lest being withstood by the former, he might meet with the like
obstacle by him who should succeed him; and by this means, the door being
opened to one inconveniency, it continued so to many others which ensued.

Of those who misled this young Prince in his resolutions, five there were who
bare extraordinary sway with him, Alexander Nevil, Archbishop of York, a man
so well skilled in what belongs to Court affairs, as was not by his Priestly
simplici^y to be allowed: Robert Vere, Earl of Oxford (a young man of no bad
inclination, had he not been corrupted by the rise of a great fortune) not
without infamy, the only favorite: Michael Poole a violent man, who from the
son of a Merchant, was got to the honor of being Chancellor of England, and
Earl of Suffolk; he was like a ship whcih not fit to bear so great sail,
oversets: Robert Trisillian, a very bold man, chief Justice, who having made
the Laws a snare, and Justice a pitfall for many, was at last served with the
same sauce, being by them ignominiously put to death: and Nicholas Bambridge,
Alderman of London (one of those Citizens who nobly behaved themselves in the
sedition of the Pesants) he had deserved an honorable remembrance, had he not
in the affairs of government proved as seditious as they.

The King was impatient of being subject to the Laws of minority, as were his
subjects, and that his desires should be limited by the Laws, and that
himself should be restrained by that authority which did derive from him: he
thought the order of the world in Princes did consist in disorder: a defect
incident to those years: for youth takes little or no delight in any pleasures
which are not seasoned with licentiousness: and he being naturally given to
please those who pleased him, did all things against the hair; so to ease
himself of that burden, which contrary to his nature he could not uninforced
bear: his uncle of Lancaster was the burden which did most molest him: for
being the prime man in the kingdom next to himself, all such as daily found
themselves oppressed by the insolence or insatiatenesse of the favorites, had
their recourse unto him. An aversion which though not good, was not yet without
reason, the original thereof being considered.

The King had formerly been informed by an Irish Carmelite Friar, that the
Duke had secret plots upon the life of his Majesty, and though the accuser had
much desired that this business might be kept secret till such time as being
made good he might at leisure and with best convenience be attached. The King
notwithstanding out of youthful inconstancy did communicate it to two of his
Chaplains, at a certain time when the Duke came unexpectedly in: who finding
himself not welcomed according as he usually was, imagined that they were
talking of him, and therefore withdrew himself into another chamber; the
Chaplains doubting their own safety (for the Duke could not but suspect
somewhat) advised the King to make it known unto him, which he did. Wherefore
calling for him, he acquainted him with his accusation, wherwithall somewhat
surprised, he in most humble manner desired his Majesty not to give credit to
such people, since so detestable an intention never entered his breast, nor
could it be for his advantage; for say he should have such an intention (which
God forbid he should) how could he effect it, since by so wicked a paricide, he
was deservedly to fall into the hatred of all men? he proffered to prove his
innocence by his sword; he earnestly desired that the Friar might be put into
safe custody, and if it so liked his Majesty, into the custody of John Holland.
This John was brother by the mother side to the King, and consequently void of
suspicion, had not his desire of marrying Elizabeth, daughter to the Duke,
(which afterward he did) made him partial: but the King not minding this,
granted the Dukes desire. The impression which at first this accusation made in
him, was confirmed by the bold behavior of the Earl of Buckingham (not yet
Duke of Gloucester) for entering at unawares into the Kings Chamber, he swore by
all the Gods to kill whosoever it was that durst say his brother was a traitor
(not excepting the King himself) an action by how much the more rash, so much
the more deserving a condign punishment, if the times had been such as would
have permitted it; or had the Scepter been upheld by a more puissant arm, then
was that of Richard. But the Friar the preceding night to the day which was
appointed for judgment, was by John Holland, (to whom he was given in custody)
and another companion of his, hanged up by the neck and privy members: And to
the end that he might die the more speedily, they placed a great stone in the
center of the Arch, which his body in that posture made; in which manner being
the next day found, without further enquiry his body was taken from the prison,
and like the carcass of a traitor, dragged up and down the streets of London.

This action did no ways advantage the Duke in the opinion of such as did not
hate him, whilst to those who had conspired his ruin, it afforded weighty
arguments whereby to infuse into the King unremoveable suspicions, by the which
being for two whole years tormented, Trisillian undertook to free him
thereof, by finding some means to put him to death by Law. But this affair
(being made known to so many favorites as the King had, and he himself not
given to secrecy) came to the Dukes ears, who conceiving that his quality was
not sufficient for his safeguard, (his death being decreed) retired himself to
Pomfret, a Castle of his own; where fortifying himself, he resolved to have
no other Advocates then strength and weapons, in a cause wherein his estate,
honor and life was concerned. The Princess of Wales, the Kings mother, was
then in a Country house of hers; where examining the danger her son was in,
being (if not for his own sake, for those that were about him) generally
hated; she, though corpulent, hasted and made an agreement between them. But
men's minds, like to the earth, abound more in bad then good seeds: for as
soon as the bad herbs are weeded out, others spring up in their place, as
happened in this affair.

It may not be amiss for us to give our opinion of the right or wrong of these
several parties. The King was young, and wholly possessed by wicked people, who
like to thirsty Leeches, endeavored to drown themselves in the fullest veins,
they lived not save in the death of others; nor were they enriched but by other
men's loss and confiscations. They thought belike, that great men were like
Eagles feathers, which do corrode those of other birds, that therefore it
behoved them to rid their hands of the Duke. He on the contrary was not without
his venom; his hatred increased the more, for that for his Nephews fault, he
seemed to be torn in pieces by the meaner sort of people, a provocation
sufficient to make a man of his quality undergo whatsoever excess: which that
he did, the death of his accuser may serve for an argument; for it was not
likely that he should fear danger, being innocent: he was great of himself,
strengthened by the authority of his brethren, by his dependants and
followers; not being to be judged but by his Peers. And though the Court
might have a great part in them, yet not so great as was to surmount his share;
hatred of favorites being in all men of more force, then the hopes of amending
their own conditions by so unworthy means.

On the other side, it may be that the Friar wrought upon by mighty promises,
had slandered him, he not being likely to have pryed into so secret a
business, whilst others knew nothing thereof; being himself neither of the
privacie, nor family of the Duke, and it may be not known by him: but if it
were so, the Duke ought not to have ended the question by violence, nor ought
his violence to have been authorized by impunity; what was this but to assure
unto us the reality of his fault, and that he was imboldned by the Kings
minority, and secured by his own greatness.

At this time did Charles the sixth reign in France, son to that Charles, who
for having hindered the progress of the English Arms, deserved to be styled
Charles the wise: and who taught by the example of his progenitors, instructs
us, That crazie states are not sustained by hazards, but by good counsel: for
rashness is seldom favored by Fortune. He dying, left store of treasure
behind him; and therewithal this Charles, who contrary to him, had likely by
his hare-braindnesse, to have lost France. The inward and conformable maladies
of these two kingdoms did seasonably abate the edge of their weapons, by
short, but redoubled truce; the sympathizing conditions of the two Kings
requiring it to be so, Richard being but two years older then Charles, each
of them alike prodigal, and unfit for government; the one and the other under
the government of Tutors: Kings barely in title, their Uncles exercising that
authority; nor was there any difference between them, save that Charles was
beloved, Richard hated: and whereas the former failed through want of wit, the
other erred only through the corruption of counsel; Charles had exercised the
maidenhood of his Arms in the behalf of Lodovick Count of Flanders, against
the Flemings, who did rebel against him: And proving therein prosperous, he
became so greedy of war, as the truce with England being expired, he
coveted nothing more then the continuation of that hatred, his little
experience not well advising him, and his years making him presume himself
borne for that, which his predecessors never durst undertake. He begun the
war in Poictou, 1386.
Saintunge and Limosin, under the conduct of the Duke of Burbone. He sent into
Scotland to Robert the second, who then reigned, an aid of Lances and
Crosse-bow-men, by John of Vienna his Admiral, to the end that the English
being busied on the one side, might be the less able to resist the invasion
which he intended to make on the other. For having given order for a great Army
at Sleus, and for another in Bretanny, he intended himself in person to
attempt the conquest of that Kingdom. Burbone took many Forts and other
places in those Provinces: But the Admiral was but badly received in Scotland*
he found not the King at Edinburgh, his usual place of residence; for he cared
not to be found there, as esteeming the coming of those people burdensome.
He very well knew King Charles his humor, and believed that for some whimzies
of his own, he would put upon him the necessity of war, which Scotland
uses not to undertake but upon good conditions, occasion and advantages: But
things were not as the King believed; for Ambassadors having been sent to him
the year before from France, to acquaint him with the truce made for one year
with Richard, wherein he was likewise comprehended, some of the Council had
treated with them, that if the King of France were resolved to send over to
them a thousand horse, five hundred Crosse-bow-men, and Arms for another
thousand, they would trouble England: which being by them understood as a thing
resolved upon, they were come without more a-doe, with the men and Arms
required: They brought no horses along with them, to avoid trouble, thinking to
find enough there; but Scotland being then, according to its own wont, not as
now, furnished with what is necessary, and with much of superfluity, had not
horses wherewithal to furnish them, they were forced to fit themselves with
horses at excessive prices. The King being returned, the Admiral delivered his
Embassage; the which being seconded by such as thought to better as well their
private as the public condition, upon the hopes that England being set upon
on both sides, would in likelihood be lost, King Robert could not resist the
importunity of his people. So as his royal will being published within a few
days, 30000 fighting men appeared under their Banners. With those, and his
own men, the Admiral entered Northumberland, took there diverse Towns, burnt
and destroyed the Country; nor had he retired from thence, had he not been
enforced by those who were most experienced, having received advertisement that
the King was marching toward them with a great Army. The English Army
consisted of 68000 men; what Bow-men, what Lances, with Pioners and other
attendants, it made up 100000. and as many horse. The Admiral persisted in his
opinion of giving battle: when being brought to the top of a hill, under the
which the enemy lay, and having seen their order, and their number, he changed
his mind: But being resolved, come what come would, to do some famous act,
he made this proposition; that since they must of necessity quit the field
(which without much rashness could not be made good) they might do the like
as the enemy doubtless would do; to wit, that as the enemy was like to find
Scotland without defense, so they passing by the other part of England (likely
to want defenders) might by their ransacking of the Country, make amends for
what of damage Scotland was likely to receive. This advice being approved of,
they came down from the Hills, and entered Comberland, where finding no
resistance, they ransacked all the parts thereof; they assayed Carlisle, but
unfortunately: for it was defended by many brave Gentlemen. This mean while
Richard being entered Scotland, came to Edinburgh; he burnt almost the whole
Town, but not the Castle, saved by the fort, and its situation. From thence
some of his troops passing further, they burnt and destroyed Towns, Houses and
Monasteries, till they came to Sterling, meeting with none that opposed them;
the men of war being gone (as you have heard) into Comberland, and King
Robert having retired himself to places of more safety: so as the Cattle
being driven into the woods, they reaped no profit for all the harm they did,
which made them more insatiate in their ruinating the Country; nay had not
provision of victual by shipping and cart been brought from England, they
could not have found food for one only day in that Country: for being
naturally barren, and of set purpose destroyed, there was no^ so much as grass
for their horses to be found. The King therefore being necessitated to
return, Lancaster propounded, that taking necessary provision along with them,
they might return by the way of Comberland, as the Scots had done, and so
barring their return, they must needs of themselves fall into their hands.

The proposition pleased the Council, and the King himself, and was the only
one like to be effected; but when night came, the Earl of Oxford had access
to the Kings ^are, and whispered unto him, that the Dukes ends were to bring
his Majesty to the last of dangers. For it was impossible for them to pass
over those hills, winter being so far advanced, without great prejudice: that
the numerous army required greater store of provision then was to be carried on
sumpter horses: that the enemy having ruinated and harased the Country, they
were not likely to find straw enough, much less other necessaries. If the
speakers Genius much more predominant then was the Kings, was able without such
likely arguments to prevail with him, how much more did it now do so,
strengthened by these reasons, and former jealousies had of the Uncle: so as the
next day, whilst (according to the resolution formerly taken) the army expected
to have order for marching toward these parts, the King having in sharp
terms upbraided the Duke with disloyalty, for that he durst advise him to
the danger of either perishing by famine, or becoming a prey unto the enemy,
said that he would return into England the road way; whilst the Duke if he
pleased, with such as would follow him, might go into Comberland; for his
part, he, and such as loved him, would go the other way. The Duke astonished
at so unexpected an entertainment, excused himself in all humility, omitting
nothing that might appease the King; nor had this sufficed, had he not been
seconded by many Lords, who were witnesses to his conscience. This was the last
scene of these Tragicomicall distasts; worthy to be so styled, to put a
difference between them and those Tragical ones of Gloucester: the former ending
in words, the latter in effects malign and mortal. He then returned the same
way he came; having for his so great expense reaped no other fruit then the
breaking of Charles his designs.

The Admiral according to his instructions, was to have wintered in those
parts, that by renewing the war in the Spring, he might facilitate the
invasion which Charles was to make on the other side: but it was not in his
power to effect it, both man and horse being brought to that pass as they had
not whereon to live. Those who had most money could find nothing to buy: and
those who would have sold their horses, or any thing else to have supplied
their wants, could find no chapmen: to tarry all in one body in one place, was
impossible; to divide themselves dangerous; the peoples hatted being like
lightning, a forerunner of tempests, there was not any who either could or
would carry there. The Admiral understood this very well; he intended to give
the most necessitous leave to depart, and to promise the rest speedy supplies
of money: but those who had leave to be gone, were not suffered to imbarque
themselves; they would neither suffer them to tarry, nor to be gone. The Scots
exclamed that 'twas they that had made the war; that their country was
ruined by reason of them; that they had done more mischief then had the
English; that they had trodden down the corn, cut down trees, and as if they
had been in the enemies country, lived only upon rapine; for which they
required satisfaction: excuses or were not found, or not admitted of. The
Admiral was at last constrained by public proclamation to engage himself to
give satisfaction to all such as pretended to have received injury by his men.
The debt being agreed upon, he imbarqued his men, tarrying himself in
Scotland, till such time as he received moneys, wherewith he satisfied the
creditors, and so departed unsatisfied himself. This was Charles his first
adventure, wherein meeting with a rub, it made him the second time stumble
against a yet harder stone. The Admiral being returned, confirmed in him the
resolution of his imaginary conquest; assuring him that the whole people of
England exceeded not 60000. Archers, and 7. or 8000. Lances; a slender defense
in comparison of what forces were for her ruin mustered in France. But it is
usual in nature for the most excellent faculties to be more tender then are
the rest; strong and acute sights suffer more by looking on the Sun, then
those which are obtuce and weak: therefore if the Admiral, a judicious
Commander, failed in his judgment, being dazzled by the splendour of so many
ships, engines, and Princes as were gathered together at Sluice, he ought to be
pardoned. Some are notwithstanding of opinion that France would never have
dreamed upon any enterprise on England, had it not been by his persuasion; and
that the Duke of Burgundy (by the death of his wives father, now Count of
Flanders) desiring the suppression of the English, who had fomented the
rebellion in those provinces, made him give this advice, which was praised of
all save the Duke of Berry, though he durst not make public opposition,
seeing Charles was inclined thereunto. Others write that the Duke of Burgundies
intentions were not to hazard the King in passing the Seas; the landing being
difficult, and more difficult to keep himself there when he should be landed;
the people considerable by reason of their number, and valor; the comparing of
these with those who had formerly conquered them equivocall: that at the
present they were governed by one only King, whose hatred was not to be put in
balance with the hatred they bore to strangers: that they were passionately
lovers of liberty, abhorring the French nation; and a country in which (grass
excepted, which as in a perpetual April is always there green) they would
find nothing; not occasioned by barrenness, but providence: and that there
being neither Castle, nor other place wherein to settle, it was to be won by
inchmeale, upon the uncertainty of fortune, and battle; any one of the which
being lost, (succor being far off, subject to delays, tempests; and winds)
the victory would no longer be the thing in question, but the safety, life and
liberty of the King, Princes, and people; that battles had little less then
lost France; the which was by Charles the wi^e returned to its former luster,
not by fighting, but by temporizing; moreover, that there they had neither
partakers, nor intelligence; without the which those who in preceding times
did, would not have attempted it: that his true design was to hinder
Lancasters journey into Spain, so to secure that State to John King of
Castile, a design in consideration of so immense an expense, more then
unworthy the refined judgment of that Duke. But whatsoever the matter was, it
is hard to reconcile Writers, tedious to dispute the business: therefore what
really appears, agreed upon by all sides, shall be the current of our
discourse.

All these preparations were not of force enough to divert the Duke of
Lancaster from his intended journey; nor the apprehension thereof sufficient to
make England detain him; which, on the contrary side, furnished him with
shipping, men and pay for six months, nor was Richard less liberal to him in
favors; the desire of having him gone, was of more force with him, then the
fear of whatsoever foreign forces. He would have him honored like a King:
he gave him a Crown royal: his wife Constance being by the Queen presented
with the like, both of them passing rich.

This mean while the French Fleet lay in the havens of Flanders, that of Sluice
not being able to contain 1267 bottomes: for upon this number all Writers do
near upon agree: as many ships as sailed upon the sea from the Straits of
Guibraltar to Prucia, were detained for this service, there were numbered of
Knights and Gentlemen 20000. as many Crosse-bow-men of Genowa; the which
together with foot and adventurers, made up the number of 100000. the Mariners,
servants and other people, made up another number apart. Whosoever had not
hired some vessel of his own proper cost, be he of what condition he please,
he was allowed no more attendance but one horse and one servant: no unusefull
mouths were allowed of; there was no Prince uninvited, nor who invited did not
contribute. The King of Spain ships, the Duke of Saxony and Bavaria's
Soldiers. The Count of Savoy went thither in person, accompanied by many
warriers: the strife in expenses between Princes and great Lords, was very
great: To what was necessary they added superfluity: the Masts and Yards gay
with streamers, glistered with gold and azure; incredible store of victuals:
there was nothing unprovided for: the price of things were eighteen times
doubled: all things were grown to an excessive price; the provisions of the
Navy were not touched: what was there daily consumed, was inestimable;
warriers flocked thither not unlike a torrent, spending prodigally the
certainty which they had, upon the hopes of uncertain gain. The court of it
self was sufficient to cause a dearth. The King was accompanied by the Duke of
Lorreigne and of Bar: by the Counts of Savoy, Genowa, Saint Paul, Armignae,
Longaville, Eu: by the Dolphin of Auvergne, by the Lord Cussi, and by all the
Barons and Nobility of France. Constable Clisson did on the other side in
Bittanny rig forth a Navy of 72 ships, and that nothing might be wanting to
the security and Majesty of so great a King, the woods of that and the
neighboring Provinces, were impoverished, for the building of a City, framed
all of boords and rafters; it was compassed about, as it were with a wall,
Bulwarks, Loop-holes, Casements, and other things then in use in
fortification, which might be joined together or taken in pieces, as occasion
should serve. The circumference thereof was 3000 paces, the height twenty, and
at the distance of twenty paces was placed a turret of thirty paces high,
capable of ten defendants, within this circuit in answerable distances were
placed lodgings for the King, Princes, and Officers, Piazzaes, Marketplaces,
space for Pavillions; nothing was wanting which was requisite in a strong,
commodious, and long-since built City: but all this Fabric, together with
five hundred men, being imbarqued for Sluice, a chance wind arose, which
dispersed the Fleet; and three vessels laden with this Fabric, were together
with their Masters and Architectors, driven upon the sands in the mouth of the
Thames; the Admiral with twenty other gaining Sluice with much ado. King
Richard afterward caused this fabric be reared up in a spacious place. At
the same time came the Duke of Berry to Sluice, much expected many weeks
before. He by diverse pretenses had of purpose prolonged his coming, though he
had been daily solicited: he finding their minds perplexed by reason of this
loss, which they took as an ill Omen, made use thereof, declaring himself
averse to this expedition; that in his opinion the King should not do well to
hazard his person, liberty, and estate to the danger of the Seas at such a
season as this, (it was now November) much less to the danger of war, in a
country where he could meet with nothing but manifest danger: that the relation
of the English forces to consist of but 60000. Archers, and 8000. Pikemen, was
false; since it was manifest that besides such as guarded the havens, and those
who Lancaster had carried along with him, Richard had an army of 100000.
Archers, and 10000. horse. This being exaggerated in full Council, were it, or
for that he really was of that opinion, or out of a desire to cross the Duke
of Burgondy, the chief inciter to this enterprise; or that they were both of
one mind (as some believed) to save their reputations, the voyage was put off
to another time; wherewith the Nobility were scandalized, but much more the
common people, from whom so vast a sum of money had been raised for nothing.
The present charge was cast up to have surpassed the ransom of King John,
which was very great.

Disorders this mean while were not wanting in England, subject to be in ill
condition, since the King and people did not agree. This division had strewed
strange fears in the minds of many; Richard not ceasing to govern himself
according to the will of such as governed him. All things were without order,
and done without acquainting his Uncles therewithal. All things passed under
the hand of the Earl of Suffolk, by the direction of the Earl of Oxford. A
Parliament was called at Michaelmas. Much people were raised out of every
Shire, and lodged twenty miles round about London, to the end that they might
be ready upon all occasions. So as so great a number being assembled together,
and not paid, they must of necessity live by force and rapine; a disorder which
if at other times it be of great consequence, was certainly of no small
importance now. For the key of military discipline (which is ready pay) if it
be not well handled is soon broken: and if men be defrauded, and payments be
not made, there is none who do obey, none who do command. For remedy to this
inconvenience, order was given that the Soldiers should retire themselves to
their own homes, with directions to be ready to return when commanded; whilst
the enemy who lay at Sluice, with hourly expectation to transport themselves,
needed with a fair wind but one nights sail to effect their desires. But it
befell the French as it does gamesters, they lost for lack of knowing when to
set their rest.

One of the first things the Parliament did, was the making the Earl of Oxford
Duke of Ireland, which caused whispering and dislike in all men. Not many
months before in the late Parliament of this same year, he was created
Marquess of Dublin, and Michael Poole Earl of Suffolk; the Kings Uncles
Dukes; the Earl of Cambridge, of York; the Earl of Buckingham, of Gloucester;
and Roger Mortimer Earl of March (in case the King should die without issue)
was declared heir to the Crown. An observation which I chose to place here,
as requisite to the pretenses of the house of York, the which in their due
time will be tried by the sword, none having at any time (to the best of my
knowledge) taken possession of a controverted Crown, by the authority of
Laws, or decree of Judges.

Moneys being afterward required for the present occasions, they were denied
with an Han^bal ad portas; they pretended no necessity thereof: that the Earl
of Suffolkes purse was alone sufficient to supply all wants: they accused him
of many misdemeanors: they required that his accounts might be seen: the
upper house sided with this request; chiefly the Duke of Gloucester. The King who
imagined to find none who would prescribe Laws to him now, that Lancaster was
gone, found he had judged amiss; but being resolved not to suffer his servants
be rent from between his arms, he determined (if it be true which is said)
to put his Uncle to death; that by freeing himself from so great an obstacle,
he might infuse reverence and respect into others. Richard would be feared,
believing it to be the only way to obedience: but he was not aware that though
Princes ought to cloth themselves with the habit of reverence and respect, the
same habiliament is woven with the thread of affection; the other of fear,
being made of threads of hatred, and composed of brittle and direful
materials. A supper was given order for in London, to which Gloucester, together
with those who had openly declared themselves enemies to Suffolk, were
invited; that by the service of napery and wine they might be slain; Nicholas
Bambre was chiefly employed in this affair, who the preceding year was Lord
Mayor of London; but Richard Stone then Lord Mayor, infinitely abhorring so
great a wickedness, hindered the effecting of it. So as the Duke being
acquainted with it, and by him the rest, they contented themselves with their
own private suppers, finding them more savoury, then the riotous other. The
discovery of this plot was the Colliquintida which distasted the palats of the
Uncle and Nephew, and which increased in the common people the hatred of the
King, and love of the Duke; affections which though they hurt the former, as
concurring causes of not permitting him to live, they did not help the other
as not being able to fence him from a miserable death.

The King retired himself to Eltham, that he might not be present at the
averseness of the Parliaments proceedings: where being advertised that the
members of Parliament were resolved not to treat of any other business,
unless the great Seal were taken from the Earl of Suffolk, he commanded
them to send unto him forty of the ablest members of their house, that he
might treat with them, and resolve upon what was most convenient. But to send
so great a number being not thought fit, they resolved to send unto him the
Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas Arundel, Bishop of Ely, with the which he seemed to
be content. The Articles of their commission were in chief two; the first,
that the King having disbursed great sums of money, they humbly beseeched him
to suffer them to take the accounts. The second, that the presence of his
Majesty being requisite for the treating and conclusion of business, he would
be pleased to remember, that by an ancient law it was permitted to the
Parliament men to return home to their own houses at any time when the King
(not hindered by sickness) should absent himself for forty days together from
the place of Parliament.

The Kings answer showed how much he was displeased at such propositions, for
without further advice he replied; that he apparently saw the ends of the
people, and commons, to tend to rebellion, that he thought not to do amiss,
if he should call in the King of France to his aid, since it would redound
less to his dishonor, to submit himself to a King, then to his own
subjects. The two Commissioners endeavored as much as in them lay, to show
unto his Majesty, that the house of Parliament had no such intention, and that
if by misinformation he would needs believe the contrary, that which he had
said would neither prove honorable, nor advantageous for him: wishing him to
consider that such a resolution was not likely to work such effects, as his
passion promised unto him: the people of England being strong enough to defend
themselves, and a people which did so much abhor the French, as that they
would never endure to be governed by them; whilst on the contrary side, he the
King of England, ought to pretend to rule the French: that the evils which from
them were to ensue, were likely to fall only upon himself, to his present
ruin, and perpetual infamy in after ages. Richard had now the use of his
natural judgment, free from wicked counselors; so as weighing their reasons,
he was persuaded to return to London. Suffolkes misdemeanors was the first
thing which was handled; they deputed the Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of
Arundell his Committees, the judgment which ensued, (as some will have it)
was, degrading, confiscation and death, moderated with this caution; If it
should so please the King. And according to some others, the loss of his
office, a fine of 20000 marks, and the loss of his pension of three thousand
a year, which was paid him out of the Exchequer. Upon this judgment Richard
again absented himself, not able patiently to endure that he abhorred; he
condoled with Suffolk, that his faults had brought such infamy upon him, as
took from him all means of defending him. The sentence notwithstanding was
not executed, a reservation being therein had to the Kings pleasure; leaving
him at liberty, they contented themselves with such sufficient security as he
gave them. Thirteen men were afterward chosen, who under the King, should take
upon them the government of the Kingdom: of the which number were the two
Uncles of York and Gloucester, and the Earl of Arundell. An Oligarchy at all
times dangerous in a Monarchical government: and which first instituted in the
reign of Richard, was afterward (as harmfull) repealed. But examples are not
sufficient to ground Laws upon, when the injustice of the Prince is such, as
it receives Laws from the subject: when their injustice springs from their
weakness, and when their weakness proves the nerves of strength and veins of
justice to the people; whether being arrived, commanding, they are blind in
doing of offense, whilst being commanded, they were Arguseyd in receiving
offenses: every man cries out, Liberty; a pleasing thing, and according to
nature: but to bring others into servitude, is a vice in nature, and more in
reason. The tyranny of the Decemviri in Rome was more insupportable then that
of Tarquin; and the short government of these thirteen more inexorable then all
Richards reign: so as if we consider things aright, we shall find, that
evils have almost always had just beginnings, but contrary proceedings and
ends; hatred envy and revenge unmasking those vices which covered by the
deceitful cloak of Common-good, were believed to be virtues. The last
business, and the only one which gave satisfaction to the King, was the
assigning over to the Duke of Ireland, the thirty thousand marks paid in by
the Admiral Clisson, for the ransom of John of Brettony, Count of Pointivers
his sonne-in-law. This John, together with his brother Guy, was taken prisoner
by John Shandois in the battle of Antroy, the year 1364. The French seconding
Charles of Bloys, father to the two young brethren (who died in that battle)
and the English John Montford, both of them pretenders to the Dukedom of
Bretanny: they gave unto him this money in color that he should go into
Ireland, to take possession of such lands as the King had there given him; but
in effect to separate him from him: barring him of all delay, they prefixed unto
him Easter for his departure from England. This was the price at which they
thought to have purchased his absence; but neither did he see Ireland, nor was
the King likely to lose his company, if Fortune did not deprive him of it. This
Parliament ended, with the giving of one Subsidy, which was allotted to Richard,
Earl of Arundell, to be spent at sea; where having done considerable actions,
accompanied with the Earl of Nottingham, he gave to the Duke and others
further occasion of hatred; whereby to suppress those virtues which in
well-governed Commonwealths use to be rewarded, so to incite others to the
service of their Country, by the bait of emulation and honor: a dismal sign
of corruption, the bringer in of vice, and forerunner of ruin. The Parliament
was no sooner ended, but the King returned 1387.
to London, retooke the Earl of Suffolk to his former favor; who, as one
condemned, ought not to have been permitted to have seen the King, nor have
come where he was, he anuld all that was decreed against him; conniving only
at this, that the office of Chancellor should remain in the Bishop of Ely,
upon whom it was conferred. And to the end that matters of scandal might never
be wanting to the favorites; and that their insolences might witness to the
world, the supreme power they had over him, he suffered the Duke of Ireland to
do one act of scandal, the which distasted all men.

The Duke amongst the chiefest of his honors, married Phillep, the daughter of
Ingram Guisnes, Lord of Consi, and Isabel daughter of Edward the third, cosen
to the King, a great and noble Lady by her own deserts, as well as birth, not
moved thereunto by any inciting cause, but his own pleasure, he resolved to
repudiate her, that he might marry one Ancerona, a Bohemian, a Carpenters
daughter, who came into England in the Queens service. It is to be believed,
that he had not taken her, had not Richard adhered to him; and the dispensation
of Urban the sixth, had not been obtained without the Regal countenance (there
being no lawful cause for the putting her away) although it was the easilier
gotten, for that the Duchess Phillep, being a Frenchwoman, adhered to the
schism of Clement of Avignion. So that it is no wonder if the King were not
generally beloved of his people, since that to second the Dukes unlawful
humors, he put no valuation upon himself. The Duke of Gloucester was
herewithall soundly netled; neither did he cloak his anger, though to declare
himself therein, was not agreeable to the rules of wisdom: for an open enemy
puts himself to too much disadvantage. Easter the prefixed time for the
journey into Ireland, was come and gone, the world was to be satisfied. He
delayed the time under the color of making preparations; but not able to put
it off any longer, he departed, and together with him the King, who went (as
he gave out) to accompany him to the Sea side. Being come to Bristow, they did
not put to Sea, but leaving it on the left hand, passed forward into Wales, as
if the people had forgotten the journey to Ireland. Tricks and devices the
more scandalous and unseasonable, for that they argued some strange alteration.
The authority of the governors troubled his quiet, and the advantage that
they had got upon Regal authority, threatened his ruin, they coveted to secure
themselves from them: for neither did the Duke intend to go into Ireland, nor
the King to part with him, nor the Archbishop of York to stand the shock of
universal hatred, nor the Earl of Suffolk to return to the censure of the
Parliament, nor Trisillian nor Bambre to give an account of their past actions.
Whereupon finding themselves in great danger, they agreed that it was
impossible for them to subsist, without ridding them out of the way, who were
only able to undo them. A wicked resolution, but now necessary, since they
were come to that pass, as nothing but extremes could work their safety. The
difficulty of the business lay in the making away of Gloucester, Arundell,
Warwick, Nottingham and Darby, eldest son to the Duke of Lancaster, who
hitherto has not been named, though the first subject of our Story. They had
likewise proscribed many others: with whom they might not have done amiss to
have temporized; but all delays were to them dangerous: and treacheries framed
formerly against Gloucester, made it impossible for them to compass their ends by
the same means. The law was thought the safest way, and the more masked the
safer. Many there were who had followed the King, not so much out of respect,
and to claw the favorite, as for that the air of London, under the blast of
the thirteen, not tempered by the propitious breath of Regality, was thought
pestilentiall: They all seemed to make up but one body; yet they were diversely
inclined, York, Ireland, Suffolk, Trisillian and Bambre, were all ruled by
like interest, the rest not so: The former being in a desperate case in their
own respects, the rest not so; unless in respect of them. Trisillian framed
ten Articles, whereof the first nine contained only two queres: The first,
whether the King being enforced to give his assent to the Acts of the last
Parliament, to the prejudice of his Prerogative, might not lawfully revoke
them. The second, that if he might do it, what punishment did they deserve
who had forced his assent? The tenth was, whether or no the judgment given
against Suffolk, was erroneous, and consequently revocable.

To this purpose the chief Judges of England were summoned to the Castle of
Nottingham, that they might give their opinions in these points, and having
given them, subscribe them. Their answers were according as were desired, but
they did not all incline to subscribe them; by threats and examples they were
drawn unto it. Robert Belenap, chief Justice of the Common Pleas, threatened
by the Duke and Suffolk, was the first that underwrit them; which when he had
done, he said, now I lack nothing but a rope; if I should not have obeyed you,
I know I could not have escaped your hands; now that I have obeyed, I shall not
escape, being punished by the Barons of the Land: nor can I complain if they so
do. The answers of the learned in the Law were, that the King might revoke all
as done against his will: that those who were the cause of it, deserved death
as traitors: and that the judgment given against Suffolk was erroneous, and
consequently revocable. This being done, they thought the worst was past: the
goods of the condemned were already shared; nor remained there any thing save
the owners death, to the taking of possession, the which was diligently
endeavored: besides the Judges of the Kingdom, the Sheriffs of every Shire
were summoned thither, for two purposes: the one to know how many men might be
found who would fight against the Barons: the other, that if another Parliament
should be called, the Knights and Burgesses might be chosen by the kings
recommendation. To the first they answered, that the people stood so well
affected to the Barons, that they would not take arms against them: to the
second, that to choose the Burgesses contrary to the usual form of Law, and
liberty of the Kingdom, was not only impossible but dangerous. The few that
with an implicit obedience soothed their designs, were commanded to be ready
at need. The Duke of Gloucester was advised of all these affairs; and fearing
lest greater inconveniences might ensue, he went unto the Bishop of London, to
whom he swore, that he nere had other design, then the service and honor of
the King and Kingdom: that his only error was, that he had hated, and still
did hate the Duke of Ireland, so singularly beloved of the King; but that he
was so far from repenting himself of it, that he desired the King and all
the world might know, that his hatred should never cease till crowned with a
just revenge: that he was sorry that no revenge was to be found answerable to
his offense, to wit the divorce of a Lady, cosen to the King, and niece to him:
he desired the Bishop to go to Court, to acquaint the king with his good
intentions: to entreat his better opinion of him, and to persuade him to less
dangerous designs. The Bishop went, did what was desired, and was graciously
heard, and had received as gracious an answer, had not the Earl of Suffolk,
who apprehended all reconciliation, mard the matter. These men were like to
those, who falling down headlong, lay hold upon some craggy stone, which if
pulled out, falls down with them. They kept themselves close to the King,
indangering his safety to save themselves. The Earl showed unto Richard, how
that the Dukes mind was full of deceit, dangerous ambition, seditious
practices, charging him with whatsoever he might do, to the prejudice of his
Majesty, as if he had already done it, in such sort, as the Bishop not able any
longer to endure so much provoking petulancy, commanded him to hold his peace:
he, not accustomed to such commands, asked him why? because (replied the
Bishop) you being a condemned man, and one who lives only by the Kings mere
grace, should not meddle in these affairs. These words did strangely offend
the King; who after many and terrible threats, went his way, commanding him to
go unto his place of residence, and not to stir from thence without his
express permission. The which he forthwith did: for afterward having made
relation to the Duke of what had past, he retired himself to his own Church.
Arundel, Warwick and Darby, were those who were most exposed to danger: To
these Gloucester joined himself, showing that it was not now time to temporize:
that force was the only means whereby to work their safety with the King,
and to keep the plotters of mischief within their bounds; since that an open
war would be more advantageous to them, then a deceitful peace, subject to
deceit, danger and suspicion. These reasons being approved, they all withdrew
themselves to their own homes, using all the means they could to raise great
troops of armed men: the King advertised of their preparations, thought the
best course he could take, would be to prevent them, and take from them the
means uniting themselves. Whereupon the Earl of Arundell being farthest
distant from the rest, and more exposed to danger, he commanded the Earl of
Northumberland to surprise him; who taking along with him store of company,
came to Rigate in Surrey, where finding him rather in a condition of offending
then being offended, he thought he should do better to return without doing
of any thing, then by making a rash attempt, discover the reasons of his
coming. But the King did not for all this, quit his design: he gave the like
order to diverse others; commanning, that if he could not be had alive, he
should be brought dead. The Earl was ignorant of these plots, but being
advertised of them by Gloucester, (who had better spies in Court) he traveled
with all his followers, all night long, and in the morning came weary to
Aringey, where he found the Duke and Warwick, with a great number of Soldier,
a rumor was at the same time spread, that the King under pretense of going to
Canterbury to perform a vow, would pass over into Fraoce, to surrender unto
that King, Callis, the castle of Guines, and whasoever else was in that country
possessed by the Crown of England; which, whether or no it were invented to
increase the peoples hatred, is more then I can say, but he made no such
journey; not to free them of suspicion, but for the fear he had of their
combination. For their forces were not to be despised, their ends being (as
they gave forth) to reduce him to a better and more frugall government: so as
apprehending danger, he demanded counsel, not without some signs of fear.
Some were of opinion, that he should do well to temporize, entertaining them
with hopes of satisfaction. Others thought that this knot was too fast tied,
and not to be undone but by the sword. The Archbishop of York was the author
of this opinion; but it met with many oppositions. The King could reap nothing
thereby but loss; the gates were opened to a civil war: and if amongst
blood and dead carcasses, the key should perchance be lost, he was not like to
meet with them in time, to shut the gate at his pleasure: that if he should
overcome, it would be a mournful victory; both friends and enemies being the
chief of the Kingdom, and equally his subjects. That if he should be beaten,
he had no place to retire unto; his ruin was inevitable, his kingdom, life
and liberty being at the stake: Ralph Basset, a Gentleman of quality, said
freely, that he would not have his head broken for the Duke of Irelands sake.
But the Earl of Northumberland propounded the giving them a hearing, as the
best rosolution in this case could be taken. This advice pleased the most of
them: The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Ely, Chancellor, were
sent to persuade them to present themselves the next Sunday in Westminster,
where they might themselves lay open their grievances before the King; assuring
them that they should find his Majesty ready to give them a gracious hearing.
But they found the adverse party hard to resolve; being by past examples
reduced to small belief, and less trust: for where there is neither shame of
infamy, nor fear of punishment, breach of promise, craft and treachery, are
taken to be terms of wisdom, and things handsomely carried: the which
being well known unto the Chancellor, who dealt uprightly in this business,
he desired them not to stick at this, since the good and peace of the
Commonwealth depended upon this resolution, passing his word unto them, that
if there were any thing of fraud intended, he would give them timely
advertisement. Upon this security they promised a meeting: but as their
suspicions were not vain, so did the Chancellor faithfully keep promise with
them: for understanding that 1000 men were laid in ambush to cease upon them at
unawares, he advertised them thereof, to the end that either they might not
come, or if they came, come so accompanied, as they need not fear danger.
Sunday being come, the King wondered that they came not, and understanding the
reason, swore he was no ways conscious of it; and commanded the Sheriffs to
go to the place of ambush, and to cut in pieces as many as they should there
meet: But the ambushers having retired themselves upon the advertisement of
Thomas Trivet and Nicholas Bambre their leaders, that care was needless. It Is
hard to say, whether the King had any hand therein or no, unless they ground
their opinions on this, that a Prince who only intends his own desires,
values no plighted faith, neither religious nor civil, so as the breach
thereof may tend to his own interest; and to him his ends being considered, the
miscarrying of these Lords, had been much availeable; and the not making
inquiry after the authors of it, must needs be subject to a bad construction.
Notwithstanding all this, the Chancellor forbear not to do all good offices: he
mitigated the resentment of this fresh wound, with reiterated lenitives, and
procuring them to boot with the Kings word, a safe conduct in writing, he
secured them a second time, and drew them to Westminster, whither they came
well accompanied, relying much upon the fidelity of the people; a security
upon such occasions, efficatious, though wavering. The King understanding their
arrival, came thither in his Robes, with his Scepter in hand, and Crown upon
his head, environed by Prelates and Lords. His favorites and confidents, upon
good advice, staid at home. Gloucester as soon as he was come into the Hall,
kneeled down before him, together with his associates. The Bishop, whose
office it was, as being Chancellor, to declare unto them the Kings intentions,
did in a grave manner say; That the King their Sovereign Lord, being informed
of their assemblies made at Haringie, forbear to use the way of violence (which
easily he might have done) to reduce them to their obedience; that he had put
a greater valuation upon the blood of his subjects, and their own particular
safeties, then upon the injuries done unto himself: That he was rather pleased
to make use of his own grace and favor (the natural Panacea of good Princes)
then to apply violent remedies to so grievous a malady: That his resolution was
not only to pardon past offenses, but patiently to listen unto their
grievances, and to remedy them if need should require. They tendering all humble
thankfulness, answered: That their assemblies had been made, not with
intention of taking Arms against his Majesty, their Sovereign Lord, but
driven thereunto out of the necessity of his Majesty's good, and the weal
public: That they had taken this resolution to withstand the treacheries
plotted against them and the State, by certain traitors, who under pretense of
serving his Majesty, intended the subversion of King and Kingdom. Passing by
the rest, they instanced in the Duke of Ireland, Archbishop of York, Earl of
Suffolk, Trifillian and Bambre. They offered to make good their assertions by
the sword, throwing down their gloves as gages, a thing then in use; and
which, in case of difficulty, is as yet sometimes used in England. The King
having patiently given them hearing, answered: That he was not well pleased,
that from the appeasing of one quarrel, many others should arise; he willed
them to be present at the Parliament, which was to commence the next day after
the purification of our Lady, where all differences should according to the
Laws, be ended. The which being said, he immediately added these words: And you
my Lords, what reason did permit you to take up Arms against me in this my
Land? thought you thereby to frighten me? could not I have raised greater
forces to your destruction? I would have you all to know, that upon this
account, I no more value you, then the least Scullion in my Kitchen. These last
words being said, not allowing time for a reply, he took the Duke by the arm,
and raised him from the ground; and returning to his Palace, welcomed them all
with such appearing signs of friendship, as in token of his good will, he
called for wine, and did in a familiar friendly manner drink with them. That
which was agreed upon in this business, was; That the differences should be
decided by Parliamentory justice: That the King should take the parties
interessed, into his protection: That the one side should not wrong the other:
That in the intrim neither side should raise forces: and, to the end, that no
mark of infamy might remain upon the forenamed Lords, Richard caused a
proclamation to be made, that they being accused of treason by some of his
Counselors (namely by Ireland and the rest) for any diligent enquiry that
could be made, there was found no treason in them, nor reasons to believe it.
Hereupon returning to their own homes (the Kings mutability, and the malice of
their adversaries considered) they resolved not to dis-band the forces which
they had. A deliberation in respect of what ensued, ascribed to too much
wisdom: for hardly had they taken their leaves, when the Duke of Ireland went
into Wales; where, under the command of Thomas Mullinax, a brave Soldier, and
one much followed in those parts, he assembled together five thousand fighting
men, hoping that when these should be joined to those who were at London, he
might be strong enough to make his party good; and thus he marched toward
London. On the other side, Gloucester, Darby, Arundell, Warwick and Nottingham
divided themselves, that they might hinder his passage. 'Twas Darbies fortune
to meet with him. The Duke came puffed up with confidence, with Standards
Royal, the King being on his side, and the chief City, if not out of
selfe-inclination, by the incedencie of his party, he expected not to be
encountered. He persuaded himself that others were as full of fear as he of
hope. Being come to Burford, a town in Oxfordshire, he himself was the
first that descried the enemy, which stood in battel-aray to hinder his
passage. It fared with him as with those which grown fierce upon supposed
advantage, turn cowards; if found equal in force, they be unequal in
valor. His former confidence ceased, cowardice and fear springing up in the
place thereof. Mullinax could by no means infuse courage into him; 'twas
bootlesse to make it appear unto him, that the enemies forces were inferior to
his, that the Earl of Darby was only there, a youth, and till then of no
reputation in war. Mountains, though covered with iron, would not have
secured him; imagining himself to be (as indeed he was) the only mark
whereat those bows aimed, the only quintan those lances addressed themselves
against, and that the safety of his men consisted in his flight, since 'twas
he, not they, that was desired. Mullinax for all this, could not forbear to
give battle. But hardly had the first blow been given, when the Duke mounted
upon a very fleet horse, ran away: the river withstood his flight; he found
the first bridge cut in two, the other well guarded; despair overcame fear,
he took the water, where both he and his horse being born down, he quit his
Saddle, swimming not without danger to the other shore. Before he took the
river, he had thrown away his Cuirace, Helmet, Guantlets and Sword, in such a
case offensive and troublesome weapons; he marched the lighter without them. He
came to Scotland; from thence to Holland, where not thinking himself safe (for
that Albertus, Duke of Bavaria, the Lord of that Country, was a friend to the
Kings Uncles) he went to France, and from thence to Lorain, where he shortly
after died. This mean while, many of his Soldiers had abandoned their Arms,
not out of cowardice, but mere anger: And Mullinax having done all that could
be expected from a wise and valiant Captain, perceiving that the Duke was
fled, and that part of his men were escaped away, part surrendered themselves;
began to think upon his own safety: he betook himself to swimming; but
Thomas Mortimer threatening to shoot him if he would not render himself, he
yielded upon condition his life might be safe; which not obtained, permit me
yet (said he) to dye like a man in single combat with thy self, or some of
those that are about thee. But as he endeavored to lay hand upon the shore,
Mortimer slew him. A man who deserved to have lived longer, or else to have
died for some other cause then the taking up of Arms by the Kings commission.
No severity was used to the rest. The Gentlemen with their weapons passed under
D^rbies colors, the rest unarmed were suffered to return: no enquiry was made
after the Duke, his Arms and horse arguing his being drowned: his carriages
fell into the victors hands: amongst other things, there were found letters,
wherein he was by the King solicited to make what haste he could, proffering to
live and die with him. But this days work, through his own fault, put a
period to all his favors: he chose rather to live hateful to himself, and
abhorred by others, then to embrace the honorable hazard of victory or death.
While matters fell out thus luckily in these parts, fortune would completely
favor the Barons desires, by bringing to their hands a post from France, he
brought with him a safe conduct for Richard, and as many as would accompany
him, to Bullen, where King Charles was to be, to conclude the bargain touching
the buying of Callis, and other strengths in those parts for a certain sum
of money. Richard being moreover, to do him homage for Guascony, the only
province which remained in his hands of all those in France which either by
inheritance or conquest belonged to the Crown of England: Essential points to
justify their proceedings, and condemn the Kings. They notwithstanding
concealed this business for the present, and marched toward London with
forty thousand men, where the King intended to keep his Christmas. As soon
as the Duke of Irelands defeat was divulged, the first who fled, were the
Archbishop of York and Trisillian: Suffolk went his way disguised in beard
and habit; nor was any news heard of him till he came into France. The King
retired himself to the Tower, as the place least exposed to sudden dangers.
Gloucester and his companions came to London on Saint Stephens day; he lodged all
his men in the suburbs: many were flocked thither, not so much drawn by
affection, as out of the hopes of sacking so rich a City. The chief
Magistrate who feared this, knew not to which side to betake himself: if he
should receive the Barons, the King would be offended; if not, the Barons.
Small resistance was to be made, the walls without defense, and the meaner
sort of people ready to throw themselves into the richest Merchants houses. The
present danger prevailed, the Barons were invited into the City, and to their
people without, was provision of bread, wine, cheese and beer sent; an
opportune remedy: for wanting nothing, and being received as friends, they
could not frame unto themselves an occasion of tumult. The Archbishop of
Canterbury, Bishop of Ely, and others, who as being neuters, endeavored peace,
counseled the King to give them hearing, to the which he was no ways
inclined; his hopes persuading him, that the multitude of people would of
themselves grow weary, and so shortly dissolve, and that the Barons being
abandoned by their followers, would without further trouble fall into his
hands: the which being by him publicly said, and understood by them, they
swore they would never depart till they had spoken with him, armed as they
were; and this did they more really perform, then did he his threats, which
with feare-infusing forces are of no validity. They did as it were beleager him
in the tower: for the Thames being well guarded, and they themselves making
good the City, he had no possible means of making an escape, whereby
perceiving the vanity of his own opinion, he yielded to the advice of others,
necessity being the chief motive.

But it was impossible to bring them together; for neither would he come out
of the Tower, nor they enter, for fear of the like treacheries, as in a less
proper place, they had not long before had experience of: at last fear found
the means: he propounded unto them to send men who might search the Tower;
with the which contented, they sent two hundred armed men, who having searched
every corner, received the keys of the gates, and so secured their entry:
Their complements were short and cool, as was to be expected in a business of
such nature. They first showed him the Letters written under his own hand to
the Duke of Ireland, upbraiding him with the breach of his private promise, and
public faith, publicly proclaimed: but at the sight of his safe conduct for
France, which in the second place they showed him, he grew pale, and not
knowing what to say in his defense, burst forth into tears. That 1388.
which was then resolved upon, was, that he would the next day cometo
Westminster, to take order for his past misgovernment. He would have had them
lodge in the Tower with him, but they excused themselves, upon the necessity of
their being present with their men. For his satisfaction Darby and Nottingham
tarried there. At night when he retired to his rest, those who were nearest
about him, wished him to consider, that to go to Westminster would be both
shameful, and dangerous: whilst they considered not, that where honor is in
question, shame consists not in the eyes but in the mind, which could
penetrate the thickest walls: and that he could not meet with greater danger by
coming forth, since he had already put himself into the hands of his most
hated enemies. But according to his custom, embracing the worst counsel, he
refused to go to Westminster: at which the Barons thinking themselves deluded,
they sent him word that if he would not come, they would choose a new King in
his stead. A more considerable shame and danger, then was the quitting of the
Tower, and the doing of what of himself as King, he ought unintreated to have
done. Yet all these errors considered, there is no law which permits subjects
to make so insolent a protestation.

Hitherto their actions had been in some sort justifiable; the States necessity
excused what of violence they had formerly used: but to use such terms to a
young King as ought only to be used to an old incorrigible Tyrant, they had
neither law for their justification, nor reason for their excuse; since they
were chosen Governors for the conservation not extirpation of the King and
Regal Majesty; but though God was pleased that his inconstancy should be
punished by this affront, and that like a child he should be frighted with the
noise of the rod, he was not notwithstanding pleased, that they should hate
that in him, which they loved in themselves, that they should fall from justice
to severity, and from a juridicall government to tyranny: so as both sides
having offended, it is no wonder if all of them in their due times did receive
alike punishment.

The King being by threats brought to Westminster, this proposition was made
unto him, that in consideration of many disorders which had happened to the
prejudice of his honor, and the good government of the Kingdom, by the
infidelity of certain traitors that were too familiarly about him, (to the end
that more the like might not ensue) he would be pleased that they might be
banished the Court, and his presence. To the which, he (bereaved of all acts of
will, especially such as tended to contradiction) did much against his will,
give consent; grieving that he was to lose their company who he entirely
loved, and esteemed his only faithful advisers; the chief of these were
three Prelates: The Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Durham his Treasurer,
and the Bishop of Chichester his Confessor. Three Barons, Zouch, Burnel, and
Beamont; five Knights, many Ladies and Gentlewomen. To boot with their
banishment, they were to give in bond for their appearing at the next
Parliament, to answer to such things as should be alleged against them. Of the
three Bishops, York and Chichester, were freed from this engagement, for they
were formerly fled. Many others of all conditions were imprisoned, Priests,
Gentlemen, and Lawyers: of the which the most considerable were Simon Burle,
and Nicholas Bambre. The day appointed for Parliament being come, and the
Judges having taken their seats, they were all (one only excepted) committed to
prison; for that in the preceding Parliament they had given their votes for the
legitimacy of the election of the governors; and in the Castle at Nottingham,
had subscribed to the Articles of Trisilian, to the contradiction of what they
had formerly done. Those who had absented themselves, were cited to appear.
The Duke of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, Earl of Suffolk, and Trisilian,
were summoded to answer to such Articles of Treason as should be objected unto
them, by Gloucester, Darby, Arundel, and Nottingham: and that in case they did not
appear during the sitting of that Parliament (which continued from the
Purification to Pentecost) they should be for ever banished, and their goods
confiscated. Trisilian, relying more upon his wariness, then a wary man ought
to do, was betrayed by one of his servants, and taken in a house near the
Parliament, whither with confidence he had retired himself, that he might the
better discover the daily passages. He had the face to deny himself, having so
transformed himself, as he was almost not to be known. After much mockery, he
was hanged. Bambre who was his companion in actions, was the like in fortune:
he had his head stricken off with a hatchet, which he himself had caused be
made to behead a number of people, whose names were found in a list about him.
Many others went the same way. But the death of Simon Burle was thought less
justifiable then all the rest. This Simon was nobly borne: John his father was
Knight of the Garter, and his Uncle Walter Burle was one of the first to whose
charge Edward the third trusted the education of his son Edward, with whom
this Simon being brought up under his Uncle, he proved so full of worth, as the
Prince thought he could not commit the government of his son Richard to a
more deserving man. A choice not to be slighted, being made by such a Prince.
In this his charge he knew so well how to comply with Richards inclination, as
that when he came to the Crown, he raised him to great honor, making him
Knight of the Garter, Chamberlain, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Constable of
Dover Castle, and Privy Councellor. Some say he made him Earl of Huntington,
but I find not this made good. The reasons of his ruin were, his sumptuous
living, the sincerity of his mind, and the places he enjoyed; by the first,
having exceeded all former presidents for magnificency; he drew envy upon him
by his sincerity, he made Gloucester his enemy, for he unfainedly loved the Duke
of Ireland; the which if it were a fault in him, let who will, judge;
certainly, a true affection and friendly faith, (things so seldom seen in
Court) ought rather to have procured praise then blame: his places, the last in
order, but first in effect, was the axe that slew him. The Duke not being able
to make any pretense unto any of them, neither for himself nor any other, save
by his death; the faults which were laid to his charge, were, the wastefull
spending of the Kings treasure; the converting of the soldiers pay to his
private use; his having sent great sums of money to Dover Castle, from whence
he had by night conveyed them into Germany; that upon the bruit of the coming
of the French into England, he had used means to the Deane and Chapter of
Canterbury, that the rich monument of that Church should be put into his hands,
under pretense of keeping it safe in Dover castle, but in effect to send it as
his own into Bohemia: to the first charge he wanted no defense, for there were
so many through whose hands the Kings moneys passed before they came to him, as
that he had no part therein, save what the King in bounty gave him; for what
concerned the soldiers pay, he was not allowed one that might reckon with him,
and make even the accounts, whereupon he was found in arrere 250000. frankes;
he on the other side demanded satisfaction for his expenses in his journey to
Bohemia concerning the Kings marriage; but this not being granted, he required
time for payment, which was likewise denied him: for the transportation of
treasure, there was no proof made of it: that he was a friend to the Duke of
Ireland (as has bin said) might well increase his danger, but not his fault;
for what concerned the tomb or monument, who can tell whether his intention
was rather to send it into Bohemia, then to keep it safe in Dover castle, as
the occasion required, and his words witnessed. Justice ought not to punish a
fault not committed, for that it might be committed; nor ought a Judge condemn
a man of a mental conception not expressed; for that such a thing might have
bin imagined and put in execution: two things make much for his innocence; that
he was beheaded on the sudden, by the sole command of the Duke of Gloucester,
without any legal proceeding; and that the Earl of Darby had endeavored his
freedom, insomuch, as that he grew to high terms with the Duke. Walsingham
accuses him for having consented to sell Dover castle to the French: when the
King should give him notice that he was proud, arrogant, an oppressor of the
poor, a dispiser of the Church, a fornicator, an adulterer; but he rather
spoke like a preacher, (being indeed of the Clergy) then as an historian: for
the surrendering up of Dover 'twas one of these popular errors which in the
fall of great men, disperse themselves amongst the common people: it does not
appear that the King would have sold Dover to the French; nor is it likely,
that he had any intention of giving them so principal a place in England,
whilst when he would have sold Callice, and the adjacent places, he reserved
unto himself the Duchy of Gascony; nor did the letters which together with
the pasport were intercepted, make any mention thereof. As for pride,
arrogancy, and the neglect of the poor, they are evils much practiced,
against such as from a low beginning, are raised to great preferments. If on
the contrary side, he had been to have showed unto us, what store of humility,
meekness and charity he had found amongst such who from a low beginning have
arrived at great preferments (though the world be not quite void of virtue) he
would have been more troubled in finding of them out, then in finding out a
piece of paper wherein to make a short Catalogue of their names. Besides,
though such sins may deserve blame, yet they deserve not death, being a
fitter subject for the Court of Conscience, then the Assizes. He was
understood to be a contemner of the Church (as I believe) by reason of his
pretended sacrilege of the rich tomb, in all likelihood falls: For if the
French had landed (as all men had reason to think they would) Canterbury was no
ways defended, the loss of that treasure most certain, and Burles providence
worthy of reward and praise. For fornication and adultery (say it were true) if
the laws were therein severe, not only the Court, but the whole world would
quickly be dispeopled. I conclude, that the Duke of Gloucester took liberty, and
the weal-publick for his color; but the bringing of the King under, and his
own particular interest was the soul thereof. The Judges remained for the last
act of this Tragedy, who as the last imprisoned, so were they the last
punished; they were as well as the rest, condemned to dye: but the Queen begged
their pardon, since they were enforced to subscribe the Articles: they were
notwithstanding banished in perpetuity, having only so much as might suffice
them for livelihood allotted unto them out of their confiscated goods: a good
fortune which Burley met not with; for he was beheaded before the King had any
notice thereof, otherwise he had not died; which when he understood, he
uttered against Gloucester what ever affection, passion, or reason could dictate
unto him. But this Oligarchy did not long continue: for it began but a little
before the last year of Richards minority, and ended as soon as he came to
full age, the year 1389. The manner of destroying it (whether it proceeded
from the advice of others, or from himself) was noble 1383.
and generous: he commanded all the Nobility to come to Court, which they did:
being all met in the Council Chamber, he was not long in coming thither
himself. They all with nuch expectation longed to hear what he would say;
when being set in his chair, and looking round about him, he asked them how
old they thought he was? Answer was made full 21. If so (said he) in reason my
condition should not be worse then is the condition of my subjects, who by the
laws are at those years exempted from guardianship, and are admitted to the
managing of their own affairs. Hitherto I have been a ward; being now no more
so, I renounce the being governed by you, intending hereafter to govern my
person and my affairs, as best shall please my self. And to the end that from
that time forward, they might hold him for a free and absolute Prince, he
forthwith took their offices from some of them, and conferred them upon some
others: breaking the ice by the change of Chancellor. The Archbishop of York,
formerly Bishop of Ely (for when Nevil was banished, he removed to that See)
kneeling down, did readily deliver up unto him the great Seal. He likewise
changed the Lord Treasurer, the Clarke of the Signet, and the Judges, he
removed the Earl of Arundel from being Admiral, and conferred that place upon
the Earl of Huntington, brother by the mothers side to his Majesty. He put the
Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Warwick, and others from the Council Table, naming
new Counselors in their places: And not yet fully resolved whom to choose for
Chancellor, he carried the great Seal along with him to his Chamber, where
pitching upon a choice, he returned back, and gave it to William Wickham
Bishop of Winchester; a favor which he unwillingly received. All this passed
quietly on, no words proceeding from any one, although the kingdom, a body
then ill affected, passed but from one ague fit to another.

At the end of this year the Duke of Lancaster returned to England, 1390.
having spent three years abroad. The mortality which fell amongst his people,
caused by the excessive heats in Spain, forced him to retire into Gascony,
where having begun a treaty with the Duke of Berry, to give unto him for wife
his daughter Catherine (she upon whom the pretense to the Kingdom of Castile
fell after her mothers death) he thereby raised such jealousies in John the
first, who then reigned, as that the said John demanded her for wife unto his
eldest son Henry, (who was afterward the third King of that name) a youth of
but ten years of age, though Catherine were nineteen years old: Upon these
conditions, that he should pay unto him for the present, 200000 Nobles, and
10000 marks yearly during the life of the Duke, and his wife Constance, mother
to Catherine: That he should assign over unto Constans^, Guadalajara, Medina
del Campo, and Olmedo, that she might enjoy the fruits thereof during her
life: and that the espoused Princess should be styled by the name of Princess
of Austria; the sons of those Kings, though their eldest, till then being
only styled Infanti. The two on the other side, renounced all their pretensions
to those Kingdoms. The Duke had before this, married his daughter Phillep,
borne unto him by his former wife, to John the first, King of Portugal; having
the good fortune to place them both, in a like country and dignity. His
coming into England happened in an opportune time, for the King having
summoned the Nobility to Redding, (where he then was) some strange alteration
was doubted, the ill will he bore to many being considered: the Duke did so
behave himself, as sweetning the King, they were all well received, and
contentedly dismissed. But the Kings jealousies of him not ceasing, being
likewise displeased with his return, he by the assistance of the first
Parliament (to the end that he might again be gone) gave him the Duchy of
Aquitany, together with all the honors, incomes and prerogatives, which of old
did belong unto that Dukedom, and which for the present were enjoyed by that
Crown; investing him with the accustomed badges of golden rod, and Ducall Cap,
upon the mere tie of simple homage. Richard was not strait handed of what he
possessed, but mainly addicted to his own will, with the which rather then to
have parted, he would well nigh have parted with his kingdom. Insomuch as
fearing lest if Lancaster should join with Gloucester, he might give him enough
to do, To free himself from an imaginary obstacle, he weighed not the
essential impoverishing of the Crown, of its richest Jewel. And if the
effects did not follow, it was not for lack of his good will, but the good
will of the people of that Duchy; who being obstinate, would not contrary to
their privileges, be dismembered from the Crown of England; neither did
Glosters siding with him (though extravagant) any thing at all avail; which
did not proceed from brotherly affection, as he would have it conceived, but
for that Lancaster being present, his authority was the less, who did pretend
to be the only director in the government of affairs. He was not troubled at
the eldership of his other brother, the Duke of York, since that he chiefly
intended his private pleasures. But Richard was deceived in Lancasters
intentions: for it is not always good to judge of things present by what is
past. For as in his departing from Spain, he merited to be esteemed one of the
most valiant and wisest Princes that did then live; so at his return to
England he deserved to be held a peacemaker: experience and the incommodities
of war, having made him desirous of repose, and changed or moderated his
disposition; the which was plainly seen in him the short time that he lived:
since that he did not only tolerate the being denied by the Gascones, but did
patiently endure his sons distastes and exile: not being moved at whatsoever
accident, save his brothers death; the which he notwithstanding suffered,
whilst if he had had like ambition as formerly, he might not have been
destitute of hopes; the King being mightily hated, he as much beloved: And
though the putting of his brother to death, might be justifiable, the manner
thereof was such as could not be denied to be unjust, cruel and tyrannical.

The King was no sooner come to age, but he was informed that the 1391.
Duke of Gloucester had raised forces against him; the which being found false, he
would not suffer him to justify himself, but enjoined him silence: were it
either that he might keep this plea on foot against him, or to free his
accusers from punishment; the three next years past peaceably on, the peace of
France being on both sides earnestly endeavored, but the reciprocal
pretentions and stoutnesse of both parties made it impossible to be concluded.
Richard did desire it, and the difficulties which the French met with for
matter of war, made them likewise desire it as much, if not more. Charles his
indisposition continued, as likewise the Uncles discords, each intent to their
own private designs and interest, so as not able to conclude a peace, they
continued the league one year longer, the which (the state being in quiet)
afforded Richard leisure to live according to his own inclination, which was
such as had he not erred in the extreme, could not have been better, but the
splendour of prodigality is like that of lightning, which consumes and bears
down whatsoever it meets withal, he kept the greatest and noblest Court of
any King in Europe. His subjects led by his example, dreamt not of frugality (a
ver^ue not much known in England) but gave themselves over to luxuriousness;
great was his excess of diet, the pomp and bravery of his Court in apparel
unimitated, the number of his servants exceeding all belief, 10000. men fed
daily of his bread; the Queen had 300. women which belonged to her service,
300. was the number which belonged to the kitchen: when he went to Ireland he
made him a horse-mans coat which cost 3000. marks; according to which if you
proportion all other expenses the sum will not be to be estimated. He
proclaimed Tiltings and Barriers, Princes and Cavalieres from all parts flocked
thither, who were all defraid during their being there, and presented at their
departing. In his private family he knew not how to deny any thing; he granted
whatsoever was asked. The easiness of obtaining favors, imbased their value:
for favors are then greatest, and most to be esteemed of, when they are
conferred with most judgment, and least expected; so as his ordinary revenues
not suffising, he was enforced to use extraordinary means. His immoderate
affection to his servants, his Uncles tyranny, and peoples hatred, not able to
undo him, his immense prodigality made the last despair, without the which he
could not have been ruined; being in some necessity for lack of money, and
willing perchance by a little to try whether he might rely on a greater sum
upon occasion, he desired to borrow of the City of London a thousand pound; an
inconsiderable sum for such a King, and so rich a City: they notwithstanding
honested their denial; with pretending not to have so great a sum; which
answer, though discourteous, was not injurious. But an Italian Merchant
offering to lay down the money for them, he was so cruelly beaten, as that
they had well nigh slain him: so as the affront reflecting upon the King, who
neither in justice nor reputation could sit down by it, As he was meditating
upon revenge, he met with a second insolency, more cruel and more
insufferable. The Bishop of Salsbury, Lord Treasurer, was then at the Court at
Windsor, having left the greatest part of his household at London. It happened a
man of his desirous to sport himself with a Baker, who passed by with a Basket
full of Bread, took a loaf out of the Basket; the Baker hereupon giving ill
words, he broke his head: the common people would have laid hands upon this
man, but being defended by his companions, he got into his masters house: they
beset the house, and were ready to have set it on fire, had not the Lord Mayor
and the rest of his brethren; come in; the people demanded the delinquent,
threatening fire and sword. The Bishops servants denied to deliver him, pleading
the privilege of Ecclesiastical immunity; and certainly much mischief would
have been done, had not the Mayor, what by authority, what by fair speeches,
appeased them; showing them that faults, how great soever they were, ought not
to be punished in such a popular seditious way; for such justice would be
more erroneous then any other fault could be. The Bishop being advertised
hereof, made his present address unto the King, accompanied with as many
Prelates as were then at Court; he so aggravated the business, as that
happening at the same time, when as the Italians wounds were as yet fresh, he
gave order for the imprisonment of the Mayor, and rest of his society, as all
equally guilty; not for that they were authors of this sedition, but for that
having behaved themselves insolently before, they had given example to the
common people to do the like. Nor yet herewithall contented, he bereft the
City of all its privileges, and wholly overthrowing the fabric thereof, gave
the government of the City to a Gentleman that was his servant: nor did he
lessen his resolution of punishing them, though they were interceded for by
many, of the which the Duke of Gloucester was the chief: But being importuned by
so many, he suffered himself to be persuaded to go, accompanied by his Queen,
to London; where being met with shows and arches triumphall, and richly
presented, as if it had been the first day of his coronation; he restored the
City to its former condition, the Mayor and other Ministers to their former
dignities, and recalled the seats of justice from York (whither to their
prejudice and disgrace they had been put over) but upon this condition, that
they should pay unto him ten thousand pounds Sterling, for the charge he had
been at in reducing them to their duties, which was the chiefest cause of
alienating them from him. So now the thousand pound which was at first but
desired to be borrowed, and was denied, grew to ten thousand pound by way of
Fine; their presents and other ceremonies at the making of his entry, having
cost them as much, without receiving any thanks or acknowledgement.

This mean while the league drew to an end, wherewithal neither of 1393.
the Kings were well pleased. The Dukes of Berry, and of Burgondy were sent to
Bullen, in the behalf of the French; and the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester in
the English behalf; where meeting with the former difficulties, they agreed
upon a truce for four years, wherein they comprehended the King of Scots,
which was afterward a step toward the long truce and affinity which ensued.

This year did Queen Anne die, as likewise the Duchess of Lancaster, 1394.
the Countess of Darby, and the next year the Duchess of York, as if
Fortune had conspired to make almost all the Princes of the blood, accompany
the King in his widowership. Richard was sensible of her death, (as being
affectionate enough) but did not for all that alter his resolution of going
personally into Ireland: as neither did it divert Lancaster from going to take
possession of his Duchy of Guascony. The King past over into Ireland with an
Army of thirty thousand Bow-men, and 4000 men at arms, where in nine months
he won more then did ever the famous King Edward, his grandfather; who
having at the same time to do with Scotland, Flanders, Normandy, Brittanny,
and Guascony, could not fix his thoughts only upon this nation, as Richard
might do, who made his way rather by dexterity, then force. For the Country
being full of woods and marrish grounds, not well stored with provisions, the
inhabitants accustomed to poverty, to the inconveniences of the air, to
living in Cavernes, to the passing over Bogges, and commodious conveying of
themselves from one place to another, the conquering of them was likely to have
proved a tedious and troublesome business. The which foreseen by him, he
endeavored to win them after a new manner. He paid the Soldiers punctually,
to the end they might not be necessitated to injure the Country; he made much
of such as yielded themselves, and leaving for the present the Arms which he
and his predecessors had wont to bear in their Shields, he took those which
were borne by Edward the Confessor, placing them in his Standards and Seals:
and reaped his ends thereby; for by this means he purchased their love; the
memory of that holy King being extraordinarily reverenced by the Irish. By such
like cunning as this, people who are more led by blind imaginations, then by
the truth, are usually deluded. This is one kind of natural not prohibited
Magic, which by timely applying the Princes actions to the peoples humors,
works wonderful effects without the effusion of blood.

This Ireland was commanded by many petty Kings; almost every Province had its
particular Prince: he drew four of them to his obedience, 1395
and by the example of his honorable treating of them, had drawn all the
rest, had he not been by his Prelates desired to return, to remedy the
troubles which the Wiclifs opinions had raised up in England. Whence it may be
gathered, that had he not been naturally given to listen unto bad advice and
flattery, he would have proved a good Prince.

The Duke of Lancaster was received in Guascony as the Son and 1396
Uncle of a King, but not as Duke of Aquitany: he with much modesty showed them
the donation which his Nephew had given him, and did with as much patience
endure the not receiving of it: He moved, that Ambassadors might be sent into
England, giving them his word, that he would approve of what should be there
agreed upon, though to his prejudice; the which was done. The points which
opposed the donative, were two: The one pertaining to Justice, the other to
reason of State. That which belonged to Justice, was, the preservation of their
privileges. The Kings of England were obliged to keep the Dukedom of Aquitany
perpetually united unto the Crown: they had deprived themselves of any power
of dismembring it, giving it away, or of giving it in fee-farme to any
whosoever, were he or Son, Brother, or Uncle to the Crown. They swore at
their coronations, to maintain these privileges, and did authorize them by
letters Patents, and great Seals. Richard had sworn the same, and had given
them letters Patents to the same purpose; but he had forgot it, being very
young when he did it. The point of State was; that the successive Dukes
contracting affinity with other Princes, (which must of necessity ensue) as
namely with Burgondy, France, Normandy, Brettany, Fois, Navar, Castile and
Portugal, they should in process of time divest themselves of all interest and
shake off the friendship of England, and the subjection thereunto. The reason
of their privilege wrought much with Richard; but this last consideration
broke the neck of all the favors therein intended to the Duke, for all that
Gloucester could do to the contrary, who left nothing unattempted, whereby he
might keep him aloof off. He annulled the donation, and recalled the Duke,
receiving him at his return with more honor then good will. This business
being ended, there remained nothing of importance, but the providing of himself
of a new wife, not any daughter being then to be found amongst his neighboring
Princes. Navar had daughters and sisters too, but Richard did not incline that
way. The Duke of Gloucester had a daughter marriageable; nor could any thing more
acceptable have befallen the Kingdom; but the being his full Cosen-german,
served him for a justifiable excuse: for if bare consanguinity had emboldned
the Duke so much to molest him, what might he expect from him when he should
be likewise joined unto him by so near affinity as to be his Father-in-law.
But if this was the cause why he would not marry her, he was deceived: for this
was the only means to have made the Duke on his side, and whereby to have
avoided the evil which did befall him: But the blinded eyes of humane
judgment fore-sees not what is to come, but rather by eschewing meets with
those evils which it thought to have left behind. The true cause, as I
conceive, was, that as his love was in extremity, so was his hatred; and that
consequently the hatred he bore to Gloucester, was the reason why he detested
this match, not the meannesse of blood.

The King of France had a daughter between seven and eight years old; here
Richard pitched his resolution, though he therein met with three obstacles,
all of them of moment: That she was daughter to a King that was his enemy: so
young, as that he was not in a long time to hope for issue by her: and that she
was formerly promised in marriage to the Duke of Brettanies eldest son. He
did not so much reflect upon the first, save what made for his advantage: for
detesting war with France, he could not find a better means to settle a
peace between the two Crowns, then this. For her years, he did not much
value them, since he himself was young enough; and also her being promised to
Brettany, he slighted it, since the King of France stood more in need of his
friendship, then the friendship of any other. He sent a solemn Embassage to
France; and though answer was not presently made, (for time was taken to
consider of it) the Ambassadors returned partly assured of success: the King,
People, and Council, being all of them well inclined to the business.

At this same time, the Duke of Lancaster took his third wife. It so fell out,
as that he had three sons and a daughter by one Catherine Roet, the daughter
of a King of Arms, she was servant to his first wife Bianca, and he kept her
as his Concubine during the life of his second. The desire he had to make his
children legitimate, and her good conditions (though not nobly borne, as he)
made him resolve to marry her; and not unluckily: for John the Duke of Somerset
(who was he alone who of the three brethren had any issue) was
Great-grand-father by the mothers side, to Henry the seventh, who put a period
to the civil wars of England: He did legitimate them, and his succeeding
marriage by Act of Parliament, and by ratification of Pope Boniface the ninth,
from whom he obtained a Bull to that effect. I was not willing to leave out
this particular in this place, as necessary for what we shall hereafter meet
withal.

The Kings marriage was likewise this mean while concluded: and since a final
peace could not be concluded on, in respect of many places which the English
pretended unto, a suspension of Arms for thirty years was covenanted, with
caution that both sides should peacebly enjoy what at this time they were
possessed of. A business which did so highly incense the Duke of Gloucester, as
the King did diverse times fear lest he might upon this occasion raise a
rebellion; since the people depended much upon him, and were not very well
pleased with this marriage, nor truce; he went in person to the confines of
France, to receive his wife, as likewise did her father, to deliver her up unto
him. Being with much content parted, he caused her to be crowned at
Westminster, not being 1397.
yet fully 8 years old. Shortly after came the Count Saint Paul into England,
sent by Charles to receive the oath of truce; a man of a working spirit, and
who was husband to Jane Holland, sister to Richard by the mothers side. The
King discoursing with this man, complained of the Duke of Glosters contumacie,
that he was the only man who opposed himself against the match with France,
as desirous of war with that Nation, and likely (that not ensuing) to raise a
war at home. To which the Count, with a sad brow, replied; That the birth and
blood of such subjects, allowing them more authority then stood with the Kings
safety, was dangerous; that to temporize in cures, made the malady greater: But
that as one poison was antidote to another; so dangers could not but by dangers
be salved: yet with this advantage, that the former being certain, 'twas a
question whether the others would prove so or no: That clemency, when 'twas
the offspring of weakness and fear, was always subject to ingratitude and
neglect, never to thankfulness and acknowledgement. So as Princes who wanted
the Balance to weigh offenses, and the power to counterpoise them by condign
punishments, might account themselves as already lost.

These or the like words gave the definitive sentence against Glosters life;
for they were fast rooted into Richards mind, as proceeding from one that was
wise, a Friend and an Ally, and who was void of interest. He now wavered no
longer neither in respects nor delays, he firmly resolved to put him to
death, but had not pitched upon the manner. As soon as the Count was gone from
England, he acquainted the Earl of Huntington, and of Nottingham with his
design; and having with them agreed upon what was to be done, he went out of
London one night about Supper time, and rid all night accompanied by a great
many armed men; who lying in ambush not far from Plashey, the Dukes house,
the King sent Huntington to acquaint him with his coming: The message was no
sooner delivered, but by the sound of trumpets, notice was given of the Kings
arrival. The Duke, who was then in bed, threw his night gown about him, and
came down to meet his Majesty, taxing Huntington of unkindnesse for not having
given him earlier notice. But these complementall quarrels were soon appeased
by the Kings smiling aspect, who desired him to go make himself ready, for
that he must presently, upon some urgent occasion, go along with him to
London. The Duchess in her night clothes, entertained the King whilst her
husband did on his apparel; who not having leisure to take his usualll train
along with him, got on horseback, followed by some few, and giving order for
the rest to follow him. As soon as they were come to the place of ambush,
Richard spurred on, and the Marshall coming from where he was conceald, took
the Duke prisoner: 'twas bootlesse for him to call upon the King, who seeming
as if he heard him not, pursued on his way. The unfortunate man was brought to
the Thames, there embarked, and carried to Callis, a fort under the command of
the said Marshall; where he was shortly after strangled: or, as many will have
it, stifled between pillowes. A business which clearly demonstrates unto us,
that their number is but small, who falling into extravagancies, upon
confidence in the people, have not come to miserable ends. And though errors
were committed on both sides, it cannot notwithstanding be denied, but that
Princes are provoked unto tyranny more by the insolences of particular men,
then of their own disposition. For it being dangerous to proceed by the
ordinary course of Law with a privileged man, as was Gloucester, it behoved
Richard to do that by force, which he was not sure to effect by justice; since
that his danger was more to be feared in the tolerating of such presumptions,
then in the violating of the Laws. And so it had certainly fallen out, had he
not done worse: But evils fruitful in themselves, produce multitudes of their
like: And honesty, in any one affair, once forsaken, quite banisheth all shame
in all succeeding actions. After the Count Saint Paul's departure, the King had
received many distasts, which wounding his reputation, had confirmed him in his
resolution of putting the Duke to death. Breast, a Fort of great consequence in
Brettany, was by the Duke thereofpawned for a great sum of money to Edward
the third, upon condition of being rendered when the moneys should be paid. It
was a place which had formerly fitted England for accommodations of war in
these parts. And if Richard had had the same designs his predecessors had, as
he had not, it may be he would not so punctually have observed conditions,
but as matters now went having received the moneys, he restored it to the owner
without further dispute. The Duke of Gloucester who no whit abated his blaming of
the Kings actions, did in bitter manner twit him in the teeth with his
restitution, as done to the prejudice and dishonor of the State: the King who
thought he had not well understood him (so outrageous was his language) willed
him to speak it over again; and he not changing the sense, but saying the very
self same words over again, did so much incense his Majesty, as after having
showed him that he had done nothing which without infamy he could have forborne
to have done, he seemed to his other Uncles to be much greeved thereat; who
though they confessed him to be over violent, did yet excuse him; affirming him
to be as void of malice, as jealous of the honor of the kingdom; the which he
was in so high a degree as that he could not suffer the least diminution
thereof, how just soever. Afterward, when any discourse concerning the King,
was offered, he spoke of him as of one degenerate, and without courage; that
being unfit for government, the greatest favors that could be done him, were
to allot livelihood unto him in some commodious prison. Whereupon his brethren
despairing of his amendment, and fearing lest their presence might add to his
boldness, retired themselves to their Countrey-houses; believing, that being
left alone, he would be more reasonable. But so far was he from this, as that
he fell upon a resolution, which if it were not the cause, was the last
pretense of his death: he had as well plotted the Kings ruin, as the King his.
Hereupon a randesvous was made in Arundell Castle; where a resolution was taken
of ceasing upon the Kings person; of imprisoning the Dukes of Lancaster and
York (to the end that they might not disturb the business) and of hanging
the greatest part of all the Privy Council. The chief conspirators were, the
Earl of Darby, Arundell, the Marshall and Warwick; and of Prelates, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Abbot of Saint Albons, and the Prior of
Westminster. This conspiracy is thus reported by a certain Historian; but I
cannot believe it to be true, for reasons which shall hereafter be alleged.
The Earl Marshall discovered the plot unto the King, and the King unto the
Council, which persuaded him to retain the Duke; the which being done,
Arundell and Warwick were forthwith imprisoned. And to shun the danger of a
popular insurrection, public proclamation was made, that the fore named
persons were imprisoned not for any former fault, but for fresh treasonable
offenses, to be made known the next Parliament, where they should be judged.
The Lord Cobham, and diverse others, were likewise made prisoners. The mean
while the King not knowing how his two Uncles would take this business,
furnished himself with Soldiers, and commanded those of his side to come to
the Parliament well attended. The two Dukes hearing that their brother was
taken, and afterward put to death, were much afraid of themselves; fearing,
lest the King being ill counseled, might take arms likewise against them.
Whereupon having assembled together a great many of such as sided with them,
they came to London, where they were affectionately received by the people, who
wanted only a head to rise in rebellion. But Lancasters ambition being long
since blown over, and York the same he ever was all things continued in their
former quiet: many Lords interposing themselves, who persuaded them that the
King would do nothing for the time to come without their knowledge and
consent; the which he afterward ill-favouredly performed.

When the Parliament was assembled, the faults of those who were imprisoned,
were laid open. To disguise the mystery, commandment was sent to Callais to
the Earl Marshall, that he should present the Duke. Answer was made, that he
was dead of a violent fever. And as there was none desirous to sift further
into the truth thereof: so did they not demurre upon the condemning of him, and
the confiscation of his goods. Arundel and Warwick were sentenced to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, as Traitors. The formers punishment was remitted to a
single beheading, in respect to his blood: for he was the son of Elenor the
daughter of Henry Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, who came from Edmund the
second son of Henry the third. The other (his life being pardoned, but not
his goods) was condemned to perpetual prisonment in the Isle of of Man: for
confessing himself guilty, (which Arundell would not do) he was referred to
the Kings mercy. The Archbishop of Canterbury, accused for having obtained a
pardon for his brother the Earl of Arundell, a declared Traitor, (his defense
unheard) was condemned to a perpetual banishment: his patrimoniall goods
confiscated, and a new Archbishop obtained from Rome to supply his place in
Church, (who held the place only till the other was called home, no mention
was made of the conspiracy at Arundell Castle, which is sufficient to make it
be supposed false; since that alone had been enough to have condemned him.
False tales were framed to undo the Archbishop, whilst he might have been
found guilty of treason in the highest degree.

But the wonder wa^, how the Duke of Lancaster, who was made Lord high
Constable for the present occasion, had the heart to hear his brother called
traitor; and in the giving of his sentence to call him so himself; whilst
being formerly himself accused of treason by the Irish Friar, he was by
Gloucester more brotherly dealt withal. The which surely happened, either for
that where private interest does prevail, honesty and affection must give
place: or else for that men who are politickly wise, had rather trust their
honor to the talk of the vulgar, than their goods and lives to the refined
sense of supreme authority: the one more plausible, the other more secure. The
like befell the Earl of Arundell, who observing that the Earl Marshall, who
was his sonne-inlaw, and the Earl of Kent his nephew, assisted as well to the
custody of his person, as the solicitation of his punishment, said unto them:
That others would hereafter be spectators of their misery, as for the present
they were of his, whilst in reason it should least become them to behold such a
spectacle. The common people believed that he died a Martyr; that the King,
haunted with evil apparitions, wished he had never seen him, and that his
head was by miracle rejoyned unto his body: the belief whereof grew to such a
height, as that the King caused him ten days after to be taken by night out of
his grave, commanding certain Lords to go see the truth of it. They found his
head (as by the headsman) parted from his body, and caused his head and body to
be reburied in an unknown place, to the end that the people might commit no
more such foolish superstitions. The feast of the Nativity caused a prorogation
of the Parliament, which was adjurned to Shrewsbury, where the King created
five Dukes. He made Darby Duke of Hereford, Nottingham Duke of Norfolk,
Rutland Yorkes eldest son, Duke of Aumerle, and his two brothers, Kent and
Huntington, Dukes of Surrey and of Exeter. Margaret, the daughter and heir of
Thomas, late Earl of Norfolk, fifth son to Edward the first, was created
(for her own life) Duchess of Norfolk: He made the Earl of Somerset
Marquis Dorset: the Lord Spencer Earl of Gloucester, Lord Nevill Earl of
Westmerland, Lord Scroope Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord Thomas Pearcie Earl of
Worcester, dividing amongst them the goods of Gloucester, Arundell and Warwick,
the more to oblige them unto him. The other prisoners were proceeded withal
with less severity. He anulled the Acts of Parliament made the eleventh year
of his reign. He granted (according to custom) a general pardon, excepting
fifty to be by him named; intending by this means to keep them all in their
duties: for every one was sure, if they should fall into his disfavour, to be
one of the fifty excepted; so as having reduced affairs according to his own
will, and rid his hands of those he stood in fear of, he thought he might
now do what he list without fear of check; since there was none of so
clear a conscience, who had not cause to fear himself. The Duke of Hereford,
who from such actions apprehended danger of public hate, finding a fit
occasion to speak with the Duke of Norfolk, told him, that he being a
Counselor, and one whom the King did much affie in, he was bound in duty to
make him see, that the small esteem his Majesty made of the Nobility, though
less of himself (suffering himself to be ruled by people of base condition,
and no worth) might likely one day cause unto him some unlooked for
inconveniencie, since that the peoples patience was not long to be relied upon;
especially when it is transformed into desperation and fury. Norfolk promised
his service therein, seeming well pleased with it, though indeed he no ways
liked it. For considering that such like offices were unpleasing to the King,
and that his favor was not to be preserved by giving him good advice, but by
soothing him, he did in so detestable a manner relate Herefords discourse, as
causing him to be called for, he would have Norfolk to make good to Herefords
face what he had behind his back affirmed of him: the which the one affirming,
and the other denying, the lie being given on both sides, Hereford threw down
his glove, which Norfolk readily took up; the King appointing them Coventry
for the place, and Saint Lamberts day for the time of combat. The two Champions
failed not to appear at the time appointed, and had already begun their
carreere with lance in rest, when they were commanded to hold their hands. The
King having a long while disputed the business upon the Scaffold (which was
sumptuously built for his Majesty to see the Duel) caused proclamation be
made, that for good respects his Majesty would not have the combat further
proceeded in; and that his pleasure was, that the Duke of Hereford should be
banished the kingdom for ten years, upon peril of his life, and the Duke of
Norfolk for ever upon the like penalty. It was observed that this sentence was
given the same day twelvemonth that Norfolk had caused Gloucester to be
strangled at Callais. He forthwith left England, and in little more then one
year after died for grief at Venice. 'Twas thought that the Kngs rigor
toward him, proceeded from a desire he had to be rid of him: for he having
been formerly of the Barons faction, and having of late wrought himself into
the Kings favor by the ruin of others, he thought that upon occasion he might
serve him as he had done his friend the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of
Arundell his sonne-in-law. Princes though they do not punish themselves for
the evil they commit, punish the instruments of evil, to the end that they
may not be thought altogether unjust.

The Duke of Hereford, who when he took his leave, in token of the Kings good
will, was remitted four years of his banishment; parted from England, being
generally bewailed, and was well received in France, where the Duke of Berry
would have given him his daughter for wife, had he not been hindered by Richard,
fearing least the favor of that Duke in France, and the peoples love in
England, might prove dangerous. Richard by reason of superfluous expenses, was
in continual want; and money past through his hands as water through a sieve.
Continual necessity was the continual fever which caused this thirst in him;
the which not able to be quenched by the ordinary revenues of the Crown, nor
yet by the extraordinary helps of Parliament, he was enforced to dig new
Wells. He borrowed money of all the Lords, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, by way of privy Seal, obliging himself to pay them, but never did:
The which though it be somewhat hard, yet not sufficient to make subjects take
their last resolutions: For particular men do sometimes borrow, and never pay.
But the violating of justice under the pretense of doing justice, was that
which turned patience to despair. Seventeene whole Shires had almost sided
with the Duke of Gloucester, at least they were so said to have done. They were
all held (notwithstanding the last general pardon) guilty of high treason:
wherewithal being threatened, they were compelled to compound for a great sum
of money, to take again the oath of allegiance, and the richest amongst them
to sign and seal unto a blanke, into which the officers appointed for this
business, might insert what sum they pleased, a thing able to undo whole
families and Shires. The like was done in London to the great distate of the
Citizens. John Duke of Lancaster, this mean while died, and the King took
possession of his goods, without any pretense of title, he bereft his exiled
son of his inheritance. The which when the Duke of York observed, he thought
it was no longer safe for him to stay in Court; whereupon he retired to his
own home. But the King being resolved to go himself in person into Ireland,
to revenge the death of Roger Mortimer, Earl of Marsh, slain there by the
rebels (he who in case succession should want, was the presumed heir to the
Crown) sent for the Duke back, assigning over unto him the government of the
Kingdom in his absence. This was the last expedition he made: for having left
his subjects ill affected, and augmented their distates by his taking along
with him great store of provisions without paying for them, he departed with
thirty thousand men, and had such good success, as had he not been compelled
to return, he would have brought that Island to total obedience. This mean
while the Town of London, the Prelates, Nobles, and People (those especially
of the abovesaid seventeen shires, who thought themselves worst dealt withal)
resolved to call in the new Duke of Lancaster, not only to the recovery of his
own inheritance, but of the Crown and Kingdom. They sent express messengers
to Cullen, to the end that Thomas Arundel, late Archbishop of Canterbury (who
in his banishment made his abode there) might go into France, and persuade the
young Duke thereunto; who though he found it a business of difficulty, the
dangers considered, as likewise the peoples changeableness; yet being brought
to live by borrowing, deprived of his estate, and out of hope of ever
recovering it by any other means, he entertained the motion; he pretended to
King Charles (who otherwise would not have suffered him to depart that he went
to see his cousin the Duke of Brittanny, and so with his approbation, embarked
himself with some few followers, amongst which number, Thomas son to the
late Earl of Arundel beheaded, who not many days before was fled from
England, was one. When he was come upon the English coast, he would not land,
but coasting along the Country, to discover the peoples inclinations, he cast
anchor at Revenspur in Yorkshire, where he needed no invitation: for the Lords
and Prelates flockt all thither as soon as they heard of his arrival: So as
having assembled an Army of sixty thousand fighting men, and all places, by
which he passed, yielding unto him, he was with great acclamation, and
expressions of joy, received into London. The Duke of York, governor of the
Kingdom, who at his Nephews first appearance, had called the Council
together, was thereby advised to leave London, and go to S. Albans, where they
might gather forces to give him battle. An advice assuredly dangerous: for the
head ought first and chiefly to be defended. The forces on the Councels side,
were no sooner gathered together, but that they made a protestation they would
not fight against the Duke of Lancaster: for having from the beginning,
declared that he pretended to nothing but to what in right did descend unto him
from his Father and Mother, every man was of opinion, that since his
inheritance was unjustly taken from him, he did justly in taking up of Arms to
repossesse himself thereof. Hereupon those of the Kings more intimate
Council, as William Earl of Wilshire, Lord Treasurer, Sir John Bushy, and Sir
Henry Green, leaving the Duke of York, the Bishop of Exceter, Lord
Chancellor, and the rest, fled to Bristoll, in the castle whereof they thought
they might be safe. Sir William Bagot, one of the same fraternity, went more
advisedly over to Ireland. The Duke of York seeing that it was dangerous for
him, and to no purpose to tarry where he was, went toward Wales; where he
thought he should meet the King at his return from Ireland. He stayed at
Beckly till such time as the Duke of Lancaster came thither, with whom (seeing
the Kings affairs went so ill) he soon accorded. Lancaster finding by this
time his good fortune, went to Bristoll, took in the Castle; and those three
which had fled thither, were by the mad multitude soon beheaded. This news was
long in coming to Ireland, by reason of the horrible tempests at Sea, which
for six weeks space suffered not a little vessel to pass over. But when it
was known, the King did not (as he should have done) make suddenly for
England, being advised by the Duke of Aumerle to tarry till his ships, which
were scattered, might be gathered together, and such provisions made as were
fitting for the Fleet. He caused the two young sons, the one the Duke of
Glosters son, who died in his return, and the other the son of this Lancaster
(who was afterward King Henry the fifth) to be kept in safe custody in the
Castle of Tremni. He sent the Earl of Salisbury for England, with directions
to gather together as many people as he could in Cheshire and Wales (his two
beloved Countries) to the end that being ready at his arrival (which should
be within six days) he might encounter the enemy before his forces grew
greater. The Earl departed, came to Wales, and had got together forty
thousand good and faithful men; by means of whom, if the King had come at his
time appointed, he had either repossest himself of all again, or had at
least given the enemy enough to do; but landing in Milford haven in Pembroke
shire 18 days after, he found, that a false report of his death being raised,
and his party having fifteen days expected him, they had disbandoned
themselves, part of them coming over to the young Duke, the rest retiring to
their own homes. Whereupon astonished at so unfortunate an encounter, his
courage failed him. And though those who were returned with him, promised to
die at his feet, he, contrary to his dignity and reputation, chose rather to
lose his Kingdom then hazard his life. A weakness which this nation mightily
detests: for the inhabitants thereof no ways fearing death, nor willing to
endure the troubles of the mind, chose rather to die, then live in misery. As
soon as Lancaster understood his arrival, he left the Duke of York at
Bristoll, and took his way toward Conaway, where the King was, without either
forces or retinue. All places as he went along surrendered themselves, and the
town of Chester, formerly so faithful, did the like. The King resolved, not to
make use of his soldiers, dismissed them, that he with the less encumbrance
might go whither his fears drove him. And for that purpose, he gave order to
Thomas Pearcy Earl of Worcester, the Lord high Steward of his household, to
discharge his family, wishing they might be reserved for a better fortune.
Others will have it, that Worcester formerly distasted for that Richard had a
little before declared the Earl of Northumberland, his brother, to be a
traitor, did of himself in public, break the staff of his office, and went
unto the Duke of Lancaster, and that upon this occasion the Courtiers did
disperse themselves. Those who counseled Richard, were of opinion, that he
should go into France, to his wives father, or else return to Ireland; where
(failing of hopes in England) he might furnish himself with foreign
soldiers, to make such use of occasions, as time should administer. But that
if he would needs tarry in Wales, a country yet well affected unto him, be
should do well to pass further into the heart thereof, whilst his presence
changing the looks of fortune, some would follow him out of affection, many
out of duty; and others by reason of the usurpers scandalous actions. But all
their persuasions were in vain: for it is the property of cast down minds
patiently to expect the blows of Fortune. And whilst their honor eggs them
on unto defense, their pusillanimity is such, as makes them suffer oppression.
He adhered to those who showed him that his hopes of France were dangerous:
that the assistance he might have from thence, would confirm his subjects in
their rebellion, lest they might be by them subdued. That to return into
Ireland, would be to no end, since he could not promise himself much from
the particular forces of that country. That he should do amiss to hope in
the repentance of the English. For if they had out of hate abandoned him, they
would persist in their contumacie; as despairing of pardon, having so highly
offended him; that foreign forces would be rather harmfull then of any use,
especially the French. So as there being no hope of help from abroad, and
despairing of any at home, his best resolution would be to think upon his
own safety; and by giving away what he could not keep, endeavor a safe and
private life. These reasons made him listen unto the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Earl of Northumberland, (the one by him banished, the other proclaimed
traitor) with whom he agreed to resign up his Kingdom, upon condition he
might be permitted to live a private life, and have the lives granted him of
eight persons, such as he should nominate. The which being largely promised
him by them, and readily approved of by the Duke, they met together, the Duke
using all due respects which are requisite from an obedient subject to his
natural Prince. Whilst Richard minding nothing but his present condition, did
things unworthy of his greatness and dignity, he gave himself up into the
Dukes hands the 20. of August 1399. together with all his money, horse and
furniture, his money amounting to above a million of gold. The manner of this
imprisonment is by others diversely related. They say, that the King despairing
of his affairs, sent the Dukes of Exeter and of Surrey to treat with
Lancaster, who keeping the former with himself, who was his cousin, and
putting the other into the Castle at Chester, did in their stead send the Earl
of Northumberland unto the King: who followed by a thousand Bow-men, and four
hundred lances, was (when he should be come nigh to Conaway) to make thereof
two Ambuscadoes, and passing forward himself with only four or five horsemen,
he was under a safe conduct to go into the Castle. That the propositions he
was to make, were, That Richard would speak with Lancaster, and satisfy him
in two particulars: The one, that process might be made against such as had
had a hand in the death of Gloucester, and his companions: The other, that he
would give him an authentical pardon for whatsoever former offense he had
committed against him; that netled at these demands made unto him as King, in a
condition of not denying any thing, he took horse, and the Duke riding before
(under pretense of providing his dinner at Rutland) stayed where the ambush
was, and where the King with his followers (among the which were the Earl of
Salisbury, the Bishop of Salisbury, and the Lord Scroope) were by them
enclosed. That when he was come to Flint, the Duke with all his Army came
thither likewise; That the Archbishop Arundel was the first with whom he
treated; and that having gathered by what had befallen him, that Lancaster was
not so simple as hereafter to affie in him, whom he had so highly offended.
That punishments, pardons and reformations were but the songs of Sirens; and
that his aim was at the Kingdom, he offered to surrender it up unto him. But
however it was, he was from Chester sent into the Tower of London. And if in
his taking water at Westminster, had he not been waited upon by the Mayor and
his associates, he was likely to have been slain before he could have got unto
the Tower. Lancaster on the contrary, was received by the City and all the
Companies thereof, as King, with processions, applause, and all expressions of
joy. A Parliament was called in Richards name. The Duke took serious advice
concerning this affair, with his best friends, particularly with his Uncle of
York, who were all of one opinion, That the resignation should be so done as
that it might appear voluntary; nor that being sufficient (since his
imprisonment would argue an inforcement) that his deposing might be
strengthened by act and authority of Parliament. To effect the first of these,
diverse were suborned, who having formerly been his friends, showed unto him the
danger wherein he was, if he did not purchase his life at the rate of the free
resignation of his Kingdom. The which being obtained, they fell to the
effecting it. The chief Lords as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, together
with the prime Judges and Lawyers, came all to the Tower, to all which Richard
with his Robes on, his Crown on head, and Scepter in his hand, presented
himself; and taking his Chair, after some few acknowledgements and excuses of
his own misgovernment, he himself read his Surrender; affirming it to be
freely done, and without compulsion. He moreover freed his subjects of
whatsoever bonds, oaths, fidelity or homage, renouncing all further claim,
authority, dignity, or title to the Crown; leaving it free for the time to
come, with all the appurtenances belonging thereunto. This being done, he
subscribed it: And then falling upon the praise of his cousin, the Duke of
Lancaster, he desired them to choose him for his successor; And made the
Archbishop Arundell, and Bishop of Hereford his substitutes to acquaint the
Parliament with this his request and resignation. And the more to witness his
good inclination toward the Duke, he took from off his own finger, a Ring
wherein his Arms were engraven, and put it upon the Dukes finger, giving him
therewithal his Ensigns of Regality, whereof he had disrobed himself. All
this he did, as seeming desirous to lead a private life; though in his
disrobing he could not hide his inward grief, at the which there was no so
hard heart as was not mollified. The Trustees discharged their trust unto the
Parliament, which accepted the resignation. And that there might remain no
scruple for such as should come after, many Articles were framed, wherein he
was accused of extortion, prodigality, tyranny, of having preferred men of base
condition to the highest places, of being cause of the imprisonment and death
of the Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of Arundell, against the rules of Law and
Justice; of having kept about him people to destroy him, permitting unto them
all insolences without correction. They omitted not his lasciviousness,
perjuries, falsehood, loss of reputation, rapine: Maxims of State able to
ruin a State, Principals contrary to the rights of a Crown; his cancelling of
public writings; his injurious proceeding against the Archbishop of
Canterbury; nor any thing else that might be objected to an apparent tyrant.
And as such a one he was by all the Judges (deputed for this purpose) declared
incable, and unworthy; and by the votes of them all, deposed from the dignity
and title of a King. Insomuch as not contented to bereave him of his kingdom,
they would likewise have him therewithal to lose his reputation. Commissioners
were deputed to acquaint him with the Act of Parliament, and to renounce unto
him all former ties, homage, fidelity, subjection or oath. To the which he made
no other answer, save, That not regarding, these titulary circumstances, he
hoped his cousin would be his good friend and Lord. I have heard by some, that
the lower House did not give its consent to his deposition, the which may very
well be true; but Writers do not mention it. In the interim of this
inter-regnum, the Duke of Lancaster made known his Titles, by which he laid
claim unto the Crown, and was by general applause cried up, King; and
installed in his Throne by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York. Thus ended
the reign, though not the life of Richard the second; a Prince in many
respects worthy to have reigned, if he had not reigned.

The end of the first Book.
THE CIVIL VVARRES OF ENGLAND; IN THE LIFE OF HENRY the fourth.
The second Book.
HENRY the 4th a Prince naturally well given, when he knew himself to be King,
began to differ in many Henry the 4.
things from what he formerly was: for the usurpation of Kingdoms (a vice in
all times blamed yet pursued) if it do not totally destroy virtue, does at
least infeeble it, or keep it in suspense. It is impossible to contract
Matrimony between the Regal Throne and Injustice, unless it be by unjust
means, and that the Dowry consist of any thing save cruelty and rapine. All
things here below have mediums conformable to themselves, and in the order of
Nature subordinate to their Genus, the good to good, the bad to bad: So he,
while he was in his prime innocence, did nothing which was not praise worthy;
neither did his praise exceed his merit; but being arrived to that where
ambition does its uttermost, he did more shamefully then miraculously
metamorphose himself: his nature, though not changed, but some ways altered,
did by fits reduce him to what he naturally was: in the vehemency of his
forces, revenge or command; he did not out-goe his own preservation or
security: so as though he might deserve the name of an Usurper, yet did he not
deserve to be termed a tyrant: for were it otherwise, since among the Roman
Emperors there were few found who were not usurpers, and yet of the number
many good men, the good could not have shunned the being reputed Tyrants. Henry
did not subvert the fundamental Laws: he was sent for before he did insinuate
himself; the Kingdom was offered unto him before he did usurp it. He did
better make good the office of a Prince to his subjects, then did his subjects
their duties unto him their Prince: neither of them forgetting their peculiar
natures, he his innate goodness, nor they their natural wavering and
inconstancy. This may be witnessed to us, by what befell him while he was a
private man, he did with temperance and modesty receive the praises due unto
him by the victory he had over the Duke of Ireland, no vainglory was therein
found in him, his discourse thereof did not exceed the bounds of modesty, and
the relation he made thereof unto his associats, was void of amplification or
boasting. Aid from Genua being demanded and granted against the Pirates which
roved up and down the Mediterranean Sea, and coasts of Italy, he was made
Commander of them: France joining in this expedition with England. Being come
into Africa, and by means of his Archers landed, he returned home; his modesty
added to his reputation while the one and the other equally contending, strove
for precedence in his renown. Those who write, that in stead of making this
journey, he went against the infidels in Prusia, did not perhaps equivocate,
but the different relation of Writers, makes the undertaking indifferent, since
they all agree in his praise. In the combat with the Duke of Norfolk, he proved
himself to be both wise and valiant: for though stricken as if with lightning,
at his unexpected accusation, he fell into no disorder: his wisdom was
inflamed, but not by anger consumed to ashes, as it is oft-times seen in such
as are unexpectedly offended: he patiently endured his exile, and with dry eyes
left his Country, whilst those who saw him go, moistened theirs. He would
have gone into Holland, if the Duke his father would have permitted him; but
the war made by Albertus of Bavaria, Lord of those Countries, against the
Frisons, at the instigation of his son, the Count of Ostervent, being very
dangerous, and but little honor there to be won (for that people did more by
desperateness, then skill in war, defend their liberties) he advised him to go
for France. He was there graciously received by the King, Princes, and Court.
But the King of France would needs of his own free will allow him five hundred
Crowns a week, for his petty occasions, (as it was termed) he thought, not to
receive it would argue incivility, and that the receiving of it would fasten
upon him too great an obligation; so as he resolved to leave France, and go
into Hungary to war against the Turks: He wrote hereof unto his father, who
approving of the cause, but not of his resolution, propounded to him a voyage
into Spain, where having two sisters the one Queen of Castile, the other
Queen of Portugal, he might with less danger and discommodity make the war
which he desired against the Infidels: but being by his friends advertised,
that the Physicians had given his father over, as not likely to live many
months, he went not. The Duke of Berry, who had a daughter of three and twenty
years of age, a widow to two husbands: Henry being likewise a widower, a rich
heir, and after his fathers decease the prime man in England next unto the
King, thought to give her to him for wife: King Charles being therewithal well
contented: a match which would have been serviceable to the Queen his
daughter, and of public good: for thus united, yea peace between the two
Kingdoms might the easilier be maintained. But Richard thinking this match
might prove disadvantagious to his designs; and that Henry being offended, was
likely always to be his enemy, sent the Earl of Salisbury to break it: nor
would Charles his wives father displease him therein, seeing he took it so to
heart. When the Archbishop of Canterbury propounded his return to England,
offering the Crown unto him, he could not at the first prevail with him, nor
had he prevailed with him at all, had not the King by depriving him of his
inheritance, caused him despair: a bad resolution, but excusable; and which
cannot be blamed by the law of Nature, save as it is interdicted by the law of
Christianity: so as innocent in the one, and faulty in the other, he erred in
both: such resolutions being prejudicial to a Kingdom, which ought always to
detest all alterations. Let businesses fall out well or ill to malcontents,
who are egged on by ambition and revenge (two spurs slightly gilded over
with the leafe-gold of public good) the people cannot but be always losers
by civil brawles; nay, if the two Registers of humane actions, Profit and
Uprightness in proceeding, meet not together, (as they seldom do) and that
profit have the precedencie, it ought to be when the conservation of the
Commonwealth is in question, and not to satisfy the ambition and private
interests of particular men. If love unto his Country, or the desolation of
the State, had moved Henry (Richard being deposed) there wanted not lawful
succeeders. But howsoever the malady had been better for the Kingdom then the
remedy: for the one was not of long continuance; the King being mortal, and of
such years as he might have amended: where as the other for the space of six
Kings reigns, produced nothing but one ill upon the neck of another; and had
it not been for the matrimonial conjunction of the two Roses in the seventh,
the mischief had perhaps yet continued: But as it is the loss of what they
did possess in France, their loss of reputation abroad, their desolation at
home, the death of hundreds, of thousands, and of fourscore or more of the
blood Royal, approve the remedy to have been more pestilentiall then the
disease: and that to have continued Richard in his authority, would have been
reputed less harmfull, then to have substituted another King, how good soever,
who in a capacity of growing worse, was cause of those woeful consequences
which such substitutions use to draw after them. Wise Phifitions apply only
approved medicines to the ^icke party, where the case is not desperate; and in
case it be, the more discreet sort do rather suffer them to dye peaceably,
then tormented with the violence of medicines. The malady here was not mortal,
save as made so by the remedies. So we may conclude, that the good conditions
of such as do pretend, are more harmfull then the bad of of such as do
possess: Virtue not being what she appears to us to be in her abstract, but
what she is in the concrete of her corruptions.

Henry had, though silent, yet conspicuous competitours, by law questionless
before him: as the sons of Roger Mortimer, the eldest son to Philippa, the only
daughter and heir to Lionell Duke of Clarence, not only by nature, but in the
eight year of King Richard by Parliament declared Heir to the Crown; she
being dead, her right remained in these, so as by virtue of the Laws he could
not justly pretend to that which contrary to the laws and the prejudice of
others he did violently usurp: But because his succession was not truly
justifiable, it behoved to seek out some color for it: his friends propounded
diverse titles unto him, all of them counterfeit and disguised, whilst right,
rich and substantial of it self, needs no false props. Henry did by his
Mother descend from Edmond Crook-backe Earl of Lancaster, they would have this
Edmond to be eldest son to Henry the third, Edward the first his younger
brother, got the birthright by reason of his brothers deformity: whence it
ensued that all the Kings since Henry the third were illegitimate: and that for
the present he was the only lawful Prince, his Mother Blanch being the only
great Niece to Edmond: but the business being more maturely examined then
propounded, they thought it better not to make use thereof, then to ground so
great a building upon so weak a foundation. His day of Coronation being come,
wherein, according to custom, his titles to the Crown were proclaimed, three
were expressed. Conquest, Richards resignation, and his being the first heir
male of the blood Royal.

The first was false, Henry made no war, 'twas conspiracy, manifest
rebellion: and the forces whereby he got the Kingdom (for he brought but
fifteen Lances along with him from Brittanny) were of the Natives, who in such
a case would prove both conquering and conquered. Conquest does presuppose a
nation or people vanquished by war; an enemy nation which contends, not a
friendly one which favors and calls in. The second title, which was the
Resignation, might by the figure Ironia be termed Conquest, for Richards
resignation was enforced, bargained for in prison, and yielded unto upon hopes
of saving his life. The third, that he was the next heir male to the Crown,
afforded occasion to Edmond Earl of March, the right heir indeed to say
amongst his friends in a Latin allusion, that this was a right title, for that
he was indeed Herus malus. But howsoever it was, he was crowned, all titles as
well just as unjust admitted of by applause and silence. 'Twas observed that
the day of his being proclaimed King was the same day twelve month that he was
banished, as the day wherein the Duke of Norfolk was together with him
banished, was the same day twelve month that he the said Duke had caused the
Duke of Gloucester to be strangled. Things which oftt-imes fall out in History, no
natural reason being to be given for it: so as we must believe them to proceed
from the hand of God, who in his due time rewards every man according to his
works. The first thing this King did after he was crowned, was the making his
son Henry eldest of 4 sons, and who was then between twelve and thirteen
years of age, Prince of Wales, the title whereby the kings eldest son is at
this day called. A decree was there made that all the dominions of the Crown
and pretensions thereunto, as well on this side as on the other side the Sea,
should be conceived, as individually united in the person of King Henry, and in
his default in the forenamed Prince, and he failing of issue, in Thomas, from
him (in the like default) in John, lastly in Humphrey, the daughters not
nominated. The succession being thought sufficiently entailed in the lives of
four. But because Richards person and his pretensions might cause much
alteration, it was so carried as that the chain of his captivity should be
forged by the Parliament, where consultation was had what should be done with
him. The Bishop of Carleil who always blamed the deposing of the one, and the
others substitution endeavored (out of more integrity then wisdom, to the
danger of himself, without hope of public good) to undo what was done: as
if a general error committed by some through malice, by others through fear,
were to be disanulled by bare and naked reason: the arguments he made use of
were two: whether Richard might be deposed or not, and if so, whether it were
just Henry should succeed him: For the first, he showed that a legitimate
Prince, though a Tyrant, was not subordinate to the authority of subjects; that
Richard was no Tyrant, his errors proceeding from youth and bad counsel: that
those should have been provided for by remedies less severe, and more just:
That the Duke of Lancaster whom they called King had done more mischief since
his return from France, then King Richard in all his reign; that suppose
Richard had merited to be deposed, the Duke of Lancaster had no reason to
pretend unto the Crown, since the lawful heirs, and those who were so
declared to be by Parliament were yet living; That the Law condemns no man
unheard. That they had condemned a King who had reigned two and twenty years,
without allowing him the hearing, and were about to condemn him again. The
Bishops reasons were like the Sun in Aries, which moves, but does not
dissolve humors: if the foundation of this affair on the one side was force,
it was ridiculous to treat thereof on the other without equal, if not greater
forces. The good Bishop was immediately laid hold on by the Earl Marshall, and
sent prisoner to the Abbey of S. Albons, decree being made that Richard being
served at his table, and in all things else concerning his person, like a
Prince, should be imprisoned during life: and in case that any others should
practice to free him out of prison, that Richard should be the first who by his
death should make amends for such a fault as the occasion and groundwork of
such commotions. Many other things were then determined: some for the peoples
ease, others for the benefit of friends, and depression of enemies. The Acts of
Parliament made the eleventh year of King Richard were confirmed; which were
by him abrogated in the Parliament held in the one and twentieth year of his
Reign: and those of the twentieth and one year repealed to the general good
and satisfaction of all men; for while they stood in force, no man could think
himself secure: the term Treason being so confusedly and so maliciously
enwrapped in so many aequivocations, as that there was no so slight fault which
malice might not bring under that head: so as they determined that in that
behalf judgment should hereafter be given only according to the Statutes
made in Edward the thirds time, for the confirmation of the Parliamentary
proceedings the eleventh year, what ere was done against Richards officers was
declared good: for the anulling of what was done the twenty one year, the
resolutions taken against the governors were declared unjust: those who did
therein suffer as the Earl of Arundell and the Duke of Gloucester, or banished as
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Earl of Warwick were restored in blood. He
gave the I Will of Man forfeited by the death of William Scroope, Earl of
Wiltshire, beheaded at Bristow, to the Earl of Northumberland: with this
obligation, that those Earls should carry the selfsame sword which he was
girt withal when he entered the kingdom, and which was afterward called
Lancasters sword on the Kings left hand at their coronations, a gift which
through his own default (as we shall hereafter see) he enjoyed not long. To
the Earl of Westmerland he gave the County of Richmond. He distributed
Governments and Offices to diverse others, either out of gratitude, desert, or
faction. He recalled from banishment the Earl of Arundels son, and the
Earl of Warwick, restoring them to their dignities and goods which had been
taken from them. The Dukes of Aumerle, Surrey, and Exceter, the Marquis Dorset
(his own brother by the father) and the Earl of Gloucester (as being those)
who had challenged Arundell and Warwick, were deprived of such titles as had
after that act been conferred upon them, and of all the goods which from that
time they enjoyed, given them by Richard, by confiscation or otherwise: the
Titles and incomes which they formerly enjoyed, remaining only unto them: so
as Aumerle from Duke was reduced to be Earl of Rutland; Surrey, of Kent; and
Exceter, of Huntington: the Marquis Dorset, his brother, to be Earl of
Somerset; and the Earl of Gloucester to be Lord Spencer. I call those chalengers,
who accuse others, and offer to prove their accusations by single combat: as
these had accused the abovenamed, to gratify King Richard: and as in this
Parliament, in hopes of pleasing King Henry; Aumerle, Salisbury, and diverse
others, were accused as traitors to the King, and offered to be proved so by
Duel. But the King considering the time and humors, knowing that Clemency
and Grace would more redound to his glory, then by giving ear to accusations,
to make himself be believed their on-fetter, appeased them; pardoning all of
them, and prohibiting any further discourse, concerning that matter. He
thought to do the same another way, and to win the friendship of his most
professed enemies, those whom he found to be so in the behalf of the deposed
King. The three degraded Dukes were the chief of these; Aumerle, Richards
cousingerman, and he who was most intimate with him while he reigned, he
hoped to win the good will of the other two, though Exceter were King Richards
brother, and Surrey his nephew, son to his other brother, who died two years
before: he feared not Exceter, having some interest in him, as who had married
his sister Elizabeth, but believed to make good use of him concerning Surrey,
if need should be: so as if he would not suffer the combats to proceed, nor
that the people should triumph in their deaths, as they seemed desirous (all
three of them being the causers of infinite grievances and extortions) it was
out of these respects which were not in likelihood to deceive him: the present
good turn which he did them, being likely to oblige them very much: for
though with justice he might have satisfied the people, and secured himself,
he chose (by pardoning them) to displease his subjects, and prejudice
himself, whilst he might so justly have rid his hands of them. An excuseable
fault for a Prince who stands upon such ticklish terms. An enemy resembles
glass, which never can be peeced. And though Christian Religion have the
secret of peecing an enemy, which is for the love of God, yet Christians
(though they should) do seldom arrive at so great perfection: and though
Nature may pretend to have the same secret, yet ought she not therein to be
believed; unless it proceed from two great extravagancies: either from a dead
and senseless pusillanimity, or from a generositie only by imagination to be
comprehended. The first is not to be trusted: for baseness and cruelty are
terms convertible. And of the second, they only are capable, who like
Iulius-Caesar, and King Henry, believe that benefits are able to blot out
injuries: but others, who judge their enemies good conditions by their own bad
ones, believe that good turns are baits to revenge; and abhorring him so much
the more, for that they are made the Looking-glass wherein his nobleness and
glory may be seen; they are Diamonds to all other impressions, wax to the
impression of hatred, as in the three abovenamed, and diverse others, we shall
shortly see.

The first news which France heard of these alterations in England, was by the
Merchants, and those so uncertain, as they knew not what to think thereof;
Madame de Cousi had the charge of the young Queen, who being commanded to be
gone, without demanding any question, or further troubling of her mistress,
obeyed; and was waited upon to the Sea side, where a ship stayed for her, and
conveyed her over to Bullen: she was the first that brought any true relation:
The which, when Charles understood, he was thereat so much grieved, as that
while he was thinking upon revenge, he relapsed into one of his wonted
frenzies, the Council not knowing what to resolve upon: they perceived by the
general hatred against Richard, and the universal consent in Henry's
election, that in a business of this nature, 'twas bootlesse to use force: for
England is not to be undone but by division. The Duke of Burgondy, who had
been no less averse to this match in France, then was the Duke of Gloucester in
England, upbraided them with the small account they made of his counsel; and
was of opinion, that the business was not to be remedied by a sudden war;
but that they should do well to wait for such occasions as are by discontented
subjects offered unto their neighbors, such as were those of Gascoigne, who
were the more displeased at Richards being deposed, for that he was borne
among them, and was always called Richard of Bordeaux. A wise consideration if
this ill blood had grown to a rebellion: or if Sir Robert Knolles, Lieutenant
of Aquitaine, a wise and valiant Gentleman, had not hindered them by
remonstrances and reasons; who likewise advertised England of the danger. This
mean while the French were not wanting to themselves. The Constable de
Sanserres was the first who presented himself upon their confines, endeavoring
to blow the already glowing Coal. The Duke of Burbon had recourse thither
likewise, provoking the Nobility and people, offering all they could desire;
adding withal such promises as upon such like occasions are usual, with as
much readiness of speech as they proved afterward difficult in performance.
Bayon, Bordeaux, and other towns, being required, sent him their Deputies, who
having no further directions then only to hear, returned laden with offers.
But these first passions being calmed, the comparative condition of France and
England (the latter free from Burdens, the other subject to perpetual taxes)
pointed out unto them the wholesomest resolve. For the common people love
nothing more then to cultivate their own grounds to their own proper use, and
to enjoy the fruits of their own industry, not being forced thereout to feed
officers or soldiers. While things were thus carried, Thomas Percy Earl of
Worster came thither with a fresh supply of soldiers, upon whose arrival all
practices ceased, while Richards friends endeavoring his liberty, did thereby
hasten his death, which was the only means to free him of the miseries
wherein he now lived. The Dukes of Aumerle, Exeter and Surrey (as has been
before said) were friendly embraced by the King, who hoped by his good usage to
win their love; but the latter two not being able to withstand the power of
blood, nor the first the like of friendship (the which was grown to that
height, that Richard, in case he should dye without issue, desired to leave the
Kingdom to him) it was impossible for them so far to alter their affections,
as that they did not prefer danger before security. The several opinions of
this conspiracy are so various, as that they may admit of doubt; but for my
part, I rest assured, that this variety proceeded from the not knowing of true
particularities, and that through the inveloping of secrets, the common people
have fashioned their story: whereupon that has happened which will always
happen, that many true cases have no circumstances, which are not or false or
very uncertain.

Having tied up all in a bundle, I will give you the opinion of Writers: King
Henry when he was young, had let some words fall (perhaps out of inconsiderate
vivacity of spirit, or else out of ambition to be thought a Statesman) tending
to this purpose; That Princes in consideration of their degree and expense had
but small revenewes, and that the Clergy in regard of their calling and
occasion, had too great incomes. To which speech Richard afterward alluding,
said; That if the Earl of Darby came to the Crown, he would be no great
favourer of the Clergy. Having now obtained it, and the memory remaining of
what he had said, and the other had judged, the Clergy had some reason to
suspect; since such like words as these were not let fall by chance; but at
such time when as snares being laid for the Clergy, because of their wealth,
there were diverse who had given such particulars of their estates to the
Parliament, as that the two Archbishops were forced to protest against any Act
which should be made against Ecclesiastical liberty or immunity: and though I
believe that these suspicions were vain (men's minds changing by years and
experience, and he not having in all his reign showed any such inclination) yet
he who shares in a believed danger does not wait the coming of it, but
prevents it; which was the only cause that made the Abbot of Westminster do
what he did. This man was religious by profession, but by practice a Courtier;
his learning and experience had won him reputation, especially with Richard,
who took him along with him in his last journey into Ireland; being then
firmly of opinion, that the King who had professed himself no friend to the
Clergy, would for ever continue the like, he thought the best way to prevent
this danger, would be by Henry's death; and because the grounds of this his
imagination were either true or likely, he suffered himself to be persuaded to
a likelihood of effecting his desires; wherein he had not been deceived, if
fortune had not failed him. He considered that Henry's preferment was
occasioned rather out of hatred to Richard, then any love to him; that such
effects change with the change of fortune: that the one being deposed, the
other was no more so much desired, who was only coveted to exclude the other:
this being effected, that his first love and applause was turned into envy and
hatred: that the people were fickle, greedy of what they have not, cloyed with
what they have: that his nearest kin were his enemies; his brother, brother in
law and cousin being censured in Parliament: that usurpation is hateful both
to God and man; that a lawful King was unlawfully deposed; the lawful heirs,
contrary to reason disinherited: that he was favored by the Nobility, as by
the house of Percy for interest, by that of York for fear: that the envy to
him ward, and compassion toward Richard were Rams, able to beat down
whatsoever well built wall. All of them considerations of much weight, but
counterpois'd by the Kings fortune, light beyond comparison. Hatred and treason
are false balances, wisdom is the only just scale, which if the Abbot had
used, he had saved his own life with the life of Richard, and the lives of
others, who drawn by a rash confidence, perished in the praecipice of a too
bold and heady resolution; for God does seldom suffer, never assist bad
actions. The first care in this business was to find persons fitly
appropriated to the business; since of the welwillers thereunto, these were
only useful, when by birth or retinue were void of exception, faithful: faith
being then most to be relied upon when most interessed, and interest being the
chiefest causer of our affections. Not herewithall contented, he would have
them oppositely affected with love and hopes toward Richard, with hatred and
fears toward Henry; so as without more ado these considerations pointed out
unto him what choice he was to make. The Dukes of Exeter and Surrey were most
nearly concerned in Richard, and under him their greatness was safe; which
under Henry was doubtful and suppressed, though Exeter had married his sister, a
thread too weakly spun to withold suspicions, which in what concerned the
Kingdom befell his brother in law: mere shadows, indangering him and forcing
upon him a necessity of impossible circumspection, for the preservation of the
State as it now was, was the only gain which was to be aimed at. In the Duke
of Aumerle were more weighty considerations; none at all for what concerned his
blood: he was in the like relation cousin to both, but it being an ordinary
thing to repay unuseful kindred with disrespect, and with hatred such as
bereave us of our good fortune, or are a cross to us therein; by Richard he
had been remunerated, by Henry cut short of part of his honors and
livelihood: but that, which of all other his distastes he was most sensible of,
was, that he could not suffer the being cut off from the Crown by his younger
brother the Earl of Cambridge, who had married Anne, to whom (when Edmund
Earl of March should dye) the right to the Crown did belong. John Montaigne
Earl of Salisbury, who had been an abusive medler in the breach of the match
between Henry and the daughter of Berry, had reason to presume him his
irreconcilable enemy: Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester, preferred by Richard,
suppressed by Henry, allied moreover to the house of York, by his match with
Constance the daughter of Aumerle, could not aspire to higher hopes. John
Bishop of Carleil, though with the height of clemency freed from imprisonment
at Saint Albons, was notwithstanding by his persevering in a preposterous
zeal, fast linked to the love of the one, and hatred of the other: Magdalun,
Chaplain to King Richard, to boot with the common interests and obligations of
the abovenamed, did naturally so much resemble Richard, as that there was no
separating of him from his party. These, and diverse others not named, were by
the Abbot invited to a great feast; which being done, they fell to private
conference, wherein having deplored the miseries of the time, the imprisonment
of a King to whom by nature, oath, and particular favors, they were obliged,
as likewise their own loss in his fall; they resolved to reestablish Richard
by the death of Henry; presuming that the people would be herewithall
contented: for by this means they should be freed from the wars wherewith
they were threatened from France, Scotland and Wales. The Duke of Exceter
propounded a Tilting at Christmas, wherein he with twenty Gentlemen, would
challenge the Earl of Salisbury with as many more, to the which the King should
be invited, and there, together with his children slain. A business likely
to succeed, they being all armed, and under the pretense of pomp well
attended, and he void of suspicion unarmed, his ordinary guard being more for
show then service. This being done, they resolved forthwith to re-inthrone
Richard wherein they expected no opposition: for of the house of Lancaster
there remained none save brothers by another mother; of the which the Earl of
Sommerset, the eldest, was distasted, and none of them comprehended within the
Act of Parliament, touching the succession of the crown. Richards lawful
heirs loved him well, and if any alteration should happen, it would not be of
much consideration, he being once re-established, and they so well provided, as
that they might preserve themselves free from danger, till the arrival of aid
from France; to doubt whereof would be sacrilege, the daughter of France
being too precious a pawn to be by the French abandoned.

This Proposition being approved, and all of them having vowed fidelity, six of
the chiefest among them, made six writings be drawn up, all of the same
tenure, the which they all subscribed, and sealed every man keeping one of
them; which was the break-necke of the business: for if any one of them should
prove false, to what Tribunal could the others cite him? And if it should
happen, that through treachery, or want of good take-heed, any one of the
Copies should come to light, there was no way left to save themselves. Exceter
having acquainted the King with the appointed titling between him and
Salisbury, besought him to honor them with his presence, and that he would be
pleased to be their Judge in case any difference should arise: The which he
graciously accepted of, and promised to do. This mean while every man
providing himself of what number of men he could get, under the pretense of
magnificencie, they came at the time appointed to Oxford, where the King and
Court was the next day expected. The Duke of Aumerle was only wanting, he
having sent his men before, went to visit his father, who lived in a Country
house, upon that road, and stayed dinner with him. Fortune would so have it, as
that the old man spied a piece of paper in his sons bosom; and, not
imagining what it might be, snatched it from him. When he had seen the contents,
the six seals, and among the rest, his sons for one, he grew so incensed, as
rising immediately from the Table, he gave order for his horses to be made
ready; reproaching his son for that having been false to Richard, he would
now be a traitor to Henry; that he was witty in finding out inventions to undo
his father, but that now his father would undo him; That he should remember
how the last Parliament he was bound for him, body for body, and goods for
goods; That therefore, since he made so little account of his fathers head,
his father would make as little account of his. This being said, he went to
Windsor. Aumerle considering, that the old man was not to be with-drawne from
his resolution, that the business was discovered, and his life in question:
having none with whom to advise, resolved to prevent his father, he got on
horseback, and riding as fast as he could drive, he got to Windsor before
him; where, as soon as he was come, he clapped to the door behind him, telling
him that looked to the door, that so it behooved for the Kings service. He
threw himself down at the Kings feet, and craved his pardon. the King
astonished at such a novelty, demanded his offense; which when he understood
(being somewhat amazed at the first) he promised him mercy, so as the business
were as he had related it; but if otherwise, woe be to him. This mean time
the Duke of York came to the Castle door, and finding it shut, bade it be
opened. He entered, and without further circumstances, put the conspirators
contract into the Kings hand; who finding thereby all to be true that Aumerle
had said, put off his journey to Oxford, resolving to expect at Windsor the
conspirators new resolutions; he sent news hereof by express Carriers, to
Henry Pearcy, Earl of Northumberland, Lord high Constable of England; to Ralph
Nevill, Earl of Westmerland, Lord Marshall, who had married Jane his sister by
the fathers side, and to all his other friends, to the end that they might make
what haste they could to the Court, and bring with them what forces they could
raise. Exceter was one of the first that came to Oxford, more set upon the
resolution taken, then were the rest: but he could not so order affairs, but
that by the extraordinary provision of Arms and Soldiers, his wife, the Kings
sister, perceived that all this was done to undo and kill her brother;
whereat, in height of Agony, she was much distracted between the love to her
brother, and affection to her husband: the ruin of one of them being certain,
and whether the one or the other equally to her grievous: whereat her husband
(who loved her as much as he hated her brother) being moved, said unto her,
that fortune might make both her and him equally content, one only thing
excepted, That their interests were in all things else common and individual,
in this alone diverse and particular. For as she could not but rejoice at her
brothers preferment to the crown: so he could not but grieve to see his
brother deposed, that now in the change of fortune, which by the preparations
that were made, she was toward: if she found cause of affliction, she should
do well to consider, that he had just cause of joy: for if she, being Henry's
sister, esteemed her greatness the more in respect of his, he being brother to
Richard, had reason to hope the like in the Rise of Richard; without the which,
(whilst her brother reigned) he was like to live in perpetual misery, and
daily to expect death: That she was not to suffer in the fates of either of
them. For if Henry should reign, she was to continue the same she was,
though having lost her husband; and if Richard reigned, both of them were to
preserve their lives, honors, and fortunes, so that come what would come, she
had cause to rejoice, but not he: For that he might not, through so many
dangers, dye daily, it behoved him to expose himself to all danger, that he
might once dye, or for ever be free of fear.

Hereupon giving her his last kiss, he left her weeping and went to Oxford,
where all the rest were come saving only Aumerle, where having expected him to
the very last hour, his not appearing, the not preparing for the King, and the
no news thereof, were manifest signs that their plot was discovered; they had
no hopes of pardon, having been formerly condemned and pardoned, so that in a
desperate case desperate resolutions were to be taken: they endeavored to do
that by open force, which they could not effect by treachery, and for their
safeties sake, to use deceit. They clothed Magdalun with Princely roabes, who
much resembling Richard, cozened the more ignorant. They gave forth that
assisted by his Keepers, he had escaped prison, thereupon they assembled
together 40000. men, the least part whereof came for good will, the most
inconsiderable for hopes, and the most unusefull for fear: all of them
consequently, changeable and inconstant: for infidelity produces fear:
incertitude hopes, and popular inclination, weakness and confusion: there was
no counsel to be had, nor foundation to ground it upon, so unexpectedly were
they surprised. They resolved to seize upon the King at Windsor, but he hearing
of their coming, had with some few horse, withdrawn himself from thence, so
as not finding him there, they intended to pursue him to London, and so take
him unproviding, which perchance was the best course they could have taken; but
fear put a period thereunto, when wisdom was more dangerous then rash
attempts. The King when he was come to London fortified himself there; the
City furnishing him with soldiers, and he providing himself of sufficient
guard: when he heard that they were coming, he came forth to meet them with
20000. men, and made his stand where they were to pass by, not diffident in
the small number of his men, nor affrighted at the multitude of the enemy.
They, on the other side, mistrusting themselves, shunned the encounter, and went
toward Reading, where the Queen was: making her believe that King Richard was
at Pomfret with 100000. fighting men, and that Henry of Lancaster together with
his children and friends, had shut himself up in the Tower, not daring to come
forth; and the better to color their false report, they threw down Henrie's
arms, and took his Cognizances from such of the Queens servants as wore them,
as if Richard did already rule. They made no further use of Magdaluns pageant,
for fearing lest they should be discovered, they when they were at Reading,
gave out that Richard was at Pomfret, and elsewhere, when they were elsewhere;
for it is usual with such as are upon the point of perishing, to make use of
false rumors. When they left Reading, they went to Cicester; Surrey and
Salisbury taking up their lodging in a small village; Exceter and Gloucester
theirs in another, leaving their army in the field. The Townes-men thereabouts,
who were informed that things were otherwise then they gave out, did about
midnight beset the house wherein the former two were lodged; who withstood
their fury for the space of fifteen hours. Exceter, who was advertised
thereof, could not possibly succor them, for all his men through a sudden
fear were fled away. A certain Priest of Surreys side, set diverse houses of
that Village on fire; hoping thereby to divert them from their assault; which
caused Exceters men to take their heels, believing that Henry was come, and
that it was he who had given battle and fired the houses. The Townes-folkes,
on the contrary, hereby doubly enraged, resolved to quench the fire with the
blood of those that fought against them: so as unfortunate Surrey and
Salisbury, forsaken by their friends, and taken by their enemies (likely by
their many mortal wounds to live but a while) were beheaded, and their heads
sent to London; twenty nine of their company, what Barons, what Gentlemen were
taken prisoners, who being brought to Oxford, where the King was, had public
justice passed upon them. Gloucester thinking to escape, was taken prisoner in
Wales, and beheaded at Bristow. Magdalun fled into Scotland, where he was taken
and sent to London, where he died the death of a traitor. Exceter, who had often
times endeavored to get over into France, and was always by contrary winds
beaten back; whilst he wandered up and down unknown, was taken as he was at
supper in a friends house, brought into the late Duke of Glocesters hands,
where his head was stricken off. Divine justice repaying him according to his
deserts, in his territories whose death he had been the causer of; the
sufferings of his own death were augmented by Richards foreseen death, he
being doubly the cause thereof, by being at first too forward, afterward too
slow. In all other respects he was a man of praiseworthy conditions: but he
stained his reputation in seconding his brothers humors, and in endeavoring
to ruin his brother in law, he lost his life: infinite was the number of the
rest that dyed; the high ways were filled with men hanged, and quartered, with
heads set upon poles; among which number did many innocent people suffer: who
under pretense of rebellion, were for particular revenge by some about the
King, put to death. The Abbot of Westminster understanding what miserable
effects his counsel had taken: fled from the Monastery: but overtaken by a
sudden Apoplexy, he escaped the halter, dying less unfortunately. The like
happened to the Bishop of Carlisle, who dyed of a violent fever, thereby
mocking his worser destiny, which had he lived a little longer, he could not
have escaped. Some will have it that he was again taken and condemned, but his
punishment by the King remitted, which if it were true, proceeded either from
Henry's innate humanity, or else to show unto the world, that they erred in
thinking him averse to the Clergy: but the Bishop enjoyed not this favor
long; for through the labor he had taken, he soon after dyed. If the
Conspiratours had known that the safety of men in despair consists in
despairing of safety: they either would not have perished (yet that had been a
difficult affair) or at least not so soon, and unrevenged: but wanting
resolution in times of extremity, still hoping for safety; and temporizing when
it was no longer time to do so; bereaving them of courage which followed them,
and those who were to follow them both of courage and time; they by their
example taught such to fly away, who were already prepared for flight, and
such to temporize as were ready to declare themselves. Innocent Richard was
ignorant of all these passages, reserved for the last Scene of this sad
Tragedy. For Henry was resolved to see his end. He was carried from the Tower
to a Castle in Kent, from thence to Pomfret; tossed from post to pillar, to the
end that the true cause of his death might not be known. Three were the
several opinions of his death, and none of them in my opinion true, or like
truth: The first, that when he understood of the conspiracy, and death of the
conspirators, thinking that it would no longer avail him to keep him alive,
he voluntarily famisht himself to death. The second, that being served
according to his custom, with choice Cates, he was not suffered to taste
thereof; and that cold being added to the rest of his sufferings, he died
within the space of fifteen days. The third, that Henry sitting at the table,
and complaining of his present condition, he should say, he saw he had no
friends, since his life and Richards being incompatible, there was none that
would free him of this anxiety. Whereupon one Sir Peter Eston, accompanied by
eight others, went straight ways to Pomfret, where meeting with Richards
Sewer, he said unto him; That it was in vain any longer to take assay of his
meat, for he was not long to taste any; and that the Sewer taking this in
another sense, waited at the Table, but did not his usual service: at the
which Richard being offended, when he understood that he was willed so to do
by Eston, who was newly come from Court, he grew so incensed, as that he cut
him over the face with a knife, saying: The Devil take Henry of Lancaster, and
thee too: at the which Peter, with the other eight, entering the room, with
Halberts in their hands, he threw the Table from him (believing that they came
to kill him) and that flying fiercely upon one of them, he wrested his weapon
from him; with the which he slew four of them: but being over-borne by the
rest, he went backwards toward the place where Eston was set in Richards
chair, almost ready to swound, through the remorse of conscience: that there
Eston with a great blow fell him to the ground: which when he had done, he
instantly cried out, that he had killed a Prince who had been his King two and
twenty years: that he should live hereafter abhorred and pointed at by all
men, as a traitor, and murderer of a King. One Historian allows Richard so
much life after the receiving of this blow, as to suffer him say, that Edward
the second his great-grand-father, was in like manner as he, deposed and
killed: that his grandfather Edward the third, having by such means obtained
and enjoyed the Crown, he being his successor, did bear the punishment, that
the like would happen to such as should succeed Henry: and though his death
(his own demerits considered) was just, yet was it not such as would justify
his murderers. But I cannot see how the blow he received from Eston, and the
desire that Eston had to see him dead, could allow him so much time for
discourse. That he voluntarily starved himself to death, is not likely, he
loved his life too well, and rather then lose it, he chose to lose both liberty
and kingdom: nor would knives have been wanting, had he had any such
resolution. And certainly Henry is much injured in the report that he should
act that which is but fained of Tantalus: for of his own nature he was no
ways wicked; and though it was a great fault to bereave his lawful King both
of Kingdom and life, yet seeing he had put on a resolution of reigning,
(Pandora's box, from which all mischief issued) he must or not be King, or
make himself secure of his kingdom: the one was the sin of ambition, which
many are subject to; but the other (not to allege other examples) would have
been the Idea of the most unheard of cruelties that ever were committed.
Respect unto himself enforced a riddance of him, but not in so cruel a
manner: such an act had been able to alienate all other people from him: his
vainglory in affecting the first seat among the damned, would have been more
then diabolical; neither is it likely that Eston slew him: for Henry needed
not in so blameable an action, publicly at the Table, to beg the helps of
others. It may suffice that Richard did dye, and after what manner best pleased
Henry; but no man knew how: otherwise in this case there would have been but
one relation: and not able to free himself from the suspicion of having caused
him to be put to death, he could not find any means whereby to be the
less hated for the doing of it, then the uncertainty thereof; which occasioned
this diversity of opinions. He caused his corpse to be brought up to London
barefaced, and gave order that it should stop for some convenient time in
diverse public places (particularly in Paul's) to the end that it might be
taken notice of. He caused his funeral to be celebrated, at which he
himself, together with all his Court, and Magistracy of the City was
present. This being done, he sent the body to Langley, lest the sight of his
Tomb in London might recall into men's memories, an action, which howsoever it
was done, was unjust and inhumane: He was there privately buried, none of any
quality being present, save one Bishop and two Abbots.

Henry the fifth, son to this man, when he came to be King, caused his body
to be brought to Westminster, and placed it the^e by the side of Anne his wife,
amongst the other Kings. Some Scotch writers are of a fourth opinion: That as
soon as Henry was crowned, an Hermit of reverend aspect presented himself
before him, who admonished him to restore the Kingdom to whom of right it did
belong, threatening the ruin of the house of Lancaster, if he would not do it;
and that Henry fearing if this novelty should be scattered abroad amongst the
people, it might cause some revolt, made the Hermit privately be put to death.
That Richard having escaped prison by the connivency of those who were his
Keepers, got into Ireland, and from thence to Scotland, where he placed
himself in service with a Lord of the family of Machdougell; and that after a
while being known, he was brought to the Court, where he was with much
civility received by Robert the third, and entertained as a King: but that
weary of the world, he retired himself to the service of God, and being dead,
was buried in the Dominicans Church, as the inscription upon his Sepulcher did
witness. But if this had been true, the English writers would have had some
little light thereof, some whispering or tradition of it would have been among
the common people: Scotland would have made some advantage thereby; France
would not have been quiet; Henry would not have demanded Richards widow for
his Son, nor would Charles have married her into the house of Orleans:
Richard would either have retired himself to France to his wife and father in
law, or having a mind to become one of the Religious in Scotland, he would
have procured by dispensation from Rome, a nullifying of his contracted though
not consummated marriage. George Buchanan writes that the old Earl of
Northumberland being fled into Scotland (as we shall hereafter see) that he
there found an English man who had falsely taken upon him the name of Richard
the second: that he endeavored to get a sight of him, but that the other could
by no means be persuaded thereunto; that if he had not been an Impostor, he
would not have shunned the sight of one that knew him; and that the same man
afterward dying, was buried at Sterling in the Church of the Dominicans with
the title of King of England.

Henry had great good fortune so happily to acquit himself of this conspiracy,
otherwise in likelihood he might have been oppressed by evils which on three
sides hung over him: for during all his life his fortune was through dangers to
arrive at happiness, and at safety by the Rocks of precipice. France had made
great preparations of man and shipping to succor Richard, with intention to
come for England; relying upon his partakers, upon the envy contracted by the
new King, and upon the inconstancy of popular affection; their former hatred
was changed into compassion. They were all in Picardy under the command of
Count St. Paul ready to take shipping, when together with advertisement of the
conspiracy, came news of the unhappy success thereof, which amazed them all.
To proceed farther under color of revenge, which brought along with it
suspicion of invasion, had now been rashness; since they were dead in whom
they did most affie. Greater preparations were to be made for the invasion of
England, these not being sufficient without some correspondency from within the
Land. And as the home conspiracy gave the last blow to Richards life, so did
the foreign preparations, confirm Henry in that resolution; which he would
not have willingly taken without these sharp provocations, so as that which
was intended for his liberty caused his death. The forces in France were all
disbanded; Charles upon good advice desired only the restitution of his
daughter; a just request and not to be had but by civil means: the which he
obtained, sending over Ambassadors to that purpose, who were graciously
received; but the King referred his answer to certain commissioners who were to
go to Callis to treat together with this, of other affairs which nearly
concerned both the Crowns. Charles sent thither the Duke of Bourbon, and
Henry, Edward Duke of Aumerle, who by the late death of his father, did now
succeed in the title and inheritance of the Duke of York, together with whom
he sent Henry Earl of Northumberland. Bourbon required the restitution of the
Queen, which they denied not, but desired that by the approbation of France,
she might yet remain in England, since by birth and years she was a fit match
for the Prince of Wales, as wife for whom they did desire her. But Charles not
willing to consent to this (having conceived an opinion that the aliance with
England would prove unfortunate for France) a perpetual peace was propounded
by York. This being likewise found a difficult business (France being
resolved not to quit what it was possessed of) the English

Edmund, endeavored to bridle his insolency: The battle was on both sides
manfully fought; Glendor had two advantages, the number of men, and his being
their Captain: By these means he proved victor, obedience and good order
having won him the Laurel. The Herefordshire men, on the other side, fewer
in number, and led by the Earl only, in regard unto his quality obeyed; many,
and sometimes none, doing what they listed; so as distracted, and not resolved
what to do, they made good the field till night; rather out of an obstinate
resolution, then any reason or order. At last they yielded, but fled not: for
none did pursue them. Glendor was contented that he had overcome: for finding
himself in an enemies Country, the night being dark, many of his men slain,
and the rest or weary or wounded, he forbear to pursue the victory. Two
thousand were left dead in the field; the Earl was taken prisoner, and kept in
the bottom of a Tower, no respect being had to his person, neither did the
King (though by many much importuned) endeavor his liberty: for he thought this
his imprisonment to be one of the happiest things that ever befell him.

Let me here be permitted to relate a Story of the Welsh Women, the like to
which I have not met withal in any other history. They ran like so many
Bacchanals to the place of battle, they cut off the noses and privities from
as many as there they found dead, they put the privy members which they had
cut off, into the mouths of the dead, with the testicles hanging out, and the
noses into their posteriors; nor would they suffer their bodies to be taken
away without ransom. An action wherein eagerness, dishonesty, cruelty, and
avarice were equally seen, and were it to be disputed which of these four
were most abusive, whosoever should give his opinion in favor of any of them,
might lawfully fear the being thought unjust, each of them having arguments to
plead for the priority of mischief; but if I were to be Judge herein, I should
believe, that avarice were not to be pleaded: For though it be a vice
natural to that Sex, yet in what belongs to their household government, it may
be accounted a virtue. I should absolve them of cruelty, as not an absolute
cause, but an effect of the fierceness of their nature. And I would free them
from dishonesty, because no dishonesty being without delight, this action was
thereof incapable: so as fierceness would win the plea, were it not that the
inveterate hatred which they bare unto the English, had been the only thing
which made them fierce, dishonest, avaritious and cruel. Glendor kept on his
course, sacking and spoiling the confines. These two victories had made him be
esteemed by his own men, and feared by his enemies: there was none, (the King
being busied about more weighty affairs) who withstood him: but good fortune
is like the flowing of the Sea, which ebbes again: for a full sea is always
followed by an ebb.

The Scots had at this very time taken their best advantage of the alterations
in England: they readily made use thereof, and Northumberland was the place
wherein they laid their first Scene. The truce continued of force between the
two kingdoms; and because war was not publicly proclaimed, the truce was
not esteemed broken: for disorderly incursions are pardoned between nations at
continual enmity. Nor was King Robert to be blamed herein, unless it were for
conniving. The Scots having ransacked the country, betook themselves to do
mischief at sea, and to endammage the fishing business. But the English were
not wanting unto themselves: for having sacked the Islands of the Orcades, they
met with the enemies Fleet, who under the command of Robert Logon, went to
encounter them; in fight they took many of them: An action of small
consequence, and only worthy of the name of Reprisall; but occasions of open
hostility ensuing hereupon, Henry was unwillingly enforced to undertake a
war. The King of Scotland had contracted a match between the daughter of
George Dumbar, Earl of the Marches, and Prince David his eldest son, the
Earl having readily paid in a great sum of money by the way of portion:
Archibald Earl Douglas, a high spirited man, not able to endure this addition
of power in any one, much less in Dumbar, who was of himself great, and
greatly followed, wrought so by the favor of the Duke, the Governor of the
Kingdom, that this contract was declared void, as agreed upon without the
Councels knowledge; and that his daughter Mary for a greater sum of money was
received in the others place: and that this marriage might be past all
annulling, he caused it speedily to be effected, and authorized by all the
accustomed Church rites. The Earl of the Marches was very sensible of this
affront, and resolving upon revenge, would not hasten it, till he might make
it justifiable to all the world. He required the repaiment of his monyes; but
the King paying him with delays, intending indeed never to pay him, he seemed
to believe the contrary, till such time as every one might perceive how he was
abused. Hereupon threatening revenge, he withdrew himself, and his whole family
into England, where he was by the Earl of Northumberland received: having
gathered some forces together, he entered Scotland, and did there some
mischief, which though not sufficient wholly to repair, was notwithstanding
enough to content him for the first bout. King Robert having degraded him, and
confiscated all he had, sent a Herald to denounce unto Henry, that it was
contrary to the tenure of Truce, to receive such as were Traitors and Rebels to
his Crown, and to favor and countenance them: that if he would have the truce
continue he should deliver Dumbar up into his hands, or banish him his
dominions. To the which King Henry (were it either that he esteemed it an
unworthy thing to revoke the protection he had given him, or that he was so
generally beloved as to have resolved the contrary, would have been to little
purpose) answered, That he was sorry he could not satisfy the King of
Scotland; for that he could not in honor recall the safe conduct which he
had by his great Seal granted unto Dumbar. That for what concerned Truce or
War, he left the choice to him: for, for his part he was ready to continue
the one if it pleased him; and if it pleased him not they were both of them
equally indifferent to him. The Herald had no sooner brought back this answer,
but war was proclaimed: And Henry willing rather to encounter it abroad, then
meet with it at home, past suddenly into Scotland: he burnt and ruined what
ere he met withal. He spared no places but such as were holy, and such as had
harbored his father the Duke of Lancaster, when he withdrew himself into
that Kingdom. A gratitude so well interpreted by the Scotch Writers, as that
Hector Boethius says, That never did enemy make more friendly war then did
he. He came to Edinburgh, and took it: he laid siege to the Castle, which was
defended by Prince David and his father-in-law Earl Douglas. By the condition
of these two, the importance of the place may be conjectured: for Edinburgh was
not to be held but by those who were masters of that Fort; whole Scotland
depended upon this siege. It was now September, and in those Northern parts
Winters forerunners were already felt. The Duke of Albany was not far off,
desiring that people might think he would do what he was resolved not to do.
His designs (which were the usurpation of the Kingdom) suffered him not to
be charitable to his country, to perform the duty of his charge, nor to have
respect unto his reputation. He would willingly have seen the Castle battered
down, and Prince David (who was his prime and chiefest obstacle) buried in the
ruins thereof. Notwithstanding his inward malice, it behoved him to make show
of good intentions: he by a Herald sent word to King Henry, that if he would
expect him but six days, he would give him battle; with resolution either to
make him raise the siege, or dye in the enterprise: he could not have sent a
more welcome message to the King: for the season of the year, and his want of
victuals would not permit him to tarry there long. He rewarded the Herald, and
bade him assure the Duke that he would expect him, and fight with him. Six and
sixteen days passed, and yet no governor appeared: so as the flux in the
Camp, joined to so many other incommodities, forced the King to raise the sige,
and return home: He brought back with him all his military affairs, as
likewise such Commanders as were wont to keep upon the Frontiers; which gave
the Scots means, in some sort, to repair themselves: they made two incursions
without opposition, into the two confining Countries of Northumberland and
Banborough-shire; for the adverse party arrived late after they were retired:
encouraged by their happy succcesse, they adventured upon the third onset,
being led by Patricke Heborne, a gentleman more adventrous then was requisite:
for whereas he was able to have assembled a great number of men, he (having
more regard to the booty then danger) made only choice of the best:
wherewithal he entered Northumberland and by prey and prisoners enriched
himself and them: but in their return, through heedlesnesse caused by too
much confidence in themselves, or contempt of the enemy, being pursued by the
Earl of Northumberland, they were routed at Nesbyt, where the greatest part of
them were slain, though not without revenge: for they fought to their last
gasp valiantly, as is usual to that warlike Nation. Heborne, more courageous
now then cautious before (having done all that belonged to a discreet
Commander) thrust himself into the thickest of the battle, where manfully
fighting he lost his life: together with him were slain the chiefest of
Loughdeane, besides many Gentlemen and Knights that were taken prisoners, but
as this defeat did rather irritate then quell the Scots, so Fortune which had
smiled upon them in their first two expeditions, turned her back upon them in
the third, and quite abandoned them in the fourth: perhaps she was offended
they should so often make trial of her. The old Archibald Earl Douglasse was
dead, the first occasioner of this war: he left behind him a son which
succeeded him in name and title, but surpassed him in worth and virtue. This
man resolved upon public revenge, for the public lossewhich had been
suffered. He raised an Army of 20000. fighting men: The governor assented
thereunto, and gave him for his associates, his own son the Earl of Fife,
the Earl of Angus, Murrey, and Atholl, together with many Barons and Gentlemen
of the chief Nobility of Scotland. They came into Northumberland with flying
colors, where not finding forces able to resist them, they returned laden with
prey, when about Hamilton they might see the Lord Percy issue out from forth a
Valley: he who for his valor and forwardness was by them called Hot-spur. He
had with him Dumbar the enemy of the Douglasses, all the Gentry of
Northumberland, and 8000. men, what horse, what foot, and though it cannot be
denied but that the hatred was great which was between these two warlike
Nations, yet who will mark it well, may see that their vying for mastery was
the cause of all the mischief which was by either of them given or received,
rather then hatred or avarice. Percy was famous for what he had already done,
and now more then ever desirous of glory. Douglasse was big with fame, and that
he might bring it to light, was desirous to add thereunto the fame of his
enemy: these two respects were the whetstone whereon the valor of both parties
was sharpened. Exhortations and warlike noises were needless, every man was by
himself encouraged, and ready for what he had to do, each side equally
thirsting for the others blood. The conflict endured a long time with like
affect, as is seen in a sheet of corn, which when driven with violent
winds, bends now on the one side, and then on the other alternately, till at
last Fortune taking stand under Saint George his Cross, thought it not
sacrilege to bear to ground that of Saint Andrew. Dowglasse (who in the
battle had lost an eye) was taken prisoner; with him Fife, Murrey, Angus,
Atholl and five hundred more: the greatest part of the Gentry of Scotland dyed
manfully fighting; of which number were twenty seven Knights, and of common
soldiers (as the English writers say, for the others say nothing herein)
10000. Percie, as soon as he had made the prisoners safe in sundry forts,
passed forward in Loughdeane, and the Marches of Scotland, making use of the
present occasion, as having slain and taken prisoners all that were to defend
those parts: which when he had sacked and utterly ruinated, he besieged
Coclaven, a place neither to be long kept, nor soon lost; it was agreed upon
that it should be surrendered, if not succored within three months. The
Governor was advised not to succor it, for that the loss of it would be of
less moment then the hazarding of a second battle. The defeat at Hamilton had
so allayed the courage of the Gentry, as that not being confident of any good
intention in the Governor, they could not be persuaded to a new conflict: but
he (his mischievous designs not being now the thing in question, but the
honor of the Kingdom, on the preservation whereof much of his hidden hopes
depended) swore he would succor it, though not seconded by any; but the first
two months being past, and nothing done, the castle was freed the third, for
which no thanks was due to him: for Percy was forced to raise the siege, that
he might follow the King in his wars in Wales.

Whilst England was thus beset on both sides, new troubles arose unto her out
of France, which though at first sight of no consideration, were yet the
occasion of incensing men's minds, and of the more easy breach of truce. The
Duke of Orleans, brother to King Charles, a Prince of an unquiet spirit, borne
to be the ruin of himself and Kingdom, took a fancy, out of a mere
capriciousness, to send a letter to King Henry by a Herald, the contents
whereof were to this purpose: That having considered how the rust of idleness
in youth, had been the loss of many Princes sprung from Royal blood, he was
resolved to shake it off, and to win renown and honor by the way of Arms: to
effect the which, he could think of no readier means, then that they two should
meet at a certain place to be by them agreed upon, where each of them
accompanied by a hundred Gentlemen of name and valor, and void of blemish,
they might make trial of themselves, till the one of them should yield: and
that such prisoners as should be taken, should be liable to ransom, and their
ransomes to be paid to such as took them. That to this purpose he went with
his hundred to Angolesme, and that if he would come with his hundred to
Bordeaux, they might choose some neighboring place for the combat. The Duke had
been the Kings great friend whilst he was in France, insomuch as in sign of
their more real friendship, they sealed a writing between them wherein they
bound themselves to the defense of one another, against all the world, except
some whom the Duke excepted; but this challenge being directly opposite
thereunto, and Henry having not been long in his kingdom, and by reason of his
affairs, free from that idleness which the other desired to shun, he
answered, that he would never have believed, that the letter which was
delivered him by his Herald, had been directed to him, had not the
circumstances assured him that it was. That the public truce between the two
Kingdoms, and the private confederacy between them two, ought to have
dissuaded him from making such a request: but that since he was pleased so to
resolve, he for for his part was likewise resolved to break their former
confederacy: That Kings ought to be challenged by Kings, not by inferiors:
That Kings ought not to use their weapons for vainglory, but for the glory of
God, and good of Christianity, and when by their state necessitated thereunto:
That he would come to Bordeaux with as many men as he pleased when it might
ought avail him: And that in such a case occasions would not be wanting to
the Duke to find him out, nor should will be wanting in him to be found out by
him. To this answer the Duke by new letters replied, that he avouched the
writing of the former letters to be to him, and to him only, and that if he
did not therein give him the title which now he assumed, 'twas because he did
not approve thereof, that he would have had due respect to their confederacy,
if it had not first been violated by him, that he would never have made any
confederacy with him, if he had thought he would have so behaved himself
toward King Richard, God knows how, and by whom slain: for what concerned
his present dignity that God never gave it him, but did only permit it in him;
and that God did oftentimes suffer Princes to reign for their greater
confusion: so as the comparison he made between them two, was to no purpose;
since his reputation was void of blemish, as was not the Kings: that for the
duty and office of a King, he could not say better and do worse: that Queen
Isabel his Niece might serve to prove this, who was sent back into France, her
husband being slain, her jonyture denied, the goods she brought with her into
England, detained: That he would maintain all this to be true in single
combat hand to hand, to the end, that (as he had said) the deaths of so many
might be spared: that he thanked him for having more charity to the blood of
France, then he had to his own Lord and King. This reply was too sharp, not
to be answered. The King wrote back: That having communicated his designs to
him, when he parted from France, which he (the Duke) did then approve of, and
promised his assistance, he wondered why he should now blame them, as if they
were new unto him: that if by his words of God knows how, and by whom King
Richard was slain, he did believe that his death was occasioned by any
command or approbation of his, he did believe falsely; and that he would make
this good unto him body to body. He did not deny, but that in the confederacy
made between them, the King of France, and Isabel, Queen of England, were on
his side excepted; but that he (the Duke) could not likewise deny, that though
the Duke of Burgondy was by name excepted, yet that in private he told him, he
held him as not excepted, for the confederacy was only grounded upon the
hatred he bare unto him, so as the objection which he made against him (the
King) was the same which the Duke, from the very beginning was maliciously
guilty of. For that part of his reply, where he said, that He would never have
m^de any confederacy with him, if he had thought he would have behaved
himself so to King Richard; why then did he, after Richards death, send a
Gentleman to him, to assure him of the continuation of his friendship, and to
tell him, that next the King his brother, he desired to serve no Prince alive
more then him. That God had permitted him, but not promoted him to reign, he
did not believe it; yet he confessed, that Gods abounding favors to him,
proceeded only from grace and mercy, the which was able to effect more then
all the art and malice of the Devil, (by these words he alluded to what was
commonly believed, that the Duke, and Valentia his wife, had bewitched King
Charles, and plotced the death of his children, to the end that they might come
to the Crown) that if he had read the Articles of agreement, he would there
have found, that England was not obliged to make any jointure: that he had not
only restored unto her what ever she brought with her, but presented her to
boot: that the Acquittance sealed in Council, he himself being present, might
convince him of his falsehood: so as what he said in this point, was not for
that he did not know the contrary, but that being of himself false and wicked,
to speak truth was contrary to his nature: that he did not deny his desire of
sparing to shed the blood of France, as it well became a King to be sparing of
his subjects blood: for such (his just claim considered) were the French to
him; that where he said, He had more respect to the blood of France then the
life of Richard, he lied; and that it were to be wished, he had not done
worse to the King his brother: for what remained that he would pass the sea,
when it might conduce to the honor of God, his own good, and the good of his
kindome, to answer him in what manner he should choose. This defiance was
accompanied by another from Valerian of Luxenburgh, Count Saint Paul, who not
calling him King, but Duke of Lancaster, denounced to him, That his friendship
and affinity to King Richard, (for he had married Magd^len Holland, sister by
the mothers side to Richard) and Henry's being notoriously guilty of his death,
obliged him to do him all the evil and mischief which by the forces of
himself and subjects he was able. But the King made him no answer, as one he
made no account of. In the Duke of Orleans his business, nothing passed
further then the defiances by writing: but the Count St. Paul began to take his
revenge to little purpose, making trivial attempts most harmfull to himself:
for believing that the new Duke of York was causer of Richards death (the
conspiracy at Oxford being by his heedlesnesse discovered) he caused his
Statue to be made, and giving it in charge unto some of his men of war, he
made it to be hung up by the heels upon a gallows, which for that purpose was
carried by night near to Callais walls, the which at the opening of the gates
being seen, did so exasperate the Garrison of the Town, that the Count and his
territories fared not the better for it: all his other attempts after this, had
ill success, as we shall hereafter see more at large.

This mean while the King of France being advertised of King Henry's
preparations against Wales, he set himself to succor Glendor, judging that it
might redound to his advantage, to annoy England under another pretext, and to
make it pine away by nourishing the fever of an intestine war. To this effect
he caused many Ships to be put in good equipage in Breast, a haven in Bretaigne,
and put therein two thousand fighting men, under the command of James of
Burbon, Count of March, who putting to Sea with his two brothers, Lewis and
John, found the winds so contrary to his passage into Wales, as that he was
forced to anchor at Plimmouth in Devonshire, where landing his people by night,
he burnt and sacked all the neighboring villages, not sparing the Abodes nor
Boats of poor Fishermen. But herein Fortune smiled upon him but a while: for
the confining people gathering together at the firing of the Beacons, and news
being brought him that the violence of Wind and Sea had split twelve of the
best Ships of his Fleet, indangering all the rest: He, with difficulty, did
re-imbarke himself, and with much ado got to Saint Maloes, having run
diverse times danger of being swallowed up by Sea.

This ill success did no ways assuage the French men's heat, for assembling
together a fleet of eighty ships, under the command of Marshall Moemerancy, and
the General of the Crosse-bow-men, wherein they embarked 12000. fighting men,
they came to Milford haven, in Pembrokeshire, where finding Pembroke Castle
strong and well defended, they sat down before Erfordnuest, which being
likewise secured by the Earl of Arundell; they passed forward to Denbigh,
doing all those outrages as they went by fire and sword, as are usually done
in an enemies Country; there they found Glendor, who stayed expecting them
with ten thousand of his own men: thus met together, they travailed toward
Worster, but not having time to try the town, by reason of the Kings approach,
they fired the suburbs, and retired into Wales, fortifying themselves upon the
hanging of a hill, betwixt the which and the opposite hill (where the King had
pitched himself) there was a Valley disadvantagious for those who should first
pass over it; they tarried eight days in sight of one another, both sides
resolute not to assail, and though daily diverse skirmishes were made, yet were
they not of much importance, some of both sides being slain; amongst which the
bastard of Burbone the Marshalls brother was one. The King this mean while had
stopped the passage of their victuals, thereby enforcing them either to pass
the Valley and fight, or else to retire: the latter being thought the better
course, they raised their camp at midnight, marching through Woods, and over
Mountains, still pursued by the King; but this pursuit lasted but a while, for
the King having lost certain provision of victuals, which the enemy well
acquainted with the ways, had intercepted, was brought himself to the like
danger of suffering for lack of victuals, and winter now coming on, he
quitted the enterprise for that time, resolving to reassume it in the spring,
being hereunto enforced, through Glendors daring, and the molestations of the
French: but the French weary of the Country; and more weary of a war wherein
nothing of advantage was to be had, withdrew themselves to Brittanny, not
intending to return. The Count St. Paul's attempts had no better success, who
willing to act his threats, had gathered together in Abeville between
volunteers and men in pay 1600. fighting men; from whence he went to Normandy,
and embarked himself at Arflore, intending to set upon the I Will of Wight, upon
the coast whereof he was sooner then he imagined, being favored by the
winds, which assisted him in his landing. The Ilanders, who expected not so
sudden a surprise, retired themselves together with the best things they had
from the more open places to places of more defense; and if they suffered some
loss, it was nothing in respect of what the Count intended; for England being
night at hand, succors in few hours to be had; the parts thereof strong, and
not to be won but by length of time, he having but a small number of men, the
inhabitants once met together stronger then he, he lost all hope of victory or
booty. This Island was by the Romans called Vecta: It is seated in the South of
England, so near to Hampshire, that from Hurst, the chief Castle thereof,
seated on the outmost part of a narrow ridge of land, which thrusts it self
forth into the sea, the distance is but two miles. It is rich in pasture and
grain, abounding in birds, particularly in A description of the Isle of Wight.
Partridge and Phesant, full of Hares and Connies; it yields great store of
Woole of the third best sort of England; it is twenty miles in length, in
breadth where broadest twelve; so well inhabited as that there is therein thirty
six towns, boroughes and villages, it has diverse strong Castles seated in
the most appropriate places for the defense thereof; it armeth 4000. men
exercised by their Captains: from Hampshire in time of need 3000 men are
assigned unto it, and from Wiltshire 2000. but without their assistance it was
able to defend it self against so few enemies: when posts flew up and down
with news of the Counts landing, those who were nearest unto him thought it
best to entertain him with treaties, as well that he might forbear doing
mischief, as likewise that being allured by hopes and gain, he might not
prepare to be gone; they sent unto him a well spoken and well advised Priest,
who made diverse propositions to him; but being advertised of the strength of
the Island, and of what danger hung over him, he reimbarked himself contrary
to the good will of the adventurers, who had laid out much upon vain hopes,
and had never any reparation made them, though they expected satisfaction from
the General. All sides were so heated with these commotions, as that war was
already kindled in Guascony, not now contented with inrodes, they betook
themselves to more evident and real injuries; but Fortune having favored the
English in these last expeditions on this side the sea, would now be gracious
to the French in the two next on the other side the sea. The one made by Count
Claremont, son to the Duke of Burbone, the other by the Constable Albert,
both which strove who should most indamage the Duchy. The first accompanied by
Count Chastearebone son to the Count de Fois, reduced three strong Castles to
the obedience of King Charles, St. Peter, St. Mary, and Chasteaunense. The
second incensed at the damages done by the Garrison which lay at Carlefine
(which had forced contribution upon all the neighboring places) sat down
before the town, accompanied by Arpadan, a Gentleman of note, and much
followed in those parts; after six weeks siege the Garrison dispairing of
succor, yielded themselves, their goods being safe, and the townsmen redeeming
their goods with money.

But these external adventures merit not the being recounted, save as apparent
1403
intermediums of the tragical acts which were internally done; men who do good
turns, use to measure merit by a common measure which agrees ill with the
measure of Princes. For subjects are born to serve their Princes, and are bound
to their service, which they are not to other men; so as private men are more
obliged by good turns then Princes, not but that Princes ought to reward worth
in those that serve them; but if this bemade in them a coactive duty, virtue
will not be its own end in subjects, and will eclips the splendour of
liberality, and gratitude in Princes, and not being able to satisfy every one
with current money (their estates how rich soever not able to suply them) they
must reward some with the Alchymy of honor, a sort of money coined for the
chiefest and most noble, amongst whom it is oftenest dispersed. Tacitus brings
in Armenius laughing at his brother Flavius, who rather desired to be a
private soldier amongst the Romans, then a Prince in Germany: and that having
in those wars lost an eye, and had his face disfigured, he termed the
increase of his pay, and certain other little gifts which children would
disprize, a reward. But Armenius did not well understand this mystery; for take
away the opinion of honor (which of the two principal columes which sustain
civil life, is the second) who will expose himself to danger, who will defend
his Country, if to die for it be not esteemed glorious? The two Percies both
brothers, the one Earl of Northumberland, the other of Worster, together with
Henry, son to the former, fell into this error, they measured their service
done to the King according to the common measure, so as if the mischief which
insued, was not answerable to the honor of their family, and their own
particular worths, it was notwithstanding most answerable to their ill advised
resolutions. In the two battles at Hamelton and Nesbit (as has been formerly
said) they had taken some of the chief Nobility of Scotland; the which being
demanded by the King (who would have them in his power) and by them denied,
they thought to satisfy him by sending unto him Mordachy Earl of Fife, the
chiefest of them, son to the Duke of Albeny, alleging that this man together
with the other prisoners, did of right belong to them, as a prey won by the
hazard of their persons, and effusion of their blood, so as the King had no
pretense unto them. Just reasons if the Prince were not to share in the booty,
Artillery, munition, or victuals, prisoners of quality, or otherwise
redonable, do properly belong to them, not so much in respect of ransom, as
to facilitate, or secure the victory, by peace, exchange, and other
contingencies which times and occasions, in the manifold interests of States
do produce. I speak not of the imprisonment of the two Kings of France, of
John in England, and Francis the first in Spain. The ransom of the two
brothers sons to Charles of Blois, were reserved for Richard the second; and
though it were afterward by act of Parliament granted to Vere, Duke of
Ireland, it was not done to prejudicate the right we speak of, but to the end
that by his being absent from the court, the King might the better govern
himself. And for what concerns prisoners of lesser condition yet re-donable,
the example of the victory at Lepanto, which happened in our fathers times, may
suffice; in the which the confederates divided the Turkish prisoners, and made
them tug at one Oar in their fleet. The King persisting in his resolution of
having them, they thought to make him desist therein, by demanding of him
things of greater consequence.

The Earl of Worster, a wicked and turbulent man, was he who did forward this
resolution, an advice worst to the adviser, and mortal to those who did
embrace it. The King was then at Windsor, whither the Earl of Worster being
come, he represented unto him the miserable imprisonment of Edmund Earl of
Marsh, their kinsman, kept in fetters by Glendor, and fallen into this
misfortune for doing service unto his Majesty and the State. He desired him to
be the means of his freedom, either by ransom or otherwise: the King finding
whither this request tended, after having awhile bethought himself, made
answer, that the Earl of Marsh was not taken prisoner in his service, but by
his own consent, as not willing to be enforced to profess himself an enemy
to Glendor; and this answer he willed to be published to the terror of all such
as had any inclination to him-ward. Worster being returned, and having
acquainted his brother and nephew with what had past; the Nephew would not
endure it, who being a violent young man, did wrongfully exaggerate the
injustice, saying: That Henry not contented to bereave Edmund of the Kingdom,
did now deny him that succor which his service done unto him, did challenge:
That if he should have ransomed him, it should not be done by his own moneys,
but by the inheritance which he usurped from Edmund; and that in stead of
praise, through too much ingratitude, he loaded him with undeserved calumnies:
wherein he said truth; for Edmunds wit was not proper for such inventions; and
if it had been true, Glendor would not have treated him as he did. But the King
who had by evil means usurped the State from him, could not by good means
maintain it; not only the loss of his liberty, but the loss of his life
would have re-

Lord Percy who came with intention to win the City, failing in his intentions,
and the aids he expected not appearing, resolved to give battle of himself,
encouraged in that his soldiers were resolved to dye for their liberty, and
for the good of the Kingdom, governed (as he gave out) by a Tyrant. He sent
the forenamed writing to the King by two Squires, the which acquainted him with
the reasons of his revolt, and did likewise denounce the battle. The King was
there only named Duke of Lancaster, it was written, subcrib'd, and sealed by
the names, hands, and seals of Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, Lord high
Constable of England, Lord Warden of the West Marches, of Henry Percy Warden of
the East Marches, and of Thomas Percy Earl of Woster. The contents thereof
was, that having sworn at his return from France, that he did pretend to
nothing but the inheritance due unto him by his father, and wife, and that he
would suffer the King peacefully to enjoy his Crown, he had done otherwise;
for after having through famine, thirst, and could, caused King Richards death,
he had usurped the Kingdom, which did of right belong to Edmond Mortimer, the
lawful heir; causing the Burgesses of Parliament to be chosen contrary to
the form of Law, and privilege of the subject, so to suborn votes for his own
advantage; that he had denied to ransom Mortimer, who being by them set at
liberty, he had proclaimed them traitors; that therefore they did defy him as
a perjured and false man, as an usurper of the crown which did properly
appertain to the true heir: and together with him they defied all his
accomplices, and such as sided with him, as traitors, acd destroyers of the
State. If true faults objected but in jest, do sting, much more did these do
so, accompanied with such upbraidings and threats.

But the King, not woonted to discompose himself, when he had read the
letter, said merrily to the messengers, that his sword should answer that
scandalous writing, and that he was confident, God would assist his just
quarrel against such forsworn disloyal traitors as were the Percies. But his
moderation in these occurrances, is worthy a particular observation: for
lacking neither generosity nor courage (if his usurpation and injustice did not
bereave him thernof, which did not appear) he received all these injuries not
only untransported, but with a settled judgment, weighed that as to hazard his
estate, life and honor, upon the fortune of one day, would be an act of
rashness: if he could avoid it, so to prefer his safety before their
offenses, would be a point of wisdom. For that injuries were passions of the
mind, which might breathe away in a standing fortune; but the ruinous effects
of a lost battle, were irrepairable in a falling fortune: so as cashiering all
punctualities, not caring what others would say of him, he resolved to see
whether he could in some sort fairly accommodate this business, rather then
trust to the inconstancy of fortune; which was not to be tried till the last
push. And that in such a case he would show that manlihood which men hasty and
void of judgment might now tax in him. He appeared the next day, and ordering
his troops as the others did, he sent the Abbot of Shrewesbury unto them,
accompanied with one of the officers of his privy Seal, with an offer of
pardon, if they would yield to reasonable conditions. The Lord Percie, though
naturally violent, examining the business in the same sort as the King had
done, accepted the proposition. He sent unto him his Uncle, the Earl of
Worster, to require of him an effectual reformation of those things which had
caused them take Arms. But the Earl (though fully satisfied by the King in
all his demands, and in a more submisse sort then did become his degree) made a
clean contrary relation to his Nephew: envy and confidence (for he judged the
Kings humility to be cowardice and fear) leading him by means of this deadly
lie, to his fatal end. The young Percie thinking himself under-valued, caused
the sign of battle immediately to be given by sound of Trumpet: the two
Armies were about forty thousand fighting men, the rebels Vantguard was led by
the Scots, who after a great shower of Darts, which slew many of both sides,
advanced themselves against the Vantguard Royal, which rigorously withstood
the first shocke; but the Welshmen coming at the same time to the rebels
assistance, the Kings Vantguard began to give ground, and had been routed, if
the King with his battalion had not put forwards. Young Percie aspiring after
victory, advanced his likewise, having formerly agreed with Douglas to kill the
King, in whose death did consist the victory, and end of the war. Dumbar
perceived their ends by their violent coming on; and with much ado, got the
King to withdraw himself to another place; which if he had not done, he had
run apparent danger: for the violence of the bickering was all made upon the
Standard Royal, the which was beaten down, and Sir Walter Blunt, who had the
charge thereof, slain; together with as many more as did defend it. Amongst
which (according to Walsingham and Hollenshead) the Earl of Stafford, made
that very day Lord high Constable, was one; though Halle reckons him amongst
the rebels. The King who (as has been said) was gone elsewhere, whilst
fighting and commanding, he performed the office both of a Captain and stout
Soldier, was by Douglas, who sought after him, with a Lance borne down to the
ground; but getting on horseback again, he did acts of such fame, as that
foreign, Writers do agree, that he slew with his own hands that day six and
thirty of the enemies. Douglas believing that he had done what he desired, gave
on still, and met with a second, then a third, clothed with upper garments
like the King, which both being over-throwne, or slain, he knew not what to
think of so many Kings in one battle incountred. I name them not, for I meet
not with their names in any Author. Henry, Prince of Wales, a youth not fully
sixteen years old, wounded in the face by a Dart, and deaf to their
persuasions who would have withdrawn him from the battle to have dressed him,
gave proof that in his due time he would be that brave King he was. The
enemy gave on no where, nor did his men give any where back, where he opened
not the enemies ranks, and closed his own. By his example instructing, and by
his valor causing shame, where none was. So as the Kings party hartned by the
valiant carriage of the Father and Son, the Father followed by the most
valiant of his men, seeing the face of Fortune changed, gave on where the enemy
was thickest. Young Percie, who according to his custom, had fought bravely,
was by I know not whom, slain, whose loss was the loss of the Battle on his
side. The Kings side began already to cry out victory; and the name of Saint
George was ecchoed through all the Camp; when Douglas not longer able to
withstand fortune, the Scots being almost all slain, the English and Welsh
fled) began to think how he might likewise escape, he set spurs to his horse,
which stumbling on the top of a hill, he fell down, and in the fall broke one of
his genitories, and was taken prisoner. The Earl of Worster (the execrable
cause of so great mischief) the Lord Chinderton, Sir Richard Varnon, and
diverse others were likewise taken, but in a diverse manner. The battle lasted
three hours: on the Kings side (besides ten Gentlemen who were that morning
knighted) 1600. soldiers were slain, and four thousand more dangerously
hurt: there was slain of the Rebels 5000. not numbering the Gentlemen, the
Scots, nor those of Chester, who as the Welsh had always been faithfully
devoted to Richard. This defeat fell upon the Saturday, so as the Earl of
Worster and the other two had leisure on Sunday to think upon their souls,
for on Monday the law passed upon them at Shrewsbury. The Earls head was sent
and set upon London bridge; the Lord Percies body, which was by the Kings
permittance buried, was by command of the same taken up, beheaded and
quartered. The punishment of offenders is one of the foundations of State, and
to teach great men their duties by their equals infamy, is numbered amongst
the secrets of government.

This was the end of Percy the Hotspurre, one of the valiantest warriers that
age produced, he died armed amongst armed troops, covered with his own blood,
and the blood of others; his end had been glorious had he died in a more
justifiable cause, he might well have preserved himself (his high spirit
being allayed by the Kings last proffer) but the malice of a wicked Uncle
hindered him, causing by his false report this his death and infamy. Earl
Douglas no subject, but a professed enemy, was by the King commended and admired,
and set at liberty. For virtue by men generously minded, is applauded even in
enemies. Owen Glendor and the Earl of Northumberland remained yet enemies, not
to be despised. The King sent the Prince his son to Wales, who finding the
people in those parts possessed with fear, by reason of the last overthrow,
chased them like so many wild beasts, over mountains and through woods.
Glendor forsaken by all men, died within a few days of mere hunger; his hopes
and life, his principality and prophesies ending all at once: so as having
appeased the country, and left governors there, the Prince returned home in
triumph. But that Glendor did dye in this sort, is only written by Edward
Halle, other writers keep him longer alive. The King took a journey toward
York, to reduce the Earl of Northumberland to his duty, and found that if he
had not been withstood by the Earl of Westmerland and Sir Robert Waterton,
he would have drawn his forces into the field, and have joined with his
son; but that fearing to encounter them, he had retired himself into his
strong Castle. The King writ unto him to disbandon his forces, willing him to
come in a peaceable fashion. He obeyed, not knowing how to do otherwise after
so great a ruin: he came accompanied only with a few of his own followers:
he used not many-words, concerning his nakedness with excuses, and laying
those faults upon such as were dead, which lived yet in him. The King
dissembling his displeasure (for Barwicke and other strengths were yet in his
hands furnished with Scottish Garrisons) suffered him to return, that he
might not again endanger those confines, he gave him friendly and holy
admonitions, which had he had the fortune to embrace, he had not heaped up
desolation upon his family by his own death. Some will have it that the King
pardoned his life, but did confiscate his goods, leaving him only sufficient
for maintenance, and it is not unlikely, for in the next Parliament he was
restored to all except the Isle of man, a superfluous favor if he had not been
formerly punished.

This mean while Valerian Count St. Paul, netled by his no honorable retreat
from the Isle of Wight, levied 2000. fighting men, part French, part Genoveses,
part Dutch, with the which heunexpectedly sat down before Merc Castle, little
more then a league distant from Callis, hoping by their valor and excellency of
his Engines, to win it: the place was defended by soldiers more remarkable for
their valor then number, so as despairing of taking it by assault, he lodged
his troops in the suburbs, which being environed by a ditch, defended him from
such as from Callis, or the other Garrisons might at unawares set upon him, he
forbear not though to assay their first work with a fierce assault; the which
being weakly defended (the defenders not much valuing it) he made himself
master of, and made a great booty of cattle and horses; his coming being this
mean while understood at Callis, the town sent out a hundred horsemen to
discover his situation, who returned without, or giving, or taking offense; but
they sent him word that if he would expect them, they would come and dine with
him the next morning, to which he answered, that their dinner should be ready
for them: upon break of day 200 horse, two hundred archers, and three hundred
footmen, followed by ten or twelve carts with victual and artillery, came
forth of Callis. They thought to have met the enemy in the field, or ready to
come forth, but finding them in their rampires, it was necessary to stir them
with their arrows; a cloud whereof falling thick upon them who were closed up
together between the Castle and the ditch, they were sorely gauled, not able
to make defense. The Dutch foot being disordered, were the first who run away,
and were followed by the greatest part of the horse, and the Genovese
Crossebowmen, who in the taking in of the first works had spent all their
arrows, were soon defeated. The Count got safe to Terrovan, leaving eighty
Noblemen and Gentlemen prisoners besides those that were slain. Of which number
was Angestes, Captain of Bullen, Dampiere, and Ramburres. The English won
Artillery, munition, and other pillage, not herewith contented they undertook
to take in Ardres. They brought thither three days after, about break of day
500. men; but the chance at dice is not always alike fortunate, for beyond
their expectation, finding the sentinels awake, and the defendants ready to
fight, after a long redoubled assault they lost between forty and fifty
soldiers, so as taking away their ladders, they carried the dead bodies into a
house hard by, which they set on fire, to the end that the bodies being burnt,
the loss they had suffered might not be known. The Count St. Paul doubly
wounded in his reputation (for every man spoke ill of him) resolved to set upon
the confines, and do there what mischief he could, but this his intention
being known at Court, he was commanded to forbear so doing: his fortune not
corresponding to the rancor of his mind: and in his stead four hundred horse,
and five hundred foot, were sent to Bullen for the safety of those Frontiers,
conducted by the Marquis Dupont, son to the Duke de Bar, by the Count
Dammartin, and Count Darpadan, that by their wisdom and valor they might
abate the audacity of the English.

Philip, surnamed the Bold, Duke of Burgondy, was dead, to whom John his eldest
son, succeeded in the inheritance of his estate, in the haughtiness of his
mind, and in his hatred to the Duke of Orleans, the first original of their
destruction, as likewise of the ruin of France. He having heard of the Count
Saint Paul's misfortune, did thereat take much apprehension; for his territories
in Flanders were next exposed to the enemies impressions; King Henry had
assembled a Fleet of tall ships, wherein were five thousand fighting men, to
force Sleuce. The Duke prepared to succor it. The English having, with bad
success, fought against the Castle, upon the advice of this succor, were
enforced to quit their design, having lost in the action threescore men;
amongst whom the Earl of Pembroke, as Monstrelet reports. But herein he is
deceived: for the Earldom of Pembroke was then in the Crown, by the death of
John Hastings, who in Richard the seconds time, was at a tilting slain,
leaving no heirs behind him: nor was that honor conferred on any one many
years after, till by Henry the fifth it was conferred upon his brother
Humphrey, who was afterward Duke of Gloucester.

But the Duke of Burgondy not affying in this retreat, put munition into
Graveling, causing a good number of armed men to fall down upon the frontiers,
under the conduct of Signior de Croi: and because to stand only upon defense,
was not conformable to the greatness of his spirit, he resolved to besiege
Callis, the nearest and likeliest thorn wherewith he might be pricked. He
began to make extraordinary preparations; and that nothing might be wanting,
he sent to require aid from France, which certainly would have been granted
him, had not the Duke of Orleans jealousies hindered him. Whereupon he was so
much incensed, as that he resolved to go to the Court of France himself, and
to stop two maine gaps with one bush: to obtain aid, and to beat down, at
least abate his enemies power. When he was come to Paris, accompanied by eight
hundred men, who under their Cassackes were all well armed: he understood that
the Duke of Orleans was some few hours before gone from the City; and that
under pretense of hunting, he had carried the Dolphin along with him, with
intention of carrying him to Germany: (the first was true, but the second much
unlikely) whereupon he believed, that Orleans had done this, to break off the
match which was formerly concluded between the Dolphin and his own daughter.
The Dolphin went from Paris, accompanied by the Duke, his mother, and Lewis of
Bavaria, Uncle by his mothers side, with purpose to go to Mellune. They were
to dine at Corviole, whither the Queen and Orleans were already come: the
Dolphin and Lewis stayed a little behind, where the Duke of Burgondy came up
unto them, who not listening to what ever reasons Lewis could allege, caused
the litter to turn about, and brought the Dolphin back to Paris. Great
inconveniences would hereupon have insued, had not the other Princes interposed
themselves. But businesses being every day more and more exasperated, Burgondy
multiplying injuries, propounding reformations in the government, and therein
in bad terms, taxing the others ill administration; the King was counseled
to employ them both in places apart; two such working brains as theirs, not
like to rest in quiet in the Court. An excellent expedience it might have been
of continuance, or at a further distance; But being in a point of time
terminable in it self, and at a distance to be measured with one pace, it
deferred, but did not take away the mischief; delay causing those miserable
and bloody effects which ensued. To the Duke of Burgondy the government of
Picardy was given, to the end that the forces of that Province joined to his
own in Flanders, might in the common cause facilitate his own security, and
the security of the Kingdom. To the Duke of Orleans six thousand men were
assigned, and defrayed, for Guascony; whither he went accompanied by many great
Monsieurs, and laid siege to Blay: This place could not hold out long,
whereupon the defendants bethought themselves of a wise caution: If the enemy
should take Blay, they could not keep it, unless they were likewise masters of
Burgos. The town of Blay did therefore promise to surrender it self as soon
as Burgos should be taken or surrendered. Orleans well pleased with the
bargain, as appearing advantageous unto him, accepted of it, gaining thereby
as much time to take in Burgos, as he must have spent in the winning of Blay.
But having lost many of his men in three months siege under Burgos (having
quitted a certainty for an uncertainty, and lost both) he was enforced to
return to Paris, whilst the Duke of Burgondy, wary and well advised, proceeded
though more slowly, yet more securely in his designs. He was fully bent upon
the enterprise of Callis: but that Fort being difficult to win, defended by a
gallant garrison, and easy to be succored by reason of the sea, and the
neighborhood of England, he could not hope the conquest thereof without great
forces, and very many soldiers: so as having assembled together at Saint
Omers, six thousand horse, and fifteen hundred Crosse-bow men, and twelve
thousand foot, with proportionable munition and artillery, the enterprise was
the second time forbidden him, though he had obtained Charles his consent, Of
such prevalence is the rage of a bewitching envy, that such a conquest being
to be had in possibility, without the hazarding of France, they would rather
have it remain in the hand of an enemy, then in the power of Burgondy: a
powerful reason to make him take that resolution which he did.

Henry's reign this mean while was like a craggy mountain, from which there
is no descent but by a thousand crooked ways, full of rocky stones and out
jetting cliffes. The first escaped, others are met withal of more danger and
anxiety, in such like paths he walked all the time of his life, nor did he
till his end arrive at a wished for plain, one danger, was a step unto
another, and the event always doubtful, for the subjects former desire of him
being now extinguished; his friends failing and his enemies increasing, he had
no other help, nor leaning-stocke in so painful a descent, but the eye of
vigilance and the staff of chastisement, helps and assistances, which though
they might cause him keep on his way, yet were they not sufficient to free him
from weariness: besides, he was not certain of overcomming all difficulties
at last, a condition fitter for compassion then envy in a Prince in his case,
and yet it was election that brought him to the kingdom, having always been
of that opinion, which is held generous by most men, to hazard himself to very
extremes, and to be aut Caesar aut nihil: yet I cannot find that there is any
worth or nobleness in aspiring to great matters by unlawful ways, and that
magnanimity, a virtue in its own nature so nice and tender, can walk in such
paths without galling her feet, unless it be that as things here below are
composed of contrary elements, so are our minds composed of contradictory
affections: he was before subject to many conspiracies, now more then ever: and
those who durst not aspire to bereave him of his life by their sword,
endeavored to bereave him of his honor by their pen. A revenge common enough
amongst poor spirited people, and such as are not worth the considering.

A Priest casting about how he might slay Henry, made a catalogue of all such
as had been rewarded by Richard; giving it for granted, that they would
undergo the business; setting down their names in paper, as if they had
already consented to the conspiracy. This list being found about him (whilst
they endeavored to lay hold of such whose names were there written) he
confessed he had never dealt with any of them, but that it was a mere Idea of
his own, imagining that some of them having been obliged by Richard, other
some injured by Henry, they would all have been willing to have contributed to
his destruction. A confession which saved the lives of many, and condemned his
own. A Franciscan Friar together with eight more of the same order, being
accused as authors of certain scandalous libels against the King, and
demanded what he would have done if Richard had been alive? answered, He would
have fought for him against whosoever else, as long as he could stand. Sir
Roger Clarindon, Bastard brother to King Richard, accused of the like fault,
was, together with another Gentleman, and a servant, ignominiously hanged.

Richard had diverse times been said to be alive after his death: more 1404
particularly this year, by the means of one Sherley his letters, who was one
of the Gentlemen of his Chamber. This man, after his Masters fall, withdrew
himself into France, where being confidently informed, that Richard yet lived,
he went to Scotland to know the truth. But after he had spoken with the
Impostor, whom he knew to be such, he forbear not to make use of the
occasion; and (through the hatred he bore Henry) to do his best to deprive
him of his Kingdom, he caused a seal to be made, like unto that which
Richard was wont to use: he writ diverse letters to sundry friends, signed with
the same, as if they had been written by Richard; insomuch that he distracted
the minds of many, it being already undoubtedly believed, that Richard lived.
The old Countess of Oxford, mother to the Duke of Ireland, did not only
publish the certainty hereof, but did likewise cause a great many Stagges to be
made in gold and silver (which was Richards cognizance) and bestowed them on
such as depended on her, to the end that they might stitch them on their
sleeves, as soon as he should be entered England. But the little advisednesse
used in this affair, and her too much security herein, who sent a Secretary of
hers to sundry people through all Essex, was the cause of the discovery: so as
she consumed her days in a close prison, her goods being by Law confiscated,
and the Secretary ended his journey in a Halter under a Gallows. Sherley
finding that his plots could not take effect, and not able to return for
France for lack of money, came to Barwicke, hoping that Sir William Clifford, a
friend of Richards, would have furnished him. Sir William kept this place
against the Kings good will, having refused to resign it over to such as were
by the King sent to him for that end: so as being guilty of high treason, he
looked to be besiged, taken, and put to death. Wherefore giving over his
useless respect to Richard, he detained Sherley, and sent him to the King, and
was rewarded with forgiveness of his former disobedience. Sherley was
executed, who confessed (to boot with his former fault) that he was one of them
who strangled the Duke of Gloucester; so as though he died very penitently, and
much compassionated by many, yet the greatest part did no ways pity him, the
popular memory of the popular Duke, prevailing over the respect of the King now
living. All the abovenamed were like so many paunes at Chesse, which advancing
too rashly, were lost; whilst the great men, alike inconsiderately,
endeavoring to mate the King, met with the like fortune. There was not one in
the whole Nobility, who did not now desire a change of government, but few that
did resolve to endeavor it. For events founded upon the uncertainty of fortune,
are for the most part of certain and inevitable ruin. Hatred, as all things
else, has its degrees: he who is in the last degrees, cares not much to hazard
himself till such time, as happy success is of little use, and unhappy
success of inevitable danger. But who is in the first degrees of hatred, and
therein bathed in his own blood, has bolder: resolves revenge, being an
intense passion, and an indefatigable egger on of the spirits in offended
veins.

The Earl of Northumberland who had lost his brother and his son; the
Archbishop of York who had lost his brother, and Maubery Earl 1405
Marshall, who had lost his father an exiled man in Venice; all enemies to the
King in highest degree, conspired his ruin, taking for their color the
ordinary pretense of reformation, and ease of the people, oppressed with
strange taxes, as if to repress the attempts of France, Scotland and Wales (in
which service they were employed) had not been necessary, as indeed it was not
according to their tenets, for such repression did preserve authority, and did
establish, together with the common good, the reputation and awe of a Prince,
which they would have oppressed and undone, though to the undoing of the
kingdom. The Lord Hastings, Falconbridge, Bardolf, and many others did join
in this conspiracy; the order they therein took, was to meet all at an
appointed time with their forces at York, under the command of the Earl of
Northumberland, but the Archbishops impatiency broke this design, for being
returned to York together with the Earl Marshall, he thought to facilitate
the enterprise by honesting it, so as having framed certain articles, and sent
copies of them into other countries, he caused them be set upon the Church
doors, thereby inviting the people to take arms to reform abuses introduced
by the ill administration of the present government. The Archbishop was of a
pleasing countenance, well read, and endued with much virtue, so as having till
this present led a blameless life, he was free from being thought to have any
evil intentions (but it is usual for man to fall back from well doing) and
hereupon at his first beck, 20000. men came flocking to him: an unseasonable
diligence for his confederates, as likewise for himself. The King was informed
of all that had past, and not failing in diligence in his own affairs, he had
at the first noise of this rebellion levied 30000. fighting men, giving order
to the Earl of Westmerland (to whom he joined a son of his own very young)
to go before him into these parts, and to govern himself as occasion should
require. Being come to York he found that the Archbishop had placed his camp
forth of the city, and perceiving that it was not his best to give him battle
(for he was much inferior in forces) he encamped himself over against him.
And changing the Lions skin into the Foxes, he sent him word that he wondered to
find a man of his profession in the posture he found him, since he could not
find any reason, why he should arm the Kings people contrary to the Kings
peace: to the which the Archbishop answered, that he so was far from infringing
the Kings peace, as that all that he did tended to the preservation thereof.
Whereupon entering upon the occasions of discontent with him that was sent unto
him, he showed him the Articles; and for the Earls better satisfaction, he
sent them unto him by a Gentleman of his own. He who had determined to do what
he did, seemed to rest satisfied: but that a business of this high nature
being in question, it was requisite they should meet together to treat thereof;
which might easily be done, each of them bringing a like number of men betwixt
the two camps. There is no net so secure as that which is spread in the
commendations of him who is to be deceived: for the Archbishop hearing his
actions applauded by him who was sent to oppose him, confident to bring him
over to his side, made no difficulty to give him meeting. And which is more
brought the Earl Marshall along with him, though with much ado, and contrary
to his will, who had in vain used all the means he could to dissuade him
from it. Being met together with equal numbers between the two camps,
Westmerland after some short discourse, seemed to be persuaded, professing
that in so just a quarrel he would fight to the utmost of his life; whereupon
shaking hands in the fight of both armies, wine was called for, and given about
in token of friendship, and agreement; a ceremony which not soon to be ended,
the Earl said to the Archbishop, that their differences being ended in a joint
consent, it was not expedient to detain any longer so many people with such
inco^modity from their houses and shops* but that suddenly disbandoned, it was
reason they should together with them, enjoy the fruits of the established
reconciliation; the Archbishop believed the Earl, and his people him, who
returned to the City abundantly content: the cups went this while merrily
about, whilst those of the Kings party gathering one by one together, grew to
such a multitude, as that there being now no more cause of fear, the Earl did
at the same time arest the Archbishop, and Earl Marshall, plighting his faith
unto them (the same as he had formerly done) that they should not suffer in
their lives: and meeting the King at Pomfret, who made what haste he could to
York; he brought along with him the prisoners, who much commiserated and
bemoaned, were adjuged to dye, and were forthwith beheaded: Some do report
that the Archbishop obtained of the headsman to cut off his head at five
blows, in the honor of our Saviors five wounds, and that the King being at
dinner, was at the same time by an invisible hand struck as often in the
neck, remaining afterward a Leper: A thing possible to him whom all things
are possible; but God does not always work according to his omnipotency, for
the King did neither receive these blows, neither did he remain a Leper; to
prove the falsehood whereof, the Archbishops tomb being devoutly flocked unto,
as to the tomb of a Martyr, he by public prohibition forbad the recourse
thereunto; the which he would not have done, if he had been miraculously
struck in manner aforesaid; and for what concerns the name of Martyr, his
cause did not deserve it, for he being a Pastor misled his flock from
spiritual pastorage to rebellion, and to the shambles; and since the
judgments of the Almighty touching the falling of the just, is not to be
sought into, the reasons of his former life conclude not for him. The King
having by fines punished the City, went toward Northumberland, at Durham he
caused the two Barons, together with the two Knights of the confederacy, to be
executed. The Earl understanding his associates misfortune, withdrew himself
to Barwicke, where not thinking himself strong enough, he fled to Scotland
together with the Lord Bardolf, and was friendly received by the Lord Fleming.
The King finding Barwick resolute not to yield, levelled a piece of Canon
against the Castle thereof (an instrument in those days new and not known)
with the which at the very first shot he battered it almost down to the
ground; whereat the defendants being amazed, without capitulation, yielded
themselves to the Kings pleasure, who hanging some and imprisoning the rest,
made himself master of all the Earl of Northumberlands seats; where taking
order for all things requisite, he passed into Wales, leaving the Prince his
son and the Duke of York with a great army in those parts; but he found such
deluges of water amongst those mountains, as he was forced toquit the
enterprise; he had carried along with him many carts and wagons loaded with the
most precious things he had, which were all born away by the violence of the
torrents, no one piece of them remaining. Some believe that this was done by
the Devil, Owen Glendor being held to be a great Negromancer; but I am of
opinion that if he had had any such power he would have made use thereof
against the King himself, for the loss of the Kings person did more avail
him, then the loss of his carriages. The Scotch men on the other side should
have come into England to aid the conspirators, but hearing what had happened,
they budged not, but endeavored to defend themselves by land from the Prince,
and by sea from Sir Robert Vmfrevill, Vice Admiral of the Navy, but nothing
happened of much importance. The one had only time to spoil the Country, and
the other to sack the coasts of Fife, and Lugdiana, all mischiefs ceasing in
a truce agreed upon for one year, which made them return to their own homes.

The plague did now grow hot in London and thereabouts; so as the 1406
King not being safe in Kent, the infection much spread in all places, was glad
to take shipping to go to Plessis in Essex, the Lord Camois was his guide;
they were already well advanced in the sea, when certain French Pirates (who
lay in the Thames mouth for pilladge) understanding of this passage, pursued
them, and intended to take the ship wherein the King was; took 4 ships that
were next unto him, one of the which was loaded with furniture of his chamber,
and things belonging to his own person. The Baron, who together with the other
vessels, were a good way from the King, came not in time enough to assist his
Majesty, nor yet to recover what was lost; so as if the Kings ship had not been
a swift sayler, and so made void the Pirates hopes, he had run danger of
going for France in stead of Essex. Camois was strictly questioned, and in
danger of losing his life, as thought to have held intelligence with these
Pirates; but better defending his own innocence, then he succored the King,
he was by the Judges acquitted. The plague being ceased, the King returned to
London: He made the match between Philleppa the younger of his two daughters,
and Henry King of Denmark; and this was the third marriage that was celebrated
in his family after his coming to the Crown, for before this he had married
Blanch to William Duke of Bavaria, Prince Elector, and he himself had taken to
wife Ione the daughter of Charles the second, King of Navarre, the widow of
John Montfort, Duke of Brittany, which I have not mentioned, as not belonging
to the thread of my discourse. But what befell Prince James the only son and
heir of Scotland, who did at this time fall into the power of England, is not
to be passed by, as worthy of ample relation.

Robert the third who now reigned in Scotland, and who in his baptism 1407
was named John, changed the name of John for Robert; either for that the
Roberts of Scotland had been fortunate, or for that the John's of England and
of France had been unfortunate; as if the name were of force enough to make
those effects good, which fortune (God permitting) had preordained bad. It Is
true, that amongst the Kings named John few are found who either have not been
very bad, or very unfortunate. Castile, Portugal, and Arragon, afford us
examples hereof, of three hereditary Queen Ioanes, the two of Naples were
unfortunate, and unchaste; the third of Castile was chaste, but most unfortunate.
This notwithstanding John of Scotland did not by change of name, change the
malign aspect of his destiny, for those evils befell him, having taken upon
him the name of Robert, which would have befalne him, had he kept the name of
John* the divine providence not being to be changed by such alterations This
King was by diverse pensils painted forth in the same colors; Hector Boethius
describes him affable, merciful, an enemy to extortions, charitable and pious.
Buchanan a severe writer, does in one place give him to us, rather as void of
vice, then famous for virtue: and another speaking of his innocence, inriches
him with all the worth that is to be desired in a private man, but judges him
rather to be an honest man, then a good King. It Is very true, he had nothing of
King in him, save the name, the whole authority remaining in Robert Duke of
Aubeney, his younger brother, in his fathers time created governor of the
Kingdom; a manifest proof of his incapacity to govern it alone. But this
Duke did not content himself with the bare government, he aspired to the
Crown; which though he attained not, yet left he no wickedness unattempted to
effect it, and the life of the Prince David being a great rub in his way, the
death of the Queen his mother, and of Earl Douglas his father in law,
afforded him means of bereaving him of it, as he desired.

This Prince was very lewdly inclined, and so given to his unbridled lust, as
that he was not to be endured. Whilst his mother lived, (who kept him in some
awe) he lived in some order; but she being dead, letting the reins loose to
his natural inclination, no maidenhood was undeflowred, nor marriage bed
unviolated. When tricks and flatteries could not prevail, he made use of
force: Daily complaints were made unto the King, of injuries done by his son.
The father (by reason of his weakness contemned) not able to amend him,
determined to transfer the care thereof to his brother, thinking that only
he was able to tame him; an error ordinary enough in persons of his condition.
For the good man suspects not what he does not imagine, and what he himself
would not do, were he to gain the world thereby. The sheep being thus
delivered over to the Wolf, the Duke, at the very first, shut him up in Saint
Andrews Castle; a jurisdiction of that Archbishopricke, the which after the
death of the last Archbishop, he had unduly usurped under pretense of keeping
it, during the vacancie of that Metropolitan See: but thinking him to be there
too nigh the Kings ear, and the Courts eye (desiring rather his death then his
amendment) he carried him to the strong hold of Faukland, a jurisdiction of his
own, where he caused him to be put into a dungeon, with direction that he
should there dye of hunger; a commission, though given in secret, yet by the
effect sufficiently published, no preparation being made in so little a place
(where all that was done, was seen) neither for the person, nor nourishment of
such a prisoner. He had died in a few days (and it had been better for him,
since die he must) had he not been kept in life by the daughter of the Keeper
of the Castle, and a country Nurse, who commiserated his condition, and had
access through an Orchard to the Castle. The former nourished him with oaten
Cakes, which by little pieces she conveyed unto him through a chinke; the
other gave him suck through a small Cane, the one end whereof he took into
his mouth, whilst she squiezed her milk in at the other end. His keepers
marvelled to see him still alive; but the means being discovered, the two
charitable women were cruelly put to death, the father accusing his own
daughter, to prove himself faithful to him that was unfaithful, and a
tyrannous Governor. At last, when he had torn his flesh, and eaten his
fingers through rage, by death he put an end to his vices, miseries and life.
This bitter accident was generally known every where, before the King had any
notice of it, every one fearing to be slain for recompense of doing so good an
office. Having at last hear^ some whispering thereof, he could not believe
otherwise then as it was. Great were the complaints, but the brother excused
himself, deluding justice by laying the fault upon diverse who were in the
castle for faults deserving death, whom he accused for having murdered the
Prince, for which they suffered death. The King not herewithall satisfied, but
unable to revenge himself, he publicly besought God by some miraculous
judgment to punish the author of so great a wickedness. He had yet a second
son living, named James, he was advised to send him abroad, since it was not
likely he who had committed so horrid a treason; would stick at the murdering
of him also; without the which, his former mischief would nothing avail.
France was thought the safest place to send him to. The young Prince was with
much secrecy embarked: Henry Sincleer, Earl of the Orchades, being given unto
him for governor, but having shunned Scylla, he fell (as the Proverb says)
upon Carybdis: for the Mariners having cast anchor before Flemburgh in England
(either driven by the winds, or to refresh the Prince much afflicted with
seasickenesse) they were known to be Scots, and the Prince known to be there,
so as he was detained and brought to Court: it was long disputed at the
Council Table whether he should be suffered to depart or no, but the negative
prevailed. His Father fearing such an encounter, had given him a letter for
Henry, which though full of compassion and pity, did not alter the resolution
taken. So as he being old, deprived of his sons, and feebly hearted, gave
himself over to grief, would take no more meat, and in three days died for
mere sorrow. Scotland confirmed the government of that Kingdom upon the Duke
of Auboney, till such time as their new King James should regaine his liberty.
Buchanan accuses King Henry for that action: his chief reason being that he
detained him whilst there was yet a truce of eight years between the two
Crowns: but I find no other truce then that of the preceding year already
expired. Edward Askew treates at large upon this, you may peruse him. This
imprisonment by consent of all Scottish writers, was more happy to him then
whatsoever liberty; for the King gave him such education as belonged to his
birth. The Scotchmen are naturally given to all discipline, as well speculative
as active; ingenious at sciences; stout and valiant in war: but this Prince
out did them all in aptness to all these, for he surpassed his teachers,
as well in horsemanship, as in Theology, Philosophy, and other liberal
sciences; especially in music, and poetry, wherein he proved most expert: so
as that fortune which was thought unhappy, crowned him with glory: for besides
the advantage of so good education, he was free from fear of his Uncle, and
was in his due time an introducer of learning, politenesse, and such arts as
were not before known in Scotland: it is to be observed in him, that evil
fortune is the best Academy for a man to profit in. A rule which suffered
exception in the Earl of Northumberland (whose last actions we must now treat
of) for though an old man, he died a scholar in that Academy, before he had
learnt the maxim of good government; not using patience, but in his vast
thoughts (plausible but pernicious counselors) resolving rather to dye, then
live declined; a noble resolution in a better cause or upon more mature
occasion.

He had made many journeyes into France, Flanders, and Wales, to 1408
raise up war, and get help against his King; all which proved of no use to
him: at last he returned to Scotland, from whence accompanied by Bardolf, he
fell with great troops of men upon Northumberland; he there recovered diverse
Castles, his army much increasing by diverse, who from those parts came to
assist him; from thence he passed into Yorkshire, where by proclamation he
invited all those to side with him who loved liberty: The King at the first
noise hereof went to meet him; but hardly was he come to Nottingham, when he
understood that Sir Thomas Rookesby Shirife of that Shire, had given him
battle, slain him, and taken Bardolf prisoner, who afterward dyed of his
wounds. The King did not though forbear to pursue his journey, that he might
quench the yet hot ashes of that rebellion: he mulcted many, and put many to
death, answerable to the condition of their faults. The Bishop of Bangor, and
Abbot of Ailes (who were taken prisoners in the conflict) met with different
fortunes according to the diversity of their habits. The Abbot being taken in
armor, was hanged; the Bishop who was clothed in the habits of his profession
was pardoned; the heads of the two Peers were cut off, put upon the top of two
spears, and sent to be set upon London bridge: This was the miserable end of
the father, son, and brother; descended from one of the noblest races that
came from Normandy, into England: all this ruin being occasioned out of a
mere capritchio of wrestling with the King, and detaining in his despite the
Scottish prisoners, which had not happened had they not believed to have so
well deserved at his hands as that they might make him do what they listed: a
presumption which has and will deceive many: for Princes will not be thought
capable of such obligation, as that they must acknowledge their being from
another; and much less to have their subjects their benefactors: the very
thought thereof has been and ever will be with them mortal.

Here all King Henry's adverse fortune had a period; and in this calm he
likewise calmed all home suspicions and jealousies; having in the short time he
afterward lived some small foreign armies not to weary him, but to keep him
in breath: he had (as wise Princes ought) his eyes every where, he took order
for the very least affairs: for negligence in a new and not beloved Prince, is
no less the mother of contempt, then is diligence the mother of reverence and
respect: many ships appertaining to particular men, were come upon the coast of
the Kingdom upon this occasion of war, to lie in wait for pillage, which
hindered the Merchants ships from traffiquing abroad; he gave order for a
sufficient fleet commanded by Edmond Holland Earl of Kent, formerly created
Admiral, who having scoured the coasts of England, and France, and met with no
enemy, he understood they had retired themselves into Britany, whither he
steered his course; he assaulted Briache a place upon the sea side: The
inhabitants did courageously defend the place, wounded many of the English, in
particular the Admiral himself with a stone in the head, of the which he died
five days after; a fatal blow to him, and unfortunate to them; for the
assaliants growing more obstinate through this loss, took the Town by force,
burnt all the houses, and put all to the sword that they found in posture of
defense. This Earl was brother to Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, who in the
conspiracy at Oxford, was slain by the Townsmen of Chester; he was in such
favor with the King, as besides the restoring of him to his blood,
inheritance, and honor, he with much labor and expense, procured him to marry
with Lucia Visconte: This Lady was the tenth daughter of Barnaby Visconte, Lord
not only of Millaine, but almost of all Lumbardy; the other nine were matched
to great Princes; as to Leopald Duke of Austria, the two Dukes of Bavaria, and
to the King of Ciprus: so as if the King had not extraordinarily favored him,
it was not a match befitting his fortune: she brought him 100000. Crowns in
gold; an unusual portion in those days, and to the last of so many daughters.
Cor^us calls him Earl of Kent, and son to Henry the fourth; believing that
any inferior quality was unfit to match with so great a Princess; she being
now a widow, and without children, the King purposed to marry her to Marquis
Dorset, his brother; but she not liking thereof (he being a man in years and
of no pleasing aspect) did secretly marry herself (with hazard of losing for
ever all she had) to Henry Mortimer, to whom she bore three daughters, which
being all honorably married, left a noble and continued succession.

The affairs in France this mean while (the which hereafter must be interlaced
with this our story) were come to the period of ruin, so to bring 1409
England to the period of greatness, which had not happened for whatsoever
worth or fortune, had not the way been chalked out unto them by the enmity
between the house of Burgundy and Orleance: Let me be permitted to make a
large relation thereof, since they were the rice of all the disorders that
succeeded betwixt these two warlike Nations: we have heard how the Duke of
Burgundy having the second time resolved upon the enterprise of Callis, was
commanded to the contrary; and that thinking that this affront proceeded from
the ill will that Orleans bore him, he was mightily incensed; this anger
afterward increasing, and not able to suffer him his superior, nor the other
him his equal, he resolved to bereave him of his life; with this resolution he
went to Paris, where he got together eighteen men, the very scum of all the
rascality of France, making one Rolletto Antoneville, a Norman, their chief,
who having by the favor of the late Duke of Burgundy, father to this present
Duke, obtained an office of great moment, had it taken from him by the Duke of
Orleans; so as the obligation he had to the one, and the loss he received by
the other, made him more covet this murder, then did Burgundy; the Queen had
bought a house without the gate Barbet, for her recreation, where she was at
this time brought to bed, the child being dead, so as she keeping her bed they
were sure Orleans would not fail to visit her; they took a house near the
said gate, for that he returning by night as of necessity he must do by reason
of the shortness of the days, the season being November, they might have
opportunity to do that wicked action: the Duke went to make this visit, and
they fearing lest in his return he might come some other way, sent unto him a
footman of the Kings, one of their number, to will him from the King to come
presently to him, for that he had a business to confer with him in, which
concerned them both: The Duke who knew the messenger, took leave of the Queen
and got on horseback, waited upon only by five footmen with torches, by two
gentlemen which rid before him both of one horse, and by a Dutchman, who being
come out of pagery, and not having whereon to ride, followed him on foot; the
assassinates stood waiting for him in a corner, as the torch light appeared,
they came forth upon him, and at the first stroke struck off one of his hands;
he cried out I am Orleans, it is Orleans that we would have, replied they;
wherwithall loading him with wounds, he fell from his horse with his head so
cloven, as that his brains fell out upon the stones; the faithful Dutchman
desirous to be his shield, threw himself before him, and was soon slain; the
horse which was gone before, did so start, when he came near these men, as
that huffing and pricking up his ears, he run so hard away, as the two men
could not in a long time take him up; having stayed him, and returning back to
meet their Master, they might see the Dukes horse with no body on his back,
which they led back by the bridle, thinking that the Duke lighting upon such
like accident as they had done, might be fallen; but being come unto the place,
and by the murderers threatened to be served with the same sauce; they run to
the Queens house, crying out murder, murder; the murderers this mean while
having set the house on fire wherein they lay, to the end that their neighbors
fright might make their escape more secure, got to the Palace of Artois a
house of the Duke of Burgundies. This news being known through all the City,
and first in Orleans house, his friends, and servants, run to the place,
where they found his body lying in a sea of blood horribly massacred; they
carried the body into the next Church, whither the King of Cicily, and the
chiefest of the Court came, sorily lamenting; the next morning his hand and
brains being found lying in the street all durty, they were put together with
the body into a leaden coffin, and buried in a Chapel which he himself had
caused to be built. At his funeral, three corners of the cloth which covered
the Bieare, were held up by the Princes of Sicily, Berry, and Burbony, Burgundy
held up the fourth; this fained charity not corresponding with his unfeigned
cruelty; for what ever inquisition could be made, no news could be heard of
the assassinates. The Provost being called to the Council table, said it was
impossible for him to find out any thing touching this affair, unless he
might be permitted to search the houses of the greatest Lords, and especially
the Palaces of the Princes: The King of Sicily, Duke of Berry, and Duke
Burbon, were content, but not Burgundy, who not knowing what to say, took the
three Princes aside, and confessed that he had bin the author of that homicide:
whereupon filled with horror and amazement (Berry exclaming that in one day he
had lost two nephews) they left him, keeping the secret to themselves, not
knowing without mature deliberation how to publish it: The next day after,
Burgundy being come to go to the Council table, Berry in whose house the
meeting was, met him at the chamber door, and told him this was no place for
him; wherewithal he shut the door upon him, leaving him much confused, a
usage he had not been accustomed unto, and what he believed would not now have
been used, without resolutions of further consequence, so as fearing to be
clapped up in prison, he forthwith returned to his own house, and getting on
horseback, and being waited on only by five men, he rid to Bapomus, upon the
confines of Artois, the place of his command, and went 42. leagues not taking
any rest but what was necessary either to bate or change his horses; from
thence having slept a while, he went to Lillo in Flanders; this his unexpected
departure, was no sooner divulged, but the occasion thereof was known, the
dead Duke had 600. what Gentlemen what Knights defraied by him in Paris, all
which were of no use to him, who trusted more in his quality then he ought to
have done, he imagined the Duke of Burgundy would have exercised his ill will
in public against his power, not by treachery against his person; a hundred
of these well horst, and led by Clegnet of Brabant Admiral of France, would
have followed Burgundy: but the King of Sicily, fearing greater inconveniences,
hindered their design, not suffering them to go. He who formerly was thought
the chief author of this murder, was Albertus of Canni (injured by the Duke
who had taken from him his wife, and had by her a son, who proved afterward
one of the bravest Cavalliers in all France) but the known truth freed him of
suspicion: all men except the Parisians, detested this fact, but their
rejoicing lasted but a while: for the evils they received through the
oppressions, and misgovernment of Orleans, were not the hundredth part so bad as
those they suffered after by the oppression and misgovernment of the Duke of
Burgundy. The Assassinates having changed their apparel, left Paris likewise,
and went to Artois, according to the order they had formerly received from
their Master. When Valentina Duches of Orleans, heard this sad news, she
hasted to Paris, and kneeled down before the King, demanding justice, which
was likely to be granted, for he did tenderly love his brother; but his
weakness was such as suffered him to give her no other comfort, save hopes and
promises. The Duke of Burgundy having represented the business to the common
people after his manner, he published a manifestation thereof; wherein having
made known the reasons which had enforced him to this resolution, he pretended
to merit thanks and praise, rather then blame or punishment. The two Uncles
Sicily, and Berry, fearing lest he might join with the English, invited him to
give them a meeting at Amiens, he came thither and caused two lances to be set
a cross upon his lodging door, in this manner X which fashioned forth the
Burgundy cross; the one of them had a bur used in war, the other such a one as
is used at tilting; as if he would by this Hyroglifique say, it should be in
their choice to choose peace or war: Their meeting was to no purpose; for
(contrary to the Kings express inhibition) he went with 4000. men to Paris
(where he was with great expressions of joy received by the Parisians) where
(to justify his horrid fault) he by the mouth of one John Petit, accused the
Duke of Orleans, for having aspired unto the Kingdom, bewitched the King,
plo^ed treachery against his children, and for having made confederacy with the
King of England, to make himself master of the Crown of France by the death
of his brother, as the other had got the Crown of England by his Cosens death;
for having sowed discord betwixt the King and Queen, ^o the end that having
lost her matrimonial love, her person might be the more at his command; that
he had made himself Master of the most considerable places of the Kingdom,
putting out the former governors, and placing others of his own depending in
their rooms, that he might make use of them against his brother; that he had
procured Pope Benedict to declare the King incapable of the Crown (as
Childericus formerly was) that he himself might obtain it: his conclusion
was, that being for so many faults guilty of treason, both divine and humane,
he was to be declared lawfully slain; and the King out of mere fear,
declared him as was urged justly put to death. The Duke having obtained what he
desired, returned to Flanders, from thence he went in assistance of the Bishop,
and Prince of Leidge against the Leigois, who had rebelled against him, he
overcame them, and gave them what Laws he pleased, whereby he won such
renown, as France had reason to fear him now more then before: for though in
his absence the King had permitted the Dowager Duches to answer unto his
accusations, and revoked his pardon, with an intention to punish him; yet
understanding of this victory, and that his brothers, and cosens, had declared
themselves for him; he disabandoned the people who were gathered together to
have forced him, and those who had appeared his enemies, repented themselves
for having been so forward. Together with this examining the continuancy of the
Parisians (strangely passionate for the Duke) the King resolved to retire
himself to Towers; not so much to free himself from their danger, as to
revenge himself of them: for the absence of the Court redounds much to their
loss, by reason of the profit they receive by its residency with them: at the
which being less satisfied, and more offended then ever, they sent for
Burgundy, who came to them well accompanied; but his conscience pointing out
unto him his injustice, and keeping him in perpetual agitation; he sent his
cosen William Duke of Baviers, to Towers, to make him some agreement for him;
not out of any acknowledgement of repentance, but out of a desire which guilty
people have to bury their shame: and because a war (in such a case always
blameable and unjust) brings ruin if it be lost; and if won, it does but
erect Trophies of shame and infamy, the King sent Lodovick Duke of Baviers the
Queens brother to meet him, and Montaigne Lord high Steward of the household
with the articles of agreement. The Duke hated Montaigne, as a maine Orleanist,
and gave him bitter words which he took patiently: but the articles not being
according to his liking, he regulated them; and though they were not afterward
agreed upon according to his corrections; they were yet so handled as that he
was contented; for his adversaries having lost all their defense by the death
of their mother Valentina, (who died of grief not long before) there was none
to oppose him: They being all young orphans, unexperienced, and for want of
direction, abandoned by all. Peace being concluded, the parties met at
Shartres, where in the presence of the King, Queen, and Dolphin, and Princes,
they swore the peace though the young Duke of Orleans, and the Count Virtue, (the
Count of Anguleine the third brother not being present, by reason of his
infancy) were observed to weep in the doing of it, being enforced by the King,
and of years, and power not fit to make refusal. The Duke of Burgundy being
together with the Court returned to Paris, and knowing that what was done was
not likely long to continue, he resolved to work his own establishment by the
ruin of such as favored the house of Orleans: but being to guild over his
unjust intention with the title of justice, directly opposite to the sworn
peace, and resolute not to suffer Montaigne live, as one of the chief of them,
he caused him to be questioned before the Magistracy, for the administration of
the Kings moneys, where in his account between figures and ciphers, his head
was struck off, and his life was made a cipher. The Duke of Berry who was a
Courtier born, and well verst in Court policies, guest at his designs; and not
able to endure affronts, as one who had formerly lived with as much or more
authority in the government, then any other Prince; withdrew himself to
Angeires; whither unsent for, all the malcontents did presently flock: this
unexpected assembly caused a speedy confederacy between the Duke of Berry, the
Duke of Orleans, and his brother; the Count Cleremont, (now Duke of Burbony by
his fathers decease) the Count Alanson, and Count Arminiacke; so as the peace
of Shartres proved a short lived Ephemera which died the day it was borne, and
indeed it was never thought other by the wisest sort: the news of this
conjunction did more and more exasperate the Duke of Burgundy: he willed the
Lord Albret, constable of France, to raise as many men as possibly he could,
making use of the name of the Kings safety, to save himself, since he, not the
King, was the mark that was aimed at. Albret obeyed, as not able to do
otherwise; he was no friend to Burgundy, and a great friend to his enemies, as
the success demonstrated. France like a firebrand newly extinguished, took
fire again at the approaching of this sudaine blaze. Count Richmonte hearing
that the colleagues were retired to Shartres, came thither likewise with a
great number of men. They first demanded audience of the King: but they wished
him to come armed with patience, whilst they pretended to appear before him
armed with iron. The Queen who did both hate, and fear Burgundy, did what in
her lay to appease them, having to this purpose made two journeyes her self in
person: but it was not in her power to keep them from coming to Paris: of so
much force is desperation, when it has usurped the place of reason, and
advice. They came to the very Suburbs of Marcelles: strange were the disorders
which were every where committed by the soldiers as well of one side, as of the
other.

But the incommodities and difficulties equally divided, after many 1410
too's and fro's, caused a second peace, called the peace of Winchester,
wherein was concluded, that both Berry, and Burgundy, were to withdraw
themselves from the Court; that when the one should be sent for, the other
should be sent for likewise; and that the mean while they should all withdraw
themselves, which gave but small satisfaction to the three brothers: for Berry
made use of them for his own particular ends, which when he had compassed, he
cared no longer for them, and it being a thing usual for the parties offended
not to forgive, unless some satisfaction be made; they pretended not to be
included in this peace, since in their particular they had received no manner
of satisfaction: so as if they swore unto the peace of Shartres it was to obey
the King: and if they consented unto this, it was for that they could not do
otherwise, being abandoned by all. The Duke of Berry was returned to Burges:
and the Duke of Burgundy desirous to calm all the former distastes, sent unto
him three Ambassadors, of which the Lord of Croy was chief. They went on their
intended way, when met by certain of the Duke of Orleans his people, between
Orleans, and Burges, the Signeur de Croy was stayed by them, and all the rest
suffered to pass: the next day being questioned concerning the Duke of Orleans
death, he confessed nothing of prejudice, though he suffered terrible torment.

The other two complaining hereof to the Duke of Berry, (to whom the affront
appertained) required his freedom, wherein though the King joined with him,
neither protestation, threats nor reason could prevail with the brothers. They
pretended the peace of Shartres to be invalid, as pursued contrary to the order
of Law and Justice: and that the King was compelled thereunto; that the Duke of
Burgundy had violated the same, by pursuing, undoing, and putting to death as
many of their friends as he could; that the peace of Winchester had been
likewise by him in many points broken; that those who had murdered their
father, though condemned and banished, did live securely in his territories,
and did likewise come at their pleasure into France, no notice being taken of
them; and that they were pensioned by him; and that no Counselors nor
Officers, depending upon either of the parties, being to tarry near the Kings
person, his Majesty was not only waited upon by such as had dependency upon
Burgundy.

The Queen and Duke of Berry did what they could to make a new 1411
accord between them: But Burgundy resolute not to recede from any thing
agreed upon at Shartres, the brothers sent a Herald with an opprobrious
defiance, wherein they intimated war unto him; and he in another, altogether
as bad, did freely accept the challenge: not many years before, he had
contracted a friendship with the Duke of Burbony, whilst (his father being
alive) he was only Count Cleremont. This present occasion serving for balance
to weigh friends, and no friends; he sent a messenger to him of purpose, to put
him in mind how they were reciprocally obliged one to another by their former
contract of friendship. Burbony having considerately thought upon an answer,
detesting his ambition, and being by blood allied unto the three brothers
(their father being son to a sister of his) thought it better became him to
fail him then them, so as renouncing the pretended confederacy, he declared
himself for the brothers: on the contrary side, the two chief Cities Amiens,
and Paris, declared themselves for Burgundy: whereupon he possessing the
persons of King, Queen, and Dolphin, who were wholly governed by such as had
dependence on them, did not doubt utterly to defeat his enemies. Those of
Orleans did the first hostile act: They held many places in Picardy, kept by
their garrisons, as most exposed to the frontiers of the enemy: but not being
thereby so strong as was requisite, they endeavored by the means of Clignet
of Brabant to surprise Retell, and Bapomus; an enterprise of great consequence
if it had succeeded. Berry this mean while pretended, at least seemed to be a
neuter; the Queen being at Melune, he went thither to come along with her to
Paris: but the Parisians thinking him to be no friend to Burgundy, forewarned
him not to come, and the more to witness their dislike of him, they broke all
the windows and doors of his house, making it unfit for him to come into. The
which being done, they recalled the Queen, they likewise broke the bridges
which were upon the Scene, to hinder the passage of the Orleanists; and brought
the King from Saint Paul's to the Louvre, keeping a good guard about him, to the
end he might not be by them surprised, and taken away: so as this infirm
afflicted Prince was made a very image by those that kept him and the regal
authority was made a cloak to cover the passions of such as did possess him.
All which things do clearly show us, that nature has not endued the common
people with the virtue of mediocrity, so as they terrify where they are not
kept in awe; pretend to govern if not governed, and where the scepter keeps
them not within their bounds, they will use their free will. But it being no
time now to temporise, and the King not able of himself to end the differences
or enforce obedience upon two strong factions; it behoved him to do amiss, to
shun doing worse, to join with one of them; and not able for want of forces
to choose whether, to accept of that side which he could not refuse: for it much
availed him to keep sovereignty still on foot (though but permitted) by the
help of one of the factions: for it might fall out, that the one faction being
defeated might so weaken the other, that the regal forces might prove the
master strength. All fit considerations, but in this case deceitful. Factions
which are favored by the people (as was this of Burgundy) not being easily
suppressed, the Nobility were by the King commanded to side against the three
brothers; so as their affairs being by regal favor abandoned, their hopes
were very small: and the Duke of Burgundy being sent for by the Dolphin, his
son in law, came into France with 50000. fighting men, drawn out of his
commons in Flanders; who freer then becomes a free Prince to suffer, would not
serve him unless conditionally; as, that their time of service might be
limited, and that all such prey as they should make, should be their own; an
evident proof that they went rather to pillage then do service: with these
sort of people (after he had taken all the Towns that were upon the Soame,
from whence all their garrisons fled, having made experience of their cruelty
by the example of those of Ham) he encamped, himself under Mondedier, where
the enemy was encamped, with intention of giving him battle, and whilst he
thought to order his troops (being assured of the victory by reason of his
advantages) the Dutchmen having fired their huts, and being loaded with prey
and prisoners, returned home; alleging that their time of service was expired;
nor was it in his power, by entreaties or fair promises, to detain them one
day longer. He was moreover enforced to give them his brother for their guide,
till such time as they should come into a safe abode, whilst he himself, with
those few which remained with him, retired to Perona.

The Orleanists who were resolved to fight, seeing him gone, went toward Paris
to endeavor an entrance into the Town, that they might possess themselves of
the Kings person, without which all their actions (though never so just) were
subject to perpetual blame, for the Princes presence in civil dissentions, is
only able to justify injustice, and make a fault meritorious; but it was
impossile for them to enter the Town, for the hatred the inhabitants bore unto
their father was not buried with him. They had better success in Saint Denis,
a Town not above two little leagues distant; where getting leave to come in,
they fortified themselves; receiving thereby much commodity to fight with the
Parisians. The Duke of Burgundy being during this time gone to Arras, found
there Thomas Earl of Arundell, together with Sir Gilbert and Sir Robert
Vmfreville, and Sir John Gray, who had brought unto him 1200. Archers, sent
unto him by King Henry. They had made a confederacy upon hopes of a marriage
between a daughter of the Dukes, and the Prince of Wales: with these and some
6000. more of his own men, he went to Pontoise, where he stayed, to augment
his army; which he easily might do: for the King having a few days before
proclaimed the Dukes of Berry, Orleans, and Burbon, the Counts of Virtue,
Angolesme, Alanson, and Arminiack, all to be traitors, Charles Albret likewise
and all adherents, the soldiers forsook them; of those that fled unto him the
Count Pontiure brother to the Duke of Britany his son in law, was one: having
assembled such people as he desired, he came with 15000. horse to Paris, and
was met by his brother the Count de Nevers, by the City, by the Council, and
at his entrance into the Louvre by the Dolphin his son in law. Having allowed
his soldiers a little rest, he sallied forth one night, and recovered Saint
Claude, which had been taken by the Orleanists: in which enterprise they used
so much slaughter, as that the Orleanists were likewise forced to quit Saint
Denis; going away by night with intention to return when they should be
reinforced. All that were taken prisoners were put to death; and the dead were
left for food to the fowls of the air, for no man offered to bury them, they
being by Pope Vrbans Bull excommunicated.

The Duke now thinking he had no more enemies to molest him, and 1412
that consequently he stood in no more need of the English, he discharged them,
to the much amazement of King Henry, who believed him to be a man of greater
judgment then this action showed him to be: for he ought to have detained
them, had it only been to have obliged Henry unto him, and to have diverted
him from joining with his enemies, as he afterward did; which he had not done,
had he not been free of him. The Orleanists had lost many strengths, so as
being reduced to extremities, not able to subsist of themselves, they threw
themselves into the protection of the King of England, who willingly embraced
their offers, which very advantageous to him, the articles of what they offered
and of his protection were these.

The Dukes of Berry, Orleans, and Burbon, the Counts of Alanson, and
Arminiacke, the Lord Albret and their adherents, did offer for ever hereafter
to expose their persons, goods, and forces, to the service of their King of
England, of his heirs, and successors, in all his just clames, as often as they
should berequired; by those words his just claims they intended, his claim
unto the Duchy of Guenne, and the appertenances thereof; and that the said
Duchy did by right of inheritance, and natural succession belong unto him,
declaring that they did not stain their loyalty by assisting of him in that
affair.

They offered their sons, and daughters, nephews, and neeces, parents,
allies, and subjects, to be married according to the good will and pleasure of
the forenamed King.

They offered their Cities, Castles and Treasures, and all their goods, in the
aid of him, his heirs and successors, in his pretentions and claims; their
loyalty always preserved; as was afterward declared in letters written, and
signed apart.

They offered to serve him with all their friends, kindred, and adherents in
his pretentions unto, and in the restitution of the said Duchy of Guenne.

They did acknowledge that the said Duchy did belong unto the King of England:
and that he ought to enjoy it with the same prerogatives, as any of his
predecessors had done.

They acknowledge that as many Cities, Castles and Strengths as they were
masters of in the said Duchy, they held them all of the King of England, as
being the true Duke of Guienne, offering to do him homage in most obsequious
manner.

They promised to give and surrender up into the hands of the King of England,
as much as in them lay, all the Cities and Castles which belonged to the
Crown, to the number of twenty, as in other letters drawn to this purpose was
declared.

For the other Cities and Forts which were not in their hands, they promised to
buy them out at their own proper cost and charges, and to assist the King of
England, and his heirs with a sufficient number of men.

It was declared to be the King of Englands pleasure (as in other letters
signed apart) that the Duke of Berry, his loyal Uncle, subject, and vassal,
the Duke of Orleans his subject and vassal, and Count Arminiacke should hold
of him in fee and homage the underwritten Towns and Lordships. The Duke, of
Berry the County of Poictou, during his life: The Duke of Orleans, the County
of Angolesme during his life, and Perigord for ever: Count Arminiacke, the
four Castles named in the aforesaid letters, upon condition and security
therein declared.

That moreover the King of England and Duke of Guienne should succor and
defend them all, against all, as their true Sovereign Lord; and in particular,
that he should help them to get due justice done upon the Duke of Burgundy.

That he should not make any confederacy or accord with the Duke of Burgundy,
his sons, brothers, kindred and confederates, without the consent of the said
Lords.

That he should assist them as his vassalls in any just quarrels, especially
in receiving satisfaction for the loss and injuries received by the Duke of
Burgundy, and his confederates.

That for the present he should send 8000. men to assist them against the said
Duke, who did all he could to incite the King of France, and his forces against
them.

These Articles were signed with a caution that they were to pay the soldiers
which the King should send; the which being taken into pay he gave the charge
of them to Thomas his second son, who was formerly created Duke, together
with his other two sons, and his brother the Earl of Dorset. Thomas was made
Duke of Clarence, John of Bedford, Humfrey of Gloucester, and Dorset of Exceter.
He gave likewise order to those who governed under him in Picardy, to wage
war there, the which they did. Whereupon the King of France, (who was then at
Sens, ready to pass into the Duchy of Berry with an army) gave order to the
Count Saint Paul to make thitherward, with as many people as he could get; the
which he did, not more out of obedience, then out of the mortal hatred he bore
to Henry: but little good came hereof, fortune being always averse unto him in
those expeditions. At his first arrival, the English retired to Bullin. The
Count resolved to set upon Guines, and to free himself from further troubles:
the Town was only strong by reason of the Castle. Its greatest strength was
the Palissadoe and the ditch: he hoped to take it by keeping it from being
relieved from Caleis. He planted himself by night between the two Forts with
600. horse, giving an assault upon break of day: the battle was very sharp,
neither side failing in their duties; but their forces not sufficing the
assaliants, thought to help themselves by fire; in one instant 40. houses were
seen to blaze. The defendants set upon both by sword and fire, got into the
Castle, from whence they powered down darts and stones: so as the winning of
the Town not sufficient to complete the victory, and the Castle not being to
be won by assault, they retired, many of them being hurt, but few slain, as
says Monstrelet. The King in this interim was gone from Sens, and having taken
some Towns which lay in his way, went to encampe himself under Burges, where
the confederates were. In his camp of all sorts, and for all services, were
100000. horse. The Duke of Berry, the more to incommodate the assaliants, had
caused all houses and Churches which were near the wall, to be beaten down;
and if some few remained unpulled down, they were not privileged: for the
insolences of soldiers, servants, and freebooters is not to be termed
military, but rather void of humanity and religion; a lamentable thing to any
one who is not blinded with passion, as was the Duke of Burgony. The Dolphin
duly considered all these discords, it greeved him that a City of such
consequence, the Metropolitan of two Provinces, Auvergne, and Berry, should be
ruinated out of private humors; and that it should be defaced and destroyed,
since it was one day to be his; so as remooving the camp, after a months
siege, he commanded the cannoniers upon pain of life not to shoot one shot
more without his command. At which the Duke of Burgony being troubled,
believing that he had compassion on his enemies, did what he could to persuade
him, that violence was the only means to reduce rebels to obedience: But
being severely answered, that too much had already been done, and that it was
time to forbear, those who desired an agreement, were much encouraged, and
concluded an agreement upon these conditions; That the peace at Shartres should
remain in its vigor and force; that the Count Virtue should marry the daughter
of the Duke of Burgony; that the Duke of Berry and his confederates should
surrender up all such Cities, and other places as the King should desire; that
he should renounce all confederacies, as well at home as forreiny, made against
the Duke of Burgony; that the King should restore all their Cities and strong
holds, not obliged to repair what was demolished; that their officers and
servants should be readmitted into their offices and possessions. And because
the brothers of Orleans were not present, their Agents promised for them. The
peace being sworn and proclaimed, command under pain of great punishment was
made, that the two factious names of Burgonians and Arminiackes should be no
more used. The Orleanists were so called: for when Count Arminiack joined with
them, his people and all that faction were by the common people called by this
name. This business being for this time thus stilled, the King went to
Auxerres, whither the Duke of Orleans and his brother the Count Virtue came.
They then swore the peace; they renounced all confederacy with England; they
accepted of the above said marriage, and showed tokens of reciprocal good
will, insomuch that the two enemy Dukes were seen to ride upon one and the self
same horse: Their former charges were to some restored. But Count Saint Paul
would not surrender up the Constables place. Whereupon the Lord Albret withdrew
himself ill satisfied from the Court. This peace was agreed upon before the
English landed in France, which was wisely foreseen by the Dolphin: for
agreement would not so easily have been made, if both the Nations joined
together had tasted the sweetes of any fortunate success. Their arrival was
first heard of in Normandy; next in the parts near Constantina, from thence in
du Main, and from thence in Touraine: all which places suffered such
inconveniences as are usually caused by enemies. Soldiers were every where
raised, whilst they only desired to be paid, the only means to make them
return home. But the Dukes of Berry and Orleans were so exhausted, as they
knew not how nor where to raise 200000. Crowns which they ought them. The King
of Sicily left the Court, and went to defend his Country of Aniou from their
incursions. The Earls of Warwick and of Kent, arrived at the same time with
2000. men at Caleis; who taking the garrisons of that Town to them, scoured
over all the Country of Bullen, and the parts adjacent; and although the
Counts Saint Paul's, Ramburres, and others, came thither with great numbers of
men, they were rather a greevance, then a help to the poor people of those
parts, who suffered such harm by them, as they could not do by the enemy. The
King being come to Paris, the Dukes of Berry, and of Orleans, remained with the
Queen at the Bois de Saint Vincennes: from whence waiting upon her to Paris,
Orleans (not entering into the Town) passed into the Country of Beaumont to
raise moneys. And though all other places were restored to him, yet could he by
no means get repossession of Perefont and Cousie, the which were held by the
Count Saint Paul, who denied to surrender them without a great sum of money,
due (as he said) to the garrisons there. Pretenses are never wanting where men
proceed not with clear intentions: but being necessitated to acquit himself
of the Duke of Clarence, he set aside all other affairs; and not able to pay
unto him the whole debt, he assigned over unto him in pawn for 209000. francks
which remained due to him, his brother the Count of Angolesme, (who was great
grandfather to Francis the first) and some other Lords, who being brought into
England remained there diverse years for lack of ransom. This being done, he
sent unto the King for the restitution of the aforesaid places; and obtained
letters and directions to that purpose; yet were they not delivered up unto
him: moreover fire breaking forth in Perefont it was almost burnt to the
ground. To this distaste others were added. The Duke of Burgundy caused
Bordinus of Saligni, formerly his favorite, to be carried prisoner into
Flanders, suspecting that he had revealed some of his secrets. The bastard of
Burbon ran a danger in Paris, the City rising up against him in favor of
certain insolences committed by a butcher. Offices which were to be restored,
were not, so as the conditions of peace thus ill observed, men rather inclined
to break it again, then to see it thus unworthily peeced. The Dolphin who
well weighed these alterations, grew somewhat cool toward his father in law,
the rather for that he was continually solicited by the Dukes of Bar, and
Bavieres, and by the Count Virtue, to take the government wholly upon himself,
and free himself from the servitude of being directed by others.

These broiles grew to no ripeness during Henry's life, and had they ripened,
he perchance would not have delighted in them, for he had 1413
changed his thoughts, and was returned to the same inclinations of nature
wherewith he was borne: for having reduced his Kingdom to quiet condition,
having no more occasion of being bloody or detested, his actions were grown to
that degree of temperance, as there remained nothing more to be desired in him.
Justice was administered without distinction of persons: He was affable,
liberal, courteous and pious; so as the Nobility and Commonalty did now as
much love, as they had formerly hated him, and having set his thoughts wholly
upon God, he resolved to spend the remainder of his life in his service, in the
recovery of the holy land: judging all other warfare misbecomming a Christian
Prince: He had no impediments likely to disturb him from his resolution: he
was free from the affairs of France, which he esteemed quieted by reason of
the last peace, a peace not likely to prejudice him: that Kingdom being so
divided within it self, as it could not hurt him; his own Kingdom was so
well united as he had no reason of fear there. The occasions of former
seditions were ceased, by the loss of their lives who were the chief
occasioners thereof: all ill humors were appeased by the death of such as were
the raisers of them. He had four sons all of them of great hopes. Scotland
had no King. The Duke of Aubenge to maintain himself in the government was
forced to peaceful resolutions. Wales was exhausted, and Glendor dead: so as
having made great preparation of Ships, Galleys, and Treasure, he thought
suddenly to embarke himself, when struck with a sudden Apoplexy, he was
forced to take a further journey. I believe that this his devotion touching
Jerusalem was occasioned by a preceding prophecy, (if it be true that is said)
that he should die in Jerusalem: for being taken with this sickness in the
Abbey at Westminster, and carried into the Abbots next house, as soon as he
was come unto himself, he enquired where he was and if that chamber wherein he
was had any particular name: Answer was made that he was in the Abbots house,
and that the chamber wherein he was, was called Jerusalem: Here said he must I
die: he was put to bed, and his Crown set upon a little table by the bed side:
His sickness continuing, and sezed by a violent syncope, all men thought he
had been dead. The Prince thinking so likewise, took the Crown and withdrew
himself into another chamber: but shortly after he came to himself again,
when missing his Crown, and being told that the Prince had taken it away, he
caused him be sent for, and asked him how he durst be so bold as to take that
which did not belong unto him? Sir (replied the Prince forthwith) I know the
Crown is none of mine so long as you live, and may your Majesty live long to
wear it: but all we who are here did think verily you were dead, and I being
your eldest son, and consequently your heir, took it as the chief thing of
mine inheritance. To the which words, the King (fetching a deep sigh) replied,
you say well my son: but for what concerns the Crown, God knows, with what
right I have enjoyed it. Be it as it will (replied the Prince) you got it by
the sword, and by the sword will I maintain it. The King more satisfied with
his sons noble resolution, then with his reason, recommended him to the
protection of the Almighty, and having given him good exhortations how to live
well, he died the 20. of March, Ann^ Domini, 1413. He reigned 13. years and a
half wanting five days. He was not borne a King, but did deserve to die one.

The end of the Second Book.
THE CIVIL VVARRES OF ENGLAND; IN THE LIFE OF HENRY the Fifth.
The third Book.
NO Prince was ever borne who did better deceive the Henry the 5.
common opinion held of him, then did Henry the fifth. For being in his youth
given to much deboychery, it was thought that when he should come unto the
Crown, he would have proved one of the most wicked Kings that ever ruled in
England. In his valor and daring he deceived none, but was therein always
the same: But such qualities, the more they do increase the hopes of good in a
Prince of hopeful expectation, the more do they increase the fears of evil
in a Prince from whom nothing of good is expected. What is virtue in the one,
is vice in the other; from which, as if illegitimate, cruelty, neglect and
tyranny do proceed. Henry was born the year 1388. Mary the daughter of Humfrey
Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Northampton, high Constable of England, was his
mother: the King his father being then but Earl of Derby. He was first
brought up at Oxford, where under the tuition of his uncle Henry Bewfort,
Chancellor of that University, and afterward Bishop and Cardinal: he grew up
in learning, wherein he gave signs of a good disposition, by putting an
esteem upon learned men; insomuch as when he came to be King, he made Thomas
Rodban, a famous Astronomer in those days, Bishop of Saint David's, and John
Carpenter a learned Divine, Bishop of Worcester, having known them both,
whilst he lived in the University. In the twelfth year of his age, when his
father came to the Crown, he called him from his studies, giving the Earl of
Worcester to him for Governor: who rebelling four years after, together with
his brother and nephew, affoorded him occasion of showing his valor in battle
against them: Where he so bravely behaved himself, as being hurt, he would
not quit the field, though he was much importuned so to do by those that had
the charge of him. After commanded by his father to pursue Owen Glendor in
Wales, he forced him (as some say) to dye of mere hunger. By which actions
having prematurely obtained the privilege of being man, and freed himself
from the superintendencie of others, he was at his own disposal, guided by
passions which sprung from the heat of blood; the which in a valiant daring
Prince (as was he) produced in the subjects, fear; and in the father
jealousy: although the relation between father and son, ought to be
composed of lesser jealousy then any other relation of friendship. But this is
not to be wondered at: for being borne to egregious acts, and his natural
inclinations accordingly framed, erring, he could not err in a mean degree,
or medium: mediocrity being an equal enemy to great wits, as well in good as
bad. Whence it happens, that changing humors, from best, they become worst;
and from extraordinarily bad, exceeding good. His deboystnesse though were not
such as are common to youth, nor subject to such desires as effeminating the
mind, and dissinewing the strength, have brought many Princes to misery, and
to be inwardly hated by their subjects; but certain sprightly extravagancies
caused by the incitations of his martial nature, which not knowing in those
years how to employ it self, chused lewd ways of employment. Amongst the
pure seeds of virtue which were in him, were certain grains of Darnell, which
did almost at the same time bud, and become barren. He took delight to lie
lurking in high ways, to steal from himself: for observing the times that
his tenants were to bring him home his rents, he would set upon them; yea
sometimes to the danger of his life; making them make good in their accounts as
much as had been stolen from them: neither could they defraud him; for he
himself knew best how much they had lost. And it they chanced to hurt or evil
treat him, he liked them the better. Businesses which in England undergo
death, are reduced to two heads: Felony and Treason. The last has respect to
the Princes person, and such things as do depend thereon. The other regards
civil affairs, as manslaughter, theft, and such like. It so fell out, that
one of his servants that used to accompany him in such like exploits, was taken
for felony: he came post to London to save him; and finding that at the very
instant he was carried to the Kings Bench bar to be condemned, he himself
went thither, and commanded the Goalers to take off his irons, and set him at
liberty. The Lord chief Justice, who at his coming had not stirred from his
seat, wished him to remember, that that was the seat of his father, King and
Sovereign: That his authority was not yet such as might force the freedom of
the Prisoner. Not that he did not know him to be Prince, and the Kings eldest
son, an high and powerful quality, but of no consequence in a business of
this nature, it being impossible for him to take from the hand of justice, to
the breach of the Law, one who was condemned to die, and more impossible for
himself to give way thereunto: he told him therefore he should do well to go
the usual way of obtaining pardon from the King.

The Prince impatient of contradiction, and who was naturally given to blows,
insomuch as he would disguise himself to seek occasion for them, gave the
Judge such a cuffe in the ear, as would have stunned any one who had been
less resolute then he: but the Judge neither frighted with the blow, nor
losing his former gravity, said unto him, That the misery done unto him sitting
on that seat, was an offense done unto the King, to whom, and to whose Laws,
he the Prince was doubly obliged; as a subject, and as a son. That though the
offense was great in it self. yet was it greater in his person, and of more
dangerous consequence: for when he should be King, he was not likely to find
any subject that would obey him, nor Judge that would execute those Laws which
he should enact, if he should permit his son and heir to violate them, as it
seemed he presumed the King his father would permit him to do: that therefore
to the end so enormous an example, might not be alleged for an example, as not
punished, he did in his Majesty's name commit him to the prison appropriated to
that bench, during his Majesty's pleasure. The lookers on, who were somewhat
scandalized, and surprised at the Princes action, and the Judges boldness,
wondered when they saw the Prince blush for shame, and yield himself prisoner.
The King who equally commended his sons obedience, and the Judges integrity,
for this and other his misdemeanors, suffered him to tarry a good while in
prison; and the more to humble him, excluded him from the Council table, and
made his brother the Duke of Clarence President thereof. But shortly being set
at liberty, he betook himself to his former fashions; insomuch as his house
being frequented by many great men, and such as were most refractory, his
father apprehended danger of an insurrection in him, a suspicion fomented by
such as know not how otherwise to win the Kings favor but by backbiting, nor
better how to make use of their flattery, then by a fained zeal of their
safeties, (the which the more detestable it is, the more dangerous is it for
such as are innocent) as likewise by his own remorse of conscience, which
objected unto him his usurping the Crown, the mischiefs, miseries, and so
many deaths which had thereon ensued: all which might open the way to any one,
much more to his son, (his presumed and declared heir) to bereave him of his
Crown. And though the reasons of aspiring thereunto, were no better then those
he had made use of to atchieve it, yet the detestation of things past which had
respect only to him, made him think it feasible. And his unjust jealousies
falsely grounded upon the Prince his ill nature, seemed unto him consonant to
reason, when they represented unto him the true reasons of his own misdeserts:
and since no love can be there where fear is, the signs of his hatred
conceived against some, were soon discovered by all men; but he who set his
private deboycheries aside, never imagined any thing of evil, neither against
his father nor the State, being advised by some of the privy Council that
loved him, what ill offices were done him, resolved to justify himself: the
which he did in the most strange and oddest manner that was ever heard of. He
was clothed in a suit of sky colored satin, all full of oylet holes, and
every oylet hole had a needle hanging at a piece of silk of the same it was
wrought withal: He had upon one of his arms, a masty dogs collar, studded
thus S. S. which were of massy gold, with buckles of the same. What he thereby
intended I know not, nor have I met with any who does explane the Allegory. He
was attended on by a great many, whereof some were Peers, the rest of the best
families of the land. Being come to Court, he left the most part of his
followers in the great Hall, with directions that they should come no further
then the chimney, attended on only by such as did belong unto the Court; he
did at unawares present himself before the King, who through his infirmities
had almost lost the use of his legs. He would have spoken unto him at his
first arrival, as he had formerly begged leave to do: but the King
considering the extravagancy of his habit, and not able to make any good
interpretation thereof, caused himself to be carried into a more inward room,
followed by such Lords as casually were at that time about him: the which I
think he rather did to gain time to think upon the business, then for any
fear he had: when his chair was set down, the Prince kneeling down before
him, said these or the like words, That the generally spread rumor of some
evil impressions his Majesty's had of him, caused by some who had deciphered
him unto his Majesty as one that had some plots upon the Crown and State, had
forced him thus to present himself, to the end that he might receive such
resolutions from him as might seem fittest for his service: That his past
behavior had been very bad, he did confess, for he would not deny a truth:
but since truth did permit him to gainesay those things which were now objected
unto him, he did deny them, for he could not affirm a falsehood. That his
obligations unto his Majesty, were greater then were those of his other
subjects; so as where he should have deserved the highest punishment if he
should have offended him as a private subject, no sufficient punishment could
be invented for him, if being his son, he should together with the Laws of
God and man, have violated the Laws of nature. That worldly Laws being
grounded upon punishment, and fear, and the Laws of nature grounded only upon
love, he deserved not to have any share in the world, who (destitute of love)
should abuse the subsistence and constitution of nature. That therefore if
there were neither Law humane nor divine, this only Law of nature would be
sufficient to make him be the most detested creature in the world, if he should
not with sincere love, reverence* and with reverend respect love his Majesty
his gracious father: The which he did not say to justify, but rather to
condemn himself, if he should be arrived at such a height of wickedness, as
not to detest the unspeakable wickedness, which never having entered his breast,
was by the malice of his accusers, hellishly invented against him. That though
it were an easy matter to convince them, since they could never prove what he
never dreampt of, yet he was not come for that purpose. That he did present
himself as guilty, since he was declared to be such, not by his own
conscience, but by his Majesty's deluded opinion: that therefore since it was
impossible for him to live without insufferable anguish of mind, being subject
to such suspicions, he beseeched his Majesty to free him from further vexation
with this weapon. Then presenting unto him a dagger by the point, he added,
That he would willingly suffer death, if it might cause such quiet unto his
Majesty, as his Majesty did believe. That he should not hold his hand out of
any consideration of his soul, for he had begged mercy of God, and taken his
Christian viaticum; much less out of fear, that this might be imputed as a
sin unto his Majesty, for being already satisfied of the humane justice in
punishing a guilty person worthy of whatsoever chastisement, for what concerned
divine justice, he did promise him (in the presence of those Lords who were by)
to be his advocate before the Tribunal of the supreme Judge, in that
fearful and terrible day when the secrets of all hearts being known, his
Majesty and himself, in the chariot of his innocence, should triumph over the
calumnies of other men. The speech being ended, the King threw away the dagger,
and with tears of joy embraced and kissed him, and confessed he had done
amiss in believing otherwise of him then he ought to have done. He assured
him that for the time to come, he would be deaf to all such as should dare to
speak against him. But the Prince not herewithall contented, humbly beseeched
his Majesty to bring his accusers to the test, that either they or he might
receive condign punishment. The King satisfied in the innocence of his son,
and unwilling that those who were zealously his, should be punished, appeased
his son, saying, that since this business was to be judged by the Peers of
the Land, nothing could be done therein till the next Parliament, and that then
he should receive such satisfaction, as he justly did demand. Then sweetning
him with entreaties, and fair speeches, he made him quit his request, and kept
him in his good opinion as long as he lived. These and the like actions
generally held dissolute, afforded reason of bad presages, as has been
formerly said, But as soon as he put on the Crown, he turned another leaf,
and became excellent in all such virtues as make a Prince famous in peace, and
redoubted in war. A change by how much the more rare, the more admired, since
thereby the worst of men do prove the best, and types of virtue. He first of
all like a good husband purged his house of all uncleanness, and not content
to have swept from thence all his deboisht companions he did not only forbid
them his sight, and further company, but banished them from coming within
ten miles of the Court. He put in their places persons of exemplary lives.
He placed in his seats of Justice, and in his Council, men worthy of such
trust, and joining piety to his policy, he founded Monasteries, and brought the
body of Richard the second, from an obscure sepulcher in Langley, to
Westminster, where he caused him with regal pomp to be put in a tomb built
at his own charge, and Lady Anne of Bohemia his first wife, by him. He sent
Ambassadors and Bishops to Constantia, to endeavor in that Council an end of
the Schism which had then a long time lasted; and where not long after in
stead of three Popes, who reigned altogether, Martin the fifth was chosen Pope,
to the great joy of all Christendom. He referred the Lord Cobham who was
accused of herefie, to the Ecclesiastical Courts, having given him friendly
admonitions (for he had formerly loved him by reason of his valor) from whence
being committed over to secular Jurisdiction, he was to have received his last
punishment, had he not by some of his friends been secretly conveyed out of
the Tower. But that which for the present befell not him, happened to diverse
others, for many of his opinion having seditiously assembled themselves, and
accused of conspiracy, so many of them were taken, as the prisons were not able
to contain them, and nine and twenty of the chiefest of them (where one was a
Priest) were put to death; the like befalling himself four years after, who
was taken about the borders of Wales, and hanged and burnt. He restored Henry
Percy, son to Henry hot spur, to his Lands and Honor, having sent for him
back from Scotland, whither he was for safety sent in the downfall of his
family, he thought it not fit that so noble blood should suffer punishment in
the person of a child, who being of so innocent years, ought not to partake of
his forefathers faults. It was easy for him to restore unto him his lands,
which the King his father had given to John his third son, whom he
recompensed with an equivalent revenue. Thus he ended the first year of his
reign, in the beginning whereof the Duke of Clarence, who was then in
Aquitany, hearing of his fathers death, returned home to England, and brought
along with him John Count of Angolesme, together with the other hostages
assigned over for the Duke of Orleans debt, and was by the King received with a
brotherly affection.

The Clergy had been practiced upon in King Henry the fourths time, by reason
of their great revenues, as being superfluously larger then was requisite for
them. In the eleventh year of his reign mention was made in Parliament that
they would have been cause of much scandal if the civil wars had not been.
The wars being at this present at an end, and men's minds more eager of this
then formerly, it was thought good not to lose the opportunity of time: For
since the King was addicted to war, it behoved him to raise unto himself a
permanent revenue, to the satisfaction of the whole Kingdom. A calculation was
made, that leaving to the Clergy what was sufficient for them, the overplus of
their revenues was sufficient to maintain fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred
Knights, six thousand two hundred Gentlemen, and an hundred Hospitalls, besides
twenty thousand pound a year reserved for the Kings Exchequer; which twenty
thousand pound was more then, then an hundred thousand pound would now be. A
calculation, which whether true or false, proved a true danger to the Clergy.
The remedy was easy, the combination being general, the advantage common to
all: for the King, Nobility and Commonalty were to share in what was to be
taken from them. A Parliament was called at Leicester, wherein they were
threatened. They thought to eschew the blow by making some great offer; but if
it should not be accepted of, (for be it what they pleased, it must be much
inferior to what was expected from them) they ran a hazard of defamation; as
corrupters of the Prince, and so to lose together with their wealth, their
reputation, which in so great a loss ought to be kept unspotted for the
dignity of their profession, and not to give a color of reason to the wrong
they were to receive. Every one thought the Kings warlike inclination would be
the Canon which should batter them to pieces; but he not having as yet made
choice of an enemy (war with France would be of a vaste expense; Scotland was
nearer hand, and easier to be invaded, James the first their King being
prisoner in England) they thought that his pretentions to the Crown of France,
as most proportionate to the greatness of his mind would serve for an
argument, and that by persuading him to that enterprise, they should stay the
proposition which was to be made against them. The Parliament being met, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, a Chertosin Monk, failed not in a well ordered
speech opportunely to propound it: his principal heads were, the equity of his
Majesty's pretentions, the honor of the King, the reputation of the State, and
the occasions now offered of making it feasible, by reason of the troubles that
Kingdom was in. In the first he showed how the King was the natural ancient
heir of Normandy, Angier, Poictou, Umena, and Gascony, of all which he now
possessed only a little part of Gascony. That being heir to Edward the third,
he was likewise heir to France, otherwise the title which he thereof assumed
would be unjust. He declamed against the Salique Law, as invented in those
days, only to exclude England, no mention being made thereof in Chronicles or
other memorialls; but since I cannot give you the very words, the story
necessary requires me to show you the Law in a rough draught, to the end that
you may examine the late undertakings of Edward the third, or the present ones
of this Henry against that Kingdom, be justifiable or no.

Edward the second, King of England, married Isabell, daughter to Philip the
fair King of France. Philip, besides this his daughter Isabell, left three
sons, Lewis Hutin, Philip the long, and Charles the fair: all which reigned
Kings one after another; and though Lewis left a daughter named Jane, and his
wife with child of a son (which soon after dyed) and that Odone Duke of
Burgony Uncle by the mother side to Jane, did what in him lay to make her
succeed unto her father; yet Philip the long her Uncle (who was crowned in
Rheims whilst armed, and the gates shut) having then four daughters, did by
marriage appease those Princes who did oppose him; giving his eldest daughter
to this Duke of Burgony, together with the County of Burgony (the which by her
mother did belong to the said Jane) and to Lewis Count of Eureux (the most
pote^ Prince of all the adversaries) he gave the same Jane, and for her
portion the Kingdom of Navarre, the County of Brye, and Shampania, so as the
business thus laid asleep, and he afterward dying, Charles succeeded him,
not interrupted by Jane, since her giving way to her other Uncle, passed as a
ruled case. Charles dyed, leaving his wife with child; Edward the third, King
of England, who was nearest of blood, as borne of Isabell, sister to these
three Kings, pretended to the regency, in case the child the Queen went withal
should live, if otherwise, to the Crown: On the other side, Philip Count of
Vallois, son to Ch^rles, who was brother to Philip the fair, made the like
pretense, as nearest heir male, alleging that the Law Salique which did
exclude the women, did likewise exclude such sons as were by them borne.
Whereupon the three States gathered together, Philip got the regencie, and the
Queen Dowager bringing but a daughter, the Kingdom. Edward alleged in his
behalf, that this law was never known till then, and then invented to
defraude him of succession, no mention being made thereof in the memory of man,
nor by any whatsoever ancient Authentic writer. That to give it a being when
it had none, and cause it to rise up in one night like a mushrome, was likely
not only not to give it a subsistence, but also to make it not to be credited.
That he did not deny the succession of the male in all times past, but that
the succession of the female sex had not happened to the Crown till these
present times. That the relinquishment made by Jane to her own prejudice, and
pursued without his consent or knowledge, ought not to prejudice him, nor ought
it be concluded that she having laid aside her claim to the prejudice of a
third, the third should likewise quit his claim to the prejudice of
succession. That she had yielded by force, being doubly betrayed by her Uncle,
that he mig^t usurp the Country of Burgony; and by her husband that he might
make himself King of Navarre: both of them being contented with the certainty
of this gain, the hopes which they might promise unto themselves by war,
being uncertain and of less account. That if the Law were fundamental (as
they would have it believed to be) it would not have been violated in the two
first races. That in the first 1.
race, the French writers made a doubt whether Morevius were the son of
Claudian or not, and that if he were not his son, it is to be believed (say
they) that he was his next a kin; which is as much as to conjecture the one,
and doubt of the other. They affirm him to have succeeded not so much by
virtue of the Laws, as by the free election of the States, not being aware
that the term free election does contradict the Law Salique, it being
impossible that there should be any sort of election (much less free) where
the Laws do determine an undoubted successor, otherwise one of two
inconveniences would necessarily ensue, either that the election should annull
the Law, or the Law make the election superfluous, the next in blood (all
others excluded) being by the Law without election appointed to the Crown.
That it cannot be denied that when Childericus 2.
was driven out of the Kingdom, Aegidius a Citizen of Rome was chosen King,
and that his son Siagrius, after the death of Childericus (who was received
as King again) did pretend unto the Crown by virtue of his fathers election,
which he never would have done had there been such a Law to oppugn him.
Clodoveus left four sons, of which one was a bastard; they were all called
Kings, not only of such proportions 3.
as was left unto them by their father, but of all France, whilst the Law
Salique supposes but one King, and does not admit of bastards. Dagobert left
the Crown of France to Clodoveus the second, his younger son; 4.
and to Sigisbert his eldest son, the Kingdom of Austracia, without any
manner of dispute; whilst that the Law Salique aims not so much at the
exclusion of women, as to the advantage the first borne son should have over
the younger. The same Sigisbert having no sons, adopted 5.
the son of his Lord Steward, which he never would have done, had there been
any Law Salique.

Dagobert the second left two sons behind him, and yet a Friar 6.
was taken out of a Monastery, and Crowned by the name of Chilpericus the
second.

Charles Martellus deposed him, put Dagoberts two sons into a 7. and 8.
Cloister, and made Coltarius the fourth be Crowned, who being afterward
deposed, the two brothers reigned Kings one after another.

Pipin deposed Childericus, and made himself King, though no Prince of the
blood, and come of a bastard. Many other examples are 9
passed over, which happened amongst the Kings of this first race, contrary to
this Law, in successions, hereditance, and last wills and Testaments.

In the second race, Lewis the stammerer, was succeeded by Lewis and 10
Charlemaine, both bastards, and the latter by another Lewis, whether brother
or son to Charlemaine it is not known.

This man was succeeded by Charles the great, King of Bavaria, and 11
Emperor, but being deposed by the Dutch from being Emperor, and by the
French from being King, Odone Duke of Angiers, of the house of Saxony was
substituted in his place.

Charles the simple being deposed, and his son Lewis being together 12
with his mother fled into England, Rowland of Burgony obtained the Crown.

Lastly Hughe Capet having taken the succession from Charles Duke of 13
Lorraine, second son to the last mentioned Lewis, which fled into England,
having thence the name of beyond sea Lewis, brother to Lotarius, and Uncle to
Lewis the fifth, the last King of that race, leaves it to our choice to think
what we please of that Law.

No mention is made of any women in these two races, because the case in their
behalf was not met withal: but say the case had been found, and that by
reason of the rigorous practice of the Law, women have not dared to pretend
unto the Crown; by the same reason those who had been excluded would not have
dared to have made any such pretense: if the institution of the Law had been
thus put in practice. Neither would Jane daughter to Lewis Hutin, have dared to
pretend unto the Crown, had there been any such thing as the Law Salique. But
if there be any argument which proves the falsehood of this Law, it is the
confusion of writers, who neither agree in the name nor in the author, nor in
the place where it was made. A modern writer will not have it called the
Salique, but the Gallique Law. The more ancient writers denominate it from the
River Sala, from the latin word Sal, contrary to the putrefaction, or from the
French word Sale, which is the Hall or Palace of a Prince. Some make the
ancient Dukes and Counselors in Germany the authors of it: And some Faramond,
in France, so as they leave us nothing of certainty, whereas a fundamental Law
ought to be certain, and not imaginary in its foundation.

They produce some reasons to justify this Law, which no ways appertain
thereunto, whereof three are the chiefest. That the Crown may be established
in its own Nation, by the exclusion of strangers. That Posthumes may be
reverenced even in their mothers womb, and notwithstanding their infancy, made
Kings: and that nature affects the masculine inheritance, which was the cause
why the Jews permitted no succession to women. The first reason would surely
be good, if together with its utility it were likewise just, if the Law had
been made in the beginning of the Monarchy, or in a time when it had not been
to any one injurious, there could be nothing said against it: but being sprung
up in an instant, never written nor spoken of before, it becomes very bad, not
only as false but as fained to the prejudice of natural heirs, and the
utility thereof proves the injustice, since what is useful, and what is just,
if not always, are for the most part contraries. Laws were instituted to
curb unhonest utility, which if suffered, there would be no safe commerce, nor
living in the world. The second reason is in part superfluous, in part false:
superfluous, because younger brothers, though Posthumes are preferred before
their elder sisters, even in those Kingdoms where women do inherit: false,
because between Lewis the stammerer, and Charles the simple, who was his
Posthume, there reigned four Kings, Lewis and Charlemaine both bastards,
another Lewis and Charles the great; which proves it not true that they are
made Kings notwithstanding their infancy: The third contains two points, that
the masculine inheritance is according to nature, and that the Jews did never
at any time permit inheritance to women: The one and the other false. They
confound nature, and her institutions, with fortune, and the institutions of
civil Laws, taking nature otherwise then she ought to be taken, for she ought
to be considered in her pure principal, not in the accidents which do
accompany her: then thus considered, nature cannot (were she thereunto willing)
exclude the female sex from inheriting, since she has no other form of
government, then what concerns the father of a family: Moreover, women being
conceived, borne and brought up as are men, it was never his intent who made
them equal in generation, to make them inferior in conservation; which he
should do, if the goods of fortune (by means whereof we live after the
introducing of civil Laws) and the municipall Laws (whereby they are
differently regulated) depended upon nature, so as who does exclude them, does
it by virtue of these Laws, as are likewise in diverse places excluded, the
second borne, though men. That the Jews did not permit inheritance to women,
is likewise false, read the 27. Chapter of Numbers, where you will find God
said unto Moses, The daughters of Zelophead spoke right, and that he should
give them a possession of inheritance among their fathers brethren, and that he
should speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man dye and have no
son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter; and if he
have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren; and if
he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his fathers
brethren; and if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his possession
unto his kinsman that is next unto him of his family. Moreover, Jesus Christ
was the son of David according to the flesh, by the woman's side, not the
man's. The Archbishop having with these and the like demonstrations, made good
the pretense to France, and consequently the war, he added three examples
which argue against the antiquity of this Law. Pepin and Hughe Cappet, to make
their usurpation justifiable, endeavored to prove their descents, the one from
Betilda, daughter to Clotarius the first, the other from Lingarda, daughter to
Charlemaine, and Saint Lewis had never peace of mind till such time as he was
certified that Isabell his grandmother by the mothers side; was the lawful
heir of Emendarda, daughter and heir of Charles Duke of Loreine; for being
conscious to himself, that the Dukes exclusion from the Crown, was unjust, he
thought himself not rightly possessed of the Kingdom, save in the right of
his grandmother, upon whom the rights of Charles fell, and consequently upon
him, as heir to her. At last he made his intended offer in general terms,
promising that if the King would resolve upon this enterprise, the Clergy would
give him such contributions, as greater were never given by them to any of his
predecessors.

This enterprise, the reasons thereof, and the offer made by the Archbishop,
did so far prevail with the King, as that Ralphe Nevill, Earl of
Westmerland, Lord Warden of the Marches, confining upon Scotland, fearing lest
the King would be persuaded thereunto, and that by taking along with him the
flower of all the soldiers, small forces would remain with him to oppose the
endeavors of that Kingdom, did thus oppose himself to what the Archbishop
had said. He confessed the enterprise to be just and honorable, but dangerous
and full of hindrances. He showed that preposterous proceedings were the
overthrow of all undertakings, and that to fight with France before that
Scotland was subdued, was the most preposterous course that could be taken.
That to make trial of fortune in a foreign Estate, whilst the State at home
was subject to alterations, was a resolution no ways agreeing with wisdom.
That it was to be believed that Scotland that had never let slip any
advantageous occasion, would much less pass by this so fair a one, presented
unto them, by the Kings absence, and the absence of the chief of the Chivalry
of England. That though it were granted, that Scotland being without a King,
and in some sort divided within it self, might in likelihood be careless in
other affairs, yet would it not neglect this, as not permitted so to do by
their ancient confederacy; and when they were not by obligation tied to this,
yet moneys, assistance, and chiefly their own safeties would force them unto
it, since it was not to be doubted that the diversion of Scotland being one of
Frances chiefest defenses, the French would not abandon her: for if she should
be lost, or weakend, they themselves would suffer a great loss, and diminution
of strength. Since then her safety, obligation, and so many other several
obligations were in question, upon the which her good or bad did depend, she
would not stand idle: The which being granted, it would necessarily follow,
that the one war would produce the other: with this difference, that France
could assist Scotland but in part, whereas Scotland could totally assist her:
France could not so fully assist Scotland by reason of her distance, and that
her aides would be weakened by pawses and interruptions they might meet with by
the way; and that by reason of her infirmities she was unfit to make a
diversion by open war; that Scotland on the other side was not only free
from these inconveniences, but sure to make an open diversion, notwithstanding
whatsoever opposition; so as making war with Scotland, though she might be
strengthened by auxiliary forces (which are always hateful, and full of
jealousies) yet one only war was made, and in France two: for since his
Majesty could not pass over the sea without weakening England, it would so fall
out, as being infested he must be forced to quit the war with France, and
undertake the other, which at first ought to have been undertaken: the which
could not be done without the loss not only of reputation, but of much
treasure, which would there be fruitlesly spent. That the events of war
being doubtful, the least difficult was to be chosen: so as rather then to
think of conquering France whilst Scotland might divert them, they should hope
to conquer Scotland: if England being free from foreign diversions, should
bring all her strength against those parts only: otherwise she were likely to
find to her cost, that to buckle with an united body, separated from the sea,
of insufferable expense, with a thousand hazards of fortune, sickness, winds,
deaths, want of victuals, and munition, would prove infinitely dangerous; the
rather for that she should leave behind her an indefatigable warlike enemy;
which was not likely to meet with any incommodity (supplies being to be had in
every house) not subject to winds, nor tempests, in a time when that Kingdom
being without a King, and ill satisfied with the government, she was to be
presumed not able to withstand so valorous an undertaking. And if Edward the
thirds past victories in France, and those of the black Prince his son, did
render men's minds confident, let them remember that fortune was fickle, and
that those who dreampt that the world was eternal, did not fancy to themselves
that all things should return to their former condition till after the slow
revolution of 36000. years, he concluded that if England would make a
successive war in France, she must first conquer Scotland.

These two opinions might have been balanced, had it not been for the third
Marquis Dorset, the Kings Uncle, which overthrew the latter of the two: This
Gentleman was a good Scholar, for the Duke of Lancaster his father (who
thought to have destined him to the Church) had caused him to be brought up to
his book, the which being added to his travells in diverse Countries,
especially in Italy, had settled his understanding, which guided by the two
great Masters, speculation and practice, could not choose but render him
perfectly wise; he repeating what had bin alleged by the Earl, and arguing
against the reasons he had brought, showed that Scotland had the same relation
to France, as boughs to the tree: the Nobility of Scotland being maintained by
pensions from her, and the young men thereof bettered by her military
discipline, so as to take away the bud, you must cut down the tree: that give
the conquest of Scotland for granted, more difficulties would be met withal
in the keeping of it, then in the defending the borders of England, whilst
war was made elsewhere: for Scotland being in some parts inaccessable, in
other parts savage, and wholly an enemy, would continually produce some new
motions, being encouraged by assistance, and moneys from beyond the seas: That
she had never endangered England in former times, upon the like occasions, but
had bin sufficiently endamaged. That Malkin was slain whilst he would make use
of William the seconds absence, who went to wage war in Normandy; and David
Bruce was taken prisoner whilst Edward the third was at the siege of Caleis:
that it is true the like does not always happen, but that therefore worse
success should not be feared, whilst the enemies forces are not augmented, nor
our own diminished; the which was now so far from being so, as that they were
without a King, and in a molested government, whilst France was in no better
estate; for to boot with the war which would distract her, she was molested
by the infirmity of her head, and the corrupted humors of her principallest
members; That France did afford many advantages to whosoever should assault
her, as seated in a climate abounding with all good things: whereas the
sterility of Scotland afforded nothing but inconveniences, sufficient to beat
back her assaliants. That England could but for a while keep footing there,
being to be beaten back by the two urgent pieces of artillery, cold and
hunger: That wit and valor would there lose the day, enforced not by
problematicall fables, of fatality, and destiny, but by the real and apparent
necessity of nature; since then no invasion was to be feared from thence, to
what purpose should the enterprise thereof be undertaken, if being subdued it
would neither cause less peace nor more trouble, then whilst left at liberty
war might be elsewhere made? for being fenced by the situation, sterility,
its own and other forces, it would always afford occasion of beginning
afresh, to the end it might never begin, much less ever make an end with
others. That therefore to leave the confines well guarded, and take in hand what
was propounded, was the only resolution now to be taken, as that which alone
was conformable to the justice of the cause, the reputation of the King, and
the reason of arms, since England should never think to subdue Scotland, if
she did not first subdue France.

No sooner had the Marquis expressed his reasons, but the Parliament did
unanimously agree upon the war with France, so far forgetting the business
of the Clergy, as no man thought any longer of it. The King having created his
two brethren John, and Humfrey, Dukes, the one of Bedford, and the other of
Gloucester, and the forenamed Marquis, Duke of Exeter: following the wonted course
of first denouncing war, before the undertaking of it, dispatched away this last
Duke, together with the Admiral Gray, the Archbishop of Dublin, and the Bishop
of Norwich, as Ambassadors to France, whither they went, accompanied with 600.
horse, and were received with great pomp, and royally feasted by King Charles,
who finding himself then well disposed, would in their presence run at tilt
against the Duke of Alanson. The jollities being over, in solemn audience they
demanded of him the restitution of the Crown, together with such Provinces as
did of old belong unto the inheritance of the Kings of England, namely the
Duchess of Aquitany, Normandy, and Angius, the Counties of Poictou, and Vinena,
with this caution, that if he would give unto King Henry, his daughter
Katherine, together with the aforesaid Dutchies and Counties for a portion,
that then he would lay aside all other pretenses; but if he did deny this, then
Henry was resolved to do what in him lay by force of arms to repossesse
himself of his right. These demands were long advised upon, to find out the
marrow of the business, but the Ambassadors standing firm to the conditions
agreed upon between John King of France, and Edw^rd 3. King of England, at
Bretigny; answer was made, that a business of so great weight was not to be
answered in an instant; That as soon as it would be maturely discust, the King
would send his resolution by express Ambassadors of his own. King Henry took
this delay, as an express denial, and sent word unto the Dolphin, who had
sent unto him a chest of tennis balls (as who should say he thought him only
fit for sport) that within few months he would requite his present, and restore
unto him balls of iron, for balls of clouts, which should be so tossed as
France should have small reason to glory in her good walls. And losing no
longer time, he began to raise moneys, munition, victuals, artillery, and
soldiers, and hired a great number of ships from Holland and Zealand, for his
transportation. King Charles was this mean while relapsed into his accustomed
trances, so as the Dolphin understanding what preparations King Henry made, did
himself likewise prepare for war, not forbearing though to send him a
solemn Embassy (as was by the Council resolved on) by the Duke of Vandosme
and Archbishop of Burges. Their instructions were to approve of the marriage,
and to propound in portion certain territories of no great consequence,
supplied by a great sum of money, upon condition that all other pretenses
abandoned, peace might ensue. The King who was at Winchester, going to his
army, when he understood their arrival stayed there to give them audience,
the which he publicly did, and after having feasted them at his own table, he
by the Archbishop of Canterbury answered them, that if the King of France would
give unto him his daughter, endowed with the Dutchies of Aquitany, Normandy,
and Aniou, and Touraine, and the Counties of Poictou, Vinena, together with the
rest that the Kings his predecessors had by right of inheritance possessed in
France, he would accept of her, and peace: if otherwise, he would endeavor to
acquire them by force, and together with them the Crown, which did of right
belong unto him. This being with much impatiency heard by the Archbishop of
Burges, who could not hide his anger, he desired leave to speak freely;
whereunto the King giving way, with an inflamed countenance, and angry voice,
he said, That if he did believe the King his Master had made him this offer,
as fearing his forces, he believed amiss; it was the compassion of Christian
blood that had moved him to it; that he erred in his presumption, to think
that he alone was able to injuriously oppress the noblest and most redoubted
King of Christendom, who by his own forces and those of his subjects and
friends, was not only likely to resist him, but to take him prisoner, and kill
him, and to expose such as should follow him to the scorn and fury of the
French Nobility; he further desired a safe conduct that they might return
without molestation, and for ought else they would not trouble him. The King
who with much patience had listened to what the Archbishop said, replied, That
he was nothing at all affrighted at his anger, much less at its being
sustained by the forces he alleged. That his claim was known to all the
world, and by them themselves, though they feigned the contrary. That the power
of their King was to them as the morning twilight, whilst they had not seen
the noontide of his strength: That if Charles had subjects and friends he
thanked God he lacked none. That he should be consident that ere long the
highest Crown of their Country should be forced to bow to him, and the proudest
Miter (meaning the Archbishop) to bend the knee before him. That they should
say to the usurper Charles their Master, in his behalf, that within three
months he would come into France, not as into a strangers house, but as into
his own lawful patrimony, to vanquish it by the sword, not boasting words.
That they might be gone with this answer, which he would give unto them under
his hand and seal, as likewise their safe conduct, the only thing of reason
they had required of him. As Soon as they were gone, the first thing he did,
was to secure the consines upon Scotland, by adding to the Earl of
Westmerland, the Lord Scroope, Lord Greystock, and Sir Robert Vmfrevill. The
last of which desirous to try his fortune, set upon the enemy of Godering,
where he slew 600. of them, and took 300. prisoners; whilst the King sent a
Herald into France with new letters of defiance, who having access unto the
Council, but not unto the King, departed with this reply, That answer should
be made in time and place convenient.

The King was a shipboard in Antona, when he was informed that the Earl of
Cambridge, the Lord Henry Scroope, and Sir Thomas Gray, had conspired his
death. This was the only mischief undertaking against him (though in vain)
by the raging blood of Civil ware. More certainly would have been endeavored
had it not been for the wars with France, which hindered such attempts;
whilst it served for a cauter to the bad humors of England. This Princes
misfortunes were put over to those that followed him; for the cautery being
closed up after his death, produced such sickness, as slew his son and
grandchild, as we shall see in the second Volume.

The three Conspirators were apprehended. The first was grandsonne to Edward
the third, cosen german to Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, and
brother to the Duke of York; a Prince of great expectation; one of whom
England and the King himself, did promise unto themselves deeds worthy of his
birth in these present occasions, he easily confessed (I will not say) the
truth, but that which being likely to be true, redounded to his advantage that
it should be believed. He confessed that he and the other two had been bribed
by great sums of money received by the way of anticipation, which caused them
resolve (since it was impossible for them to deliver him alive into the French
men's hands) to kill him, before he should set footing in Normandy. This did
very much afflict the King: he thought it improbale that men of so great
fortunes should be capable of so base corruption: for in his person they
betrayed their Country, exposed the very flower of England to the slaughter,
and cut the very nerves of the fortune of the land. He bewailed the fault, but
did not perceive the true occasion of the treason, which if he had done, he had
perhaps by rooting out the house of York, prevented the ruin which was a
framing against his house of Lancaster. But humanity attains not to the secrets
of above; and if it did, it is not wise enough to divert the wisdom of heaven.
God is as well the reward of good in thousands, as he is the punisher of evil
in the third and fourth generation. In Richard the 2. he punished the death of
Edward the second. In Henry the sixth and his son, the death of Richard the
second. In Edward the fifth and his brother, the death of Henry the sixth and
his son. And in Richard the third, the death of Edward the fifth and his
brother; and yet he was pleased to suffer those to dye in peace which were the
authors thereof. I would not place Edward the third in this number, if his
mothers fault did not in some sort lay upon him the aspersion of parricide.
Henry the fourth, who murdered Richard the second, and Edward the 4. who
murdered Henry the sixth, remained all unpunished. But to Richard the second he
denied life, and perhaps repentance, his inhumanity not deserving successor,
nor pardon. And though he died a violent death, yet not so ill as he deserved,
for who does live through cruelty, should through cruelty die. It was not
credited that the Earl of Cambridge was corrupted by France (as he himself
said) but of his own accord: for being married to Anne, great grandchild to
Lionell Duke of Clarence, and sister to Edmond Earl of March, to whom the
Crown did of right belong, his design was to kill the King, and his brethren,
that so he might make his brother in law, King, who having no children, nor in
a capacity of having any, he and his son were to succeed in the right of
Anne, so as fearing lest to confess the truth, might endanger his heirs life,
he framed this fable, He and his accomplices were beheaded. And though he was
pitied by all, yet his resolving upon so wicked a deed, in the nicke of so
important a business, to the common loss and danger, did much abate their
commiseration: for his death was thought expedient for the life and safety of
King and and subjects. Walsingham writes, that the Lord Scroop, Lord Treasurer
(whose hypocrisy had won so much of credit with the King, that nothing was
done without his approvall) was he who was corrupted by the Ambassadors of
France, and that the other two received their infection from him. That the
Ambassadors being returned home, reported that they had so ordered the
business, that King Henry was as then either diverted from the enterprise of
France, or slain. A manuscript cited by John Speed says, that the King of
France gave them a million of Crowns, that they might either kill him, or
deliver him up prisoner into his hands, and that the Earl of Cambridge
desirous to draw the Earl of March unto his party, revealed the design unto
him, forcing him by threats to swear secrecy; and that having obtained one
only hour for resolution, the Earl of Marsh accused him unto the King. The
sentence of death which in history is recorded, says, That it was so wrought,
as that the Earl of Marsh should take upon him the government of the Kingdom,
in case Richard the 2. were dead (there remained still an opinion that he was
yet living in Scotland) and that he should be proclaimed heir to the Crown in
opposition to Henry of Lancaster, usurper. The which does partly correspond
with the manuscript, as likewise that the Earl of Marsh was the accuser: it
being probable, that having no children, and void of ambition, and of a
peaceful condition, he would not hazard his life to satisfy his brother in
laws ambition. But it is not possible that the King of France should have
paid this money; for if so, it would have been found after the delinquents
death, and some mention would have been made thereof. Moreover the revenues of
France in those days not amounting by much to so great a sum, it must of
necessity either be taken out of an already gathered treasure, or from the
common peoples purse, not from the treasury; for Princes lay up treasure only
in peace, and by good government, both which were a long time unknown to that
Kingdom. Not from the purse of the common people, for it was impossible in
such an instant, and with so much secrecy to have drawn it from them. So as
for what appears to me, the reasons alleged in their sentence ought most to
be believed, the rather for that King Henry did never upbraid King Charles, nor
the Crown of France with so ignominious an act.

The truce between these two Kingdoms ended the second of August, whereupon
such English as were in the garrison of Calleis, and other frontiers of
Picardy, were the first who began the war, sallying forth the very next day,
sacking the frontiers of Bolonia, and places next adjacent. Five thousand
soldiers under the command of Monsieur de Rambures, general of the
crossebow-men, were sent to defend the Country. But King Henry did not weigh
anchor till some days after, and came to Normandy the Eve of the Annunciation.
His fleet consisted of 1500. ships, his army of 6000. men of arms, and 24000.
Bowmen, furnished with all such artillery and provisions, as humane diligence,
and the power of so great a King could assemble for such a design. He cast
anchor at Cape Caux, and landed without resistance, having by public
proclamation commanded that neither Church, Monastery, women, children, nor any
other person whosoever that had no arms, should be molested upon pain of
life. The next day he went to sit down before Harfleur, a Town situated upon
the mouth of the River Sens. The chief Lords of his army were, the Dukes of
Clarence, Gloucester, Exceter, and York, the Earl Marshall, Arundell, Oxford,
Suffolk, Warwick, and others. The Town was commanded by Monsieur de
Etouteville, afsisted by Messieurs de Blanville, Bacheville, Ermanville,
Gallart, Bos, Clear, Bestu, Adsanches, Briote, Gocurt, Illeadam, and many other
Knights and Gentlemen, to boot with which were 400. men of arms, besides the
inhabitants who all made what resistance possibly might be. The King of France
dispatched away the Constable Albret, the Marshall Boniquot, Henaut, Ligni, and
others to fortify the sea Towns with men and artillery. The garrison of
Harfleur as soon as they understood of the enemy coming, dug up the way which
leads from Monteviller to the Town, so to make the enemies march more
difficult, and sallying forth to skirmish with them, they had much ado to get
back into the City, so many were their opposers, and in such number the
arrows which shoured down upon them. But notwithstanding all impediments, the
English pitched their camp, and planted their artillery upon the most
advantageous places. The place was well fortified with walls and turrets,
together with a broad and deep di^ch, the defendants resolve to maintain it
whilst there was any the least hope. Those who were sent to secure the maritime
places, did what in them lay to hinder the booties, which notwithstanding all
their diligence, the besiegers did every where take. All the good they did, was
to preserve the neighboring Towns from being taken. The victuals in the
English army being almost wholly corrupted by the sea, they must have suffered
much scarcity, had they not made great booties of men and cattle.

The King of France was come to Vernone, between Paris and Roen, levying men
from all parts to succor Harfleur; The which being furiously assailed, the
gates, walls, and turrets, almost all beaten down, their mines ready to play,
and the powder which the King had sent unto the town surprised by the enemy:
they of the town brought to such a pass, as they were not able to withstand a
general assault: a great many of them being slain or sick, they agreed to
yield themselves, their lives saved, leaving all other things to the discretion
of the besiegers, if they were not succored within five days. Bacheville
brought these news to Charles, who finding himself weak, permitted them to
do what they were by necessity enforced unto, so as the five days being past,
they threw open the gates, after a siege of 37. days, wherein they suffered
very much. Harfleur was the chiefest Port Town of all Normandy. The Town was
sacked, quarter was given to the soldiers, and Citizens, who demeaned
themselves well. The women, children, and religious persons, were all put out
of the Town, the poorest sort of them having six pence a piece given them. The
great and rich spoil was sent into England, as a witness of good success:
Whereupon people of all conditions flockt from England thither, who besides
other privileges had a house of inheritance allotted to every family, so as
the City was in an instant peopled by the English. The King made his entry
without any solemnity, walking a foot to Saint Martins Church, to thank God
for that victory. He made the Duke of Exeter governor thereof, who chose for
his Lieutenant John Falstofe, and for his Counselors the Lord Carew, and Sir
Hughe Luterell, and put therein a garrison of 1500. soldiers, besides
horsemen. A great many sick people were sent back to England, amongst which
the Duke of Clarence, the Earl Marshall, and Earl Arundell, the Earl of
Stafford, the Bishop of Norwich, Lord Molins, and Lord Brunell died of a flux
in the siege. That which imported more then all the rest, remained yet to be
resolved on. The King undertook this business about the end of summer, who
came not to Normandy till the 14. of August, so as to continue the war as was
requisite, was impossible; and so much the more for that winter came early and
more egerly in, then it had done some years before. To pass the sea again,
if it were not a kind of running away would at least be proclaimed such by the
enemy. To keep in Normandy within the small precincts of Harfleur, was
impossible, the incommodity of victuals being considered. That which was
resolved upon was to march to Calleis through the heart of the Country, and
through the enemies forces: a resolution no ways necessary, as for lack of
other means, but most necessary for what concerned the honor and reputation
of arms, of 30000. fighting men who had past the seas from England, there
remained but 15000. 2000. men at arms, and 13000. bowmen; The rest were either
dead of fevers or flux, or sent back into England, or left in garrison at
Harfleur: so soon then as the ruins of the Town were repaired, that things
necessary were provided for, and that such prisoners as had not paid their
ransomes, had sworn to come unto the King to Calleis on Saint Martins day, he
commanded that those who were to follow him, should carry along victuals for
eight days. And crossing the Country of Caux and En, he marched apace that he
might get to the bridges of Soane (which he necessarily was to pass) before
they should be broken. A bold resolution, and which not seconded by good
fortune, might have been esteemed a rash one: for the Dolphin took from the
Country all manner of provisions, and placed great troops of armed men in all
parts to annoy him, and caused the bridges to be broken, hoping that wanting
wherwithall to live, he would be forced either to yield himself, or fight:
whereas according to the common maxim, in case they had been wanting, he
should have built him bridges of silver to pass over. King Henry finding the
bridges broken, turned toward Beauquene, to the same Foord between Peronne,
and Corbie, which Edward the third his great grandfather, passed over before
the battle of Cressi: But infinite were the dangers he ran; the enemy in his
face, at his back, and on all sides, yet did he march in so good order, as
that he passed the Foord not receiving any damage, so says Duplex. Mostrelate
says that finding the Foord strongly guarded, he passed forwards toward
Eraigne, burning, and making booty wheresoever he went, from thence to the
bridge of Rhenus; and not able to pass there (for it was bravely defended by
Monsieur du Vaucourt, the Master of the place) he went to Hangest upon the
Soane, from thence to Ponteau de Mere; from whence turning backward he came in
the sight of Amiens, to Voicre, and to Betencourt, where he made his passage,
those bridges not being broken by those of Saint Quintane, according as they
had beeene by the King commanded: they not perhaps believing that he would have
taken so great a compass, to have come thither. It was resolved in Council
(which kept still with the King in Roa^) to give him battle: And the King
himself being now free of his malady, resolved to be the leader.

The Dolphin would by all means be there likewise, nor for ought could be
said to the contrary, would he alter his resolution: But the old Duke of
Berry, who had been present at the business of Poctiers, after he had in
vain labored to dissuade as well from the giving of battle, as from that the
King and Dolphin should be present at it, not being able to prevail in both,
prevailed in what was of greatest importance, making it as apparent as day,
that since to give battle was of eminent danger, there was less of harm in
hazarding one loss then two. Whereupon the father and the son being
appeased; the Constable was commanded to fight; the which being divulged, all
the neighboring Nobility flockt to the army, which growing hourly greater and
greater, did never lose sight of the enemy, coasting along the other side of
the River till coming near Artesia, the Constable sent word to Count
Caraloise, that the batell being resolved upon, he did invite him to partake of
the victory. Answer was made to Monsieur Mongaguire (who was the Ambassador)
by Count Carallois his Counselors, that all diligence that might be, should be
used that he might come. The young Prince thirsted for nothing more; but his
governors, though they seemed to prepare for his going (order being given to
the Nobility that they should come to accompany him) having received express
commission to the contrary from the Duke, did otherwise then they had promised,
deluding the second messengers, who with a herald were sent to resollicite him.
And to the end he might neither know of the day of battle, nor where the army
was, they made him go to Air, a place out of the way, so as the Nobility and
Gentry which expected his coming, finding that they were only fed with hopes,
went of themselves unto the army, and the young Counts governors were feign to
stop his tears, by making known unto him his fathers express inhibition. The
Constable, who together with the Marshall Bonciquot, saw himsel^e environed
with so much Nobility, with so many troops of horse and foot; and that the
very Princes themselves in opinion of their valor and experience, had
willingly yielded the command to them, coveted nothing more then combat: so as
fearing lest the King (who had already passed the River) might escape them,
they sent to offer him battle: his answer was; That he had not learnt to
accept of the opportunity of fighting from his enemies; that he went to
Calleis; That if they durst assail him, at their perils be it, they should
then find that his Army was composed of able Warriers. But the Constable
thinking that to set upon him in the present posture he was in, would be to his
disadvantage, and that the answer though in appearance generous* foreshewed a
hidden fear, warily dissembled, marched on before him; whilst the King marching
at leisure came in three days to Blagni, where understanding that the enemy
was encamped at Agencourt, he encamped himself at Maisoncelles, not above
three bow-shootes from them, where his soldiers half dead with hunger,
wearied and frozen to death (for they had not time to provide for fuel) spent
all the night in confession, communion, and other spiritual exercises, as if
it were the last night they were to live; so as their souls comfort much
encouraged them, the which they witnessed by the continual music of their
trumpets which never ceased to sound till the break of day; whilst the French
Camp put up with confidence, and buried in sleep, buried all their mirth in
silence, the very horses not so much as neighing, so as some of them fuller of
imagination then the rest, took it as an ill omen; it being almost incredible
that in the number of 150000. horse which were then in the army, what for
carts, wagons, artillery, and other war affairs, there should want
instruments to out do the Tantaraes of the enemies contemptible camp, or at
least voices to drown them. And this devotion whereof we have spoken, though
voluntary, was augmented by the Kings example, who ever took special care
that God should not be offended, insomuch that one of his soldiers having in
his journey stolen the tabernacle wherein the hostia is kept, out of a Church,
he would not quit the place, till it was restored, and the felon hanged upon a
tree; which action being divulged in those parts, the Country People strove who
should soonest furnish him with victuals, though they had strict command to
the contrary: of such efficacy is religious justice, yea even amongst enemies.

The five and twentieth day of October was come, wherein the French promised
unto themselves undoubted victory, and the English to lose their lives at as
dear a rate as they could, resolute rather to die then to be wanting to
themselves. Those scorned these, and these feared not those, but recommended
themselves to God, who was only able to save them. The Constable made three
great squadrons of his men. The Vanguarde reserved for his own leading, was
composed of 8000. gentlemen, armed from head to foot, of 4000. archers, and
1500. crosse-bow men, placing two wings upon the flancks, the one of 1600. the
other of 800. choice horsemen. Here were placed the Dukes of Orleans, and of
Burbon the Counts of Eu and Richmond, the Marshall Bonciquot, the general of
the crosse-bow men, and the admiral Dampiere: the wing of 1600. was commanded
by the Count de Vandosme and that of 800. by Clugnet of Brabant, William de
Sanenses, and Lewis of Burbon. The maine battle of equal order, and number,
was conducted by the Dukes of Bar, and Alenson, and by the Counts Nevers,
Vademont, Blamont, Salines, Grampree, and Roussi: The reereguard exceeded the
other in number, but was composed of men less experienced, the flower of all
the army being put in the two former squadrons: It was conducted by the Counts
Omalle, Marle, Dammartin, Fouchingburg, and Louray Captain of Ardres, so as
not reckoning the reereward, the Vanguard, and the maine battle were composed
of 20800. horse and 11000. archers and crosse-bow men; the three squadrons
seemed to be seven times as many as were the English. King Henry seeing hem
troubled in the ordering of themselves, and that they did not presently set
upon him, as he expected, gave order that his soldiers should eat, before
they should be put into battle array; and because they were so far inferior
in number to the enemy, as that of thirteen thousand archers, and two thousand
men at arms, a great many were sick, insomuch as to divide the remainder into
several squadrons were to make them very small ones, he resolved to put them
all into one body, placing the archers in the front, defended (as if it were by
pikes) by certain stakes sharpened at both ends, and set bending forwards in
the ground, which he himself had caused be cut out of the woods by the way as
he marched: of the men of arms he made two wings, placing them on the flanks,
and in a field hard by, fenced by a bancke, he placed two hundred archers in
ambush, with directions that they should not shoot till the sign were given.
The French men had been a full hour in order, not having advanced one foot,
and it was about ten of the clock, when the English, expecting to be set
upon, and impatient to attend any longer, did advance themselves, and after
having made a little haste, Sir Thomas Herpingham an ancient man, and long
experienced in war, threw a trunchion into the air, which was the sign of
falling too. The soldiers shooting aloud, and the 200. of the ambush answering
them, began to let fly at the Vanguard, so as the enemies horse being wounded
in the fall of arrows, and their riders troubled to govern them, they came
not to the charge as they should have done. Duplex notes three errors
committed by the French in this encounter. The first that when the English
advanced themselves, they did not likewise advance, but stood still, though
much the stronger; an error which Caesar observed in Pompey, in the battle of
Pharsalia: first motions give courage, whereas standing still takes from
courage: for wounds which are received whilst men stand still, by wounding to
the quick, do infuse fear, whereas the sense abstracted by motion, has less
sense of wounds, and the spirits remaining entire, do strengthen the arm, and
makes it give the first blow. The second, that standing so immovable and
bowing down their heads, to the end that the arrows might not enter through
the sight holes of their helmets, they made themselves a firmer But to hit. The
third, that of 800. horsemen led by Monsieur Sanenses, 120. went only to give
the charge, and those but sluggishly, so as their Captain not seconded, was by
their arrows beaten down and slain.

Their horses being thus wounded, strength, dexterity, and the bit not able to
govern them; in stead of going forward, they recoyled back, and in shocking
and justling together, fell one upon another, so as the English leaving their
bows, and laying load on them with their hatchets and swords, made great
slaughter of them; whilst passing from the first file to the last, they came to
the maine battle, the which either disheartened by the sight of so cruel an
execution, or beaten back by so unexpected an assault, or that being too close
pressed, and straightned within themselves, they had not means to manage their
swords, was in a short space rooted; the English receiving no harm at all,
save that some of them were trodden under foot by the horse. Here the Duke of
Brabant putting himself forward, and not followed by his men, was slain. Many
who fell, or were beaten from horseback found means to escape, being assisted
by their servants, whilst the English being but few in number, minded not those
that escaped or fled away. This mean while the King giving on with his horse,
which were fresh, and well ordered, drove those of the maine battle which yet
remained in order, back upon the reareward, which being composed of new and
unexperienced people, ran away, making small or no resistance. The archers,
crosse-bow men, and foot, did nothing in this days work but run away. On
the contrary side many Noblemen and Gentlemen, lost their lives through too
much courage. The Duke of Alencon gave on upon the squadron royal, where he
slew the Duke of York, wounded, and bore to ground the Duke of Gloucester, and
hurt the King himself upon the head, whilst he stooped to raise up his
brother; but being struck at on all sides, and beaten down, as he held up his
hand and cried to the King, it is Alencon that yields himself, he was slain
before the King could have time to save him. The Counts Omale and Marle, and
diverse other Gentlemen did by force keep 600. horse together, with whom they
were all or taken prisoners or slain. Others stuck together with the like
success, being either slain or discomfited. Robert Brovocille, and Izembert
Agencourt, were the only two who coming with an intention to steal, and not
to fight, being followed by six hundred horse, entered the English camp,
wherein was none but servants and sick folks, whom they put all to the sword,
and bore away from thence a very rich booty: the which the King understanding
and believing that the enemy had reunited themselves, fearing to be set upon
again, he made it be proclaimed that as many as had any prisoners should
kill them, the number of the prisoners being less then were those that took
them: whereupon those two as having been cause of so woeful an effect
(bewailed by the actors themselves) were afterward long kept in prison by the
Duke of Burgony: and it was thought that a sword richly set with jewels which
they had taken amongst the Kings stuff, and given to Count Caralois that he
might protect them, saved their lives; which had not served their turns, if
the Dolphin had lived. But no more people appearing, the victory was ended, by
taking of more prisoners and adding fresh numbers to the dead. The heat of
this battle continued three hours, and three hours longer did they continue
to fight till such time as there was no more neither to kill nor take; so as
about four in the afternoon a retreat was sounded, and by the Prelates and
Chapplins, Te Deum, was sung, and the Psalm In exitu Israel de Aegypto, and at
the verse Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam, all threw
themselves upon their knees. The camp and tents of the French served for
lodgings to the victors, in recompense of their own camp which they had lost.
The next day Monijoy the King of arms of France came, accompanied with four
other Heralds to know the number of prisoners, and to obtain leave to bury the
dead. The King calling him before him, said, That the multitude of men slain
which he saw there, was no work of his, but the work of God Almighty, to
punish the unjust usurpation of France, That therefore he willed him to say
whether he thought he, or the King of France had won the battle? To the
which Monijoy replied that his Majesty's victory was so apparent, as there was
no place allowed for dispute. the King then looking round about desired to know
the name of the Castle which was nearest to the two camps, and understanding
that the name thereof was Aiencourt; from henceforth, said he, this battle
shall be called the battle of Aiencourt. He then granted him all he demanded;
but the soldiers desired first to view the field, and to take such prisoners
as did yet live, and to take from such as were dead, their gold, and jewels,
and what else they had of value, leaving them their apparel; of the which
they were afterward by the Country people stripped. The number of the slain
(according to Monstrelet) were above 10000. of the which 9000. gentlemen. He
registers the names of the chiefest of them in a particular Chapter. It will
suffice us to know the names of the Princes and chief commanders. Of Princes
there died the Duke of Brabant, and Gount de Nevers. both brothers to the Duke
of Burgony, The Duke of Bar, and his brother John the Duke of Alenson. The
Counts of Marle, Vademont, Blamont, Grampre, Roussi, Faucumberg, and Lewis of
Burbon: of chief commanders Charles Albret Constable, Dampiere the Admiral,
Ramburres general of the crossebowes, and Guishard Master of the Kings
household. The prisoners were the Dukes of Orleans and Burbon, the Counts Ew,
Vandosme, Richmont, the Marshall Bonchiqu^t, and eighteen Gentlemen of name,
beside others. Of those who were slain of the English side, reports do very
much differ. Paulus Aemilius sets down 200. naming the Duke of York for one,
whom he calls the Kings brother. Gaguine sets down 400. comprehending the said
Duke with the said error. Monstrelet 1600. Duplex the same number adding a
great many that were wounded, which (as he says) did almost all die. Of the
English writers, Grafton says between 500. and 600. other between 20. and
26. Edward Hall who comprehends the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk, Sir
Richard Kikely and David Game, the only men of note, says, there were not
above five and twenty slain. Let who please believe miracles. But in all
reason it is likely that having fought three whole hours, with so great a
number of enemies, the relation of 500. or 600. is the truest. David Game, the
last of the four above named, and one whom the King much esteemed, as one of
the bravest, and most judicious soldiers of his camp, being sent the night
before to make an estimate of the number of the enemy, went to the top of an
hill and seeing all the Champion covered with tents, and blazing with fires,
brought word back, that there were enough of them to be slain, enough to be
taken prisoners, and enough to be made run away. When the King was come to
Calleis, he found there the prisoners of Harfleur, who according to their
promise were come to present themselves unto him. As Soon as he had dispatched
them, and refreshed his men, he passed into England, meeting in so short a
passage with so terrible a tempest of winds, as it drove two ships laden with
soldiers into Zeland, without the loss of any one vessel: yet some write
otherwise: he was received in triumph with processions and other magnificences.
He took order for the safety of his prisoners, and caused the Duke of York,
and Earl of Suffolkes funerals to be splendidly celebrated.

The afflictions wherewith France was in general wounded would more
particularly have touched upon the Duke of Burgony by reason of the death of
his brothers, had not the imprisonment of Orleans and Angolesme, and the death
of Alenson served him for defensive weapons. It cannot be easily judged whether
of these two prevailed most with him, till it be resolved whether the love of
friends or hatred of enemies be of most power in humane affections: But who
shall well consider it, will find that in an ambitious and revengefull mind,
the excess of hatred is greater then natural affection is: Few are seen, who
to inherit their possessions, would not be content to lose their brethren, and
very few, who do not forget the love to their own blood, when at the charge
of their friends, they may revenge themselves upon their enemies. But whereas
hatred proceeds from injuries, from the which (as being done, not received)
evil is to be expected, without the concurring of any other passion; It is
able to corrupt whatsoever nature, much more the Dukes nature which was already
corrupted. And it is to be believed that the private and public loss he
suffered in this battle did not more afflict him, then he was joyed at the
benefit he received by his enemies being oppressed. Hence it was, that seeing
himself void of competitors, he resolved immediately to go to Paris to resume
that authority, the desire whereof had caused him to cause the Duke of Orleans
father to this present Duke, be slain: to break so many covenants made with
his sons, and to reduce the fair and rich Country of France almost to
gastlinesse and poverty. But the present condition of government, did not
permit him to enter in a peaceful manner: for the King being possessed by the
contrary faction, those of his party being or excluded or banished, the Dolphin
(though his son in law) evilly conceited of him, if he came not in a
condition to give the Law, he ran hazard of suffering it both in his life and
livelihood. Having then levied 10000. horse, he took his journey; but as soon
as his design was heard of, King Charles laying aside all other business,
endeavored to stop his coming. He strictly forbad all Cities and Towns to
permit him entrance; and that he might oppose unto him a man of valor, and of
the contrary faction, he recalled from Gascony (with the offer of being
Constable of France) the Count Armignack, who willingly came, drawn rather
through hatred to the Duke, then ambition of the honor. The Duke seeing those
gates shut upon him, which he thought to have found thrown open, and that the
Count Armignacke was arived at Paris with great troops of men from Gascony and
Languedock, and that he had received the sword (the badge of Constableship) to
the end that he might wield it against him, tarried at Lagni: where in a short
time he was 20000. horse strong, remooving all obstacles which might withstand
his entrance into Paris, not unarmed and with his particular family, as he was
permitted to do, but armed in the head of twenty thousand horse, alleging the
same reasons to obtain his entrance, as the King did to deny it.

During these disputes, Lewis the Dolphin died of a fever, but according to the
opinion of most, of poison, being by the Orleanist thought no less a bosom
friend then son in law to the Duke. I know not though what judgment to give
herein, the tokens of this friendship (his alliance set aside) being very
slight: For at Burges he appeared against him, and in other places upon other
occasions, seemed but very meanly to favor him: he had quitted his wife, the
Dukes daughter, for some affection he had elsewhere; nor would he have resumed
her, if not threatened to have the treaty of Arras broken; besides, the Dolphin
of his own nature was not constant in his friendship, opiniatred only in odd
fancies; not over thankful to his father, and as much ignorant of government
as he was presumptuous and headstrong. Serres notwithstanding calls him terror
of Burgony, but without cause, for had the Dolphin lived, he had run no
danger; for in time he might easily have won him by his subtilnesse: And though
through the antipathy of ambition he appeared against him, yet it is not likely
that he would have forgone that respect, which as to a father in law, he owed
him. This his death was rather thought, and assuredly was a great blow to the
Dukes fortune, to the which he began to give way, and retired himself to
Flanders, failing in what he intended in France.

The Emperor Sigismond had all this while endeavored as much as he might the
peace of the Church: which not likely to effect without 1416
the assistance of other Princes (for to send their Prelates and Ambassadors
to the Council, was not of force enough against the stubbornness of three
titulary Popes, which required a coactive authority to incline them to reason)
he resolved to go himself to France, whether he came with 800. horse; and
finding that it was impossible to compass his designs, without the peace of
the two Kingdoms, he meant to endeavor it. And having laid the groundwork
thereof with Charles, he procured Ambassadors from France to go along with him
to England, that he might the better treat thereof in their presence. He was
received by Henry with all due respects. William Count of Hannault came thither
likewise in person to the same end, and shortly after the Ambassadors of many
Princes, amongst which were those of the Duke of Burgony, in greater
magnificence then all the rest. But the propositions which were propounded to
King Henry, were far short of what he pretended unto, and of his good success,
by the which he seemed to be inwardly advised to the contrary. He forbear not
though, in thanks to so great a mediator, to send Ambassadors to Bavaois;
where as an introduction to the business, a truce was propounded, together
with the ransom of such prisoners as were in England. Things which easily
might have been agreed upon, had not an accident happened, which hindered all
agreement, the which though it be by Chesnes denied, his arguments for
confutation are very weak. The Duke of Exceter governor of Harfleur, was gone
forth with 3000. soldiers to scour the parts near about Roan, against whom
the Constable opposed himself with 5000. (The French writers say it was
Monsieur de Villaquiers, and not the Constable, and that he had but 3000. men.)
They fought, and 300. of the Dukes men were slain: (the French say 1800.) so
as finding himself to be the weaker, the Duke retired himself into an Orchard
encompassed with a hedge of thorns, where he stayed the rest of that day, and
the next night. As he retired upon break of day toward Harfleur, he was
overtaken, and set upon again near unto the City, from whence new succors
issuing forth, he put the enemy to route, Villaquiers himself being one of
those that were slain. But however it were, the Constable having for his first
enterprise resolved to drive the English out of Normandy; he besieged Harfleur,
and though he saw that this resolution would wholly break the treaty of peace,
yet was he so desirously confident to win it, that he would not raise his
siege, though he was commanded so to do. Whereat King Henry being offended, he
recalled his Ambassadors, intended to have gone to the succor thereof himself
in person, and had done so, had he not been by the Emperor dissuaded. Being
then persuaded to send away others in his stead, he dispatched away the Duke
of Bedford with 200 ships (the French authors say 300.) and with him many Lords
and Gentlemen, with whom he arrived there the day of the assumption of our
Lady, a fatal day, as well to the keeping of Harfleur, as it was to the winning
thereof, for the year before the King came thither upon the Eve of that day.
The City was narrowly besieged by sea and land. Vicount Narbonne Vice Admiral
of France presented himself before it with a great fleet before the Constable
came thither, hoping alone to have surprised it, by taking the defendents at
unawares. But being discovered, and driven back, he was contented to have
company in the continuance of the siege; he gave many assaults into the Town,
but little good was done either by sea or land: When he discried the English
fleet, he prepared for fight, and went into the mouth of the River. The Duke
did not refuse the encounter, but sending some of his stoutest ships before to
begin the bickering, he with all the rest seconded them, resolving either to
die or overcome. They fought a long while with equal courage and obstinacy
tillat last fortune favoring the English, the enemies ships which what great,
what little were in number 500. were all of them almost either taken, or sunk;
amongst which were three great Carrects of Genua, which being afterward sent
into England, did witness the defeat. The Duke having reinforced the garrison
with moneys, and men, returned home, the Constable having raised his siege,
as soon as the Navy was defeated.

The Emperor who sufficiently knew that it was lost time to tarry any longer
in England touching the matter of peace, provided for his departure. The King
had conferred upon him, and the Count Hannault at their first coming, the
order of the garter, and they were installed with extraordinary pomp at
Winsor. The Count was already gone, and the Emperor being likewise to be gone
(the affairs of Germany and of the Council recalling him) the King would wait
upon him to Calleis, a strait league being agreed on between them, which having
caused jealousies in diverse Princes, was the cause why the Duke of Burgony
desired to speak with them both before they parted. And because the declared
war did not permit him to adventure his person to a professed enemy (or at least
he would have it so believed) the Duke of Gloucester and Earl of Marsh, were
sent unto him for ostages, and he was met, and brought to Calleis by the Earl
of Warwick. This mean while his son Philip Count Caralois, having with much
honor received the ostages, led them to lodge in Saint Omers: And the next
morning going to give the good morrow to the Duke of Gloucester, who was
standing with his back to the door, discoursing with some of his domestiques,
the Duke was somewhat late in saluting him, and did it in a more familiar
manner then did become the quality of so great a Prince: whereat he made no
sign of distaste, though he resented it, his fathers occasions infusing
dissimulation into him. The Duke of Burgony was driven upon this by an accident
from whence nothing but dangerous consequences was to be expected. Those who
governed France, after the Emperors departure for England, had laid a general
tax upon all things vendible; the which having distasted the people, the
Parisians more seditious then the rest, plotted the most detestable conspiracy
that till then had been heard of in that Kingdom, and having had recourse
unto him, as on whom they chiefly did rely, he sent some of his friends unto
them, to confirm them in their resolution, promising to assist them: hoping by
this means to compass the so much coveted government, and to suppress his
enemies, his two ancient unalterable designs. The appointment was, to take the
King, the Queen, the Duke of Berry, the King and Queen of Sicily, the
Chancellor, the Council, and those that sided with Orleans, all prisoners on
good Friday, and to kill them all. But many going that day out of the City, to
obtain pardons by their devotions, and fearing lest some of those might
likewise have gone forth whom they would not have had to gone, and so might
save themselves, they deferred executing their plot till Easter day, which was
the safety of those that were proscribed. For the Chancellor hearing of the
treason by means of a woman, made the King and Princes suddenly retire
themselves into the Louvre, whilst the Provost arming such as upon so sudden
an occasion he could assemble together, made himself master of the Market
place, and taking some of the conspirators prisoners, infused fear into the
rest, freeing the lives of many from eminent danger, by the death of a few.
Afterward securing himself of the City, by such men of arms as flockt unto
him from all the neighboring parts, and taking away the chains from the
streets heads, which made them insolent, he disarmed the people whilst the
Dukes officers had time to escape. This business produced such jealousies and
rancor, as all parties drawing into the field, they omitted nothing whereby
they might injure one another. And the Duke, who masked, presented the
principal person in this tragedy (the argument whereof was not changed, though
the Scene were) thought that to compass his ends, it was requisite for him to
secure Flanders from the danger of England, that whilst he endeavored to
endamage others, he might not be indamaged at home: To this purpose he came to
Caleis, where he did so work upon these two great Princes, as that the
Emperor, who at his passage into England, was by the Duke of Bavariaes means,
brother to the Queen, who was an utter enemy to the Duke, become an Orleanist,
did upon this meeting become a Burgonian, being wholly changed through cunning
and the homage made unto him of the County of Burgony and Allost: and King
Henry prorogued the truce formerly made between Flanders and Artois for two
years longer, to the Dukes advantage, and scandal of all well minded men: for
to prefer private respects before the public, with the enemies of the
State, without the knowledge of the Sovereign, is as blameable and worthy of
punishment, as it is contrary to conscience and Law. But he that propounds
evil for his object, loses all shame which thereupon depends: and his
natural confidence (by reason whereof his Dutchmen called him Undaunted)
becoming the fatal chariot of his precipice, made him to be undaunted at the
encounter of his ruin. His affairs being thus acommodated, every man betook
himself to his own home, he to Flanders, the Ostages to Calleis, the
Emperor to Germany, and the King to England.

Partly before, and partly after this time were the funerals of three great
Princes celebrated in France: That of the Duke of Berry, of John the Dolphin,
who succeeded to his brother Lewis, and of the King of Sicily. All of them
unfortunate deaths, for all the respects which concerned that Kingdom. Berry
and Sicily did serve to counterpose the ambition of Burgony, and the Dolphin
served for a removal of those evils (if he had lived) which in the succession
of his brother Charles, through the Dukes death did afterward happen. The Duke
alive or dead, was borne for the destruction of France; so as that which
authors write hereof, if it be not true, it is truth like: That a Turkish
Mathematician saved his life when he was prisoner to Bajazet the first, by
assuring Bajazet that more Christians would in short time be destroyed for his
cause, then the Othomans sword would cut off in a whole age. John the Dolphin,
during his brother Lewis his life, had married Giacalina the only heir to
William Count of Hannault, and whilst he kept with him, ready to go for
France, he died, not being yet fully twenty years old. Not long before this a
strait confederacy was made in Valentiniana, between him and the Duke of
Burgony, the reputed cause of his death: for it caused his being poisoned by
those of the Orleans faction: for (he being dead) the hopes of the Kingdom
falling upon Charles Count de Poictou, son in law to the King of Sicily, and
the last of King Charles his five sons, they fell upon a Prince that was
their friend, bred up in the hatred and passions, wherewith his father in law
then living, was endued. But he dying likewise shortly after, left it in doubt
whether his death caused more of pleasure or displeasure unto the Duke: for
though he were freed of a mortal enemy, yet his hopes of revenge being in his
death lost, did sour the sweet thereof; so as it may be said, that the sweets
of ill disposed men, have no taste which is not seasoned with somewhat of
sour. The articles of this confederacy, and which caused the Orleanist to rid
him out of the world (if it be true that they did so) were, That the Duke of
Burgony should serve the King and the Dolphin against whosoever, particularly
against the King of England. That he should keep peace with all men in France
except the King of Scicily. The Dolphin on the contrary part obliging himself,
to assist the Duke, not only against his own subjects, if so it should fall
out, but against whosoever else should molest him. But his enemies encouraged
by this death, became so insolent, as they forced him to essay the strongest
Cities, to exclude the present government, whereupon the civil war grew
hotter then ever it was. And Count Armignacke upon whom through the death of
these Princes, the Kings incapacity, and the Dolphins tender years, all
authority of government fell, seconded by those of the Council, who together
with him were afraid, that the Queen weary of their presumptions, might
endeavor their ruin, made her to be carried to Towrs, under the custody of
three of his confidents. And that this her banishment might be irrevocable, he
interessed the Dolphin therein, making him (under pretense of the necessity of
the war) seize upon such treasure, as she had gathered and placed in certain
Churches, and Monasteries, as in so many Sanctuaries. An action which caused in
her such hatred against her son, as (hoping for revenge) she by his ruin,
who was her only son, wrought the ruin of France; which things though their
success were uncertain, yet nothing of good could be conjectured thereby. So
as they being by King Henry well examined, he hasted to call a Parliament,
propounding the continuation of the war, which was embraced with much
applause, and moneys to that purpose readily paid down, nothing but good
success being to be hoped for, whilst matters went thus.

The King to make himself Master of the Sea, dispatched away John Holland,
Earl of Huntington, his Admiral, son to that Duke of Exceter who was
beheaded the first year of Henry the fourth, a young man whom he much favored,
not so much, for that he was cousin german, (borne of Isabell his fathers
sister) as that his conditions did deserve it. He on the other side, desirous
by some honorable achievement, to augment the Kings favor, departed resolute
to do some action worthy of the opinion which was conceived of him. The
bastard of Burbon was Captain of the French fleet, of equal force with the
Earl, in one only thing surpassing him; that being guarded about by nine
Genway Carracts, as by so many fortresses, he thought them alone sufficient to
secure him from all the enemies forces; so as seeking him out, and finding him
who did not hide himself, they came to blows. Their equal courage and
valor, held the balance a long time equal, till such time as the English
prevailing, Burbon was taken prisoner: and of the nine Carracts, three were
sunk, and three were taken, and amongst the prey, the money which was allowed
for half a years payment of the fleet.

The which being taken by the King as a good omen, he took shipping at
Portsmouth, waited upon by many of the nobility, and followed 1417
by his two brothers Clarence and Gloucester, leaving his third brother Bedford,
Regent. He landed at Tongues, a Castle in Normandy, which in four days
surrendered it self, as with the like speed did Harcourt, Beaumont, Ereux,
Falese, Baiensa, Lis^aux, Corances, Aurenches, and other places. Caen a Town
well peopled, strong, and one of the Bulwarks of that Province stood out
resolutely, and not listening to any terms of surrendering, it was soon after
taken by assault, and sacked. The Castle (as Monstrelet says) held out three
weeks longer, and seven weeks according to Duplex: whilst the English say
that all manner of rigor being denounced against the defendants, if they would
not yield after the first day, Monsieur de la Faietta, and Monsieur de Montene
(despairing of succor) came forth within the limited time. All the riches and
ornaments of the neighboring Towns were found there as placed in a safe
place. No man durst lay hands upon them, for whosoever did, was unavoidable to
be put to death. They were by the Kings directions restored to the Monasteries
and Churches to which they did belong: The which purchased him the good will of
the Country, and helped him in his succeeding enterprises. Religious actions
unfainedly done, have power to molifie even those breasts, which hardened with
hatred, would for all other means prove obstinate and irreconciliable.
Chereburg, and Ponte del Arco, were next Caen, the most considerable Forts, for
the conquest of Normandy. A particular account must be given of Roan by it
self. The King sent the Duke of Gloucester to Chereburg, who finding it
provided with men, munition and victuals, spent ten months there in vain;
in which time when he could not get the gates open by battery, force nor
industry, the avarice of John d'Engenes, the governor thereof threw them open
unto him, which proved afterward a gain which caused his death: for having by
this infamously purchased money, received a safe conduct for a certain limited
time, during the which he might trade where ever the King of England did
command (for he could not in reason trust himself in France) he was in Roan
after the City was yielded up unto the English; and tarring there, relying upon
some, when his set time was expired, his head was cut off: the presence of a
traitor smells so rank in the nose of a noble Prince and lover of virtue.
After this many other places yielded, incited thereunto by the King, having
made it to be proclaimed, that all men should enjoy their goods and
privileges, and that he would treat with all such as with his natural
subjects, who uninforced would put themselves under his government; so as in
little more then a year his ensigns were seen flourishing in every place,
nothing almost remaining to the entire conquest of Normandy, but the
Metroplitan Roan, proceedings sprung from the Prince his worth, and soldiers
valor, but facilitated by the enemies disunion; it being in them made true,
that desolation must needs ensue, where a Kingdom is divided within it self:
And that as amongst the passions of the mind, there is none so great as that
of hatred, so all hatreds must give place to the violence of civil or home
hatred.

The City of Roan in the loss of all those Towns (which as to the head of the
Province were under her) had her eye more fixed upon France, then upon her own
eminent danger; for being a principal member thereof, she thought she should
be cut off, and made no member if she did not partake of her infections; and
her inhabitants imitating the Parisians in wealth and riches, would have
thought their honor had bin concerned, if they should not likewise emulate
themin their seditions. Being then resolved equally with them to favor the
Duke of Burgony, they made an insurrection under the conduct of Allen Blancard,
a partaker with the Duke, and having slain the governor, and some of the
officers; and chief Citizens, they would make themselves masters of the Castle
(a place requisite for their safeties, after so sottish a rebellion) and were
repulsed by James of Burbon, Signieur de Preaux, who had the command of it; so
as their ill success causing repentance, they were forced to fly for
protection to the same Burbon, whom they had but just then so unjustly
offended. So rash and hair brain bold are the people, in stumbling upon
offenses, and so affrontedly presumptuous in the choice of their remedies. But
the Dolphin who was come thither with an intention to give them exemplary
punishment* meeting with unexpected difficulties, did cloak his ill will, and
pardoned the fault, the which without much danger he could not punish. But
since I am to speak much of this Prince, I crave permission to describe him to
you in four lines, that you may the better know him. He was borne under a
fantastical planet glistering with incomparable felicity and miseries.
Amongst his miseries was his fathers frenzy, to whom it behoved to side with
one of the two factions alternately. Two wars at the same time with Burgony
and England: his mothers hatred, and thereby the loss of little less then the
whole Kingdom. Amongst his felicities the death of four elder brothers,
whereby the Crown fell upon him: the death of King Henry, which settled it on
his head: for if Henry had lived, he was in hazard either to have wholly lost
it, or to have enjoyed but a small part thereof, and that with difficulty, and
continual war; being bred up in hatred to the Duke of Burgony, to undo him,
he undid himself: He was of as various an humor, as his fortune was various;
as indulgent to his pleasures as his dangers would permit him: whereby he was
tutored sometimes in abstinence, sometimes in temperance; inconstant in his
affections, constant and acurate in his actions, insomuch as when he died he
left that Kingdom entire and peaceful, which at his entry thereunto, he found
not only turbulent but almost lost. So as it may be said, that tribulation
made him wise and glorious, which otherwise of himself he would not have been;
he had before him three powerful enemies; the King of England, the Duke of
Burgony, and his mother; who though a woman, and unarmed, was more of trouble
and damage to him, then the other two: It was hard for him to fence against
them all. He could not encounter the first without affording leisure unto the
second, who the more domestical he was, the more dangerous was his enmity: For
whereas against the King of England he might rely upon his peoples faith and
assistance, he durst not affie in them against the Duke, whom they were
inclined to favor: so as hisgreatest difficulty for the present, was, which of
the two he was first to oppose: if he quitted Paris, he lost it; and if he left
it not, he lost Normandy. But Count Armignack, were it out of passion, or the
interest of his own authority, or out of true judgment, showed it unto him,
that losing his capital City, he would likewise the less inferior ones, which
would follow the others example; and therefore thought it most necessary for
him to secure that City against the Duke, a Prince of the blood, and a subject,
then to oppose himself against the King of England, a foreign Prince, and
pretender to the Crown, though thereby he might lose Normandy. The Duke
therefore perceiving that it was impossible for him to enter Paris for the
present, betook himself to the taking in of some small Towns near about it,
and after many too's and fro's, besieging Corbeille, whilst every one thought
he did it to famish Paris (it being the most important passage, whereby to cut
off the victualling of Paris) be rose from thence, and hasted to Towrs, and
finding the Queen in Maurmoters Abbey (according to the agreement which was
formerly made between them) he brought her in liberty to Towrs with
reciprocal commodity, for her to reenter into authority and command, by means
of the Dukes forces, and for the Duke to make way to his designs, by means of
the Queens person and name. They were to the peoples great joy received into
the City and Castle, gladded that they were freed from all other taxes, save
that of salt; not perceiving that such graces were of no long continuance,
as well for that they cannot be granted but by the sovereign Prince, and in
such times only as being free from war, it redounds to his advantage that
his people be eased; as likewise that those who are factious and seditious,
cannot subsist without oppressing the people. From hence they went to Chartres,
where the Queen made herself be proclaimed Regent of the Kingdom,
establishing two Courts of Justice, the one at Amiens, the other at Troyes in
Champania, and prohibiting upon great penalty any whatsoever recourse unto the
Parliament at Paris. Diverse Cardinals and Prelates treated a reconcilement
between her and her son; the Duke desired it, hoping thereby the more to
tame him. But Count Armignack, and the Chancellor Marle (which thought it would
be the overthrow of their authority) brake off the treaty, becoming thereby
more hateful unto the people. Whereupon those who sided with the Duke in Paris
embracing the occasion, opened one of the gates by night, and brought in
Monsieur d'Illeadam, who strengthened by the Citizens, and crying out, Vive la
paix, Vive le Roy, Vive Bourgogne, did assault the houses of such as were of
the Armignack faction. Tannigues du Chasteu a faithful servant of the Dolphins
(guessing by the first bruit at the matter) ran at the Dolphins bed side, and
conveied him safe in a sheet into the Bastille. The Count Armignacke hid
himself in disguise, in a poor neighbors house, who afraid of the punishment
which was proclaimed against whosoever should conceal him, did discover him:
Those who led him away prisoner having much ado to save him from the fury of
the people. The King compelled to rise out of his bed, was by this rascally
route set on horseback, and led through the City, to the end that the
mischief which was done, and which was to be done, might be authenticated by
his presence; as if a lewd and deadly mischief should have tended to his
service, and that he had commanded it. The Chancellors, diverse Bishops,
Counselors and Magistrates, were taken and made prisoners, whilst the common
people possessed with a fresh fury, brake the prisons, and slew them all, their
madness reaching to the rich, enemies and friends, wealth, anger and
inheritance were under color of the Armignacks, the death of many innocents,
who never had to do in any faction; so as death, though every where of an
alike countenance, was clad with different liveries. The Constables and
Chancellors corpse having been three days together dragd naked up and down the
streets (to the end that the air might not be therewithal corrupted) were
thrown out of the City, where carrion used to be laid. The Duke of Burbony,
who was then at Dijon, approving of the fact, but seeming not to approve of the
manner thereof, came from thence together with the Queen, and were in great
triumph received by the Parisians. Being thus arrived where he desired,
increased in power, freed of his enemies, possessed of government, and having
the King to dispose of at his pleasure, he did his uttermost to draw the
Dolphin to him; he sent Embassies one after another, as sent from his father
and mother, pleading the infirmity of the one, and the others for their
inabilities to resolve upon any thing requisite against the King of England
without his assistance, nor was he sparing in the vowing of his own service
unto him. But the Dolphin, though he was thereunto inclined, was dissuaded by
those who thought themselves irreconciliable with the Duke. Thus do Princes
ruin themselves and their affairs, whilst wanting judgment how to govern
alone, they measure their own interests by the concernments of their servants,
who if they were worthy would either sacrifice themselves for their Masters
welfare, or would save themselves by flight, to shun the being reputed their
Prince his undoing.

These alterations made sport for King Henry: the vital spirits which ought to
have concurred to the strengthening of so important a member as was Normandy,
retired themselves unto the heart, oppressed by dangerous symptoms; the which
not easing the one, did aggravate the other, to the danger of them both: nor
could it be otherwise: for the business requiring union and obedience; the
Duke could not obey the Dolphin, whilst he pretended to govern him; and union
was impossible to the Dolphins servants, being they were to lose their
authority, which together with the Dukes authority was incompatible. The one
side and the other did alike fear that the several factions being once
reduced into the right way, would not go astray again: for there is nothing
whereof seditious men are more jealous, then to make those taste the sweet of
good, who were formerly their associates and coadjutors in evil. So as France
running ruin through the excess of disorder, it was no wonder if England did
establish herself through the excellency of counsel.

The English before they could besiege Roan were constrained to endeavor the
taking in of Pont d'Arcke, a fortress seated upon the River 1418
S^ne, that so they might the better keep Roan from being succored. The King
being not far from thence in the Priory of Boneport, sent the Lord of
Cornwell to sound the defendants minds, and to see whether the example of so
many other places which had received his ensigns, would move them to do the
like. John Graville was governor thereof, who being resolute to stand out, the
Baron said unto him, that he did ill to oppose himself against the King of
Englands forces, for he would undertake himself alone with very few more to
pass over that River in despite of him and all his people, offering to wage
with him hereon his helmet with 500. Nobles in it, against the best horse in
his Stable. Graville accepted of the wager, and placed great troops upon the
passages, James Harcourt being come to him from Estempes with 800. fighting
men, and 12000. of the Country people. The Baron failed not to make good his
word the next day: he brought along with him 600. almost all archers (amongst
whom was a young son of his own of fifteen years of age) one horse, and
some little field pieces, all which he conveied over in eight barks, to a
little Island situated in the midst of the River: from whence shooting at the
enemy who were upon the further bank, he so disordered them with his small
peeees and his artillery, as that they were feign to save themselves, Harcourt
retiring himself to Estempes, Graville to Ponte d'Arcke, and the rest to the
woods, so as being past over without resistance, and having Knighted his son,
he put himself in battle array, and sent back the boats, to the end that they
with some others that he had provided, might convey over about a thousand
soldiers, with which he did not only maintain skirmish against the garrison
of the Fort, but lodging himself in Mortamer Abbey, he ransackt the Country,
putting them all in fear and disorder. Graville being afterward jibed at for
having so poorly maintained the passage against so few men, replied, That if
he had been so seated as was he, he would have hindered the passage, not only
against him, but against England and France put together. But the seat was not
the right reason of this, it was rather the bowmens cunning, and the terror,
which without any evident cause does surprise even the stoutest hearts, by the
ancients called fate, but by us, divine providence, the which is then more
particularly seen, when greater things are done then were the means whereby
they were done. The next day the Duke of Clarence passed over with 4000.
fighting men, and the King causing a bridge to be made on Roans side, made
himself Master of the field, so as the Country people having no place to
repair unto, the greatest part fled elsewhere, and Graville having withstood a
siege of three weeks, despairing of succor, yielded the Fort, their lives and
goods saved.

Roan yet remained, not that there were not many other Towns yet not taken in,
but because if she were once taken, the rest would come in of themselves
without one blow stricken. The King of France and Duke of Burgony, had sent
thither made Captains and soldiers to boot with the great number of
inhabitants, who were all resolved rather to die then to suffer the English
subjection. This siege was laid when the corn was not yet gathered in, to the
end that hunger might assist the other forces. The King took up his quarter
amongst the Cheartosine Monks his brothers, and Lords quartered themselves in
seven other places, to wit, upon Saint Kathernes hill, and over against the
gates of Saint Hillary, Caux, Martinville, Beauvais, the Castle and the bridge.
The defendants made many fallies to impeach the besiegers works, slew some of
them, and lost some of their own, retiring themselves sometimes with their
swords bloody, sometimes with bloody heads. But for all this they could not
hinder them from securing their quarters with great ditches and works, and
from accommodating themselves, as that though they found all the adjacent
houses, Churches, and Monasteries beaten down, and razed (particularly Saint
Severe, Richburg, Saint Gervais, M^rtenville, the Arsenalle, and the Galleyes
that were in it) yet they used such diligence, as that they wanted nothing
requisite for a long siege, as they thought this would prove, the Cities
strength being considered, and the Citizens resolution; who on the contrary
side chased out of the City all such as had not wherewithal to victual
themselves, easing themselves (out of the number of 210000. mouths which were
numbered in the City of 12000. of the most unusefull ones, as old men, women,
children, and religious people; who did afterward all of them almost dye for
hunger in ditches, for they were not suffered to pass any further, that the
City might be enforced to take them in again, the which she did not: one of
the evil effects of war amongst those who do defend themselves, being to
lay aside all manner of charity, even though it concern their own blood, so
as the King was constrained (the moanes and outcryes of the miserable people
flying up to heaven) afterward to succor them, to keep them from utter
perishing. He sent the Earl of Warwick and the Baron Talbot to Caudebec, a
place upon the Seen, between Roan and Harfleur, wherewith they agreed for the
passage of the English Vessels over the River, and that that Town of Caudebec
should surrender it self as soon as Roan should either be taken or
surrendered. They gave ostages hereupon, and suffered an hundred Vessels to
pass over, which came from the Fleet, to cast Anchor under Roan. He made a
bridge over the uppermost part of the River toward France, and displaied three
chains, a Canon shot off from the walls; the one a fooot and a half, under
the water, the second equal with the superficies of the water, and the third
two foot above the water; bereaving them thereby of all manner of succor. And
because their many salleyes were the cause of the loss of many of his men, to
no purpose, he endeavored to take it in by famine, being sure that their
obstinacy could not continue long. Those of Saint Katherins, who had not been
diligent in making their provisions, yielded themselves at the first months
end, their lives saved, but not their goods: The field this mean while was full
of Burgonian, Daulphinist, and English Colors, all of them to each other
enemies, so as if the former two did back together, the third made booty, the
two carrying away what the third left.

At this same time sixteen hundred Irish arrived at the Camp, conducted by the
Lord Kilmayne, ill armed, and but badly clothed; but of such agility and
valor, as they were commended beyond all the rest: whereupon a news being
given out, that the French were coming to succor the town, they were placed
where it was thought the French would come; they received this charge with
unexpressible joy; and though the succor came not, they ceased not to do much
mischief, going and returning with more speed, and to better purpose, then the
horses themselves either could or would have done.

The City had suffered much ever since October, their victuals were spent,
happy were they that could get either Horses, Dogs, Cats, Mice, or such like
uncleanness to eat. The poorer sort of people, if in the streets they met any
one with any thing of livelihood, they would fly upon him, blows nor wounds
not availing to make them to desist. In three months space no meat had been
publicly sold, and those who had means to purchase any, paid excessive
prices: above 50000. persons died of hunger, during this siege. They sent
Eustace Paville, a Doctor to acquaint the King and Duke of Burgony with their
misery, who when he had showed how great evils they had suffered, only that
they might preserve their faith and loyalty, protested that if they should be
enforced to yield themselves, the King and Kingdom of France should have no
greater enemies then they. The answer was gracious, that the King would
preserve his good City of Roan, that within a few days he would so succor
it, as that the enemy should rather bethink themselves how to escape away,
then any longer to continue the siege. Words which proved to no effect, yet
necessary to hinder the proceedings of the English to the cost of the miserable
besieged; but not able to succor them by force, he bethought himself how to
give them comfort by a treaty of peace. Cardinal Vrsino was about this time
come from Avignon, sent by Pope Martin the fifth, to find out some means how
to agree these two great Princes. The first thing he treated of, was that they
should send their Ambassadors to Pont d'Arcke, as they did; but the time being
spent in disputes and no conclusion made, he resolved to go himself to the
walls of Roan. He spoke with King Henry, he presented him with the Picture of
the Lady Catherine of France, the best means as he thought whereby to persuade
him. The King after he had well considered her beauty, and praised it, seemed
to be desirous of the match, if she should come endowed with a million of
gold, with the Province of Normandy (by him almost wholly conquered) the
Province of Acquitany (by him likewise in a great part possessed) the County of
Poictou, and all the other Signiories which did formerly belong and were
hereditary to the Crown of England; adding that he would have them free from
having any dependancy upon France. The which seeming very hard to the French
Deputies, the conference was dissolved: For besides the abovesaid pretensions,
the English Deputies explained themselves, that Charles by reason of his
sickness, was not fit to make treaties, nor the Dolphin, as not being King,
nor the Duke of Burgony, as not having power to dispose of the inheritance and
dependances of the Crown: That therefore it did necessarily follow, there was
no accord to be made but by the sword, which was only able to satisfy the
one, and enforce the other.

The breach of this Treaty did almost quite dead the hopes of the besieged; yet
did they a while languishin agony, by reason of the great preparations which
were made throughout all Picardy: but as soon as they perceived that the King
and Duke of Burgony, distracted through their jealousies of the Dolphin, could
not succor them, they resolved to hazard their lives (less valued then their
pretended liberty) and to go themselves to procure and bring in succor; the
which they could not do, but by breaking through the Camp; 10000. of them
well armed (the rest remaining to defend the City) rushed furiously out of a
gate, from whence they were not gone two miles, when the rafters of the bridge
breaking, as many as were upon it fell into the water, and those who remained in
the town issued out at another gate to save their companions; the which they
could not so soon do before the English had already fought with them and
driven them back. Those who fell, shared all of several misfortunes, few of
them escaping, being either drowned, broken or wounded. The bridges rafters
were cut in two by Guy Buttler, after the place was surrendered; he was thought
to have caused them to be cut, only because he had sworn loyalty to King
Henry, and was become his subject. The Duke of Burgony did not cease though in
this desperate case, to flatter them with hopes of succor, and that they might
believe him, he said, he would do that which he was far from being able to
effect. He brought the King and Queen to Beauvais, and caused great troops of
armed men to come thither, which served to no other use, then to be an
oppression to the Countries through which they passed. Hither for their last
Embassy came new soliciters from Roan the midst of December, who laid open what
miserable famine they suffered: the misery that those endured who being shut
out of the city, died in ditches, that they were forced to take up such
children as were there borne, in baskets over the walls to baptize them; and
being baptized, to convey them down again to their mothers, who rather
expected death then life. That many died unbaptized; evils which had happened,
and did happen for their service done unto the King and Duke of Burgony,
whilst they on their sides had done nothing that they ought to have done, and
had promised: that they could expect no longer: that if succor were not
immediately sent, they would render themselves to the King of England. And with
this protestation they renounced what ever former loyalty, faith, oath, service
and obedience, declaring themselves discharged thereof, since they were by them
abandoned. They were mildly answered, that the King could not as yet succor
them: But that shortly he would not fail to do it. But not satisfied with
this unlimited answer, the Duke promised to succor them the fourth day after
Christmas. Whereupon returning with more appearance of danger then hope, they
were but sadly received.

At this time les Sieurs d'Arcourt, and de Meurle had gathered together two
thousand fighting men, with a resolution to try their fortune. They placed
themselves in ambush, in two several places, not above 2 leagues from the
English Camp; yet so near together as that they might aid one another. To
allure the English, they sent out an hundred and twenty horse, who meeting with
certain English, who were lodged in a little village, slew the greater part of
them: the few that escaped, gave an alarm unto the Camp, believing that they
who had set on them, were the forerunners of the succor. The King commanded
the Lord Cornovallia to discover the truth. The Baron took along with him, six
hundred horse; and for guide, those who had brought the news: not far from
thence he discovered the enemies troops, who turning about, clapped spurs to
their horse, and ran to the place of ambush, giving as great alarm to their
leaders, as the English had done to Henry. But the Baron made such haste, as
finding them in disorder, and possessed with fear, he made some of them betake
themselves to their heels, charged other some, killing and taking two hundred
and forty, of which number were Monsieur de Moreule, Butor, Delroys Bastard,
and many other Gentlemen: Harcourts horse saved him, and the Baron made a quick
return unto the camp, with victory, news, and prisoners.

In Beauvais where the King, Burgony, and Council were, (as has been said)
nothing was treated of, but how to succor Roan: after long debate it was
concluded, That during the enemies might and power, the Kings and Dukes forces
were not sufficient to make him raise the siege. The Duke perceived this, but
not with the same eye as did others: For he considered that if he should meet
with any notable disaster in the succor, together with Roan, he was to lose
the advantage of forces he now had over the Dolphin: That the loss of that
City, though it would be a loss unto him, yet he therein should have sharers:
whereas the loss of a battle would disorder and discompose his authority, his
government, and his particular designs. A cautelous, but bad consideration: A
Prince who sits at the helm in a Kingdom, ought to prefer the public
before his private good; nay, here his own peculiar good consisted in the
public welfare: for his authority and greatness depended upon the well
managing of affairs; he should have succored Roan, though with never so much
danger, for in the loss thereof, he lost his reputation both with his friends
and enemies. And though it had been impossible for him to effect it (as indeed
it was) yet should he have attempted it, for in matters of difficulty, the
world accepts of the will for the deed; he should have shadowed the weakness
of his forces, and in the fail of fortune, have given a rich testimony of his
worth and valor; he might have presented himself, and not have been enforced
to fight. King Henry was content to defend his trenches, and prohibit succor,
not troubling himself about ought else: It made not for him to quit his
trenches, and leave them to the desperate sallies of the besieged, to the end
that he might to no purpose, and with much danger fight with the enemy in open
field, whilst by fitting still he overcame, his only end being to win the
Town, without or blood or danger; and though it had behooved the Duke to
adventure a battle, the disadvantages were counterpoised. A City wherein was
above 15000. defendants resolved to dye: despair, an obstinate defense, almost
not to be overcome: so as the enemy being fewer in number, and set upon behind
and before, if he were not overcome, would at least be weakened, and though he
should win the place, would be so weakened in his forces, as that he could not
make any further progress. The victory at Cressis, and Ajencourt had only
advantaged him in affording him a means of saving himself; for the small
number of his soldiers, and his requisitnesse to pass the sea to reinforce
himself, took from him the benefit of his victory. On the contrary side, the
loss of men would not be of much moment to so populous a Kingdom, able of it
self forthwith to furnish more: For great bodies are not moved, much less do
they fall for one shocke.

The battle of Poictiers would not have been of great moment, had not the
King been taken prisoner: for this now in question, the soldiers were only
to be hazarded; and grant the loss of the day, Roan suffered no mischief,
which without this hazard was assuredly lost. But for my part I believe that
the Duke did never really intend this succor, knowing that (to boot with his
fears of the Dolphin) it was impossible for him to force a well disciplined
victorious army, within its trenches, under a powerful King, and great
commander, unless he were mainly assisted by fortune. And events being
uncertain, are not of force enough to persuade to dangerous and irrevocable
resolutions. The which if it were so, it may be inferred, that the reiterated
hopes given to the besieged, the making of them suffer so much, and at last
yield themselves with so undoing a disadvantage, was one of those errors upon
which they fall, who make use of public calamity, for their own peculiar
good. Had he prolonged that siege to win time, to withold the proceedings of
the English, and quite break them off by some great undertaking, he could not
have been accused; but his not caring though all were lost, so as the Dolphin
did not advance, proves it to be true, That who has double ends does always
amiss; since the moments of reputation, are not measured by the moments of
time, which leans upon things casual; but by order, which depends upon the
rules of wisdom and fidelity: a principal condition of him that governes,
from which whosoever has at any time swerved, has ever had the heavens and
fortune for his adversaries. The examples hereof are so frequent, in past and
present times, as it is a wonder so many do stumble against this rock.

The resolution of not succouring the Town being taken at Council table, all
the soldiers were dismissed, save such as were to be put in garrison upon the
face of Normandy, and of the Dolphin. As Soon as the King was gone from
Beauvois, those of Roan were secretly admonished by the Duke to surrender
themselves upon the best terms they could. A death doing adue, which did
utterly astonish and affright them. They were not permitted to die fighting,
for the enemy was in a condition of not being enforced to fight; and say those
of them who should fight, should die, a greater number yet remained behind
unable to fight. They resolved to send a Herald for a safe conduct. The which
being granted, they sent six Ambassadors, who were brought before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Warwick, who had commission to hear
them. Their answer was, that the King would not admit of their surrender upon
any terms, save such as should best like himself. Whereupon a great assembly
of Council being had in the City, it was resolved that losing the foundation
of some part of the wall, and then underpropping it, to the end that they might
make it fall when they pleased, they would set diverse parts of the Town on
fire, then place the women and children in the midst of the armed men, and so
throwing down the wall outward, they would sally forth in that manner with a
resolution either to die or to make their way through the enemy, whither their
fortune would lead them. But the King hearing of this, and desirous to have the
City whole and undemolished, sent back for the Ambassadors, with whom he
concluded the surrendering of the Town. Thus writes Monstrelet, and with him
the French authors, who as in this, so in many other things have punctually
followed him. I will tell you what the English say of this. The City sent
twelve commissioners who were brought unto the camp, whilst the King was at
Mass; which being ended, and they admitted, he gave them audience with a
severe countenance. Those who had order to speak, said unto him, That the
glory of victory in the taking in of Towns, and assubjecting of people, did
consist in manifest worth: That there was no worth shown, and consequently no
glory won in the taking of their Town, since it was consumed by suffering,
not by the sword. That therefore if like a generous Prince he would suffer
those who were ready to perish for hunger to come forth, that they might seek
for their livelihood elsewhere, and use his milltary rigor with such as
remained, he should by conquering them, win that true glory, which a great King
and valiant Captain ought to seek after. The King having heard their
indescreet demand, and thought a while on it, replied, That he had thought they
were come to surrender the City, not to read lessons to him. But that he did
not wonder at it, for arrogance is the for erunner of ruin. That the conceit
they had of him came short of his condition, because they either thought him so
ignorant of moral virtues, as that he was to learn of them, or such a novice
in war, as to govern himself therein according to their rules and precepts.
And to the end they might perceive their error, he would read them a lecture,
That they should therefore know that nature having been liberal in some habit
of strength to all sensible creatures, giving the use thereof in one sort to
buite creatures; in another to men, she had given every creature some defensive
arms, except man, who being borne naked, would be inferior to all other, if
God had not given him understanding, whereby he offends others and defends
himself better then any of them. So as if he use advantageous weapons against
beasts, he is not therefore to be blamed, because he follows the instinct of
nature, who not having endued him with weapons, has showed him (because he
should have no reason to complain of her) how to subsist without natural
arms. That therefore if strength be a virtue, it consists not in the strength
of the body (then beasts would be more virtuous then men) but in the
understanding, which makes him that has least force overcome what has more.
The which if it be to be understood between man and beast, much more between
man and man, for whom this and all other virtue is only predicamentall. And
though there be diverse means whereby to compass it, yet war is the
chiefest, And as every art has its instruments, so are sword, fire and famine,
the instruments of war, of the which the commander makes use by turns;
wisdom the soul of warlike strength, is the only chuser and moderator of
them; so as if she be by reason induced to quit the one for the other, none
will blame her. That therefore if he who was chief commander would have used
the sword against the desperate (as they desired) it would not argue strength
in him, since he might obtain the victory without exposing his men to
slaughter; whose safeguard is the chief end of a good King and wise commander.
That it sufficed him to have sufficiently showed that he feared not to use the
sword, and that he was ready to demonstrate it when occasion should require:
That France and they knew this to their cost: Fire made not for his purpose,
he loved what was his, That he would preserve those conquests, the possession
whereof was due unto him by his ancient and lawful hereditary right, with out
the right of Arms: a known title, and which of it self did render his
conquests undoubtedly just. So as these two instruments being for the formerly
alleged reasons laid aside, famine did remain, as the only proper means to
vanquish them: The which did not bereave him of praise nor glory, since he was
prompted thereunto not through want of courage, but through wisdom and
understanding. For the point of sufferings, That he wondered they had a tongue
to pronounce them, since in general they could only accuse themselves, for
from the beginning they might have made choice of that, which now by necessity
they were forced to do. And in this particular they had no excuse to justify
them: For the putting forth of their gates, Citizens borne in the same Country,
privileged by years, as were old men and children; by sex, as were women; and
by profession, as were the Friars and Monks, was an action as inhumane as
contrary to all Laws. Hereunto might be added that they expected that succor
from him an enemy which was denied them by them their friends, fellow Citizens
and parents, who had exposed them to the injuries of air, famine, cold, and
all manner of miseries: That they had done them all the mischief they could,
and yet blamed him (who had done them all the favors an enemy could do)
because he would not suffer them come forth of their trenches, as if he had not
more reason to keep them in, then they to drive them out; the only reason
which had moved them to so inhumane an action (if it might be termed a
reason) being the prolonging for some few days more, at the cost of the
innocent, their own nocent obstinacy which was that which did only deserve
fire and sword, and (if nature had permitted it) not one but redoubled famins.
That in answer to their demands, he would have them know, that though he knew
he was sufficiently able to conquer them with the sword, he would not do it;
the means he had made choice of, being the fittest and safest for his
soldiers, and the best suiting with their deserts; That he would keep on his
course, and that when they should be humbled with famine, he would further
humble them with such punishment as their obstinacy did deserve. This being
said, he retired himself with an angry countenance into his lodgings,
commanding his officers to keep them at dinner with them. These people were as
much astonished at the Kings wisdom, as they were at his power; After dinner
having advised of what was to be done, they desired another audience, the which
was by the King graciously granted them; They desired a truce for eight days,
and having obtained it, returned to the City. The English set up in their camp
three rich tents, one for their Commissioners, one for those of the City, and
the third for the one and the other to confer together in. The King named the
Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, the Baron Fitzhugh, Sir Walter Hungerford,
Sir Gilbert Humfreville, and Sir John Robsert, together with John Vasques of
Almadas, the City, John Buttler and six more.

The eight days were spent in contentions, accusations, excuses, demands and
denialls, nothing being concluded: Whereupon, when those of the City took
their leaves, they compassionately begged a prorogation of the truce till the
suns next rising, and obtained it: When they were returned to the City, they
found the people in such an uproare, as that they ran in danger of their lives,
so as they went early the next morning to Sir John Robsert, entreating him to
interceede for a second prorogation of truce for four days. To the which the
King again giving way, the surrender of the Town was agreed upon the first
day of the four, upon three and twenty Articles. The chief of the which were,
That they should pay unto the King 365000 French Crowns, that Robert Linet,
Vicar general to the Archbishop, John Giordane, Captain of the Crosse-bowes,
and Allen Blancard, should be delivered to the Kings disposal. That they
should swear perpetual fealty to him, and all the Kings of England; and that
so doing, they should enjoy all immunities and privileges which they had
enjoyed in the reign of Saint Lewis. That those who would, might have leave to
depart, carrying nothing along with them but one ordinary suit of apparel.
That the Soldiers marching out unarmed with a white staff in their hands, and
one only suite, should swear not to bear Arms against the King for one
year next ensuing. This City was surrendered the 19 day of January 1419. Guy
Buttler, accompanied by the best of the Town, brought the keys; and the Duke
of Exceter took possession, placing Corpse de guarde, and Sentinels where he
thought necessary. The next day the King made his entrance, waited upon by
four Dukes, ten Earls, eight Bishops, sixteen Barons, and a great many
Knights, being met by the Clergy and Citizens, who led him to the chief
Church, where he was received by the Archbishop, and Cannons. As soon as he
had given thanks, he gave order for repair of the ruins; and causing
proclamation to be made, that all such Cities and Towns as would willingly
submit themselves to his obedience, should enjoy their former privileges,
Caudebe, Monstravillier, Diepe, Fescampe, Arques, Chasteau, Neuf, Dencourt,
Vernon, Mante, Gourne, Honfleur, Pont de Mer, Triet, Tancarville, Abrichier,
Moleurier, Vallemont, Nucaville, Ballacombre, Fontenes, Nugondeville, Logembre,
Saint German upon Calli, Bodemont, Bray, Villaterra, Ciarles, Menill,
Ferefonte, Beccrispin, Baqueville, and many other Towns, sent him, their
keys, and received in English Garrisons. The Country people, and such as
lived in the fields, did the like; so as the white Cross of France was changed
into the red of England. Normandy fell into the hands of the English 229
years. After the time that Philip the second took it from John King of
England, which was the year of our Lord, 1190. Allen Blancard was beheaded,
and the other two reserved to be disposed of as the King should please, were
sometime after restored to their liberty, having paid therefore great sums
of money, and the government of the City was conferred upon the Duke of
Gloucester.

The Duke of Burgony was he who suffered more then any other in this loss,
whose authority being grounded upon the peoples good opinion, was in danger to
have fallen upon his opposite. The evils which happened thereupon, were to be
imputed to him alone; he was the directer (if not rather the corrupter) of the
State: he who by his evil practices had got possession of the Kings person,
had through his ill government obscured his luster, lost his reputation, and
lessened his command; not void of suspicion that he had intelligence with the
King of England, to suppress the Dolphin: a fault not to be averred, because
it was not true, the opinion thereof though, likely to cause his ruin. He
could not contest against two enemies, it behoved him to reconcile himself
with one of them. His natural hatred, his faction, his ancient and new
injuries: his opinion of him to be of an humor not to be trusted, his behoving
to yield the government to him, and the often denied agreement between them,
made him despair of reconciliation with the Dolphin. With King Henry, set the
war aside (which may notwithstanding be maintained between generous Princes,
without malignity or hatred) he had nothing of injury or offense. His affairs
(being reconciled to him) were not only to be continued in their present
condition, but bettered: for his forces would be preserved entire, to contend
more vigorously against another: The which being well weighed by him, he chose
the later, and sent express messengers unto Henry, to persuade him to send
Ambassadors; with whom at Troyes in Champania a truce was concluded, by means
whereof the two Kings (meeting in a Park near Melune) might treat of a peace.
And though King Charles came not thither (hindered by a new access of his
accustomed indisposition) the Queen, her daughter, and the Duke, failed not to
come. This fair Princess was by them of purpose brought, out of hopes that the
beams of her beauty dazzling King Henry's eyes, might make him desist from his
rigorous pretenses, so as peace might be the easilier made, and upon more
advantageous conditions: but where honor and love do intershock; Honor
though a friend, cannot but treat Love like an enemy: Honor is not Honor, if
encountering with passions, it overcome them not. So as the King, though he were
much taken with her, did not forgo any thing he had formerly pretended unto,
hoping if he could not get her by peace, to win her by war. They came not at
first to the Rendevous, but having made choice of two neighboring places, the
Queen tarried at Pontouse, the King at Mantes, where he kept his Whitsuntide,
and made there three Earls, Gaston de fois, a great man in Gascony, he made
Earl of Longaville: John Gray, Earl of Tancherville, and the Lord Bourchiere
Earl of Eu. The day of meeting being come, the King departed, accompanied by a
thousand horse, and came into the Park, followed by the Dukes of Clarence,
Gloucester, and Exceter, and by Henry Beaufort, brother to Exceter, a Clergy
man; by the Earls of Marsh and Salisbury: he there found his Tents pitched,
wherein he reposed himself. The Queen came, accompanied by her daughter, the
Duke of Burgony, the Count Saint Paul, by twenty Ladies and Gentlewomen, and as
many horse. A large pavillion was erected in the midst of the Tents of both
sides, wherein they met. The King kissed the Queen and her daughter, and
received the Duke of Burgony with much respect; and having spent some time in
complements, the rest in business, they took leave one of another, the one
retiring to Pontouse, the others to Mantes. The next day returning to the same
place, they began the treaty, which lasted three weeks, Princess Catherine
not appearing there any more: for it was thought the niceness of her appearing
would produce prodigal effects in him that coveted her. But the King
persisting in his demands, and they in their refusals, no conclusion was made.
This meeting raised mighty jealousies in the Dolphin, thinking it to be a
means to depresse him, as indeed it proved. And having no other means to
break it off, but by proferring to make peace with the Duke, which he had so
often formerly denied to do, he set himself about it, intending to keep it,
with the same mind as he offered it. Tanniques du Chasteau was his adviser,
messenger, and he who put it in execution. Tannigues came in a time when the
Duke (not able to make agreement with the King, without the relinquishing of
many Provinces) was in a strait, either to condescend to the Kings desires, or
to be necessitated to fight at one and the same time, against two powerful
enemies. Whereupon having greedily accepted of the Dolphins offer, and grown
obdurate to the King, Henry (who perceived it) broke off the treaty, saying to
him at his departure, that since by means of peace he could not effect his
desired marriage, he did him to wit that he would obtain it by war; and
together with it King Charles, and all he did desire: and that if he could not
get King Charles his person, he would force him to forsake France, as he would
do him the Duke. To the which the Duke answered; that he might say and think
what he would, but that in the effecting of it he would be so weary, and so
out of breath, that the King of France and he were not likely to be put to much
trouble.

Reciprocal Ambassadors, and Madam de Giac, a favorite of the Dukes, and a
maine mediator in this business, had already accorded all differences with the
Dolphin, and named a seat in Champagnia, near to Melune, for their meeting.
Whereupon the Duke departing from Pontoise, with a many armed men, and
accompanied by the Count Saint Paul, John of Luxenburge, the forenamed Lady,
and many other Lords of great quality, met the Dolphin near Povilli: when they
were come within two bow shoots one of another, they made their followers make
a stand, each of them attended by ten others only passing forwards, the Duke
lighting first from Horseback, bowed himself oft-times to the Dolphin,
before he came up unto him. The Dolphin taking him by the hand, had much ado
to raise him from off his knees, saying that he pardoned whatsoever offense, if
any such he had committed against him, that for the time to come his will
should be governed by the Dukes will, to which end he referred the articles
wholly to him, to be corrected, or altered, wherein they were not satisfactory
to him: the Duke replying with redoubled obsequies they swore the peace, and
after them all the Lords there present; their Soldiers in sign of joy,
mingled one with another, and cursed whoever for the time to come should bear
Arms upon the same quarrel. The Duke would needs hold the Dolphins stirrup,
(though the Dolphin would not have had him do so) and having waited upon him a
good part of the way toward Melune, he took his leave going himself to lodge
at Corbeile. Some are of opinion, that the Duke had been slain at this
meeting, had it not been for fear that their people might have gone together
by the ears, the which would undoubtedly have ensued, to the danger of the
Dolphin, and that which followed does manifestly prove it.

When King Henry heard of this agreement, he easily conceived it to be made to
exclude him: he was not thereat notwithstanding dismayed, it being his use to
increase in daring, as difficulties did increase: and to give a proof hereof,
he forthwith surprised Pontoise. The Marshal Ibeadam was Governor thereof, as
a frontier place, and inlet to the Isle of France, which if the enemy should
win, it would secure unto him not only Roan, but all Normandy; by reason of
former occurrences many English Ambassadors had passed through it; by whose
advertisement the King took occasion to make himself Master thereof, he sent
thither three thousand fighting men, who coming thither about the break of
day, did not only scale the walls, not meeting with any that made the round,
but opened the nearest gate whereby they who remained without entered, and
passed forward in battle array, crying Saint George, the City is taken. The
Marshall who was wakened at this noise, got on horseback, but seeing their
number and order, he thought best to yield, carrying nothing away with him but
what he had in jewels and ready money; the like did the garrison, and about
ten thousand inhabitants which followed him, he went out of the gate toward
Paris, whereof not having the keys at hand, he caused it to be broken open,
for all delays were dangerous. Thus did the English make themselves Masters of
this place, not without ransack, though without blood. King Charles not well
pleased with this neighborhood, withdrew himself to Trois in Champagnia,
followed by the Queen, his daughter, the Duke and Council; leaving the Count
Saint Paul, and Eustas de Lactres, Chancellor of France, in charge with the
government of Paris; the Marshall went to Beauvois, another fronteire City of
Normandy, intending to keep it more warily then he had done the other; and he
had need to do so, for he had lost his reputation in the loss of Pontois,
and rendered him more hateful to the Dolphin then to all the rest: the winning
of Gissors, accompanied this conquest, received to mercy the Duke of Clarence;
whilst the Earl of Huntington, and Sir Philip Lys did each of them make much
havocke about Cleremont, Abeveile, and Pont de Reine, returning loaded with
prey and prisoners. Chasteangalliard and Roccagion, the two strongest places of
Normandy, (guarded by the Dolphins people) were at one and the same time
besieged: the latter yielded at two months end, the other held out sixteen
months; nor had it then yielded, had it not been for want of cordage to draw
up water; a thing unheard off, and whereby we may believe, that they had made
use of their sheets, and all other things fitting for the like business.

The Dolphin this mean while was not at peace within himself: for no torture
does more torment the soul of man, then that which gnawes thereon betwixt
resolution and execution of a premeditated wickedness. The fear he had the
Duke of Burgony should make peace with the King of England, had forced him to
reconcile himself with the Duke. The appearing end was the home peace between
them, that they might join in expelling the foreign enemy. So did every one
think and not without reason, having compassed his first desire in the breach
of the treaty, he betook himself to a second; to quit himself (under the
security of reconciliation) of the association of an hated colleague: the
Kingdom was not capable of two heads; he imagined that the Dukes ambitious
spirit, would never give way unto him, nor would ever withdraw himself from
government, whilst he had in his hands the Kings person, was favored by the
Queen, and had the people at his disposal: Besides all these provocatives, he
was naturally an abhorrer of such contracted friendship: Resolving then to have
his life, he came to Monstreau upon the River Jone accompained by 20000.
soldiers; from whence he writ unto him; that having a great many soldiers
about him, and desirous to employ them about some useful action, he desired
him to come unto him, that they might consult what to make choice of. The Duke
were it either that he did not think good to resolve upon any such thing,
without the participation of the King and Council, or that he did not affie in
him, sent back Tannigues, who had brought him the letters, with this answer:
that business of this nature required the assent of King and Council, and
that since he the Dolphin could do nothing more acceptable to the King and
Queen, he wished him to come himself unto them, since their authority was
requisite in such like resolutions. But the Dolphin, who had already put on his
resolution, which was not to be effected without him, sent Tannigues again
unto him, who knew so well how to persuade him, as that he brought him to Bray,
where he tarried, thinking more considerately upon his business; he bethought
himself that to go without forces, was dangerous, and not to go, was to
proclaim a diffidency: the first uncertain, the second most certain; and
that if he should misdoubt him, he should be thought a man of small belief,
being overcome by redoubled embassies he was persuaded to the worst. The Bishop
of Valensa, brother to the Bishop of Langres, one of the Dukes ancient and
cabinet Counselors, was he who most egged him on to this. Valensa being abused
by the Dolphin, did abuse his brother, and he his Master, showing him that
under such promises, such witness, and between so great Princes, faith could
not be falsified; that treachery would be too apparent, which would not only
prove ignominious but dangerous to the Dolphin; and that the Castle of
Monstrueill, which he gave unto him, might be a pawn unto him of his true
meaning, and safety of the Dukes person, wrought upon by these reasons he came
thither, (his hour being come) waited on by 400. horse, and 200. archers upon
Sunday the tenth of September 1419. at three a clock after dinner; a little
before he came thither, he was met by Anthony Tolongones (who had bin to spy
what was done at Montreville who wished him to bethink himself well, for the
bars that were placed upon the bridge, (the place appointed for their parley)
were to his disadvantage, if the other had any intention to proceed fowly with
him, wherewithal some what surprised, he stayed a while, taking new advice;
some diswaded him from going, showing him that to believe well, and have a good
opinion in enemies, was good in the golden age; but for the present times they
served only to supplant the security of life: others persuaded him to go,
alleging an impossibility that the Dolphin would commit so infamous and
unexcusable a treachery; whereupon after having a while bethought himself, he
said, he must go lest it might be said, a womanish fear had made him make a
new breach, which was not to be shunned; if he should doubt the Dolphins so many
letters, promises and oaths: that though he had reason to proceed more
cautiously in this business, yet the world would not conceive the reason
thereof, nor would concur in the establishing of peace, if for the present he
did not adventure his life, that he might very well lose it, but not without
the greatest infamy that could befall the basest man alive, much more so great
a Prince as was the Dolphin: Thus opinioned he passed forward, he entered by the
gate which opens into the fields, into the Castle, which he found trimd up for
him with all pomp, and hospitable magnificence: he placed a hundred foot to
guard the gate which opened into the Town, placing the rest in order without;
the which he had no sooner done, but Tannigues came to advertise him that the
Dolphin expected him, making new promises and new oaths unrequired: the ten
which the Duke was to bring along with him, were Charles of Burbon, John of
Friburg, Messieurs ae Novaile, Saint George Montague, and d'Ancre, Antony of
Vergi, Guie of Pontaisler, Ciarles of Lens, and Peter de Giac, to the which he
added Peter de Sanguinat, one of his Secretaries, giving order to the rest to
stay behind: when he came to the first bar, he met some sent to meet him,
who by renewing the so often reitterated promises, made him suspect somewhat,
and had almost made him return back, but his own men made him pass on,
alleging that so much treachery was not to be imagined, and that they were
likely to run the same shipwreck as was he; when he was passed the second
bar it was presently locked, which did a little amaze him; yet resting his
arm upon Tannigues shoulder, who was come to receive him, he said to St.
George, this is the man on whom I rely; when he was come to the Dolphin, (who
with his corslet and sword by his side stood leaning against a bar) he
kneeled down before him, saying he was come to receive his commands; but he
giving him but a cold welcome, upbraided him with the not observancy of what
was agreed on between them; and for not having made war against the English,
nor taken the garrisons from such places as should according to their articles
be restored to him: to which the Duke replying, that he had done what was to be
done against the English, and that he had made surrender of all such places, as
by articles he was bound to do; Robert de Loyre took him underneath the arm,
saying he was too great a Prince to be so long upon his knees, but as he lifted
him up, finding his sword behind his back, as the Duke with his hand would
have put it in its right place, Robert said, will you lift your hand against
the Dolphin? and at the same instant, Tannigues having said to his companions,
now is the time, he struck at him with a hatchet thinking to have cleft his
head, but did only take his chin away; at which blow he fell with one knee
upon the ground; and laying hand on his sword, wounded as he was with many
blows borne to the ground, whilst Oliver Laiet thurst his sword into his belly
up to the hilts; Monsieur de Novaille, brother to the Count de Fois, as he was
about to defend him, was hindered by the Vicount of Narbone, who opposed him
with a dagger, and whilst he flew furiously upon him, to have taken his dagger
away, he was by others slain: Friburg doing his duty likewise was taken
prisoner. St. George was wounded in the flank, and d'Ancre in the hand,
Montaigne leaping over the bars got into the Castle, the Secretary and all the
rest were taken prisoners, those of the Castle perceiving the bickering, and
not knowing of the Dukes death, came forth to the palisado, but driven back by
the bowmen, fled to Bray, beaten slain, taken, and losing all they had.
Monsieur de Jouvelle and Montaigne, with some soldiers, and about some thirty
of the Dukes servants and pages, fortified themselves within the Castle, but
wanting victuals, they yielded it up, their lives and goods saved. All the
Dukes furniture and jewels which were many and of great worth, were reserved
for the Dolphin; such prisoners as would not take the oath, had ransomes set on
their heads, and those who would were set at liberty. Charles de Lens Admiral
of France and who was constant in his friendship to the Duke till his last
gasp, was slain upon cold blood. John Lovet President of Provence, the
Vicount Narbone, William Butler, Tanniques de Chasteau, Francis de Grimaux,
Robert Loire, Peter Frotiere, Oliver Laiet, and ^onchore de Namae, Marshall
Seneshall of Auvergnia, were the authors of this parricide; Madam de Giac was
thought a confederate in this business, for that the deed being done, she
withdrew herself unto the Dolphin; Monsieur de Barbasan not guilty of the
treachery, but present when it was done, said unto the rest that they had
ruinated their Masters reputation, and wished rather to have been dead, then
present at so wicked an action: the Dukes body was laid upon a table, and
carried at midnight into a mill, from whence it was taken away the next day and
buried in his calsons with his hat upon his face, his dublet on (the which they
had not taken off because it was bloody, and full of holes) with his boots and
spurs without any Christian decency, save a dosen masses, which were likewise
the oblations of bleeding hands and tears of woe.

This was the end of John Duke of Burgony, surnamed the Undaunted, by him
deserved, by reason of the murder committed twelve years before upon the Duke
of Orleans person, by his command; but his fault did not wash away theirs that
slew him: and though in the former, ambition was the only cause, so as he
could not be more wicked, and in the second hatred, and reason of State; yet
the so often plighted faith, and swearing by the name of God in witness
thereof, makes the latter more wicked and inexcusable.

The Dolphin who had promised himself great advantage thereby, found he was
deceived, for effects are not always taken away by the cutting off their
causes, unless they be wholly rooted out: the son remained a branch from
which did bud forth more ruins, then either could or would have done from the
stock: if the advisers to this business, had had respect to the subjects
relation, to the good and honor of the Prince more then to the jealousy of
his authority, (the which whilst the Undaunted lived, was fading) they would
have seen that dying he left clients, subjects and servants ready to revenge
him; that so detestable an action was sufficient even to alienate the Dolphins
own friends; that the King his father was subject to those that governed him:
that his rulers were the defuncts creatures; his mother more then ever
irreconcilable; the King of England fastened in France; The new Duke of Burgony
as well heir to his fathers injuries, as to his estate and authority; that
being descended from a turbulent family, he was not likely to be quieted
without bitter revenge, though the worlds welfare should therein consist; so as
the interest of servants, which for the most part does ruin such Princes who
are either very young, or ill advised, did undo the Dolphin; who not able in
sincerity of truth to excuse so scandalous an act; endeavored to cloak it by a
falsehood, giving out that the Duke came with an intention to kill him the
Dolphin: but Montaigne published the truth of the business: whereat the King
was troubled, the Queen offended, (who as was thought, did love the Duke more
then became her reputation, after he had delivered her from Towers) and the
people which had always sided with him, were herein confirmed; the Court
remained as before, governed by such as did depend upon him, not staggered by
his fall: He had a son by surname and actions good (who afterward was called
Philip the good) not violent, as was his father, but more wise; so as of the
whole of so great a Kingdom, a little cantle did only side with the Dolphin:
his more southern Provinces (which disjoined from the low Countries, had no
occasion to be annoyed by the Undaunted) were those alone which did sustain
him, and which after a tempestuous voyage brought him safe into the haven,
thanks to the disorder of others; which are the chiefest, and most frequent
occasions of taking away of Kingdoms from some, and conferring them on others:
for the death of King Henry, the underage and weakness of his succeeding
son, and the bad intelligence between the Uncles and Duke of Burgony, (the
reason of their reconciliation) did after many years contrary to all
likelihood, set him on foot again.

Philip Count Carelois (whom henceforth we will call the Duke of 1420
Burgony) understanding his fathers death (after his sorrow and obfequies)
consulted upon what was to be done, he had two advices given him; the one he
should treat well the Duchess his wife, sister to the Dolphin, since she did
not share in the injury done unto him by her brother; the other, that being to
revenge his fathers death, he should seek out the most effectual means how
to do it; that friendship with the King of England being of all others the
likely best, he should offer him peace, and his assistance in his pretenses to
the Kingdom and his marriage; for the Dolphin could by no other means be
debarred of the Kingdom, he who had cooled in his affection to his wife, his
passion overswaying his reason, and who knew her virtue did deserve this
advice, honored her and made much of her as long as she lived, which was but a
small time: for what concerned friendship with England, (his father having
chalked out the way unto him, from whence had he not swerved, he had not died)
he thought he could not choose a better way of revenge; wherefore he answered
the Parisians, who after their condoling with him; desired his assistance
against the English, by Ambassadors which they of purpose sent, that they
should not need to trouble themselves therein; for he hoped with the Kings good
liking, to make a peace, which should secure them, and their friends, the which
he forthwith did; he sent the Bishop of Arras and two more, with such officers
to King Henry, as were very well approved; and the Bishop being returned with
satisfaction, he sent soon after him, the Earl of Warwick and Bishop of
Rochester, with whom the Duke concluded a truce, to endure till such time as a
peace might finally be concluded, by means whereof the way was opened for
commerce, between them, as if the peace had been already concluded; so as the
English soldiers, as friends and confederates, did join with those of France,
and the Duke against the Dolphin: as soon as he had accommodated his home
business, (having obtained of his subjects all he could desire) he came to
Trois, where he plotted the peace and marriage: for King Charles did what he
was persuaded unto, and those who did persuade him, were the Dukes dependants,
and such as were upheld by the Duke.

King Henry being advertised hereof, and nothing now remaining to conclude the
business, but the formality of his Ambassadors, he sent the Duke of Exceter,
the Earl of Salsbury, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Fitshug, Sir John Robsert,
and Sir Philip Hall, with whom the peace, and marriage was agreed upon; the
latter to be celebrated in that very place as soon as the King should come
thither. As soon as the Ambassadors were returned (Robsert only tarrying with
the bridge) the King went from Roan, waited on by his brother Clarence and
Gloucester, the Earls of Warwick, Salsbury, Huntington, Eu, Tancherville,
Longaville, and fifteen thousand fighting men, making his journey by Pontoise,
Saint Dennis, and Sciarantone; where having left some troops to secure the
passage, he came to Trois by the way of Provence, and was met 2 leagues off by
the Duke of Burgony, and the Nobility, which upon the like occasion were in
great number come unto the Court: his first meeting with the King and Queen was
in Saint Peter's Church, where he took his Bride by the hand, and the marriage
was solemnized on Trinity Sunday, with the greatest pomp that ever was seen in
that Kingdom. He corrected and altered the Articles as he pleased; the which
being sworn unto by the King, Duke of Burgony, Princes and Lords, were sent to
be published in both Kingdoms: they were thirty three in number, the chiefest
whereof were, That King Charles should enjoy his dignity, title, and Kingdom,
as long as he lived; That King Henry should be Regent thereof, and afterward
Heir; That neither he nor the Duke of Burgony should make peace with Charles
who termed himself Dolphin, without the consent of the three Estates of both
Kingdoms; That the peace between France and England should be perpetual;
That these two Kingdoms should never be dismembered one from another, but
should be governed by one and the same King, but under their several Laws.

Sens, and Montreville were the two most important places which the Dolphin did
hold in those parts: so as the marriage solemnities being over, they besieged
Sens. This City would have held out longer, had it had any hopes of succor;
but having none, it surrendered it self the twelfe day. Such Soldiers as
would stay in the Kings service, were suffered to depart, their lives and goods
saved; except those who had had a hand in the Dukes death. And though many of
them did for the present accept of the English Cross, they did afterward at
several times for sake it, betaking themselves to the Dolphins service: of the
inhabitants the oath of fidelity and obedience was only demanded. Montreule
held out longer: the Castle was fortified, and provided for a longer siege; but
though they did valiantly defend themselves, the town was taken within a few
days, thanks to the assailants successful rashness, who charged it on sundry
sides, without directions from the King or Duke. When they had taken it,
pursuing their good fortune, and closely following those who fled into the
Castle, they were the cause why many of them were drowned; they took twenty
prisoners, almost all Gentlemen; whereupon the King having lodged his people in
the town, over against the Castle-gate, did yet more narrowly enclose it,
bereaving it of all hopes, save a rational capitulation. But Monsieur de
Guitres, resolute in the defense, was cause why twelve of the twenty prisoners,
whom the King had protested he would hang, if the Castle did not yield, were
immediately hanged before his face, after they had in vain requested him, and
had their request seconded by their wives tears, and friends intercession. His
inexorablenesse was the more to be blamed, for that after so deplorable an
execution he made good the Castle only eight days. He came forth his life
and goods saved, as likewise all such as would not remain in the Kings
service, those only excepted (as formerly) who had had a hand in the death of
the Duke. Guitres, who was accused to be one of them, did defy his accuser, a
Gentleman of the Dukes; but no apparent proofs being found, he was let go.
The Duke had sent diverse Gentlemen, to cause his fathers body to be taken up;
who finding it buried in so miserable a manner, took it up, and wrapped it in
lead, and it was sent to Chertosa in Dijoune, where he was buried near unto
his father. At the same time his people took Villenense, situate upon the same
river, putting all the garrisons to the sword.

The Dolphin on the other side made his progress; for being resolved to out
the Prince of Orrenge (who fought on Burgonies behalf) from such places as he
held in Languedocke, he besieged Saint Esprite, and assisted by Avignon, and
Provence, took it, and drove all the Princes people out of that Country. The
which being done, he returned to Burges, his usual abode, that he might
raise what force possibly he might, intending rather the enemies proceeding,
then to give him battle.

The Duke of Bedford was come from England before the taking in of Montreule,
with two thousand Archers, and eight hundred horses, and was by the King and
his brothers received with much joy. Thus reinforced, he went to besiege
Melune: The King of France came, together with his Queen, from Bray, (where
they had tarried during the siege of Montreule) to Corbeile. Melune was begirt
by two Camps, with artillery and such engines as were then in use for the
taking in of places. Messieurs de Barbasan, and de Preux, commanded seven
hundred fightingmen, who were within the town. By battery, mines, and
trenches, the assailants got shortly underneath the ditch. The Duke of Burgony,
who had made himself master of a Bulwark, did fortify it much to the
prejudice of the besieged. The King built a bridge over the Seen, to serve for
commerce between the two Camps, securing the Banks on both sides with good
corpse de guard; and to free his quarters from danger of surprise, he cut some
trenches on the outside of them, and raised some works upon each end thereof,
that so they might not be assailed without great danger to the assaylors. The
breaches made by battery, were made good by earth and bavens; the besieged
omitted nothing wherein either diligence or foresight might stand them in
stead: one ruin was answered by another, wherein they fought at push of pike,
and wherein the King and Duke of Burgony managed theirs. King Charles was come
unto the Camp, and together with him the Queen accompanied by the Duchess of
Clarence, newly arrived from England, with a great train of Ladies, who were
lodged by King Henry in a house erected of purpose near to his own tents,
without the reach of Canon; so as making use of this occasion, he would try
whether the besieged would yield to their King or no; but being questioned
thereupon, they answered: that if Charles King of France would vouchsafe to
enter there, he should be received with all due respects unto his Majesty; but
not Henry King of England, nor Philip Duke of Burgony, their professed enemies:
he sent this mean while the Duke of Clarence to Paris, giving him the chief
command of the City, to the end that taking possession thereof, he might by
English forces secure the most considerable places therein; as the Basteille,
the Louvre, the house of Neele, and forth there of the Boys de St. Vicenne; the
Count of St. Paul who was chief commander there, was sent to Picardy to
receive the oaths of the Cities of that Province touching the peace with
England, and to except of King Henry as Regent and heir, the which was done
without any opposition: the besieged and besiegers were both but in bad
condition; the one being reduced for lack of better nourishment, to eat all
manner of uncleanesse, the other by reason of the Prince of Orenges departure
(who was gone with his people into Provence to defend his own affairs) and by
the rage of a violent pestilence which had much lessened their numbers;
insomuch as the Duke of Burgony was forced to send the Signior de Luxenburg to
Picardy to raise more men, who returning shortly after with them appeared in so
handsome array before Melune, as that the inhabitants believing they had been
the succor they had so long expected, did not only show signs of joy by the
ringing of bells, but grown insolent did mock the besiegers; an error of
small continuance, yet not sufficient to have made them yield, if the Dolphin
had not at the same time advertised them, that he could not succor them.

This Prince was governed by the wisdom and upheld by the purse of the Count
de Virtue brother to Orleans, and Angolesme, prisoners in England; but he being
at this instant dead, he was like a ship without sails, he could not move
toward the preservation of a place of so great importance. The Town was
surrendered the eighth of September, upon disadvantageous terms; those who were
guilty of the Dukes death, were condemned, a prime article, not to be
forgotten, the soldiers were to be forthcomming till they could put in good
security, not to bear arms under the enemies of either of the two Kings; that
inhabitants submitted to pleasure, their weapons and movables were put into
the Castle. Monsieur de Barbasan, who was accused of being guilty of the Dukes
death, was saved for that there appeared no proofs thereof against him, save
only insomuch as he was the Dolphins servant: This notwithstanding he was sent
prisoner to Paris, and from thence to Chasteau Galliarde; where after nine
years space, he had the good luck to recover his liberty; the place being
then taken by the Dolphins forces, who, his father being dead, called himself
King. Monsieur de Preaux together with five or six hundred Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen, and Citizens, were likewise sent to Paris, put into several
prisons; the chiefest of them into the Basteile; those who were put to death
were few: amongst which was one Bertrand of Chaumont, a Gascoine, a natural
subject of England, for that he was bribed to save Amicron de Lau, an accessory
in the Duke of Burgonies death, and though the Kings brother did intercede for
him (for he had always been valiant) yet could they not obtain his pardon;
for reason of State would not permit Henry to give way unto passion, and to be
partial in the Duke the sons just revenge; moreover in right he was to lose
his life, who saved the life of a delinquent, not through pity but avarice.

Winter growing on, and the soldiers requiring rest after having been so long
in field, the two Kings retired themselves to Paris, being met by the people
and Clergy with great magnificency; they rid together, the King of France on
the right hand, they lighted at the Church of nostre Dame, and from thence,
Charles went to l'Hostell de Saint Paul, Henry to the Louvre, and the Duke of
Burgony to his own house, l'Hostelle de Artois: the next day the two Queens
made their entry in the like manner, and were received by the City with great
expressions of joy, and met by the brothers of the Kings, and Duke of Burgony,
followed by all the Nobility; richly presented by the Citizens; particularly
the Queen of England, and the King her husband.

The Dolphin had been set upon all this while only by the way of war, now
they endeavor to opugne him by the Law; a business which did nothing at all
import Henry's pretenses; his foundations were of another sort, not supported
by these formalities; for without them, without his marriage with Catherine, or
his being adopted by Charles (all of them works of supererrogation in this
case) he was lawful King; but it redounded to his advantage to second the Duke
of Burgonies desires, that thereby, or by what ever other means the Dolphin
might be by the people abandoned. Princes are subject to no seat of justice
save that of conscience; all others are but phansies and tricks: fancies and
therefore not to be despised, for such are often times more embraced by the
people then is reason: whence it happens that their authority being darkened,
and deprived of its luster by contrary opinions, they are subject to the
eclipses of their subjects disobedience. Burgony endeavored the Dolphins ruin
his fathers murderer; he was to open the way thereunto by the peoples fury;
persuade them he could not: for though the fault were very heinous; the guilty
party was by the common Law, and Law of nature of too great authority with
them, being borne their Prince, yet (men always reserving some seeds of equity
in them) he hoped that by objecting this case, clothed with the habit of
justice, dyed in the colors of so many perjuries, treasons and breach of
faith, he might cancel the respect the people bore him, and by degrees draw
them from pity and commiseration, to hatred, and from hatred to arms. Charles
the Dolphin according to the pretended Law Salique (set aside, that Henry's
pretenses were by the people repulsed that so they might repulse his person,
not only as a stranger but as an English man) was presumed heir to the
Crown. Moreover the murder of the Duke of Orleans (set aside the
circumstances) was in its original more wicked then this: if the Duke of
Burgony had then been punished (as of right he ought to have been) in his
estate, the Dolphin had had no occasion to bereave him of his life* so as the
parity of fault, requiring parity of punishment, it was against reason, the
second should be punished by justice, when by injustice the former escaped
unpunished: whilst having no respect to the diversity of the delinquents
qualities, the Dolphin being a privileged person as Sovereign, should be
punished for being so, rather then the Duke for being a subject: let us learn
by this; that men's particular interest is that which ever has, and ever does
pretend; and that severity is quick sighted when the question concerns
others, but blind, when we are our selves concerned.

This cause was pleaded in the presence of both the Kings, the Princes, and
Judges, in the low Hall of l'Hosteile de Saint Paul by the dowager Duchess of
Burgonies advocate and the Duke her sons, who accused Charles (who termed
himself Dolphin) the Vicount of Narbone, Monsieur de Barbasan, Tannigues de
Chasteau, William Butler, John Lovet President of Provence, Robert de Loyre,
Ol^ver Laiet, and others of this murder; he demanded justice, and
particularised in what punishment: this plea was seconded by a Doctor of
Sorbonne (sent thither for this purpose by that College) who by many
allegations drawn from the Scripture, labored to persuade the two Kings, to
punish those who had had their hands in so grievous a fault; but no declaration
being forthwith to be made, without the due proceedings in Law, the Chancellor
answered in the Kings name; that by the advice of the King of England, Regent
of France and his declared heir, all should be done that was requisite in so
important a business: so as the Dolphin being cited to the marble table, with
the accustomed solemnities, and not appearing, he was for his contumacy
declared guilty of the aforesaid murder, fallen from the Crown, incapable of
what ever present, or future succession, and banished the Kingdom: the Dolphin
hearing this appealed to his sword, the which was that alone which afterward
(by the help of the Duke of Burgony his chiefest enemy) did annull the process,
decide the question, and cut in two the sentence.

King Henry was to go for England after Christmas, to make new provision or
war, and to cause the Queen his wife to be crowned; so as 1421
having licenced the three estates, who all had sworn obedience to him, he
went his way, having the Duke of Exeter with five hundred fighting men in
Paris, and in other places good and faithful governors: he stayed a while in
Roan to give order for things belonging to the Duchy, and left therein the
Duke of Clarence his general; from thence he together with his other brethren,
took his way toward Callice, and were received in England with such joy, as
Kings use to receive who return crowned with victory, and accompanied by
wives, rich in dowry, grace and beauty, as was his: she was crowned at
Westminster, on Saint Matthews day, where whilst the pomp and solemnity
exceeded whatsoever of former times, fortune prepared funeral solemnities for
the Duke of Clarence in France; a business which being very diversely reported
by authors, forces me first to recount what the English say thereof, then how
others relate it: for passion within circumstances of winning, or losing, is
very great amongst them, makes them to contradict one another; and who does not
join them together, will hardly be able to extract the truth.

This Prince had made a select choice of Soldiers, out of all the garrisons of
Normandy; he entered Umena, and passed over Loire, placing himself underneath
Angiers, hoping that those of the Town would have fought with him: but they
not issuing forth, he spread himself over the country; where, after having
enriched his people with prey and prisoners, he returned for Normandy. Being
come to Bewford, he understood that a great number of enemies were at Beuges,
conducted by the Duke of Allanson, the Dolphins Lieutenant, who had in company
with him, 26 French Lords, one Spanish Captain, John Earl of Bow han, Robert
his brother, sons to the Governor of Scotland, Archibald Douglas, Earl of
Vigtonia, Alexander Linsay, brother to the Earl of Crayford, and eighteen
Scottish Gentlemen, lately come from Scotland with 700 Soldiers (Buchanan
says, seven thousand:) he was about to set suddenly upon them, but did not:
for, to assail an enemy, not knowing his forces, is like walking in a dark
night in unknown ways. He had at that time, one Ardrea Fregosa, an Italian,
who had been with the French, and who assured him, that the enemy was so few in
number, that half his company was sufficient to rout them: so as believing
this man's relation, who did abuse him, being desirous of glory, he took only
the horse along with him, commanding the Bowmen not to stir, and leaving them
under the command of his son John, called the Bastard of Clarence; between
him and the enemy there was an uneasy and a narrow passage; through which,
when without any opposition he had passed, he discovered the enemy not far
off, and contrary to the relation made unto him, in full and well ordered
troops; whilst he not able to retire, the passage being taken, which if it had
not been, he could not pass over it again in File, as he did before without
danger: it did more avail him to hazard himself by making a stand, then by
giving back to venture the being shamefully cut in pieces. The one side fought
desperately, the other bravely; but the English not being above one for four,
were discomfited, the Duke himself being slain, the Earl of Tancherville,
Gilbert Vmfreville, Earl of Kent, the Lord Ros, Sir John Lumbl^y, and Sir
Robert Verend, and near upon two thousand others; the Earls of Somerset and
Suffolk, the Lord Fitzwalter, Sir John Barckley, Sir Ralph Nevil, Sir Henry
Iuglos, Sir William Bows, Sir William Longiton, Sir Thomas Burrowes, and many
others were taken prisoners. Of the French were slain about twelve hundred of
the best of the Army. The Bastard of Clarence, who after the Dukes departure,
was informed of the number of the enemies, marched with all possible diligence,
to succor him, but came too late; and the French having notice thereof,
retired themselves with their prisoners, and did forsake the Field. The English
buried their dead, and carried the Dukes body along with them, which was
afterward sent from Roan to England, and buried at Canterbury, by his father.
This is the substance of their narration. Chesne and Derplaix say, that the
Duke of Clarence, a wise and valiant Prince, went to fight with the Earl
Bouhan, the Dolphins Constable, and Mr. de Faiette. That the French, though
fewer in number, obtained the victory, having slain three thousand English:
And that the English Historians to defraud the French of this glory, make their
loss less, accusing the Duke of Clarence of rashness, for thatnot trusting
in the French that were with him, he undertook the business with his own men
only. Dupleix further to convince them, asks, what the French men did while
they fought? whether or no they stood with their arms acrosse? and that he
expected they should couple imposturisme to their calumny; and say, that the
French had joined with the Dolphins forces, to their prejudice. Monstrelet
says, that the Duke of Clarence had sent his people into Anjou, where under
the command of the Scottish Constable, and Mr. de Faiette, a great number of
the Dolphinists were met: That Clarence hearing they were at Bawges, took
along with him part of his men, and almost all the chief Commanders, being
followed by the rest aloof off. That he marched toward them with much danger
and pain, by reason of a troublesome passage over a river which he was to
pass. That the Dolphinists being aware of his coming, and provided for him,
after a keen, cruel, and bitter battle, had the victory; That the English
lost between two and three thousand men, the French above eleven hundred; yet
notwithstanding all this, they under the command of the Earl of Salsbury,
recovered the Dukes body. Paulus Emilius writes, that the Duke being come
before Angiers, and having provoked the Garrison, and taxed them of cowardice,
because they did not issue forth, passed forward to a little town, where he
understood the Scots were (who fought under the Dolphins pay) joined to some
companies of French, the which he carelessly set upon, for that he was much
more in number then they: but that being known by a golden circle, which as a
Jewel he wore on his helmet, he was set upon by many of them and slain: That
notwithstanding this, the greatest part of his men retired themselves without
or fear or disorder, unto Umena; where taking upon them the white cross of
France, and finding the bridge over the river cut, they compelled the country
people to re-edifie it, killing some of them, and leading the rest along with
them, lest that the inhabitants being by them advertised, might have followed
them, and that in this manner they got safe to Normandy. He speaks nothing of
the number of the dead. Gaguinus says, that the Duke of Clarence being gone
with a many Soldiers, into Anjou, did incamp himself at Beufort; that being
at table, he was told by certain Scottish Free-booters, who were taken
prisoners, that the French and Scotch were met together at Bawges; whereupon,
rising immediately from the table, he said, they are our own, let none but the
horse follow us: that when he was come to little Bawges, he met with John de
Croix, a valiant French Gentleman, who being got into a Church, and having shut
the door upon him, was got up into the Belfree: that the Duke seeing he spent
his time in vain, set upon the rest; and being himself in the head of his
men, having a garland of Jewels upon his helmet, he was one of the first that
was slain by the French, and many other Lords with him. The Earls of
Huntington and Somerset, and Thomas Beaufort brother to the last, being taken
prisoners. That the rest saved themselves by flight; but that finding the
bridge broken at Umena, they took the white Cross, faigning themselves to be
French, and causing it to be mended by the Country people, they put them all
to death, and passed forwards. Serres reports, that having presented himself
before Angiers, and having no hope to win it, he set upon the French Army
lodged at little Bawges; that out of assurance of victory he was lost: and that
together with him, there were there slain fifteen hundred English. The history
and Chronicle of Normandy relates, that being come into Angier on Easter Eve,
he understood that a great number of Scots were at Bawges; whereupon passing
the river, he in disorder set upon them, not tarrying for his company: that
the Earl Bouhan, a Scot, had the honor of the day, the English being defeated
and slain, he names the great ones, but makes no mention of the rest; but
says, that the bodies of the Duke, and the rest of the Lords, were taken away,
and sent into England. Buchanan reports, that the Duke being informed by Andrew
Fregoso, or some other Scottish Free-booters, that the French were carelessly
disporting themselves at Bawges, as thinking themselves secure, it being good
Friday, a day dedicated to devotion; or were it because there was a truce for
eight days, resolved to set upon them, and that rising from the table, he
commanded that the horse should only follow him; that when he came to Bawges,
he met with some scattering French, who saving themselves in a Belfree, whilst
he in vain did spend his time there, the rest were advertised of his
arrival, that the Earl Bouhan sent 30 Archers to possess the bridge, with
whom Hugh Kened, together with an hundred others who were quartered in a Church
hard by, all of them almost unarmed, as upon such sudden occasions does
oftentimes fall out, did join himself. That the Duke not able to make his
horses take the bridge, being shot at by the enemies, was the first that
lighted, and who won the passage; but that whilst he and those few that
followed him, got on horseback again, and that the rest passed leasurely after
him, by reason of the narrowness of the bridge, he was set upon by Earl
Bouhan, who had not with him above two hundred horse; That they fought with
equal courage, and hatred, the Scots as having an occasion to give proof of
themselves, (for the French were of opinion, that the inhabitants of great
Britain, were good for nothing but to eat and drink: the same opinion which
the Spaniards hold of the French, and the Africanes of the Spaniards) and the
English as having before them an unplacable enemy, who not contented to fight
with them at home, was come to seek them on the other side the Sea: That they
laid load one upon another, the Duke himself fighting more eagerly then did
any other: but that being wounded with a lance in the face by James Luinton,
and unhorst by the Earl Bouhan, who let drive at him with a battle Axe, the
rest all ran away, and were pursued till dark night: that there died about 2000
English, of which six and twenty men of account, besides prisoners, which were
many. Of French and Scots very few, and almost all of the meaner sort. That
others do believe that Alexander Macelselan was he who killed the Duke, having
sold the Duke of Clarence Coronet to John Stewart for five hundred pound, which
was afterward pawned by him to Robert Vstonne, for two thousand five hundred
pound. That the Scots had the greatest share of glory in this business, and
that for this cause the Dolphin made the Earl Bouhan Constable, rewarding the
other commanders according to their deserts. From these expositions may easily
be gathered, that Dupleis the latest of all other Writers, does falsely accuse
the English Historians. Monstrelet witnesses the Duke was fewer in number,
where he says he took but part of his forces; the Chronicle, that he did not
tarry for his men; Gaguinus and Buchanan, that leaving the foot, he took
only along with him the horse; that they tax him of rashness, to rob the
honor from the French; Monstrelet says that he was abused by information,
that he was to make a difficult passage, and that the enemy was advertised and
provided for him. Paulus Emilius, that he set upon them carelessly, as if he did
despise them: that he would take only the horse along with him, believing that
the French were already as good as lost. Serres, that his imagined victory was
the cause why he lost his life: the Chronicles, that he set upon the enemy
disorderly; and Buchanan, that he only made use of the horse; that they have
lessened the loss, they confess 2000. Serres faith but 1500. none but
Monstrelet, names them to be between two and three thousand; an
undeterminated number: Buchanan about 2000. he likewise undeterminates; Paulus
Emilius, and Guaginus speak not hereof at all. That any French troops were
with the Duke, neither English nor French author, of as many as I have met
withal (himself excepted) mention any such thing; for what remains, if it
were not true that the bastard of Clarence came in unto his rescue, the Dukes
body could not have been recovered; that it was recovered, Monstrelet and the
Chronicles of Normandy do take away all dispute; and as Monstrelet says, the
Earl of Salsbury was he who recovered it, were it at the same time or
afterward: to say afterward, is absurd: for flying from the defeat, he must
with danger of his life, have tarried somewhere, till the enemy was gone, or
else have returned with new forces from Normandy, and to no purpose, since they
might have taken his body away: he tarried no where; for the English in their
flight (according to the French writers) took their white cross for their
own safeties, and caused the bridge of Umena to be reedified, lest they might
be again set upon, neither did he return, for being come to Normandy, he
could not at the same time have made this voyage, and that of Alanson;
therefore if the bastard recovered the body, the Duke fought without his
bowmen: and if the Earl, it was at the same time, but not unless he were
Master of the field, the which after such a defeat he could not be without a
strong succor, which was that which did dissipate the cloud of enemies, which
buried the dead, which recovered the bodies of the Duke and the Lords, and
whereby he returned home void of fear, not clothing himself with the white
cross: but say that this recovery be false: is it possible the French authors
(were it only for triumphs sake) should make no mention of it? and if they
deny not that it was carried into England, would they not say how it was
granted, whether in change, in gift or by ransom? the English narration then
(unless it be the equivocall meaning of the Duke of Alanson, wherein John
Speed erreth not, and which has nothing to do with this our affair) is that
which I shall judge the truest: which being granted, the Duke being but a few,
was overcome by many, and not unrevenged, for he was indebted to the enemy
only for 800. carcases, he having lost 2000. the enemy 120. he was a wise
Prince, but not at this time; he preferred magnanimity before wisdom; without
which the former is as an unbridled horse which runs upon precipices, and
ruins the rider; so as if his authors have accused him of rashness, they have
done it justly not to rob the French of the honor, as says Dupleis; rather
writing as he does, he that robs it both from the English and the Scots, for
this act, what ever it was, was done under the happy guidance of Earl Bouhan
their General.

The death of this Prince encouraged the enemy, for Normandy wanting now a
General, they thought it weak to endure an encounter; they besieged Alanson;
the Earl of Salsbury; who did ill endure the loss of such a place, gathered
all the forces together he possibly could, whilst the French who spied his
ways, expected his coming in good order, intending to set on him; but he, who
came to succor not to fight, turned toward the Abbey of Bec, losing in his
retreat about 200. men, an easy prize for the raising of the siege; for the
enemy having driven a way the succor, retired to Anjou, leaving Alanson free.

When King Henry heard of his brothers death, he chose in his place, and
endowed with the same authority, Edmond Earl Mourton, brother to the Earl of
Somerset; and calling a Parliament, he had great assistance; the Bishop of
Winchester, his uncle lent him moneys (till such time as the subsidies could be
raised) wherewithal he paid 4000. men at arms, and 24000. archers, which he
caused to pass over to Callis, conducted by the Earl of Bedford, and followed
himself in midmay: the Dolphin did at this time besiege Shartres, a place of
importance, defended by the bastard of Theime, and some troops which the Duke
of Exceter had sent unto him from Paris, whilst he being weakened, suffered
much for want of victuals; the City by reason of the multitude therein easily
to be famished; the reason of this scarcity was, for the Dolphinists having
made themselves Masters of Bonevalle and other forts thereabouts, did command
the field. But the King being come to Callis, dispatched away unto him the
Earl of Dorset, and the Lord Clifford, with 1200. men; by means whereof and by
the news of his passage, he stopped the enemies excursions: at Montreule he
met the Duke of Burgony, who was come thither the day before, sick of an ague;
they stayed three days together, after which time the Duke departed, to
procure for him the passage over Some to Abeville, and did obtain it, whilst
the King marching that ways took in Fertes held by Monsieur de Harcourts
people; he placed there in a garrison of the Dukes soldiers; when he was past
the bridge at Abeville, he took his leave of him, the Duke having promised to
meet him again within a few days, as he did; when he was come to Bois du
Saint Vincent, as soon as he had saluted the King and Queen, he resolved with
the Duke of Exeter (who was come from Paris) to go to Shartres, and to fight
with the enemy, to this purpose he added some French troops to his own men:
when he was come to Mantes, the Duke of Burgony met him with 3000. fighting
men; the Dolphins forces consisted then of 7000. men at arms, 4000. crossebow
men, and 6000. archers; but finding himself much inferior to the Kings forces,
he raised the siege, and retired himself to Turin, for one defeat would have
been sufficient to have ruinated all his fortune: the hopes of battle being
thus vanished, the Duke past into Picardy; this Province was held in much
disorder by Messuers de Harcourt, ^'Offemont, and other Captains: he and his
men marched without any manner of order, looking for nothing less then to be
set upon: so as being assaulted at unwares, not far from Mons, the Dukes
Banner born by his servant, who should have borne it, fled suddenly away, and
two thirds of the Army, believing that the Duke had been gone with it, fled
likewise after it: and Pieron de Luppes pursuing them with an hundred and
twenty horse, did so weaken his companions, as that the Duke accompanied by
valiant Gentlemen, overthrew those who remained, killing four hundred of them,
and taking an hundred prisoners. This good fortune was accompanied by the
gaining of St. Requier, which was surrendered to him by Monsieur de Offemont in
change for the prisoners he had taken. The King on theother side made himself
master of Dreux, Beaugensy, and other places upon composition: and returning by
Beause, took Rougemont by force, and Villeneue upon articles; having here made
fitting preparations for the siege of Meaux, he passed thither in Boats over
the river Marna, environed it with works and trenches. This place was defended
by brave Captains, under the command of the bastard of Vaures, and by a
thousand Soldiers, besides the inhabitants, who were all ready to defend it:
here did the King receive news that his Queen was delivered of a son at
Windsor, baptized Henry, the place of his birth and name did allay his joy; for
he called to mind an unlucky prediction, the which though he did not
believe, yet it is incident to man, to doubt of happiness, and fear
calamities: for evil events happening oftener then good, we do rather believe
such predictions as foretell bad events, because they are likeliest to ensue:
So as turning to his Chamberlain, he said, that to himself who was borne at
Monmouth, great conquests were fore told, and a short life; but to his son
borne at Windsor, a long but miserable life, and a declining fortune: that he
left the sequel to Gods disposal; but if the predictions were such, they were
too true: for just so it fell out.

Mr. d'Offemont was to go to Meaux, to take order for defense of that place;
and the besieged had writ unto him the name of the place by which he was to
enter, giving him down a ladder at the walls foot, that he might the readier
climb up: he came accompanied with forty Soldiers, he slew some Sentinels
which were in his way, and passed quietly into the ditch: but whilst his men
clome up the ladder, that he himself might be the last, it so fell out, that as
he was passing over a board which crossed some kind of concavity, his foot
slipped, and he armed as he was, fell in: and not able to be got out without
noise (having broken two Lances which were by his men let down to help him
out) the besieged ran thither, and setting upon those who were not yet gotten
up, took him wounded, and by direction from the King, he was carefully
dressed and looked unto. This chance did much trouble the besieged; who not
able to defend the City without infinite labor (their number not being
sufficient to defend so great a circuit) they abandoned it, and retired
themselves to the Fort in the Marketplace; where having broken their Lances in
their daily bickerings, they made use of Spits: and the English who were lodged
in the City, enjoyed the like advantage: for they were freed from infinite
guards which the great circumference of the place enforced them to keep. The
King caused Artillery to be planted in fitting places, beating down the
walls, houses, and the only Mill which was within that compass; winning the
which, he did so incommodate them, that if they had been succuored, they could
have received no comfort without a counter-siege. This only difficulty had
been sufficient to have made them whilst time served, think upon their
safeties; but their vainglory to be buried in the ruins, made them lend no
ear to the persuasions of an enemy King who did friendly admonish them.
Whereupon force being the only cure for their obstinacy, he set upon them
with a general assault, which was valiantly performed, and more vigorously
oppugned, the defendants being enforced, after much loss of blood, and lives
of both sides, to retire: and the defendants esteeming themselves victors, in
as much as they were not overcome, were so puffed up with pride, as after diverse
opprobrious and scornful speeches, they did drive an ass to the top of the
walls which encompassed the Market place, in sight of the besiegers, and
causing him by blows to bray, they incited his assistance to the besieging
King: the which he made a less esteem of, then the loss of the son of the
Lord Cornwalle, a young youth who being hardly out of his nonage, had through
his wisdom and valor raised such an expectation in every one, as had not a
Cannon shot bereaved him of life, he in a short time was likely to have been
numbered amongst the worthiest Captains of that age. But these the besigeds
uncivil, rusticke insolences, were but of short continuance, like the last
blasts of a candle ready to go out: for they surrendered themselves, at the
Victors wills, the lives of the meaner people being only secured. The King
used such justice as they had deserved. The bastard Vaurus was beheaded, and
his body hung upon a tree without the City, upon the which he had formerly
caused a many English and Burgonians to be hanged; whereupon it was afterward
called, Vaurus his tree. Dionegius Vaurus, and Lewis Ghast were afterward put
to death in Paris: the rest, which were between seven and eight hundred, were
imprisoned, and their goods divided amongst the soldiers; the taking in of
Meaux drew after it the surrendering up of many other places; amongst which that
of Crespi in Valesia, of Pierrapont, Mertean, Offemont, Compeigne, Remy,
Gurney, Mortemer, Neville, Montaigne, and others; Moy, Montecurt, and Bressii,
were set on fire by their own garrisons, as unable to hold out any longer: the
garrisons of Moy, retired themselves to Guise, and the rest elsewhere. King
Henry was no sooner gone from Meaux, but the Queen his wife came into
Normandy, with a puissant army of horse and archers, under the conduct of the
Duke of Bedford; she passed on from Hafew to Roan, and from thence to the Boys
de Saint Vincent, where the King met her, joyfully welcomed by her, his
brethren in law, and all the Court, and after they had with great solemnity
celebrated the feast of Whitsontide at Paris, he took his last farewell of
her, betaking himself to the first occasions the war offered.

The Earl of Warwick was gone with three thousand men to take possession of
Gamach, which was to yield it self, in case it were not succored by the eight
of June, and having left there a sufficient garrison he took his way toward
Saint Valery, having sent before some few horse to discry the Country: who
being met by a hundred horse, they defended themselves, till such time as the
Earl came in to their succor, whereby they were forced to withdraw themselves
into the City, which was forthwith besieged; those within the Town had the sea
open, and the Earl had no ships, insomuch as they scorned his siege; for they
furnished themselves with victual by their own ships, or else had them
brought unto them from neighboring Port-townes. But as soon as by his
directions they saw ships come from Normandy, they grew to Articles of
surrender, if they were not succored by the fifteenth of September, which they
were not: so as all the Towns between Paris and Bullen, were now in King
Henry's hands, except Crotois and Guise, the which Monsieur de Harcourt would
never yield up, though in the Kings name he was thereunto entreated by his
brother the Bishop of Amiens.

The Dolphin this mean while sat not still; but being twenty thousand men
strong, he went to St. Serres; he took Charitee upon Loyre, and besieged Cone,
enforcing it to give Hostages to surrender, in case it were not releeved by the
16 of August. But their courage growing warm in this negotiation, and egged on
by millitary discipline, they agreed to fight a pitched battle the aforesaid 16
day: whereupon the Duke of Burgony being ready to go into Artois, advertifed
hereof, stayed in Burgony, sending for people into Picardy and Flanders, and
gave account hereof to King Henry, who was then at Sentis, entreating him to
send unto him some of his men, under some good Leader. His answer was, he would
send him none: for he himself would be their Leader. Whilst his mind being
greater then his strength of body, he promised what he could not perform: for
though he were sick, he thought not he was come to his last end; which in
truth was somewhat bitter, and out of season to one of his years; who
notwithstanding, according to the will of heaven, was ripe, and at his full
growth. So as not able to go himself, nor willing that the succor should come
late, he commanded the Duke of Bedford, accompanied by the Earl of Warwick,
and other Lords, to lead it along, promising to follow them himself, as soon
as possibly he could. But when he was come to Melune (his sickness growing
strong upon him) he was compelled to go into a Litter, and to be carried to
the Boys de St. Vincent. This mean while the Duke of Burgony being come before
Cone, and having mingled the two Nations together, to the end that they might
equally share in honor, so to avoid the difference which might arise between
them touching precedencie therein, he found that the Dolphin, not willing to
hazard himself upon the success of a battle, had raised the siege, and was
gone to Burges; so as he was forced to be content to have with his honor freed
Cone.

The Duke of Bedford understanding that his brother grew worse and worse, rid
post to the Boys de Saint Vincent, and Burgony not able to go along with him,
(for his affairs called him elsewhere) sent Hugh de Lanoi to make his excuse,
and to visit the King, who finding his estate of life by all signs desperate,
and knowing that he must die, finding his brothers, his uncle, and all the
rest, sad and disconsolate, he wished them to praise God, who took him unto
him in such a time when as his honor was not subject to the inconstancy of
fortune; that he was sorry for nothing but to leave them under the burden of
so weighty a business; that their worth and fidelity, did much comfort him;
that the Lord God would share the glory between them, which he had had in
giving a good beginning thereunto, and which they were to have in bringing it
to a happy end; he willed them to remember what they ought unto him in the
behalf of his young son; that if he did deserve to be served as his heir, and
their Sovereign, he deserved much more so to be, for that his innocent age had
not yet been harmefull to any: that it was their parts by instructing him in
virtue, to infuse into him a disposition to gratitude and love, that by the one
he might recompense service, and by the other affection; he advised them above
all things else to keep the Duke of Burgonies friendship, and never to disjoyne
themselves from him: that if any treaties of peace should be with the Dolphin,
they should agree to none, without the reservation of Sovereignty, the Duchess
of Normandy and Guascony; that they should not set at liberty the Duke of
Orleans, and the other prisoners that were in England, till his son was of
age. To Humphrey Duke of Gloucester he committed the protection of England, and
to John Duke of Bedford the Regency of France, with this caution, that if the
Duke of Burgony should endeavor it he should freely yield it up unto him:
finally, he recommended the Queen his wife unto them, entreating them to
honor and respect her as he had done; all the room was filled with sighs and
tears, in midst whereof they promised punctually to obey him: having thus freed
himself of worldly affairs by his verbal will, he desired to know of the
Physicians how long in their judgments they thought he might yet live: But
they referred the event to the good will of God, whereupon he commanded them to
speak freely their opinions; after a short consultation, the chiefest of them
kneeling down, said unto him, that for what the skill of physic could
foresee, he was not likely to live above two hours, a sentence which did no
whit startle him, but calling for his Chapleines, he caused them read the seven
penitential Psalms before him, and when they were come to the verse, Benign
fac Domine in bona voluntate tua Sion ut edificentur muri Jerusalem, do good
in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, he said
that his intention had always been (if God had granted him life) after he
should have reduced the business in France to a peaceable end, to have gone to
the winning of that holy City, but since that the divine Majesty had pleased to
dispose otherwise of him, his holy will be done; and they returning again to
read the Psalms, he made a blessed and a happy end; dying near about the same
time his Physicians had foretold, and having received all those sacraments,
which by the Church of Rome were prescribed to dying men: he dyed the last of
August, of a plurisie, a disease not well known in those days, which caused
amongst the common people two several opinions of his death, the one that he
dyed of a disease called Saint Anthonies fire, the other of that called Saint
Fiacree, which is convultions, or extention of the nerves, he reigned nine
years, five months, and twenty three days, not having fully completed his
eight and thirtieth year; his temperature according to the observations of
physic, promised a longer life; he was of a lean and sinnowie body, of a
black hair, his limbs well proportioned and active, of stature higher then
usual, his face well shaped though somewhat long, endowed him with a manlike
beauty. England has had before and since his time many worthy Kings, but of
perfections exceeding his, none: he was just, wi^ magnanimous, valiant, I would
say fortunate, if fortune had any abiding place with virtue: he undertook a
difficult war, in a time when his enemies intestine dissension did facilitate
it unto him, he thereby appeased his Kingdom, purging it of all its ill
humors, he healed it, and made it greater by reducing slothful and vagabond
people (the ordinary plagues of common wealths) from idleness and vice, to
warfare and honor, he was served by inclination, and affection; the
greatness of his spirit, and his heroique actions were the loadstones which
drew unto him his subjects love and reverence; he was of an unblameable life,
and an enemy to all vice, which may serve for a sufficient testimony for
whatsoever else of good may be said of him: at home he spilt no blood, save
that of the Earl of Cambridge and his fellow conspirators; under whose ashes
as long as he lived, and some while after, all civil wars was buried; and if
he used severity abroad, arms his enemies obstinacy, and the laws of war,
must suffer the blame.

The end of the first Volume.
THE Henry the 6.
FOVRTH BOOK OF THE CIVIL VVARRES OF ENGLAND IN THE LIFE OF HENRY THE SIXTH.
BY the lives of the preceding Kings we have seen that the Civil Wars had
their beginning from the bad Government of Richard the second; that Henry the
fourth did first commence them, and Henry the fifth suspend them; but that
after 40. years Peace they should again break forth under Henry the sixth
when the Government was established, Men's minds quieted and appeased, is a
matter worthy of consideration, which ought not to be passed over, to the end
we may examine whether this happened by default of the Subjects or Prince, and
which of them it was that after the cure of the first malady were causers of
the second. We shall find Arguments probable enough if we consider the
different natures of the two last Kings. Henry the fifth found a Kingdom
usurped by his Father, so exasperated by the deaths and confiscations of many,
as he would never have been able to have settled and maintained a Peace had not
his valor caused him to be feared, and his virtue beloved by his Subjects; in
all the time of his life he met with no other Conspiracy then that of Richard
Earl of Cambridge, which was suppressed as soon as undertaken, not for that
Richards Heirs were Children (since that Edmund Mortimer lawful Heir to the
Crown outliving him, pretenses were not like to be wanting to any one who
durst have molested him) but for that Edmunds fearful, (or were it peaceful)
nature, the tender years of such as were to succeed him, the ambition of great
ones allured by honors, and enriched by foreign Wars, and that another King
could not better their private conditions, nor raise the public honor to a
higher pitch; were the true causes which did suppress alterations: being dead
the fortune which did accompany him during his life, did not for a long time
forsake him in the person of his Son; insomuch as in his infancy and two
succeeding ages he was by his Subjects served without contradiction, out of
hopes that together with the Kingdom he had Inherited his Fathers virtues; his
tender years privileged by his own comlines, and the love of others, had not
afforded them time to dis-deceave themselves in what concerned valor and
wisdom, (virtues in him of much expectation) whilst the bright sunshine of
other virtues dasled the Eyes of the wisest, for malice it self cannot but
confess that Henry the sixth was one of the best and holiest Kings that ever
England had: if goodness alone without the help of other virtues were only
required to the office of a King; but there is difference between the virtues
of private Men and of Princes, what is sometime to be praised in the one, is to
be blamed in the other; not for that the faculties of operation be not from
the highest to the lowest uniforme in all, but that being diversified by the
differing condition between Princes and Subjects, they produce contrary
actions, according as the condition of those who operate is contrary, and as
the ways and imaginations of God are not such as are those of Men: so (all due
and reverent proportion being given, if any proportion at all be to be given)
the conceptions and proceedings of Princes ought not to be such as are those
of private Men. Very moral virtues, though the same in all Men are not in them
considerable, but with a particular difference, for that becomes them, and they
may do that, which becomes not us nor may we do. Henry was a good Man, but no
good King. He was borne with good intentions, but of himself simple.
Conditions plausible in a private Man, misbecomming him that Reigns, and in
all cases harmefull, for as wisdom without goodness is a mere infirmity, so
goodness without wisdom is a mere defect. Were it not the part of wisdom to
put us upon those actions which in reason we ought to do, but only to make us
simply or merely good, he would have had no need thereof; nor yet they who are
naturally given to be good. Those who imagined all virtues, though differing in
name not to differ in Office, but that they all were so many wisdoms, did not
perhaps believe amiss; experience shows us that without wisdom fortitude is
rashness, justice, severity, and temperance disorder, other virtues are common
or indifferent to all Men; this of wisdom in Princes is singular. The goodness
of Henry the sixth was a Cloister life goodness, but as the affections of a King
do not befit a Clergie-man, so do not the affections of a Clergie-man besit a
King. We are borne under two Laws, the one of God, the other of Nature; the
which though distinct are not incompetable, if we do embrace the former which
has no other end but the spiritual health, the choice is good, and much the
better, if it be accompanied with contempt of the World, and mortification of
the Spirit. If the second, (in which Princes are comprehended, and which joined
to faith does not exclude saving health) to command and to Reign requires
active Spirits, as far differing from this contempt and mortification, as
ought a Clergie-man differ from the lively and ready resentments which are
requisite Apoc: Cap: 4o.
in him that commands. The four Beasts which are described to have Eyes before
and behind, ought to serve for a type to Henry, for if the inward eyes of
conscience were sufficient to him as a Christian, the outward eyes of wisdom
were requisite to him as a Prince. A Prince cannot be said to be good and
innocent (though of harmless intention and customs) when his simplicity
proves hurtful to his welfare, honor, and Subjects. Goodness ought not to be
borne a Sister with us, but be begotten by us, we our selves ought to be the
Fathers thereof, our will the Mother, and Election the Soul; for though
natural simplicity or sincerity brings with it many advantages, he is
notwithstanding more to be commended, who has not transgressed when he might
have done so, for well doing is not defined by Ignorance of evil, or an
impotency thereunto, but when a Man is able, and knows how to do amiss, and
does it not. A bound which does not exclude the faculties of civil actions (as
did Henryes goodness which was borne a Sister with him) but makes them so much
the better, by how much after the primary cause its objects are the second,
without which there is no corporeal nor civil life. I know not whether his
education did concur with his nature to the making him what he was, but
doubtless faults enough are committed in the education of Princes, in their
Childhood they are observed with too much respect, whilst their discreet
Governors knowing that some Wits require the spurr, some the bridle, ought to
make use thereof alternatly, and with respect but not excess: for by thus
doing, they will not only make them be reverenced and beloved by their
Subjects, but respected and feared by all Nations. However it be, it is evident
that Henry's ruin did derive it self from this simple inanimate goodness,
which lame in its own judgment rested it self upon that of others, so as
loosing reputation, the Soul of Government, he therwithall lost Authority,
Kingdom, Liberty and Life.

The Conditions of affairs in both Kingdoms at Henry the fifths Death was
such, as by reason of the good directions he left, could not be amended. His
Subjects were ready to obey, drawn by the glory of so many famous Victories,
and by the profit which accrewd unto them by so many considerable acquisitions.
In France the home discentions of that Kingdom, the wisdom and valor of the
Duke of Bedford, and the good Commanders and Soldiers which waged War under
him nourished hopes of more happy proceedings. And the two Brothers, Unckles to
the Infant King free from jealousy and evil intelligence (the Duke of Bedford
remaining chief in France with the Title of Regent, and the Duke of Gloucester
commanding in England under the Title of Protector) did conspire, not only to
preserve what they had gotten, but to acquire more: but the cause being taken
away, the effects cannot continue. Charles the fifth King of France dyed within
less then 3. Months after King Henry the fifth, who being incapable of
Government, and governed by his Wife a revengefull Woman, and bad Mother; had
by her means alienated his Kingdom, deprived his Son thereof and set
dissension among his Subjects to the increase of Englands greatness. Philip Duke
of Burgony, who (according to the Council of deceased Henry) was to be
ensnared by allurements, was by Gloucester distasted, driven thereunto either by
ambition, or love, or both. Whereby Men may learn not to build too much upon
their own knowledge, but to watch over their selves, every little intrest
being sufficient to change us to the worse. Since Gloucester, a good and wise
Prince, ceased to be so when he suffered himself to be transported by his
passions and private intrests, seldom meeting with public respects, those
who look after the one abandon the other, or else do ruin both the one and
the other together, with the State and themselves as did he. These were the
true causes of the English retrogadations in France; civil discentions in
France had established the English, and the reconciliation between the Duke of
Burgony and Charles the seventh was their ruin. So as though the
recomencement of the Civil Wars be chiefly ascribed to the losses in
France, yet since they began not till the King was grown a Man and that the
Affairs of France were little better then quite lost, there would have been
no liklyhood of any disorders in England, if things had succeeded well, and the
Son had been like the Father: for in the same manner as the one suppressed the
Conspiracy of the Earl of Cambridge, and thereby won reputation, the other
might have quelled the Duke of Yorkes audacity, and have preserved his
Kingdom: but the Sword wherewith Scanderberg cut off armed limbs was not of the
same temper when managed by another Hand, and therefore the real difference is,
that whereas the Earl did Justle with a strong and fierce Lion, his successors
encountered with a weak mild lowly Lamb. King Henry was proclaimed King 1422
when he was about 8 Months old, the Duke of Exceter and his Brother the
Bishop of Winchester were deputed for the Government of his person, and the
Queen his Mother for his Diet, whilst the Duke of Gloucester Protector of the
Kingdom, took care for all things which might make for Peace at home, or
Wars abroad; the Infant King was brought from Windsor to London to be shown
in full Parliament; his Mothers bosom was his Throne, and general
acclamations served as the earnest penny of obedience. Ayds were willingly
contributed for the perservation of what his Fathers worth had won. The Duke of
Bedford on the other side surprised by the disadvantageous Death of Charles the
sixth (which happened in October the same year) and by his being forsaken by
many who had formerly followed his Standard to follow the Dolphin (who was
proclaimed King by the Name of Charles the seventh) knowing how contrary to
their natural affections that obedience was, which those who remained with him
had sworn to the King his Brother; did in a solemn Assembly cause new Oaths
to be taken in the behalf of the now Heir, a thing readily obtained but very
irreligeously observed, and had it not been for the power and authority of the
Duke of Burgony, a Prince of great Possessions and attendance, the affairs of
England would not have lasted so long as they did; but they grew worse and
worse according as he slackned his vigilance therein by reason of Gloucester,
and the City of Orleans wherewith he was not trusted; by reason of the death of
his Sister who was Wife to Bedford, and by his total alienation, when having
appeased his anger against Charles, the lives of those first Warriers who were
his friends did cease. Henry in Paris was likewise proclaimed, and sworn King
of France and England, Monyes were there Coined with his stamp and the Arms
of both the Kingdoms, whilst Charles of more years but lesser power, and
excluded from the Metropolitan City, possessed nothing: on the other side the
Loire save the Countries of Berry, Forest, Bourbonne, Lions and Auvergne, the
greatest part of Poictou and St. Onges did submit to him, in consideration that
the Nobility of those parts depended on him, or else that they Neighbourd upon
him: these parts were reduced to such a point, that one part of their
Territories being under him, the other under the English, they were
necessitated either by complying with the one faction, to offend the other, or
else to declare themselves partial for the one of them, conformable to the
intrest of their possessions. On the other side of the River, he held the
Countries of Main and Anjou; some few places in Champagnia and Picardie being
forced to tolerate the insolences of his own Soldiers, for not being by
reason of his poverty able to pay them, they paid themselves by rapine and
extortion upon the poor people, afflicted and impoverished by all sides. The
Count de Fois had recovered Languedoc for him from the Prince of Orange; and as
for Guienne the Count Cominges by inclination, and Count Arnigniac for hate to
Burgony, by reason of the Constable Arnigniacs ignominous Death in Paris near
his Bulwarks. All which effects proceeded from the Subjects love, for who
shall consider his undisolvable difficulties, will find he could not possibly
have overcome them without the resolved patience of those who did obey him; who
were constrained to endure not only Hostile injuries, but likewise the injuries
and rapine of such Soldiers as were their friends, who being uncorrected and
undisciplind were more of damage to them then was the Enemy; hereunto may be
added that they had no Prince of the blood to uphold them.

The Dukes of Orleans and Burbon were Prisoners in England, the Duke of Anjou
resolute upon the recovery of the Kingdom of Naples; and Burgony their
inexorable Enemy: but to dispute the contrary, it is likely that was not so much
the love to Charles, as the hatred to the English which made them willing to
suffer so much: for being but a young Man about 22. years of age he could not
have obliged them by benefits, nor in those years have given such proof of
himself, as to cause him to be desired: it is rather to be believed that being
born their presumed King, their desire to exclude the English was that which
did only foment their affections. All Nations do naturally abhor being
subjected one to another; the diversity of Language, Customs and Humors,
causing the reciprocal aversion and hatred which we find in them, and if
there were no other reason, for that it is a kind of wretchlesnes (though not
always) to be overcome by Strangers, was a prevalent cause of making him be
beloved, he being the Nail by which the other of the English Empiremust be
driven out.

When Charles had understood his Fathers Death, and caused his Obsequies to be
celebrated, in Espalles (a small Castle in Overgnie, where he then chanced to
be, after one Days Mourning, he caused him self to be solemnly proclaimed
King: and going from thence to Poictiers, he was with Title of solemnity
Crowned: Reens a placeantiently destinated for that Ceremony was by the Enemy
forbidden him; so as France had now a divided Crown, not easy to be peiced
together, since two did equally entitle themselves King. Whilst it was easy
for Charles to piece the divided minds of such, who either were not encumbered
or wavering in Burgony's faction, whence it insued, that to preserve what the
English had won, or to augment it, depended now no more upon the hope of aid
from France; but upon the proper strength and Council of England: upon
Council that they might keep Philip firm unto them, for friends by reason of
their passions are changeable; upon strength, since the obstacles which daily
increased by the going over of so many to the adverse party were by no other
means to be removed.

After the two Kings Death skirmishes were made in all parts, wherein certain
petty places were taken and retaken, not worthy to be mentioned in story. The
Pariseans had sent a solemn Embassy into England to require speedy succor
against the injuries done by Charles. The English Writers say this Embassy was
sent to cloak under this pretended zeal the treason which they were a
hatching, how to yield themselves up unto him, which whether it were so or no
cannot absolutely be said: but Du Pleis perverting the times, and mentioning
the Conspiracy before the Embassy augments the suspicion; they were sent back
loaded with promises, the effect whereof the English did better make good, then
did the Parisians their Faith.

Charles was by this time come to Rochell (being somewhat startled at some
forces raised by the Duke of Brittany, believing it to be done to his
prejudice, and contrary to what was lately agreed on between them during his
Fathers Life) where sitting in Council, part of the Chamber fell down, which
with certain others indamag'd John of Burbonne, Seigneur de Preaux he himself
being in evident danger, had he not been suddenly drawn from thence. At this
time happened the surprizall of Ponte de Melone under the Conduct of John de
Greiville, who slew as many English as he found there: as likewise their
punishment who trusting upon the Duke of Bedfords absence had appointed time
and place for Charles his People to enter Paris, a plot which very well might
have succeeded, had not the Duke by his making have hindered them for coming
upon them with good forces; unexpectedly he put many of them to Death, some few
escaping by flight: and now no longer trusting them, he put strong Garrisons
into the City and parts adjacent, whereof some yielded themselves, and some he
took in. He sent for the recovery of Ponte de Melone, Thomas Mountaigue Earl
of Salisbury, a man (according to the witness of such Writers as are not
English) to be compared to whosoever of the Ancient Romans: and together with
him the Earl of Suffolk, the Lord Scales, the younger Lord Poinings, and many
others. This place was beseiged all January and February, those which were
within the Town defending themselves valiantly upon the hope of succor, which
to the number of 6000 was Musterd together upon the confines of the Duchy of
Berry, under the conduct of the Count d'Omale, Count de Buchane and the Vicount
of Narbone; but being come within 6 Leagues of the Enemy, and ordered in
Battle array, there fell such disorder amongst them, that they returned;
disbanded the greatest part of them, being defeated by the English which were
at Chartres and thereabouts, the which when those of the Town understood, they
grew into such a fury, as throwing down in the sight of the Enemy Charles his
Colors which were set upon the Gates, they tore them in pieces, as also all
his other Ensigns, cursing those who had persuaded them to shut themselves up
in that Fort, upon perjured Oaths of succor; they yielded themselves their
lives only saved, the which was denied to such as had served Henry the fifth,
to those who had sworn the final Peace; to those who were Accomplices in the
Death of the Duke of Burgony, and to such Soldiers as were Scotts, Irish or
Welsh, together with Melene; they surrendered all other Forts which were in
their hands, amongst which were Marchuse and Monliere, those who would swear
fealty and Homage had their liberties granted them without Ransom; the which
all of them almost did; in particular Greville; moved thereunto as I believe by
his believing Charles to be dead at Rochell, for when he knew the contrary
he was not long in forswearing himself.

This mean while Arthur Count de Richmond Brother to John fifth Duke of
Britanny escaped away from the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Lieutenant to the King
in Normandy, with whom ever since the Battle of Agencourt he had been
Prisoner. A civil liberty was permitted him upon Oath and promise not to
depart, the which as long as the King lived was precisely observed by him, not
listening to his friends who had sundry times offered to back him if he would
fly away, now thinking that by reason of the Kings Death, he might with safety
to his honor escape, he fled; pretending himself to be free from his Oath, as
personal to him that was dead: but who shall well observe it, shall find that
bare promises not aggravated by courtesies no ways due nor enforced, as was
this the largnes of his Imprisonment, are of as much force in moral affairs
with Princes and amongst such as are Nobly borne, as is an Oath in Religion,
especially when as pretensions not dying with the King, they together with
their estates remain in title and in substance entire unto their Successors,
if when the King dyed he had been close Prisoner, he could not (without a note
of folly) have said himself to be disobliged from his promise; so as having
escaped he seemed to repent that resolution, which though at all times
requisite was then the more to be esteemed of, as it was now the more blame
worthy, since his own Death, and not the Death of any other was only able to
acquit him of his Oath and promise made. His first flight was to his Brother in
Britanny, from thence to his Cousin Philip in Flanders, from whom he received a
Commission to procure a Parley between him, Britanny and Bedford, so as being
returned from his Brother and having concluded the Interview, Bedford went to
receive them upon the confines of Normandy, all three of them coming into an
appointed place where Philip stayed expecting them, the Confederacy which was
contracted between them was confirmed by a double Marriage, the one between
the Duke of Bedford and Anne the younger Sister to Philip, together with the
County of Artois in portion, in case they should have any Issue: the other
between Count Richmond and Philips eldest Sister, Widow to the Dolphin Lewis.
This being done Burgony and Richmond withdrew themselves to Arras, Bedford to
Paris, and the Duke of Britanny to his own Country, to whom Bedford paid 6000.
Crowns for his expenses in that journey. The inconstancy of the Dukes of
Britanny in their friendship may seem strange to some, being subject to often
and momentary changes: but who will examine passages from the time that that
State grew litigious will not wonder at it. I have thought good to give you a
short breviat thereof for the better understanding of the History, and to ease
the Reader of the pains of seeking that in others which I should have omitted.

John the third Duke of Britanny who dyed without Issue, married his Niece Jane
of Britanny (Daughter to Guy his next Brother but now dead) to Charles of
Blois, second Son to Guy of Chatillione Count de Blois, and Margaret Sister
to Philip the sixth King of France; to the end that she being the true Heir,
other Women having been formerly Heirs to that Dukedom, she might have a
Husband that might defend her. When he was dead John Count de Montfort his
third Brother (who during his life had no ways opposed his Niece) pretended by
prerogative of sex to be Heir unto the State: so as Blois relying upon France,
and he on England, they had fierce War together for 23. years, in which time
200000. Men were slain in that quarrel. To Count Montfort, (who as not having
entirely possessed Britanny, was not numbered amongst the Dukes thereof) did his
Son John succeed, named John the fourth, after that Charles de Blois slain
in a great Battle left him possessor thereof. The King of France who could not
by force take from him his Estate endeavored to weaken him by Interposition.
He agreed upon this with the Widow, and the Sons of Charles the Defunct,
who renounced their pretensions to the Duchy and he his pretenses to the
Vice-county of Limages; restoring unto them (together with other obligations)
the County of Pointevere, an agreement which lasted not long among ulcerated
minds. The Duke beside these had two other great Enemies; Beretrand de Gueschin
and Oliver de Clissenne his natural Subjects, who having betaken themselves to
the service of Charles the fifth against the English proved so gallant Men, that
both of them one after the death of the other were Constables of France; so as
they having drawn unto the Kings pay the greatest part of the Lords and
Commanders of Britanny, who under their command had fought against Charles de
Blois, they left the Duke quite bereft of Captains, and Military affairs, and
but badly obeyed by his Subjects, who were naturally inclined to the French, so
as wrought thereunto by gratitude (Edward the third being his Father in Law who
had put him into his Estate) and by necessity (the King of France being his
Neighboring powerful Enemy) he turned sometimes one way sometimes another,
till being abandoned by his Subjects, it behoved him to retire himself into
England, forsaking his Country least he should be made Prisoner by them; not
for that they hated him, but for that they hated his friendship with the
English, whom they thought to be the cause of their ruin, being at last aware
that the King of France molested him, not out of the pretended suspicions, but
to bereave him of his Estate, they sent for him back a little before the Death
of Charles the fifth; whereby hoping now to be in quiet, to please them he
renounced his friendship with England, and sided with Charles the 6t, who
succeeded to Charles the fifth. Clissonne who was of greater power with the now
King then he had been with the former, finding him without his leaning stock,
Ransomed John Count de Pointevere from his Imprisonment in England, upon whom
(as Son to Charles de Blois, and Jane of Britanny Heir to John the third)
the pretenses to the Duchy fell, and Marrying him to one of his Daughters, he
began under that pretext to trouble him again, the which though it were done
under the name of the Count de Pointevere, yet it being the forces of France
which did most oppress him, he was forced to betake himself to his accustomed
Protection of England, without the which as he could not preserve himself
being surmounted by France, so could he find no peace to affie in with France,
being betrayed and disobeyed by his Subjects, at last having reconciled
himself to Clissonne, and both of them being dead, John the fifth his Son (he
of of whom we now speak) brought up in France under the Government of John
Duke of Burgony Son in Law to Charles the sixth, would have been constant, if
the French had known how to conceal their desire of taking from him his
Estate; a thing which he deserved not, for he had sundry times given them
proofs of his good will, especially when being come to Amiens with 10000.
fighting Men, two days before the battle of Agencourt, he sent to the
Commanders to desire them to stay for him, the which to their Cost they would
not do, his Brother the Count de Richmond being there sorely wounded and taken
Prisoner. France by this and other losses growing into a bad condition. Henry
the fifth being powerful in Normandy, and he having been treacherously made
Prisoner by Pointeveres Brethren, and set at liberty by his Subjects, and
knowing by certain of the Kings and Dolphins letters which came into his
hands, that it was they who had been the boutefe^'s (to boot that it made not
for him to have so puissant an Army upon his confines) he made agreement with
Henry and afterward forsook him, being naturally inclyn'd to the other side,
at last the two Kings being dead; to comply with Philip of Burgony, he
condescended to this last confederacy with the Duke of Bedford at Amiens. The
following inconstancies will be by this story manifested, one thing only
remains to be superficiously known, that Britanny was never at quiet, till
such time as (Lewis the twelfth having Married Anne the last Heir, of whom
came Claudia and Renete; the latter Married to Hercules the second Duke of
Ferrara, the former to Francis the first King of France) she was by the said
Francis united to the Crown of France.

The Duke of Bedford made but small abode after his return to Paris, for
having assembled a great number of Soldiers, he went to celebrate his Marriage
at Blois in Champania, whether his Wife was brought accompanied with a great
number of the chiefest Ladies and Lords of Burgony; the Marriage being
consummated and the solemnities over, he brought her along with him, not
forbearing by the way as he came to besiege Pons upon the Seen which he took
by assault, putting the defendants to the Sword, so as his Wife amidsts arms
and blood was brought to Paris.

The Earl of Salisbury was gone to besiege Montegulionna a little Fort but of
much inconvenience to the Neighboring parts: for being hardly to be taken, for
Garrison (though not of above 120. Men) was become very insolent: he spent
there 6 Months, having endeavored, though in vain, at his first coming to
take it by assault. This mean while William Stuart Constable of Scotland was
come into France with 3000. Scotts, with whom together with certain others
that were added unto him by Charles, he went to besiege Crevant a place which
held for the Duke of Burgony whose Mother (he being himself in the Low
Countries) gave order to Tonlongonne his Marshall to succor it, having
advertised the Regent Bedford, that he might do as much on his side. Salisbury
was commanded to assist in this succor, so as leaving Men sufficient to
continue the siege, he joined himself with Tonlongonne in Auserres; and being
come within a quarter of a league of Crevant, they lighted making their Horses
be led aloof of from the Army, to the end that they might rely upon their
Soldiers Arms not their Horses legs; they marched slowly up unto the Enemy
that they might not tire themselves being much encumbered by the Sun, which in
July seemed to them (being armed) and in March, to be very hot. The Scotch
Camp was augmented by 600. Spanish Horse sent thither by Charles under the
Conduct of Marishall Severa^ to boot with whom was come the Count de
Vantadore, and many others; these were placed upon an advantageous Hill, by
which the English were to have come if they had taken that way, but coming
another way, they could not join Battle for the River Iona was between them.
Such was the will they had to fight as drew them down into the plain, keeping
themselves in readynes, the one nor the other side not doing any thing for
almost the space of 3. Hours. The first that moved were the English and
Burgonians, as those who were come with a resolution to fight, they set upon a
Bridge defended by the Enemy, and having won it passed forward, whilst those
of the Town sallyed forth to second them, the Battle was fought with valor,
resolution and hatred, but the Scotts who had placed themselves in the
Forefront of the Battle, being almost all slain or taken Prisoners (amongst
the number of Prisoners were the Constable and the Count de Ventadoure, each of
them with like misfortune having lost an eye) and the French set upon behind by
the Garrison of Crevent, the Assailants won the field having slain 1200. of
the Enemies, and taken 400. Prisoners. This Victory, to boot with the freeing
of Crevant, was accompanied with the taking in of Cussi Chasteau de La Roche
Schartres upon the Loire, Mondidiere, Abbeville, and Han upon the Soame. This
is the relation made by Monstrelette and the French Writers. The English
Writers who do particularly name the chief of those who were slain or taken
Prisoners, affirm: that their Men past the River, forcing not only the Bridge
but the Foords: that besides the chief Men whom they name, and the ordinary
Soldiers which they put not into this number, they slew 1800. French
Gentlemen, 3000. Scotts, amongst which the Lord of St. Iohnstonne and 12.
Knights whose names they relate, and took 2200. French Prisoners all
Gentlemen; that on their side were slain 2100, amongst which Sr John Gray, Sr.
William Hale, Sr. Gilbert Halsull, and Sr. Richard Madocks. Boethius, and
Buchanan speak nothing at all of this: let the Reader believe as he lists.
After this bickering the Earl of Salisbury returned to his Siege of
Montaguliome where he found that the defendants of 120. that they were, were
reduced to 30, the rest having forsaken the place, to the end that the
Victuals might hold out the longer to those that remained; but when they had
eaten all their Horses, they could not though yielding up the Town save their
lives without the sum of 22000. pieces of Gold by them there called Saluti;
which they obliged themselves to pay, leaving four of the chiefest of them for
their security. On the contrary side the Marishall Tolongonus at his return
found not foretime with so smiling an aspect, for believing that by Monyes he
had corrupted the Captain of a Fort called la Busiere, he was abused through
too much belief; for whilst he went to actuate the bargain, the Captain
having fitly placed two Ambushes brought him together with 11. others into the
Castle, where taking him Prisoner he at the same time caused almost all those
that were without to be slain, and had it not been for the Imprisonment of
the Count de Ventadoure, for whom he was changed, he had not been soon set at
liberty. This Year in the Month of July was the first Son of Charles borne,
who in his due time succeeded him in his Kingdom by the name of Lovis the 11.
a fantastical Prince and almost ever rebellious toward his Father, so as
whilst he thought to have been at quiet being free from the English Wars, he
gave against his Sons turbulencies; which brought him to his end before his
time, marcerated by jealousy and slain by suspicion: His birth notwithstanding
(so uncertain are we of future events) brought unto him great cause of joy;
for the pledge of a Successor increases the Subjects love: he was howsoever a
great Prince, who proved successful in the rules of dissimulation, rather
borne together with them then learnt of any other. Ghirard de Hallian describes
him to be malicious, wary, cruel, and full of Cousenage.

In England this mean while it was resolved to give liberty to James the
first King of Scotland, after 18. years Imprisonment; which caused to the
first mover thereof (since home hatred, not love nor Charity had moved him to
endeavor it) instead of gratitude, unhappy success, and an ignominous end.

Robert Duke of Albany, Governor of Scotland, being dead the year 1420. (just
15. Years after the Death of his Brother Robert the third) his Son Mordecay
succeeded him in the Government, one who resembled his Father in the profuse
spending of the goods of the Crown amongst the Nobility, to the end that
forgetting the Prisoner King, they might be content with the present condition,
and was like the King his Uncle in his Children; for having neither ability
nor wit to cause himself to be obeyed by them, he was through desparation, and
despite reduced to ruin at the same time, both them and himself. Of the 3.
(for 3. they were) Walter was the most insolent, although they shared all alike
in haughtines and disrespecting others. Pride and the neglect of Inferiors was
by them esteemed gravity, and what became them; and such insolent actions as
arise from them proper and natural to Men of royal Lynage, and to generous
and magnanimous Hearts. Mordecay had often times admonished them, but because
in stead of reaping fruit thereby, he was laughed at by them, he took no
further care thereof, placing all his dislikes upon the back of Patience, till
such time as the burden grew too heavy for him to bear. He very much loved
field sports, especially Hawking, and having one Day an ex'lent Faulkon on his
Fist, Walter did with such incivility require it on him, as he denying it, the
other snatched it from his hand, wrung off the neck, and threw the Carcass at
his feet: at which the Father being incensed, said unto him, that since he had
in vain used all means possible to bring him to obedience, he was resolved to
find out one whom both his Son and he should be forced to obey, and he
effected his words; for a Parliament being immediately called, the Kings
freedom was resolved upon, Ambassadors were chosen and sent into England;
where their request was maturely consulted on; those who were against it
alleged; that having been detained so many years, his Captivity was by him
to be esteemed an injury never to be forgotten, and for the which he would
take present revenge, since England was now busied abroad, that being at
liberty he would regulate the disorders of Scotland, the Governors authority
not being sufficient to quench the contentions which Day by Day grew greater
among the great ones, nor to remedy the Thefts, Murders and Rapines, which as
it were by reprisall was committed by the common People; so as since nothing
could prove more advantageous for the affairs of England, all alteration was
pernicious. Others being of a contrary opinion, affirmed his Captivity was so
unlikely to raise in him any such conceits, that it was rather by him to be
accounted the original of all his good fortune, since that living there safe
from his Unckles snares, he was fallen into the hands of two Kings, who proving
Fathers to him in education, were not therefore much commended by such, who
prefer what is useful to what is honest; who argue that a worser resolution
could not have been taken then to have perfected wisdom by study, and
strength by the exercise of Arms in a Prince of so sublime inclinations;
whilst to do well they should have brought him up in all common vices, and have
made him effeminate amongst the worst of conversations: that to have done
otherwise was as much as to expect what befell him, who nursed up a Snake in
his bosom which when it had recovered his heat slew him, that had preserved
it: fitting considerations for Tyrant Princes, but not for such as were so
given as were these two Kings; for if the one by making him Prisoner, the other
by detaining him had had respect to their own proper intrests, they would have
treated him as an Enemy; but their having enriched him with so virtuous
education, not to be lost neither by liberty nor Imprisonment, was so rare and
unparalleled an example, as he beyond all others was ever to acknowledge such.
The Duke of Gloucester who thought there could be no better means then this to
join Scotland and England and sever it from France, concluded his freedom
setting a fine upon him of 100000. Marks, and giving him for Wife Ioane
Daughter to the Earl of Somerset, Cousin-german to Henry the fifth, and Niece
to the Bishop of Winchester whom he loved, so as having paid part of his
Ransom with his Wifes Portion, and given in Hostages for the rest (the which
was afterward paid by the Subjects in so good a manner as that they seemed
not to be therewithal any whit aggreived) he went his ways nobly waited upon
to his confines by his ancient friends, by his new allies and richly presented
by his Father in Law. Being come into his Kingdom he found it like a Ship
tossed by the Seas. Nothing remaining for maintenance of the Crown save only
the Customs, the rest was all squandred away and bestowed upon particular Men
by the two succeeding Governors: Robert the Father, and Mordecay the Son, to
the end that not minding his return they might adhere unto them: to public
grievances private ones succeeded; the first complaints were against Walter,
who was Imprisoned; and after him Mordecay and Alexander, James who was the
third growing hereat mad, thinking to redress evil by evils; assaulted
Dumbartaine a populous City, where letting loose the raines unto his fury, he
put Men, Women and Children unto the Sword, none being excepted from this
Cruelty save such as fled: being by the King pursued, he fled into Ireland
leaving his Father and his Brethren in the Hangmens hands, who were shortly
after beheaded. He carried himself toward England as did his predecessors,
notwithstanding his Allyment, Oaths, and benefits received; whereof the English
Writers accusing him, and the Scottish recriminating moved by passion, they
leave the story and fall to invective speeches, whereas the accusers should
consider, that as our understanding works diversely in us according to the
diversity of our temperatures, so Princes who are the states understanding,
work only according to the interest of state which is their temperature.
Obligations and courtesies things apart and externe give place to this interne
inseparable disposition, in like manner as desire gives way to nature, in that
which by nature cannot be otherwise. It made not for Scotland that England
should be Master of France, since they might then fear their own subjection.
Henry the seventh bound to the French in having received aid from them against
Richard the third (as we shall see) forbore not, notwithstanding to work
according to the temperature of his state, doing what in him lay to keep them
from making themselves Masters of Britanny being a place far of, and
disjoined from his Kingdom, whereas Scotland being near and Contiguous was
fitter for Invasion, yet was he not blamed for this: the first law of States is
indemnity and self safety. Neither would the French have formerly moved in his
behalf not being any ways offended nor molested by Richard, had they not
hoped by nourishing Civil Wars to better their affairs, an end which took
away the Obligation, for Princes can hardly oblige one another, save for their
particular intrests; it may be alleged that his sworn homage ought to have
obliged James to have kept his word. In conscience he ought to have done: but
yet ought he not so to be upbraided as if he had done what never had been done
before; the French accuse Edward the third for that having done homage to
Philip the second, he awhile after laid pretenses to his Crown, the
pretension not arising since but before his doing of homage; if the one be
excused the other ought to be so likewise, necessity enforced Edward; he ran
hazard not doing it to loose what ever he held in that Kingdom, having as then
neither forces nor intention to make his pretenses, nor is it likely he ever
would have had without the favor of the Emperor, Duke of Geldres and of his
neighboring Provinces, Flanders, Brabant, Hannault, Iuliers, Liege and Collen,
I was willing to allege this Example passing by the many others which in like
case I could produce, for that I thought the sincerity of my pen did require
it: but the rest are not for all this to be excused. There is no State so
innocent but for what concerns promise (and by no means excusable as this) is
besmeared with blemishes blacker then is the blackest Coal, never to be washed
off but by the Water of Oblivion: and in that promiscuous generallity I accuse
none, I only accuse and condemn Reason of State, the general Idol of all
Governments. Buchanan who upbraides the English with having undone whatsoever
of good they had formerly done unto James, by loding him with so insufferable a
Ransom, does them much injury; for neither does Hector Boethius blame them for
it, neither could James being a King be taxed at less. David one of his
Predecessors paid the same sum to Edward the third and John King of France
three Millions of Gold, besides the Provinces which he bound himself to
restore, so as there was no injury done to James being taxed with the like
sum as a King of Scotland formerly was, and so far inferior to a King of
France: for what remains, the Fatherly and Brotherly piety of Henry the fourth
and Henry the fifth in giving him such instructions as made him prove the most
famous and virtuous King that ever Scotland had, frees them from all calumny,
and makes it appear, that since therein they had none of the common intrests of
State spoken of but rather the contrary, it did proceed merely from the
magnanimity of those two valiant and excellent Princes.

Ten thousand Soldiers were come from England to Paris, just at such time as
the French had made themselves Masters of two important places. Compaigne
equally distant from Paris and Amiens, and Crotoi a place of consequence on the
Sea side upon the Coast of Picardie. The Earl of Suffolk was sent by the
Regent to recover Compaigne accompanied by the Messieurs de Ligni and de
Lilliadam with whom he encamped himself on both sides the River Oise
incompassing the Walls thereof with Soldiers, Trenches and Artillery to the
end that he might the easelier and the sooner win it: but he was likely to
have lost there many men and much time had it not been for a happy exigent
which he luckily laid hold of Sir John Falstaff an English Knight, had not
many Days before taken Gerolumus Raymond surnamed Mariolanus Prisoner, a
valiant Captain, who having formerly commanded those Soldiers, who were now
shut up in Compaigne was by them passionatly loved. He made him be brought
from Paris to the Camp, and putting him in a Cart, they presented him to the
sight of the besieged with a rope about his Neck, threatening to put him to
death if they would not surrender themselves; they had not much ado to
prevail with them, for those of the Fort thought it bootlesse to trouble
themselves with the maintaining of a Fort which not being succored was to be
lost; they surrendered the Town, their Captains life and liberty preserved;
and in their own behalfes their Lives, Horses, Arms, and Baggage. James de
Harcourt Charles his Lieutenant General for that Province was he who defended
Crotoi, one of his best and most enriched commanders, this Man having lost Noel
a Castle belonging to himself, surrendered by those who did defend it; and
Rues a place not to be defended, being abandoned had put himself into this
Town with intention to endure the Siege, which Paul Butler an English
Commander laid to it by Sea and Land, by Shipping and Land forces, brought from
Normandy; he defended it from June till the midst of October: but both of them
being weary, not so much in respect of the time they had spent but for what in
all appearance was of longer duration, either for the ones achievement or
others succor, capitulation was made for the surrendering of it up upon the
third day of March ensuing, always provided if in the three first days of
that Month the Regent nor those that should be by him sent to receive that
place, should not be by him or some other of Charles his forces defeated; the
Siege being raised and all Articles observed the place was surrendered up upon
the appointed day, none appearing in the succor thereof. Harcourt himself
being dead, whilst practicing wiles upon a strength belonging to Monsier de
Partene his Wives Uncle, and coveting the lives of others he lost his own. The
Duke of Gloucester was intent in the execution of his Office, when fortune to
cross the good way he was in, threw upon him Iocheline of Baviers, Countess
of Holland, Zealand and Hannault, Mistress of Frisia and Wife to John Duke of
Brabant, who flying from her Husband got into England, a business which to be
well understood must be taken from its beginning.

The house of Bavaria was come into the possession of the said Provinces
inherited by Margaret Wife to the Emperor Lodovic the eighth of Bavaria by the
death of William the fourth his Brother who was Master thereof slain by the
Frysons, leaving them to his Son William the fifth, who becoming mad and
without issue they fell upon his Brother Albertus, to whom did succeed his
Son William the sixth Father to this Iacoline; who was the last she of the
House of Bavaria commanded in those Countries. Now she having been Married to
the Dolphin of France and left by him a Widow, her Father William would have
her to Marry (a dispensation being to be procured from the Council of
Constance, there being then no Pope) John Duke of Brabant, her Cousin-german
for Margaret her Mother was Sister to Anthony Duke of Brabant, Father to John;
William dying before this Marriage was concluded, John of Baviers Bishop of
Leidge his Brother and Uncle to Iacoline, hoping by the Title of Guardian to
work himself into the Government of these States, wrought so with the
Emperor Sigismund (though he formerly assented to the aforesaid Marriage) as
that the dispensation should be denied unto her: and giving up his Bishopric
(held by him the space of 27. years with much War and Blood) into the hands
of Martin the fifth lately chosen, he went into Holland, where by assistance of
such as sided with himself, Master of certain places, threatening War unto
his Niece if she would not submit unto his Guardianship: she and her husband
were advertised of her Unckles sinister proceedings in the Council; and having
obtained the dispensation from the new Pope, it was by the Emperors
importunity redemanded, when alleged the evils and Wars which were
thereupon likely to ensue. John of Baviers had received a Copy of the
revocation before the Original came, and had sent it them to stop their
proceedings, but it being by them rejected, as not authentical, not coming
from the Pope, they Married themselves, the Husband being 16, the Wife 17
years old: this Marriage was shortly after confirmed by the Pope himself,
declaring that the revocation being surreptitiously obtained, the dispensation
was in its first vigor, so as they might continue without any scruple in the
state of Matrimony wherein they were. John of Baviers falling in this design
entreated and obtained a dispensation for himself likewise to Marry, not
having in his so many years of Episcopacie exceeded the degree of Deacon, he
Married Elizabeth Duchess of Luxenburg Niece to the Emperor Sigismund, from
whom he obtained in Feefarme all the territories belonging to Iacoline as fallen
to the Empire, William being dead without any Heirs Male, not remembering that
they had descended to the House of Baviers by Female succession; but he was
stoutly opposed by those States who objected unto him; that as they did not
acknowledge any one but her for their Princess, so he himself had
acknowledged her for his, by doing homage to her for those Lordships which he
possessed. That Women were not there excluded succession when the case had so
fallen out; that for this they had Letters and approbation from former
Emperors, nor was this the first; with these protestations they declared
themselves his Enemies; and Hannault more then all the rest, since she had no
dependancie upon the Empire; but the War which for this cause the Duke of
Brabant waged with them ended so favorably for him, that besides having
granted him by Title of inheritance diverse Countries in Holland, he was
declared Lord Lieutenant for 3 years with Sovereign authority in all the
rest, Hannault only excepted. So as having now reduced the whole arbitratorship
unto himself he did so work upon the said Duke partly by wiles, partly by
snares, as that he did not only prorogue unto him his title for 7 years
longer, but by his instigation became an Enemy to his Wife, and by taking from
her and changing her attendants, did so much incense her that to be rid of him
she retired her self into Hannault accompanied by her Mother, and afterward
her self alone into England, where the Duke of Gloucester incited either by
love or out of the hopes of so great States fell upon a resolution of Marrying
her. For the which some apparent reason being to be given, they pretended the
dispensation to be invallid, and she caused the Duke of Brabant by his
Proctors to be cited to Rome, she demanded that the Marriage might be
declared null; a business wherewith the World was scandalized, and which above
all others troubled Duke Philip, joined by Father and Mother in the same degree
of Consanguinitie to them both; for he and Brabant were Sons to two Brothers;
he and Iacholina to Brother, and Sister: by which kindred he afterward became
Heir both to the one and the other. But because the Progress of this business
fell out the next ensuing year I will reserve the relation thereof to it is
proper place; having enlarged my self herein out of a belief that others
might have the same curiosity that I had; for not finding in the stories which
treat hereof, the Light I did desire to see; what moved Gloucester to Marry
another Man's Wife, I could find no satisfaction save in the History of Holland.

John Poole Brother to the Earl of Suffolk had the Government of Auranches in
Normandy; who thinking he lived but idly in his garrison, gathered together
about 2500 Men, taking them from their appointed garrisons to Anjou, wherewith
making excursions even to the Town of Angiers, he burnt the Suburbs thereof,
spreading himself every where about to the much prejudice of the Country,
till such time as loaded with prey and Prisoners he intended to return. But
adversity causing warynesse, and prosperity the contrary, as his men were
marching out of file and in disorder, and doubting nothing; they were set upon
by John de Harcourt Count of Omale and Charles his Lieutenant in the two
Provinces of Anjou and Maine accompanied by the Viscount of Narbonne the Baron
of Coulouses, Ambrogius de Lora Monsier de Larchet, by Andrew and Guy de Lavall
Britons, who together with the comminalty of those Frontiers were gone to join
with him, making about the number of 6000. Men; with these he gave upon the
others who were in disorder, mingled with their Carriages and Prisoners, and
(not without some difficulty) defeated them: 300. of them being left dead upon
the place, and 600. taken Prisoners, amongst which their Conductors, the rest
saving themselves by flight. Hallian and Argentres say that the number of the
dead were 1400, a difference of no small consideration, having obtained this
victory he passed on forwards hoping by the good luck he had therein to take
Auranches, wherein he failed; so as firing the Suburbs of St. Lo, he returned
to Main; but fortune which ballanceth her adventures, that she may seem to
be just, though indeed she be not so, did by, contrary events put life into
the one party, and mortify the other: for the Bastard de Baume, and Monsier de
Craignar, making the like incursions into the Country of Macone, were
unexpectedly met by Matthew Goches, who having with him a number of English not
inferior to them, set upon them, and did so behave himself as that the French
were almost all slain: the Bastard of Baume having done all that a brave
Soldier, and Commander could, seeing there was no other help, clapped spurrs to
his Horse to save himself; but Goches, who was upon as fleet a Horse as he,
overtooke him at the Castle Gate, where he thought to have entered, and took
him Prisoner, presenting him to the Earl of Salisbury, who to encourage the
rest, did together with the Prisoner give him one of the best Horses he had.

The English possessed all Normandy, except Mount St. Michael, a Fort situated
upon the top of a Mountain, in a little Island named by the same name, some two
leagues distant from the continent, and some three leagues from Auranches,
unaccessable, and not to be won but by Famine; they had laid siege
thereunto, debarring them of being come unto by any, or of going forth
themselves, so as it was impossible to Victual it, the Sea being guarded by
many Ships: the Duke of Britanny, who could not brook the loss thereof for
fear least the English forces might advance to his prejudice (not minding the
late capitulations at Amiens) resolved to raise the siege: the chief of this
enterprise was Monsier de Beufort Admiral of Britanny, the principal authors,
William Monfort Cardinal of Britanny and Bishop of St. Malo, Messieurs de
Limbour, de Montalban, and de Coutchen; who having armed a good number of Ships
in the Haven of St. Malo, filled them with Soldiers and Bow men, having made
all this preparation with such secrecy, as they were upon the Enemy before he
was aware. Terrible was the bickering, navall fights not being subject to
escapes or retreats, and much less the English at this time blockt up by the
British Vessels, and fast tied by their own Anchors; they grapled together
but came not to handy blows by reason of the English Ships fight, so as
having a long time labored with Weapons, Fire, and Arrows, the Britons who
were well provided of Soldiers had the Victory over the English, who were but
meanly stored with men, designed only for the safeguard of the Ships, they
slew them almost all, together with the Mariners and Pilotts, some few only
escaping by sail. Argentres says that the besiegers seeing their Men lost,
and not daring to expect the Enemies landing fled away, abandoning their
Houlds; had it been so, it would have been by the assistance of an ebbing Sea,
for otherwise being in an Island and without Ships, they could not have saved
themselves. The English Historians make no mention of this, nor many French,
those that do, write it thus; that the Admiral of Britanny having sunk some
of the English Vessels he gave chase to the rest, and that the besieged
joining with those that came into their succor, assaulted the besiegers,
defeated them, and freed themselves from them; but that escaping to Ardenon
3000. paces distant from the Mountain they there built a Fort, from whence
issuing forth they had many skirmishes with the garrison; and that the Baron
Colonsus having agreed thereupon, with those of the garrison, came at an
appointed time and slew above 200. English, taking Sr. Nicholas Burdet
Prisoner, a rich and valiant Knight; a Narration much differing from that of
Argentres, who relates it somewhat obscurely, but yet ends it, the rest giving
it no end at all, neither can it be gathered from them, if besides the 200.
that were slain, or 240. according to Giles, any others remained: besides they
name not any one head in this expedition; which they forget not to do in
businesses of less consequence.

This mean while Victories and losses were had by both sides, but not equally,
worthy notice, and therefore rather to be pointed at then described. John of
Luxenburg besieged Guisse a place belonging to Renato D' Anjou Duke de Bar, and
Brother to the King of Sicily; who forbore to succor it being so advised by
the Duke of Lorraine his Wives Father; for they should both of them have put
their States in too great danger, if they should have declared open War with
two such potent Enemies as were England and Burgony; so as they thought it the
lesser evil to suffer it be lost, then to hazard the rest; the defendants did
what they could to defend it under the command of John de Proisi their
Captain, but not being succored they surrendered the Town: it fell otherwise
to Sadone in the County of Virtue, which being besieged, threatened and taken by
force by the Earl of Salisbury, met with the last of ruins, being sacked and
the Soldiers almost all slain: but such were the Burgonians Insolences under
John de Luxemburg, and so insufferable even to such as sided with the Duke, as
they resolved to make an Assembly at Roie where having considered their
condition, and expostulated their injuries they resolved to change sides: but
all would not do so, not that they did not desire it, but for the danger they
were likely to encounter: those who declared themselves for Charles were
Mussieurs de Longeville, de St. Simone, de Maillis de Reicourt and others; some
of which falling afterward into the Enemies hands were severely put to death:
being this mean while all banished, they furnished their own Habitations and
Governments with good garrisons, entering into mortal War with the English
and Burgonians: to such as accused them of breach of faith, they answered, that
it made more for them to have an open declared War, then to endure the
insolences of such, as under title of friendship and defense did every where
commit injuries, roberies, and contumacies. A good example to Princes not to
suffer the Dogs which are to defend their Houses, turn Wolves amongst their
Flocks. But the incorrigiblenesse of Military men proceeds not always from
them; it is impossible that Soldiers be well disciplined in long and Civil
Wars, especially if their Commanders be avaritious; such inconveniences have
been and will be, no remedy being to be had for it. For where Wars grow
inveterate, and where hatred together with damage does increase, humanity
grows there corrupted or is totally lost; He not being allowed of for a good
Soldier who is not brutish. Piety, conscience, and other Christian affections
are lulled asleep by extortion, violence and the habit of being imbrued in
blood.

Charles had sent Reynauld de Schartres Archbishop of Rheims his Chancellor in
company of the Earl Douglasse into Scotland to raise there 5000. men, with the
which being returned into France, he brought along with him the Earl Boughan
his Son in law, and John Stuart constable of Scotland, to all which Charles
gave diverse possessions the better to encourage them to serve him. To Douglasse
and his Heires-male, he gave the Duchy of Touraine in fe^ farm: though
others write, he did but pawn it unto him; He Earl Bowhan Lo. constable but
neither of them enjoyed these honors long, to Stuart he gave the Lordship of
Aubenny which is by his posterity possessed to this day, and to captivate their
good wills, and make the Scottish-men partial in his behalf, he took a 100.
of them for the guard of his person, an institution to this day maintained by
the Kings his successors. He had likewise a little before this received an
aid of 1000. foot and 600. lances from Philip Maria Duke of Millan; these
forces being added to his own, he made up the body of an Army consisting of
18000. men, (not counting those who were dispersed abroad in other Provinces;)
He made use of these men as of a marching Machin, conducted by gallant and
experienced Commanders; neither was he long in setting them on work, though
with ill success.

The Count Richmond had at this time forsaken the confederacy 1424.
made at Amiens, by reason of some distaste he took at the Duke of Bedford;
but what the business was I find no where specified save by Serres, who taxing
the Duke of too much haughtines, says that the Count being gone unto him to
receave some charge worthy of him and his affinity; He found him so hard and
intractable, as that being accustomed to the affability of the King of France,
he took distaste thereat, and returned back with a resolution of trying all
means he could to put himself into Charles his good opinion, and to
endeavor that the Duke his Brother should do the like. The garrison of Jury
(a place belonging by inheritance to Ambrose de Lore, and which being taken by
Henry the fifth was given in gift to this Count Richmond with all the
emoluments thereof) understanding his revolt, declared themselves for France.
Bedford laid siedge unto this town, the which defended it self till such time
as a mine being ready to play they yielded, the Castle remaining yet untaken,
which after some days siedge agreed likewise to surrender it self, if it were
not succored on the day of the assumption of the virgin Mary. Hostages were
given hereupon, and the Captain was permitted to advertise the King thereof;
this place was of great consequence to Charles, which had it not been, his
reputation would have enforced him to succor it, for it was a kind of defiance
to be advertised thereof by the consent of the enemy. Resolving then upon it,
he charged the Duke of Alansonne to succor it, yea though he should hazard
the battle: Alansonne obeyed, marching toward it with the aforenamed Army;
being come near to the Town, he sent 40. Horsemen to survay the Camp; but
such were the relations he heard, as he thought it the lesser evil to loose
Jury, then to hazard a battle. A resolution which displeased the rest; he
notwithstanding took on his way toward Vernuille, presenting himself before
it in so brave and stately manner, that it not being to be doubted, but that
he came from Jury; whether it was known he was gone to raise the siedge, he
easily made the inhabitants believe, that he had defeated the Duke of Bedford,
slain his men; the Duke himself with some few being escaped on horseback. A
tale which bearing with it a seeming likelihood; was easily credited; the place
yielded it self up unto him; and it was a purchase which properly belonged unto
him, for he had not long before obtained it from Charles. The Castle of Jury
this mean while not succored, Gerard de Palliere as he presented the keys
unto the Duke, showed him a letter signed and sealed by 18. Lords, wherein they
promised him to come upon the precise day, with a resolution to fight and raise
the siedge: afterward he added, that since they by falsifying their promise
had given him so great a wound, he found no other salve whereby to heal it,
but by making their breach of promise known. To which the Duke replied, that
since they would not daigne to come to him, he would go to them, with a
resolution to end all disputes by Arms. He commanded the Earl of Suffolk to
follow him, who taking with him 600. horse, went to Bertrille where hearing of
the loss of Vernuille, he by post advertised the Duke thereof; who marching
forthwith thereupon sent word to Douglasse that he intended to dine with him
the next day, that therefore he desired him to expect him, and see that dinner
were ready. Douglasse answered, that being come from Scotland of purpose to
visit him; he would not fail in preparing for him the banquet he desired;
but neither was Douglasse nor any of the other Captains minded to give
battle, for Jury being lost, the thing for which they fought, they should not
do well to hazard preposterously, and without necessity against a victorious
enemy: those forces which were Charles his only stay and support, and that
doing otherwise they should at least make good the place of advantage wherein
they were; having Vernuille upon their back, their soldiers likely to grow
fresh with rest, and weary if they should travel; But the Viscount of Narbonne
showing what shame they were to undergo, if they should not abate the edge of
Bedfords bravado's, caused his troops take arms in a tumultuous manner
(composed of Provincials gascons and men of Toulouse, all good soldiers)
saying, that if the wisest would not follow him, he could do no less then
go alone to defend with the hazard of his life the honor of France, so as
moved thereunto by shame they all confusedly followed him, and were by the
event too late taught, that resolutions contrary to reason have been seldom
seen prosperous they made one only Battalion of their men, placing 1000.
horsemen upon each side of their flanks and 400. of those that came from Millan
in front to annoy the enemies ordnance, to the end that they being opened the
gross battle might the easier enter. The Duke of Bedford was not displeased
with this order, for finding himself to be inferior to them in number, it
behooved him to make one only squadron of all his men; He placed bowmen on
their flancks and front, secured by certain sharpened poles, which fastened in
the earth with their points outward, served for pikes against the shocke of the
horse; He made no use of horse, but causing them to be fastened together by
the raynes and tails, he made them stay in the Arrere of the battle with the
Pages, Servants, Carriages, and Baggadge guarded by 2000. bowmen; the fray
endured 3. hours without any diversity of fortune; the 400. horse which could
not open the English troops (though they did a little trouble them at their
first assault) past forward toward the carriages thinking to find less
obstacle there, whilst the rest of the horse, infesting the enemies flanks,
wrought so much, as having put them in some little dis-order, they cried out
victory, whilst they had no share at all therein; for the second files
houlding close together firmed the former, and the bowmen by their shooting did
suppress the hopes of their supposed advantage, so as the English having
withstood their first brunt, and passing from defense to offense, charged hot
upon them, whilst the horse galled by the bowmen were the first that fled, the
400. that were gone against the carriages being galled by a thick shower of
arrows, were constrained to betake them to their heels: pursued by the
Archers, who fresh and free from the custody of the horse joined themselves
with the rest, letting fly at the enemies Battalion, who weary, wounded, and in
dis-order remained; the greatest number of them slain upon the field, and
those who fled toward the Town (the gates whereof were shut least the enemy
might enter in with the rest) found in the ditches thereof death and sepulture;
those who betook themselves to the open fields did better; it was well for
them the enemy had no horse; and that they were busied in the taking of
Prisoners. Amongst the rest, the Duke of Bedford himself fought bravely and
manfully. This battle happened in the month of August 1424. the day being
uncertain, it being diversely said to have been on the 8. 16. 17. and 28. but
I believe it happened on the 17. since it is by most part so affirmed, and
because the night after Jury was rendered, the 16. the Duke went from thence and
came on the 17. to Vernuille, the way being not above 5. leagues. I was willing
to note this variety not for that the business does deserve it, but since we
are to meet with others in more substantial affairs, particularly in the
calculation of years, no man may wonder if sometimes to follow one, I dissent
from the rest, according to the English Writers witness, by the testimony of
the Heralds of both Nations there was slain of French and Scots 9700. and
2100 of their men. Monstrelet names but 1600. English, and between 4. and
5000. of the others, the greatest part whereof were Scots; Paulus Emilius 5000.
Giles and Belleforest 4000. Alleyn, Chartier, Chesnes and Dupleix 4500.
Argentres is he alone, who differing from the rest affirms them to have been
7000. Dupleix says, that as the English make their own loss to be less
then it was; so they make their enemies loss to be greater, wherein he is
deceaved; for since they confess it to be 2100. they make it to be 500. more
then he or the others; it is true that Polidore Virgill numbering the lost
French to be about 5000. adds, that the common report was that the number of
dead and Prisoners amounted to 15000. but this he does not affirm for truth,
so as in such diversity it will not be hard for us to guess at the truth from
the total number of both their Armies. For since the French write, that their
Army consisted of 18000. and the English but of 98000. it follows, that if the
number of the dead on their side did not exceed 4. or 5000. and of the English
2100. there should yet remain of their men alive between 13. and 14000. and
of the adversary 7700. so as after the battle their number was the greater by
5. or 6000. but let us take those 6000. and let us give them to Salisbury to
content Serres, and let us suppose, that the English Army was 15800. all this
granted we shall find, that if the number of their dead were 4000. the number
of those who remained was yet greater by 300. if 4500. less by 200. and if
5000. less by 700. a difference in like case of small moment, besides it is
not to be believed, that so valiant a Nation would have quitted the field,
unless they had lost so many as without blame might have made them inferior
to their enemy; and their Writers thinking thereby to sustain their reputation
withdraw from it, since it makes more for them to have been overcome fighting
and dying upon the place, then to have yielded the field and fled away whilst
they were as many in number if not more, and if reply be made that from these
the 3000. should be withdrawn, who were left under Ramburres to make good
Vernuille, those must likewise be subtracted from the English who were lest
to guard Jury, and the Castle, places lately recovered from the enemy, and
which in reason were not to be kept without a good garrison; Moreover the
battle was begun with 2000. Archers less, without the which the fight was a
long time maintained; neither were they to have quitted the guard of the
baggage and horse which was their charge had it not bin to have assisted their
Companions; an act only to be expected from experienced Soldiers, who well
verst in their occupation, and fit to command knew, how to serve unanimously
and to purpose uncommanded. We must then beleve the number of the dead
specified by the English to be 9700. to be the true number; the chief,
whereof were the counts of Omale, Tonnare, Ventadoure, and the Viscount of
Narbon; together with a great number of the nobility, whose catalogue is
diversely set down by Monstrelette and Belleforest of Prisoners; the Duke
D'Alansonne, the Bastard of Alansonne, the Marishall Fajette, Gaucourt, Puis
and many others of name: together with 200. Gentlemen and some Soldiers; the
body of the Viscount of Narbonne being found amongst the dead, was cut in
quarters, and the quarters hung up upon Gallowses; for they used him being dead
as they would have done, had he been alive, for that he was one of those who
murdered John Duke of Burgony; The chief of the Scotts that dyed, were
Archibald, Earl Douglasse, who together with his life lost, the Duchy of
Furaine, for his Son, the Earl of Wintonne, dyed with him; and the Earl
Bowhan Constable of France, who (as some write) enjoyed, not that charge above
100. hours, together with these there dyed 9. Knights 2700. Gentlemen of
quality. The Duke of Bedford was this day abandonned by many Norman Cavaliers
just as the Battles joined, who fled over to the contrary party, to whom they
adjudged the victory by reason of the inequality of the numbers; some of which
falling afterward into his hands suffered condign punishment; and the rest
lost what of command they held under him. But S. Railes diligence did much
comfort Charles his misfortune; for had he not taken care to assemble together
such as were escaped, he had been wholly destitute of Soldiers. Steven de
Vignolus called la Hire did the like, for considering in what condition his
King was without Soldiers, Commanders, and Princes of the blood (all of them,
being all most Prisoners to the English) He quitted Vitres and other places in
Champagnia to join his troops with the others. Charles had not any time
before been in a worse condition, Monsieur de Rombarres deputed to the custody
of Vernuille with 3000. men (as has been said) yielded it up two days after
coming all of them out of the Town, their Lives, Arms, Baggadge, and Horses
saved. He likewise was of some comfort to the common apparent ruin. The Duke
of Bedford who after so happy success had withdrawn himself to Roan, and
from thence to Paris sent the Lord Scales with 2000. men, accompanied by Sr.
John Montgomery, and Sr. John Falstaff to annoy Aniou and Main where though a
number of Castles yielded unto them; yet this seeming but a small affair (the
neighborhood of these two Provinces being dangerous for the safety of
Normandy, and requiring greater effects) the Earl of Salisbury with 10000.
fighting men went to besiedge Man's; the Metropolitan of Maine, battering it in
such a sort, as throwing to the ground, the Houses, Walls, and Toures thereof:
He won it to his obedience, and giving the command thereof to the Earl of
Suffolk, and the Lieutenancy to Falstaff he passed forward to S. Susanna
defended by Ambrogius de Lore, assaying it on that side, which he thought
fittest for assault, but having got no good thereby, (the Walls being manifully
defended) He bethought himself, how to have it without so much blood. He
played upon it with his Ordnance two whole days together, so as having laid
flat its, defenses and reduced it to such a point as that it was not able to
endure any other assault, they were enforced to surrender, paying some certain
moneys, and the Garrison coming forth only in their Doublets, their lives
saved. From hence he went too before Forte Barnardo where being advertised by
the Gascons of Alansons Garrison, how they had made agreement with John de
Villiers to sell unto him that place for 400. Crowns, he sent thither the
Lord Willoughby and Falstaff with 2000. Soldiers who surprised the purchaser,
whilst he thought to have made his entry with 200. Horse and 400. Foot, which
he had brought to guard the place, they slew him, none of the rest escaping,
save 25. thanks to their Horses heels. The place which he besieged being
then yielded up unto him, together with a many more he frighted France, which
thought fortune too partially favorable unto him.

At this time Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, formerly deprived of his liberty
died at Trimmes in Ireland; whereupon his just and lawful pretenses fell upon
Richard Plantaginet, son to that Richard Earl of Cambridge, who by the
commandment of Henry the fifth, was beheaded at Antona, we shall shortly hear
news of his claim; unfortunate to him the King and kingdom, for though he
turned England topsey turvy, he did not notwithstanding compass the government
thereof; the which was reserved with better fortune for his son. This his
death was accompanied by the death of John Mortimer his Cousin, who accused of
treason to the scandal of all men suffered the punishment of the Law, his
faults being believed to be calumnies, and himself brought to so ignominious
an end for that alone, which by vulgar Politicians is called Reason of State.

The same resolution which (as we have said) made the Duke of Gloucester marry
Iacoline of Baviers contrary to the Law, made him likewise resolve to take up
Arms against him, who of all others was most requisite for the friendship of
England; neither could he after the first error forbear committing of
others, for he was enforced to recover for her, her possions enjoyed by the
Duke of Brabant her legitimate husband; the which he now (pretending himself
to be the like) must account his. Neither thought he that he should need any
great forces, since Hannault which was to be the seat of the war was thought
to favor him, for the people of the Country had always sided with their true
and natural Princes, so as both of them imbarking themselves at Dover with
5000. fighting men conducted by the Earl Marshall, they went to Calis. Duke
Philip according to appointment formerly made with the Duke of Bedford was come
for this cause to Paris, and after having friendly disputed it amongst
themselves they framed an agreement to be accepted of by both parties, the Duke
of Brabant did not refuse to accept thereof, but Iacolina and Gloucester did,
who said they might go to take possession of what was their own, without the
interposition of others. A resolution which did inwardly wound the brother, who
foresaw the evils that were to ensue thereupon, and did touch Philip to the
quick, being interessed in these states and Princes by neighborhood and
pretensions; besides he thought Gloucester did too little value him, whilst the
English ought rather to set an esteem on him then on any other. Neither did
he forbear to say to Bedford that since his brother would not condescend to
the agreement made between them two, he was not to be blamed if he should
employ all the forces he had in the behalf of Brabant against Gloucester, to
the which Bedford knew not what to reply, no reason being to be given for his
actions, who not respecting friendship, equity, nor publik interest is resolved
to pursue his own Caprichies. Gloucester passed through Artois into Hannault,
where he and his wise Iacolina were received with all expressions of obedience,
all the Lords and Gentry of the Country coming into their service, except the
Counts Conversan, Angebert and Anguiere, and John de Iumont, who were the only
men that with their Towns and Fortresses observed the oath they had formerly
taken to the Duke of Brabant who growing more powerful by reason of the
concourse of men from Artois and Flanders, (for Philip had made it be
proclaimed that such as were obliged to wear Arms should go to his service)
he began the war to the great incommoditie of the Country, the which growing
cooler toward their Princes would have showed some effects, had not not their
places of chiefest importance been in the power of the English. Gloucester did
not believe that Philip would have opposed him, but hearing of the
Proclamations, and seeing the effects, he made his grievance known unto him
by letters, which though in some sort modest, yet were they not void of injury,
for he had let fall from his pen, that in his Proclamations there were many
untruthes; whereupon Philip replied that he had taken upon him the defense of
his Cousin the Duke of Brabant, as by reason he was obliged; by accepting the
Articles of that agreement which Gloucester refused to do; whilst both law and
conscience required that the deciding of the question should be expected from
Rome where the cause did yet depend, but that passing by these particulars as
not belonging to him, he would answer only to that which reflected upon his
honor. That therefore he would have him know, that in his Proclamations, he
had given out nothing of untruth, and consequently willed him to recant his
assertion, which if he would not do, he challenged him to single combat,
either before the Emperor or the Duke of Bedford, who being his Brother was
not to be refused for a Judge. Gloucester accepted the challenge appointing St.
Georges day for the time, and the place to be before the Duke of Bedford, if
he would be the Judge, otherwise before the Emperor. Those of Brabant this
mean while who with their Auxiliaries made up a body of 40000. men, besiedged
Brame in Hannault, wherein was a Garrison of 200. English; after 8. days
houlding out, necessity drew them to capitulate; they were suffered to come
forth with part of their Baggadge, and the City was fined to pay a certain
sum of money in ransom of their lives and goods; but whilst the English were
ready to come forth, the common People entered tumultuously in at Sundry places,
putting most of them to the sword, and together with them some of the Citizens;
and not satisfied with blood, they sacked the City, and set it on fire,
reducing it into ashes. The commands and entreaties of their leaders were of no
avail, who had much ado to save the few English that were left; and because
the tenet of the challenge was, that there should be a suspension of Arms to
shun the effusion of so much blood (the quarrel being to be ended by the two
Princes) no other hostility ensued at that time, save that Gloucester being come
to Brain thinking to have come time enough to have succourd it; there was much
appearance of coming to blows; for those of Brabant apprehending this
arrival put themselves in battle Array, and a battle had certainly ensued,
had not the greatest number, of the common sort run away; leaving their
weapons in the highwayes; so as the Count Sr. Paul and other commanders were
much perplexed, being exposed to the mercy of the enemy; but the Duke finding
that Brain was taken and burnt, so as there was no remedy, and not knowing any
thing of the other dis-orders thought no further on it, they all retired; they
to Bruxzels and he to Mons, from whence he went to England, to provide all
things requisite for the Duel. He much against his will left behind him; his
pretended Wife, won by the entreaties of her Mother and Subjects, all of them
swearing (the City of Mons in particular wherein she remained) to defend her
against whosoever should annoy her, the which they did not make good: for he
had no sooner turned his back, but Hannault being set upon, Mons yielded to
Brabant, and the Princess was delivered over into the hands of Philip, by whom
being sent to Gaunt with appearing respect, but in effect a Prisoner; she
bethought herself how to makean escape by the secreet assistance of her
Subjects, clothed in man's apparel she got to Zealand, and having received
5000. men from the Duke of Gloucester, she entered Holland, where being fought
withal and beaten, she lost 3000. this mean while the business being decided
in Rome, and the first marriage declared legitimate, the other void; Gloucester
did wholly abandon her, so as finding herself single against so powerful
enemies, she was enforced to give way to fortune, and to yield Hannault to her
Husband (from whom she was for ever separated) together with Holland and the
rest, under the Tittle of Government: she obliged herself to Burgony not to
marry again without his consent as long as Brabant lived; but being herein as
in all other things inconstant, and having secreetly married the Lieutenant of
Zealand (a marriage misbecoming her quality) she so highly offended Philip, as
having detained her Husband, to free him, she was enforced to new conditions,
and about the 36. year of her age, being deprived of her possessions dyed for
mere grief, this was her end. Her marriage with Gloucester was unluckly to them
both, she thereby lost all she had; and he was thereby the cause, not so
much of the loss of France to the English, as of the increase of the Duke of
Burgundyes power in the Low Countries; Philip after his Fathers death, came to
the Government of Burgundy, Artois, and Flandres; few years after by the death
of two Brothers John and Philip, he came to the Dukedomes of Brabant and
Limburgh; by the death of Iacholina to the Earledomes of Haunault, Holland, and
Zealand, and to the Seigniory of Frisland: He by Arms won the Dukedom of
Luxenburg from those who descended from the Emperor Sigismund, and purchased
the Dukedom of Namures, so as if he had continued in his enmity to Charles,
and friendship with Henry, he was likely to have been the destruction of the
one, and the establishment of the other. But human affections the more
subject they are to passion, the more prone are they to change, they made him
friend unto his enemy, and a bitter enemy unto his friend. Natural hatred
prevailing more then casual; especially when believing our selves to be the
benefactors and obligers: We do not think our selves to be sufficiently
recompensed according to our own deserts.

The Duel between the two Princes was this mean while by the Duke of Bedford
and his council annulled, whilst the Duke of Gloucester having received advice
of the invalidity of his marriage, married Elianor daughter to the Lord Cobham,
a Lady formerly loved and known by him, this match caused more scandal then
did his former, and proved much more unfortunate to him.

The defeat of Vernuille with the loss of so many Lords and 1425.
chief Commanders, as it had much indangerd Charles, so were the difficulties
of making new provisals wonderfully great. His ruin was certain and sudden,
the remedies thereof subject to the length of time, the loss of the constable
did most of all incommodiate him; a new one was of necessity to be chosen, but
as there were many, that did pretend thereunto; so was there none that was fit
for the employment. The present occasion required not only an expert warrier,
but such a one as should be of power and should have followers out of France,
conditions which were not found in any of his subjects: and for this reason was
the late Earl Bowhan chosen, as he who if need should require, was not likely
to fail in new forces from Scotland. After long consultation, he pitched upon
Count de Richmonde, the causes moving him thereunto were, that he had been
brought up in the Wars from his Childhood, and upon all occasions showed
himself to be valiant, so as he was rightly ranked in the number of the
chief warriers of that age, that at all times he had showed himself to leyne
more toward the French then the English; that the Nobility of France were not
likely to deny him obedience being so great a Prince, that together with the
Nobility of France, he would be followed by that of Britany; that, if he
could not so far prevail with the Duke his Brother, as to make him declare
himself for the French, he might at least divert him from the English, and
free France of the jealousies, they had of him, that the like was to be hoped
from Philip Duke of Burgundy; for being no less his friend then Parent, there
was none more fitter then he to sow the seeds of that reconciliation, from
which was to be expected the expulsion of the English, the peace of France and
his own establishment: but as he did wisely resolve upon, so did he
inconsiderately begin this business, for this not being to be treated of
without the Dukes consent; He sent unto him Monsieur D'Omale, and together
with him John Louvet President of Provence, who was by him hated to death, as
being one of those that had advised his imprisonment; so as having given him a
cool audience, he roundly answered, that if his brother would he might accept
the offer, but not by his consent; and likely he was to have treated him ill
favourdly, had it not been in respect to him that sent him; the which being by
Charles conceived, he entreated the Queen of Scicily to go her self in
person to him, giving her for an Assistant Tannigues d' Chausteau; who being
better received, then were the former Ambassadors, the business was referred
to the Council. The Duke had no reason to trust the King, knowing that his
delay would make him equally enemy to the English and to Philip, which could
not but oppugn his interests. For though he had broken the confederacy at
Amyens, that he might accord with him, yet was he not at enmity with them nor
linck't to him, save only that he might remain a Neuterall: the troubles
caused unto him by Charles, and Charles his father in times past kept him in
perpetual suspicion, neither did he look for any better were Charles in
prosperous condition, for the Kings of France have always sought how to molest
the Dukes of Britanny in their prerogative and soveraigntie, choosing them for
brethren in their miseries, that they might partake with them therein, and
never owning them in their prosperity, unless it were to ensnare them; never
reasonable nor just, but in adversity and need, besides he had not forgot,
that at the taking of Chantonceaux he had met with some of his letters (though
he denied them) wherein he assured the two brothers of Pointevers of his
protection, when under pretense of feasting him, they invited him to their
house; and afterward kept him many months prisoner in Irons, so as such a
friendship could not be esteemed advantageous.

In effect it had made for him that France had been perpetually agitated, for
being respected by both sides (each of them needing his friendship) he remained
safe and free, whilst wanting leisure to work his ruin, they ruinated one
another, but that which most of all perplexed him, was the new affinity
between his brother and Philip, which did not permit him to resolve on any
thing that might displease him. 'Twas notwithstanding concluded that the Count
should go himself to treat thereof, upon condition that his return might be
secured by equivolent Hostages, and that Philip should be therewithal
contented; to whom Ambassadors were forth with sent, who brought back his
consent upon certain conditions. And Charles having put into the Counts
custody (besides the four towns, Lusignan, Chinon, Loches and Meung) William
Albret and the bastard of Orleans to be Hostages in Britany, went to Angiers;
where the Count accompanied by many of the Nobility met him, for what belonged
unto the charge offered unto him, he at the first did with much modedesty
excuse himself, alleging his unexperience in the affairs of France;
afterward he seemed willing to accept thereof, if his brother and the Dukes of
Burgundy and Savoy were contented. Anedens the eighth (the first that bore this
title) was Duke of Savoy. His interests with the Duke of Burgony were the
friendship contracted between them by reason of their ancient jealousy of the
greatness of France after that Dolpheny was united to France and their near
affinity. Amedens his wife, who was daughter to Philip the fair, being Aunt
to John father to the present Philip surnamed the good, the Count having with
this resolution taken his leave returned to Britany, and having surrendered up
the Towns and Hostages went with his brothers approbation to speak with the
aforesaid Dukes, from whom he obtained their desired assent. At Chinon he
received the sword from Charles according as the custom is, upon condition
that the Bishop of Cleremont, the President of Province, the Bastard of
Orleans, his son in law William d' Avogour and some others who had a hand in
the Duke of Britanies imprisonment should be banished the Court. Tannignes de
Chasteau whom Philip believed to have given the deaths wound to his father, was
of the number of the banished. Charles was hardly brought to this, for he
valued this faithful and valiant gentleman as his Father, and although he
promised all this, yet would he not have observed it, neither in those nor
this, had not necessity enforced him. For having given order to the new
Constable to raise forces in Britany, and having sent to Savoy to the same
effect, he was absolutely denied by those Princes for that he had not observed
what he had promised. Whereupon Tannignes more respecting his masters
necessity then himself, advised him not to love the favor of such Princes,
and service of great men by keeping with him contrary to his promise people of
so small consideration as were he and the rest. And though the aforesaid
Princes believed amiss, (at least for what concerned himself for 'twas not
he that slew the Duke of Burgundy) yet the mischief would fall upon him, that
as times should alter; He might recall them, whilst for the present, he was
to preserve the good will of his Parents, and of such whose service might be
useful to him. He only desired him, that being grown old in his service,
he would take such order, as that he might not perish for want of food,
wherein Charles did not only satisfy him, but suffering him much against his
will to depart: He assured him, that as long as he lived, he would account
him as his Father. He gave unto him Beauciere for his place of abode, together
with the Government and emolument thereof; 15. Archers well paid for his Guard,
pensions well assigned, and confirmed unto him the office of Provost of Paris,
the which though in the enemies hands was of reputation and profit unto him.
The President of Provence did not willingly withdraw himself as did Tannignes,
but much against his will into Province leaving two Daughters very well matched
the one to Monsieur de Ioyense, the other to the Bastard of Orleans, who went
along with him, and afterward forsaking him returned to Court; and though he
had formerly bin hated by the Constable, was afterward favored by him, by
reason of his Valor, who shall consider what we have related in this present
affair will think it far from likelihood of truth, for Charles intending to
advantage his party against Philip by making Richmond Constable who would not
accept of it without Philips consent; Philip did ill in consenting thereunto,
and worse in agreeing, that Savoy and Britany should furnish him with
soldiers, receiving no other satisfaction for it, but Tannignes banishment
from Court; but one of 3. things in my opinion caused him to do it; either
that being distasted by the English, he was not well pleased with their
advancements; or that having his thoughts bent upon Iacholina's territories
(where it behoved him to attend) and Charles being in bad case by reason of his
loss at Vernuille; He resolved to give him a breathing time, to the end he
might not be made a pray by the English and he have no share therein, or else
that he did it to lead the way to that reconciliation which ensued shortly
after, and that the Constable had already begun to treat with him, which is
the most likely, but if it were none of these we must say that the actions of
Princes are like the works of nature which are seen but not known.

The first advantage Charles reaped hereby was the alienating the Duke of
Britany from England. To this end he sent unto him Mussieurs 1426.
de Treves and de Lusa, entreating him that since he had banished those whom
he had reputed his enemies. He would as a Parent and kinsman assist him with
men against the English, who advanced every day more and more to the ruin of
the Kingdom. This Embassy being consulted upon and oppugned, he resolved
against the opinion of the major party to succor him; believing that the
mischief he had suffered was occasioned rather by those Counselors which
governed him, then by Charles, so as desirous to speak with him mouth to
mouth, before any resolution should be taken, they met at Lanmeurs, where they
tarried some days, and departed the one and the other infinitely satisfied.
The Duke at his return raised a good body of Soldiers and gave them to his
brother, who joined with the French Troops; whilst the Earl of Warwick
besieged Pontersoune and enforced it, if not succored by such a day (which it
was not) to surrender. He placed there a Garrison, which not ceasing to make
inrodes into Britanny caused the Constable to march thither. He besieged it,
forced it, slew all the English and demolished it, from thence he came to S.
Jacques de Beveron, a place of no great circuit, a little before fortified by
the English; but fortune did not smile upon him here, as it did in the former
exploit, for the besieged not only defending themselves against the besiegers
violence, but offending them by perpetual sallies, and skirmishes did abate
their first furies: to which may be added the Soldiers want of pay, which
should have been administered by Mounsieur de Iae, who enjoyed what of favor
and authority the President of Provence held under Charles, so as the
Constables protestations of not being able without pay to hold the Soldiers
together, either being not listened unto, or not regarded; he resolved to try
his fortune by a general assault before the Army should disbaind; which
according to the French calculation consisted of 20000. according to the
English of 40000. and because he knew that the Earl of Suffolk and Lord
Scales were in a neighboring town, he sent 2000. men, to the end that they
might be impeached if they came to succor the town; but these men having gone
a good way, not discrying any enemy as indeed there was none (for Suffolk had
had no notice of this the Constables last resolution) they returned back with
flying colors, and in Battle array, when these who were scaling the Walls
believing them to be enemies, tumbled down from the Ladders, following those
who at the foot of the Wall, out of the same belief threw away their Arms
and fled to save themselves. The defendants who were of the same belief
sallyed forth at two several places toward the River side, and charging them
home forced them to throw themselves into the water, where according to the
French Authors, between 6. and 700. men were slain; but according to the
English, what by water, what by sword above 4000. forsaking their Tents,
Artillery and all manner of provisions; and the Constable being abandoned by
the French, who in great disorder and without leave taking, returned to their
own homes, retired to Britanny, more worthy to be comiserated then blamed.

The English Court, the town of London, and the whole kingdom was at this
time full of troubles by reason of the contention sprung between the Duke of
Gloucester and his Uncle the Bishop of Winchester. Alterations not to be
wondered at, for as thunder proceeds rain, and the conjunction of two dismal
Planets the malignity of their influence, so were not Henry's misfortunes to
fall out without the precedence of many disorders, which though (severally
considered) were of no great moment, yet being joined were such as caused his
ruin: the distemperatures of a state being like to those of human bodies
which if languishing are almost always mortal the natures of these two
contenders were hard to be reconciled, the one would be obeyed the other could
not brook command: the Bishop pretended that since the Government of the King
appertained to him, the Duke had no reason to insinuate himself thereunto,
though he were nearer of blood and of greater authority, but whether this or
ought else were the cause of their hatred, it is most certain the Bishops pride
and ambition was most hateful. His mighty mass of riches procured him not
only hatred but envy likewise; an evil which as it caused one part of the
Nobility to wish him well, so wrought it a contrary effect in the rest, which
drawn either by the condition of his birth, as of blood royal; by the
reverence of his calling as of Bishop, by the spendor of his attendants, as
being served by none but selected men, and by the fullness of his tables which
exceeded all others) did adhere unto him, so as the City being thus divided,
the chief Magistrate who had the care thereof, was constrained to keep a
great guard therein day and night, the shops were all shut up, hourly fearing
least some contention arising amongst the partakers, they should fall to
pillage, which was the only end of the poorest sort of people, which were the
aptest to do mischief. The Bishop failed not to justify his cause to the
Duke of Bedford, writing unto him, that if he did not immediately come to
England his brother would be the cause of much mischief which he prayed God
to withstand; he entreated him to make haste, for that the affair in France
could not prosper if those of England did amiss, this news made a great
impression in the Duke, so as deputing the Earl of Warwick, who was but a
little before come thither with 6000. men; His Lieutenant in the Regency of
France, he went together with his Wife to England; and came to Lancaster where
the Parliament was at that time called. The first action he did was to blame
such Lords as had sided in this difference (not naming his Brother or Uncle to
whom his discourse tended,) who drawn by their venom had stirred up the People
to the danger of the King and Kingdom, and utter subversion of the affairs in
France, he exhorted them to lay aside their passions, and take to them more
moderate and civil thoughts. Gloucester did not forbear for all this to present
in full Parliament, his complaints against the Bishop. First, that Richard
Woodville Lieutenant of the Tower had by the Bishops instigation denied him
entrance. Secondly, that he was resolved to lay hands upon the King, and carry
him from Eltham to Windsor without the Kings consent, or consent of the
Council. Thirdly, that when as he had resolved to hinder him herein; He had
caused the Bridge to be shut up upon him, caused the chains to be drawn,
and placed men armed with bows, arrows, and all other manner of weapons in
the chambers, windows, and corners near about to hinder his passage, and to
kill him, and as many as were with him. Fourthly, that he had been told by
Henry the fifth, as he lay asleep in the great chamber at Westminster in his
Fathers time, by the barking of a Dog, a certain man was discovered behind the
hangings, who being questioned by the Earl of Arundel, said, that he was
placed there by directions from the Bishop of Winchester to kill the Prince in
his bed, and that being removed from thence, he was immediately drowned in the
Thames. Fifthly, that he had told him likewise, that his Father in his latter
times being troubled with grievous indispositions, the Bishop should say unto
him, that since he was no longer fit for governmrnt, he should do well to
transfer both the government and Crown upon him. The Parliament was not
easily brought to believe the circumstances of this accusation, especially when
the Bishop gave in his answer; To the first he said, that before the Duke of
Gloucester went to Hannault, he and the council good reasons moving them
thereunto had ordered, that the Tower of London for the time to come should be
victualled and munition'd as other forts use to be. That after his being gone
to Hannault, the City being in apparent danger, threatened by libels and
seditious speeches, particularly against strangers (the greatest part whereof
were for this cause fled) the council fearing a rebellion had appointed
Richard Woodville to be Lieutenant of the Tower (who to boot with the great
affiance the deceased King had in him was Chamberlain and Councellor to the
Duke of Bedford) with directions, that during this his charge, he should not
suffer any one whosoever to enter therein that was stronger then himself,
without particular commandment from the King or order to be given by the
Council: that the Duke at his return disliking this order would break it;
He pretended to enter and inhabit there being offended, that Woodville denied
him entrance, and that the Bishop had advised him so to do, the which he did
not deny; his reason being that the Duke desiring Richard Scot Lieutenant of
the Tower to deliver up into his custody one Randall a Friar convict of treason
against the late King, and who had bin some years Prisoner; Richard not able
to deliver him without order from the Council, nor to refuse his delivery
without offending the Duke, desired him to send him such a command as might
serve for his discharge, the which the Duke denied to do; saying his
commandment might serve for a sufficient discharge: so as the Bishop seeing
him so far exceed the limits of his authority, and not knowing where it would
end, could not choose but give Richard this advice, so much the more, for that
after his return from Hannault, he had not forborne to allure some of the
People, saying, that if they had been ill dealt withal in his absence (as he
understood they had) they should be so no more now that he was present: and
that as for the Tower, which was reinforced to keep them in awe (as who should
say, they were not loyal) He would find a remedy for that, if they so
pleased. To the second, that he never had any intention to lay hands upon the
King, much less to take him from where he was, to govern him otherwise then,
till then he had been, unless it were by the resolution of the Council;
that such a thought could no ways avail him, but rather prove harmefull and
dangerous to him, the which he offered to make good in time and place
convenient. To the third, that he denied not to have done as much as was
alleged, but not to the end as was objected, that he had been certainly
informed ever since the last Parliament at Winchester of the great ill will the
Duke bore him; which made him resolve not to be there, to shun the evils
wherewithal he was threatened, that evident signs were seen of this, that
certain people of base condition being assembled together on the Thames side,
where boats use to land, were heard to say, that if they should meet with the
Bishop in that place, they would throw him into the River; and that the Sunday
before All Saints day, the Duke being demanded by the Council, concerning his
ill will to the Bishop, he said it is true, and that it might be his reasons
should be seen one day in writing, that the next Monday by the Dukes
commandment (no reason being given for it) the Citizens were all night in
Arms, saying injurious things against the Bishop; that commandment was
likewise given to the Courtiers to be with the Duke by 8. in the morning
armed, that on Tuesday he gave directions to the Major and Aldermen to send
unto him 300. Horsemen to wait upon him, whither he was to go, which was
(as it was said) to remove away the King without the Councels knowledge, all
which being manifest signs of this the Bishops danger, he resolved to prevent
him, as it is lawful for every one to defend himself, so as if he had
fortified the Bridge to the end it might not be forced, it was not done with
any intention of damnifying the Duke or any others, but to keep himself from
being damnified, since he was not the assaylant but the defendant. To the
fourth and fifth, that he had bin true and loyal to all Kings, which if he
had not been Henry the fifth, a wise King would not have trusted him so much
as he did. He offered to prove this; the proof to be such, as is wonted to
be granted to persons of his state and condition; that herein he humbly
entreated the Duke of Bedford and all the lords spiritual and temporal of
that Parliament, since they were the lawful Judges for the administration of
justice, especially in this case, and because the aforesaid letter written to
the Duke of Bedford suffered a sinister interpretation, he interpreted it
according to its natural sense, the end for which it was written, not
admitting of any other.

If this business had hapened between private men, or that it had been
judgeable where Lextalionis is practiced, it would not have been so easily
ended; but being between two great Lords almost equal in authority blood, and
followers, and where he who lays treason to another charge, though
calumniously undergoes no punishment, but the hazard of single Duel, the
remedy was easy, the condition of the times, the necessity of peace at home,
and the evils which by doing otherwise were likely to ensue, being considered,
for the cure of a Fistula differs from the cure of a wound, the one as soon as
cut, must be suddenly closed, the other being newly made must be kept open to
the end it may purge. But there was no probability in this accusation, the 3.
first articles though they had some show, yet was there no proof of them, and
that appearance wiped away by a more solid recremination; the fourth and fifth
not to be spoken of, since the dead are not called to witness, nor cited
before Earthly Tribunals, they were alleged only to make the party accused
ill thought of, not that there was any reason to condemn him for them.
Moreover it is not likely, that in England where the accusation witnesses,
defense and judgment are all made in public and in face of the Court, an
accessory should be privately drowned by night, the King not being advertised
thereof, the party not delivered up into the hands of justice, nor confronted
with his accuser: whilst the Prince who could not love the Bishop, seeing the
ill will he bore him had so large a field to revenge himself in by Justice,
not being withstood either by any interest of fear, or want of proof, the
case being clear, the guilty convinced, the fault inexcusable treason in the
highest degree; The order which was taken in this business was to swear all the
Lords as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, to proceed therein without passion
and with secresy, it was by them put over to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Dukes of Exceter and Norfolk, the Bishops of Durham, Worcester, and Bath, the
Earl of Stafford, the Lo. Privy Seal and the Lo. Cromwell, who after having
made them promise to stand to their judgments as well themselves as their
adherents; Gloucester in the word of a Prince and son of a King, and the
Bishop in the bare word of a Priest, they framed certain words which they were
to speak one to another, causing them, (the King being present) to come to the
Parliament. The Bishop (seeming much grieved at the scandalous speeches laid to
his charge) pressed much either to be declared innocent, of what he stood
accused concerning the two last Kings (since he was not, nor could not be
convinst thereof) or else that he might be permitted to justify himself, and
being gone out of the house, to allow them time to consider, he was shortly
after called in again, and Bedford in name of the whole house said unto him,
that upon the examination of his request, the King and all the Lords declared
him to be an honest man, and faithful to both the Kings, which declaration was
ordered to be regestred amongst the Acts of Parliament, then saying the
conceived words one to another, and having shaken hands, the business was
ended, and they pacified.

The King was willing to witness his gladness of this accord, by solemn
mirths and Court solemnities, he created Richard Plantagenet, son to the
Earl of Cambridge, beheaded at Antona, Duke of York. This title ceased in
this family, through the death of Edward Plantaginet, slain in the battle of
Aiencourt, elder brother to the forenamed Earl of Cambride, and not to be
ransomed by this Richard his nephew, and next heir, without his being restored
in blood as now he was, this was he who afterward deposed the King, and who
was the first cause of exturpating the house of Lancaster, having boldness
enough to contest for the kingdom with him, and to lay claim thereunto in
full Parliament, as we shall hereafter see in its due place; neither was he
likely to have arrived at so immense a boldness had he not been promoted to
this honor, and honored by those high places of trust which by the King he
afterward was. But God governes things here below by means contrary to wordly
reason, for whilst men foolishly believe that good turns make past offenses be
forgotten, examples show us that the correspondencies due to virtue and reason,
ought not to be expected from men, but such as the interest of profit daily
produces profit is that alone which surpassing virtue or reason spurns at any
other gratitude, the which though it ought not always to be supposed, it is
notwithstanding a want in judgment to think otherwise in great offenses;
especially such as were these of this Richard; on whom no benefit being to be
conferred, which was not inferior to the kingdom usurped from him, it was the
chiefest of all others to chalk out unto him, the ways to the conquest
thereof, and by conferring upon him honors, riches, and power, to indow him
with an ability of doing what he did. An error whereunto the best of men are
only subject, who expect not that from others which they themselves would not
do, this creation was accompanied with another of John Moubray, who being
Earl Marshall was made Duke of Norfolk, which title was unluckily enjoyed not
above three years by his Father, who died in Venice, being banished for
England the first year of Henry the fourth, this solemnity was concluded by
the order of knighthood, which the Duke of Bedford gave into the King,
accompanied by 35 great Lords, or some of great Families, and the liberal
contribution, which by way of subsidy was given in Parliament in consideration
of the war with France, no one City being exempt from the payments of moneys
or raising of soldiers. At this time the Duke of Exceter died, a man of great
wisdom, who having no sons made the King his heir, though besides the
Bishop, his brother, and the Countess of Westmerland his Sister, he had by
her a great many Nephews.

Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, whom the Duke of Bedford had left his
Lieutenant in France, was not this mean while faulty in what belonged unto
his charge for entering the County of Maine, he took there many towns, and
being returned to Paris met with this news of his, being chosen to the
government of the King in place of the deceased Duke of Exceter, though he went
not into England till a good while after, advancing in the mean while by his
service in France his Kings, his kingdoms and his own reputation. Alansonnes
liberty who was taken prisoner at the battle of Vernuille, was by the Duke of
Burgundies means, (Bedford being at London) procured; his ransom came to
200000. Crowns: Fair offers were made unto him if he he would forsake France
and cleave unto England, in particular, much of what he was to pay was
proffered to be remitted him, but no offer promised, nor benefit could sever
him from his affections unto this King and Country. He sold unto the Duke of
Britanny (not being otherwise able to pay so great a sum) the Barony of
Fugures for 80000. pieces of gould called saluti, and 38000. which he was
moreover to give him, for the which he pawned unto him the two Rubies of la
quaglia and Estampes, and the two brothers, famous Jewels in the house of
Britanny, the which being repawn'd by him and the rest made good out of his
own moneys he returned into France. The Duke of Bedford went thither likewise
with a great many Soldiers, having taken requisite order for the affairs in
England. He was waited upon to Calis by the Bishop of Winchester, I know not
whether in respect or to receive the Cardinals Cap which was sent to him from
Rome; the new discensions councelling him perhaps to do so. This Prelate had
coveted the being a Cardinal ever since Henry the fifths time; but that King
much misliking his ambition, forbid him to endeavor it; that rub being now out
of the way, the present King a Child, and though Gloucester his enemy yet
Bedford his friend, there was none that withstood him therein. He received
therewithal the faculty and title of Legate, which added to his incombes, so as
loosing his former name, he was through all the kingdom styled the Rich
Cardinal.

The Count de Richmond this mean while endeavored by his valor to repair
the ill fortune he met withal at his entrance into the Constableship. In
Anior he took La Methe upon conditions, and the Castle of Gollerande by
assault. In Maine Ramfort by composition, and Malicort by force, where he slew
the English and hung up the French that defended it. On the other side Sir John
Hothall an English knight passing between Man's and Alansonne with 20. Horse
was set upon by a Captain called Monceau who had with him a troop of 120.
fighting men; the English lighted from off their Horses in the midst of the
highway, where they were set upon, and where there was no help, but a
resolution either to overcome or die, they so behaving themselves, as that
killing many of them and putting the rest to flight, they took John Sorret
prisoner, a British Gentleman, and returned safe to their Garrison; but the
daily inrodes that the Norman Garrison made into Brittanny made the Duke
thereof, resolve to shut them up within their own limits, by fortifying
Pontersonne. To this work together with the Constable came Messieurs de
Castelbriand Beaumaneir, Lohac Castelghironne, Montalbon, Belforte, Charte,
Rostrenan, Balliere, and others of Brittanny; the Constable of Scotland, John
Onscart, Walter Brusacke, and other French Commanders; these coming by night
to descry the English fortifications, they were pursued by such as were within,
with danger of being but ill treated; but as soon as the Constable had
fortefied Pontersonne, he went from thence leaving Mounsieur de Rostrenan
Captain thereof, and under him Mounsieur de Belfort, John Veyer and Ouscourt,
who doing as they had been done by, did by incursions pass on to Auranches,
doing all the mischief they could; but those of the Garrison not enduring to
be braved underneath their walls, sallied forth, and had likely to have
retired with loss, had not 400. English led by Mounsieur de Novestres come
unexpectedly to their aid, who charging Rostrenon took him prisoner, and
together with him 140. others, not above two being left dead upon the field.
This chance made the Duke of Britanny send Mussieurs de Castelbriand and
Beaumaneir to command Pontersonne in Rostrenans place. I have described this
action according to Argentres Hall, and the other English Historians, ascribe
the glory only to the Garrison of Auranches, not mentioning Novestres nor any
others that came into their succor. So as being almost always likely to meet
with the like discordance, likelihood ought to open unto us the way to truth
which by writers is with passion shut up, for no Judge can injoyne us to
believe one rather then another, unless the one relation be held Canonical
the other Apocriphall.

Pontersonne was a thorn in the Duke of Bedfords side, for it was a place
whereby the enemy was much commodiated for the annoyance of Nor mandy, and his
men hindered for doing the like to Britanny, so as resolving to quit himself
thereof, he sent thither the Earl of Warwick accompanied by the Lord Scales
and many others who laid siege unto it with 7000. men the first day of Lent.
Belleforest and Argentres writes that the Duke of Britanny knowing it was not
able to hold out would have it abandoned, that so together with the town he
might not loose the people that were in it, that the French and Scots withdrew
themselves from thence leaving only the Britans there, who contrary to their
Princes command would defend it, but it is hard to be believed that the Duke
having purposely sent his brother to fortefie it, assisted by so many Lords,
and the work of three nations, France, Scotland and Britanny, should
afterward repent it, as if no places were to be defended save such as are
inexpugnable, and that to busy the enemy in a long siege as was this, subject
to so many contingences, especially of being succored either from Britanny,
which was Contiguus with it, or from France, were a matter of no advantage;
besides it is not probable but that he should have foreseen the enemy would
assay it, it being a place so contrary to his designs; and much less that the
British Garris on abandoned by the Scotch and French should dare to defend it,
contrary to their Princes command: but howsoever it was the Earl of Warwick
besieging it, and those within valiantly behaving themselves, as well by
defending it, as making often sallies, the siege was brought to that pass, as
that the assailant wanting both meat and munition, and not having won one
foot of ground, the Lord Scales was enforced to go his ways with 3000. men
(Monstrelet says but 500.) to provide for necessities for the Camp,
accompanied by Sir John Harplay Bayliffe of Constantine, Sir William Breerton
Bayliffe of Caen, Sir Ralfe Tassonne, and Sir John Carbonall.

The Duke of Britanny who had made a general Muster of all his Horse and
Foot, and chosen out a part thereof under the command of Mounsieur de
Castelgironne, Hanandaye and the Viscount of Belliers, leaving the rest,
entertained a proposition made by the Baron of Coulonnis a Norman, to surprise
the Lord Scales at his return, in a place which he knew fit for the purpose.
He gave the charge thereof to the above named; who guided by Coulonnis made an
Ambuscado of 6000. men (Monstrelet says but 1500. in a place called la
Bassecourt, near unto a Bridge, between Pontersonne and the plain over
against Monte Saint Michael, where the Lord Scales and his men were furiously
set upon; this place as it was the more advantageous for the assailants, so was
it the less proper for the assailed, who were beset on the one side by the
enemy, on the other side by the sea, so as inanimated by necessity and danger,
and despairing of all other hopes, then what they should by their Swords
receive, they did in close files and on foot so well defend themselves, as
that the Britons could never open them; but this their first heat being
abated, and being withstood by an unexpected and stout encounter, they began to
give back, and then to run away, being followed at full speed by their
enemies, who were gotten again on Horseback, the number of those who were
slain and taken prisoners was about 1100. amongst the dead were the Baron
Coulonnis, theinciter to this enterprise, Messieurs de Castelgironne, and de
Hananday, and amongst the prisoners the Viscount de Belliere, and many other
Gentlemen. So as the Lord Scales loaded with victuals, munition, and
prisoners, came with much honor and praise to the Camp. The Constable went
afterward to persuade the Duke his brother to succor the town, but could by
no means work him thereunto, for his experience upon this occasion had proved
unto, that to hazard a battle might be his ruin; for by loosing it he should
loose Dukedom, whereas the enemy was to loose nothing but men, so as
Pontersonne being for three months space well defended, and not succored,
surrendered it self in May, the Garrison marching forth with their Arms and
baggage. Which as soon as the Duke of Bedford understood, he went from Roan to
enter Britanny with a powerful Army; and likely he was to have done good, had
he not been persuaded to accept of the Duke of Britannies offers: who being
too weak to encounter with him, Pontersonne his chief hold being lost, his
hopes but small of being succored by Charles, he himself not knowing what to
do, his Peers and People affrighted, having nor provisions, nor forces, no
courage, but full of apprehension and danger; he was compelled to send unto
him, that pardoning what was past he would be pleased to grant him peace.
Bedford yielded thereunto unwillingly, and as some will have it by bad advice;
but in my opinion very discreetly; if we consider the uncertainety of events.
For the garrisons of Britanny (give the conquest granted) would require a great
many people, not to be made use of elsewhere: Countries subdued are subject to
infidelity, and chiefly Britanny which naturally ill inclined was to be
thought subject to the least puff of alteration, so as joining it by this
means unto himself, or if not so, cutting it off from the enemy. He might
upon all occasions, like Poliphemus keep it for his last bit. Moreover he
could not have desired more honorable nor more advantageous conditions. For
the Duke obliged himself to renounce all former confederacies made with the
Kings of France; to observe the treaty of peace between the two Kingdoms; and
to do homage to King Henry (as soon as he should have crossed the Seas) in the
self same manner as the Dukes his predecessors had done to the Kings of
France, requiring but 3. months space after requiry. The Bishops and Barons of
Britanny; bound themselves to the observance of this treaty, together with the
Dukes two Sons Francis and Richard, the Chapters, Cathedral Churches,
Citizens and all those who amongst the meaner sort of gentry were of any name,
so great was the fear, wherewith the one was enforced, the others surprised,
foretold (as Argentres will have it) by a terrible earthquake which shook the
whole Country of Nantes some few Months before.

Small things and but of small importance were done during the seige of
Pontersonne; Nicholas Hansonne one of the garrison of S. Susan plundered the
Country of Aniou: He took Ramfort before the Captain thereof knew of his
coming, he slew and took as many as he found there. A number of the French
on the other side assembled to succor Pontersonne, went to regaine Ramfort,
they besieged it the space of 10. days, and Articles being made, that the
defendants should come forth with their Arms; Horses and other provisions,
they returned, abandoning their first designs. Messieures de Raise and
Beumanoir took Malicorne and the Castle of Jude in the Country of Maine, by
assault treating them according to the Laws of places taken by force; they
saved the lives of none save such by whom they might reap advantage; being
gone from thence and Pontersonne surrendered, the above named Hanson surprised
S. Lorance de Mortiers, the Captain thereof being gone to hear Mass in a
neighboring Church, and returning home, not knowing, that the Town was taken,
he was taken prisoner, but those who followed him saved themselves. Falstaff
the Governor of Aniou and Maine having almost at the same time taken the
Castle of S. Oven by composition went to lay siege to Grieville, a place not to
be taken by force, but wanting victuals they treated on a surrender, if they
should not be succored by such a day. Falstaff himself went to advertise
the Regent thereof, who suddenly came into the field hoping to fight, if the
French should come; but they appeared not, though not far off, being taught
to be circumspect by the battle of Vernuille. Grieville which this mean time
was victuall'd denied to make good their treaty, and the English not likely to
reap any good by tarrying long there, raised the siedge, hanging first in
sight of the Castle their hostages their friends and fellow soldiers.

The Regent at his return from England had given the charge of those men,
which he then brought along with him, to the Lord John Talbot, who afterward
proved one of the most famous Captains in all the French wars. His name
lives there yet amongst them, who never read his story: before that by his
worth he achieved greater titles of honor, he was of most noble blood,
Son to Richard Talbot Lord of Goderick Castle, who in his time had fought
valiantly under Henry the fifth. Camden speaking of him calls him Englands
Achilles. His warlike humor cannot be better described, then by the Latin
inscription on his sword, on the one side of which was read Sum Talbotty, on
the other side, Per vincere inimicos meos. The Regent thought fit to confer
upon him the Government of Aniou and Maine, fitting Falstaff with some other
charge. The first thing he did after having received his command was the
taking in of Lavat, wherein Monsieur de Loac and other People of account, being
casually at that time, they bargained for the liberty of their Persons and
goods, paying therefore 100000. Crowns, none of the least useful things in
those times. The Regent this mean while being advertised that Montargis was
not well provided for, sent thither the Earl of Suffolk. This place was not
only oportune, but necessary for him, in respect of the neernesse thereof to
Paris, and for correspondency with Philip (which though it were some what
lessened by mistrust, yet did it remain entire their reciprocal interest,
making them appear outwardly friends, though their private distasts made them
be inwardly otherwise) then because it opened unto him the way to the taking
of Orleans, the winning whereof would be the total ruin of whatsoever
Charles possessed. The Earl obeyed, accompanied by his Brother Sr. John Poole,
and Sr. Henry Basset together with 6000. Soldiers, but finding the place well
defended by good Soldiers and sufficiently victuall'd, though not for a long
siedge, he thought it rashness to undertake the taking of it at first by force,
so as pitching his camp, he divided it into three parts, as the River Loinge
upon which it stands, breaking out into certain branches and marshes enforced
him to do; and to the end, that his quarters might have means of
communication and succouring one another, he built bridges in the fittest
places, hoping for want of victuals to make it yield: whilst the Earl of
Warwick tarrying at S. Matelin d' Archamp, to withstand the succouring of the
Town, trusted too much to himself, not believing succor could be brought by
any other way then that where he was, whereas if he had made use of spies,
necessary officers for a commander, he had not been deceau'd. I will allege
two examples to this purpose, the which though in latter times and not
appertaining to our history may notwithstanding always be of use. The great
Captain Consalvo being by his own King brought back into Spain and pursued
by such as envied him, was required to give an account of his disbursments in
the conquest of the Kingdom of Naples; the first, Item of his accounts was, in
Spies one Million, which when Ferdinand read he tore the leaf and would read
no more. A great Prince who I forbear to name (though I could not name him,
but with much honor) who was wont to defray his house with not above 20000.
crowns spent 400000. crowns in Ambassadors, and spies, believing that ones
own state cannot be secured without a perfect knowledge of that of others;
the generals Judgment on which depends both good and bad resolutions, is best
enlightened by such instructions as he by this means receaves, and therefore
prodigality which is always harmefull in a Prince is commendable if thus
imployd. Had Warwick been of this opinion, succor had not come unmet
withal, and Montargis had not been saved. This siege lasted two Months,
before that Charles could think how to raise it, the Court contending with the
Kingdom in disorders: and as Monsieur de Giac had succeeded in the authority
of president of Provence, so did he likewise in greediness and pride. Pride
and avarice bereave men of their understanding, so as not profiting by the
example of other men, they are not aware, that a singular favor without worth
or merit, has been and ever will be with Princes slippery and precipitius:
and that to aspire without reason, and to grow rich whilst other men grow
poor, besides that it is hateful, is of so perverse and obstinate a quality,
that it brings men rather to death, then moderation. The Constable after the
unfortunate siege of Beveronne was come to the King and complaining, that the
detaining of the Soldiers pay was the cause of his loss, required, that
Monsieur de Giac might give an account of those moneys, which for this purpose
was raised from the people. But Charles not minding this business, giving signs
that he made more account of the Giac then of him; the Count was so highly
incenst, as setting aside all respect, he caused de Giac to be taken by night
from his Wives side, to be carried elsewhere put into a Sack and drowned.
Camus de Beaulier who succeeded in affairs with the like arrogance was not
long after slain in the Kings own house, by a Soldier of the Marishall
Bossac who thrust him through the throat with a dagger. The Constable could not
brook neglect, especially from such people; but he was not therein to be
praised, though he had sufficient cause to do so; Princes ought to be
wrought upon by persuasion not violence, and who in any other manner seeks to
pervert order or government, do rather aggravate then take away offenses,
since errors ought rather to be tolerated in Princes, then such violent
remedies in subjects, as are rather to be termed revenge then Justice. The
King was highly netled at these outrageous insolences, so as being much
displeased with him, he was the more confirmed in his ill will toward him, by
the bad offices of Monsieur de Tremulle a former favorit of the Constables, and
by him brought into favor with the King. The Court being thus turmoyld
Montargis ready to be lost, the forces which were to be sent thither but
weak, some will have it, that the Constable framed excuses to shun the
employment, being possessed with fear by reason of his late bad success, and
much more by the ill will, that Charles bore him. But Argentres says, he was
at that time gone into Britanny, and it is to be believed could not well
brook his sight. The charge of this succor was then generously undertaken by
the Bastard of Orleans, who had along with him the best captains of all
France, amongst which John Stuart a Scot, William D'Albret, Goucourt, Guitri,
Greville, Villiers, la Hire, Santreglie, Giles de S. Simon, and Walter
Brossard, together with 1600. Soldiers, carriages, and victuals, the first
thing he did was to advertise the besieged of his coming. The English say,
he went thither by night, the French by day, the which if it were so, they
should do well to show how he past their Palisadoes and Trenches; for the
English (by what we read of them) are not wont to suffer themselves be slain
and to run away at so cheap terms, especially when they were more in
number then the enemy, as likewise, that the fear of being stopped by the
Earl of Warwick and loosing of their provisions might have detained the
French. For first, he was lodged not far from them, and then it is not
likely, that he wanted Sentinels by day, and that the Horsemen did not their
duties in fit places, who were there of purpose to withstand whosoever should
venture to succor or victual the Fort If it were by night nothing was
impossible. The besieged had so blockt up the Waters as that they overflood the
Bridges and made them impassible; they charged the two nearest quarters which
were Pooles and Basset's, nor had they much trouble to enter them, for the
enemies were all asleep, great was the slaughter they there made. Poole saved
himself by swimming over the River on horseback; and Basset past over the
River likewise with 7. more in a little boat, others, in passing over a
Bridge, which overburned with the weight of water; and those, who were upon it
broke were drowned, so as 1500. were slain and drowned. This worthy
observation that the French Authors, who in all their actions count more
English, then the English do, in this alone count fewer, for whereas the
English say, they were 6000. they will have them to have been but 3000.
whilst there is no likelihood, that two great Lords as were Warwick and
Suffolk should be sent with so few men, to besiege a place strongly
situated, and likely to be succored, if they shall say, they came with so
few, because they thought to surprise it. I will allow it for good, if when
they found the contrary, they had returned back, but making a formal siedge
for almost the space of 3. Months, they had been out of their wits, if their
numbers all that while had not been augmented, so as it is not probable, that
they set upon them by day, and that afterward the English fled away favored
by the night (as they write) but rather (as the others say) that the two Earls
the day being come presented battle, putting themselves in order before the
Town Walls, but that they were refused to be fought withal, answer being
made that they were victualled according to their design, which was as much as
they cared for; the Dane was graciously received by Charles, as he well
deserved; for though the action were done by night, yet was it according to
reason of war; so as having done what a wise and valiant commander ought to
have done, He would have been thought rash in doing otherwise.

This happy success was followed by another of great consequence, had it met
with the like fortune. The City of Man's was under the power of the English, but
the Inhabitants were inclined to Charles, so as resolving to shake of their
yoke, which not being natural is always unwillingly borne, the chiefest of
them with the assistance of some of the clergy conspired to free themselves of
it, they advertised the Court of this; Messieurs d'Albret, de Faiette Orval,
Beaumanoir, la Hair, and others were dispatched away thither with 500.
Soldiers, a precise night was appointed for this deed, the sign was a little
fire on the top of a hill, answered by another on the top of the steeple of the
greatest Church, which were no sooner lighted then put out. The Inhabitants
run to the Gate which opened upon their friends where the troops were ready,
they slew the Gate-keeper and the Sentinel, they opened the Gates, the foot
entered in, the Horse tarrying, that they might enter or keep where they were,
as occasion should require, great was the hurly burly, and greater the
slaughter, for they were all asleep, no man knew what the matter might be,
the Citizens who were not acquainted with the plot, believing that the Garrison
had pillaged some quarter of the City, kept within their own doors, such
English as had not yet met with their enemies sword, imagined either the matter
as it was, or somewhat like unto it, or else, that there had been some
discention amongst the Citizens; The Earl of Suffolk Governor of the City
and who after his return from Montargis was come to inhabit there, being
advertised by some, who with much ado had escaped, that the enemy was within
the Town, withdrew himself into the Castle, where all the rest that escaped
being slain, did likewise save themselves, but the place being but little, the
people many, and no victuals, and inevitable ruin threatened them by the mines
the enemy made, they were likely in a short time to be reduced to great
extremity; the nearest place of hope was Alansonne; they dispatched away a
messenger who advertised the Lord Talbot of their condition, who went toward
them the very same night with 700. fighting men, and came by morning to
Guerche, two leagues distant from Man's, from whence he sent away Matthew Gough
to discover the enemies condition, and to advertise his friends; this man took
on his way upon the coming on of night, and got into the Castle by night,
unseene or undiscovered. He told them of the Castle of their friends arrival,
and from the received advertisment of the enemies carelesnes, who thinking
themselves free from all manner of danger, minded nothing but their pleasures
expecting when the Castle which abounded in mouths, and wanted victuals
should yield. He suddenly departed and met Talbot by the way, who making have
least the day should overtake him, entered into the Castle by the field gate,
and having rested himself a while, came down upon the City, meeting with no
obstacle, the entry being free, open, no trenches, no barracadoes no
impediment, no guard, the assailants crying Saint George and Talbot, they
served as many as they met withal, as they had formerly done the English, for
they caught them in the same manner; those who escaped fled away in their
shirts, leaving their arms, weapons and what else they had behind them, the
slaughter was not great, because but few made any defense, and none denied to
surrender themselves, so as the number of the dead and prisoners did not exceed
400. the greatest matter was how to form process against the conspirators:
30. Citizens and 35. Priests and religious people were beheaded, and the City
remained in its former condition; the question only was which of three things
were most commendable in Talbot, his wisdom, his celeritie, or his valor.

This year the Earl of Warwick went into England to take up on him his charge
of Governor of the King, and the Earl of Salisbury succeeded 1428.
him in the charge he held in France, who went thither with 5000. Soldiers;
many were the disputations which were held in Paris at his arrival concerning
what enterprise was to be undertaken. He propounded that of Orleans, wherein he
met with great oppositions, but if danger should stop great enterprises, none
would ever be undertaken since they are all subject to uncertaintie and danger;
it is very true that this brave Commanders reputation was the sole thing which
made the Regent resolve upon it, as if Englands design which was not to make
that war immortal, but to exclude Charles were not to be effected but by
some such means; for the taking in of Orleans opened the way for the winning
of Bourges, the place of his residency, which if they should get, trouble and
time might go to the outing of him of all the rest, but not so many dangers.
Moreover the taking of that town would not only be a curb to the river of
Loire (in almost the midst of whose long course it is seated) but likewise to
all the Towns situated uponit. The French writers accuse the Englishmen of
treachery, because by undertaking that siege, they broke the agreement made
with the Duke of Orleans, that no hostility should be committed against that
City, nor the City of Blois, belonging both to his Parrimony, during his
imprisonment. Whereupon they ground this I know not; for it is a childish thing
to article with a prisoner that is an enemy, in what is advantageous to him,
and the contrary to ones self, not being thereunto enforced neither by force
nor reason; but say this were so, France is not so free from this fault as that
she should be the first that should cry whore; I will only allege one
agreement made, if that of Bertigny was ever observed, let England though
innocent be condemned. The siege of Orleans being then resolved, the Earl of
Salisbury went from Paris with requisite provisions, and 10000. fighting men,
accompanied by the Earl of Suffolk and Lord Talbot; and desiring to have the
way free between Paris and that City, he took the Town of Ianville by
assault, and five days after the Castle thereof by composition, causing some
to be put to death there, as having forsaken the side they had formerly sworn
unto. Bogeances having yielded it self, he caused Proclamation to be made,
that all privileges and goods should be preserved unto such as would
acknowledge Henry for their King. Ierguo and Meung by reason of this offer,
brought in their keys. He took Nogunt, Retrou, Puisset, Rochforte,
Bertanwurt, Touri, Mompipeo, the Tower of Pleuviers and other places; he
presented himself before Orleans, the 12. of September Charles had sent to the
defense of this City, Mounsieur de Busacke, and Mounsieur de Faiette, both
Marshalls of France, the Bastard of Orleans (who commanded in chief during
this siege) William Stuart Constable of Scotland, William Albret Lord d'Orvall,
Mussieurs de Guicourt, Tovars Chavigni Greville, Chabannes, Ponton de St.
Treigle, La Hire, Valperga an Italian, and Luis de Vancourt together with 1200.
Soldiers, Luis of Bourbone Count Cleremont went thither likewise uncommanded.
The inhabitants pulled down all the suburbs of the City, amongst which 12.
Parish Churches, four Monasteries, places of pleasure, Gardens, Orchards, and
whatsoever else could hinder the sight of the besieged, or be of service for
the Besiegers; within the Town they spared not for any fortification or fence
either to secure themselves from the besiegers, or whereby to be less exposed
to their batteries, the Earl could not pitch his quarters unmolested with
continual skirmishes, which was the Soldiers daily exercise for three weeks
together; but without any remarkable effect; Fortune disdaining to show her
countenance in things of so little moment; but the Bastard having made a salley
forth by the gate of the Bridge, and being entertained with like bravery, he
lost many of his men, and had many of them taken prisoners; He made head again
at the great Tower upon the end of the bridge, from whence he was beaten back,
leaving the English masters of the Tower, which was presently given into the
custody of William Glasdale. This secured the Bridge, which was the safest way
for victuals and succor. The Earl built many Forts round about, and
especially over against the gates; so as the City being little less then girt
about seemed to be in a desperate case, not able without difficulty to
befurnish'd with victuals or reinforced with defendants, though the Citizens
upon all occasions did voluntarily perform the duties of Soldiers; but this
Tower a purchase so appearingly advantageous was the loss of Salisbury and the
ruin of this and all other enterprises; for blows from heaven are like
lightning, which wounds where it is not expected. The Tower had a bard window
in the highest part thereof in the very face of the City, where the Captains
went often times to discover such places as were most subject to danger, and
where the Earl of Salisbury accompanied by Sir Thomas Gargrave and William
Glasdale came to look out. A Canoniere observing that many people used to
appear at that window, levelled a piece of Canon against it, and going to
dinner, left order with his son, that if he should see any one at that
window he should give fire unto it, which just as the Earl came thither he
did; the Bullet broke the Iron bars which gave upon the Earls head, striking
out one of his eyes, and bearing away one of his Jaws, and wounded Gargrave so
sorely, as that he died thereof two days after; at eight days end the Earl
dyed likewise, leaving one only daughter behind him; whose son showed
himself (though to the public loss) to be descended from that gallant man;
no death was ever more lamented. The Soldiers believing that in his loss, all
was lost, as indeed it fell out; for the good fortune of the English declined
from that time forward, even to their being wholly driven out of France. The
Duke of Bedford who was mainely sensible of this news, deputed the Earl of
Suffolk in his place, and made the Lord Scales and Lord Talbot and Sir John
Falstaff, chief under him in that Camp; they did what they could, not to
loose the enterprise together with their General, but their worth could not
withstand the change of Fortune.

The first day of the year they essayed to scale the Bulwark before 1429.
the gate Saint Renard, which being stoutly defended, they retired; the second
day the City was succored with some small provisions brought by the Admiral
Gallant, who waded thorough the Loire, in a season which being extraordinarily
dry, though in the midst of winter suffered them to pass and repasse without
danger, and in his return meeting with some troops that went a freebooting,
he set upon them, defeated them, and retired safely. The Camp stood in great
need of Victuals, Artillery and munition; wheresore they sent Sir John
Falstaff, Sir John Ramstone and Sir Philip Hall with some Forces to the Regent
to convey some unto them; they were furnished with a great many Carts and
Sumpters, the Regent adding to their small numbers Simon Mosier Provost of
Paris, together with a part of the guard of that City, and some of his own
Domestiques, which in all made up 1500. not counting those who waited on the
Carriages; they marched in good order, not meeting with any obstacle, till
being come to Rounray they might discover between 9. and 10000. of the enemy,
the French say between 4. and 5000. Serres but 4000. led by the Duke of
Bourbonne to succor Orleans, but as he was deceav'd in the person of the
Conductor, taking the Father for the Son (for the Duke of Bourbonne was then
prisoner in England) so was he deceived in the number; though I do not
believe they were 9. or 10000. for so great a number would have been
sufficient to have fought with the besiegers Camp. But were they more or
less, they flew upon the English, as if assured of victory, for their Troops
being assuredly great, and having nothing to hinder them, the enemy encumbered,
fewer in number and weary with Marching, they believed them not only not fit
to fight, but neither yet to put themselves in defense. The Scottish-men who
were better acquainted with the English and knowing the effect of their
arrows, knew how to be thereby least damnified advised to fight on foot, but
they were not listened unto, so as every one following their own fancy much
disorder ensued. Falstaff at the appearance of this cloud, was together with
all his men lighted off horseback, and making one firm body of them, fenced
them about with the carriages, and planted his wonted stakes expecting to be
set upon as he was; but businesses were so carried that after much shooting and
many handy blows, the great number of the enemy vanished, some of them being
slain, some retiring in good order, and some taken prisoners; the chief that
were slain were the Constable of Scotland, and his Brother Mussieurs d'
Orvall, Chasteau Brune, Montpipe Werdusan Duray, Grave, and some sixscore
gentlemen more, part French, part Gascons, the rest almost all Scots: the
English count 1100. prisoners; Dupleix but only one and he a Scotchman. Serres
accuses Count Clerement (whom he formerly called the Duke of Brabant) of want
of courage, for that frightened at this blow, he and his men went their ways
abandoning the besieged, which Guitres, Gancourt, Greiville, Villiers La Hile,
and S. Raigle did not, resolving all of them to see the end thereof under the
Bastard of Orleans. The English came unto the Camp with their expected
carriage, and with their unexpected prisoners and because the provisions which
they brought consisted much of Herrings, it being Lent, the French entitle this
encounter the Herring day. This defeat did much perplex the besieged for all
their resolution of well defending themselves; for though generous hearts in
adversity do not go less in courage, year they distempered by eminent
dangers; for where courage pretends the two distinct offices of Captain and
Soldiers, it pretends ruin; for wisdom ought only to regulate, she being
the only lawful egger on, or withholder, of what ever generositie or
fortitude, such qualities as were required in a good Soldier, were not wanting
in the Bastard of Orleans, and the Inhabitants abounded in all such conditions
as a Prince can desire in his people; in love to him, in hatred to their
enemies, and in resolution amongst themselves, rather to suffer the worst of
evils then suffer themselves to be governed by forrainers, yet we are neither
Numantinians nor Saganthians. Christian religion forbids it us, but as we must
dye when one Humidum radicale, or radical moisture fails, so the yielding
unto others does consequently follow the want of forces, and bad fortune.
Charles was weak, his helps desperate, he wanted Soldiers, wanted Captains,
a many whereof were slain in this battle; the City full of people, victuals
grown scarce, and dangerous it was to expose themselves to the last of
dangers; the defendants lives was not the only thing in question, but their
wives, children, goods, and country to which ones duty is performed, when all
is done that may be; the surplusse is not generositie but impotency of mind
repugning it self, for all this, they could never pitch upon the resolution of
yielding themselves unto their enemy, though it were impossible for them to
hold out many weeks, but no understanding is more speculative then that of
Prisoners; These were no better, shut up in an expectation of speedy death or
servitude; they bethought themselves to offer up the City, upon condition that
it should be delivered into the hands of the Duke of Burgony; for if this offer
were accepted of, they were to remain under the command of a Frenchman, a
Prince of the blood, and though an enemy, not so of his own inclination but by
passion, and this much abated of its first fervency, and if it should not be
accepted of, it was likely by reason of the distaste this refusal would cause
in him, to procure an alienation in that Duke from the English, as though not
immediately, yet not long after it did; to this purpose Ambassadors were sent
to the Regent with two propositions, the first that the town of Orleans might
be held as a Neutrall, alleging that it was no reason the jurisdictions of
their Duke, now prisoner in England, should be molested contrary to the
articles agreed upon between the Crown of England and him; the second, that
if this might not be granted, that the town of Orleans might be assigned over
into the hands of the Duke of Burgony, a friend and confederate of England, as
upon these conditions it should be; to the former the Regent answered that the
Duke of Orleans was not taken prisoner upon conditions, but in the battle of
Agencourt, wherein there was no treaty, neither of life nor livelihood, that
therefore that which they pretended unto was ridiculous and new, since his
jurisdictions as those of an enemy, and as those which in all actions of
enmity took part with Charles, were subject to the laws of War, and
lawfully to be oppugned: To the second that England having undertaken this
enterprise at a great charge, and with the loss of so many great commanders
and Soldiers, no other body having contributed, hazarded or lost any thing
therein, to require of them to invest a third party therewithal, defrauding
themselves thereof was an unjust and anindiscreet request, and not to be
granted; this negative displeased Philip, but if he herewithall incited his
Counselors to anger (who pretended themselves to be treated withal like
fools, since that they having framed the net by turning the kingdom of France
upside down, others enjoyed the fruit thereof.) He did it against reason, for
Philip would have done the same: Those who accuse Bedford of folly, that being
able to have won Orleans he lost it, for not being willing to trust it in a
friends hands, do judge by the event, after the which any man may be wise. A
town abandoned by reason of the Kings impotency, without victuals, without
munition, which parlied, which offered it self; a battle formerly lost against
all rule or reason, and therein the loss of so many Captains and Soldiers:
to make Philip more powerful, with whom for past distasts they were to
proceed with more caution; to open unto him the way of making himself master
of all such places as could not be made good; to make him Arbitror of France
that he might dispose of it at his pleasure, after that he had intended his
own ends, added so many Provinces to what formerly possessed by him, the
English by waging war with Charles having diverted all his oppositions,
without the which he could not have enlarged his territories, and at this
present yield up Orleans unto him, was to make them be rather reputed weak
then wise. I deny not but that he might have done better to have yielded it
unto him, but am only thereunto drawn by the event contrary to the preceding
apparances and foresight, wherein if a man err he is not to be blamed for it,
but if it had been possible that a contrary event might have shown us, how
Philip would have behaved himself having gotten Orleans, we would then perhaps
be of another opinion; it is true that one only reason, and that a great one,
contradicts what has been formerly said. Bedfords wisdom ought to have
been regulated according to that of the deceased King his brother, who by his
last will having left the Regency of France to Philip if he would accept
thereof, he was unjustly dealt withal to be now denied a Town, not coveted by
him, but offered unto him as a surety, when he might have had the whole and
would not, and this so much the more, for that his trusting of him in this, had
been able to have sweetnedall past dislikes, and to have made him as formerly
an entire friend.

Thus all returned to their own former affairs; the Ambassadors to Orleans,
the English to the continuation of their siege, wherein but very little was
done; the Soldiers on both sides spared themselves; those within, that they
might not lessen themselves being but few, and those without, hoping that time
and hunger might effect that, which till then by all their machinations and
assaults they could not do: but they were both deceived, though in a different
manner: luckily the besieged, for the evil they expected and apprehended
turned to good; unluckily the besiegers, for the confidence of that purchase
was turned to the not looked for loss of that place and others. Charles was
advised to retire himself, for the loss of Berry and Tourraine being granted
if Orleans were lost, he might by tarrying undergo many dangers, especially
the being besieged in some place or other; the which if it should happen, he
should hazard, together with his liberty, the loss of that title which he yet
was possessed of, the preservation whereof depended upon the preservation of
his person. They counseled him to go into Daulphine, for from Grenoble a safe
place, he might by the succors of the Count of Province King of Sicily his
cosen, the Counts de Fois Armigniac and Cominges defend Lionois, Auvergnia and
Languedoc: but such as were of a contrary opinion said, that to pass over the
River Rhone, and abandon the Provinces situated on the other side, was the way
to undo him; for if in the midst of so many dangers he should abandon his
subjects, what could they do but abandon him? that to trust Fortune was to be
his last resolution: Being thus in doubt what to do, he was succored by one
Jane d' Arc, a means unexpected by him, nor foreseen by such as looked for
new events; this woman's story is full of extravagancies and controverted not
only between the two contrary parties, but between the French themselves. Of
these two former the one affirms her to be a virgin, a Saint, sent by God to
deliver that kingdom; the other gives her out to be unchaste, an heretic, a
sorceresse, a witch, and for such a one condemned; the third dissenting from
the latter in the last Articles, do the like from the others in the former;
for they believed her to be unchaste, and raised up by the craft of some great
ones, who not able to cheer up men's cast-downe hearts by any arguments of
worth, thought to raise them up by superstition, which prevails much in
calamitous times. With these I side, finding no reason to make me believe the
former, nor sufficient proof to make me admit of the second's opinion, all of
them full of uncertainty and passion. I know, it is not lawful for us to
examine the works of God, but it will be granted me, that it is not only
lawful, but necessary to search out whether any humane action, reputed the
handyworke of God, be so or no. She was borne in Lorraine, in the Parish of
S. Rhemes, her Parents peasants, her exercise was to feed sheep (Pasquiere
says to spinne and sow) her age, some say 18. some 20. some 22. (Pasquiere
says 29.) her inclination (according to Du Pleix) pious, confirmed by the
Hermitage of Maddona de Beaumont near the place where she dwelt, devoted
(next to God Almighty) to the Virgin Mary, to the Angels Michael and Gabriell,
and to S. Catherine and S. Margaret, who having oftentimes appeared to her, did
reveal unto her that S. Charlemaine and S. Lewis had prayed to God in the
behalf of her King Charles the seventh for the delivery of the City of
Orleans, after the which the English should be overcome and beaten out of
France; that the Duke of Orleans should shortly recover his liberty; that the
Dolphin Charles should be crowned in Rheims, waited upon by her; that here
upon putting on man's apparel, she should go to find out Charles, procuring a
command of Men, Horses and Arms to fight in his service; that in the
execution of these commissions she presented herself before Robert de
Baudicourt Governor of Vaucolore, who though he did not at the first believe
her, yet convinced by her constant asseverations, he made her (clad like a man)
be conducted to Chinon, where the King then was, to whom the business seemed
the less strange, for that he had been formerly foretold by another Virgin
called Mary of Avignon, who was likewise vers't in revelations, that he and
his Kingdom after much calamity and affliction, should by the means of a
Virgin be freed from the tyranny of strangers; that he caused her be brought
into his chamber, where but meanly apparelled himself, he was conversing with
Princes and great Lords richly attired, which she not esteeming, add rest
herself immediately to Charles, representing unto him with much confidence, for
what causes God had sent unto him; that being examined by certain divines
touching her faith, revelations, life, and causes of her journey, she did
satisfy them with such simplicity, modesty, and resolution, as that they
esteemed her sent from God for actions of great importance; that being searched
by diverse Midwives in the presence of the Queen, the Queen of Sicily, and
other Ladies, they found her to be a Virgin, whereupon she was afterward
called the Virgin or Maid of Orleans; that she much desired to have a sword
which was found in the Church of S. Catherin de Forbois in Touraine, buried
with the ashes of a Knight behind the Altar, the which being marked with three
Crosses and rusty, the rust fell all forthwith off, no means or art being
used; that a Horseman meeting with her and understanding that she was the Maid
of Orleans, accompanied his lewd thoughts with some foul words and blasphemous
speeches, whereupon she said, O miserable man that thou art, who art at
deaths door, and do blaspheme God; that within one hour after he being in
a River, fell off his Horse and was drowned; so as by so many signs of the
grace of God as shined in her, resolution was taken to give her men and
victuall's to releeve Orleans under the conduct of Mussieurs de Rieux,
Marishall de Cullant Admiral of France, the King having given her Horse and
Arms for her own Person, and deputing for her guard one Dolon an ancient
Knight, one of his Counselors, and Sheriff of Beaucaire. This relation is
made by Du Pleix a modern Writer, who complains of his not being therein
believed, as if it were as much to be believed as an Article of faith. He
agrees in many things with them that are of his opinion, in some things he
says more then they; as the miracle of the Horsman, and the cleansing the
sword without art, to the which he ascribes the mark of three Crosses, but
they three flower de-luces on both sides: likewise they say not, that it was
buried with a Knight, but hung up with other rusty swords and prison Irons,
which by devotion or vow were found in that Church. Giles and Belleforest
write, that Baudicourt was not well satisfied for what concerned her till the
hearing day, at which very time she told him that France had received a great
defeat, and that it would receive many more, if he would not take order for
the convaying of her unto the King; so as hearing that that loss had happened
the very day she had foretold it him, he thought he should offend God, and
do dis-service to the King should he not send her, and therefore dispatched
her away suddenly; that she said some things to the King which were never by
him retold to any, but that laying aside all melancholy, he seemed ever after
to be exceeding joyful, that when she demanded the aforesaid sword of him,
he asked her how she came to the knowledge thereof, and whether she had ever
been in that Church, or no; to the which she answered, No, but that she knew
it by divine revelation, and that there withal she was to drive out all his
enemies, and to lead him into Rheims to be anointed and consecrated; and to
strengthen their testimony they produce Mieres a Flemish Author; who, though
he be accused of falsehood and partiality against the French, they will yet
have him in this to be on their side, and to say the truth; but it is a strange
thing, that the English differ not in this, and the French do. Vasseburg,
Paradine, and Hallian, write diversely of her, to whom Argentres may be joined
for a fourth. I will relate what Hallian says of this in his history, and in
his book entitled, Touching the estate and success of affairs in France.His
words are these, The miracle of this Woman, were it true or false, did much
encourage the depressed hearts both of King, Lords and People; of so great
power is religion and sometimes superstition; for some thought her to be a
Wench belonging to John Bastard of Orleans, others to Monsieur de Baudicourt,
and others to Lentruille, who being wary, and knowing the King to be so moap't
as that he neither knew what to do nor say, the people to be so dejected as
that they were not to be cheered by any humane hopes, they bee-thought
themselves how to make use of a false miracle, as a means which infuseth
courage and strength into men, and which makes men, especially such as are
simple, more then is true; the people being subject to believe such
superstitions: so as they are not to be condemned who believe her to be a
Virgin sent by God, nor yet they which believe otherwise. These noble men spent
some days in instructing her in all such things as she was to answer to the
demands the King might likely make her, and such as in his presence they would
ask of her, for they themselves were to interrogate her; and to the end she
might know the King from among the rest, she never having seen him, they
oftentimes made her contemplate his picture, and failed not to be present the
day that she was to come, being themselves to be Actors in this business. The
first, that asked her what her business was, was the Bastard of Orleans and
Baudicourt; she answear'd, she would speak with the King: then they there
presenting some of the Lords that were there present for the King, she said,
that was not he, for he was hidden behind his bed, whither she went to find
him; and a little while after he adds, This invention of counterfeit and
fained religion was of such advantage to this Kingdom, as that it infused hope
into men that were before deprest by despair. Hitherto Hallian.Now that this
was rather to be believed then the other report, Argentres seems to denote,
where sometime after he makes her encounter with the Constable. Monsieur de
Tremuille was by the Constables means brought into favor with Charles, and
he like an ingrate person had wrought the Constable out of favor with him,
made him be forbidden the Court, diminished his pensions, given order to the
City to shut their Gates upon him, and to the Captains to fight with him; the
which the wisest sort thinking to be somewhat hard, the Maid willed it should
be put in execution; but the contrary opinion prevailing, she went along with
others to meet him, who did him this honor not only as being a Prince, but as
being Constable, and their superior; so as being informed of her bad offices,
as he came to salute her, said, Jane, I understand you would have fought with
me; I know not what you are, nor by whom sent, whether by God or the Devil;
if by God, I fear you not, for he knows my intentions as well as yours: if
by the Devil, I value you much less, therefore do the worst you can, I defy
you. Whereby is plainly seen, what opinion was held of her; and that having
failed upon this occasion, as in many others, she had no Spirit of revelation,
for then she would not have been subject to ambiguity in the undertaking of
things, nor to inconstancy in the putting of them in execution: For what
concerns Messierus his testimony, every man who speaks of other men's actions
does say and believe what is said and believed by a concurrence of Writers, not
having heard those who affirm the contrary. Moreover, though he were a
Fleming by Nation, yet was he not separated from the interest of France; For
if in some things, he writ in favor of Philip against the French, he writ
many things wherein Philip was not concerned (as namely this) infavour of them;
but the evidence that he brings of this Woman for what concerns Philip, ought
not make that be believed which he had formerly written in the favor
thereof. He brings her forth as sent by God, but not against Philip: He
affirms that she had not like success against the Burgonians as she had
against the English; that some said, though she were of power against these,
yet was she not so against those; as if grace had been conferred upon her
conditionally, less toward them, and in abundance toward the English. To
witness the which, he alleadges two cases: the one, that being gone to the
siedge of Senlis, in the defense whereof, besides the English, there were many
Burgonians under the command of Lilliadam and Croy, she advised sometimes to
fight, and sometimes not, having lost in some small skirmishes 300. men, that
is as much as to say, she had taken Senlis if there had been none but English
there; that the like befell her before Paris from whence she retreated wounded
in her leg. In a word, Sodom was spared as long as Lot stayed there; but if
it were so, I see not any reason he had to believe much therein, since these
contrary events show the falsehood of her revelations; for since error did
ensue thereon, they proceeded not from God, from whom comes no error: and if
he will have them to be true, but not obeyed, he will find that the Lord God
delivered up a disobedient Prophet to be the prey of a Lion, and that he
took away his grace and kingdom from the first disobedient King. The chief
reasons which the French produce to prove her being sent by God, are her
requiring that sword which she had never seen, as placed in a Church where
she had never been, and her having said many things in secret unto the King,
which were never by him retold to any man; the argument of the sword is very
light, for if her coming was by cozenage, other things were effected by the
same deceit, without the which she was not to be believed in the principal,
but the diversity of writing of the place, of the miracle, of the rust which
fell off of it self, and of the diversity of the mark, there is no man who
will not account it a manifest sign of falsehood. I forbear to mention in the
necessity of this sword, the supposall of somewhat of fatality (according to
the Ethnickes opinions) and that France should be delivered by the virtue
thereof, and not of other weapons, smells of a Romansa and enchantment. The
Kings keeping her Counsel does no ways take from, but rather aggravate the
former suspicions. He should have averred the fact, at least after her death,
since such secrets appertained only unto himself, and were one day to be
known, unless it were that, taken up into the third Heaven as was Saint Paul,
she had participated such things unto him as are not lawful to be told to
man. Finally, to cry down them for Heretics who do not believe in her, is an
apparent vanity: we are then infidels, when we have not that sanctified sense
of faith, to the which we are by faith bound; when the usual and daily works
of God, which march under the name of nature are not received and admired by
us, as the works of his omnipotency; and when we do not believe his
extraordinary works, the which being at the same time supernatural and yet
visible (as Miracles) cannot be denied without infidelity; but such as do or
may depend upon humane cunning or wariness, unless the proofs thereof be
more then evident, we may without any scruple of infidelity, not only doubt
thereof, but absolutely deny them. The true causes why this was so strictly
pressed were two: that which has already been said to raise up men's spirits, to
the end that out of the imagination of special help from Heaven, they might
undertake, what their own faintness made them give over; the other, that
fraud being turned miracle, Charles his pretenses might be declared just, and
Henry's unjust, for God does not protect injustice. Monstrelet describing her,
as do the rest, agrees with the English in that point of her; having served a
long time in an Inn, and that as she watered Horses, she rid them without
any manner of fear, having abilities not usual in that sex; the which the
French deny in words, but in effect confess, when, describing her entry into
Orleans, and arming her with white Arms, they make her ride upon a Courser of
the same color, whilst it is to be supposed, either that she would not have
known how to have governed him if she had not formerly practiced to ^ide, or
else that she did it by miracle: to affirm it done by miracle is too much to
abuse miracles by too profane boldness; if otherwise, it was a couzenage
handsomely plotted to choose out a Woman, which knowing how to do things which
other Women usually know not, the simple sort were made to believe them as
extraordinary, not in the sex, but in nature.

The assembly of people and victuall's which were to be brought into Orleans
was made at Blois, whither the maid came and marched on with the succor. Her
Standard was borne displayed before her, wherein were painted three Angels, one
in one corner, another in another, with a flower de Luce in their hand; in the
midst the image of the Virgin Mary, opposite to the which stood the third,
which presented a flower de Luce unto her. Her intention was to enter fighting,
but the Conductors, who did not believe it, knowing that the greatest part of
the besiegers were on Beaux side, left that way and took the other of
Soulogne, as the more safe. When they were come to the River they passed over
their victuall's, the English not stirring one foot, and entered the City with
great applause of the Citizens; but the English say, they made their entry by
night, favored by a dark season, wherein it did both thunder and rain, so as
they were neither heard nor seen. The chief Conductors returned back to
Blois to bring more victuall's and munition which yet remained there, while the
Bastard of Orleans sent for all the forces that were at Montargis, Schattadune,
and other strengths there abouts; with the which, accompanied by the maid, he
went to meet them, and passing by the enemies forts, none of the enemy budging,
they entered safely into the City; the easines of this second succor ought not
(as I suppose) be ascribed to a miracle, as well for that the like has happened
upon the like occasions and in other places, as likewise for that two things
did facilitate it: the one, that upon the belief of the Maids being sent by
God, 7000. Volunteers came flocking to them, who without this would not have
taken up arms for all that Charles could either have said or done unto them;
the other, for that (as some of them do write) they were purposely let pass
out of hopes, that the City would the sooner be famished by the increase of
her number: thus was it twice victualled the night in the former, and the
multitude of Soldiers in the second; making the miracle by the means of who
(nor hoped for, nor expected before) the maid being to do great matters, she
(as a Messenger from Heaven) would first persuade her enemies peaceably to
depart; by this Letter translated and set down in its own natural ancient
phrase, as it is more succinctly registered by Serres.

KIng of England, do reason to the King of Heaven touching his blood royal,
deliver up unto the Maid, the keys of all the good Cities you hold by
violence; she is come from God to demand, what is due to the blood royal,
she is ready for peace if you will do her reason, paying and quitting what
you possess; if you do not this, King of England, I am the Head of War: in
whatsoever part of France, I shall meet with your people, I will drive them out
will they nill they; If they will obey, I will receive them to mercy. The Maid
comes from the King of Heaven, and if you will not obey her, she will make you
so great an Hahai, as the like has not been heard this thousand years in
France; for you ought firmly to believe the King of Heaven will give to her,
and her good Soldiers more force then you are likely to have, go to your own
Country in Gods name, and be not stubborn, for you shall not hold France by
permission of the King of Heaven, Son of Saint Mary; but King Charles the
true heir shall hold it to whom-God has given it, and who shall enter Paris
with a fair company.

You William Poole Earl of Suffolk, you John Lord Talbot, you Thomas Lord
Scales, Lieutenants to the Duke of Bedford, and you Duke of Bedford, who call
your self Regent in the Kingdom of France, spare the innocent blood, leave
Orleans in liberty, for if you will not do reason to those, you have done
wrong unto; The French will doc the bravest deed was ever done in Europe,
think well upon what God, and the Maid says unto you.

No man will think it could produce any thing but laughter, but by what soon
ensued, that laughter was turned to an other tone. The Frenchmen say, that the
Trumpetter who brought the Letter, was contrary to the law of Nations detained,
and that he hardly escaped being burnt; Chartier and Dupleix add, that after
the siedge, he was found in shackles, which whither it was so or no, I cannot
tell: for the English say nothing in this point, and the French do not all
agree in one relation, therefore let it be lawful for every one to believe as
he lists; but it is hard to believe (if it were so) that the rage of those
who were driven away, who formerly had a mind to burn him should not provoke
them to kill him before they went, since they did not depart in such have, (as
Chartier will have them to have done) but that they might have time enough to
have done it, since it consisted only in the striking of one stroke. The
besieged consulted what they had to do, being by the Maiden assured of
certain victory, they resolved to begin with the Fort of Saint Lupe, placed
over against the gate of Burgony and guarded by 400. Foot.

Fortune favored their forwardness, they set upon it the fourth of May with
so much resolution, as that though it were manfully defended, it was after long
contestation more manfully gotten, the garrison was put to the sword, the Fort
burnt, the Artillery and munition brought into the City, and since Serres
writes, that the maid was the first that entered the town crying Monjoy Saint
Denis victory; let us grant her this honor, though the rest who speak of her
as the head of the enterprise speak not one word thereof. They left the town
the next day, and took two Forts, St. John and Londre, the first was easily
taken, the second not so easily, where the Soldiers were cut in pieces, and
many French prisoners recovered, the sixth day they assailed the tower upon the
bridge, defended by Gladisdale by them called Classidas, and highly commended;
the fight continued from break of day till Sun set. Gladisdale was slain
together with the Lord Merlin and Poinings and many Soldiers. The maid was
wounded with an Arrow between the neck and the back, but she forbore not
though to fight, and to encourage her men, Dupleix says, that the Bastard of
Orleans seeing the stout resolution of the defendants would have sounded a
retreat, but being entreated to the contrary by her, he did not. That having
retired herself to her Oraisons, for half a quarter of an hour she returned
more courageous then before, emboldening the rest by her example, and again,
that she having till then been undervalued by the English, they seeing her
valor, began now to think that there was somewhat more then humane in her,
which formerly they did not believe, and that they were led to this by one of
Merlins prophecies which foretold that they should be ruinated in France by the
means of a maid. To the first it is answered, that it was by him invented,
since that he says that which others do not, the more to confirm the
opinion of her pretended sanctity; so the second that amongst all Merlins
prophecies there is not any one such; there is none of any understanding in
England who do not hold Merlins prophecies as invented tales; the diversity of
editions (the one not agreeing with the other, as every one of the compositors
best liked his own) proves this clearly unto us, but to leave generals, no
historian mentions any such thing save himself, so as the English could think
no otherwise of the maid then as of an imposture chosen for that purpose,
neither is it they alone that do believe this, for the sharpest sighted of
France did and do believe it. Things were brought to that pass as has been
said, to the besiegers great disadvantage, so as the besieged pursuing their
good fortune, provided to invade such Forts as yet remained in the possession
of the enemy, the first was that of the Lord Talbot, who not waiting for them
locked up within, met them abroad, fought with them, and forced them to retire
with the loss of some men and Artillery, but this imported nothing to what
remained to continue; the siege was dangerous, the City was free on the side
of Soulogne, the number of the enemy was increased and daily to increase more
in number already then were they; victuals could not be inhibited them; to
recover what was lost was impossible; so as they resolved to rise from before
the town, which was no sooner mentioned, then put in execution: but to take
away all appearances that they should be driven away, they resolved (their
Forts being forsaken) to put themselves in battle array, to expect the enemy
to fight with them if they should come, if not to retreat as they did; for the
French making them a bridge of gold by keeping within the City, having
expected them the greatest part of the day, they marched away in good order,
after seven months siege. The Earl of Suffolk came with 400. men to
Iergeau, Talbot to Meune, and the rest to other places. John Chartier says,
that at the end of the the siege there were left but 4000. of the English.
Serres says, that they stole away by night in a squadron of 9000. and marched
toward Baugences, but since he is noted of falsehood by his own country men,
it is needless for me to endeavor to confute this flight by night, for the rest
relate it as we have done; this was the end of the siege of Orleans: A game
blow, for as in the loss there of Charles would have run in danger of
loosing his whole kingdom, so in the preservation thereof, the English lost
France; the Citizens and Soldiers joy, and the Maids glory is not to be
expressed, the Forts were thrown down and trenches filled up, and a Crucifix in
brass was erected upon the City bridge, on the one side thereof was the
effigies of King Charles, and another of the Maid on the other side, both upon
their knees and in Armor, as they are there at this day to be seen; and a
decree was made that the memorial hereof should every year be celebrated.
The first of two evils which forthwith ensued unto the English was weakness,
by reason of the death of so many of their valiant men; the which, though by
them denied, amounted to the number of 8000. as the French do write, as I do
believe Chartiers, who judged their remainder not to exceed 4000. so as being
dismembered that they might place the residue in requisite places; they wanted a
flying Army, whereby they might be succored; so as in this their first change
of fortune they were peece-meale, if not totally destroyed; the second, that
their enemies increased in all parts, and laying aside their fears, did put on
as assured a confidence of help from heaven, as was the means despiseable and
of no avail, whereby they thought God, (as he was wont to do in his great
works) did serve himself; the vulgar do not truly observe the reason of
their own obscurity in understanding God had made use of the Maid, if of her
self alone, or together with the besieged, who could not long defend
themselves, she had freed the City; but if we add to her opinion (which
though a phantome in it self) is yet of substance in the elevating of men's
spirits, and which really brought her 7000. unexpected fighters over and above
those of the Garrison, and those that she brought with her) we shall find that
it was not she, but the effects of this opinion which freed them: The Maid
departed in great pomp from Orleans to meet with Charles at Chinon, and being
by him honorably received, she obtained from him, such reinforcements as she
desired of him. The Court had laid aside solitariness by reason of the
frequent concourse of Princes and great Lords; for prosperity invites, and
adversity keeps men back; the first thing resolved upon was the recovery of
such places as were situated upon the Loire, for occasion was not to be let
slip: The overthrowing of the English was the setting up of France. For this
purpose Charles named John de vallois Duke of Alansonne for his Lieutenant,
whilst the Bastard of Orleans believing to lose Iargeau, without the assistance
of others was enforced to withdraw himself from thence, hindered by the Loire
which had overflowne all the adjacent parts; but Alansonne being come to
Orleans accompanied by the Count de Vendome, who was likewise Prince of the
blood, and by the Maid, he together with them went to Iargeau, the Earl of
Suffolk was there with two of his brethren John and Alexander, they made
terrible assaults on three parts, so as the defendants who were but a few,
flocked all to the parts assailed; so as S. Traile perceiving the walls bare
where no assault was made, had not much difficulty in scaling them, nor in
cutting in pieces those who fought; amongst the which Alexander was one: They
took the Earl of Suffolk, his brother John and many other prisoners, who
being brought to Orleans, and the victors not agreeing in the dividing of them,
they all agreed in the putting of them to death upon could blood, sparing only
the Earl and his brother Avarice in hopes of their ransom outvying cruelty,
they were at the same time reinforced by 7000. men sent unto them by Charles
under the command of Guy de Laval, the Marishall Loeac his brother, Chavignes
de la Tower and Vidame de Schartres; with these and their former Forces
Alansonne and Vandome went to Meune, they fought for the bridge and won it,
wherein leaving a sufficient Garrison, they forbore to besiege the town till a
more fit time, thinking it requisite for them first to make themselves masters
of Beaugences; Talbot this mean while took Laval by scaling ladders (formerly
won by him, but which according to their natural inclination, had afterward
set up their first masters standard) wherein though he found much riches, yet
wanted he the conquest of the Castle to make it an entire victory. Hither was
Andrew de Laval, Lord of Loeac retired, not out of hopes of keeping himself
there, for he wanted provision; but to make a more reasonable composition, so
as engaging himself to pay for the ransom of himself and all that were there
with him 25000. Crowns, remaining himself prisoner till such time as that
sum should either be paid, or sufficient security given in for the payment
thereof. Talbot placed a Garrison there, and went to Paris, whether as soon as
he was come he was forthwith dispatched again, together with the Lord Scales
to the succor of Beaugences, which they were informed was besieged. He
presented himself before it with 4000. men, but found it so straightly begirt,
as he thought best to retire. To this siege was the Constable come,
accompanied by Messieurs d'Albret, Rieux Chasteaubri and, Beaumanoir, Marshall
of Britanny, Montalban, St. Giles, many others 1200. Horse, and 1500. Foot;
wherewith he had so enforced Charles his Army, as that the enemy was not able
to stand before them, and though the English make his Army to consist of
between 22. and 23000. yet are they somewhat deceived; for the French count
7000. before Iargeau (besides those who Alansonne and the Maid brought with
them) 7000. who Charles sent by Guy de Laval, and 2700. which the Constable
brought with him: all which as they were formerly wont to run away from the
Army, so did they now flock thereunto; for Fortune favoring, they hourly
multiplied, the which being perceived by the besieged, and failing in their
succor they yielded themselves, their Arms, Horses, and Baggage being saved.
Belleforest says that for what concerned their Baggage, they were limited to
a mark a man, and were obliged not to take Arms for the space of ten days
against the King of France. How ever it was, the two English Captains retreat
was more unfortunate, then was their coming* for thinking themselves to be
able to force the Tower of the bridge of Meune, and be there in safety, they
could not do it, for they were so closely followed by the whole Camp, as that
the Avantguard was at Meune, at the same time that they went from thence. They
endeavored to recover Ianville, but were hindered by those who followed them,
so as being come to Patay in Beausse, and surrounded by the enemy, they
resolved to fight; they were furiously set upon by 1400. Horsemen chosen out of
the whole Camp, to stay them by skirmishing with them, till such time as the
others should come up, who were conducted by Messieurs de Vignolles St. Traille
Tilloy, Lore, Terms and Illiers. Talbot seeing himself so hard beset, had
given order to his men to keep themselves firm within their sharpened staves,
believing to be set upon by the whole body of the Army, but this unexpected
number of Horsemen charging upon him, there was no time to think thereon; the
fight was come to that pass as the whole body of the Army coming up, Talbot
being wounded and afterward taken, his men had no more mind to fight nor
resolution to die; some fled to Corbuille, and some to Meune. Ianville would
not receive them, for they were mingled with the enemy, which pursued them
closely, so as the slaughter was great and but few the prisoners, the chiefest
whereof was, Talbot, Scales, Hungerford, all three Barons, and Sir Thomas
Ramstone. Sir John Falstaff fled from this scuffle without giving or receiving
a blow (judging it as I think rashness to fight at disadvantage against so
many in open field) who for his former actions was that year made Knight of
the Garter. The Duke of Bedford incensed at this his flight, took from him his
George and Garter, which afterward by means of friends and his alleging
excuses, (which were judged reasonable) were restored unto him, though against
Talbots will. This brave Commanders imprisonment was of such consequence, as
'twas thought the English would never be able to do any thing more of moment
in France, Ianville, Meunes and all other places which the English held in.
Beausse yielded up themselves, as is usual in great losses, so as Charles did
in a short time win in these parts what he was long in loosing; for to boot
with the preservation of Orleans (wherein the Earl of Salisbury, the
principal pillar of Englands fortune was slain) he recovered Iargeau,
Baugency, Ianville, Meune and all Beausse, together with the imprisonment of
Talbot the second Column of the adverse party, all which happened out of the
belief, that a base woman of a doubted reputation was sent from heaven to
raise the one and suppress the other. For France was so discouraged before, as
none durst take up arms to defend her, nor is this to be wondered at, for as
the understanding conceives not but by the sense, so force does not work but
through imagination weakened by fear, or strengthened by hope; so as we must
believe that the good effects of moral actions do proceed first from good
imagination, then from good action, for the latter depends upon the former;
Notwithstanding all these conquests 'twas disputed whether Charles should be
crowned at Rheims or no; the reasons alleged against it being all of
consequence. He was to pass by places held by the enemy; on the one side
Auxerres, Troyes, and Shallon were an obstacle to him; on the other side Laon,
and Soissons, and Gastinois, Brie, Picardie, and all the Country from Loire
northward, and to the Sea was in their possession. The Coronation was a mere
ceremony, whereby the right unto the Crown was neither given nor taken away.
It was not a thing universally used, the use thereof derives not from the Law
to make it requisite, but from necessity (if any there be) to make the Prince
thereby known unto the people, there was no such necessity in Charles his
case. He was a lawful Prince by all men held lawfully to be so, he was not
opposed by his own men but by strangers, and if by some of his own, they were
thereunto by fear enforced, 'twas not of freewill; but say it had been
necessary, since Henry thought it not necessary, neither ought he to have
thought it; not that the institution was to be changed (for use had so far
prevailed as it was not to be altered without scandal) but to be changed for a
time, for what is deferred is not absolutely taken away, especially where the
delay proceeds from wisdom and good advice, but these reasons did not
satisfy the Maid, as contrary to one of the three points for which she was
sent: for Orleans being set at liberty, his Coronation at Rheims was to follow,
and the driving out of the English, to the end that her prophecies might be
fulfilled, as indeed they all were, though not according to her sense the
third: for the English were driven out, but not by her, as she threatened them
in her letter; Charles was waited upon in this his voyage by all the Barons of
his train, except the Constable, (whom Tremuille was not willing to be
troubled withal) and Count Pedriac, who by being friend to the Constable was
by Tremuille opposed; yet for fear least being discontent they might undertake
some ill business, their denial was honested, by giving commission to the
former to guard the frontiers of Normandy, and by naming the other Lieutenant
of Guienne, to the end that being thus parted, theirforces might not have
communion together. The which being by them well known, they accepted these
charges with like dissimulation as they were conferred upon him. Dupleix
notwithstanding contrary to the opinion of the rest, will have the Constable to
go along with him. Charles his Army consisted of 12000. men wherewith he
arrived at Auxerres; the English say that those Cities demanded day for the
surrendering of them selves, if in the mean while they should not be succored
and they obtained it. But the French accuse Tremuille, for that being brided,
he made Charles pass on without troubling them. Saint Florentine did readily
yield. At Trois, they found some difficulty, for they wanted things necessary
to take it by force, so as the greatest part councelled to retire, but the Maid
(according to Belleforest) promissing to take it within two days set the
Nobility it self a work in making platformes, forts, and trenches, as if all
things were ready to force the Town, whereupon for mere fear they surrendered
themselves. The English say, it was besieged 12. days; and that Sr. Philip
Hall, who had the command thereof, wanting both men and victuals, and not
hoping for succor, compounded for the safe departure of himself and garrison
with all their baggadge. the Garrisons of Shallon and Rheims enforced by the
Inhabitants came forth upon the like conditions, the Cities yielding themselves
up to Charles, who made his solemn entry into Rheims, and was crowned there. I
set not down the Ceremonies as not requisite to our story; but I will say,
that as coronation is a useless and vain ceremony in Kings, who have no
competitors, so is it more then requisite for one that has competitors, as it
happened here, for people judge not things as they are, but as they appear.
Charles was no sooner crowned but Men and Cities hasted to do him homage, as
if that action had endowed him with right and justice, which before he wanted.
Auxerres not being succored within the limited time sent him its keys. Laon
did by Deputies do obeissance to him, as he went from thence Soissons,
Chasteau-Thierre, and Province, yielded to him, whereupon the Duke of Bedford
thinking, that this torrent could not be withstood, but by a field battle came
forth of Paris with 10000. English, and some few Norman troops. When he was
come to Brie, he writ by a Herald to Charles, that his pretensions (which had
caused so great mortality and mischief to the people) being contrary to all
laws especially to the agreement made between Henry the fifth and Charles the
sixth, and the Kingdom of France; he was came out of Paris to prove them
unjust, that therefore, if he would choose the place, he was ready to give him
battle where ever it were. Charles accepted the invitation at least seemed so
to do, the Armies presented themselves in sight one of the other near to
Senlis, they stayed there the space of two days and two nights, making only
some little skirmishes, each endeavoring to get the advantage over the other;
but the English having secured themselves behind that they might not be
surprised (for Charles was by much the greater number especially in horse) and
the French not willing to venture upon one battle what they had won, and what
they had to win by the devotion of sueh as daily came over to them, and the
Maid councelling sometimes to fight, sometimes otherwise, they retreated face
to face, and Bedford returned to Paris doubting the Citizens loyalty. This
retreat is diversely reported by Authors, this which I have said, is according
to Monstrelot. The English affirm, that Charles retreated by night, as not
willing to hazard a battle, nor yet willing to tarry longer, for fear of
incurring the name of Coward. Belleforest, on the other side says, that
Bedford did not pass Melune, where examining the turn of the wheel, he
resolved like a wise Prince not to wrestle against fortune, leaving Charles
Master of the field, Giles brings him to Brie near to the Town called Motta
de Nangis, where hearing, that the King expected him, he durst go no further,
but fled away with his Army to Paris. Hallian encamps him so much to the
advantage, as that the King was advised not to fight with him, and that
therefore the next day, he returned to Paris. Chesnes having registered the
long letter of defiance sent by Bedford to Charles, adds, but as such letters
were fuller of bravadoes and passion, then of desire to fight, so the Duke of
Bedford being come near to Charles not far from Senlis, durst not give him
battle, but shamefully sounded a retreat, which afforded the King leisure to
lead his Army toward Champagnia: these four Authors are of four several
opinions in this history. The first will not have Bedford pass Melune, the
second brings him to Brie, the one making him wise, the other a Coward; the
third making him wise by well intrenching himself, whereupon he was advised to
retire: the fourth brings him near to Charles, but arming him with Thraso's
Army makes him a braggard and runne-away. Dupleix confronts the two Armies with
an opinion of fighting, though some skirmishes only insued, wherein about 300.
of both sides were slain. He says, that the English intrench't themselves to
much to the advantage against the French-horse, that the Council and Jane her
self advised not to set upon them, whilst they the mean while were sure not
to stir forth for fear of being fought withal: that the English say,
Charles retired by night for fear of being enforced to fight, where on the
contrary side it was likelier, that it was not he, who formerly forbore to
fight because he went with banners displayed directly toward Paris, where the
English might advantagiously have given him battle, all the Country thereabouts
being at their command; to witness what he says; he in the Margent cites
Monstrelet, and Chartier; Monstrelet says, they did skirmish; but not, that
the English durst not come forth of their trenches, for they could not
otherwise skirmish. He adds, that they were so well intrench't, as that they
could not be set upon behind, the French exceeding by much the enemy in
number. A particular whereof Dupleix speaks not, then if Bedford merit blame
for having secured himself backewards, to the great disadvantage of those,
that should fight with him; what does Charles deserve, who with so much a
greater number durst not confront him, whilst unintrench'd, he stood ready to
receive him; so as it was not cowardice in the one, not to permit all
advantages to the adversary, so not to fight because all were not permitted
him, was no sign of much valor in the other. Monstrelet does not say, that
Jane advised not to set upon the enemy, but that she was various in her
opinion, advising sometimes to fight, sometimes not: a witness rather, that
she was any thing else, then what by his own testimony she was reputed. But I
wonder at nothing more, then that Dupleix should quote Chartier, who writes all
things contrary to what he says, Chartier brings the two Armies face to face
within the shoot of a Culverin, for one whole day together, without either
hedge or thorn between them, that is, any thing whereby to fortify them, or
to detain them; they not having according to his account sufficient time to
fortify themselves. He says Charles was the first that left the field, and
then Bedford. Charles that very night went to Crespus, and the next night to
Compaignes, where he says, he stayed 8. days; if Charles went first away,
Bedford fled not: that he departed by night is more likely by the English
Histories, which affirm he did so to shun fighting; then the likelyhoods
affirmed by Dupleix, grounded upon his fained voyage to Paris, which none other
writes off; Chesnes and Chartier say plainly, that he went to Compaignes,
where if he tarryed 8. days, Bedford could not with advantage give him battle
in a Country which was at his command and disposal, as he would have it.

My opinion (amongst the diversity of so many which, if they could be credited
should be conformable) is, that the Duke, if Charles had not gone his ways,
would have fought though upon whatsoever disadvantage. For the English covet
battle at all times, and in all wars, as well foreign as civil they are by
nature firm to their resolves as are their cocks and dogs, which suddenly
fall to, and give not over but by death or want of breath: but say, this was
not the reason which eggd them on to battle, since that the French forces
increased by temporising and theirs decreased; Charles on the other side had no
reason to fight, least by an irrational hazard, he might break the course of
his victory, one battle being able to ruinate him: so as holding fortune in his
fist; by pursuing her, he had no reason to give her occasion to forsake him by
tempting her too much.

The Duke of Bedford seeing that the state of affairs required brisk
resolutions, writ to his Brother, desiring to use all means possible to send
him over some Soldiers, for without speedy help his affairs in France were
in great danger. These Letters came unto the King, just as the Cardinal of
Winchester was at Dover ready to pass over into Bohemia with 4000. men. The
Hussites had much troubled that Kingdom not without danger, of infecting the
Neighboring Countries with their opinions, the which Martin the fifth, being
willing to withstand; he did (together with other remedies) nominate the
Cardinal of Winchester his Legate in this War, and that by coming armed,
he might not be despised, he gave him power to raise the tenth part of all
the Ecclesiastical livings in England to make thereby a leavy of soldiers.
The business being propounded in Parliament, and approved of, by means of the
said moneys these 4000. men were raised.

The Duke of Gloucester, who could not make so sudden provision of men,
entreated the Cardinal to assist the business of France by transporting those
soldiers to the Regent, and that when he should see those affairs out of
danger, he might go on his journey. The Cardinal obeyed him though
unwillingly, moved thereunto out of consideration, that if any disaster should
be fall the Kings business, the fault might be laid on him. The Regent
reinforced by these men, came forth again into the field, continuing his
resolution of fighting with the enemy, who being encamped between Baron and
Monpillier, he incampt himself between Baron and Selins where many skirmishes
were made; but Charles not willing to set upon him in his own Camp, though he
were by much the greater number; nor the Regent to expose himself to all
disadvantages, they both retired, the Cardinal taking his way toward Bohemia,
where having had ill fortune, he returned home with little honor; and
Cardinal Guilian was sent in his place.

Henry was now entered into the eighth year of his reign, and the ninth of his
age, not having been till then crowned; so as on the sixth of November this
solemnity was with much pomp celebrated at Westminster, with all such
demonstrations of joy, as upon like occasions are usually made both publicly
and privately. Charles this mean while being free from the encounter with
Bedford, received as he passed by such Cities as surrendered themselves,
amongst which Campaigne and Senlis; but thinking this success not sufficient
unless he could totally sever Philip from the enemy; he resolved to send
Ambassadors to him, who excusing the death of his Father, might show unto him
how misbecomming a thing it was for a Prince of his quality, so blamefully to
join with those who did oppugn the house royal, the Country and Kingdom, to
the which he, or such as should descend from him might sometimes aspire, if
Fortune should throw the succession upon him, offering him what conditions he
pleased, and such as were never to be effected. But Philip keeping himself
upon generals, neither giving hopes, nor taking them quite away, and demanding
such things as were not to be granted him, reserved himself to his best
advantage, for being courted by both sides, he was sure that without him
neither of them could prevail. This mean while Beaunois and Omale being come
over to Charles, the Regent fearing yet worse, went to Normandy, the Province,
which though all the rest were lost was chiefly to be preserved, as being the
Patrimony of the Crown of England, and the most convenient for it of all the
rest; leaving Lovis of Luxemburg Bishop of Ierouanne, who by Henry's means
enjoyed the office of Chancellorship of France in Paris, with 2000 English
under good Commanders. Charles would not not lose the opportunity of this
absence, to try whether fortune would favor him in the atchieving of that
City. S. Denis yielded it self up unto him without resistance, so as his men
began to scowre the country even to underneath the walls of Paris; and the
chiefest of his Army being lodged at La Chapelle, they levelled their
Artillery against the gate Saint Honor and took the Bulwark thereof;
whereupon the Maid throwing her self into the ditch, and resolute, contrary to
the advice of Alansonne and all the rest, to give an assault (he pretended
revelation, having not revealed unto her the depth of the ditch, and the water
therein) she was wounded in her leg; the which not abating her violence, but
she still persisting in causing where withal to be brought to fill it up, she
had there been taken had not a servant of the Duke of Alansonnes withdrawn
her from thence; so as force proving vain, many brave soldiers being there
slain, and the Bulwark abandoned, they wholly forsook the enterprise.
Charles took his way from Touraine by Berry, being not naturally inclined to
businesses, but rather to the trimming up of gardens, as usually are the lovers
of idleness; an humor which though it be allowable in men who have not much
to do, yet is it harmefull in Princes, whose art it is to give laws to peace,
to govern their people with honor, to pardon the humble, and punish the
proud. The Regent understanding the danger that Paris was in, made have
thither; he thanked the City for the loyalty they had showed upon this
occasion, promising whatsoever might be expected from a moderate government,
and from a King who loved nothing more then the preservation and content of his
people: Philip was not long in coming thither, who after having treated with
him of what was to be done, after a short stay departed leaving him to the
recovery of Saint Denis, and the adjacent places; whilst the Bastard of Orleans
laid siege to the Castle of Turcis, which being very strong both by situation
and art; held out six months, at the end whereof it yeeded; the Soldiers
lives being saved, and the Castle wholly demolished. At this very time Sir
Thomas Tirill had with 400. Soldiers, much damnified the county of Cleremont,
the Count thereof resolute to chastise his boldness, drew out the Garrisons
from thence and the neighboring places, and chasing him therewithal,
overtooke him about Beauvois, in so narrow a passage, as his Horsemen could not
make use of their Horses, they therefore quitted them, and fiercely set upon
him; the bickering lasted a good while without knowledge which side had the
better, till such time as the English bows decided it, the Count saved
himself, for which he owes thanks to his Horses heels; of the rest 300. were
slain and 200. taken prisoners, with whom Sir Thomas returned to Grovay, the
place of his Garrison. Omale had a little before yielded unto Charles as has
been said, Mounsieur de Ramburres remaining Governor thereof; the Earl of
Suffolk besieged it and after 25. assaults, the Town not being able to do
any more, surrendered it self, the Earl caused 30. of the chiefest of them to
be hanged on the Walls as falsifiers of their faith, and perjured to Henry; he
fined the rest, and sent Mounsieur de Rambourres into England, who six years
after recovered his lost liberty by exchange. On the other side Laval which
Talbot had taken the year before, was retaken by the French, who lay in ambush
all night near unto a Mill, and following the Millers advice who they had
corrupted, they entered the town at the opening of the gates, putting all the
English they found there to the sword, save some few who saved themselves by
throwing themselves from the top of the Walls. La Hire did likewise surprise
Louviers, making rich booty, taking many prisoners, and swearing the
inhabitants to be loyal to Charles; for all this change of Fortune Philip
forbore not to think of Feasts and jollities, for being widdower to two barren
wives, he married Isabel daughter to John King of Castile, and Philip of
Lancaster, Sister to Henry the fourth, Grandfather to the present King; in
honor of that marriage he instituted the order of the fleece, the which
together with the succession of the Low countries in the Crown of Spain, is
at this day one of the noblest, and most singular signs of favor which those
Kings use to confer; the solemnities being ended, he went to Gournay
accepting the offer of Tristen de Magvelliers (who was Governor thereof) to
surrender it self the first of August in case it were not before that time
succored: from thence he past to Soisi which yielded unto him; the lives and
livelihoods granted to as many as were there, and demolishing it to the very
ground, he went from thence to Soisons, which the French say was sold unto him
by a Captain of Picardy who commanded there, so as having freed the way from
his own dominions to Compaignes he laid siege thereunto. Compaignes was
provided with men munition and victuals for a long time, so as the Burgonians
not hoping to take it but by the length of time and much danger, having planted
their battery, they there made Forts and Trenches for their own safeties, and
to necessitate the besieged: The Earls of Arundel and Suffolk increased the
Camp by 2000. English, and the Maid the Garrison by 500. Soldiers which she
brought thither from Laignes. William de Havie was Governor of the place, a
valiant Gentleman, who failed not to keep the besiegers in exercise. Soon
after his arrival the Maid came with intention of making herself Master of the
Castle of Mounsieur de Bawd, who was then absent, and gone to Marigny in the
service of Philip, but being overdone by those who flocked thither to oppose
her, it behoved her to give over the attempt, whilst her men entered into the
City entering thereinto tumultuously, by reason of the straightness of the
bars, which the keepers durst not take away, least the enemy might enter in
along with them; she was one of the last that came thither, entertaining those
who pursued her, and affording time to the rest to save themselves; but her
upper garment being seized upon by a Horseman, and she pulled from her horse,
she was maugre with those which would have defended her, taken prisoner. An
opinion is held that the bars were shut upon her out of malice; some of the
Captains, particularly William de Havy, not well enduring that the glory of
all that was done should be ascribed to her; but how ever it was, she was led
to Marignes, and from thence to Roan, where being strictly imprisoned her
process was made, duly suffering (had she not deserved punishment for any
thing else) for having not long before with too much cruelty, and upon cold
blood put to death Franchetto d'Arras, a valaint Burgonian, whilst she should
have treated him like a Prisoner of War, as the French exclaim she ought to
have been treated, but being transported by womanish anger (for that he in an
encounter had long, and valiantly resisted her, causing her send for help to
Laignes, and the Circumvoysive Garrisons, without which she had not been able
to overcome him, though much the greater in number) she caused his head to be
taken of, so as in her is seen accomplished what is said by the Evangelist,
the like measure being measured forth to her as she measured forth to others;
we will in due place relate the rest, she not being put to death till some
time after. The Regent to boot with the former had sent to Philip the Earl of
Huntington, Sir John Robsert and a thousand Archers, so as that place was not
likely long to have subsisted had not the news of the Duke of Brabants death
enforced him to go from thence to take order for that state, which by
inheritance fell to him. He left John of Luxenburgh his Lieutenant, a poorly
spirited man, and who the more discouraged by reason of the Forces which Philip
carried away with him, did forth with doubt the enterprise. He imparted his
resolution of quitting the siege to the English, honesting it by the
incommodities of winter, and by remitting it till the Spring; they dissuaded
him, showing him how shameful a thing it was to forsake it now that the Camp
was so situated, as that the Town could not be succored, and those within the
Town reduced to the point of being within a few days famished, but no reason
could prevail with him. He by all means would be gone. The English went to
Normandy, and he having set on fire all his hutches went his ways, leaving
behind him many pieces of Artillery wanting wherewithal to carry them away,
'twas thought that the besieged could not have held out above ten days, the
plague and famine having begun to make havocke of them.

Fortune did for the most part after this retreat from upon the English, so as
perceiving themselves to decline, they thought that the same means which had
raised up Charles might do the like to Henry; and that by coming into France
to be crowned he might confirm those of his party in their obedience, and
might reduce those thereunto who were now far from it; but examples cannot be
equal where circumstances are unequal: If Charles his coronation drew unto
him both Cities and men, 'twas because he formerly had their hearts. 'Twas
otherwise with Henry, for though he were of amiable years and customs, yet
being a stranger he was not to promise himself that beyond nature, which
Charles by nature had so easily come by. The difference of the Climate where he
was borne did subvert these effects in him which conformity had made happy in
his enemies advantages the 27. of April he took Sea at Dover, and landed the
same day at Calis attended on by a great many of Lords and Soldiers, from
whence he past to Roan, where he was received by the inhabitants with great
signs of joy.

The Maid being taken prisoner, we left the pursuit of her story to end the
siedge of Compaigne; we will now make a short relation of her process and
sentence. The University of Paris was her first accuser. They writ to Henry,
desiring him, that she might be delivered over into the Ecclesiastical
Courts, for that she had been a cause of much scandal amongst the people to
the prejudice of Religion, and of the Catholic Faith; she was delivered over
to the Bishop of Beauvois, and the Inquisitor, being taken in the former
Diocese; she was examined upon 78. articles, some of which were. Her change
of Woman's apparel for man's. Ruins and Manslaughters partly committed by her,
partly by her directions, that she had seduced the people, by making them
believe, she was sent from God. The falsehood of her revelations, that she was
a Sorceresse, a Witch, a foreteller of things to come, that she had dissuaded
Charles from peace with England; that she had boasted herself to know things
to come: that she had said, the Saints that conversed with her, had been
seen by the King; the Duke of Bourbon and two or three Lords more. That she
had so seduced the people, as that many abused by her hypocrisy and fained
devotion worshipped her as a Saint. To these and the rest, in some she gave
becoming answers; in others very foolish ones. Giles one of her chiefest
advocates, says, these underwritten words. For my own part I intend not
totally to take from any one, the judgment of visions, wherein this Maid has
showed her self too superstitious. I am clearly of opinion, that she never
was a whore, nor vagabond, as some have deciphered her to be. I likewise
think, that he having raised the siege of Orleans, and brought the King to
be crowned, was not done by the Devils means, but if there were any folly or
lightness in her answers to her interrogations, it should be ascribed to the
weakness of her sex, and the confusion of her mind, caused by her miseries
and imprisonment, the like I say of her boldness, which was somewhat more,
then became Christian humility.

The words of a man of integrity, though said, that he might not fail in his
judgment, and for that they could not be denied: for amongst the rest of her
vanities, being asked by what name those who spoke unto her in vision did call
her; she answered, that after the siedge of Orleans they called her the Maid
Jane, daughter of God, as if the freeing of Orleans her pretended work had
made her worthy of that name. But Giles leaving the judgment of visions at
liberty, seems not to approve, that which he defends: for visions, not
honesty makes her what she affirms her self to be, and as touching her
honesty; though it be a bad sign, that her own writers have doubted it, yet
will not I dispute it, only in as much as unchastity admits not the favor of
divine mission, which is the ground work of the controversy. Ancient
Idolaters give us Pithia, and the Sybils Virgins; nature showing us, that
divinity is an enemy to pollution, as for the freeing of Orleans, and crowning
of the King: I do not, only think them, but all her other actions to be
done without the Devils means for it appears not to me, that she knew what
the Devil was. I with Polidorus praise her as parallel to Cloelia since it so
pleases him; but not as parallel to her in her actions. Cloelia fought not,
fained not, did no harm to any: the Maid did hurt, and as much unto her self
as others. I do not praise her with Tillet, who does paragonise her to
Deborah, Iael, and Judith. I do not liken herto them, nor yet the English and
the French to the Canaanites and Israelites. Israel was a chosen faithful
people, the Canaanites Idolaters and reprobates; The English and French both
Christians. Of the latter two let me be permitted to say, that Iael violated
the laws of Hospitality and friendship, neither did she do it by the
commandment of God so as her act may be authorized. Judith deserves praise
for an act more generous then just: Justice admits not of flattery deceit lies,
first to cosen, and then to assasinate the enemy, she is praised for the good
that ensued thereupon; Her action being the more Heroique as done against an
infidel by the hand of a Woman, and in the service of her Country, for the
which all actions seem lawful though they be not so: deceit is vulgarly
accounted lawful against the enemy, the which whether it be to be approved
of or no in Christian religion, I leave to be decided by divines, whilst in
the mere respect of virtue, the Gentles teach us the contrary. The Athenians
rejected the advantageous record of Themistocles, because it was (according to
Aristides) as much unjust as useful. But let us grant what parallel you please
unto the Maid. If she had proceeded in this business like Cloelia, without any
fiction, out of much zeal to her Country no praise had been too great for
her, but Hypocrisy (without the which she could not compass her end)
cancelled all worth, leaving only so much shadow thereof, as may become a bold
resolution; and moreover that Cloelian worth vanished in her, when swearing
that she never dreamed of, she confessed her self guilty, when she was not,
that she might not die; and being sentenced to be burnt, she said then she
was with child to prolong her end; signs of a Spirit inconstant in sanctimony
and virtue, the which if at any time they entered into her, it was not as into
their own house, but as into a lodging or inn by way of passage. Her first
sentence was perpetual imprisonment with bread and water, abjuring the evils
committed, and the opinions contrary to the holy sense of Religion; the evils
committed, not submitted to abjuration but to repentance, and her opinions
contrary to the holy sense of Scripture as void, asignorant; unless, by
opinions they understand her impostures and lies, in affirming herself to be
sent from Heaven, and to have talked with the Saints. Vanity which causing her
to repent, her repentance made her to be thought relapsed, and to be
reassigned over to the secular power, which condemned her to be burnt;
whereupon affirming her self to be with child, and her punishment deferred
for nine months; she not being brought to bed; nor proving with child, she
was the next year 1431. in the month of May burnt in the marketplace of Roan,
where at this day stands Saint Michels Church, and where her ashes were by the
wind dispers't. Belleforest relates one of the two miracles which you may read
in the underwritten verses of Valeran Varan.

POstremo enituit pietas in morte Puellae,
In cinerem cunctos dum flamma resolveret artus;
Illaesus cor habet ve^as (mirabile dictu)
Nec sinceri animi temerant incendia sedem.
Albaque tunc vita est igni prodire columba
Et petere Aethereos multis spectantibus orbs.
But saying nothing of the dove; and publishing the other of her incombustible
heart, he leaves us in doubt whether Varan writ these by way of Poetical
Hyperboly, or of true Miracle; if by Hyperboly, Belleforest should have made no
mention at all thereof; if by Miracle, where he alludes the one, he ought not
to have conceald the other: but say that the incombustibility were a truth, and
the dove a poetical fiction; how is it possible, that this truth should be
only written by a Poet, and that the English should be so obdurate as not to
be affrighted at so great a wonder? if they were both Miracles, and that the
English concealed the one by stealing away her heart, they could not conceal
the other, since the dove flew away to the sky, in midst of flames, and in the
sight of all men; whereby her innocence, sanctity and martyrdom, the injustice
of her judges, and the infidelity of the English, spiritually blind to so
apparent a miracle might have clearly appeared to the World. Neither would
Varan have been the only relater hereof, for France, the whole World, and
England itself would in despite of her self have confessed it: for what
remains, that the Judges who condemned her, came all to an evil end, it might
be believed (suppose it were so) if a death according to humane appearance
happy, were an argument of a man's uprightness. The just would then have reason
to judge themselves more then all the Judges of the World, since amongst the
unjust (which are innumerable) few, or very seldom any come to apparent
punishment. But I am of opinion, that according to Christian piety, it would
be safer to believe, that as of good men there are more miserable then
fortunate, and of bad more fortunate then unfortunate, so God reserves to his
own good will, as well the reward as the punishment, changing the good and
evil of this World; with the good and evil of the World to come; our
judgments in this case, being oblique false and not belonging to us. The last
argument of her innocence, the most solid and hardest of all the rest to be
answered, is, that 26. years after when the English were driven out and
Charles established, she was declared innocent by a Comissioner deligated from
Calistus the third, but the Pope had nothing to do herein more then his
delegation; an ordinary title upon such occasions. Princes though delegated by
God are not always just, neither could the Popes assign them to that office,
but upon the place where the testimonials were to be examined: so as the
Archbishop of Rheims, and the Bishop of Paris Commissioners, and the Bishop of
Constance, who were joined with them are liable to the like oppositions by the
English, as were the Bishop of Beauvois, and his associates by the French.
These opposed, as having dependancy upon England, those as depending upon
France: the witnesses of her condemnation partial to Henry, the witnesses of
her absolution partial to Charles; she was condemned by those, who had
dependancy on the one, and absolved by those, who did depend upon the other,
and yet in a case so favored, as that none did oppose it (where the interest
of no third Person was treated off, and a Party being in question, to whom
France ought so much, as also Charles his right to that kingdom declarable by
the ablution of the condemned, as sent from God to this purpose) what was the
reason why (according to Giles) many of those that were cited, did not appear,
if it were not either, that they would not depose against their consciences, or
else were loath to offend the King by deposing the truth? the which being well
foreseen by the Commissioners, they failed not to add this clause in their
letters, to proceed notwithstanding the contumacy of such as being cited, would
not appear. Finally, if her innocence had been totally cleared by this
absolution; it was impossible, that any foreign pen much less those of
France, should have defamed her, but rather her pretended sanctity being
granted: her revelations, missionem predictions, apparitions of Spirits and
blessed Souls, her Canonization was not to have been pretermitted, which for
all this was neither procured nor thought upon by any one: for say, that all
these patchings were taken for things as clear as day; her change of habit,
her profession of Arms against Christians and Catholic Christians: Her
cruelty, her thirst after blood, her having served in an Inn, her fictions,
hypocrisy and dishonesty (though not true) were of too scandalous suspicion to
suffer her to pretend to be a Saint. Notwithstanding let her not want the
praise she did deserve. She was a brave and a valiant Amazone the restorer of
that Kingdom; and if she did not drive the English from thence, as she her
self had vaunted, she was if not the only, the chief, or at least one of
the chief causes why the English lost France.

They had resolved upon Henry's coronation, hoping for the like good effects as
upon the same occasion had ensued to his Comp^itor, not observing, that if this
were the essential reason of his advancements, they were notwithstanding
deceived: for there was a certain place appointed for the coronation and
circumstances not to be pretermitted, nor were they omitted by Charles in what
the condition of times would suffer him, that Rheimes was the place appointed
for this ceremony, that the oil brought by a dove from Saint Remigi^ (as they
write) was to be used in the anointing of the King; and that the inclination
of the people was to intervene, which Henry wanted. So as if he had been
crowned in Rheimes and anointed with the reputed heavenly oil, his fortune
was not thought to change, since it did not proceed from those extrinsicall
actions, but from humane affections after divine providence, which is the only
cause of our good or bad fortune; and which being inscrutable is not discovered
by any events, neither does it declare unto us whether we be worthy of love
or hatred; favors and disfavours from Heaven are by us interpreted a like
beneficial to us; for if we repute favors a sign of Gods grace, we account
his disfavours likewise as marks of his love, since he corrects and
chastneth those that he loves, then since we are certain of nothing more
then of our no^ deserving of good, and of our meriting of evil, we ought not
to grow proud in prosperity, nor to be cast down by adversity, but to receive
scourges with hope, and good fortune with fear, since we know not what may
thereby happen unto us, the which we see in Charles for being freed from his
foreign enemies, the enmity of his son threw him into an abyss of so many
jealousies and suspicions, as they brought him to die a death which no Prince
ever did; so as it rests in doubt whether his favors were divine graces, or
rather means to bring him to a miserable end; but however it was Henry went
from Roan toward Paris in November, followed by a great many Princes and
Lords, English, French and Gascons; the chief of the English were the two
Cardinals, of Winchester and York; the Dukes of Bedford, York and Norfolk,
the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, Oxford, Huntington, Ormond, Mortaigne and
Suffolk. Of French the Duke of Burgony, Lewis de Luxenburg, Cardinal and
Chancellor of the Kingdom; the Bishops of Beauvois and Noyon, first Peers of
France: the Bishop of Paris and others after him. Of Gascons Count
Longuerville, Count de March; Count Vademont of Lorraine and many others: He
was received and met with great pomp, no expenses spared for the
solemnization. He was crowned in the Church of Nostre-Dame on the seventeenth
day of October, the Cardinal of Winchester setting the Crown upon his head,
whereat the Bishop of Paris was much distasted, thinking that office had
belonged to him, to whom the Church and Diocese did belong; he returned with
a Crown on his head and a Scepter in his hand, another Crown and Scepter
being borne before him, in signification of the Kingdom of England. Chesnes
sets down the particularities which I omit, as not requisite to our story.

The business of War did not in this mean while lie idle, but was pursued by
both factions, with alternate Fortune; some good success this side had, and
some of no great consequence. Francis Suria^es called L' Aragonesa, suprised
Montargis, getting that by some little money, which those who had attempted it
before him, could not get by force. He with 2000. Crowns corrupted a woman
belonging to Mounsieur de Villiers Captain of the Town, by whose means he
made himself master thereof, and though not long after the town was re-taken
by Messieurs de Graville, and de Vitry, yet not being able after a siege of
five or six weeks, to take the Castle they went their ways, leaving the town
to 'its former possessors, who refortifying it, held it, till with it they lost
all that they held thereabouts. Mounsieur de Bousac Admiral of France being
come to Beauvois, with intention to make some impression in Normandy, was crossed
therein by the Earl of Arundell, who lying in ambush with 2300. men near to
the Castle, and having sent a choice troop of Horse even to the Palisadoes, to
set upon him behind; they were by him set upon with as much violence as
diligence, they retired making him believe that he had won the day, but
falling into the snare, and being after a long and gallant conflict defeated,
he with some few saved himself; amongst many others Saint Raigle was taken
prisoner, who was afterward changed for Talbot.

Renatus of Aniou, brother to Lovys the third Duke of Aniou, Count de Province,
and who by his pretensions to the Kingdom of Naples entitled himself King of
Sicilie, enjoyed the Duchy of Aniou, as Husband to Isabel daughter to Charles
the first Duke of Lorraine. Anthony Count Vademont, brother to Charles
pretended to the succession thereof; alleging that the inheritance fell not
upon women, whereupon the War began. Renatus was maintained by the French,
Anthony by Philip and the English. Renatus besieged Vademont, Anthony went to
succor it, strengthened by his assisters. Renatus leaving some to make good the
siege, went courageously to meet him; they fell together at Velleamant not
far from Nauci, the English having obtained that the Horsemen should fight on
foot, so as the Bowmen having routed the enemies Horse, they disordred all the
rest, and defeated them, killing 3000. of them, and taking 200. of them
prisoners: amongst the which the Bishop of Mets, and the Duke himself who was
sent to Bracones upon Salin, a strong Castle of Philips, whereby reason of the
negligence of his subjects, he was a long time captive, and delighting in
drawing of pictures. He painted upon the walls of his chamber a great many
wafer cakes, which in French are called Oublies, willing by that Hieroglyficke
to signify that he was forgotten by his own men; Oublier in French
signifying to forget. Those who were before Vademont, understanding by those
who had escaped that the battle was lost, and their Duke taken prisoner, rise
from before it, fearing to be set upon by the conquerors; and leaving all they
had behind them, fled away: but the besieged pursued them, slew and took many
of them, ransackt their Camp and returned home rich. To oppose this
prosperity, the Lord Willoughby, and Matthew Gough had besieged Saint Silleri,
a strong Castle in Aniou with 1500. men, Mounsieur de Lore was Governor
thereof, who was at the present absent, and hearing of the danger, gathered
forces to succor it. Chatier upon this occasion names Buil, and not Lore, and
says that he gave order to the Garrisons of the neighboring Forts,
particularly to those of Loval and Sable, that they should come at an appointed
time, who came to the villiage called Vivain, to expect him there where they
were set upon: but whether of the two it were, Willoughby being by his spies
advertised of their coming, prepared to set upon them, before that being
increased they might set upon him. He gave the charge hereof to Matthew Gough,
who went away by night with part of the 1500. He found them fast asleep in a
place they thought safe, without sentinells; they were wakened by slaughter,
and the beating down of their Pavillions, no safety being had but in flight,
but having driven them away, they fell themselves into the like carelessness:
for busying themselves in binding up their booty, and overtaken by the day, the
light discovered the weakness of their forces, so as the fugitives
re-assembling themselves, set upon them on the one side, whilst Lore coming up
unto them did set upon them on the other side. Gough and Lore were both taken
prisoners, but Lore was rescued by the death of 600. English; the French name
not the number of their slain, but that about 25. or 30. were taken prisoners,
and that Willoughby raising the siege, suffered in his reer-ward by the
besieged. Chartier makes no mention of Lore, as has been said, nor that the
English came by night, but that surprising the French as they were at dinner,
and they ^lew and took as many as they pleased of them; and that Buil and Lore
coming upon them they were defeated, and 1500. of them slain. A number
absolutely false, not so much for that the other writers mention 900. less, as
for that the whole number whereof they were but a part exceeded not 1500. But
though this loss were considerable, 'twas nothing in comparison of that of
Schartres, though not sealed by any English blood. Fourteen years were fully
past since this City had quitted Charles his obedience to side with Burgony,
never changing party. So as the obstinacy thereof made it not to pretend
remission, nor yet to hope for it by rebellion. The Garrison thereof was but
small, not exceeding 120. English, who relying upon the faith of the
Inhabitants, left the care of the custody of the town to them. One who was
servant to one of Charles his Financiers, was native of Schartres, who besides
other kindred had a brother there, who won his living by buying and selling
meat, carrying it in a Cart from one place to another, but because the Wars
hindered him from trafficking with Orleans a City near at hand, and which
imported his profit very much; he entreated his brother to procure him a safe
conduct, that he might go and come unmolested by those of the contrary side,
having obtained the safe conduct; he met his brother in Orleans, who offering
him great rewards, persuaded him to betray the City, as he did; for having
won the good will of those who kept the gate, by giving them victuals as he
past too and fro, he entreated them that being to return on Friday morning
with a load of fish, they would open the gates betime unto him, that the sun
might not spoil his ware, which they willingly promised to do. Without that
gate there was a Cellar which he had formerly hired, under pretense of keeping
his ware, wherein he had this night hidden a hundred Soldiers, he came with
his Cart about the break of day to the gate, calling to them to open unto him,
the gate being opened, those who were hidden in the Celler entered unexpectedly
with the Cart, slew the gate keepers, and made themthemselves masters of the
gate, giving a sign formerly agreed upon to the Bastard of Orleans, and
Mounsieur de Gaucourt, who were hard by with 3000. men, and presently came
thither. The English at the first noise hereof knew not what it was. When they
heard the enemy was within the City, knowing themselves to be but weak, they
saved themselves by the gate that opens upon Eureux. The chief of the
Inhabitants (amongst which was the Bishop a great sider with Burgony) certain
to be ruined, endeavored to die with their weapons in their hands. He was
slain upon the stairs of his Cathedral Church with 80. more; they took
between five and six hundred prisoners, computing those of the Clergy, who
were all ransomed, the City was treated as won by conquest, their goods were
taken away, their women ravished, and those put to death that had ruled for the
English. This loss was of great consequence, which being of inexorable enmity
with Charles, should have been more carefully looked unto.

They endeavored at the same time, though not with the same success, to
surprise the Castle of Roan. The Marishall Bousac had corrupted one Peter
Andebeefe, borne in Bearne, a Captain in the Castle promising to give him the
revenues thereof if he would undertake the enterprise, wherein Andebeefe
failed not for as much as in him lay, upon this hope came the Marishall to
Beauvois with Messieurs de Fontinees, Movy and Ioquet, followed by 600.
Soldiers, he imparted unto them his design, and finding them willing, he
took shelter in a wood, a league distant from Roan, sending a gentleman named
Richarville, who presented himself before the Castle with 120. Soldiers, in
all which Company there was not above four or five Horses; they were all by
Peter according to his promise brought in, two or three excepted, who stayed to
look to the Horses: having slain some sentinells, they won almost the whole
Castle, wherein was the Earl of Arundell, who fearing nothing was a sleep in
bed. The English who were in the places that were taken, were some of them
slain, the rest saving themselves by leaping over the walls into the City.
Richerville not able with these alone to win the whole, got on horseback to
cause the Marshall come along with the rest, but no persuasions could suffice
to persuade any of them, save some that were his friends, nay the booty (not
yet won) being in question and not agreed upon, they returned, leaving their
companions to the mercy of the sword. Richerville enraged, and knowing that by
his return, he could not assist his own men, but rather loose himself, went
along with the rest to Beauvois; this mean while those who had gotten in, did
what in them lay to make themselves masters of the field gate; but the English
in the defense thereof, did so long entertain them till the day appearing, the
ruin of the one and safeguard of the others were seen. Many of the English
out of the City entered the Castle, and together with them not a few of the
Inhabitants, to shun being thought conscious of the treason; so as the
assailants were forced to retire themselves into the greatest Tower, wherein
having found some victuals, they resolved to keep as long as the victuals
lasted. But having defended themselves against innumerable assaults, the Tower
being battered and damnified, they likewise having battered and done mischief
by artillery, which at their entrance thereinto they dragged after them, they
were enforced after twelve days manfull defense to surrender themselves upon
discretion. A rigorous inquisition being made 1500. Citizens were beheaded, and
Peter quartered, what became of the Soldiers that yielded, is not reported by
Monstrelet, who makes this relation; but however they deserved better fortune
and more faithful associates then the Avaritious cowards who had so shamefully
abandoned them; yet do not I believe that this was caused more out of
cowardice then out of improvidency, not having thought time enough, upon that
which they too late thought upon, to wit, that it was rashness to shut
themselves up without victuals or munition, in a place so near unto a great
City, which was not likely to lack people from so many neighboring
Garrisons; the which though granted I see not how they are excusable, for these
considerations ought to have been had before the exposing of so many valiant
men to death; for having exposed them thereunto, they should have run the
same hazard they did, it not being likely that such places wherein were
abundance of victuals and munition, had not where withal to defend
themselves, and live: and that if they had all entered together, they had not
made themselves masters of the Castle, since the sixth part of them had almost
totally won it. The field gate was to be by them made sure for their last
refuge, Beauvois being near at hand, and every small thing sufficient to have
made them capable of an honorable capitulation, in so much as a more shameful
act of Soldiers, not having been heard not read of, the Captains were worthy
of death and degradation, but this just and necessary discipline is not there
to be practiced, where the Princes condition is to flatter, not to command the
Soldiers, and where his weakness inforces him rather to cloak, then to
discover delinquents.

The miseries of these wars and the mortal hatred of these two nations had
been a cause of pity and scandal to the whole world; which thought it
impossible for them to subsist after so much suffering, death, and expenses.
England wearied with so many Subsidies (which are unwillingly granted when
businesses do not fadge) suffered yet much more through the loss of so many
brave men; one supply being the step unto another, the return uncertain and
the loss usual. France the seat of misery, scene of Tragedies, sepulcher of
Arms, unmanur'd, ruthful, impoverished; no less by the rapine of her own
men, then of enemies, made the school of inhumanitie: no sex, age, nor
Religion being exempt from injuries and cruelty; was in so deplorable a
condition, as that it was not to be succored but by miracle: and if by any
natural means, only by peace, the which Eugenius the fourth well observing
to discharge his duty, he resolved to try it. He dispatched away the Cardinal
Santa-croce about so holy a work; he came treated, but did nothing at his
first coming; both parties seemed to be well disposed; their words in
general were complementall, full of honest and good intentions; but those
which were in fact essential, were high in demands, resolute to keep what they
had, and obstinate in pretensions; so as perceiving he did but loose his time
(that he might not return home and do nothing) he concluded a Truce for six
years, which (according as was foretold) proved changeable and of short
continuance, the more needful France was of rest and quiet, the less prone
was she to suffer it. Monstrelet, Chesnes, and Dupleix say not, that it was
made with Henry, but with Philip; Polydore, Hallian and Serres affirm it to be
made with both Paulus, Aemilius, Chartier, Belleforest, and Giles do not at
all mention it.

The Cardinal of Winchester went by order from the King to allay some tumults
raised there under pretense of Religion by two seditious spirits, William
Mandeville and John Sharp, who endeavored to insinuate two things into men's
hearts, that the Clergy should possess nothing, and that the lay people should
by way of charity have all things common amongst them, a superfluous division,
the last article being sufficient; for that which was pretended from the one
was indifferently demanded of all, the direct way to introduce carelessness and
sloth amongst the people instead of Charity, and to punish Industry, virtue and
all good acts. They were severely punished, their extravagant and contagious
opinions ceasing with them. The Cardinal was to return to France with
provision of Soldiers and money, the truce not thought likely long to continue,
whereupon a Parliament being called the Duke of Gloucester took order for this
business, as likewise to the concluding a peace with the King of Scotland: who
being troubled with home dissentions had sent Ambassadors to demand it, for it
made little for his purpose to have war abroad and at home, whilst France as
he believed, had by means of this truce laid down arms. But I wonder that
Buchanan and Ascu make no mention at all hereof: The King and Regent were at
Roan, when the Cardinal came thither. Consultation was had what was to be
done, the soldiers expense in time of truce, as in time of war seemed
superfluous to some, the wisest amongst which the three Dukes, of Bedford,
York and Sommerset, did not only diswade from lessoning the Soldiers, but
would have their numbers increased, to the end that if a breach should happen,
as was expected they might have forces enough to end the enterprise, or at
least to make good what they had won; for the ordinary provision did not
resolve the war, but did only draw it out in length with danger of loosing
what they with so much expense of blood and coin had already won. But the
appearing good of sparing prevailed over the other more essential one, though
it was not afterward put in execution, the regulating of companies being
deferred till the truce was broken. The King this mean while went to Calais,
and from thence to England, where he was received with great solemnity and joy.

But the Soldiers sorry to live under the Laws of France, the Garrison of
Calais accustomed to pillage, mutinied, not alleging the want 1432.
of pillage for their cause (though it were so) but the small nesse of their
pay, not able to maintain them; the Regent hasted thither, and putting four
of the most seditious to death, cashiering and banishing some, and putting
others in their place, appeased the rest.

The Duchess his wife, sister to Philip was some months before dead, the
only preserver of that lukewarm intelligence, which after so many ill
satisfactions remained between them; so as going to Terrovane, he there
married the daughter of Peter de Luxenburg; Count Saint Paul, one who was no
great friend of Philips; this he did not giving Philip any account at all
thereof, increasing the former distasts by the little account he seemed to make
of him, since being his Ally and confederate, he had pretermitted those offices
with him, which among friends and Princes who are friends, use not upon like
occasion to be pretermitted; the last occasion save one of severing him wholly
from England. According to the opinion of the wisest, the truce in stead of six
years lasted but six months. Charles his people deprived of their pray and
accustomed to Rapine, could not live upon the air; the greatest and worst part
of them were handicrafts men, and country people, who wonted to the sword,
scorned to turn back to the Plow, Harrow and Pick-axe. The first beginnings
were pilferings and robberies, from whence they came to the taking of men, and
setting them to ransom; but this they did only with the Burgonians, till such
time as having taken free liberty, they shocked likewise against the English.
So as their insolences causing reprisalls, and those reprisalls incounters, so
as the War was as easily kindled again as are firebrands, which full of
vapor and smoke suck the flame unto them, the parties offended knew they
could not be righted but by arms, and that all appeals, as untimely refuges
would be ridiculous, so as interchangeably and with the liking, as I think of
both parties, they threw themselves upon all inconveniences. The French took S.
Valleri in the mouth of the River, some confining upon Normandy, a little
distant from Abbeville, seated on the other side of the River, and with
diversity of fortune made many attempts and conquests in Aniou and Maine.
Ambrogius de Lore being gone from St. Scelerin with 700. men passed over the
River Orne; he went toward Caen to surprise the Fair, which was held every
Saint Michaels day before S. Stevens Church in the fields; he divided his 700.
he kept a 100. Crossebowme^, and 50. Horse with himself, with the which he
placed himself between the Fair and Caen, to beat back those of the
Garrison, if they should sally forth to hinder his design. He sent the rest to
the place of business which succeeded luckily unto them, for the English
ignorant of what was done came not forth, and none being in the Fair but
buyers and sellers, they found no opposition; the booty was rich, with which
repassing over the Orne, he made a scrutiny of the prisoners, he detained such
as were ransomable, which were 800. and suffered the rest to depart home, which
were in number 2000.

The Regent seeing, that by the open breach of Truce, Laignes hindered the
commerce and victuals which were brought to Paris, sent the Earl of Arundel
to besiege it; he gave him 1200. soldiers, and for his companions the Earl
of Warwicks son, and Monsieur de Lilleadam who was Marishall of France for
Henry, but little good could be done; his forces were but few, and the place
was well provided for: so as having by Canon shot broken one of the Arches of
the bridge which crossed Marne, and burnt the Ravelin finding himself the
weaker in assaults, and the number of the besieged if not more, at least as
many as he, he raised the siedge, whereupon the Regent was forced to go
thither himself with 6000. men; he fortified himself in a great Park near
unto the Walls; he threw a bridge over the Marne. His Canon played where it was
requisite to make breaches for an assault: he to his loss assaulted the
place, which was defended by Guermede Fanculdus, and Reynald of Saint John, all
brave Gentlemen. He for all this slacked not his rain, but was resolved to
win it, if not by sword, by famine on the other side. Charles knowing how
much it imported, dispatched away a succor of 6000. men with great store of
victuals, under the conduct of the Bastard of Orleans. Monsieur de Rieux
Marishall of France, John Straigle brother to Potone, Stephen de Vignolles,
surnamed la Hira, Roderigo Villandras a Spaniard, Monsieur de Coulant Admiral
of France, and Gaucourt Governor of Daupheny: these Gentlemen made a proud
appearance at their first coming, the Regent kept himself within his
fortifications, not suffering any one to go forth; the next day, he sent to
offer them battle, they deny it; and say that being drawn forth to skirmish
many of the French were hurt, slain, and taken prisoners: amongst the which
John Straigle for one, but that the besieged sallying forth, and the English
fighting with them, the French set upon them behind, and defeated them, entering
the City with victuals: and that Bedford coming forth to hinder them, the
business was so intricate, as that the one knew not the other, in so much as
the heat being very great (it was on Saint Laurence his day) many being
suffocated in their armor, the Regent in all have was glad to save himself
within his Park, that Gaucourt entering the City the next day, and the other
Captains having made a bridge of boats over Marne, they passed over into the
Isle of France, and took many Forts there: so as the Duke fearing to loose
Paris by reason of the peoples bad inclination, raised the siedge in all have,
leaving his Engines, Provisions, and Pavillions behind him, and was pursued by
the besieged who slew a great number of his men, and took many prisoners,
returning back to the City rich in Arms and Horses. Dupleix more then the
rest, is pleased to add unto the good or bad according to his love or hatred;
says, that he rise as shamefully from before Laigni, as John de Luxenburg did
from before Compaigne; and that being valiantly assaulted by the Constable
Richmont, he readily passed over the River, and shut himself up in Paris. As
for Compaigne, judgment may be made by what is to be alleged, how equivocall
and full of malice the comparison is. For the Constable no man names him but
Chartier, who though a Writer that lived in those days, has as some that live
in these days his oppositors. And if he say, that Bedford did return to
Paris, he concludes not, that he shut himself up there, for to return, and
to shut one self up are too much differing terms. For what remains I mean
not to use the authority of any of the English Authors, though with all just
men, their authority ought to be as much credited as what the French say. I
allege Monstrelet as a neuter, though by Country, language, and faction he
be to be reputed French, his words are these; The Duke prepared to fight with
the French who came upon him, and that he might the better do it, he sent
for men out of other places that were under him. He then sent some of his
officers to signify to the French that he was ready to fight with them,
notwithstanding all their aids, if they would appoint a day for that purpose;
To the which they made no answer, save that with the grace of God they would
at their leisure, and when they should best think fitting, accomplish their
enterprise. And afterward describing his retreat to Paris, he says, he
afterward assembled his people, and marched to where the Frenchmen were, to
offer them battle once more, but their answer was as before, they had done
what they came for: The English do not deny, that he raised the siege,
fearing least otherwise he might lose Paris, but not driven away nor in
flight. They say he offered battle, which the French affirm not, nor will
suffer others to affirm it, that he continued his siege after the enemy was
gone; that he retired, not for that a fictious constable made him shamefully
pass over the Marne, but because the reason of War would have him so to do;
that he went to Paris to secure himself thereof, not to shut himself up,
that he defied the enemy the second time, that he failed not in the duty of a
good Soldier, and if he met with evil fortune so long as it was not through
cowardice (which is, that which Dupleix would insinuate) malice it self has
not where withal to defame him.

The ill success of Laigni was in some sort recompensed by the retaking of
Valery, which was not long before taken by the French; the opposers were Peter
de Luxenburg Count de Saint Paul; and the Lord Willoughby the Defendants
Messieurs de Voucourt de la Torre, and de Verseil. But after three weeks stout
defense, they yielded, their horses and baggage saved, the Town soon after
lost two thirds of her inhabitants, by reason of a contagious pestilence caused
by the corruption of the victuals they had eaten. This was the last of the
Count Saint Paul's actions. He dyed near to Blangi, when having set down his
time to be at the Chasteau de Monchas, and taken order for the siege of
Rembarres, he was seized upon by one of those indispositions which nature
sends us, when she pretends to claim from us what we owe her. His obsequies
were solemnized in the Metropolitan Cities of both the Kingdoms, as to the
Duke of Bedfords Father in Law. His son Lewis succeeded him both in title and
possessions; a young man, not then above 15. years old, who grown to riper
years, served for a witness, that cunning woven with infidelity and
dissimulation, has always been mortal: for having forsaken England, and
being by Charles the eleventh created Constable, he ended his life by the
Hangmans hand for having been unfaithful to him in his service.

The French failed not to do all the mischief they could. La Hire accompanied
by many Gentlemen, and by 1500. Soldiers took Sum, and therein a great
number of Prisoners, by whose ransoms the Soldiers did better maintain
themselves, than by their pay. He afterward divided them, and sent part of
them into the Country of Cambrey, where they assailed Haspre, a great concourse
of people being come thither by reason of free feast.

They set upon it at unawares, and took some Prisoners, affording leisure for
such as were of better condition to save themselves within a great and strong
Tower, so as having sacked the Town, burned the Church, and Abbey, and many
Houses; they retired to Mount Saint Martin, where la Hire expected them; who
having this mean while burned Beaurevoire, and la Motta a house of pleasure,
belonging to the Countess de Laigni being reunited to them, did infinite
mischief in the Country, not meeting with any opposition; as he before so
resaw he should not, for John de Luxenburgh Count de Laigni, and Count S. Paul
his nephew, being diverted from those affairs, by reason of the old Count
Peter his Brother, there was none other, that could withstand him, in so much
as having scoured the Champion, burnt Houses, and made great booty; he went to
Laon to divide the prey, all his men returning rich unto their Garrisons, and
not one man of them lost. Paunesach a Captain of Laon paid for these losses:
for being one that did emulate or rather envy the others good fortune, he
phancied unto himself the like success. He went toward Marle with 400.
Soldiers, intending to surprise Vervins, which belonged to Giovanna de Bar,
daughter in law to the above named John de Luxenburg; but as soon as he had
begun to set fire on the suburbs of Marle near unto Vervins; John came up unto
him, (who upon the first advertisement came, together with his nephew) with all
possible speed to interrupt him, and gave him battle. Monstrelet says, that
John did wonders in his own Person, that he alone would have been able to
have beaten the enemy, had they been more in number, then they were. He slew
about 160. of them, took 80. of them prisoners, the greatest part whereof were
hanged the next day: and to flesh his nephew, he made him kill some of them;
the which he did with such dexterity, and took such delight in embruing his
hands in blood, as he gave open testimony of his natural bad inclination; a
cruel custom, and not to be practiced. We are naturally too apt to do
evil, though some are of an opinion, that a Soldier cannot be a perfect
warrier, unless he be perfectly cruel. Others attribute this work to
Willoughby and Kerill, sent by the Regent as soon as he heard the French had
entered the upper Burgony, that it was they that slew the 160. recovering those
places to Philip, which he had formerly lost.

At this time the Lord Talbot was returned from England with 800. men, and
having taken the way of Roan to go to Paris, he by the way set upon Ioyng, a
Castle seated between Beauvois and Giz^, he destroyed it, and hanged up the
Inhabitants. Being come to Paris, his army was increased by some troops,
commanded by the Marishall de Lilliadam, and Monsieur d'Orveille, where withal
he took and raised Beaumont upon the Oyse. By composition, he recovered the
City and Castle of Creil, held by Amadore de Vignelles. Pont Saint Massens,
Nonaville, and Casaresse, yielded unto him, he took by force the City of
Crespi in Valois, and recovered Cleremont which was formerly taken by the
enemies. He thought to have assayed Beauvois, but finding it in a condition
not to be enforced. With so few numbers, he returned with great booty to
Paris. In pursuit of this good fortune, the Earl of Arundel went to besiege
Bommolins, which being surrendered, he destroyed. He went to Orle in the
County of Main, and playing upon it with his Canon, he had it upon
composition. But being gone toward Saint Selerine, Monsieur de Lore believing
that he came to charge him, came forth into the field, and surprised him;
Giles says, that he slew about 80. or 100. of his men, and made the rest
run away, being for the space of an hour Master of the Artillery, victuals
and tents; but that the English making head again, did again charge upon
them, though he returned with 80. horse and many prisoners: The English say,
that being set upon at unawares, they gave back about a bow-shoot, that being
encouraged by the Earl, they slew a great many of them, and enforced the rest
to save themselves within the City; Disagreements which will not permit
judgment to be passed upon the business. And yet as it seems to me Giles
himself does explain it, for if the French were Masters of the artillery,
baggage and tents for an hour; the permitting them to be taken from them,
makes it clear unto us, that they who took them last had the advantage; the
remainder resting doubtful, whether they retreated or fled, with the booty of
horses and prisoners, as Giles reports, or rather whether their only gain was
the safeguard of themselves. He, and Hallian do both report that about 12000.
of the English besieged the City of Louviers, wherein were the two brothers la
Hire and Amadore de Vignolles, Florence d'Illiers, Ghirard de la Paliera and
many others, who all did valiantly defend themselves, but not able to withstand
so great a number, they yielded the City, and the Walls thereof were thrown
down. They name not the main who did command in chief in this great number
of men, whilst in the like, and in actions of lesser consequence they omit not
the name of any one particular Captain, for since they would have the Earl of
Arundell to be routed, if they should name him here, they would call in
question the first defeat. The English say, that it was he who besieged
Louviers, and that it was yielded unto him without the striking of a blow, that
it was in his return to Saint Selerin, that he had so powerful an army;
Louviers being fallen into his hands, when he had only his first ordinary
forces. That he besieged Saint Selerin for three Months together, at the end
whereof he took it by force, and therein took Monsieur de Lore's sons
prisoners, and slew John d' Armagne, William de Saint Aubin, both of them
Captains, and 800. of the garrison; Giles and Hallian confess the three
Months siege, and the assault wherein the two Captains were taken, but in
stead of saying it was taken, they say it was like to be taken, and that the
besieged, not being succored, were enforced to surrender the Town, to receive
safe conduct, and to march away on foot, not carrying any thing along with
them, Chartier, Goguinus, and Dupleix say, that he took it, and Serres, that
he took it by force; so as if the English Writers needed to prove the truth
of what they say, it would be made good by the contradiction of their
adversaries: from hence the Earl went to the siege of Silli, which is by them
related with like inequality. Giles says, that the captain thereof articled
to surrender up the place, in case that he were not succored, or that the
Earl were not fought withal within 15. days, and that hereupon, he gave him
ostages. That the Duke d' Alanson, Charles d' Aniou, the Count de Richmont, the
Marishall of France, Messieurs de Lokhac, and Graville, who at the importunity
of Monsieur de Lore had gathered a great army to succor Saint Selerin, made
use thereof to succor Silly: that the English went to meet them, that the
French came to a little village called Lonvell, and were only parted from the
enemy by a little River; that great skirmishes were there made; that finding
them to be in an advantageous place, they would not set upon them; that about
evening, they sent word by a Herald to the Earl of Arundel, that he should
either come forth to battle, or else give back his hostages, the which being
received; they departed, and that the English seeing themselves free, returned
too before Silli, and took it by a fierce assault. The rest differ not from
him; but add, that in their Articles the besieged specified, that the English
should quarter themselves near such an Elm and fight there, that whereunto
the besieged were obliged (according to Giles) was, to surrender themselves if
the Town were not succored, or the English fought withal, neither of both
which ensued. To fight belonged to the French, for they were to free the Town:
The English were to keep from fighting if they could, and to inhibite succor;
so as the French not able to do the one, should have tried the other, which
they did not. That the Earl of Arundel should give up the hostages, was a
piece of obedience not to be believed: for since they could not fight with him,
they could not force him in this point; that they should depart having received
the hostages, without putting them into Silli, or succouring the Town, argues
either simplicity (which was not likely to be in such personages) or want of
strength, and is not sufficient to excuse their retreat; for say that the
Earl had delivered up his hostages, the more reason had they had to have kept
the field, to show themselves masters thereof, and to have seen the enemy
first gone, that they might have secured the town: for what concerns the
Elm, the besieged may by agreement prefix the day of succor, but not the
place of combat; for that were to teach him what to do who was to hinder
their being succored, whose advantage it was to work his ends without danger,
or bloodshed. Two armies equally resolved to fight, may appoint a time and
place that they may know where to meet, not out of any advantage; but such
appointments happen not between besiegers and besieged, for the besieged have
only two things to look unto; necessity which enforces them, and reputation
which makes them do their utmost endeavor; which when they have satisfied;
their being, or not being succored, belongs no more to them, since by yielding
they are freed from necessity, and it is not likely that the besiegers together
with the prolongation of time (which was much to their disadvantage) would
accept of a disadvantagious place, whereby to be cut in pieces. But this
invention is like to that of the Duke of Orleans, which has been spoken of,
who being taken prisoner in the battle of Aincourt, where there neither was
necessity, reason, nor yet time for capitulation: those who were besieged in
Orleans did notwithstanding allege, that by express agreement, his
territories were to be exempted from the damage of war, during his
imprisonment, whilst no such condition complies with the nature of war, nor
can be witnessed by any president. The English say, that when the succor
appeared (the term whereof was not 15. but 30. days) they of their own
accord delivered up the hostages to those of Silli, according to their
Articles; that they stood in face of the enemy, without any skirmishing, or any
show of battle, that the French departed by night, as if afraid: whereupon
Silli surrendered it self according to promise without assault or blood. The
Earl ended these his proceedings with the taking of Millay, and Saint Laurence
de Mortiers, so as having in hostile manner succored the country of Main, he
retired, sending his men to their wonted Garrisons.

Not long after a good part of the lower Normandy rise in insurrection against
the English; a fire as easily extinguished as it was lightly kindled: They were
all countrymen, inhabitants upon the coast of that sea, a Monstrous body, a
beast of few arms, all head, under the conduct of the Marishall de Rochefort,
Walter de Brusack, and Charles de Mares (who came with some troops of horse to
sustain them) they took Diepe, Fescampe, Harfleur, Monstrevillier,
Tancherville, and all the country of Caux, except Arques and Candebec. But
going afterward themselves alone toward Caen, to encourage and incite the
malcontents; The Dukes of Sommerset and York who commanded that Province,
dispatched away the Earl of Arundell, and the Lord Willoughby with 6000.
bowmen, and 1300. horse to take order with them. The Earl who had notice which
way they went, sent Willoughby with part of the troops before, to light upon
them in the way, not fearing their numbers, and hoping that the condition of an
ill guided rabble, would win him the day, as it did: for Willoughby lying in
Ambush, as soon as they appeared, he set upon them, having formerly agreed
upon a sign with the Earl, so as being set upon before and behind, they threw
away their arms, and cried for pardon; the Earl moved to compassion, forbad
the killing of them; yet could he not so readily be obeyed, but that about
1000. of them were slain. The heads of the insurrection were detained, and
afterward severely punished; the rest were suffered to return to their own
homes, having to their cost learned the difference between the handling of the
Mattocke and the Sword; the conquest of the forenamed places was not of long
continuance after this; for the Commanders who were therein left, being of this
summy multitude, behaved themselves so insolently, as that the country
revolted from them, and by reason of their rustique tyranny recalled the
English; so as this threatening storm was soon blown over.

John de Bressay Lieutenant to the Marshall de Rieux, had taken the Fort of
Rue, a loss of great consequence to the English, the country lying thereby
open to incursions; even to Estaples and Monstrolle; which caused the Duke to
commit the recovery thereof to the said Earl, who with 800. men undertook
this enterprise; but being come to Gourney he altered his resolution: An old
Fort called Gerberoy was seated between Gournay and Beauvois, dismantled and
ruinated a little before. And because the situation thereof was convenient to
suppress the enemies incursions into the country of Beauvois, La Hire had
order for the rebuilding of it. The Earl not thinking that in so short a space
it could be in any condition of defense, for he thought to ruinate it in the
beginning of its being reedified, before that being built and fortified it
might be the harder to be won. He thought suddenly to have dispatched the
business, not knowing that La Hire was there in person with a great many
soldiers, so as leaving his foot behind him, which followed him at leisure,
he advanced with his horse which were not above 500. La Hire seeing him
appear with so few horse, and those wearied, resolved to set upon him, before
his bowmen should come up unto him. And to make the Earl the more confident,
he sent forth 50. horse, as if there had been no more in the Castle. The
Earl sent Sir Ralph Standish with 100. horse to encounter them, who had hardly
begun the skirmish, when the rest that were within the Castle sallyed forth,
slew him and his companions, and without any interposition of time set upon the
Earl, who, as he was manfully fighting, was defeated by a Culverin, which
being shot among the thickest of his men, swept away a great many of them, and
at the second shot, broke the Earls leg above his ankle, who in a swound
fell from his horse, and was taken prisoner with Woodville and a hundred other
horse. Two hundred were slain, the rest saved themselves by flight. The Earl
was carried to Beauvois, where within a few days he died. His loss was as
much bewailed as his valor (had he lived) was full of expectation and hope.

He was the fifth Earl of Arundell, of the noble house of Fitsallen. Six
others of the same succeeded him, the last of which was Henry, who dying
without heirs male, the Earldom and the title fell upon Philip Howard,
eldest son to Thomas Duke of Northfolke, and Mary his wife, daughter to the
said Henry. This Thomas was father to the now present Earl of Arundell, Earl
Marshall of England, who married the Lady Alithea, daughter to Gilbert Lord
Talbot, Earl of Shrewesbury, lineally descended from John lord Talbot, of whom
we have spoken in this our story. I was willing to ^ist upon this particular
here, which I desire may not be imputed to me as a superfluous digression, but
rather to the gratitude which from me and all Italy is due unto them both.

Ten years were past since the battle of Aiencourt, where and since when,
the Duke of Bourbon was prisoner in England, when having paid his ransom of
18000. pounds sterlin, the very day destinied for his return, he was seized
upon by his last infirmity, which brought him to his grave, dying a free man,
after having lived so long a captive.

The confederacy, friendship and affinity of the two Couzins Bedford and
Burgony, were come to the period of their dissolution, not so much for the
death of the ones wife, the others sister, as for that the distasts caused by
diverse passages between them had afforded field-roome to such as desired a
breach between them, to whisper such tales in both their ears, as being
supposed to be spoken in the prejudice of each other, could by neither of them
be taken in good part, but with a great resentment of their honors; an Idol
which amongst imaginary deities (especially between Princes) is the most
supreme, though as too suspitiously false, sometimes with much loss too much
idolatrised, friends enterposed themselves, but 'twas not sufficient; the
gangrened sores of their souls were not to be cured by Lenities. A meeting
between them was treated of, out of hopes that by an enterview and speech
together, they might come to understand one another mind, better then by
reports, 'twas obtained; Saint Omers was named and agreed upon for the place. A
place which belonging to Philip redounded to his honor, since Bedford went to
him, not he to Bedford. Bedford came thither first, whilst Philip being in his
own dominion, and his own house should have been there, to have met and
welcomed him. But he was so far from doing this, that though he came last,
he pretended to be the first visited. Perhaps a just pretension in a neutrall
place, he being the last commer thither. For as for other respects which give
precedence to Princes, there goes not much difficulty to the deciding of the
question. Bedford had two which argue for his precedence, the one casual and
but for a time; the other borne with him, and whereof he could not be bereft.
His regency of France was that which was casual, and therefore I build not
upon it, as well for that Philip might have been regent if he had so pleased;
(though what might have been, gives place to what is) as likewise, for that
France held it an unjust, usurped dignity; though he ought not to esteem it
so who held Henry for King of France, for that that was borne with him, and
whereof he could not be bereft: Bedford was the Son, Brother, and Uncle of
a King. And took these prerogatives from him (superior without question to
any thing, that Philip could allege) they were in their genealogies equal.
For if John King of France were great Grandfather to Philip, Edward the third
King of England was the like to Bedford, and if any difference be made
between the Princes of the blood in France, and the Princes of the blood in
England, (where there is no such title by Law, the former being privileged by
the pretended Salique Law, the latter not, since women do succeed) it is a
reason whereof Philip ought make no use, since that Law was by him broken, and
so much the less against Bedford, as that if Henry should dye without heirs,
he was the next presumed heir to the Crown. In titles they were alike, in
sovereignty and peculiar power Philip was before him. But if sovereignty were
ever to precede, there are little sovereign Lords, and no Princes, who should
take place of great Princes who are no sovereign Lords: and power which
contributes advantage, does nor contribute degrees of dignity. But let all be
granted, civility will not permit the affecting of the best place in a man's
own house, but rather wills that it be given always to our equals, yea
sometimes to our inferiors. To end this difference Philip propounded, that the
business might be discust by third persons, which Bedford would not
condescend unto, so as parting without the sight of one another, their
friendship was broken, and all memorials of their former affinity were
cancelled, wherein if the English lost all, he got not much, for one would
think, that in the fall of this great tree, he should have seized upon one of
the greatest boughs for himself, the which if he had not formerly done, the
fault was his, since he by their assistance (which did divert those who might
have troubled him) obtained territories elsewhere; to the unjust and violent
possession whereof (I mean Hannault, Holland, Zeland, and Frisland) he had
never come (their natural Princes being alive) if France had been at liberty.
He had sundry times given fast signs of this his bad inclination, especially
when (notwithstanding the heat of war) he was contented, that his brother
in law the Count de Richmont, should receive the sword of Constableship, and
that Charles de Bourbon (the now Duke, a great sider with King Charles, and an
implacable enemy of the English) should marry his sister Agnis, powerful
means for the accommodation, which his delays did not cut off, but defer.
He had thus two strings to his bow. Moreover when the council of Basil had
sent the Cardinals of Cyprus and Arles, to exhort the two Kings to peace, he
resolved to do it himself alone, the forenamed Cardinals and the Archbishop
of Rheims Chancellor of France for Charles, being gone to Nevers to speak
with him about this, where it was resolved that the general treaty should be
held at Arras. Likewise in the heat of this treaty the Bastard of Orleans
would not have adventured to have taken Saint Denis, neither would Charles have
sent him his assent from Tours, where he then was, whilst he desiring nothing
more then to pacify Philip, had feared to displease him, and though some of
Philips men went afterward to the recovery of Saint Denis, yet it behooved him
so to dissemble the business, but the injustice of the one does not make good
the others fault. Philip played his part excellently well, he wrought things
according to his own inclination and proper interest, and whilst he did wrong
unto others, did none unto himself. Bedford played his part very ill, he
followed his own inclination, but not his interest, and walking in the path of
reason, was unjust unto his King, unto himself, and unto the cause. His duty
had been to have contented Philip, though he had no reason for it,
dissimulation is requisite in him who pretends to reign. All punctuallities
are vain if unusefull, and foolish if harmefull. He was deceived in presuming
he could do that when he should have him his enemy, which all the while he
could not do when he was his friend; for though whilst his friend he helped
him but a little, (being busied about his own affairs) yet when he turned
enemy, he harmed him sufficiently. Humane means are more able to do hurt
then good. Facilis descensus averni, (says the Poet) the descent to hell is
easy, the gates thereof stand wide open day and night, all the difficulty is
in getting out again. The Remora, a small Fish does stop a ship though under
full sail. Phillip being both a Remora and a Whale, could much more easily
stop the course of this ship (partly interrupted before) and sink it as he
did. A good opinion of ones own strength if it be not matched with the
undervaluing of another is commendable, and assists in enterprises, but where
despisall enters, there enters presumption which does subvert it. If Bedford
erred not in this, all the evils which did derive from thence, ensued contrary
to all rules.

The Bastard of Orleans had intelligence in Saint Denis with one Regnauld de
St. John, a Gentleman borne in the Isle of France, who gave him notice how he
might surprise it. Whereupon he sent Captain Deinville with sufficient troops
thither, who scaled the walls by night and made himself master of it. A
purchase of such consequence (as being upon the very gates of Paris) as it
invited both sides, the one to keep it, the other to recover it. The Bastard
as soon as he was advertised of this, hasted thither together with the
Marshall Rochford; but finding the Marshall Rieux there, and being certain
that the English would not fail to besiege it, he left him there, and went
himself to raise men to succor it. Monsieur de Flani, Governor of Campaigne
being come up unto him, with those of the County of Valois, to divert the
enemy, he took Howdan, Pont de St. Mesense, and Meulan; losses which were not
sufficient to fetch the English thither; who having laid siege to St. Denis,
under the command of the Lord Talbot, accompanied by Monsieur de Lilliadam and
others. The Constable, the Count D^voise, Monsieur de Loheac, the Bastard of
Bourbon, Chabannes, Illiers, Terms, La Palliere, Mascaron, Biull, who had all
joined themselves together to this purpose, durst not set upon him; so as
Marshall de Rieux, (after having lost Renauld de St. John, who had betrayed the
town, and Dianegius de Vaucourt, who were both slain, and those upon whom he
did most rely) was enforced to yield up the town, upon honorable conditions.
The walls of the town were beaten down, unless it were on the side next the
Abbey, the Tower de Veneno being kept in its former being, under the custody of
Simon de Morior, son to the Provost of Paris, with a proportionable number of
English Soldiers under him.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND IN THE LIFE OF HENRY THE SIXTH.
THe commonly embraced opinion, that the World grows every day worse and
worse, is prooved false, in that evils have the same vicessitude amongst men,
as has the Summer and Winter amongst seasons; with this difference
notwithstanding, that whereas the seasons of the year are regulated by the
certain course of the Sun, to the end that we may be prepared to receive
the benefits thereof, the course of evils is uncertain, to the end that being
taken unawares, we may receive the mischief thereof: the former ordained by
divine providence for our conservation, the latter destined by heavens justice,
for our punishment, wars, and peace, health and diseases, turbulent and quiet
Spirits, have been in all times so, as who will examine history will find,
that there is no evil in these present times, which has not been in former
ages; The distinction of ages ciphered forth by the difference of gold and
other metals are Pocticall inventions, mere dreams, there is no common wealth
which had not sundry times experimented this, who corrupts good government,
the Author of the golden age falls not into the lowest station of degrees, but
head long tumbling from gold to lead without passage through the intermediums
of silver and iron: Murder was found between the first Brothers, whilst the
World was yet in it swaddling clout's, rapes, whoredom's incest's, and other
worser sins, did with the swiftest motion glyde into such as descended from
them: they were not borne, with us we derive them from them. Wars,
insolences, and oppressions, did with the swiftest motion pass to the last of
ages from the first, so as the World if not in substance, may yet by accident
be said to be better, for being more equally divided, and the ways of offense
and defense grown general, it falls out, that the progress of violence waxing
slower, some are quiet for that they know not how to disquiet others, otherwise
second Nimrods would not be wanting to succeed the first to the prejudice of
mortals, the goulden age cannot be granted, unless you will allow of
natural original justice, which (at least according to holy writ) was never
found in any age, for this cause was it that civil constitutions were
invented, discipline advanced, and commerce established, to the end that people
being kept in awe by the laws, for fear of punishment, men's minds amended by
the use of arts and sciences for the love of virtue, and allured to concord by
reason of the commodity of traffic: Our age might rather be thought the age
of gold then the formerly pretended; since there are no more vices now, then
have been heretofore, and the extraordinary violences of those former times
do cease, ordinary ones not being to be taken away, no more then are men's
affections, for that nature cannot be withstood, and man is in the first rank
of fierce creatures, composed of senses and inclinations little less then like
to them: and yet more harmefull, did not reason the mother of virtue prevail
in some of them, and fear the moderator of vices refrain the most of them.

The Kingdom of France was by the universal consent of all, fallen into the
iron age, and England though she had the active part, yet the subject whereon
she had to work being hard and apt to resist, made her subject to
repercussions, so as by doing mischief, she mischieved her self, whilst
fortune uncertain in her windeings, did by apparent dangers render the event
ambiguous, to fight upon an others ground, was the advantage of the one, to
fight favored by the people the advantage of the other, their disadvantages
were equally divided, the one and the other did reciprocal damages, so as the
Christian looker on could not but pity them, and fervently desire peace
between them.

Pope Eugenius the sixth, was he who did most of all desire this, it behooved
him to endeavor it, the title of universal Father, and 1435.
the affairs of Christendom enforced him to it, for Christendom could hardly
evade the ruin threatened her by the Turks, who having envaded Europe in the
year 1363. after having taken Philippopolis Philippopolis, Andrenopolis.
Serviae, Bulgaria, Vallatchia. Di. Bittinia in Thracia. Di. Brusia in
Andrinopoli.
and Andrenopolis in a few years had made themselves Masters of Servia,
Bulgaria, Valacchia, and little less then all Slavonia, and in the year 1412.
Mahomet first having transported the regal seat from Brusia in Britinnia to
Andrenopolis in Thracia conquered Macedonia and extended his empire even to the
Ionique Sea: he left it to Ammurath the first with the same design of the
conquest of Christendom a thing easily conceaved by a proud heart and not
impossible to be effected by a warlike Prince, whose power and fortune
corresponding, it was not easily discerned whether were greater in him, and to
those who apprehended the danger they were a like terrifying, whereupon the
Pope not knowing how to withstand them, but by uniting the Christian Princes,
he sent the Cardinal Santa Croce to procure the agreement in the assembly,
which was appointed at Arra's, the Council assembled together at Bazill, did
the like by the Cardinal Cyprus accompanied by many Prelates; England sent
thither the Cardinal of Winchester, the Archbishops of York, the Earls of
Huntington and Suffolk, the Bishops of Norwich St. David and Lisieux: France
the Duke of Burbone, the Constable, the Count Vandosme, the Archbishop of
Rheimes, and many other of the Counsel: The Emperor, the Kings of Cyprus,
Portugal, Castaile, Scicily, Navarre, Polonia, Denmark, and the Dukes of
Brittany and Savoy, sent thither their Ambassadors, though unrequested on
Henry's behalf, the soveraigntie of France was demanded on Charles, that Henry
should renounce the title of the King of France, and that he should possess
Normandy, and whatsoever he did possess at the present in Guienne but this
with homage, and under the sovereignty of Charles, and the Crown of France;
the just opposite to which each of them did pretend, so as the two Cardinals
perceiving no means how to agree them, nor how to make them lay down their
Arms: The English Ambassadors departed, but Philip made an agreement, being
come thither to that purpose, and the French with resolution of giving him
content; the articles were what satisfaction Charles should give, for the death
of John Duke of Burgundy. They conceived words that he should say in his
excuse, punishments for as many as were thereof guilty, and present banishment
for the absent, either sort of them to be named by Philip, a Church to be built
in Monberea, and a Charter house with annual means befitting the Church and
vestry, and livelihood for twelve Monks and a superior, 50000. Alavenente 3.
Crowns for the jewels that were taken away from the dead Duke, and a
reservation for Philip to recover the rest which were not named, more
particularly the fleece esteemed of a great value then followed the articles of
such places as were to be delivered up unto him, the Counties of Maseon
Xaintonge in inheritance to him and those who Mascone.
should descend from him, whether male or female, together with all the
appurtenances thereunto belonging, jurisdictions, prerogatives, patronages by
Law; nominating of offices, taxes, Magazines of salt, Impatronato La
Castellania.
and other things of like nature. The City of Auxerres, and the precincts
thereof, with all the abovesaid preheminences, the jurisdiction of Bar upon
the Seine, together with the City Castle, and all thereunto belonged, the Law
patronage of the Church and Abbey of Luexeule; pretended unto but never
possessed by the Dukes of Burgondy, Peronia, Mondedier, Rom, and all Cities on
either side the Soane, Saint Quintine, Corbie, Amiens, Abbeville; the county of
Pontian, Dourlens San Requior Creuxcore, Arleux Montague, and all the other
places belonging as properly to the Crown of France, as those pretended unto
by the Emperor in Artois and Hamault. Charles reserving nothing to himself
but homage and soverainty with this condition, that all that were named with
Perone, and after Perone should be understood as ransomable for 400000.
Crowns, which was afterward in the time of Lewis the eleventh one of the
causes of his distaste with Duke Charles, who was son to Philip, and did
succeed him: To these were added the counties of Guiennes, Bolognia, and
Burgony for him and his heirs male, free from fealty, homage, or service; the
like was to be understood of all the other towns of importance of the crown,
which for the present or for the time to come, were to fall to him by
inheritance, or succession during his life, after which the soveraigntie should
return unto the King, and their subjection unto his heir, according to the
several nature of their entailers: And in case the English should wage war
with him, Charles was obliged to assist him by sea and land, as in his own
particular cause, nor was he to make peace with them, unless he therein
comprehended him; and that if Charles should break this agreement, his
subjects should not be bound to obey him, but being freed from all oaths,
they should obey and serve him against Charles himself. Lastly, that Charles
Count Caralois son to Philip should marry Katherine King Charles his third
daughter, and have with her in portion 120000. crowns, a marriage which was
not consummated till about four years after, by reason of both their tender
years, for when she died, eleven years after this leaving no children behind
her, she was not above eighteen years old. This was the rate which Charles
bought Philips friendship, a bargain very advantageous to him, notwithstanding
all 'its disadvantages, for his friendship was not to be bought at too great a
rate, since being freed from the English and his kingdom restored; his son
Lewis recovered what he with an opportune incommodity had alienated, the which
if the English had in any sort imitated, they had not lost France, for Philip
was their only Pillar whereupon their Fabric was to rely, but trusting more
upon their own forces then was convenient, and being more jealous of him then
they ought to have been, they seconded their hatred, whilst anger harmefull in
government, for want of requisite dissimulation, causes irreperable ruin,
wherein if any one shall think that I contradict my self, since I have
elsewhere been of another opinion, he will be of another mind, if he
consider when I treated thereof, it was touching the legallity thereof, where
now it is touching the expediency by which humane actions ought chiefly to be
regulated.

Philip sent a King at Arms to give an account of this peace in England,
changing the wonted style in his letter which he sent to Henry, for whereas
before he styled the King of France and England his Lord and master, in these
he termed him only King of England, his welbeloved Cousin. The contents
thereof was, that being overcome by entreaties of the Pope, of the Fathers of
the Counsel of Bazille, and of all the Princes of Christendom, he had made
peace with Charles to shun the being thought cruel and implacable, he desired
him likewise to do the like, to the end he might be numbered amongst the authors
of public tranquillity, offering to serve him therein. The Ambassador was
not permitted to see the King, but sent back without any letters, what could
be said to the greatest enemy, was said to him by word of mouth; wherein they
forbeared not to call Philip perjured traitor, and this news being divulged
in the City, the people not able to revenge themselves of Philip, vented their
fury upon his subjects, who for traffic sake had their abodes in London, they
slew many of them, and would have slain them all, had not the Kings
Proclamations withheld them. But those who were most rational and who had not
imbrued their hands in the blood of these innocents, accused by Philip of
hypocrisy in that he made a scruple to make the peace, as having sworn to
obey Henry as his King, but yet did it when he had received absolution from the
Legate, which was a tacit kind of judgment, which ought not to be made when
both parties are not heard. An oath is not subject to absolution, if there be
nothing of evil therein, no evil was in his oath since Henry was not
declared, nor was not to be declared an usurper, save by the real evidence of
a Salique Law. They did not accuse the Legates authority but his act, the which
though it were excusable, the end thereof being good, yet give it for granted,
that the evil thereof were pardonable, in respect of the good that was thence
expected, what good was there to be hoped for, whilst the Swords of such
Princes were yet wreaking with blood; for France and Burgondy being accorded,
and England excluded out of the agreement, she was thereby endangered as
inferior in Forces, in other too lately united to her destructions. But none
understood this business better then Philip, nor did better make it conduce to
his own ends; for being scandalized with his fathers death, he sided with the
English; violated the pretended salique Law, bereft Charles of his Crown and
Inheritance and gave it to England, hoping that the government should be
conditional in her, absolute in him; and if it be said, that if he had had any
such design, he would not have refused the Regency when it was offered him. I
answer that he refused it out of singular wisdom, for that being come newly
to his estate, and finding the people of Flanders contumatious he would have
increased their forwardness by living far from them; besides the danger that
his command was likely either to cause a breach between him and the English,
who would not be satisfied with his superiority, or else coolness in the
administration of succor, which would not fall out under the authority of one
of their own Princes of fortune; for that distracted by the regency of France,
he could not have made those accusations which he did, finding himself
afterward deceived in his first hopes, that the English would have been
governed at his pleasure, (Bedford having always commanded by his own
particular authority) and having so far revenged himself of Charles as that
his anger grew now to be somewhat appeased, distasted by Bedford, and grown
greater elsewhere; he changed his purpose, he chose that King which he had
rejected, and rejected that King which he had chosen: So as after the death of
300000. men who all dyed in this quarrel, after the destruction of so many
Cities, he made peace gaining thereby that which he could never have pretended
to, much less have had from the English, one only thing did not succeed unto
him, neither did it much import him, that as by the degrading of Charles and
promoting of Henry the fifth, he added nothing to the claim of England (whose
pretensions were not grounded upon such foundations) so by revoking what he
had done, and gainesaying himself, he brought no prejudice at all thereunto
for what remains: he was a Prince worthy of the Cognomen that was given him of
God; if you will pardon this present affair and that of his cosen Giacholina
Countess of Bavaria, Philip did like unto Rivers overgorged with rain, which
when floods of waters cease return to their former channel, when his desire
of revenge ceased he forsook the English, and returned unto his own proper
nation and blood, and as he might have done better had he not violated his
plighted faith, so if he had not plighted it, his virtue had been the greater;
but to commit errors being a thing common, since there is none that does not
do amiss, not to out do others in mischief is almost a species of virtue.

The Duke of Bedford dyed 7. days before the peace concluded by Philip, the
one happening the 14. the other subscribed the 21. of September: but by him
foreseen long before, I will not say, that his foreseen peace was his death;
but that it was in part a cause thereof may probably be conjectured; Generous
hearts use to be undaunted in danger, but in the change of fortune, if they
be not accumulated by adversity, they are macerated by vexation: his death is
to be numbered amongst the chiefest causes of the loss of France, he was a
wise and prudent Prince, of long experience in arms and government, inferior
to no Commander in his time, he was obeyed by his own, feared by his enemies,
in so much as Lewis the eleventh being many years after in the Church of
Nostre-Dame at Roan where Bedford is buried, and being told by some as he was
looking upon his Tomb, that that sumptuous memorial was a great shame to
France, since it had bin by him so much endamaged, that therefore it should be
defaced, and his bones thrown out, he nobly answered, that it would be a
greater shame to France to show her self cruel to his bones, who whilst he
was alive none durst oppose; that he was sorry, that the memorial was no more
stately, and that none was to be found answerable to so great a worth; none of
the Sons of Henry the fourth did degenerate: a thing not usual in so large a
family. Henry the fifth dyed gloriously in the pursuit of his conquests, the
Duke of Clarence valiantly fighting, and though Bedford of a natural death,
and Gloucester of a violent, yet dyed they not with less fame then did the
others: so as nature having done her utmost in them, if she failed in the
present Henry; it is not to be wondered at, for having clade him with a rich
shirt of goodness, she was scant unto him in an upper roabe of real virtues,
and of fortune; Bedford being dead, a new choice was made of, who should
succeed him, of two that pretended thereunto the Duke of York bore away the
bell, whereat the Duke of Somerset was scandalized, who being the Kings cosen
thought to have been preferred before him, but the council was of an other
opinion; Yorkes true pretenses unto the Crown though at that time not spoken
of, was perhaps the cause why they would not discontent him, Somerset finding
no other remedy endeavored the hindering of his dispatch to the common losses,
for Paris and the chiefest places which the English held in France, were in
this interm lost which would not have happened, if he had had his dispatch time
enough. Disadvantages which infant Kings are usually subject unto, who governed
by many and shared by the emulation of great ones: cannot favor private
interests without disfavouring the public to the ruin of King and Kingdom.
York seemed not to take notice of these practices, Parteggiati.
a dissimulation which caused an inward impostumation in him, wherewith
Somerset being afterward infected, it in a few years after brought them both
to immature end.

In the same month of September, Queen Isabell mother to Charles King of
France, and Katharine Queen of England, dyed in Paris; she was buried by the
side of her husband in Saint Denis without any funeral pomp, the times not
suting with such like solemnities, she lived not much esteemed of by any: no
not by the English which made them undergo the imputation of ingratitude
though without reason; since nature has endued us with a secret not well
understood, light which cleer's unto us all ambiguities, so as the imagined
good, which is not, is, will we, nill we, not taken by us for good: No man
denies, but that ingratitude is of all vices the most abominable, but neither
is it to be denied that benefits sprung from charity or any other species of
courtesy and love, not from ostentation or interest are those alone which
denominate an ungrateful person: Isabels good turn's had their rise from self
interest, if she sided with the English 'twas to side against her son, she
favored them not as friends, but as instruments of her revenge: her daughters
marriage was from the like cause, she loved her as having been her companion
in her misfortunes, but it is not likely, she would ever have sought her
advantage to the injury of Charles, had she not hated him; she confounded the
World, ruinated her Kingdom, disinherited her own blood: and out of dispight,
not any inclination, favored the enemy; so as if the English seemed not to be
over grateful to her, it was because her benefits were none of those which
conduce to gratitude.

The rebellion of Normandy was one of the first evil effects caused by the
death of the Duke of Bedford, for seeing herself freed from that chain which
held her in obedience to England, she gave her self up unto the French.
Charles de Marest accompanied by the Marishall de Rieux, Messieurs de Bousack,
and Longaville, two hours before day scalled the Walls of Diepe, near to the
Gate and met with no opposition by reason of the intelligence, they held within
the Town; he had the like success in forcing open the Gate which leads to
Roan, through which the Marishall and all his People being entered, he made a
stand in the market place, crying out according to the military custom of
France, the City is taken, these acclamations awakened those who slept, who
with stones and darts made some short defense, but they were forced to give
way to the last comers; there were but few that were slain. The Lieutenant
Mortimer with some few others saved himself, the rest remained prisoners
together with such Citizens, as had almost affectionately favored the English:
their goods were ransackt, but not theirs who were willing to receive the oath;
upon the news of this acquisition, Anthoni de Chabanus Sentraglie,
Estouteville and many other Lords, with between three and four thousand horse
came thither, to whom one Kernier a leader of the common People followed by
6000. of the Countrypeople, joined himself and all of them did willingly take
the oath: being marched forth into the field with these and many other
Gentlemen of the Country which daily flockt unto him, Fescan yielded it self
up unto him on Christmas eve, and on Saint Stephens-day, Monsieur Villiers the
Gnascoigne Captain who commanded there having revolted; he assaulted Harfluer
but being beaten back and forty of his men slain, whilst he put himself in
order for a second assault, the Inhabitants capitulated to surrender up the
Town, upon condition, that the English garrison which consisted of 400. men,
should be suffered to depart peaceably with all their goods; Beccrespin
Tancharville: Gomesseule, Loges, Vallemont, Graville, Longerville, Neneville,
Lambraville, and other Towns did the like. Upon this flood of fortune, the
constable Richmont arrived, to whom Carles, Mesull, Aumerle, and many other
Towns yielded themselves; all which having Garrisons put into them, he
withdrew himself for want of victuals, the rest doing the like. So as in a
short time, Normandy was dismembered of the greatest part of the Country of
Caux; the English were not now to defend themselves against one only enemy;
The treaty at Arras as pointed out unto them, a second (viz.) Philip and though
war was not yet declared between them, they forbear not to bethink
themselves how they might prejudice each other, the Garrisons of Callais and
the adjacent parts had a design upon Ardres, and those Burgonians which were
in the Country of Ponitean; upon Crotoi designs wherein they both failed. The
low Countries were not well pleased with this Breach, for the loss they
thereby received by want of commerce, having acquainted Philip with the
importancy hereof, they prevailed so far with him as to permit them,
endeavor the continuation of peace: John of Luxenburg Count de Ligni (who had
not yet revolted from the English) was thought fittest for this employment, he
writ hereof to his Brother, the Archbishop of Roan one of Henry's chiefest
Counselors in France, who writ over into England, where the proposition being
entertained he acquainted his Brother there withal, and his Brother Philip:
much of hostility ensued this mean while, whereat Philip being offended, and
much more that Henry had written to the Hollanders; Profering them the
continuance of his friendship (as if he had done it to seduce his subjects
from him) he went from his word, and told Ligni, that he would have no longer
peace with the English, since they had much defamed him in his honor, that
they had beaten his people upon the confines of Flanders, endeavored to
surprise Ardras, sent Ambassadors to the Emperor to provoke his Imperial
Majesty against him, sought to seduce his subjects, and done other things not
to be passed over without resentment, and not herewithall contended, he writ
to Henry repeating over the same things, and denouncing war unto him; Henry
writ likewise to him saying, that it was himself, not he that had defamed
him, by his perjury, by his violation of their confederacy, and by his having
made that peace which neither of them without the others consent could make,
for what remains that he had beaten his subjects, for that he found him in a
readiness to beat his; that his offering at Ardreas was no more then what
Philip had done at Crotoy, that the instructions he had given his
Ambassadors, sent unto the Emperor did convince this calumny; that he had
much more reason to complain of him, who contrary to the Laws of nations had
taken the said Ambassadors prisoners before any declaration of war, that he
had not seduced his vassalls as his letters could testify, that he had
endeavored the continuance of the commerce which in his name was propounded
unto him, and whereby advantage was to redound to both nations.

After these complaints Philip resolved to begin the war by besieging
Callais, a Fort which he pretended did belong to him as a member of Artois;
the which if he could take would redound much to the prejudice of the English,
and much to his advantage since thereby he should secure Flanders, Artois,
Picardy, and the country about Bullen; he had several counsels concerning
this, for it was not to be undertaken without extraordinary Forces; the
enterprise was difficult, and not to be undertaken without sollid foundations,
he could not hope much from Charles, he was sufficiently busied for himself:
He bethought himself that if the Flemmings and Hollanders his subjects would
assist him their Forces would be sufficient: he went with this design to
Gaunt, he assembled all the Magistracy, of whom he obtained what he desired,
and when this resolution was published throughout all Flanders, in stead of
being displeased thereat (as done by the private authority of those of Gaunt,
without the accustomed votes of the other members of that Province) they all
confirmed it, thinking the time of putting it in execution too long. They
thought Callais could not resist their Forces, in imagination they had already
taken it, sacked it, incorporated it into Artois, and they themselves returned
home enricht, reputed of, and feared by all men. The Hollanders though not so
entirely as those of Flanders, did likewise satisfy their Prince in his
desire, who went himself in person to entreat them: So as whilst on this side,
preparations are made for a new war, the former of France grew more
exasperate. La Hire who was persuaded, he could surprise Roan by reason of the
intelligence he held therein, failing in his design retired to Rey; a good
great village to refresh himself and his men; where he was set upon by Sir
Thomas Terill and wounded, but escaped away having lost some of his men:
Monsieur de Fountains and 60. more being taken prisoners, and most of his
horse lost; his horsemen who had not leisure to get on horseback saved
themselves in the neighboring wood: The Constable met not with the like
misfortune at Paris; for being certified by Monsieur Lilliadam (who had betaken
himself to Charles his party at the same time that Philip did) That those who
took part with Burgundy in that City would be favorable unto him, he
marched from Pontosa, accompanied by the Bastard of Orleans, Messieurs de La
Roche, de Fernant and others, with 6000. Soldiers to discover what might be
hoped for out of the inclination of the Inhabitants. But finding no alteration
at his appearing (for they were kept in a we by the vigillancy of the rulers,
and the Garrisons force) he lodged himself at Mommartres, and went the next
day to Saint Dennis. There was in that Town a Garrison of 400. English, the
place was void of defense, wholly dismantled, save toward the Abbeys side, as
has been said. These notwithstanding withstood a powerful assault, wherein
200. being slain, the rest retired themselves into the Abbey and Tower, where
being besieged, and without hope of succor they yielded themselves, the
English their lives saved, the French upon discretion. The Lord Beaumont was
not long before come from Normandy to Paris with 600. men, he resolved to march
out with these (not knowing of the loss of Saint Dennis) to watch the
Constables ways, but being by him discovered and surprised, whilst he
valiantly defended himself he was taken prisoner, together with 80 more: 300.
of his men were slain, the rest saved themselves by flight, being pursued and
beaten to under the very walls of Paris. An inconvenience which lost the City;
for those who took part with Philip, expecting only an occasion of revolt.
This loss of the Lord Beaumonts who held them in awe was the happiest thing
they could desire. They advertised Monsieur de Lilliadam hereof, desiring a
general pardon for all their past disobedience and rebellion: the which when
he had communicated to the Constable, he came before the town with all his
Forces; the chief of the English party besides the Lord Willoughby were the
Bishops of Tarrovan, Liseux and Meaux: who perceiving an open insurrection,
thought to make sure St. Dennis gate, but finding the streets chained, they
themselves beaten with Stones and Arrows from the windows, and driven from
one street to another, they and their men retired themselves into the street
of Saint Antonia, where they were safe under the Cannon of the Basteile, the
which they furnished with victuals and munition the best they could in so
short a time. The Constable this mean while being come to the Port of Saint
Jacques, Monsieur de Lillidam presenting himself before the walls showed them
their pardon under the great seal, persuading them to obedience, and to open
the gates unto the Constable, to the which they all assenting Lillidam and the
Bastard of Orleans not waiting for the opening of the gates, scaled the walls
and were followed by a great many Soldiers, to whom the Burgonians and a great
many of the people having joined themselves, crying peace, peace; long live
King Charles, and the Duke of Burgundy, they threw open the gate, by the which
the Constable entered, marching straight toward the Basteile, under the which
the English had retired themselves. They made some resistance though but for a
small time, their numbers not being able to withstand the great Forces of the
Constable and people; so as some of them being slain and the rest retired into
the Bastaile, they were beset with Corpse de Guard in such places as were least
to be annoyed by the Artillery, in so much as being blockt up on all sides,
this their retreat served only for their recapitulation, which is no small
advantage in such a case; the goods they had left in the City were seized on
and shared; the Bishop of Terrovan, to boot with his other household
implements, part of which he afterward recovered by the favor of Messieurs
de Trenant, and Lalaigne lost the richest adornements of his Chapel; the
goods of such Citizens as had sided with the enemy were confiscated; the
ancient Officers cashiered, and new ones put in their places, and the besieged
not able to hold out, and not likely to be succored, after ten days came
forth their good and lives saved; and with a safe conduct from the Constable,
retired themselves to Roan. Thus Paris returned to its former government,
sixteen years after that the Duke of Clarence had placed a Garrison there in
the behalf of his brother Henry the fifth. This and some other losses had
rather madded them then mated the English. The Garrison of Callais went to
Bullen, and had almost taken that part which is called the lower Bullen. But
Fortresses are taken by great Forces, not great anger, having burnt many of the
ships which lay in the Haven, they passed into the precincts of Gravelline,
where destroying all the country, they gave a furious allarum to the common
people, who having taken Arms ran to oppose them, but as it is usual to
homebred people to presume much and perform little, they were rooted, 400. of
them slain, 120. taken prisoners, the rest escaping whither they could, whilst
the English leading away their pray and prisoners retired themselves to their
Garrisons; on the other side some of the inhabitants of Gisores were corrupted
by La Hire to permit him entry in to the City, so as coming with great forces
from Gerbery he entered in, and laid siege to the Castle wherein the Garrison
had saved themselves, and given notice hereof to Roan, so as whilst the
oppugners and defendors were in their chiefest heat, the Lord Talbot came
thither with the Lord Scales and 1800. Soldiers werewithall he freed the
Castle, recovered the City chased the enemy away, and punished the traitors. At
this time the Duke of York came from England to Normandy, bringing along with
him 8000. Soldiers, with which if he had bin dispatched away when he ought to
have been, the Country of Cauxe had not been lost, and much less Paris. The
Duke of Summersets envy the cause of so great loss was not punished, for that
hidden mischiefs are not subject to punishments, or for that the faults of
great delinquents are not without great danger taken notice of.

Monsieur de Croy, Bayliffe of Hannault had at this time gathered together
1500. Soldiers under the conduct of Messieurs de Vaurin Noyrule, Sananses, and
other remarkable commanders with intention by way of Praeludium to the siege
of Callais, to run the country round about it. The Garrisons of Callais,
Guines, and other neighboring places fall upon the same design, who the same
night were gathered together to the number of 2000. to sack the country about
Bullen, so as the Burgonians had advanced themselves but one hour sooner, they
had met with their Scouts who they descryed by break of day upon the passage
over the bridge of Millay, Croy having advised what was to be done resolved to
set upon them whilst in disorder they should be pillaging the country, and
though he could not take them at unawares, yet howsoever to give them battle
he divided his men into two squadrons, himself following the English with the
former, having for his guide the smoke of such houses and villages as they
burnt. The English had notice of his coming from Some, who at the same time
they had taken prisoners, so as having there forraging those who were nearest
him united themselves together, and placed themselves upon the top of a little
hill, where being by him discovered, but not the rest that marched after, he
set upon them not expecting the arrival of his second Squadron, and finding
them in disorder, and but a few in number, and the first encounter he slew
between three and fourscore of them, the rest fled to their companions and
were pursued by the victorious. But when they perceived a second Troop, they
made a stop, expecting the arrival of their second Squadron, and wavering in
their resolution of fighting, they encouraged one another, to what none of them
had any mind. The English this mean while having reordered themselves, set
furiously upon them; the Bickering was not long, and the formerly victorious
making very little resistance were driven even to underneath the walls of
Ardresse, the number both of slain and prisoners did not exceed 100. for
surprised by fear they betook themselves rather to flight then fight. Decroy
was wounded and his horse slain under him, but he had the good fortune to
recover another, and was more vexed at the manner of his loss, then at the
loss it self; which might be counterpoised by his former encounter. The
victuals returned with their prisoners to Callais, and were met by the Earl
of Mortaigne, son to the Duke of Sommerset, who was sent thither with 1500.
men to oppose Philips designs, who if he had undertaken this enterprise with
men taken into pay, and not with the common people of Flanders (who will be
entreated and not commanded by their Princes) he would either have reaped more
advantage thereby, or lesser shame had he gathered together so many men, as
thinking the number superfluous he dismissed the greatest part of them; the
number of those who remained amounting to 40000. An Army which if considered in
'its number, richness of apparel, splendour of Arms, quantity of Artillery,
Pride of Pavillions, and infinite number of Carriages, fit to conquer a whole
nation, not a single town; but we are deceived in nothing more then in a good
opinion we hold of our selves. The people of Gaunt thought that the walls of
Callais, ought to have fallen down at their appearing, as did the walls of
Jericho, when the Israelites appeared. They were troubled that the ships came
no sooner from Holland, fearing least the English having the Sea open, should
leave the town empty and fly away to England; they thought that being terrible
to their own Princes at home, they should be the like abroad to all the
world, and growing insupportable by reason of this confidence they became
odious to all men, before they came from Flanders, they caused two Mills
belonging to two particular men to be beaten down; imputing the late loss of
the Flemings before the Graveline to them, neither durst Philip contradict them
herein, nor would they be satisfied with any reason when they had passed the
water at Graveline and were entered into the enemies land, they pitched
themselves before Oye. A small Fort the which yielded upon discretion, the
which they so indiscreetly made use of; as contrary to all reason of war,
they forthwith caused 29. of the Garrison to be hanged, and 25. more
afterward, and would have served all the rest alike; had not the Duke
interceeded: they burnt, defaced, and to the very foundations thereof wholly
threw down the Castle: to the end, that the Ashes thereof might show the
extent of a Plebaean power, such as appertained to Philip were not suffered to
make booties, for if they made any they were forthwith taken from them, and if
they resisted, beaten; being come to the Castle Saint Marck: with in sight of
Callais they had it at a dearer pennyworth; for it defended it self and slew
many of them, but not able to hold out, after having sounded the Bells and hung
out colors, to be succored from Callais, which was impossible; it yielded
upon condition not to be treated, as was Oye; so as 24. Soldiers (for they
were no more) being led by the 24. divisions of Flanders to the Tents of Gaunt,
they were sent prisoners to Gaunt to be exchanged for such of theirs as were
already taken or were to be taken, those who entered the Castle having sacked
it, returned joyful with their pray, when at the Gate they found some of the
chief of Gaunt who took it from them, saying they did it by the direction of
the Magistrate of Gaunt, but this not being true, they who had converted the
spoils of others to their own use were banished, which caused so great an
alteration as they had well nigh gone together by the Ears, justice not having
sufficient force against the unjust power tyrannically usurped by the armed
avarice of the most feared.

At last, Callais was by them beguirt, and Philip lodged toward the Sea side;
diverse skirmishes were there made, the English sallying forth, that those of
Gaunt might be deceived in their flight, many were wounded, many were slain
on both sides; amongst the wounded, La Hira made one, who being come to visit
the Duke drawn thereunto by the name of so glorious an army, was shot in the
leg, and Philip whilst he went about to spy the situation of the Castle, a
Canon shot slew his trumpeter and three horses, which were nearest unto him,
upon one of the which was Monsieur de Savances. Monstrelet describing this
siedge, praises the valor of the Piccards; but Il trombetta.
as for the Dutch he says, that the English made little account of them, and
that if it had come to a joint Battle they would have been content to have
had 3. Dutch for one English, and yet would have come off with honor: Philip
thought good, that whilst he was besiedging Callais, John de Croy should
besiedge Guiennes, wherein fortune favored him with victory though exclusively;
For Sangatus having yielded to Robert de Sanences under his conduct, and those
of Sangate.
Guines being necessitated to forsake the Town, and retire themselves into the
Castle, he could not for all the aforesaid good luck compass the getting of
it. All this while, the Fleet from Holland and Zealand appeared not, whereat
Philip was much troubled, and those of Gaunt murmured at it, as if the sailing
of ships like the running a cariere with horses depended upon man's will, on the
contrary, the English Ships came to anchor, loaded with men, munition, and
victuals, so as blushing at their belief, that those who were there would
have fled, since they saw others come voluntarily to run the same hazard,
they knew not what to say: they thought themselves betrayed; Philip by his
Advisers, and they by the Hollanders being too late aware, that it was
impossible to take Callais, so easily as they had imagined without the
Mastership at Sea, or hinderance of daily succor; the besieged having put
their Cattle to grass without the Walls, they would not have dared lay hands
on them had not the Piccards encouraged thereunto, by having cunningly got some
of them, but whilst 200. of them undertook the enterprise, 22. of them were
slain, 33. taken prisoners, and the rest escaping by flight thought themselves
never a whit the worse men: but accounted it a piece of bravery to have
escaped, every whisper affrighted them; and every motion made them give
Allarum's, all which were punyards which wounded Philip, to whom whilst he
was thus agitated; Pembrooke an Herald of the Duke of Glocesters presented
himself, letting him know; that the Duke his Master intended to come and fight
with him, in that very place if he would tarry for him, and if not he would
find him out in his own Dominions: that he could not prefixe a set day as
willingly, he would have done, because his occasions depended upon the Seas
and Wynd, which were uncertain and unconstant; Philip replied that the Duke of
Gloucester should not need to seek him forth elsewhere, for he would find him
out where he now was, if God should not dispose otherwise of him, then causing
the Herald to be fairly treated, he dismissed him giving him a goblet, and
an hundred pieces of gold, Philip went then to the Tent of Gaunt (wherein all
resolutions were made his own not having that prerogative) were sum-moning
together: all the Flemish Commanders and Cavalliers, he made one of his
Counselors acquaint them with Glocesters Embassy and his answer which his
reputation did oblige him unto, entreating them for hishonour and their own,
not to desert him but to serve manfully upon this occasion, noe man opposed,
all were forward in their promises, but every little pretense wherein honor
did not predominate, did always break what every obligatory promise. There
stood a little Hill not far from Callais, which being fortified was not only
likely to prejudice the Fort, but from thence might be discovered whatsoever
was therein done. To this purpose, Philip caused a Fort to be built there, of
oak and other wood in all have guarding it with Artillery, and placing therein
a Garrison of those of Gaunt commanded by brave Captains, a business which the
English did not very well like of, and though they used all the means they
could to win it 'twas but in vain for the greatest part of all the camp
flocked thither to repel them, at last came the Holland-fleet upon the 25. of
July, which had brought along with it six Ships laden with great stones which
were all sunck, the next night at full Sea in the Mouth of the haven, though
the besieged did what they could to hinder them, but the Hollanders were
mightily deceived, for they had not suncke them in the right mouth of the
Channel, so as at the eb they appeared above the sands, it being easy for
those of the Town (who run thither in troops, man woman and child) to free
themselves thereof, by burning some of them, and carrying the rest together
with the stones into the City, though the Canonplaid upon them from the Fleet.
This bad success cooled the little heat which yet remained in the besiegers,
but they were conjealed to ice: when the Hollanders without any notice given or
leave taken, waighed anchor and hoized sail, steering their course homewards,
two days after their first arrival. The reasons which they afterward
alleged, for this were the hazard their Ships were in, by reason of the
narrownes of the variable Sea, between the two points of Dover and Callais,
and the danger they were to run of the English-fleet, to the which they were
inferior, both in quality, number of Ships, and Soldiers, it is incredible to
say, how mad those of Gaunt were at this, they said they were promised, that
Callais should be besiedged by Sea and Land, that Philip was abused by such as
governed him, and they by him, they had ill favoredly handled Monsieur de Croy,
and three others that were with him, had they not retired themselves to John de
Croy's camp underneath Guines, they affirmed these things not for that they
believed them to be so, but to cancel their own defaults with other men's
incke, to the end that their hatched mutiny (a natural defect in them) might
be thought reasonable, the Advisers thereunto to be judged indiscreet, not
traitors, whilst their bad Council proceeds not from malice, the execution
depending upon the Arbitrament of a judicious Prince, if such a one he be, if
not, the fault is to be shared between them. Malice subject to the
punishment of law, under the deserved title of treason, indiscretion to the
punishments of shame and repentance, not but that there may be some advices
wherein imprudency may not be punishable, but this was none of those: if the
Advisors had equally considered, the profit and the difficulty, they had not
erred; but their confidence in the one, would not suffer the other to be
seen. All great actions proceed from bold and hazardous Councels, which are
esteemed good if the success be good; if bad indiscreet and rash, the going
away of the Hollanders might suffer excuse for their defeat which would have
been certain, bore along with it, the Princes undoubted prejudice, they errd
in departing without leave, but it was a discreet error, for had they desired
it, it would not have been granted, if those of Gaunt had had a like courage
to those of Brugus who would not consent to be gone, had they had patience to
expect Gloucester, and valor to overcome him; the Advisors would have been
thought wise, and the Hollanders faithful. Treason is not a casual but a
voluntary act forethought on, to the prejudice of the Master, and advantadge of
the enemy, conditions which were not found in any of the forenamed, those of
Gaunt were they alone who were in fault, since their Prince undertook this
siedge upon the promise of their assistance, and yet they failed him to the
prejudice of the undertaking, and loss of his honor, for the which they
should have hazarded all, since he hazarded his life, for fortune might
bereave of victory, not of honor, which was not to be bereft; but through
their baseness and default. After Philip had received the Ambassy from
Gloucester, he had sent to levy new Forces out of Picardy, Artois, and
Hannault, and calling the chiefest of the army together, he found them all as
formerly willing and ready, but the common people wholly altered, for those of
Callais had sallyed forth in great numbers, the foot to win the for^, the horse
to keep it from being succored, so as with very little difficulty they won
it, burnt it, and of 400. that were there, they slew a 160. and took the
greatest part of the rest prisoners, but slain before they came to Callais to
revenge the death of an English Gentleman, who being taken by the Picardes was
forthwith slain in the midst of them by those of Gaunt: this accident did so
incense them as that they resolved immediately to be gone, and though Philip
himself came unto them, remembering them with the promise he had made unto
Gloucester, he could not prevail with them, he entreated them to tarry but
till the next day; to the end that they might march away without dis-order, and
not leave any thing behind them: which might service for a trophie to the
enemy, offering himself to bring them beyond the water, at Gravelin: but
neither could he prevail in this, they said they needed no guide, they went
their ways and were followed by the rest, they took away with them all that
in so short a time, they could pack up, and not able to carry away all; they
broke out the bottoms of many buts of wine and other drink, that the enemy
might not make use of them, they left notwithstanding many pieces of Artillery
behind them, munition, and victuals, for want of carriages, and having set
their huts on fire, they marched in disorder toward Gravelin, crying out home,
home, we are betrayed; Philip who had observed all these proceedings with a
sorrowful countenance tarried in Battle array, till he saw them out of
danger, and then marched orderly after them having his Horsemen for his
reareward. John de Croy, who by his commandment was risen from before Guines
came to him, he likewise having left his Artillery behind him and many other
things for the same defect: at Gravelin, Philip held a Council what was to be
done, the resolution was, that all the frontire places should have addition of
Garrisons put into them, and that commissions should forthwith be sent abroad,
to the end that troops might not be wanting for all places which might be
assembled together as occasion should serve, he again entreated the common
people to defer their departure for some few days, but was forced to give
them leave to be gone since they would have taken leave, had it not been
given them, by this he learned that men without courage and who are forced to
fight, win no battles. Of all other places he chiefly prepared for the
defense of Gravelin; he left there many brave Gentlemen, who voluntarily took
upon them to defend it; amongst which Messieurs de Chricchi Sannenses and
L^laine, he did the like in Ardres, Bullen, and all the neighboring places in
his passage to Li^e, he caused soldiers every where to be raised, being sure
that Gloucester would perform his promise to him, though he had broken his; all
this relation is according to Monstrelet, but the English though they agree in
all things else, differ in the raising of the siege, they say that Philip being
advertised that Gloucester was to come the next day, went his way by night; and
that though the French labor to excuse him, the Dutch lay all the fault upon
him; but I believe Philip to be so generous, as that he would rather have dyed
then have been guilty of so much baseness. There want not examples of the
Flemings insolences toward their Princes, his father John was in the like
manner abandoned before Mondediere.

And as for the Flemmish Authors Meierus Henterus and Petit, if I understand
them aright they say no such thing, and Speed an English Author says that
Philip was excused by many out of reasons suffiently probable. Gloucester came
to Callis as some say with 300. as others with 500. vessels loaded with 25000.
Soldiers, and finding the enemy gone entered Flanders, meeting none that did
oppose him, he tarried not to besiege any place, but burning and destroying
where e're he went put all to ruin; great was the prey he made especially of
beasts: He burned Popernence, Bailleul, Chasteauneufe, Rimesture and
Vallor-Chappule, he dismantled many Castles forsaken by their Garrisons; till
weary of going about and wanting bread he retired to Guienes, and from thence
to Callais. Many women at the price of a piece of bread recovered the ruins of
their houses, the scarcity of bread was the cause of much sickness in the
Army. But Gloucester having only self interest for his occasion, he returned
to England; where he found new troubles appeased, first by danger and then by
the death of the King of Scotland.

King James had married his daughter Margaret to Lewis the Dolphin, whereat
England was distasted; since this affinity could but not be prejudicial to
her, so as the two nations being netled began to endamage each other, the Scots
pretended a double injury that England had endeavored to hinder the Brides
passage into France, since not able to break the marriage, they would have
interrupted it by taking taking her prisoner; and that the Earl of
Northumberland unprovoked had assailed the confines of Scotland. Upon these
dislikes, James commenc't the war, and went with 30000. men to besiege
Rosburg. This place was commanded by Sir Ralph Gray, who though he did
valiantly defend it, yet was not he the occasion of the Kings raising the
siege, nor yet the succor which the Earl of Northumberland was to bring him,
it is likely some more urgent occasions was the cause thereof, the true reason
then was his wives hasty coming unto the Camp, who being a woman and a
Princess, would not have hazarded herself at such a time without some urgent
occasion, which since it does belong unto the story, I will take leave shortly
to relate it; she came to advertise him of a conspiracy that was plotting
against his life, which caused him raise the siege to prevent it; though his
intentions did not succeed for blows from heaven are not to be evaded.

Walter Earl of Atholl, his uncle, was chief of this conspiracy wrought
thereunto by wicked ambition, which lay lurking in him many years before.
'Twas he that had incited Robert Duke of Awebeny to kill Prince David, that he
might serve this James with the same sauce, had not his father sent him away,
had he been saved by being prisoner in England; his design was when these two
Princes should be murdered, himself to kill Robert and his son, that he
might without any competitor remain the sole heir unto the kingdom, and
'twas not unlikely to have fallen out according to his wish; for Robert after
so many detestable wickednesses grew to be hated by all men: But James his
preservation, having broken both their designs, it took life again in him
alone. When Robert being dead Mordecay his son, and the sons of Mordecay
executed after James his return to Scotland, none stood between him and the
accomplishment of his tyranny but the very King; neither did he believe that
the people would be thereat displeased, for James had mightily distasted the
people, by putting a great taxation upon them for the Fleet which did conduct
his daughter to her husband, which was by many of them denied, and but
unwillingly paid by the rest. In so much as though James had given order to the
Collectors to gather no more monyes, and to restore what already had been
collected to those that gave it; yet did he not sufficiently sweeten them, for
such favors as are caused by necessity do not content the people, but that
which did the most of all offend them was his unexpected rising from before
Roseburg, for having been at great expense for this enterprise, and no man
guessing at the reason of his quitting it, it could allow of no good
construction. Atholl was the chief actor in this Tragedy, but would not be
seen therein; till he appeared as King, not as guilty. His chiefest
instruments were two bold Roberts, the one his own Grandsonne, the other of
the Family of the Gri^es; the former drawn by his Grandfathers authority; and
his hopes after him as being his heir, the other out of an eager desire of
being revenged upon the King, by whom he reputed himself doubly injured, for
having long before for some misdemeanors been imprisoned and banished the King
had lately taken from him the guardianship of a nephew of his, which was fallen
unto him by his brothers death. The Queen had discovered the conspiracy, but
not the conspirators, so as the King using all possible diligence to find them
out, made them hasten the effecting of their business for fear of being
discovered, he had withdrawn himself, together with his wife, and some
familiar friends, without any guard to the covent of preaching Friars near to
the walls of Pearth; amongst which was one of the conspirators named John,
whose Surname I find not written. The Traitors entered into the Friery
rewarding the Porter, and being come into the Kings Ante-chamber and met not
with any body, they stood expecting that the said John should open the door,
that they might enter without noise; when one Walter Stretton came forth for
some business concerning the King, who seeing so many armed men, and not able
to get back, cried Treason, treason; but him they instantly slew and ran unto
the door, and found it shut by one Katherine Douglas a Lady worthy
remembrance; This Lady missing the great Bar wherewith the door was wont to
be shut, and which was purposely hid away by John, supplied the place thereof
with her own Arm, but they forced open the door, and brake her Arm, they
slew all that withstood them: the King was slain with 28. wounds, the Queen
who when her Husband fell, fell upon him to serve him for a Buckler; so as she
could not easily be dragged from him, received two wounds: and Patrick
Dunbarre, brother to the Earl of the March, who defended the King as long as
he was able, was left for dead sorely wounded, and his fingers struck off. This
cruel treason was forthwith divulged every where, filling all men's minds with
horror and pity, those who formerly hated the King did now celebrate him,
they called to mind how he had passed all his life in afflictions, his
childhood practiced upon his uncle, his youth bittered by imprisonment, his
Kingdom annoyed with perpetual seditions, and now slain in a Court of
government, the most moderate and most just that ever Scotland enjoyed; there
was not any Lord though never so far off, who did not hasten to revenge this
death, all the actors whereof (were it out of their overdaring confidence, or
did it only proceed from the will of God) were taken, brought to Edinburgh,
and severally punished. The three principalls Atholl his Grandsonne and
Grains, were the last reserved for punishment, and all of them suffered death;
I know not whether more examplary or cruel.

Atholls punishment was divided into three days suffering, the first day he
was led through the City in a Cart, wherein was framed the form of a Cross
in wood, with a pully at the top of it, with a rope fastened to it, wherewith
his hands being fastened behind him, and he all naked, having his privy parts
only covered, he was at certain appointed places drawn up to the top of
the pully having leaden waights at his heels within two foot of the ground,
and after having had many of these draughts, he was set in a Scaffold and had
a crown of red hot Iron set upon his head, a punishment invented as they say,
for that he was once foretold by a Sorceresse, that he should one day be
crowned King, in the concourse of a great many of people, the which whether it
be true or no, or whether belief ought to be given to such predictions I leave
it to be decided by the learned, the knowledge of things to come belong
properly to God alone, and if it should be granted that the devil have some
share herein, by his observation of the Stars and their Aspects (wherein he
may be a great master, being Coetanean with the Plannets and immortal) yet
should I think him altogether ignorant herein were it not contrary to the
school of Theologists who say, that by sinning he lost what he had received
by favor, not what was natural in him, I should resemble him to a cancelled
writing, for perfection of knowledge which was natural in him being a Species
of beatitude, there does no beatitude belong unto the damned, but allow the
opinion of the Schools, we may affirm, that his knowledge of things to come
being uncertain and conjecturall (as are all such things as depend upon the
like principals) he does not communicate them, but by uncertainties, and
equivocation. Athols prediction proved this unto us; since pronounced in a
sense of exaltation and glory it proved to be base and infamous; but formy
part I believe these predictions are invented when things have succeeded, one
part of the World delighting in being deceived, the other in deceiving and
seeming wise by affirming what is not. The second day he was laid upon a
hurdle, and drawn at a horse tail through the chief streets of
Edenbourough. The third day he was laid upon a table, his Belly ripped up; his
Bowels thrown into the fire, his Heart torn out and burned, his Head cut off,
his Body quartered, and his Quarters sent to the four chief Cities of
Scotland; his Grand-sonne faired the better for his being young, and set on by
his Grandfather, he was only hanged and quartered; Robert Grames was put
naked into a Carte, had his hand wherewith he slew the King, fastened to a
ladder erected therein, was pincht with hot yrons in all the parts of his Body,
his vital parts excepted, and then quartered.

England was grieved at the death of this virtuous King, though her enemy; but
not thereby incommodiated; for James the second not being past seven years old
was not of age enough to annoy any one, he himself being sufficiently annoyed
by the ambition of such who strove to be his Governor. I observe one thing
remarkable in the story of Scotland, that of one hundred and eight Kings that
have reigned there; (our gracious King Charles that now reigns not
comprehended in the number) 54. have dyed natural deaths, 49. have come to
violent ends, by misfortune conspiracy and battles, and for the other five
which remain to make up the number, one renounced the Kingdom, and four fled
from thence, and were banished: so as if you will account them happy who come
to natural ends, and number the five who did not dye Kings amongst the
unhappy, the number of happy and unhappy is equal, each of them making 54. the
like will not be met withal; as neither the succession of so many Kings in
any one Kingdom, or any Kingdom of Europe. After the havoc Gloucester had made
in Philips territores, both parties drawn either by the persuasion of friends
or commodity of trading were drawn to treat of truce at Gravelein, whither for
Henry went the Cardinal of Winehester, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Stafford, with others verst in law and business, and for Philip the Duchess
his wife, the Bishop of Arras, Monsieur de Croy and others, a truce was
concluded in the name of the Duchess; Philip not being so much as named
therein, which caused two opinions, either that Henry would not treat with him
as being a perjured man and a breaker of former agreements, and therefore not
better to be now expected from him, or else that it was a piece of cunning in
Philip not to cause jealously in Charles, and that it might be lawful for him
to undo what was there done, when it might turn to his advantage: since wives
promises do not oblige their husbands, which of these was the true cause; it
is hard to say neither; does it much import, the only certainty is that it
lasted but a while.

The death of Queen Katharine mother to King Henry happened at the same time, who
being left a widow in her time of youth, and without hope of marrying her
self otherwise, did secreetly marry Owen Tewdor a young Gentleman of Wales,
whose laudable parts added to the Noblenes of his birth (for he was descended
from Cadwallader, the last King of the Britons) moved her to take him for
husband, by him she had three sons and one daughter, the sons names were
Edmond and Jasper, the third sons name who became a Benedictine Friar is not
expressed; as neither the Daughters name who became likewise a Nun: the two first
being brothers by the mothers side to King Henry, were by him created Earls:
Edmond of Richmond, Jasper of Pembrooke: Edmond who did marry Jane the only
daughter and heir of John Duke of Somerset was Father to Henry the seventh;
but Katharine being dead, Owen was questioned for marrying a woman that had
such relation unto the King without his consent, whereupon Gloucester having
caused him two several times to be imprisoned, and he having twice made an
escape, the third time he was caught and lost his life. But this is not the
common opinion of Authors as we shall see: George Lille lays, he was
descended from a base original, and touches no other particulers, Meirus
makes him the Bastard of an Alehouse keeper in Walls, Katharnes Tailor; and
very lately married by her; to the end, that the children she had by him might
by her marriage be made legitimate: Belleforest affirms the same. I cannot
imagine where Lille can have had this, if not from Meirus: none of all the
English Writers, I have met with having so much as dreamed thereof. Belleforest
by alleging Lille and Meirus, and giving word for word what Meirus says,
does plainly show, he had it from him, and from whence Meirus had it, it is
not hard to guess, since he was a Dutchman, his Author was Margarita the
Sister of Edward the fourth; second wife to Charles, Duke of Burgandi, Philips
son. Of all women that ever were she was the most passionately given to the
faction of her own family, for if she had a hand in the false supposition of
an Edward Plantagenet, and afterward by her own invention did suppose the
son of a Jew turned Christian, to the end that he might personate the Duke of
York, when he together with his brother Edward the fifth was smoothered in the
Tower; and so trouble the affairs of Henry the seventh (as we shall
hereafter see) it is no wonder if she invented this Genealogy to defame him and
make him to be by the World despised; besides it is not likely, that a young
Queen Dowager lately come into the Kingdom, who neither had had time nor
occasion to raise herself a faction in the Kingdom without regency or
authority, without means either to punish or reward, should be so long
permitted to live in so dishonest a manner, not only in the face of her son
a mild youth, but in the fight of her too powerful and sensible
brother-in-lawe, of the nobility, and all the Kingdom; (for it is not to be
supposed that the Court could be hud winckt in four great bellies) she was
therefore undoubtedly married, and her marriage wincked at by reason of her
husbands birth, which though it was not answerable to her present condition,
yet to be tolerated in respect of his fore fathers, for nobility does not lose
it privileges for want of fortune and want of worth, which he wanted not, if
we may believe them who were likely to have better testimonials thereof then
Meirus, and if he were put to death (which is not certain,) it was not for his
baseness of birth but for his offense, in having dared contrary to the laws to
marry the Kings mother. Queen Katharine was followed in her death, and
imitated in her marriage: In death she was followed by Queen Jane daughter to
Charles the second, surnamed the wicked King of Navar, Dowager to Henry the
fourth King of England, and before him to John the fourth, Duke of Britanny, by
whom she had John the now present Duke, and Arthur Count de Richmond Constable
of France. In her marriage she was imitated by Giva Colinia, daughter to the
late Count Saint Paul who for fancy sake like her did marry Sir Richard
Woodveil afterward created Earl Rivers, without acquainting her brother the
now present Count St. Paul therewithal nor yet her uncle the Bishop of
Tirrovane, and as from Katharines marriage; Henry the seventh did proceed, and
all the Kings that have succeeded him, even till this present day; so from
Iacholinus marriage did Elizabeth wife to Edward the fourth proceed, from whom
came Elizabeth wife to Henry the seventh, the first mother of the Kings of
England and great Britanny they were both French women married to two brothers
alike in resolution and fortune so as if those that blame them could have
foreseen their succession, they would have commended them for bad actions are
styled good by their happy events. In the last insurrections in Normandy the
English had lost Harfluer a loss of great consequence for the preservation of
that province, the Duke of Somerset went to besiedge it, and to recover it,
accompanied by Faulkonbridge, and Talbot. Estouteville commanded there in
chief with a Garrison of 600. Soldiers and though the Town did suffer much
by battery the walls being thereby defaced, and the houses beaten down, yet
could they not come to an assault; The Bastards of Orleans and Burbone,
presented themselves before it in the way of succor, and did on all sides
molest the besiedgers, hoping by disordering them to succor the Town, but not
succeeding therein they abandoned the enterprise. The Duke of Somerset got as
much honor in the winning of this Town as shame in the loss of it, for
having won it in the Duke of Yorkes regency he not long after lost it in his
own, Tancherville yielded it self likewise to Talbot after a siedge of four
months as did also Beauchastaean and Maleville: Charles on the other side
having past the Loire, with the Constable and Count de Marsh, did by assault
take Chasteau Landone, hanging up all the French they found there. Charni and
Nemours yielded themselves up unto him, he battered the Town of Montea^: till
such time as Thomas Gerard who did defend it sold it to him for a sum for
money, so say the English, not Chartiere, who says he wan it by force, so as
the Castle afterward yielded, all the French wherein were hanged, and the
English set at liberty at the Dolphins request, from thence he went to Paris,
where having not been since it returned to his obedience, he made his entry
with great solemnity and acclamation all these losses happened in the interim,
when the Duke of York being called from his regency, and the Earl of Warwick
appointed in his place, no man thought how to regaine them, for York being out
of authority, and Warwick seven weeks weather bound, so as he could not
pass into France for lack of wind: this was the cause why Monstreau without
any further contestation yielded it self unto Charles: York during all the
time of his regency in Normandy was not personally present at any act of War,
saving at the taking in of Fescampe, yet at his departure, he left the fame of
a wise and just Man.

Florimand de Brima^ Balieffe of Pontieu had private advertisement, that the
Fort of Crotoi was ill provided of victual and not likely 1424.
therewithal to be supplied, if it were beguirt with an unexpected siedge:
He advertised Philip hereof who suddenly dispacht away, Messieurs de Achi
Crovi, Kenti Jacques de Brimeau, Boudlers Lavense, and Graen, with good forces
to besiedge it, but he did not provide for the most essential thing which was
to block up the heaven; for it had not victuals wherewithal to sustain it
self for 8. days. The Garrison which feared nothing but hunger (an engine
against which there is no defense) finding the Sea open; sent forth a vessel
which by several returns freed them from the pressing affair, and were no
ways afraid of being otherwise oppugned. The Burgonians were too lateaware of
their error, so as manning forth four ships, they took from them the liberty
of the Sea, and there land forces were daily augmented. Philip was come for
this purpose to Hedine and leavied new forces in Hannault and Piccardy. This
Fort was a place of great consequence, a Sea haven, the inlet into Picardy;
situated between R^es Monstreula and Saint Valeri: requisite to the peaceful
possession of Callais, Bullen, and Pontieu. So as if Philip did what in him lay
to win it the English did what they could to succor it; The Burgonians that
they might be sure to keep it from being succored, built a great Fort
wherein they placed 1500. Soldiers: and the English to free the Town from
being blockt up by Sea sent forth seven ships, which chased away the other
four: thereby freeing it from the fear it was in of want of victuals and
totally to set it at liberty: the Regent Warwick sent thither; Talbot, Scales
and Terrill, with 5000. fightingmen who having passed the Soame; marched
forward with a resolution either to raise the siege or dye in the quarrel.
Philip being hereof advertised hasted from Hedine to Abeville, accompanied by
the Counts of Nivers, Saint Paul, Estampes, and the Prince of Cleurs, in a
posture of affronting the enemy but in effect did nothing. For the English
passed every where unresisted doing all the mischief they could; so as by this
proceeding it was thought he meant to raise the siedge with the least
dishonor he might, and the besiedgers scandalized at this his temporising, no
sooner understood of Talbots approach, but imitating those of Gaunt before
Callais, they rise from before the Town not expecting any command, and retired
to Rues; being scoftat and mocked by the Garrison (as says Monstreulet) as men
of no courage there was amongst them four Knights of the order, John de Croy,
Florimand, and James de Bremiau, and Baude de Noyelle; so as Talbot after
having burnt eight Towers, ruinated all the Country about, and raised the
siege; turned back the same way into Normandy with a booty of many prisoners
and horses: and Philip with this second shame retired himself to Arras having
lost many of his carriages taken from him by S. Thomas Terrill.

This Winter was much more sharp then usual, which caused the surprise of
Pontous, the possession whereof the more necessary it was 1438.
for Charles, by reason of the nearenes thereof to Paris, the more was he
incommodiated by the loss of it, it was a fit place to annoy the one side, and
to secure the other from the City, and all the Isle of France. Talbot was he
who did the business, who favored by the ditches being froozen over, might
without danger make himself master thereof by scaling it, the only obstacle,
he met withal was two brothers surnamed Gurry, who having fortified
themselves in a Turret which stood over the Gate which lead to Paris, and sent
notice thither did defend it, till the ensuing night, and if any succor had
come, the Town had run danger of being recovered by that place, but no succor
appearing they covenanted to be gone; their lives saved, and leave the Town to
him that had won it, so as the in-roades that were afterward made. The
mischief that the French Garrisons for want of pay did in the Country, and
famine which by reason of the Countries not being cultiated, was very great;
forced the poor Country People to retire themselves to Paris, where near
about 50000. dyed, for mere want: and amongst so many miseries, the newest and
unheard of was, that no man durst walk through the open fields and Country
Villages for fear of Woolves, which having slain and eaten about 80. people
taught the rest to guard themselves from them, thus were they warred on by all
sides; their friends injured them by their insolences and rapines, their
enemies slew them, their ground gave not its wonted increase, and ravenous
beasts devoured them.

After Warwick was come into France; Earl Montaigne came to Cheriburg with
400. Archers and 300. Lances, with the which passing through the Country of
Maine, he by assault took Saint Annian put 300. of the Scottish Garrison to
the sword, and hung up the French therein as falsesifiers of the oaths, they
had formerly taken to Henry at the same time. Longaville, Charles, Ma^ille, and
many other places yielded themselves up to Talbot not so much for lack of
victuals as want of Loyalty: On the other side natural inclination caused
Montargnes and Cherosse to submit themselves to Charles, his obedience playing
with fortune and as it were in sport, giving themselves some times to the one
side, some times to the other. This mean while Philip who after his
unfortunate retreat from Callais studied nothing more then how to annoy that
place, sent a number of Pioners, Woodcleavers and Smiths with a conduct of
1600. Soldiers to cut down the bancks which resisted the Sea, believing that
he should thereby drown Callais and all the precincts thereof, but the event
showed his want of experience, who advised him thereunto for leaving the
enterprise; they went to Pont de Millay, rather that they might appear not to
have come in vain, then out of hopes of their endeavors might prove
prejudicial to Callais or the parts adjacent. The Soldiers of France were
reduced to that point, as they were no longer fit to defend, but made rather a
profession of living upon other men's goods, more to the prejudice of their own
side, then of their enemies: some good store of them, had assembled themselves
together to commit robberies safely amongst their own men, since they could
get nothing amongst the enemy but wounds, and death. They were properly enough
called Flears, great complains was made hereof to Charles, especially of one of
their troops which rise to the number of 600. horse led on by Rodrigo de
Villandras, who being by Charles commanded either to quit the Kingdom or else
to fight against the enemy, did not obey him, which forced Charles to march
himself into the field and fight with him. Villandras weighing the danger made
virtue of necessity, he went to Toulosse, from thence to Guiene, where having
much endamaged the English; he deserved his pardon though the English did
afterward in the Dolphins insurrection regaine all they there lost.

The dangers of that Province were at this time caused more by corruption of
money then force of Arms, which being known in England, and that the Bastard
of Orleans was for this purpose at Tolousse they dispatched away the Earl of
Huntington with 2000. Bowmen and 400. Lances, who broke the bargain by
changing the Governors, and removing the Captains from one place to another,
and because the like contagion was entered amongst the Soldiers in Normandy
corrupted by the French crowns, a supply of a 1000. men was sent thither under
the conduct of four Knights which secured that Province, and though it cannot
for certain be affirmed, that there was some corruption in the loss of Meaux
in Brie, yet he who did defend it gave evident signs thereof, for being
besieged by the Constable and taken by assault, wherein the Bastard of Tian was
taken and immediately beheaded. The defendants retired themselves into the
market place (one of the strongest retreats, that then was in all France) where
they might longer have held out, for Talbot being come with 4000. Soldiers
with full purpose to give the Constable battle, (who having fortified himself
in the City did not stir from thence, though much provoked) took a Fort
placed in the Island near unto the Marketplace wherein he slew 120. men,
took all the rest prisoners; and forced Monsieur de Croy to abandon his
quarter; and got many barks loaded with victuals, so as having secured the
besieged and furnished them with fresh Soldiers, they did not withstanding
forbear to surrender themselves. A few days after, Sr. William Chamberlain
was their chief as says Monstrelee, and Sr. Thomas Abringant according to
Chartier; but whether of either it was where he came to Roan, he was clapped up
prisoner in the Castle, and accused for having surrendered, not necessitated
thereunto, since he had men, victuals, and munition; but how ever, he so
pleaded for himself, as he was set at liberty. The Constable not content with
this achievement marched into Normandy, besieged Auranches; and at the coming
of the Duke of Alansonne was by him reinforced with new troops, a part whereof
took the City and Castle of Saint Susanna in Main, through the treachery of
an English Knight, as says Giles, whom he names not. As for Auranches after
three weeks siege he was forced to rise from before it, for Talbot came and
countersieged him, entering the town in his very sight, the Constable not being
able to hinder him.

The Dolphins insurrection which happened at this time, did a little retard his
fathers good fortune, for thereby the English repossessed themselves of such
places as they had lately lost, he was then just sixteen years old, he lived
at Loches under the tuition of Count de Marsh, a gentleman of noble conditions,
but his authority grew less after his marriage, and after that with the
weight of the Corrazza, he liked well of millitary applause, and the
flatteries of such who hoped for advancement by reason of this rent, the causes
hereof were two; the first for that Charles was always governed by people of
no great account, the second the ambition of the Princes, which has at all
times been prejudicial to France, for they pretend to that out of right, which
is only due unto them by favor. Charles gave occasion hereof by his ill
conceived suspicions, and the Princes laid hold thereof contrary to the laws
of nature, by making the son disobedient to the father, and to civil
wisdom; by putting dissension in the kingdom in a time when they should all
have conspired to have set it free, by expelling the enemy. But suspicions were
in Charles become inseparable and become natural unto him, by reason of his
being become accustomed to his mothers persecutions, and the enmity of Burgony,
and England, so as affying only in the meaner sort of people, as those that
were less apt to hurt him, he made them insolent, as mistrusting the great
ones; he gave them cause of offense, by excluding them from his familiarity and
affairs, his sons discontents sprung from the same fountain, his father
grew jealous of him, seeing him grow in authority as in years, and in the
subjects expectation, so as to keep him under, he treated him more frugally
and held a stricter hand over him, then his years, his being married, and his
ambition could permit; those who misled him were the Dukes of Burbone and of
Alansonne, the Counts of Vandome Chabanes, the Dunnesse, Charmount, Tremugtie,
Boveant and Pry by the Bastard of Burbones means, these bad him weigh the
duty he ought his father, and the welfare of the state; that the former was to
be preserved by the preservation of the latter, but not contrariwise. They
showed unto him the evil effects caused by his fathers bad government, they
ripped up all from the murdering of the Duke of Burgundy even to the present
time, they informed him that those who were of the greatest authority about
him, persuaded him to peace, which could not be done without dismembring the
kingdom, (which was to deprive him the Dolphine of his inheritance and
patrimony) for that their power being weakened by war, wherein Captains and
governors of provinces were only to be used, they could not tyrannize over
the King, Kingdom, Princes and Dolphin, unless they should exclude men of
merit. They told him how his being confined in so solitary a place, might serve
for an Argument to prove this, since he was kept there of set purpose, that
being far from the Court, and ignorant of affairs, he might depend upon them,
that by taking upon him so generous a resolution he could not displease his
father, since the effects would show that such disobedience would redound more
to his profit then any obedience could do, since thereon depended the
preservation of the state; father, son and subjects. I know not whether it
were these reasons that prevailed with the Dolphin, or else his own
contumatious inclination^: his answer was, he was ready to do whatsoever his
quality obliged him unto. That all the power lay in the Princes, that he would
neither be wanting to himself nor them. In brief leaving Loches and the Count
his governor, he went to Monlius where the Duke of Burbone waited for him, and
whether the Duke d'Alansonne and Count de Dammartin came unto him, and after
them all the rest, with a resolution not to part with him till such time as
(according to the common pretense of all seditious people) disorders were
reformed, the authority of the Princes established, and men of worth called
into favor. They used their best means to draw Philip to their faction, but
he whose eyes were not dazzled did not only deny them, but advised them to
more wholesome resolutions; since their enterprise was unjust, full of danger,
and for which they had no ground, he protested, he would never separate
himself from Charles, and said, he should be able to do the Dolphin better
service by not siding with him, then if he should take his part, this answer
did displease the confederated, finding themselves thereby deceived in their
chiefest hope, but they were much more displeased, when all the Provinces did
with horror and detestation hear of this insurrection. They all loved the
Dolphin, and offered to serve him, but not against his Father, who having
admonished him of his duty, and not prevailing, went armed to Poictiers: from
whence he sent to the Duke of Burbone, commanding him to deliver up unto his
Son, and to the Duke of Alanson, commanding him to surrender up Niorte, and
Saint Massence willing them both to come before him, and give a reason for
their insurrection; but they obeyed not. On the contrary, Alanson sent word to
Massence to defend it self, upon notice whereof the City revolted, and the
Castle was besieged, and taken by the Kings forces, which suddenly flockt
thither, and the Commanders hanged. Finally a total agreement was made by an
assembly held at Clarimont, where the King being persuaded to pardon the
Offenders, if together with the Dolphin they would humbly beg forgivenes,
they all came and threw themselves before his feet. Charles blamed his Son
for his fault committed, and the danger he had thereby put the Kingdom to,
exhorting him to better thoughts, and he desiring his Father to pardon,
Tremoulle, Chamount, and Pry, (who were excepted in the pardon) protesting he
would not accept of his unless they had theirs: His Father rebuked him again,
and was contented that being free from punishment they should retire themselves
to their own houses, wherewithal he was notwithstanding to be contented,
unless they would abandon those.

In the time of these disorders Richard Beauchampe Earl of Warwick and Regent
of France dyed, and the Duke of York was the second time chosen, who passed
into Normandy, accompanied by the Earl of Oxford, the Lord Bourchier,
entitled Earl of Eu, and many other gentlemen: he presently found wherein to
employ himself for the loss of Pontouse, being very incommodious for the
Parisians, they disbursed a great sum of money to Charles, that he might
endeavor the recovery of it, wherefore he went to besiege it with 1200. old
Soldiers, and was followed by the greatest part of the Princes, and Nobles of
France, the Lord John Clifford, who together with Talbot had but a little
before surprised it, commanded there in chief.

The River Ouse did much incommodiate the besiegers, for they could not
approach the City on that side, wherefore having built a bridge of Boats over
against the Abbey of Saint Martins, and made themselves masters of the Abbey,
they made thereof a Fort, which did much endamage the besieged, yet were they
not so begirt on all sides, but that they were succored as some will have it
four or five times; Talbot was the first who furnished them with men and
victuals, and the Duke of York came thither with 8000. men, sent to present
battle by his heralds, which Charles would not by any means accept of, for
since the river parted the two Armies, he believed that as long as the bridge
of Beaumont was well guarded (by which the Duke was to pass) he could not be
enforced to fight; but the Duke having brought along with him in Carts great
store of Boats, Cordage, timber, and plankes, he passed some few of his men
over the River, who so speedily wove a bridge of Ropes (whilst Talbot seemed
as if he would force his passage over the bridge of Beaumont, as that they were
almost all past over before the enemy was aware, so as it was too late to
withstand them, in the endeavoring whereof many were slain, and many taken
prisoners; Charles was commended for his wisdom in not entertaining the
battle, but he was blamed for his negligence in suffering the enemy to pass
the River, being thereby reduced to a necessity of fighting against his will,
but being resolved not to come to handblowes, he raised his siege by night, and
having put his Ordnance into the Fort Saint Martin, the which he left in the
custody of Charles d'Aniou and the Admiral Coetery, with 3000. men, he retired
himself to Poiesy. The Duke who upon break of day had put himself in order to
give him Battle, finding him gone entered the City, and having caused fresh
supply of victuals to be brought in, and left Sir Iarvis Clifton there with a
1000. men to defend it, he marched forwards toward Poiesy, but Charles
eschewing him after some few skirmishes he went to Lamote, and from thence to
Rhoan; Charles this mean while suffered in his reputation, especially amongst
the Parisians and Courtiers, which made him resolve to return to Pontouse, and
either take it or dye in the enterprise, he went thither with new Forces, he
assaulted it on three sides he himself in person in one part, the Dolphin in
another, he entered the town though in his entrance he lost 3000. of his men,
of the thousand that were in the Garrison; 500. died in the assault, and many
afterward, so as very few of the Commander Cliston remained prisoners. This
loss was the cause of many others, particularly of Corbeile, Mellune and
Eureux, but this accident hindered not the Negotiation of peace, which was
adjourned the last year, till the now present time, the assembly was to be at
Callais, for the English would not give way it should be else where. Those
that were employed from England brought along with them the Duke of Orleans
still a prisoner, to the end that by his endeavoring the business, he might
procure his liberty; the chief of those who were employed from France were the
Archbishop of Rheims and Narbone, and the Bastard of Orleans. On Philips
behalf came Monsieur de Croevaceur, many days were spent in finding out a
means of accommodation, but all in vain, for it was impossible to agree so
disagreeing interests. The English held resolute to three points; to repossesse
the Duchess of Normandy, and Gascony, to repossesse whatsoever they had lost
for 30. years before, and to hold all this free from any dependency upon the
crown of France. In the first there was no great difficulty, nay it was
yielded unto, but the other two were impossible, for Charles would not restore
back any thing, and much less quit that sovereignty, which had been informer
times enjoyed by his predecessors, so as the business being adjourned to
another time, the assembly was dissolved, the private businesses concerning the
Duke of Orleans had no better success, for monyes were not found ready for his
ransom, and the English would not rely upon his promises, but he had his
liberty by a means which no man would have imagined. Philip began to consider,
that if this Prince should be set at liberty, by any other means then his,
their amity would be immortal; to the ruin of the one or of the other of
them, or rather of them both, and of the kingdom; and that if he should
undertake to free him, not only a peace between them was likely to ensue, but
a friendship for which every one and the King himself would thank him. Yet
that he might not walk on hud winckt, and perad venture be deceaved in his
belief he would first know for certain whether he could forget and forgive
his fathers murder committed by Philips father, the which as it was altogether
unknown to King Phillip till 'twas committed, so was he much displeased
thereat when 'twas committed: as likewise whether or no he would marry the
daughter of the Duchess of Clea^e his sister; this Prince had been prisoner
25. years, which caused so great a desire of liberty in him, as he with much
willingness embraced these propositions: he promised for ever to forget his
fathers death, in respect of this present favor, and gave his word to marry
her whom he proffered him. Hereupon Philip paid 300000. Crowns, and took him
from England, he sent the Duchess his wife to meet him at Gravalein, and
came thitherafterward himself, he brought him to Saint Omers, where having
sworn to the peace at Arras, he gave him the wife he had promised, and each
of them bestowed on others their several orders. Philip the fleece to Orleans,
and Orleans the Porcospino to Philip; actions wherewith Charles was no whit
pleased, and which made him not to admit Orleans to his sight, till one year
after his being at liberty. Of all the Ancient prisoners there remained now
none in England (for the Count de Eu had ransomed himself some two years
before) save John Count d'Anglesme, who was not a prisoner by name, but lay in
pawn for the security of 209000. Francks or of 100000. C^wnes, according to
St. Marta as the residue of 240000. due for the expenses in the assistance
given to the house of Orleans against the house of Burgundy, as we heard in
the life of Henry the fourth. This Prince in the year 1413. when he was given
in hostage into England was but nine years old, and he tarried there till the
year 1445. which was 32. years; The Duke of Orleans his brother left him in
hostage, not being able to do otherwise, since he himself was ransomed by an
other: but what by some moneys he had, and some other moneys he got for the
Country of Perrigord, which he sold for this purpose; he set himself at
liberty four years after. From these two brothers who had so long lived in
captivity did two Kings descend, which succeeded one another, from Charles Duke
of Orleans; Iris the twelfth, and from John Count de Angulesme, Charles Count
de Angulesme, who was Father to Francis the first. Thus fortune is pleased to
sport her self with men, as if sorry she had been so long cross unto the
Fathers, these would recompense them in the glory of them who should descend
from them.

The Duke of York was this mean while careful in the discharging of his
office, his honor and actions, were subject to the censure 1442.
of evil Willers, which made him more diligent not only to preserve what was
gotten, but to add to what the Crown of England did for the present possess
in France: where much having been lost, he thought the best way to preserve
the remainder, was to prevent the enemy: and rather to assault them in their
own territories, then suffer himself to be prevented, and assaulted by them.
To which purpose he selected forth the best Soldiers out of all his
Garrisons, and divided them into three parts, he gave the one part of them to
the Lord Willoughby, the second to Talbot, and kept the third for himself: and
had the Duke of Somerset in his company; Willoughby entered Picardy and
forbearing to sack and burn, that he might avoid giving an Allarum to the
Country, he advanced further by such silence, then he would have done by
ruinating, where he went for thinking themselves safe; and hearing no news of
any enemy, they were either slain or taken prisoners, ere they were aware. The
neighboring Garrisons this mean while awakened by their losses joined
themselves together and opposed him, but he having slain about 600. of them;
and made the rest to fly, their fortune led them to fall upon the Count Saint
Paul, whereby they were totally ruinated, and Willoughby returned to Roan,
loaded with booty and prisoners, the two Dukes having scoured the Countries of
Aniou and Main, not meeting with any to withstand them; York retired to
Normandy and Somerset entered into Britanny, where having taken Guarches a
place belonging to the Duke Alanson, he put all the neighboring parts into
great combustion, whereupon Charles sent the Marishall Loehac to stop his
further progress, who whilst he intended to set on him by night was by
Somerset prevented, who slew a hundred of his men, and took 72. prisoners:
amongst which Messieurs de Davesigni, and de Bueil; and with the taking in of
Beaumonte called the Visconte, he put a period to his progress, Talbots
commission was to besiege Diepe, an enterprise not likely to be effected with
1500. men, he forbear not though to try his fortune, he first made himself
master of the adjacent places, and notable to beguirt in with a formal siege,
he built a Fort upon a hill called Polet which looks up in the Haven, and
beginning to play upon the Town with his cannon, he left it to the care of
his Bastard Son, till such time as he might return from Roan with
sufficient Forces. Giles says that he left there 600. men, and 200. pieces of
Artillery which is not likely; if we consider the small number of those who
conducted them, the number of horses which were requisite to draw them, and the
small precincts of the Fort. The preservation of this place did more import
Charles, then the winning of it did the English; though it did much concern
them: so as resolving to succor it, the Dolphine got the charge of the
conduct, with the title of Lieutenant general and governor between the two
Rivers of Sceine and Lomes, he gave unto him for his assistants and
counselors the Bastard of Orleans, and the Bishop of Avignone, he was followed
by a great number of Gentlemen who flockt unto him from all parts; amongst
which the Count Saint Paul made one, who just then had quitted the English
party; he came to Diepe with 15000. fighting men, he entered the City where
having built six bridges of wood, which ran upon wheels to pass over the
ditches of the Fort, he assaulted it, and had what he desired. Yet great was
the resistance that was made, for many of the assailants being slain, the rest
gave back; and had it not been for the Dolphins example, (who fought as if he
had been a common Soldier) the Fort had not been taken: his presence made
them to return, fight, and over coming all difficulties enter the Fort by
force; 300. English were then slain, the rest remained prisoners, amongst
which the Bastard Talbot, and two Knights, the few French that were found there
were hanged up, and the Fort beaten down, this happened in the year 1443.
Though I have placed it here to avoid telling the same thing twice: The Dolphin
gave many privileges to the City, because it had constantly held out which
were afterward confirmed by Charles, and left Monsieur de Marrets Governor of
the Town, who had behaved himself there very valiantly. The affairs in
Gasconi passed on with the like remisenes, for the English they had besieged
Tartras, a City belonging to Monsieur d'Albret, the Defendants had agreed to
surrender it up: if they should not be succored by Saint Iohns-day, and had
given Monsieur d'Albrets eldest son in Hostage. To this purpose, Charles came
to Tolousse, and from thence to Tartras with an Army of 40000. fighting men
with the which the English not being able to bicker, the Tower was quitted, and
the hostage restored back from thence he passed to Saint Levere, he took it
by assault; and be sides the Inhabitants slew 400. of the English, and took
Sr. Thomas Ramstone, who was Governor there prisoner. Ayes yielded after two
months and half a siege; Reolle a City seated upon the River of Garrone,
seven leagues distant from Bordeaux, was taken by force, but when Charles
returned into France, the English repossessed themselves of Ayes and Saint
Leverine, and kept Ayes but lost Saint Leverine, which was retaken by the Count
de Fois their great enemy, in an other part the Town of Galerdonne, did much
molest Shartres as being near unto it, in so much as the Bastard of Orleans
did besiege it, but raised the siege when Talbot having taken Conches came to
confront him, and Talbot being assured, that it would again be set upon as
soon as the Bastard was gone, did demolish it to the very ground, whilst
businesses went thus in France; the ground works of Glocesters ruin were laid
in England, who relying upon his quality, was not aware that his brothers death
had lessened that authority, which was due to him, as Uncle to the King, and
Protector of the Kingdom, whereupon provoked by his ancient hatred of the
Cardinal of Winchesters pride, he laid many faults unto his charge wherein
though there might be some likelihood, yet were not his proofs sufficient to
convince him, he objected unto him 24. Articles, (some of which touched
likewise upon the Archbishop of York) that he had dared to do many things
without the authority of the King, or him the Protector, to the offense of
Majesty and of the laws; to the end, that in honor and dignity he might
proceed wheresoever else of greater degree, that to enrich himself he had
defrauded the Exchequer, and practiced things prejudicial to the affairs of
France, and that he had been the cause of the King of Scots liberty contrary
to the interests of England, there were the contents of his most weighty
objections which were by the King referred to the Council, and the Council
consisting much of Ecclesiastical persons, the Duke was deluded, not with
oppositions or difficulties, but with hopes and promises, till such time as the
controversy falling into oblivion there was no more speech thereof: he had
plunged himself into this business upon extraordinary disadvantage, his nature
and the Cardinals were too much differing, for being more violent then
revengefull, and satisfied in that he had vented his choler, he did not
solicit expedition, whilst so harmefull carelesnes made him subject to be
despised, and encouraged the Cardinal to revenge. This great Prelates ambition
was grown so high, as that he did pretend that King and Kingdom depended
upon his directions, wherein he did so artificially behave himself, that
though his actions were blameable and unjust, yet did they to all men seem
praise worthy and just, dissimulation and cunning are the characters of a wary
Courtier, but not of a good Christian, as simplicity and candor are of no use,
but of more danger to Princes then private men; Henry and Gloucester lost
themselves, for not having taken the other Council: the Cardinal did with the
Duke, as does a well experienced Captain with a Fort, who not battering the
Wall undermines the foundations, being sure that the Battlements and Walls
withal fall at once, without any hazard to himself, the foundations were the
Dukes reputation, which falling it behooved him to fall, he caused Elianor
Cobham Duchess of Gloucester, to be accused of treason witchcraft, and
enchantment, for having made the Kings image in wax, purposing that the King
should consume away and perish, as that image should do, to the end that the
Duke her Husband might come unto the Crown: her accomplices were Thomas
Southwell, one of Saint Stephens Canons in Westminster; John Hum a Priest
likewise, Roger Bullenbrook reputed a great Negromancer, and Margery Jordan
surnamed the Witch of Eye: they were examined and convinced in Saint Stephens
Chapel before the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duchess was sentenced to do
public penance in three several parts of the city, and to perpetual
imprisonment in the Isle of Man, John Humme was pardoned, the other Priest they
say did die the night which did immediately preceede his punishment, according
to what he had prognosticated of himself, that he should die in his bed. The
Witch was burnt in Smithfield, and Bullingbrooke being drawn at a Horses tail
to Tyburne was hanged and quartered, whether this imputation were true or no
may be disputed by reason of John Hummes being pardoned, and Bullingbrookes
constant affirmation at his death, that no such wickedness was ever imagined
by them, how ever it was this business was in it self so shameful and
scandalous, as the Duke did not any wise meddle therein, but patiently endured
the affront, and the being parted from his wife.

The losses which this mean while were suffered in Guienne, made Henry resolve
to send thither some little succor, till such time as he could provide
greater; Sir William Woodvile was dispatched away with 800. men, and
Proclamation made that whosoever would transport any victuals thither should be
exempted from all taxations, which caused so much provision be sent thither as
did supply the necessity of that Province: which being environed enemies could
not make any use of the adjacent countries; Talbot was likewise dispatched away
with 3000. Soldiers into Normandy, and that he might go with honor
answerable to his deserts, he was by the King created Earl of Shrewsbury, a
title which had not been made use of for 340. years from such time as William
the Conqueror having bestowed it on Robert Montgomery, who came together with
him from Normandy, and who had but two that did succeed him. It fell upon the
person and family of Talbot, who have enjoyed it the space of a 190. years
with a successive descent of ten Earls.

Whilst these provisions were made in England, Count Armignac proffered his
daughter for wife to Henry, together with all the places 1433.
which he or his predecessors either by their own acquirement, or by gift,
and investment from the Kings of France had possessed in Gascony; together with
moneys and assistance in the recovery of such places as were detained from him
by Charles, by Monsieur d'Albret, and others of that Province, till such time
as he should be entirely Duke thereof as anciently he was of Aquitane, the
council did well approve of these offers, and Ambassadors were sent unto him,
but this business was not, nor indeed could not be handled with so much see
resieas to be kept from Charles his ear, who caused notice to be given unto
him for his personal appearing at the Parliament, to be holden within 15.
days at Toulouse, and from thence at Paris. That which moved the Count to
this offer (to boot with his ambition of having his daughter a Queen, and his
dislike for not having a share in Court answerable to his greatness, and his
fathers great deserving) was his desire to appropriate to himself the county
of Comminges, whereunto he laid pretense; Jane Countess of Comminges daughter
to the Count of Bullen, and Comminges, and widow to John Duke of Berny, who
married her when she was but 13. years old, and he himself above 50. was
married a second time to Matthias Count de Castelbuono of the house of Fois,
who had by her one daughter, but being hardly handled by her husband, she made
a will whereby she made King Charles her heir, in case her daughter should die
without lawful heirs, for the which her husband shut her up in prison when
she was fourscore years old, upon this her daughter dyed, and Charles having
his hands full else where. Matthias maintained by the Count de Fois, and by
agreement with Count Armignac, both his cosen; smade himself master of many
places of that County; Amignac doing the like, who laid pretenses thereunto,
the King who was obliged to assist Jane, and desires to enjoy in his due time
the inheritance that was given him, commanded her husband to present her at
Toulouse, where asperation between her and him being declared, half the county
was assigned over to her, and the other half reserved for the kings use, but
she dying some three months after, and Count Armignack having usurped many
places, Charles sent the Dolphin against him: so as being abandoned by Count
Perdriak, his brother by Count de March and by Salatzar a Captain of Arragon,
who did all sustain him, he shut himself up in a Castle, where thinking to
cousen the Dolphins young years by simulation and treaties, he was by the same
arts cozened by the Dolphin, who was a great master therein, for when he
suffered him to enter into the Castle he took him prisoner, and sent him his
wife, his second son and two daughters to Carcassonne, from whence he was
delivered at the intercession of Count de Fois, his desire then to revenge this
affront, and to regaine this County from Charles made him offer this marriage
which took no effect as we shall see.

The Pope and all the other Princes of Christendom, continued in the desire of
making a peace between these two Kings, to the which they thought the expenses
they had been at, and the reciprocal evils they had suffered would make them
more inclinable; to this purpose an Assembly was appointed at Tours, whither
came most of the Princes of the blood, and those who came not sent their
substitute, amongst which the Duke of Burgony sent his; for Henry came William
Poole, Earl of Suffolk, Doctor Adam Mollins Lord Keeper, the Lord Robert
Rosse and others, for Charles the Duke of Orleans, Lodovick of Burbone, Count
de Vandosme, and Monsieur de Pesigni, but meeting with the wonted difficulties
not likely to be ended in a short time; A truce for 18. months was concluded,
by which means they hoped they might meet with the necessary expedients for
the desired peace, some report that upon this occasion Henry demanded Margaret
of Aniou daughter to Renatus King of Scicily, for wife which was not so: for his
marriage with the daughter of Count Armignack was at that time thought as good
as concluded; her fathers performance of his promises being only expected for
the consummating thereof, the only moover in the other was the Earl of
Suffolk, who did it of his own head, not acquainting any of his Colleagues
therewithal, and wherein he did too boldly exceed his instructions, if he
did it out of belief, that this new alliance by blood was requisite, to the
joining of their minds, he was much too blame, for if consanguinitie be of no
moment amongst Princes, when particular interest is in question, much less
affinity, if not, Henry being the son of Charles his sister, no tie save
that of father could more strictly have united them, so as it did not much
import that the Queen of France should be Aunt by the Fathers side to her
whom he should marry, since Charles was Uncle to himself by the mothers side:
what was credited was, that the Earl did this to advance himself, by means
of this Lady intended by him for wife to Henry without any further respect. The
conclusion was that the King of Scicily should have all restored unto him,
which did patrimonially belong unto him in Aniou and Maine, and which were now
enjoyed by the King of England, so as it was not sufficient that this unlucky
marriage should neither bring profit with it, nor any hopes thereof, but that
to make it on all sides disadvantagious, he should endow his father in law
with these countries which had been won at expense of blood, and which for
safety and reputation ought to be unallienable from the Crown of England, but
the fate (if any such thing there be) which led him unto ruin was in-evitable,
for the Earl of Suffolk being returned to England figured forth this match as
a means to end the wars, to procure peace, and make the Kingdom happy,
whereby he blinded the Council, and painted forth the Lady in the most lovely
colors that beauty could be set forth in, and in conditions the most sublime
that might become a Princess (whereby he allured Henry) so as though no man
did approve of it, as thinking it good, some seemed to approve of it, not to
displease Suffolk, and all to please the King, who was persuaded to it; for it
is dangerous for such as council Princes, to have more regard to the Prince
his profit, then to the humoring of him in his affections. Which were it
otherwise Princes would be too happy, and peradventure not acknowledged: God
the author thereof, who does therefore counterpoise the power of their might
with the impotency of their passions. The Duke of Gloucester was he alone who
to his cost opposed it, thinking the former intended match not fit to be
broken, as well for that it was amiss to fail the Count Armignac, as likewise
that his alliance was more advantageous and of more pregnant hopes, of
honorable achievements, whereas the other brought nothing with it, but loss,
the City of Men's, Main, and that part of the Duchy of Aniou, which Henry
possessed serving as a Bulwark to Normandy, did to the first loss of their
surrendering add a second of weakening the affairs in France; which ought to be
maintained in their full force to the end that the treaty of peace might be
made upon the better terms, but all these reasons were to no end, since the
heavens had decreed that the Duke should for this cause loose his life, the
King his life and state, the Crown all that it possessed abroad, and the
kingdom that peace at home which till then it had enjoyed. When Charles
understood that Henry was herewithall contented, he sent unto him the Count de
Vandosme, a Prince of the blood and the Archbishop of Rheins, who concluded the
match; the more to honor this unfortunate marriage, Henry created three Dukes
and one Marquess, he made John Holland Earl of Huntington, Duke of Excester;
Humphrey Earl of Stafford, Duke of Buckingham; Henry Earl of Warwick, Duke
of Warwick; and the Earl of Suffolk, who was the author thereof Marquess
of Suffolk, and for his further honor made him his deputy, to celebrate the
formality of espousall, and to bring his bride over into England.

He went then, and had with him his wife, and a great many of Ladies and
Gentlemen, carriages, and letters for her father, who 1445.
was rich in titles of imaginary kingdoms, as of Scicily and Jerusalem; had
not means to send her to her husband; so as all the charge which was very vast
fell to Henry's share; being come to Tours he married her in the name of his
master, in the presence of the King of France. The Queen and a great number of
Princes and Lords, amongst which were the Dukes of Orleans, Calabria, Alanson,
and Brittany: the marriage was solemnized with feasts and tilting, after which
with the like or better, she was married by Henry in England, and crowned
Queen; Normandy lay openly exposed by the surrendering of the two Provinces.
Count Armignac was scandalized, and shortly likely to revenge himself: the
kingdom was fallen into an Abisse, from whence it was not to be raised but by
the death of the King, the ruin of the Queen, the desolation of the house of
Lancaster, the destruction of the Nobility, the rebellion of the people, and
the alteration of the State.

This separation of Arms caused the Duke of York and many other Commanders
return to England, that they might consult of what 1446
provisions were to be made before the expiration of the truce, to the end that
Normandy being well fortified, Charles might be brought to a well conditioned
peace, and if not that they might be able to make a powerful war. But
England did in this an evil mannager, who having a house covered with Lead,
sells the Lead, and then covers it again with straw, to the end that a spark
of Fire by reason of this new covering may be sufficient to set it on fire; the
given Provinces were the Lead sold, and prodigally squandred; the provisions
for Normandy, the thatching over with straw (the two Provinces might have
entertained the war, and being lost have advanced time, which is the father
of the changes of fortune, for loss in war does seldom happen in one action
and at one instant.) To this purpose a Parliament was called, subsidies paid,
Soldiers raised, and the Duke of Sommerset made a Regent of France, in stead
of the Duke of York, the Marquess of Suffolk, (were it either to boast of
his favors, or that he foresaw the future danger) made a long speech in the
upper house, relating his ownemerits, in the making of this truce, and this
match, and advertising the Lords, that since the truce expired the next April,
and peace did not ensue, they should do well to take such order, as that
Normandy might not be endamaged, for it was to be believed that the French
finding it ill provided would make use of their advantage, that having
advertised the King thereof, he did now the like to them; to the end that if
any evil did happen, it should not be said to have been for want of any good
admonition, he desired them in discharge of his innocence to think on this;
the same thing was done the next day in the lower house, the Messengers whereof
entreated the Lords of the upper house, that by joint consent of both houses
this present action might be registered amongst the acts of Parliament; he
obtained what he desired, the favors of favorites being like to little
Rivolets, which easily glide into the current waters, even of the greatest
rivers, they sent their Speaker to the upper house, where the Lords who did
likewise waver with the wind, did on their knees beseech the King, that in
respect of great services done by the Marquess he would vouchsafe him this,
and whatsoever other favor, for that he could not bestow his graces upon a
more worthy subject and the King who of himself was wonderful prodigal of
his favors to him, and loved to be entreated thereunto, as not willing to
seem to do it, of his own inclination answered them in such a manner, as
every one might see he made him the haven of his favors, and the object of
other men's respects, the action was registered, but not with that success as
was hoped for, to witness that the peoples and Princes favors are of short
duration, and oftentimes unfortunate, he shortly after created him Duke, he
gave him two rich wardships; that of the countess of Warwick, and of Margaret
the daughter of John Duke of Summerset, who was afterward the mother of Henry
the seventh; he likewise at his request created John de Fois, Count de
Longaville, and Captain de Bus, Count de Candale both of them Guascons, all
these favors served only to make his downe-fall the more sudden, which
usually does not fail being caused either by the hatred of private men, or of
the Prince, for such men's insolences increasing with their authorities, and
their authorities growing greater by their favor, they become insupportable,
and having once offended, cannot support themselves but by new offenses,
whereby begetting hatred and envy amongst private men, and society in Princes
they must needs fall and be overthrown, either by the one or the other.

According to Articles of marriage all places belonging to Aniou and Main,
were already surrendered except Manns, the which being of more importance then
the rest, Charles did believe they had no intention to deliver it up, so as
having raised a convenient Army he prepared to have it by force, which when
Henry understood he gave order that it should be forthwith surrendered unto
him, not so much for that he should not have just cause to break the truce, as
that by justice he was to do it. But Chartier and Monstrellet say, that the
English held it till the year 1449. at which time Charles besieged it: and
that the Lord Privy Seal being chosen Bishop of Winchester caused it to be
yielded up unto him, but how ever it were this cessation from Arms wrought the
like effects in England, as in a healthful body the forbearing of moderate
exercises does, which by filling it with bad humors brings infirmities upon
it. The natures of the late married couple were, if not opposite, sufficiently
differing; the husband was of a womanish inclination, the wife of a manlike
spirit; the King was humbled, evout, spiritually given, caring only for his
souls health: the Queen was proud, ambitious, worldly given, and not to be
quieted till having brought the kingdom to be governed as she pleased; she
might see her self free from Rivals in the government. The Duke of Gloucester
was no ways pleasing to her, as well for that he had opposed her marriage (an
injury not to be forgotten) as likewise that her husband being long since out
of his minority was still governed by him as formerly when he was under age;
the which being observed by such as did not love the Duke, they let slip no
occasion whereby they might work his ruin. The Marquess of Suffolk for that
he could not rise to the height he aimed at, during his life* Humphrey
Stafford Duke of Buckingham, for that being son of Anne Plantaginet, who was
descended from Thomas Duke of Gloucester, the seventh son of Edward the third,
if the Duke were out of the way he should be the first Duke of England,
wherefore he thought that this prerogative, and his being cousen to the King,
would cause his advancement; the Cardinal of Winchester by reason of his
emulation which their reciprocal hatred had kindled, not to be quenched but by
the last of revenges. The Archbishop of York for that Gloucester having
declared himself his enemy, in his last accusations he was desirous (though
not according to the Gospel) to render him evil for evil, but his eminency
and universal love had rendered all their designs vain, had they not come
assisted by the Laws. They accused him at the Council Table of many faults,
of all which he did with such sincerity acquit himself, as that he freed the
Counsels mind from any the least scruple, and used such arguments as did add
to his reputation. They objected unto him that he had caused many to be put to
death contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, inferring thereby that hatred and
cruelty had been the directors of his justice, whilst that whereby they were
most scandalized, was that he could not endure wicked men.

These forenamed men, together with them, the Queen perceiving that nothing
was done, caused a Parliament to be called at Berry in 1447.
Suffolk, whither he came, together with the rest of the Peers, not dreaming
of any evil; relying more upon his own integrity then by reason of the others
malice he ought to have done. The first day of Parliament passed over quietly,
spent in the accustomed ceremonies, the second day he was made prisoner by the
Lord high Constable of England, accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham and many
others, a guard was set upon him, his servants were all taken from him whereof
32. were imprisoned; and he not long after (Hale says the very next night)
was found dead in his bed, some affirming, that he dyed of an Apoplexy, some
of an Imposthume in his Head, but although there was no doubt, but that his
death was violent; yet did no man know of what sort, some thought he was
strangled, some stiffeled between two pillowes, and many, that he had a red
hot spit thrust in at his fundament; five of the prisoners were examined and
condemned, but as they were carrying to execution they were set at liberty by
the Marquess of Suffolk, who brought their pardon signed by the King; which
did not satisfy the people, for the saving of these men's innocence did not
salve the treason used to the Duke. By a pardon given to one of his servants,
may be seen the pretense they took to commit this Murder, where it is said,
that he was one of the many Traitors who came in the train of Humphery Duke
of Gloucester to destroy the King, and set his Wife Elianor at liberty. The
death of this Prince was lamented by the whole Kingdom, from whom he deserved
the surname of good; for so in effect, he was a lover his Country a Friend to
good men, a Protector of the learned, whereof he himself was one, as well
verst in the laws of the Kingdom as whatsoever Lawyer, and if he erred in
his enmity with the Duke of Burgony, and the Cardinal of Winchester 'twas
through the greatness of his Spirit, the which if it bereave not of fault, does
at least deminish the blame, for all humanity is subject to error. After him
the title of Gloucester was reputed ominous; for the four last Glocesters came
to violent ends. Thomas Duke of Gloucester son to Edward the third was
strangled at Callais, Thomas Spencer Earl of Gloucester beheaded at Berry,
Humphery Duke of Gloucester dead as you have heard, and Richard Duke of
Gloucester slain in a Battle of civil War after he was King by the name of
Richard the third, as we shall see. I do not withstanding believe, that if
occasion be offered, no man will refuse the honor; since before these
unfortunate four, there were cleaven of that title, nine of which dyed
natural deaths; the other two Ieffery Mandeville, and Gilbert Clare slain in
turnament: the first in war, the other before Sterline; so as they are not to
be rancked with the last four: since their deaths happened through malice or
civil war. The Cardinal of Winchester enjoyed not the content of this his
death above 14. or 16. days for he dyed to see the ruin of his house of the
which he was the chieefest raiser, for doubtless if Gloucester had lived; the
Duke of York had not risen, and the Queen who by his death thought to have
established her authority, lost thereby all she could loose (her life
excepted) her Husband, son, and Kingdom, for her ignorance in things to come
threw her headlong upon those evils which at the price of her own blood, she
would willingly have redeemed together with the life of Gloucester, but too late
foresight brings repentance; remedies not.

Having by so cruel a way obtained her desire, she employed all 1448.
her endeavors how to establish an authority which under her Husbands name
might make her absolute in the Kingdom, she raised Suffolk from Marquess to
Duke, which title he but a short time enjoyed, for fortune of her own nature
inconstant is much the more so, when her favors are conferred without merit.
The Duke of York who saw that all these things redounded to the advancement of
his designs, slipped not his occasions, for laying open to his friends, and the
male contents in how bad a condition the Kingdom was, the King weak and
governed by a Woman, under the haughty direction of the Duke of Suffolk, it
was easy for him to persuade them to establish him in his own right, since
the house of Lancaster did usurp the Crown, and held it contrary to the laws
of the Kingdom; the laws of blood and nature, this he did with so much
vehemence insinuate, so opportunely and to people who desired nothing more then
change, as it was easy for him to draw unto him subjects of the most eminent
condition, who that they might have followers and preferments were apt to
uphold him. To this was added the greatness of his family, and the family of his
wife; Cicelli Nevill by both which he was allied to the greatest men and
chiefest families of the Kingdom; his reputation won in France, but chiefly
his right unto the Crown in a time, when if he had no right they might have
imagined some in him, so to withdraw themselves from the Government of an
imperious Woman and a proud favorite who ruling all as they listed, and
excluding all others made use of the authority of a weak King who had nothing
of Prince in him but name. This was the first stone which Richard Plantagenet
Duke of York laid in the groundworke of the general ruin and ruin, of
himself, wherein did no less appear the common consent, by the secrecy in
such a business of great importance which was inviolabely observed, then the ill
satisfaction given by such as governed, who were not aware that by alienating
such as ought to have depended upon them, and not spying into their actions,
nor making use of liberality and hopes, (things usual in him who knows how to
govern) they were of necessity to fall, but on the contrary they trusted every
one whilst they discontented all and minded not any friendship, believing the
bare name of King to be sufficient, whilst weakness and simplicity made the
King to be despised, and them hated, who made use thereof.

The first day of April 1447. the truce expired and the desire of peace
prorogued it till the first of June 1449. when an accident brake forth which
interrupted the quiet, and quite dashed the hopes of a conceived peace: Duke
Francis the first who was comprehended in the truce, reigned in Britanny, and
Francis Surianne named the Arroganne who for services done to the Crown of
England had deserved the order of the Garter, was Governor in low Normandy,
his Garrisons namely those of Saint Jacques and Beveronne, had by reason of
their commerce discovered the weakness of the neighboring frontier Towns,
especially of Tongeresse in Britanni, the which being rich and ill guarded was
by the Arragon scaled by night and taken together with the Castle, not without
the mark of much cruelty and avarice, for to boot with the breach of truce;
and the taking of other men's goods in a time, when in all reason they ought not
to have done so, they slew many of the Inhabitants and pilladged all they had,
giving more scandal by the circumstances then by the deed it self. Duke
Francis complained hereof by a Herald to the Duke of Somerset, requiring of
him amends for the injury and the restitution of the place, together with what
was taken from thence. Somerset cooly replied, that the accident displeased
him, that he did approve thereof, and that he should make such satisfaction
as he should think fit; Francis was herewithall no whit pleased, but
represented his injury to Charles as done unto his Majesty, requiring aid at
his hands, affirming he was resolved to re-have his own by the way of Arms,
with him to force it, he forthwith dispatched away Messengers to England, and
Normandy: making his complaints and received the like answer as formerly the
Duke had done. And Somerset sent unto him two Knights (one of which were Sir
John Hungerford) affirming by them that the action displeased him, as being
blamefull and done without his knowledge, but reparation for the injury and
satisfaction for what was taken away being demanded, they said they had no
other order, but to endeavor that all places as well of the one side as the
other should remain according to the truce in their former secrecy. To the
which Charles replied, that if the Duke of Somerset were really sorry for what
had happened, he should do well to show it by making amends, for the injury
done, which if he should not do he would fail his Nephew the Duke of
Britanny, and therefore he would not be tied to secure any place, nor was it
reason, that being injured and endamaged, he should be denied revenge; since
he was allied in blood to the greatest Princes and Lords of his Kingdom. That
Somerset should mind his own affairs, for so would he do, since it was but
reason that the English having possessed themselves of what was another in time
of truce: the offended party might be free from any tie of obligation, and
allowed to recent the injury received. Hungerford not knowing how to answer
him, desired him to send some body to Sonniers a Town belonging unto Charles,
whither the Duke of Somerset would likewise send some other.

Charles willingly did this, but he sent thither Monsieur de Cowlant, and two
others; but whilst they were treating with Somersets deputies, Monsieur de
Bresse Captain of Sonniers, in company with Monsieur de Manni, Robert Hacquet,
and James Claremont, took Pont d'Arc; being therein assisted by a Merchant who
wonted to go from one place to another, and therefore well known, was got to
the Gate upon break of day with a Cart, wherein were two Soldiers apparelled
like Carpenters, and called for the Gate to be opened, the which being done,
he stayed his Cart upon the draw Bridge, and faining to take out some money to
reward them, he let a piece of silver fall, which the keeper of the Gate
stooping to take up, he was slain before he could raise himself again by
the two Soldiers, and together with him an Englishman that came to open the
Gate at the same time, the forenamed Captains came from forth their ambush,
and with their followers entered the Town; they took sixscore English
prisoners in their beds, amongst which the Lord of Faulconbridge the Commander
of the Town (whom Argentres believes to be a Dutchman came thither the night
before) and sent them all to Sonniers, this accident displeased the English,
but Charles liked it well; of whom restitution being demanded: he replied, he
would willingly do it, when Tongerres with all the Losses and interests
thereof should be restored to the Duke of Britanny. The which the English
could not do for the losses and interests of the Town were irreparable, life
could not be restored to them that were slain, and the spoils estimated at
1600000. Crowns were diversely disposed of by them, that took them and
emborsed them that were the Authors or Permitters thereof. This inconvenience
could not have happened in a better time; for Charles being informed of the Duke
of Glocesters death, the Nobilities division, the Kings weakness, and the
Queens detasted government; he thought it a fitting time to drive the English
out of France: yet moved he not suddenly, to the end that the breach of truce
might be on his side justifiable, he made a confederacy with the Duke of
Britanny; with an obligation of reciprocal assistance by Sea and Land, and
under the name of the Duke of Britanny (Charles consenting thereunto) Gerbory
was taken by Monsieur de Money, and as many as were found there, put to the
sword. Conques by Robert Hocquet; Coingnac, and Saint Magrine near Bordeaux in
Gascony by Verdenne. Somerset complained of these invasions to Charles and
required restitution, answer was made that he wondered, that the English who
had taken Tongerres in time of truce, without any occasion given, and without
restoring, should pretend the Duke of Britanny unjustly injured: should restore
what by just reprisall he had taken from them. At last they came to conference
in the Abbey of Boneport, the which prooving fruitless, Charles resolved to
make open war, and it succeeded well unto him; for not having before any
design upon Vernuille, he understood that upon day break it was surprised by
Peter Bresse and James Claremont: by the means of a Miller who was Sentinel
there, of 120. English, that were there; some were slain, the rest fled into
the Castle out of the Ditches, whereof the water being drained by the same
Miller after a great assault it was taken by force, and those who remained
alive retired themselves into a strong Tower called Legrize, a part from the
Castle and beguirt with a deep Ditch full of water, and which was not to be
taken, but for want of victuals. The Dunnesse was come to assist him in this
siege, but hearing that Talbot came to the succor, he went to encounter him:
Talbot hearing thereof withdrew himself to Harecourt, so as they both failed
in their designs, the one in succouring the Town, the other in giving
battle. At this same time came Count Saint Paul into the field with 4000.
horse, he took Norgent by composition, from thence passing by Ponte d^ Are in
company with Count de Eu, he marched on Honnefleur side to Ponte de Mare,
whilst the Dunnesse marched on the other side the River Riule. By joint
agreement, they assailed that Town, each of them on their side, after long
contestation taking it by force, and the English who had retired themselves
into a strong house on the towns end, were constrained to yield themselves
prisoners; Lizeux by the Bishops means yielded it self before they came near
it, so as the Inhabitants received no damage, nor yet the neighboring places
who followed the example thereof. Saint Jacques de Beveron battered by Monsieur
de (...), and valiantly defended, was yielded up; the laws and goods of the
inhabitants saved: The Tower Gryse of which we have spoken, after a few days
did the like; there being but 30. Soldiers in it, the Garrison of Mantes would
defend themselves, but the Inhabitants seeing Charles near at hand; and that
the Dunnesse had appeared before it with 6000. men, made good certain stations
against the English, who having enemies without and within yielded, and Charles
his people entered the Town to secure them, from them without, who pretended
to sack it. The Castle of Laigni was by the Captain betrayed, and those of the
Garrison made prisoners; Vernon yielded it self, the Inhabitants whereof would
not defend themselves, so as the Garrison having it, witnessed under their
hands that they were abandoned, came forth with their weapons and baggage, and
the Town was given to Charles by the Dunnesse in consideration of his service;
the French forces were divided into four armies commanded by the Duke of
Britanny, the Dunnesse, the Counts de Eu, and Saint Paul, and by the Duke d'
Allanson; besides the Lances and Archers which waited upon Charles his person,
so as it is no wonder, if for the most part they won it at first sight since
notwithstanding the forces, the Inhabitants inclinations did decline from the
English party; the Castle of Aniou yielded as soon as sommoned, by means of a
Portugal who was Governor thereof, who Charles left in the same charge in
recompense of his service unfaithfully performed to his former Master: Gourney
yielded upon the like terms, Rocheguione commanded by John Hovell an
Englishman was surrendered with liberty to the English Garrison, and leave for
himself to enjoy his wives lands, who was a French woman and to continue still
Captain of some Castle; the French now thinking, that they lost too much time
by keeping all in one body. The two Counts de Eu and Saint Paul went to besiege
Chasteaunent de Nicourt, they took the Town by assault and the Castle upon
conditions in 15. days, the Dunnesse besieged Chasteau, Cambresse, which
yielded in seven days space; Le Chasteau de Harecourt bargained to do the
like if it were not succored within a prefixed time which it was not: Iammes
yielded suddenly. Argenteu defended it self, but the Inhabitants having drawn
the enemy into the Town, the English retired into the Castle, which having a
breach made in it by the cannon, they got into a tower, from whence they came
forth with white truncheous in their hands; the Duke of Britanny accompanied by
his Uncle, the Constable having left Peter of Britanny his brother upon the
frontiers of Tongerres and Arranches with 300. Lances for defense of the
Country) entered into Normandy, he came before Constances, where when he had
tarried but one day, the Citizens forced the Garrison to depart, they
themselves remaining in the same condition as before the war. St. Lo. Hommet,
Nentreill, Tonigny, Benterill, Hambre, Mota, da Eresque Haie, Chantelon, Auney,
and other like places compounded; upon the like terms Carentesse held out
three days, the Garrison afterward marching out with a Truncheon in their
hands, and the inhabitants set at liberty, Ponte D'ovey and Ga^rey were taken
by assault, the Duke d' Alansonne entered thereinto, and the English withdrew
themselves into the Castle, but they made but short abode there.

Fortune this mean while (as if she meant to undo England on all sides)
raised a rebellion in Ireland, which though it did no harm (for the Duke of
York was sent thither who appeased it) yet the evil not caused by the
Mallady, was occasioned by the Physician; for the Duke having quieted the
tumults, won so much of friendship in that kingdom, that for his sake they
forsook the King to follow the house of York; to the which they did ever
after passionately adhere. Charles was then at Sonniers, whither the King of
Scicily, and Count du Maine his brother being come unto him, with fresh supply
of men, he resolved to pursue his fortune in totally driving the English out of
Normandy; he gave order for the besieging of Chasteau Galliarde, this place
was built upon a rock, upon the River, not to be lost but by famishing, the
Seneschall of Poictou pitch his Camp before it, whither Charles came shortly
after himself in person; this mean while the Duke of Alansonne took Grisney
upon composition, and Sir Richard Marbury Governor of Glizors who had married
a French woman, made his peace by his brothers means, took his oath of
Allegiance to Charles, betrayed his honor, kingdom and King, that without
ransom he might re-have two sons which were taken at Ponte de Mere, and that
he might enjoy his wives patrimony, and be captain of Saint Iermans in Say:
wealth being more powerful with him then any sense of honor; there remained
no place of importance in all Normandy except Rhoan her metropolitan, which did
not take part with Charles; he assembled all his Forces to take it in being
come to Ponte de Ar^, he sent his Heralds to summon it to alleagiance, but the
English would not suffer them to do their office; fearing least the people
might mutiny. The Dunnesse who was come before it, perceiving no commotion in
the City, and annoyed by perpetual rain and sallyes, after three days
returned to Ponte d' Arc. Those of Rhoan this mean while, having made
themselves masters of two towns (by whose entre-pressed curtain they might
give him entry) recalled him, whereupon he returned, and some 40. of his men
having entered the town by Scal^do, they were surprised by Talbot who (though
played upon from the town) slew the greatest part of them, and drove the rest
from the walls. The slaughter of the Towns men, then of the assailants, the
Rampard between the two towns was covered with blood and dead bodies, besides
those who in throwing themselves from the Towers broke their limbs, or lost
their lives, but this encounter in appearance little favorable to Charles, was
that which brought him the victory, for the Citizens fearing least that the
English resolute in defense of the town might make them run hazard of their
lives, resolved together with the Archbishop come what come would to surrender,
so as presenting themselves before the Duke of Sommerset; and acquainting him
with the danger that the City was in, and with their resolution; they demanded
the surrendering thereof, he willingly would have delayed and have punished
them, but having enemies without and within he seemed to be therewithal
content. The chief captains, together with the Archbishop went to Ponte d'
Arc, offered to surrender the city, demanding leave for those to depart who
would the preservation of their goods, who remained; and free passage for the
English and their goods; the which being granted, and relation thereof made in
the town house, it pleased the inhabitants, but not the Duke, who going from
thence, caused all his men take Arms and made himself strong at the Bridge,
in the Palace and in the Castle, the which when the Citizens saw they did the
like, and placing strong guards every where they advertised the King, offered
to throw open the gates unto him, drive back such English as were fallen into
the City, and ^lew some seven or eight of them: nor yet contented herewithall
they made themselves masters of the walls, turrets, and gates. Upon this
commotion the Dunnesse came thither, and seeing the City defended by Citizens,
he placed himself before Saint Katherines, demanding the surrender thereof,
the Captain thereof when he had not above 120. Soldiers, and who knew the
King was coming thither with his Cannon yielded. They were by a Herald led to
the gate S. Owen, where meeting with the King; he advised them to use no
violence by the way, but to pay for what they should take; and answer being
made that they had no money, he caused ten pound to be given them, being
come to Rhoane he alleged in the aforesaid Fort of St. Katherines, whilst the
Keys of the City were presented to the Dunnesse, as he was with all his Army
in battle array before the gate Martinville, the troops which he brought in,
took their stand before the Castle, and the Palace guarded by 1200.
Soldiers, and kept by the Duke and Talbot. The Duke had quit the bridge, and
was too late aware of his ill advisement in excluding himself from the Cities
capitulation, whilst he had neither strength to defend it nor to punish it, he
desired to speak with Charles who yielded thereunto, he desired he might be
permitted to depart according to the capitulation agreed upon by the City, the
King replied he was not comprehended in that capitulation since he himself had
broken it by revolting against the City, by endeavoring to hinder the
surrender thereof, and by fortifying himself in the Palace and in the Castle,
actions contrary to that agreement which he pretended to make use of, that it
behooved him to pay for this by surrendering of Honneflour, Harflour, and all
the country of Caux, if he would have his liberty, to the which the Duke
consented not, but returned much confused to his former station. The Palace
was besieged, it had gates without and within the City, but it was impossible
to get out, for that without was straightly guarded, the like was done unto the
Castle, and nothing but giving fire unto the Ordnance already adjusted against
them both, was wanting to enforce them: to boot with this they had but little
victuals, many mouths, and small hopes. The duke desired a second hearing, the
King granted it, he was received by the Heralds, and at coming forth of the
City met by Count Cleremont, eldest son to the Duke of Burbone, his demands
being the same as formerly. Charles his answer was likewise the same, so as the
Duke was much blamed as being too impudently obstinate, he had no reason to
look for better capitulation since his condition grew worse, he thought it was
bootelesse to importune the King the third time, therefore forced by necessity
he spoke with the Dunnesse, from whom he obtained a truce till the 24. of
October, which was prorogued 12. days, from day to day, in all which time
granting what he had denied to do, to wit, the forenamed towns, and denying
what was not before required of him, the delivery up of the Earl of Shrewsbury
in hostage for the performance of his promises, it was at last concluded that
he, his wife children and soldiers, as well of the Palace as of the Castle
should go their ways, their lives and goods saved, that he should set at
liberty such prisoners as should be found with him, that he should not carry
away with him his greatest pieces of Ordnance, that he should pay unto the
King within the space of one year next coming 50000. Crowns to the Dunnesse,
and those that joined with him in the conclusion of the treaty 6000. that he
should satisfy all debts ought by him, or his in the City, and that he should
deliver up into the Kings hands, or his Commissioners Angues, Candale,
Tanchervelle, Bon-Isle, Honnefleur and Monstrevilliers; that he should oblige
himself hereunto by hand writing, and give hostages thereupon; the chief
whereof should be Talbot, the Earl of Shrewsbury. The towns were restored
except Honneflour, the which the Governor thereof refused to surrender, which
caused the detainement of Talbot, and the rest of the hostages, whilst these
things were treated of at Rhoan, the Duke of Brittany made himself master of
Tongerres, after having besieged it above a month, so as having battered it,
and being ready to assault it; Francis Surian who did defend it, together with
five or six hundred English yielded it up, their Arms and Horses saved, and
not permitted to carry any thing out, save each of them a little bundle. He
who had been cause of the violation of truce, whereby so many mischiefs were
occasioned, betook himself to the French side; I know not whether fearing his
own safety or some less excusable cause. The Duke of Alansonne besieged
Bleeme, a place which patrimonially did belong unto him, and which for some
days was stoutly defended, they articled to surrender if they were not
succored by the twentieth of December; this was the clematericall year to
England, seven multiplied it by it self, producing 49. which after so many
losses, ended with the loss of Harflore; the King went thither in person the
third of October, Cannons and Mines brought it, to parley on Christmas eve, and
on Christmas day it yielded, those of the Garrison were furnished with shipping
to transport them, and had safe conduct by land, together with their weapons
and goods, the Soldiers without suffered much in this short siege, for the
season was very violent in rain and inundations, so as the waters entered into
all the Huts throughout the whole Camp; this notwithstanding they willingly
underwent all incommodities, seeing the King expose himself to all dangers,
his example made them willing to suffer with him; the only way to infuse
patience into the French, for being led on by their King they out did
themselves, doing that under his command, which under another had been
impossible for them to do; and because we have diciphered this King else
where with affections, much differing from these present actions, we must cite
Hallian for our discharge, who will free us from reproach telling what happened
in the year 1445. he falls upon these words.

In the concourse of so many affairs the King suffering himself to be
transported by pleasures, fell in love with a Gentlewoman belonging to the
Queen his wife, called Agneta Sorrel borne in Onvergne, a Lady so fair, as
she acquired the name of Agneta the fair, and to the end that she might have
the title, the King gave her during her life le Chasteau de Beante, near to
the Boys de Saint Vincent; and caused there to be erected that great Pavillion
which at this day is there to be seen all covered. When she was called the
Lady of Beauty; the King had by her four daughters, all married into good
houses of this Kingdom, though some say he had but one married to Monsieur de
Bresse.

Of Normandy and others; That she lived not long, and that the King did not
avow her for his, but though the affection the King bore her lessened his due
respects unto his wife, and took from her much of of the rights of marriage,
yet was she feign to swallow this bitter pill and patiently permit the fair
Agneta enjoy the best of her husbands affections: it is said that when she saw
the King careless, effeminate, not minding the affairs of his kingdom, nor
the victories which the English won; she one day said unto him, that when she
was a very young girl, she was told by an Astrologer that she should be
beloved by one of the most courageous and most valiant Kings of Christendom,
and that when she had the honor to be beloved by him, she thought he had
been that valiant and courageous King foretold by the Astrologer, but seeing
him so soft natured, not minding his affairs, normaking head against the
English, and Henry their King, who before his face had taken so many Cities of
his, she very well perceived she was deceived, and that this valiant
courageous King could be none other but the King of England, and therefore said
she, I will go find him out, for he is that King foretold me by the
Astrologer, and not you, who neither have courage nor valor, since you suffer
your kingdom to be lost and do not resent it. These words pronounced by her,
whom he loved better then he should have done, did so touch him to the quick
as that he fell a weeping, and awakening himself, took courage upon him,
gave not himself so much to hunting and dalliance as he was wont, so as by
his good fortune, and the valor of his good Commanders who faithfully served
him, he drove the English out of all France, Callis excepted. I was desirous to
place here the words of this Historian, not so much to show that I did not lie
in my other contrary descriptions, as that it being my duty to praise virtue
and blame vice, I have done it in their due places, as every writer ought to
do particularly where they speak of Princes, to the end that those who are
alive may thereby be admonished, that when they are dead the same rules will be
observed in the writing of their story. The affairs in Guienne.


Though they did not precipitate so fast of as those off Normandy, Guichus a
strong Castle, four leagues distant from Bayone, was besieged with a formal
army by Monsieur de Lantree, brother to the Count, and Bastard de Fois; 4000.
English went to succor it, and that their coming might be the more unlooked
for, they embarked themselves in the River that passes by Bayone, and landed
not far from Guisches; Lantree who by spies was informed of their design
left the siege, and treated them as they thought to have treated him, for they
not dreaming of being discovered, were taken at such unawares as not having
time to put themselves in order, they fled toward their Barques, were followed
by the enemy and 1200. of them slain. George Stapleton one of their Commanders
mistrusting to escape by flight, passed through the midst of the enemy, and
was followed by 600. Lances, who valiantly fighting saved themselves within
Gueschin; but it did but little avail him, for the town being blockt up, and
no body to succor it, he departed at unawares with his men, hoping to get into
Bayone, but being followed by the Bastard de Fois, he and many of his men were
taken prisoners; the Castle was yielded up the next day, and therewithal all
the country which lies between Auxe and Bayone, wherein was contained 15. or
16. strong holds which afterward caused to the French the more easy winning
of whole Guascony.

Charles did not forbear to prosecute his designs in Normandy, for all the
frost and cold in January; he sent the Dunnesse to besiege 1450.
Honnefleur, whither he afterward came in person, and was lodged in an Abbey
not far from thence; valiant was the defense, and furious the onset, wherein
neither wit nor labor was wanting. The town articled to surrender, if they
should not be succored by the eighteenth of February; but the Duke of
Sommerset not daring to trust the Citizens with Caan, which if he had done,
wanting men to resist the French Forces, Honnefleur was enforced to run the
same fortune the other towns did. Iearnsy yielded, and paid down 10000.
pieces of gold, not so much that the Garrison might be suffered free with their
goods, as for the ransom of Momfort their Captain not long before taken at
Ponte de Mere. This mean while the English though at variance at home, sent
Sir Thomas Terrill into France, a renouned Captain, and who had been trained
up in these wars from his youth, but being landed at Cherreburgh with 1500.
men he could do no good with so small a number; and though in a short time he
took in Liseux and Valonges, the matter was not so much, since the enemy being
severally busied else where, had not leisure to divert them; he added to his
number certain troops, drawn out of the few towns, which yet remained to
the English, conducted by Sir Henry Mowbery, Sir Robert Vere, and Sir Robert
Gough; which in all made us 5000. with these he judged it best only to march
toward Caen, whither all the enemies Forces were bent to besiege it, and in
case he should be met withal to fight as he did, for being come to Iermingy,
a place between Carenten and Baieux, on the 18. of April, they were met by
Count Cleremont the Admiral of France, and the Senesshall of Poictou with 600.
horse, and 6000. foot; they fell to blows, and valiantly was the battle
fought, till the Count Richmont coming in with fresh men, the English were
defeated, 4000. of them slain, 800. taken prisoners, amongst which Terrill,
Mowberry, and Sir Thomas Drue, Vere, and Gough; with the small remainder saved
themselves; this is the relation made by the English.

Monstrelet says the French had but 600. Lances, besides their bowmen, whose
number he does not specify (but as we shall see every of his Lances proved
four, and all on horseback) that the English pitched their Swords and Daggers
against the ground, to the end that the enemies horse might thread themselves
thereon, they that were gotten into an advantageous place, with a little River
and many Gardens full of trees at their backs, so as they could not be set
upon behind, and that Count Claremont having with him but a small number of
men, sent speedily to the Constable at Saint Lo, to come and succor him, who
came thither with 240. horse, and 800. Archers, that being come to a mill where
the English had beaten back 1500. Archers, and won two Culverins he set upon
them, overcame them, and slew 3770. of them, and took 1400. prisoners. I will
not relate what others write hereof, but only what is set down in the
Chronicles of Normandy printed in Rhoan, the year 1581. no authors name set
there, the which I cite in other places because it particularly appertains to
the Province, it says that the English who landed at Chereburgh were 3000.
that they had added to their number from the Garrison of Caen, five or six
hundred from that of Bayeux, 800. from Vires, between four or five hundred,
which number it sums up to make between five and six thousand whilst; give
the number granted which is there but doubtfully spoken of, it makes but 4900.
that Messieurs de Cleremont, de Castrus, de Mongaton, de Rays Admiral of
France, the Senesshalls of Poictou, and Burbone, and James Renault met with
them near to a village called Iermingi, where they skirmished the space of
three hours, but that the Constable Monsieur de Lavall and Marishall Louhac,
coming up with 300. Lances and their bowmen, the battle was valiantly fought
on both sides, the English discomfited, 3774. of them slain, and 1440. of them
taken prisoners, that but five or six of the French were found missing, so as
the English being well 6000. the good people say that God was the cause of this
victory. Belforest says, there were 10. of the French slain, Hallian 8.
Dupleix 4. or 5. and Serres agrees in the number with Hallian, yet he makes
the miracle greater then do the rest for he says, the English threw away
their arms, and suffered themselves to be slain, and taken to mercy, many of
them being spared through the courtesy of the French, his own account prooves
him a lier, but much more the accounts made by the rest, for he counting those
who came from England to be 4000. and that with the addition; of the other
Garrisons they made 8000. (whilst the Chronicle makes them in all but 4900.)
and counting 3774. slain, and a greater number saved through the courtesy of
the French, those who he makes to run away shamefully, will prove but a very
small number, and his number exceeds the number mentioned in the Chronicle
above 3000. To boot; he contradicts Hallian who writes that Gough escaped
away with a good number, of horse and 1000. Archers, and whereas he accused
them of cowardice. I know not with what face he can do it, if they for the
loss of one Battle ought to be reputed cowards, what ought the French to be
who lost so many, to fight till the last gasp is not cowardice, to defeat
1500. Bowmen and take two culverins is not cowardice; cowardice is a thing not
known unto the English as Serres says, they either fight with valor or
retire with reason. Matthew Gough who upon all occasions gave trial of his
valor, did not abandon his companions, as he calumniously affirms he did,
but the case being desperate and the loss inevitable; he deserves
commendations, in that he reserved himself for a better occasion, for had he
done otherwise, he should rather have merited the name of fool then of
valiant. This battle being won the French went before Virus, Captain Henry
Mawbery their prisoner was there, so as it held not out long, the Garrison
withal they had got to Caen, here count Cleremont parting from the Constable
went into Britanny, and from thence to the siege of Auranches, which in about a
Month was taken, the defendants being suffered to depart away weaponlesse.
Tom^laine a place near Mount Saint Michell might have held out longer; but
there being no hopes of succor, the Inhabitants would not together with the
Town, loose all that they had: The Dunnesse Nivers and Eu, encamped themselves
before Bayeux, where much was done before it fell into their hands, for though
great breaches had been made by the cannon, and the Walls beaten down in
many places, yet would they not yield: whereupon the Assailants who longed to
sack the Town, seeing the breaches made and the walls ready to fall down,
gave them two assaults, but in such disorder as doing it without their
Captains command, they were beaten back; yet Matthew Gough who after the
Battle of Iernimgi was got thither, knowing they were not able to resist the
third assault surrendered it, coming forth with a cudgel in his hand, and
with some 900. persons, the greatest part whereof were Women and Children, to
whom carriages were permitted, though not articled for, wherein this route was
carried a pitiful Spectacle into Cheriburg, Bribec, Valonges, and Saint
Saviors, yielded to the Constable, who mustening all his forces together,
besieged Caen on two sides, and made a Bridge to pass over the River; Charles
came thither in person accompanied by the King of Cicely, the Duke of Calabria
his son, the Duke of d'Allanson, the Counts of Maine, Saint Paul and
Tancherville with a great many other Noble men, Gentlemen, and Archers, and
took his Quarter in the Abbey of Dardenne; at his coming with much a do and
loss of blood. The bulwarks of Vancelles, upon the River Dine were taken,
mines were made in all places particularly toward Saint Stephens, so as the
Walls being thrown down, they fought at handy blows. This notwithstanding,
the City was not likely so soon to have yielded, and much less the Castle
which very was strong, had it not been that a cannon shot lighting upon the
Duchess of Somersets-house (a particular which the French conceive) made her
with tears in her eyes beg of her Husband, not to suffer her and her
Children remain any longer in so eminent danger. Caen was by King Henry given
to the Duke of York, so as though the Duke of Somerset as Lieutenant general
had all plenary authority in all other places, yet had he not so in this
without Sir David Halls consent, Commander of the Town under the Duke of
York. But Somerset summoning together, the chiefest Citizens told them, that
it was impossible to defend the Town, and that in endeavoring it, they would
endanger being taken by force: His proposition was gladly entertained by them
all, Hall opposed him showing him that though his authority was general, yet
had he nothing to do in that place, which did belong to the Duke of York,
and whereof the charge was committed to him, that the Town was not in such
danger as he pretended, for it neither wanted men, munition, nor money, that
therefore it behooved them to spin out the time till the Duke himself might
come to the succor thereof, or else give order for the surrender thereof. That
in the mean while, he would defend it against whatsoever power, since the
Castle was impregnable; and though subject to the thunder of a cannon, yet
only Women and Children were there at to be afraid, not men of war. Long
were the disputes hereupon, but the Inhabitants siding with the Duke all of
them naturally inclined to the French; and fearing to be sacked they mutined
against the Captain, vowing that if he did not yield up the Town within
three days they in despite of him would throw open the Gates to the King,
their threats were not to be despised, since the common sort of Soldiers, and
the Duke sided with them, so as he was constrained to yield, but would not
have his name used in the articles, which were signed in this manner; the next
day of the Feast of Saint John Baptist, that in the Town and Castle should be
yielded up on the first of July, in case they were not before that succored,
that the Duke, Duchess, their Children and all others, that had a mind to
depart might do so, the Soldiers with their horses and harness, the
Inhabitants with their Wives, Children, and movables, but at their own
charges, that they should pay what they ought unto the Citizens, and should
leave behind them all sort of Artillery. Sir David Hall took shipping for
Ireland to advertise the Duke of York his master hereof, who was so much
offended thereat, that if his former injuries received from the Duke of
Somerset, did touch him to the quick, this vexed his very heart. Of a 100.
Towns enjoyed by the English they now enjoyed but four; Lisieux commanded by
Gough yielded, their lives and livelihood saved, but the Garrison was to march
forth with a white truncheon only in their hand, Falce whereof the Earl of
Shrewesbery was Master, by gift from Henry held out a while, the soldiers
sailed forth to surprise the cannon which they saw appear, but being repulsed
and Charles himself coming thither in person, they demanded parley, which was
granted them; they agreed upon two articles, one for each side for them, that
they should surrender the place if they were not succored within twelve days.
For Charles that he should set the Earl of Shrewesbery at liberty who was
prisoner in Dreux. Dumfronte yielded the second of August, the lives and goods
of the Inhabitants saved, Chereburg held last out, it was valiantly defended as
long as their munition lasted, from thence, the Governor thereof Captain
Thomas Gonvall, and the Garrison went to Callais, where he found the Duke of
Somerset and the rest, who after so many adverse fortunes had retired
themselves thither.

Normandy returned back again to the possession of the French, 30. years
after it had been conquered by Henry the fifth, and 3. were the causes of her
loss, the first that a small number of Soldiers were not sufficient to
retain it in obedience, for though it did patrimonially belong to the Crown
of England, yet did it not any longer retain those former good affections to
England, which had been cancelled by the interposition of the government, of
two ages from the time, that King John of England was deprived thereof by
Philip the first, so as being French in situation, tongue, and customs; it
was impossible to preserve her with the weak forces of bare garrisons, divided
conquests, and which are aloof of, are not kept without great Collonies, or
without the total rooting out of the people, especially when they neighbor
upon great Princes, that may help them, the common wealth of Rome does
anciently teach us this, and in modern time the Turk and the Spaniards; the
Turk in the Eastern Countries, and parts adjacent, the Spaniards in Cuba,
Muxico, Pera, and the rest of America, wherein destroying as many as could hurt
them, they reserved none alive, save some few, that they thought might do them
service; the second was the Duke of Somersets avarice, for that he did not
keep such garrisons there as he should have done, but pocketted up the money
in his own purse, as appears by his conniving during the truce at the
robberies, which with suppository beards were done upon the high ways by his
Soldiers, whereby he gave just occasion of complaint unto the French, and by
not paying of his Soldiers, lost all power either of suppressing their out
rages, or punishing their selves, the third home divisions, of these three, the
first is not to be questioned, the second though some what obscure, yet clear
enough by the effects; the third may suffer a dispute, for though ill humors
were conceived they were not ripe enough to cause the ruin of the state, ^or
would they have been at all conceived or bred under a princely spirited King*
(...) proceed from ill government; ill government from the want of judgment,
insufficiency and easiness, and cruelty in the Prince; now to come to these
ruins, I say the chiefest of them had their beginnings from the Duke of
Suffolk, of whom there are diverse opinions, Polli^ore, Holinshead, and Hall,
judge evilly of him, following the v^lgar opinion which never adheres to
favorites. Caniden and Speed evilly, but not with ingratitude, grounding
themselves upon many truths. I in like manner believe both well and ill of
him, the good in him was, that he was very virtuous, and of heightened
conditions for what concerned himself, he waged war in France 44. years
without intermission, in seventeene of which he never saw his own country,
when he was taken prisoner, his ransom cost him 20000. pound sterling, though
then he had no greater title then bare knighthood, he was of 30. years
standing of the order of the Garter, his father was slain at the siege of
Harflore, his elder brother in the battle of Ajencourt, and two younger
brothers in the same wars, so as it cannot be denied but that his Prince and
country ought much unto him, since he spent his life and livelihood in the
service of the one, his reputation in the service of the other, his bad, that
suffering himself to be gulded by a prodigious ambition (a usual disease
amongst great wits he of himself did negotiate in an unexpedient and
harmefull match, and which was likely not to be denied, since that thereby
those territories were surrendered which ought not have been quitted for any
whatsoever cause, that he did too indiscreetly make use of the Kings favor,
occasioned by the Queens more then ordinary inclinations.

The Parliament was summoned at the Black Friars in London, wherein treaties
being had against the Duke and the Queen, fearing least he might therein
suffer, she thought she might reap some advantage by remooving the Parliament
to Lecester, but, very few of the Nobility coming thither she, was forced to
remove it again to Westminster; where both houses being full, the lower house
presented many complaints against the Duke; whereof some were true and some
false. The Articles were many, the chiefest that he had treated with the
Bastard of Orleans, when he was sent Ambassador to Henry, to move Charles to
make war with England, to the end that he might make John son to the said
Duke King, by marrying him to Margaret, daughter to the late Duke of Sommerset,
the presumed heir to the Crown, in case the King should have no children;
Secondly that suborned by the said Bastard, he was cause of the Duke of Orleans
freedom; Thirdly, that the loss of France and Normandy was happened through
his advise, which was represented to the King of France by the said Duke of
Orleans; Fourthly, that being sent Ambassador to make peace or truce he had
condescended to the surrendering of Aniou and Main, without the knowledge of
the other Ambassadors his fellow Colleagues, and that being returned to
England he persuaded the King thereunto, so losing him the inheritance of those
countries; Fifthly that having at the same time discovered the Kings counsel
unto the enemy, together with the defects of the Forts and number of Soldiers,
the English by reason of these informations were driven out of France; Sixthly,
that he had given the like informations to the Dunnesse, when he was
Ambassador in England; seventhly, that the King having sent Ambassadors into
France to treat of peace, he was the cause why peace was not made, having by
way of Anticipation advertised Charles of his advantages; Eighthly, that in the
Star Chamber he had made his boasts, that he had as much power in the
Council of France as in that of England, and that by his power he could
remove whatsoever Counselors there; Ninthly, that corrupted by Charles he had
retarded the melitia that was to go to France; Tenthly, that in the conclusion
of the peace, he had not comprehended the King of Arragon nor the Duke of
Britanny, both friends to the King, so as being comprehended by Charles he
alienated the former, and made the other so great an enemy as Giles brother to
the said Duke, remaining firm in his friendship to England, lost first his
liberty and then his life. His answers to the first three Articles were, that
he never had committed, nor so much as thought any such thing: To the fourth,
that the business of the truce being left to his discretion, it could not be
concluded without the surrendering of those states which was but a weak answer:
since the marriage of the Queen, in consideration whereof this surrender was
made, was not so much as dreamt of by any save himself; But on the other side
it being approved of in Parliament, wherein both the houses did join in
Petition to his Majesty to reward him for this his great good service, it
follows that either the one Parliament or the other did amiss, since the one
desired reward, the other punishment, for the self same action: the fifth,
sixth, seventh, and ninth have no proof at all, but the accusers bare
narration. In the eight he may be convinced but more of vanity then of any
other error; in the tenth his fault was omission, but as it was not excusable
in a personage of his condition, so it was not to be punished in the highest
degree; his other accusations contained the topicall faults of favorites, which
in like persecution are usually alleged, that he had enricht himself out of
the Kings treasure, monopolized things belonging to the Crown, diminished the
revenues thereof, removed worthy men from the Council, placing such in their
rooms as had dependancy upon him, that he was the chief instrument in the
death of the Duke of Gloucester, which though it were likely enough yet were not
their proofs sufficient to condemn him. Upon these complaints, he was sent
unto the Tower as to be there forth coming, till he should give an account of
what he was charged of, but being set at liberty about a month after, the
people were thereat so highly incensed, that to avoid sedition, it was
requisite to take from the Lord Say his place of Treasurer, all their places
from all his other friends, and so banish him for five years out of England.
But being embarked in Suffolk to go for France, he was set upon by a man of
war belonging to the Earl of Excester, was fought withal, taken, beheaded
near unto Dover in the same ship, and his body thrown upon the shore, from
whence it was taken by one of his Chaplains, and buried in the College of
Winkefield in Suffolk. This was the end of this man in whom so many causes
both of blame and of praise concurring; I know not whether he ought to be
blamed or praised. Vices are like Clouds which though they do not totally
obscure the day, yet the thicker and blacker they are, the more horrid and
fearful do they make it. Vices are not to be balanced with virtues no more
then is air and water, with earth and fire, yet if amongst punishments the law
givers could have taken away the memory of what was good in the guilty, I
believe they would not have done it.

If there had been no other evil in the Duke of Suffolk then the death of
the Duke of Gloucester (whereof the signs are too manifest for him to clear
himself) 'twere sufficient to eclipse all his other virtues in the estimation
of all honest men, but be it as you will, his misfortune was very prejudicial
to the King, since thereby he was deprived of a servant as necessary for his
preservation, as by his Council and valor he was ready to preserve him.

This chance did much inanimate those who syded with the Duke of York, who
spared not in what they could to render the King despised and hateful, they
forgot not to inculcate the ignominious loss of France; enough to bereave of
reputation the most valiant Prince, that is much more him who was given to
idleness and wretchlesnesse; that the state was governed by a proud woman, the
chief cause of all their evils.

Thus said, the people should do well to take example by the government of
Ireland, where the wisdom and valor of the Duke of York had domesticated a
savage people, reduced them to discipline and to obedience, that England stood
in need of such a King, who were to be sought out if there were not such a
one, and were to be chosen, were it not by nature, and by the Laws due unto
him, so as if he were not privileged by his lawful pretentions, his only
virtues were sufficient to purchase him the Kingdom. That Henry was
illegitimate, yet a King to be borne withal, did he resemble his grandfather
or his father; but that degenerating in worth, usurping the laws, and being by
nature incapable, he was unworthy and not to be tolerated; since that as
France had been lost by him, England would likewise run danger of being
lost, if his preservation should be endeavored. That necessity, the times,
and chiefly the danger the common wealth was in, required other resolutions,
that advantage and the commonweals good being joined to justice, it would be
injustice injury and ruin, not to provide for it.

They did not preach this Doctrine in private, but dispersed it abroad; to the
end that like seed sown in due time, they might there out reap to harvest
which they expected. Every man had the vanity to publish these things to show
their wisdoms and their affection to the public necessity, and to the end
that these seditious practices might be followed by effects.

York before the death of the forenamed Duke had wrought the end of Adam
Molleins Bishop of Chichester, and Lord privy Seal; believing that he being a
man of integrity might oppose his designs: he caused him to be assassenated
by Fishermen at Ports-mouth, to the end that he might be thought to be
slain by the outrageous commotion of that baser sort of people, but all these
things tending more to undoing then to the doing of any thing, he thought to
begin his work by some popular sedition, which precipitating the Rebels
into a fault unpardonable, and their fear of punishment making them obstinate
in their errors, he might make use of them either joined together or
separated as occasion should serve; he persuaded one Jack Cade an Irishman, a
bold man, and who had a spirit which did not correspond with his low condition,
to faigne himself to be a Cosen of his, of the house of Mortimer, to the end
that winning belief by reason of his blood he might be favored by the true
Mortimers who did not know him, and might seduce the rest which he was to
work upon; he chose Kent for his scene, believing it to be fickle, and
fitter for his design than any other place, as being near to London.

There did Cade exagerate the wickedness of the Counselors and of the
government, the grievances and such other like things; till such time as having
sufficiently enflamed the Inhabitants of those parts, he made offer of
himself to be their Leader, promising them that when he should have
possessed himself of the Kings person (the which he feigned he would do)
and driven away those who governed him amiss, he would put them in a way of
so just a government, that the grievances introduced under spetious pretenses,
and which framed the chain of their servitude, should totally be taken away
and the chain broken.

Thus persuaded, he assembled a great number of people, with whom he encamped
himself not far from London, and calling himself the Captain of Kent, he
sent for one Thomas Cock a Woollen Draper, under a safe conduct, commanding
him to bring him certain numbers of Arms, and Horse, and a thousand Marks of
ready money at the charge of the strangers that did inhabit the City; by the
name the Genowayes, Venetians and Florentines, threatening that if these things
were not sent unto him he would kill as many of them as he could come by, and
it is to be believed he was herein obeyed. For when afterward he entered the
City; he did no harm at all to any forreigner, the Citizens were not
displeased at his commotion, who did not consider their own danger, and the
little belief which ought to be given to such people.

But the King and Council who foresaw the consequences, sent to understand
from him the reasons which had moved him to take up Arms, and make the people
rise; he answered to amend the evils under which the kingdom suffered, to
chastise those who were the ruin of the Commonwealth, and to correct the
errors of the chief Counselors, which being said, he gave unto those that
were sent unto him two writings, the one was entitled The Commons of Kents
complaints, the other their demands from the King.

The Articles of the former were, that it was reported that Kent should be
destroyed and reduced into a Forest, to revenge the Duke of Suffolkes death,
whereof the County was no ways gurltie, that the King had taken a resolution
for the time to come to live upon the peoples contributions, and to give his
own revenue to particular men, that those of the blood royal were excluded
from the government of the state, and people of mean condition introduced, so
as businesses were not dispatched according to the Laws, but by corruption;
that provisions for the Kings household were had, and not paid for, that by the
Kings giving of confiscations unto his servants, the innocent were falsely
convinced, and by being kept in prison lost the benefit of the Law, so as they
could not defend themselves: that the like was practiced against them, who
being justly possessed of their goods were denied to show their title, that
they might be thereof deprived. That France being lost through the faults of
certain Traitors, they should be enquired after, and condemned without
pardon; the writing which contained their demands was to this purpose, that the
King that he might live conformable to his royal dignity, should retain
unto himself the patrimony of the Crown, and not participate it unto others.
That he should banish all Suffolkes kindred; should punish according unto the
Laws such of them as had deserved punishment, and should take near unto him
the Lords of the blood Royal (viz. the Dukes of York, Excester, Buckingham,
and Norfolk, and all the Earls and Barons; for that so doing he would be
the richest King of Christendom, that those who were guilty of the Duke of
Glocesters death (who was injustly declared to be a Traitor) should be
punished; the Commons declaring that they would live and die in this quarrel,
and maintain the imputation to be false, that the Duke of Excester, the
Cardinal of Winchester, the Duke of Warwick, France, Normandy, Gascony,
Guien, Aniou and Main, many Lords, Gentlemen and others were lost through the
fault of these Traitors to the Kings great prejudice.

Finally, they demanded the Abollition of diverse things which they termed
extortions, the Council was much vexed at the Arrogance of these men, and since
there was none there who did not condemn them; Henry with fifteen thousand
men marched toward them himself in person to give them battle, but Cade
faigning himself to be afraid, retired himself into a Wood near Senock;
hoping that the King emboldned by his flight would in disorder set upon him,
which he did not, believing that this vapor would of it self exhaule. But
the Queen thinking they were fled for fear, sent Sir Humphery Stafford and
William Stafford his kinsmen after them who remain both slain, together with
many other gentlemen. Those of the Kings Camp who were both badly satisfied
with the government, upon the news hereof discovered themselves, for hating
the King the Queen and government, and esteeming this putative Mortimer their
Angel of deliverance, they wished the Duke of York with him, that they might
reap the profit, and he make use of this occasion, the King frighted at these
whispers returned to London, where such of his council as were least
passionate doubting an insurrection, caused the Lord Say, the Treasurer to be
shut up in the Tower of London, that they might sacrifice him if need should
require, to the fury of the people, they would have done the like with diverse
others, had they not saved themselves. Cade grown proud by reason of this his
victory, and having put on the arms of Sir Humphery Stafford (his richest
prise) returned to blake Heath, whither the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Duke of Buckingham were sent unto him, to understand what his pretenses were,
they found him under a feigned humility, so puffed up with pride and obstinate
presumption, as they could not persuade him to lay down his arms unless the
King should come thither himself in person, and grant whatsoever he demanded,
he was grown so strong by reason of this victory (many flocking unto him from
the neighboring counties) that the King and Queen were persuaded to rely
themselves to Killingworth, leaving no other Forces in London then what was
requisite to guard the Tower, under the command of the Lord Scales, and Sir
Matthew Gough one of the most famous and ancient Commanders in the Wars of
France. This his retreat increased Cades arrogance, he marched toward London
and not suffered immediately to enter; he lodged in Southwark whilst the
commons of Essex following his example had likewise taken up Arms, and were
the same time encamped at Mile-End. The Lord Major, who held it equal danger
to suffer him to come in, or to deny him entry called a Council, where the
business being debated with variety of opinion, Robert Horn one of the Aldermen
stood stiffly to it, that he was not to be suffered to enter the City, which
when the rebels heard they raged and roared so loud, as the Major was glad to
put Horn into Newgate, and on the second of July, Cade entered in over London
Bridge, and being come into the City (to win the more good will, and the
better to deceive;) he caused proclamation to be made in the Kings names,
that no man should steal any thing, nor take ought not paying for it, upon
pain of death, and passing by the streets which led from the Bridge to Saint
Paul's, he with his sword struck the stone called London-stone, saying now is
Mortimer master of London; the next day he caused the Lord Say to be brought
before the Lord Majors Court where together with the Major he caused diverse
others of the Kings, Judges to set, the accused party did in vain demand his
lawful privilege, of being judged by his peers, he was carried to
Cheapside, was beheaded, his Head stuck upon the point of spear: his naked
Body dragged at a horses tail into the Sub-vrbs and there quartered; he would
have done the like to Alderman Horn, had not his Wife and Friends ransommed
him at the price of 500. marks, besides his being popular made much for his
safety, but not here withal contented (for he was as cruel as avaritious)
he went to Milend where he seized upon the body of Sir James Cromer son in
law to the said Lord Say, and who was that year high sheriff of Kent, he
made him to be beheaded not allowing him time to confess himself, and
putting his head upon an other spear, he caused both the heads to be carried
before him, he put many others to death, either for not obeying him, or for
that he feared that being known by them, they might publish the baseness of
his birth, being returned back to London, he fell to sack the houses of the
richest Citizens, he began with Alderman Malpals house, to pay him for a feast
which Malpall made unto him two days before, he did the like with others of
the best, so as the rest of the Citizens frighted hereat, were forced to buy
the safety of their houses with great sums of money, the Lord Major who too
late perceived, that he had taken a snake into his bosom called together the
Aldermen and sheriffs to advise upon a remedy, they resolved to fortify the
bridge and deny him entry. (Cade kept always his first quarter in Southwarke,
from whence he came each morning into the Town and returned back at night.)
They gave notice hereof to the Lord Scales Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir
Matthew Gough desiring their assistance, the first promised to play upon them
with his cannon, the other came to them to be their leader, the Captains and
Traine-bands of the City being assembled, they began at midnight to barracado
the Bridge, but this could not be done without the knowledge of the rebels,
whose consciences and the danger they were in, made them vigilant, they with
much fury assaulted them, the fight endured all night, and till nine of the
clock the next morning, which diversity of fortune, some time the one,
sometimes the other, having the better they fired many of the houses upon the
Bridge, so as the fire, the outcries of those that could not save themselves
from the flame; the complaints of women and children, the throwing themselves
into the River of Soame, who stand one death to meet with another, was a
miserable sight to those who had any pity in them, but not sufficient to
assuage the anger of those that fought, who drove one another alternately from
one end of the Bridge to the other, in this bickering Alderman Suttun and many
others were slain, but the death of Sir Matthew Gough was most to be deplored,
who having defended oppugned and won many Castles, fought in private
encounters, and public Battles with the valiant'st Commanders, that were:
should now be miserably slain by base people, thieves, and rebels, which how
it happened is not justly known, most certain it is that his life was of more
value then a million of those that slew him, nothing but wearines ended this
bickering, and that caused a truce till the next day, upon condition, that each
side should keep its quarter, the Citizens should not pass into the Sub-vrbs
nor the rebels into the City, there were then and yet are in that Sub-vrbs two
principal prison's the Kings bench and the Marshalsea's which were then full
of prisoners, and Cade hoping for good thereby, set them at liberty and armed
them; but this did but little avail him, for the Archbishop of Canterbury
having wisely framed a general pardon and authorized it with the great Seal;
(he himself being Lord Chancellor;) he crossed the River over against the
Tower, accompanied by the Bishop of Winchester, made it be proclaimed in
South-wark, where it was so welcomly received by the rebels, that without
taking leave or seeing their Captains face, they returned to their own homes,
so as being suddenly forsaken, and those aids not appearing which were
promised by such as sided with the Duke of York, he fled in disguise into
Sussex, and was pursued by many to gain the 1000. marks, which were promised
to him that should kill him; this good fortune befell Alexander Iden, who did
well deserve it, by reason of the danger wherein he put himself; for finding
him in a Garden, he slew him hand to hand without any manner of treachery, and
brought his Body to London, where the Head being taken of, it was put upon a
spear's end, and set it upon the Bridge, as are usually the heads of Traitors:
and Iden received the 1000. marks, which he had generously won.

The Archbishop of Canterbury played a discreet part in this business, by
applying the general pardon to the seditious in a time when many of them being
slain, or hurt; the rest shreudly affrighted, and fearing yet worse, he did
that with a few strokes of his pen, which many a stroke of sword neither
could nor would have done; an act of a wise Minister, for the common people are
for the most part like pettish children, who grow wild at the whisk of a Rod,
and are made tractable at the sight of a red cheekt apple. The King was advised
to go into Kent, where having chastised some, he made good the pardon to all
the rest to the great satisfaction of the Country.

Charles made use of these dissentions in England to impatronize himself of
Gascony, just as he did of the disorders of Normandy, to make himself master
of that Province, the experience of so many years, wherein he had governed
himself amiss, had made him more mind his business; Monstrelet observes, that
the conquest of Normandy was an effect of his good order taken with his
Soldiers, for he had reduced the horse (which was the chiefest part of his
strength) to so perfect a discipline, by well arming of them, and well paying
them, as that the Country people did in safety enjoy their own goods, any
transgression in that behalf being severely punished, which if all Princes
would do, they would seldom be loosers. Nothing did more preserve the
Guascons for 300. years, and upward in their obedience to the English (not
withstanding all the forces policies and proffers of France) then good
government; for they were ruled under the liberty of the laws, as if they had
been natural Englishmen, not, that when a government is come to it is period
any thing is able to uphold it, since the orders of fortune and of nature have
their bounds prefixed, as well in what is good as what is bad: Bergerac was the
first place besieged in Guien, a place seated upon the River Dordon in
Perigord; Charles made the Count Pointeverres, who was likewise Count de
Perigord and Viscount de Limoges his Lieutenant in those parts, he was
accompanied with many Gentlemen, and with 2500. horse, 500. whereof were
lances, for every lance consisted of five horse, the man at arms his page, his
servant armed and two bow men. When the artillery came up, Bergerac yielded;
the English came forth on horseback, and with their goods, the Inhabitants
enjoyed their own as formerly; Iansack seated upon the same River was taken by
assault: 35. English being there slain, the rest taken prisoners; Monferat,
Saint Foye, and Chalois yielded: for the Inhabitants were affrighted, and
resolved not to hazard their lives and livelyhoods, since the Lord Cameile had
written into England for succor and no order was taken for any by reason of
the home broils there, so as no Town now durst any longer hold out, but that
which did chiefly quell their Spirits was the defeat given by Monsieur de
Orvall the third son of the house of Albret, to the Mayor of Bordeaux. Orvall
was parted from Bazas to make an inroade into the Island of Medock with 4. or
500. fighting men, when night came on, he staid some two leagues short of
Bordeaux, and the next morning being all Saints day, as he was on horseback to
enter the Island, he was told, that between 8. and 9000. of those of
Bordeaux, what Townsmen, what English were marched forth to give him battle,
whereupon he set his men in order, expecting to be set upon. When they came
to blows, he slew 1300. of them, and the Mayor fled away abandoning the
Infantry, which he had placed in the front of the enemy; and besides those he
slew, he took 1200. prisoners; this is according to Monstrelets relation.
Hallian who taxes, the Geographers of ignorance for calling the country of
Madock an Island, since it is only environed on the one side by the River of
Garronne, and on an other side by a little arm of the Sea, all the rest being
firm continent joining to the lands of Bordeaux, does agree almost in all
things with Monstrelet, save that he says, that the English Authors write,
that the French were twice as many as they, and that their victory cost them
the lives of 1000. of their own men; Chartier says, that Monsieur d'Orvall
had between 6. and 7000. fighting men, that as he returned with his booty;
he was set upon by the English, that he slew about 2000. of them, and took
2200. prisoners. The English writers on the contrary side say, that the Mayor
of Bordeaux was overcome more by number then valor, that those who were slain
and taken prisoners were about 600. and that 800. of the French were slain.
Which of these is the true relation is left to the judgment of him, who will
take the pains to examine them; if Chartier be to be believed the 2200.
prisoners will prove likelier to be sheep then men; for every one of the
Victors must bind at least 3. or 4. and if it be said, that they, who could
kill every man 14. (which is not granted) might much easier take every man his
3. or 4. prisoners: The argument holds not, for it is easier for one man to
kill 14. then to take and detain 4. The English have diverse times fought
against 7. or 8. and have overcome; the French themselves will not deny it, but
there is some reason given for it, for though valor be to be accounted in
the first place, (since without it no so disadvantagious resolution can be
taken) yet in the second place may be alleged the disorder of the enemy;
their own good order, and their arrows which gawling and disordering the
horse, were cause of the victory. In this present affair neither the valor
nor the fortune of the one side is described, nor the cowardice, nor disorder
of the other, no man doubts but that 150. Spaniards may have defeated great
armies of the Indians. And it is no wonder, the novelty of their horse, the
resistance of their armor, the noise made by their muskets and field pieces,
made them be believed to be descended from heaven and were causes of their
victories; if Hallian had read the English historians, he would not have
thought them so vain gloriously light, he would there have feared the death
of 800. French not of 10000. as he says, however it was this defeat was the
cause of the surrendering of many Towns this year, which were neither
beleaguered, nor summoned; and the next ensuing year 1451. was the decider of
the general disputes in Guascony which was by the sword taken from the English
and given to the French. The chief Commander in this enterprise was the
Dunnesse Lieutenant general to Charles; he was accompanied by his brother,
the Count de Angovelesme this being the first service he did his King and
Country; after his imprisoment in England. Monguione held out against him, 8.
days and then yielded; from thence, he went to Blaye to block up this Town,
great forces were brought both by Sea and Land. John Bourchier general of
France brought thither great store of vessels loaded with men, arms, and
victuals, and finding five great English vessels there, which had brought
provision to the besieged; he fought with them forced them, to weigh anchor
and fly, and gave them chase even to the haven of Bordeaux. Messieurs de
Bessiere de Chabanes, and Count Pointever came thither by land, a great breach
being made, they gave an assault wherein the City was taken about 200. English
were slain, and taken prisoners. Messieurs d'Esparre and d'Monferand both of
them Guascons saved themselves within the Castle the which together with
themselves they soon after yielded up. Bourg held out 6. days, Libourne
summoned by the herald delivered up its keys. Whilst businesses proceeded
thus in these parts, men were not idle as else where, every man of any account
employed himself about some thing or other: four Princes of the blood
Cleremont, Angovelesme, Vandosme, and Eu; did jointly besiege Fronsac (a place
thought impregnable) both by Land and Sea. Count de Fois Lieutenant of Guienne
beyond Garronne, accompanied by many Gentlemen, particularly by Messieurs
d'Albret, and Laurec, brethren by Tarras and Orvall sons to the former, went
before Arques, and had it upon composition; Count Armignac not forgetting his
affront touching the marriage of his daughter went to besiege Rions; Count
Pointeverres besieged Castelon, which yielded to him, as did likewise Melion,
where he stayed and sent his troop to Fronsac, which was the most important
place of all the rest as has been said; Charles had four armies in the
fields, which were all at the same time busied in several places, so as it is
no wonder, if the English were enforced to yield, since to boot with the mighty
forces of the enemy, the Towns whereof they were masters denied to do their
duties, in defending themselves being wrought upon either by inclination or
fear* Fronsac was a very strong place, but likely in a short time to be
brought to extremity if not succored, four armies did environe it, so as if
the English had been in case to have kept the field, yet would they not have
been able to succor it, as well by reason of the besiegers great forces, as
likewise, for that the two Rivers Dordonne and Darronne, by reason of the very
great increase of waters were not navigable. Being thus difficulted, the
defendants demanded a truce until Saint John Baptists-day, upon these
conditions, that if they were not succored before that time, so as the
Dunnesse should be enforced to raise up siege, they would surrender up the
Fort, and he was to give safe conduct to whosoever would be gone, and to fit
them with carriages and shipping for themselves and goods at their own
charges. That the garrison should march forth with their horses and arms, and
leave their artillery behind them, that those, who would swear obedience to
Charles and to be his good and loyal subjects should enjoy their goods in
whatsoever part of the Kingdom, and be pardoned for what was formerly past;
that such as would serve him in the war whether Citizens, volunteers, or of
the garrison, should have the like entertainment, as the other soldiers; that
of the prisoners that were taken at Blaye Gaches, Charnali and 6. other should
be set at liberty without ransom, and that the like was to be understood o^
John Stafford who was taken prisoner at the Battle of Iermingi; the 23. day of
the Month being come, and the besiegers not fought withal the City was yielded
up, and the Castle, the English oretired themselves to Bordeaux, whither
likewise the Dunnesse did immediately go. The English stories do not mention
the particulers of the surrendering of this City, only that finding it self
abandoned, it shared in like fortune as did Fronsac, but those of France do
specify that Bordeaux agreed to yield, if Fronsac should yield, and that they
would expect it till then to pay the duty they ought to Henry, and yielded with
the more honor to Charles. I forbear to speak o^ its long capitulations as
likewise of those made by Gastonne de Fois Knight of the Garter, and Bartrand
de Monferanda, the former not desirous to live in France disposed of his goods
to his grandchild, who bore the title of Count de Candalle, a child of three
years old, who when she should be of years was to swear allegiance to
Charles, the second agreed to yield up the places he held to the French, upon
condition that when he should have sworn Allegiance to Charles they should be
again delivered up unto him. Bordeaux was easily brought to execute the
agreement. The Dunnesse made his entry thereinto the 29. of the same month,
and on the sixth of A^gust he besieged Ba^onne, which held ou^ till such time as
the Artillery being come up and a breach made, so as it was in danger of being
taken by assault, it yielded with power, for the Garrison to retire, and a
penalty laid upon the City to pay 40000. Crowns, half of which was
afterward remitted by Charles. Charter reports a miracle which happened the next
day after the surrender thereof, he says that the air being clear a white
cross appeared in the sky for the space of half an hour, at the sight
whereof the inhabitants took from of their ensigns the red Cross the badge
of England; saying that God by that white Cross, which was the badge of France
did admonish them for the time to come to be good Frenchmen. And because
Hallian writes that this effect which proceeded from the clouds, was ascribed
to religion and prodigy; Dupleix calls him a destroyer of all miracles,
pretending him to be convinced, no less by the serenitie of the air then by
the Testimonial letters of the Count Dunnesse, authenticated by his seal,
both which are very slender reasons: The air cease not to be termed clear
though some little cloud may appear, wherein may be formed the forenamed
Cross, and for the testimonial letters alleged, they might be believed had
they been written by some English General. Factions are like Sexes, the one
does not succeed unto the other, especially when the one does disagree within
it self; Hallian one of the same faction not believing that the Pucell of
Orleans was sent from heaven, was therefore reprehended, and now not believing
this Cross, his believing in the Cross of Christ does not exempt him from
being reputed by Dupleix a bad Christian. We have the first and the second
causes, and ignorant people not able to give a reason for the second have
recourse unto the first, which is by all men known to cover their idiotisme
with piety and religion: but the learned though allege the second causes,
they omit not the first, though they name it not, supposing that no existence
can be without it. God in the creating of nature has given her her orders, to
the end that without the name of Miracle (though all his works are wonderful)
she may operate accordingly. So as if the earth yield not 'its fruits so
abundantly one year as another, and they allege for reason thereof the
inequality of seasons, some conjunction of unfortunate Plannets, or some such
like influence, they forbear notwithstanding to have recourse to God
Almighty. Knowing for certain that he is able though contrary to the course
of nature absolutely of himself to provide therefore, no^ is there any so
ignorant nor wicked body who does not confess this, but in miracles it is
otherwise; the Church must always examine them. Hallian denies not miracles,
nay I do verily believe, he believes them so much the better in that not
admitting of them indifferently upon simple testimony; he according to true
Piety discernes between devotion and superstition, as good Grain is
discerned from Tares, but piety is not there simply required by Dupleix though
he make show thereof, he uses it for a vehiculum; he would make us swallow a
falsehood wrapped up in religion, with the same end he had in the Pucells case,
which was to strengthen Charles his pretenses by the means of miracle; and in
this case he alleadges his testimonies with such seeming sincerity at the
business required. The Dunnesse letters contain these words, that the Cross
appeared in a cloud with a crucifix crowned with an Azure Crown, which
afterward changed to a Flower de Luce, according to the relation of more then
a thousand that saw this prodigy; This was the end of the English government
in Guascony, which had 'its beginning in the year, 1155. by the marriage of
Ellinor Duchess of Aquitany with Henry the second King of England: and came
to its period after 296. years, in the year 1451. in Henry the sixth his
days; and as William the father of Ellenor forsook his stake, the world, and
his daughter to undertake a pilgrimage, and peacefully ended his life in an
Hermitage, and was canonized for a Saint. So Henry the successor to two
Williams, the one a Gu^scoyne the other a No^man, did not quit it, but lost it,
for having too imperfectly imitated the sanctity of the one, and no whit at
all the valor of the other, and being opposite in nature to the Conqueror,
and in piety not equal to the canonized Saint, he came to a violent end with
the reputation of being innocent but no Saint.

The Duke of Yorkes machenations were a chief cause of all these losses, where
withal the people being corrupted nothing was thought of but homebred rancour
the praise worthy ambition of public reputation, which so long had warmed
every man's heart was extinct, the evil satisfaction given by the Queen
augmented, and Sommerset so much hated as that his house was broken open, and
ransack't every one det^sted his actions, envied his power and lay in Ambush
for him as being the obstacle of their worst designs. The Duke of York who
was in Ireland had notice given him of all these proceedings, and because the
Kentish sedition had had but an ill success, he resolved to come for England,
his chief friends and Counselors were Sir John Mawbery Duke of Norfolk,
Richard Nevill who was styled Earl of Salisbury in the behalf of his wife,
daughter and heir to the valiant Thomas Montague who was slain before
Orleans. Richard Nevill his son who was likewise Earl of Warwick in the right
of his wife, Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire, and Edward Brook Barron of
Cobham, all of them personages not inferior to any for their power, followers
and valor, of these five, the first two were drawn to forsake the allegiance
they ought to Henry their King and kinsman, by reason of their affinity with
the Duke of York* the rest were only moved by Englands ill genius; the Earl
of Salisbury descended from Jane Beaufort daughter by the third wife to John
Duke of Lancaster. Henry's great grandfather, so as being so near a Kin unto
him he had no reason to take part against him, but the marriage of the Duke of
York with his sister Sicily, was the reason why both he and his son for
sooke their former duty. John Duke of Norfolk took part with the Earl of
Salisbury, as being the son of one of his daughters, but more in the behalf
of his Father, who was banished, and of his Uncle who was beheaded at York in
the time of Henry the fourth.

I know not what moved Thomas Earl of Devonshire, who married the Daughter of
Somerset first to side against him, and afterward (to his misfortune) to join
with him, the Lord Cobham had no other interest save his own proper
disposition, always inclined to actions of the like nature: their resolution
was for to cloak their first commotions, as that they should not seem to be
against the King, but the people should be pressed under pretense of the
public good. That the Duke of Somerset should be their bait, who was fit by
reason of the bad success in Normandy to color the reason of this
insurrection, and consequently they intended his ruin without the which they
could not hope to effect their ends, since he was the only remaining Buckler
for Henry's defense and preservation.

Having taken this resolution, he went to raise people in Wales, many flocking
unto him from all parts under the plausible pretense 1452.
of public good, with these he marched toward London. The King at first
news hereof had got together a good army to meet with him, but he shund him,
hoping to increase his numbers, and like fame to yet by going, he would not
hazard to try his passage through London, the denial thereof might lessen his
reputation: but passing over the Thames at Kingston, he went into Kent, and
pitched his campea mile from Dartford, some ten or twelve miles from London,
and secured himself with trenches and artillery. The King brought his camp
thither likewise, and sent unto him the Bishops of Winchester, and Ely, to know
of him what had caused him to take up arms, he answered nothing against the
King nor yet against any honest man, but against some evil Counselors who
were enemies to the commonwealth and the peoples leeches: and naming the Duke
of Somerset, he said, he was the cause, that brought him thither; and
offered, if Somerset might be put into safe custody, till such time as in
Parliament he should make defense to such things as there should be objected
against him, to dismiss his troops, and present himself before the King, and
serve him as all good and faithful subjects ought to do. The Dukes end in
this enterprise was to justify his own actions in the beginning, for to fight
with the King at very first would prove scandalous and diametrically opposite
to the public good. With this his answer he would possess the World of a
good opinion of him, shun the dangers he might light upon, if he should
hazard a battle and have the worst, and by making Somerset safe so as he
should be enforced to answer to what should be objected against him: he was
sure the Parliaments severity considered, and the hatred which the people bore
him, he could not escape with his life: the which happening, he might with ease
deprive Henry of this Kingdom rather by means of law, then by violence; for
having lost Somerset he lost all council, commanders, and followers. The King
on the other side who thought that to reduce him to obedience by violence would
be a hazardous affair, seemed to gratify his desire, and gave order for
Somersets being forth coming, whereupon dismissing his people according to his
promise; York came unto the King, but whilst he had published his complaints
accusing the pretended guilty person of treason and oppression. The Duke of
Somerset, who was not far of, and heard all that was said, hearing himself
wounded in his honor and could not contain himself, but coming from where
he was concealed and not contented, to answer to what was objected against
him, he accused his accusor of high treason, for having with many others
conspired against the Kings life, and consulted how with least danger they
might bereave him of his crown and scepter, an accusation which was not
slightly to be passed over. The King returned to London whither he was
brought as a prisoner and presented before a great counsel assembled for this
purpose a^ Westminster, where the two Dukes accusing one another reciprocally,
nothing could be resolved of: for York denied all, nor were there any
witnesses to convince him; but Somerset perceiving the evils that were likely
to ensue, if he should escape; did all that in him lay to have him put to the
rack, which in this case only is permitted by the laws of England. He showed
how that if York and all his generation were not bereaved of their lives a
^vill, war must needs ensue, which would be the destruction of England, for
that he had long ago resolved the ruin of the King, and of the house of
Lancaster: that he might make himself King and transplant the Crown and
Kingdom into his own family or house. But these advertisements were of no
force, his supposed innocence withstood them, since when he was armed with
considerable forces, he had presented himself unarmed before the King, which
it was not likely he would have done, had he been guilty of any such thing.
An opinion which easily prevailed, for that at the same there came two
important nuses; the one that the Earl of Marsh was marching with an army
toward London, the other, that the Count de Cardale and Monsieur Desperres
were sent from Bordeaux to make a new offer of their obedience, and to desire
an army to recover what was lost, and which was easiliest to be recovered, for
that the French were weak and the Country weary of them, so as the eminent
danger threatened by the coming of the Earl of Marsh; and the Gnascons
request, the first not to be excited, and the latter not to be promised
without peace and quiet, were the causes why the Duke of York was released,
and why he retired himself to Wales, to expect a more opportune occasion
whilst the Duke of Somerset had wherewithal to appease his grief, remaining
without rival, the moderator of the whole government.

The alterations of Gascony sprung from impositions laid by the French, caused
fresh hopes in England, the which though it be denied by Dupleix, who does
therefore tax Hallian, who follows the opinion of Pollidore, yet are the
proofs of the contrary very weak; he says, it is not likely, that Charles
would have imposed grievances upon them contrary to his oath, especially the
first year wherein he was to establish his government amongst them, and that
the Soldiers were so well disciplined as that the open fields were free from
rapine, as if Princes did always, that which they ought to do, and that
military discipline not subject to corruption, should observe the reformation
in Gascony: The King being absent which when he was in person present, he
caused to be observed in Normandy. France has had good Kings and good
Officers, yet not sufficient to suppress or change the inclinations of such as
serve them, It is impossible for Princes to do any thing of excellency, if
their subjects appear not in their interests.

Particular avarice has at all times been cause of remarkable mischiefs. If
Francis the first had had as many men fighting, as he paid pay unto, he had
not lost his liberty before Pavia. King Henry entertaines the offer of
Bordeaux, and suddenly sent Talbot Earl of Shrewsbery thither, who though ever
exceeding diligent in all expeditions, yet in this, he did out do himself,
he embarked himself and took with him 3000. soldiers leaving order for
such as were to follow him, he landed upon the coast of Meddock, and the more
to terrify the enemy, he made great spoils in their Towns, but being sent
for in by those all of Bordeaux, he filled the adjacent parts with horror;
the City was of different opinions touching the French garrison, some would
have them be suffered to go away free, others not, and these threw open the
Gates to the English who entering at unawares imprisoned the garrison, but
spilt no blood, nor did no outrage neither to them nor the Townes-men: Fronsack
did for a few days stop Talbot in his advancement, but when it yielded, all
the neighboring Towns did alike, and did freely of themselves return to
their former obedience. Castillian sent for him, and the French garrison being
put forth, his men entered; when Charles heard hereof, he sent thither Count
Cleremont his son in law, and his Lieutenant in Guienne with 600. Horse and
1200. Crosbowmen under the Conduct of Messieurs de Lorhac, and Orvall, to make
matters good till such time as he should come, which was not long after. On the
other side to Talbot came the Lord Lisle his sons, the Lord Mullins and
Harrington, and Lord Camus the Bastard of Somerset, Sir John Talbot, Sir John
Howard, Sir John Montgomery, and Sir John Vernon, who brought with them 2200.
soldiers, munition, and victuals; Charles being come to Lusignano mustered
his men which flockt unto him from all parts when he was come to Saint John
d'Angeli, he understood how that Jacques de Chabanes had taken Chales, and
slain many of the English; he divided his army which consisted of 22000. men
into two parts: to the end, that he might weaken the enemy, who were to divide
theirs; likewise, he gave 15000. to Count Cleremont, and sent the Marishall
Lorhac with the rest to besiege Castillion.

In this case, Talbot resolved to fight with one of the armies, and made choice
of the weaker to succor Chastillion, he went thither with 1453.
800. horse commanded by 3 Barons his son Lasle, Mullins, and Camus; and 3.
Knights, Sir Edward Hall, Sir John Howard, and Sir John Vernon, and gave order
for 5000. foot to follow him conducted by the Count de Candalle, and Monsieur
Desparres. In his march he took a Tower which the French had fortified, and
slew as many as he found there, meeting with 500. of the enemy, who were gone a
forredging, he slew some of them, the rest saved themselves before Chastillion,
which was the cause of the ruin which ensued: for fear having caused them to
withdraw from the siege and draw into the field, fortified with trenches and
deep ditches, they put themselves in order to expect his coming, and he,
though he knew, it would be to his disadvantage to set upon them in that
posture, yet fearing what he could not shun viz.) that if new troops of the
enemy should come up, the enterprise would be the more difficult, he
resolutely gave in amongst them: the fight continued along time before it could
be discerned which side had the better; but certain forces sent by the Duke
of Britanny to assist Charles coming up unto them, when the battle was at the
hottest conducted by Messieurs de Montalbon, and Hunnandy, they took some
colors and made the rest retreat. Talbot rid every where up and down upon a
little ambling nag, his age not permitting to fight in any other manner, when
struck with a piece of Artillery, he and his horse were borne to the ground
above 300. more faring alike with him, so as being ready to dye, and seeing his
son close by him, he advised him to save himself; the which his son
refusing to do, the Father replied that his valor which in this case was to
be esteemed mere rashness ought to be reserved for a better occasion, that it
did misbecome him being old to run away, since thereby he should darken the
luster of his past actions, but that it was not so with him, who being young
and but a novice in arms, could not be prejudiced by a flight grounded upon
reason; but all these admonitions wrought nothing upon the generous youth, he
chose rather to imitate his Fathers actions then to obey his desires; he dyed
by his side, though not without revenge, for he fell, valiantly fighting with
his sword all bluody in his hand. His Bastard brother Henry Talbot, and Sir
Edward Hall were slain together with him, the Lord Moullins and 60. more were
taken prisoners; most of those that fled saved themselves within Bordeaux,
amongst which Monsieur Desparres was one. A thousand of the English were left
dead upon the field, according to the English-writers, and 2000. according to
the French; this was the end of John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbery the terror of
France; he put a period to his victories and his life the 13. of July in his
80. year of age, after a long uninterrupted warfare, he was borne not to dye
by humane hands, had he not been slain by the hellish humane invention of
guns. Chastilion served for a short refuge to many, especially to Messieurs de
Monferant d'Anglades, and the Count d'Candalles son, but after ten days
defense, they yielded up themselves, and the Town upon conditions, all other
places followed their example except Bordeaux which would yet have held out
longer had not want of victuals enforced it to capitulate, and Charles who
could not hope to keep there long, for the plague grew very hot amongst his
people, received their offers, without any show of severity, making them only
promise never to rebel again. He suffered the English freely to depart and
reserved 20. of those who were chief authors of the rebellion to be banished
France for ever; amongst which Monsieur d'Espares, and Monsieur de Duras. The
loss of this Duchy, according to the English stories, was as prejudicial to
particular men as to the Crown for being of no charge, but rather of benefit
both within and without (the revennes thereof being great and the commerce very
great) it was of great consequence, for the breeding up and maintaining the
youth of England as in an Academy of war especially younger brethren, who
having but little to live on were there provided for with honorable
entertainment.

Hence forward, I shall not speak of France save in such occurrences as often
times happens betwixt neighboring Countries, for though these two Kingdoms
did not cease to do mischief each to other, as much as in them lay, yet did
they it not in like manner as formerly they had done, but answerable to the
common state rule to keep their neighbors from growing greater: and if they
should have been otherwise minded, it was out of their power to mischief one
an other, it was hard for the one to recover what was lost since they had lost
all, and very difficult for the other to wage war with the former in his own
home. The Queen of England was brought to bed of her only son Prince Edward
the thirteenth of October in this present year, such as bore ill will to the
house of Lancaster and endeavored the subversion thereof talked lewdly of this
birth. They would have the child to be the issue of adultery; affirming Henry
to be insufficient, whether he were adulterously got or not was only known
to the Queen: but that the King should be unsufficient is a thing which could
not by any one be better known then by himself, and i^ to the prejudice of
others, he should avowe a child for his own which he knew was not so, he
should not have been that sanctified Prince which by his very enemies, he was
at all times acknowledged to be, in celebration of this birth, or for that he
thought it otherwise convenient, he made his two brothers by the mothers side
Edmond and Jasper Earls, Edmond who was Father to Henry the seventh Earl of
Richmond, and Jasper who dyed without issue Earl of Pembrooke.

We have already spoken of, and we shall now continue to relate the art and
cunning used by the Duke of York to ensnare the 1454.
King and Kingdom, his pretensions were just according to the laws of
England, but according to the chiefest of all laws (which is the peoples
welfare) directly unjust; for it is more convenient that a private man suffer,
and smart alone, then the weal public be ruinated and every one smart: for
if the means to claim be unjust, there cannot any thing be thereunto framed,
but an injurious and blamefull justice: he doubted that Henry's known goodness
would render this his business difficult, and that the people borne by their
love to a Prince who bore the Crown, not by his own usurpation, but by two
successive discents from Father and Grandfather, both worthy Princes (the house
of York never having been in possession thereof) his pretensions would
appear a dream, and if not such, yet not such as were likely to be applauded.
The evil consequences considered which were to ensue, such controversies not
being to be decided, but by the bloody law of the sword, and the loss of many
an innocent life, that therefore they were not likely to forsake Henry long in
possession, for him a new pretender, these considerations prevailed so far with
him as to keep him within the bounds of simulation, for doubting that the
danger might consist in making known his designs, he thought it best to make
that be believed to be done for the weal public, which was indeed done for
his own ends, and that by taking his former pretenses touching the Duke of
Somerset; he might take revenge of a mortal enemy, free himself of his
greatest obstacle, deprive the King of his chiefest leaning stock, and
afterward purchase the love of all men, the love of the people by the
ruinating a man detested for the loss of Normandy the love of the Nobility, by
reducing him who by reason of his too powerful authority and greatness was by
the most of them infinitely envied. Not herewithall contented, he forbear to
villifie Henry's reputation giving him out to be poorly spirited, and
affirming that the condition of the now present times required a King who would
not be governed by his wife, nor any third person, but by his own judgment,
a wiseman and endued with such virtues as not being to be found in him, were
requisite in a Prince who was to govern, so as having by these means prepared
the peoples inclinations, he made firm unto him such as sided with him
especially two, the Father and the Son, the one Earl of Salisbury, the other
Earl of Warwick, the first excellent for matter of council; the second endued
with such qualities as virtue does not impart, but to those who are ordained
for heroical actions, he won the good will of all men by approving his
wisdom, and valor with his innate liberality and magnificence. Virtues by
how much more solid then others, and proper to make him be esteemed so much
the less, to be commended in this occasion, altogether unworthy of any manner
of praise, he ordered things in this manner, by the assistance of those
forenamed, he caused the Duke of Somerset to be arrested in the Queens
lodgings, and sent unto the Tower, the which he was emboldned to do by reason
of the Kings being at that time sick, whose double weakness both of mind and
body had encouraged him, assisted as he was to work himself into the
government.

But as soon as Henry recovered his health, he did not only restore 1455.
him to his liberty but made him chief commander of Callis (the then the most
important charge the Kingdom had) which caused great alterations, for he was
thought unfit for the custody of the only place which remained beyond the Sea:
who had lost all Normandy, but York perceiving that he had twice failed in his
endeavors of ruinating him, went into Wales where having got together a good
army, he marched toward London, being accompanied by the forenamed Lords and
many others, the King so much distrusted that City as that he would not expect
his coming there, but went to encampe himself at Saint Albans, where the
adversary presented himself to give him battle, the King had in his camp the
Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham; the Earls of Pembrook, Stafford,
Northumberland, Devonshire, Dorset, Wiltshire, and many Barons, amongst which
Clifford, Ludley, Berneis, and Rosse, and proceeding according to the peaceful
instinct of his nature, he sent some unto him to know why he came in that
hostile manner, and what he did pretend unto, but the messengers were hardly
arrived, when the Earl of Warwick at unawards set upon the Vantguard Royal,
and disordered it before the Duke of Somerset could remedy it, so as all forces
on both sides giving together a bitter battle was begun: each side made good
its station, no man recoiled so many were slain, as it was thought, there
would not be a man in all the field left alive. The Duke of York stood
observing all occurrences, and sent fresh men to supply the place of such as
were wounded, whereby he made good the fight, which Somerset could not do as
not having so many men and being more busy in fighting then in making
provision. The Royallest were almost all slain. The chief that dyed there,
were the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Stafford son to the Duke of
Buckingham, the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford, the Duke of
Buckingham, the Earl of Wiltshire, and Thomas Thorp Lord chief Baron together
with some few that escaped, fled away wounded. This victory which happened the
23. of May, was a good Omen to those that ensued, and to the putting an end to
this difference for the prevailing party, though not without shedding their
own tears and blood, did some few years after effect what they desired; the
Duke of Somerset left three sons behind him, Henry, Edmond, and John, who
adding their Fathers revenge to the hatred of the faction, came all of them to
miserable ends as we shall see in midst of this good success.

The Duke of York would confirm the people in the belief, that he had taken
up arms only for the good of the commonweal. For the Duke of Somerset being
dead (who was the pretended reason of his commotion) nothing remained for him
to do but to assume the Crown, so as having the King in his hands, and under
color of his name, power, to frame the golden age, which all seditious people
promise in their rebellions: he resolved to arrive at his end by degrees, not
thinking to meet with any more oppositions; but he was deceived as are all
those who not able to effect their desires, but by wicked means dare not
withstanding be so wicked as it were requisite for them to be. Some report,
that the King in this occasion was but ill served by the three Lords, that
fled, and by his domestique servants their flight caused him to forsake the
field, and mightily dishartned the few that remained, the King had withdrawn
himself to a poor man's house, where being found by the enemy, he was with all
appearing respect carried from thence and comforted, and made believe that the
Duke of Somersets death had established the Crown upon his head, being come
together with them to London. A Parliament was called, wherein all things were
decreed directly opposite to what had been enacted in former Parliaments; to
testify, that the late government had been unjust, and the King abused by the
malice of those that councelled him, Humphery Duke of Gloucester was declared to
have been Loyal unto the King and faithful unto his Country, all Donnatives
howsoever made whether by patent from the King or by Parliament were revoked,
beginning from the very first day of his reign to the present time, as things
which impoverishing* the Crown bereaved the royal dignity of luster, and that
the now spoken of insurrection, though condemned by all laws might be thought
meritorious; declaration was made, that the Duke of Somerset, Thomas Thorp Lord
chief Justice, and William Joseph (the third that governed the Kings will)
were the occasioners thereof by detaining a letter, which if it had been
delivered unto the King his Majesty would have heard the complaints, and so
taken away the occasion of the aforesaid disorders, that therefore the Duke of
York, the Earl of Salisbury, Warwick and their associates should not for the
future be blamed for it* since the action was necessary to free the King from
captivity and bring health to the common weal. These pretenses thus past over
they came roundly to their work, by framing a Triumve^at the ground work of
the designed monarchy; York caused himself to be created protector of the
Kingdom, Salisbury Lord Chancellor, and Warwick Governor of Callais, so as
the politic authority remained in the first, the civil in the second, and
the military in the third: whilst Henry King only in name was bereft of all
authority and safety; all that had dependency upon the King and Queen, were
put from the Council bereft of whatsoever charge they bore in the City or
Kingdom, and John Holland Duke of Exeter was by force taken from Westminster,
whither he was fled for sanctuary and sent prisoner to Pompheret; a sacrilege
not formerly ventered on, that I know of by any King. They now thought no more
needed to the establishing of their power whilst tyrannies are not established
without means much more abominable; the Duke of York should have done that
wickedness then which once was to be done, and which not long after was done by
his son Edward. A Kingdom cannot brook two Kings, and if experience had
made known unto him his error in preserving Henry's life, his carelessenes
was very great to stumble the second time upon the same stone, and thereby
loose his own life as he did. Moderate evils in such like cases have always
been their authors overthrowe.

The respect due to Henry was not yet so much diminished, nor his Majesty so
much darkened, but that Henry the now Duke of Somerset, 1456.
Humphery Duke of Buckingham and other Lords that sided with him, resolved no
longer to endure the injury that was done unto him, and together with them to
quit themselves of the eminent danger that hung over them, for every man saw
Yorkes end to be the usurpation of the Crown, and that his delay proceeded
from the fear of danger, for the King being by reason of his sanctify
reverenced by the ^est, he thought, he could not on a sudden compass his
ends without scandal: and the being oppugned by the greatest part of the
Kingdom, the ^ch if it should happen, he should for the present ruin, and for
the future totally loose all his hopes. So as consultation being had with the
Queen who being highly spirited did with impatiency endure the present
subjection;) a great Council was called at Greenwitch, wherein it was
resolved, that since he was now no child, and consequently needed not a
Protector, nor was so void of wit, as that he was to be governed by other men's
discretions, that therefore the Duke of York should be understood to be freed
from his protectorship, and the Earl of Salisbury from his being Chancellor
and that he should surrender the great seal to whom the King should please;
York could not fence himself from this blow being taken unprovided, and it
self strengthened with reasons not to be gainsaid without a note of rebellion
so as he was enforced to endure it, but not without the dislike of such as
sided with him, who were not wanting in adding fuel to the fury of the people;
by making them rise up in tumult occasioned by a dissension between a Merchant
and an Italian; which though they did, yet did not things succeed as they would
have them; for after having pilledged many houses of the Venetians,
Florentines, and Lutchesses, thetumult was appeased, and the chief authors
thereof punished, but the present remedy had nothing to do with the threatening
mischief, and both sides failed therein. The Duke of York since that he did
not quit himself of his enemy, when he might have done it in expectation of an
opportunity, to do it with less danger to so horrid a cruelty, and those of
the Kings side in that they durst not venture upon the Duke of Yorks life for
fear of some insurrection, since the City was for him, and the greatest part
of the greatest adhered more to the hopes of a profitable tumultuous change,
then to the preservation of a quiet condition, whereby they could not be
advantaged: for the King did no more distinguish of deserts then does a
distasted palate of tastes, and the Queen so jealous as that she durst only
trust those who being injured were to run the like fortune with her Husband.
But where last extremes are in question extremities are to be chosen, for
chance may do that which council cannot.

York left the Court confirmed in his former designs by this new affront,
whilst the Scotts entered England in one part, and the French in two; the
Scotts having endamaged the confines retired themselves with their booty into
Scotland, the French pilledged some houses, surprised Sandwich, took some
ships and returned to Normandy, the surprise of Sandwich did but little avail
them for they went away and quitted it, it not being to be made good by small
forces against many enemies. England was like a body oppressed by a general
distellation, humors dispersed themselves every where abroad, the vital
faculties which are the laws had not force enough to repulse them. Thomas
Percy Baron of Egremont one who was an enemy to the Earl of Salisbury sons,
fought with them in open field and slew many of their followers, he thought to
have escaped but could not, for the King who would not have the fault to go
unpunished had used means to have his body seized upon, and the offended
parties being of the contrary party, he (as not willing to be thought partial
in justice caused him to be roundly fined and imprisoned, from whence he
escaped to the much trouble of his keepers, the Queen this mean while not
being able to secure herself. The King and Kingdom, but by the ruin of the
Duke, and the two Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, nor yet able to work their
ruin, but by cosenage and deceit, made the King to go to Coventry under
pretense of passing away his time in hunting and hawking, and of changing the
air (she thought London inclined too much to them, and faining some great
affair sent for them by express letters from the King, the which they
believed, and had been caught had they not been advertised by their friend
which caused them to eschew the danger.

The King was displeased at these proceedings of the Queen as contrary to his
good inclination, and being returned to London he 1458.
called a council, wherein having stated the condition the Kingdom was in, he
showed how that the rent and division had encouraged both the Scots, and the
French to assault him at home, and that therefore a reconciliation was
necessary, the which if particular men's offenses, and the offenses of his own
family were likely to impeach, he for his part would forget the injuries done
unto himself, and would endeavor his kindreds agreement with them, who in the
late uproares had spilt their blood promising that the Duke of York and his
followers should in this business have nothing to do, but barely to desire.
When he had ingeniously said this, every man believed him, for of himself, he
was not accustomed to cousenage. Choice was made of some personages of quality
to be sent to the Duke of York, and to those of the house of Lancaster, many
of which had forborne coming to the Court since the battle of Saint Albans,
they told how they were sent to treat of things necessary and expedient for
the public and private peace, the Duke of York, and the Earls of Salisbury,
and Warwick came accompanied with 1500. men, the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of
Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford waited upon by as many, these were sons
to the three Fathers slain in that battle, the Dukes of Excester and of
Buckingham, the Lord Egremont and almost all the nobility of the Kingdom
appeared in like manner: lodgings were severally appointed for them in
different places, to shun their encountering, the City was assigned to Yorks
faction. The Suburbs to that of Lancaster, the King and Queen lay in the
Bishops house, serving as a bar betwixt the two, the Major and Magistracy
together with 5000. armed men supplied the place of guard, walking the streets
day and night to prevent tumults; those of York assembled themselves together
at Blackfriars, and those of Lancaster at Westminster, much a do, there was
to compound the business, wherein the Archbishop of Canterbury labored much.

At last, a reconciliation was signed, wherein the offenders being fined in
certain payments to the offended, they all indifferently obliged 1459.
themselves to the obedience of the King, and to esteem those as friends or
enemies who the King should esteem such, the which being done a solemn
procession was made, wherein all the Nobility of both factions intermingled did
walk before the King, in his roabes and diadem, and the Duke of York
followed after him, leading the Queen by the arm, but the more discreet might
read in their countenances that their ill wills were not changed, according as
they endeavored to make them appear to be, and as almost immediately did
appear.

The Duke of York, and Earl of Salisbury went to York, Warwick stayed at
London, his charge of Callais detaining him longer in Court. It happened, that as
he was one day sitting in Council one of his men fell into contestation with
one of the Kings servants, by whom he was provoked, wounded him and withdrew
himself to a place of safety. The guard and others of the Court who were hot
upon the revenge of their fellow servant, not able to get him who had offended
them, reflected upon the person of the Earl his Master, and set upon him as he
was coming from council to take boat, and had been slain had he not been
assisted by some: he had leisure to leap into his boat, and recover the City.
The Queen were it that she was misformed of the business, or that out of
malice, she took his pretense to bereave the Earl of his life, commanded his
being detained, the which if it had happened he had bin for ever lost. But being
by his friends advertised, he hastened to York and brought the first news
himself to the Duke, and his Father. He concluded, that the violation of
oaths, and of the peace, brooked no more dissimulation, that the last of
fortune was to be attempted either to live or dye, and taking leave of them he
went to Callais, to sease himself of the Town as it well behooved him to do:
where he was received according to the authority of his charge, which had not
been, had the King given order to the contrary at his departure from London:
without this fort the Tryumverat had been ill besieged, for from thence they
took their first advantage. York and Salisbury were of opinion that this
disorder proceeded from the Queens malice; to the end, that Warwick being
slain they might the easilier be suppressed, and although they resolved to make
use of force, yet they thought best, that the Earl of Salisbury should go to
London, with such troops as were most in readiness, should complain of the
violated faith and demand justice, to the end that if it should be denied,
their actions might appear more justifiable. That the Duke assembling, this
meanewhile a good army should come to join with him, that they might jointly
advise, what resolutions to take according as time and occasion should serve,
the Earl marched toward London, with near upon 5000. men, whilst the Queen
advertised of his coming, gave order to the Lord Audely (through whose
territories, he was to pass) to give him battle out of pretense that justice
ought not be demanded at a Princes hands with troops of men, contrary to the
tenure of the laws; since such proceedings were fit for him that would enforce
not entreat: the Baron having this commission meet him near Drayton in
Shropshire with 10000. fighting men. The Earl seeing himself twharted,
resolved to fight; so as encamping himself near unto him, the two armies
being only divided by a small water, he tarried there all night, and commanded
his bowmen to shoot upon break of day into the enemies camp: so to provoke
him, and at the same time they should retreat. Audely egged on by the arrows,
but more by the Queens express command to take the Earl alive or dead,
seeing him retire, commanded his vanguard to pass over the water and stay him,
he himself passing over at the same time, whilst the rest which were on the
other side were of no use. Unto him which was the very thing, the Earl aimed
at in his retreat, so as turning about he furiously assaulted him. The welfare
of his men proceeded from their desparing of faring well, for being certain to
fare ill if they should loose, they resolved rather to dye fighting then to
live in shackells, and perchance be hanged. The Baron was one of the first that
was slain and together with him about 2400. more, a sorrowful happiness for
some days to the Earl, for his two sons John and Thomas being wounded in
the Battle were both taken as they were providing for their cure, and seeking
out a bed in some neighboring place, they were led away to Chester, and were
likely to have fared ill, had not the Inhabitants of that Town affectionate to
York set them at liberty, so as the Earl having recovered them, did plenarily
enjoy his good fortune, this battle was the chance which ruined both the
parties, though for a while it was fortunate to Yorkes Successor, for God after
having chastised the one side, and the other; was pleased to appease his anger,
by the uniting of both the houses which put an end to the civil wars.

The Duke of York having received advertisement from the Earl 1460.
himself of this good success writ thereof to Callais, from whence came the
Earl of Warwick, with a good band of old soldiers commanded by Andrew Trollop
and John Blunt Captains, who were accustomed to the French-warres, they marched
all three to Shrewesbery, so strong as they feared not to meet the enemy, the
King who had notice of their design gathered together a very great army, part
of which came for the love they bore to him part for fear of the Queen whose
anger was implacable. The Duke had pitched his camp not far from Ludlow upon
the confines of Wales, whither the King went likewise to plant his, and where
they stood looking one upon an other waiting their best advantage, but the Duke
thinking it would be dangerous for him to temporise, since consciences are
subject to repentance, and the insurrections of subjects against their Princes
ought either to be suddenly executed, or not at all undertaken; resolved to
give him battle early the nextmorning. The Earl of Warwick had not declare
him self to the two fore named Captains to be an enemy unto the King; so as
when they saw; they were led to fight against their own Prince, in whose
service and under whose pay they ever had, and yet did live, they fled to the
Kings camp, and acquainted the King with the Dukes intention, who imagining
his design was discovered, as it was resolved to fly, which whether it
proceeded out of his fear of Trolops valor and wisdom upon whom he had much
relied, or for that he thought his example would enduce others to do the like;
I do not know. He went to Wales, from thence to Ireland together with his
second son the Earl of Rutland, his eldest son the Earl of March;
together with Salisbury and Warwick embarkt himself in Devonshire, and made
for Iernesey, from whence he went to Callais, where without any manner of
difficulties; he and his companions were received: the King sent after the one,
and the other but in vain, he pardoned all that stayed, save some few who could
not be left unpunished for examples sake, he sacked Ludlow, and Ludlowe Castle,
he detained the Duchess of York and her Sister the Duchess of Buckingham;
he banished those that were fled, and by Parliament declared them to be
rebels, traitors, enemies, to the Kingdom and confiscated their goods; he
disposed of their commands, he gave the wardenship of the North marches to the
Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford. and the command of Callais to
the Duke of Somerset: on the which if he had thought at first (as has been
said) their ruin had been inevitable wanting that place of refuge, the Duke
of Somerset believing to have possession given him, with as much ease as he
had the grant of the place, went thither with a good band of soldiers, but
being shot at by the cannon from within the Town, he withdrew himself a
little of, and sent unto the Captains of the garrison to let them know the
occasion of his coming, and caused his letters patents to be showed them, but
this availed him nothing nay having retired himself to Guines by skirmishing,
from whence he thought to bring them to obedience, his ships went into the
haven at Callais, bearing a long with them those to whose charge they were
recommanded, who being enemies to Warwick were forthwith beheaded. His
skirmishes this mean while did daily diminish the number of his soldiers, the
which though it did the like to those within the Town, yet did they not so
much feel the loss for they had every day fresh supplies, many of the same
faction flocking apace unto them, from England unsent for, whereupon having
advertised the King and Queen of what straits he was in, they dispatched away
unto him, the Lord Rivers and Sir Antony Woodveile his son with 400.
soldiers, who being come to Sandwitch had the winds so contrary as they could
not put to Sea, the Earl of March had notice of all these proceedings and
those of Callais who sent away Sir John Denham with a company of soldiers more
valiant then numerous, who with a wind as favorable to them as it was contrary
to their enemies, entered the Haven and Town of Sandwitch, which being
unguarded and free from suspicion, her Inhabitants thought they might sleep
securely, he took the Lord Rivers and his son in their beds, and though the
soldiers awakened made head and wounded Denham in the leg, whereupon he
remained lame, he not withstanding mastered them, he sacked many houses, he
being favored by the mariners made himself master of the chiefest of the
Kings-ships, furnished with all manner of warlike provisions, and returning to
Callais he presented them to the Earl of March together with the prisoners;
the Earl of Warwick made use of these ships to convey himself into Ireland to
the Duke of York: in his going and returning, he was so favored by the winds
as he spent not above 30. days in his whole journey, but he had come short
home being waited for by the Lord Admiral the Duke of Excester in his return,
had not the Dukes commands been in like manner set at naught by the soldiers
and mariners, being come to Callais, he told them that the Dukes pleasure
was that passing into England, they should vex the King, till both the King
and those, he should bring along with him should come and join with them; the
King to inhabit their landing had caused the Seaports to be fortified
deputing Sir Simon Monfort for that work, who to effect it went to get into
Sandwich, but nothing being done in Court, whereof the Earl of March had not
notice even by the Kings domestiques, he sent thither the Lord Falconbridge
who took it the second time, and sent Monfrot with diverse other prisoners unto
him, advising him that the inclination of that shire considered, she should
do well not to loose time, but crossing the Sea, he should march up to London
as to a certain victory, this advise was approved of by the three Earls, so
as having caused Monfords head to be struck of, and the heads of other twelve
leaving good order for what belonged to Callais, they came to Kent where they
were met by the Lord Cobham, and so vast a number of others as were esteemed to
amount to 4000. fighting men. The Lord Scales both a favorite of King and
Queen hearing of their coming, gathered some forces together, and having in
his company the Count de Candale Aguascon and the Lord Lovell, he hasted to
secure London; but being told by the Lord Major that he stood not in need of
that succor, nor would permit that other men should meddle with what was his
charge, he much incensed entered the Tower, understanding by that denial that
the City was not for the King, as the effects made manifest, for when the three
Earls came thither, they were received with general applause, and the Earls
of March and Warwick going from thence with 20000. fighting men, the Earl of
Salisbury, the Lord Cobham and Sir John Vanlock tarried behind to keep so
important a City true unto them. The Queen (for the King had no thought but of
his souls health) had assembled a good army, and Coventry, which conducted the
King to Northampton, amongst other Lords there was in that army, the Duke of
Somerset, who was newly returned from Guienes, and the Duke of Buckingham they
were no sooner come thither, but they heard of the enemies approach, so as
passing the River, they went to encampe themselves in the neighboring fields,
the Earl of March egged on by his youth, early in the morning began the
battle their arrows played on both sides whilst any were left, then they came
to handy blows for 5. hours together without any indifferency. At last the
King was the looser with the death of 10000. men, a great loss, but not of so
great a consequence as it was, had he not lost himself for being bereft of
his defendors who were slain round about his person, he fell into the power
of the enemy. There dyed of Lords the Duke of Buckingham, John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbery (who fighting valiantly did not degenerate from his Father) the Lord
Egremont, the Viscount Beamont, besides many other Knights and Gentlemen: great
was the number of prisoners especially of Knights and Gentlemen; for being
lighted from horse to fight on foot they had no means to save themselves. The
Queen, Prince Edward her son, and the Duke of Somerset fled to the
Bishoprike of Durham, the victor being returned to London inflicted such
punishments as are accustomed in the injustice of civil Wars; upon such his
adversaries as he found in the City, those who could escape fared better;
Thomas Thorp second Baron of the Exchequer endeavoring to escape was taken
with his head shaven like a Friar, and in a Friars habit he lodged a long time
in the Tower, those of the Tower had yielded upon certain conditions which not
being clear enough for the Lord Scales his safety, he thought to escape
unknown, but being discovered by certain Watermen he was taken, slain, his
body wallowing in his blood and stripped of all of his apparel left to the
public view of all men, post after post was sent into Ireland to acquaint the
Duke of York with this victory, so as persuading himself, that nothing now
remained to hinder him from possessing the Crown, he took shipping and came
to London at the same time that the Parliament was assembled, he made his
entry with great troops of men, and trumpets sounded before him, he made the
sword be carried before as Kings use to do, only with this difference that
where as it is carried sheathed before them, before him it was carried naked,
he lighted from horse at the Kings palace of Westminster, and entering into
the upper house of Parliament where the Kings throne was, he laid his hand a
good while upon it, as if by that act, he had taken possession of it, when he
took of his hand, he turned to those that were by, as desirous to read in
their countenances what success he should have, and as it is usual for us to
flatter ourselves, in what we passionately desire, he thought they approved
of what he had done. But the Archbishop of Canterbury standing up and asking
him if he would be pleased to go and see the King, he changed countenance
and angerly answered him, he knew not any in the Kingdom to whom he ought
that duty, but that on the contrary all men ought it to him, so as the
Archbishop going forth to acquaint the King with this answer who lay in the
Queens lodgings not in his own, he likewise went forth and entered into the
Kings lodgings, where finding many doors sshut, he caused the doors to be
broke open, to the much disdain of those who could not brook so great a
pride: since that the King living and in possession of the Crown for 38.
years (not numbering those of his Grandfather and Father) at his first arrival
he by his own proper authority pretended to be King. But they were more
scandalized when coming again into the Parliament house, he sat himself
down in the Kings Chair under the cloth of State, where after having set a
while he told them a long rabble of reasons, why he had sat down in that
place, that by the law it was due unto him, and that contrary to the law it had
been usurped by the three last Kings from the house of Mortimer, the lawful
heir to the Duke of Clarence, and lastly from his house of York, the others
lawful heir. He exagerated the evil means Henry the fourth used in
usurpingthe Crown, his cruelty in deposing and murdering Richard the second,
the injustice of Henry the fifth in causing his Father to be beheaded at
Southampton, that he might establish himself, and that he being now of years,
and without hope of ever enjoying what was his right by fair mean's, was
enforced to betake himself to force, not for any respect of himself, but to
restore peace unto the kingdom, which was not to be had by any other me^n's,
that he ought rather to be praised then blamed for this, since thereby the
evils should be redressed which were sprung up and were to spring up,
especially under a weak King, who to the so much shame of the English nation
had lost France, Normandy, Maine, Anjou, and in one only year; Aquitany after
the Crown had been hereditarily possessed thereof little less then 300.
years, that for these reasons, he had taken the Chair wherein he sat as
belonging to him, and that his mind gave him that with their assistance he
should restore it to its ancient glory, and that it behooved them as peers to
concur with him in equal actions affections and ends. When he had done
speaking, the Lords wereall so astonished as looking for an answer no man
opened his mouth, but all stood like dumb immovable statues, whereat not
much contented, he wished them to think upon what he had said, and being
again desired to go visit the King, he said God excepted) he knew no
superior: two prodigies are said to have happened at the same time, that the
Duke of York alleged his reasons of laying claim unto the Crown in the
upper house; from the top of the lower house there hung a Crown with certain
branches serving for Candlesticks affixed to it, and on the top of Dover Castle
was an other anciently placed for the adornement of that place. At this instant
time they both of themselves fell down, no cause at all being to be given for
it, whereupon judgment was made that in like manner the Crown of the Kingdom
was to fall; The Duke of York at his very first commotions against King Henry,
had sent unto James the second King of Scotland, to desire his aid and to
acquaint him with his pretensions, but James not willing to meddle in other
men's affairs answered, that the English had taken many of his Towns, whilst
having enough to do with rebels at home, he had not means to defend them,
that if he would promise to restore them he would assist him, the Duke promised
him so to do: upon these hopes, James assembled a great army, and at the same
time, the Earl of Marsh took the King prisoner besieged Roxborough. York who
had now no more need of him seeing in what danger the Town was, sent unto him
to let him know, that now he had ended the War, that he thanked him for the
promise of his assistance, but that the siege of Roxborough being a thing which
did dislike the people, and himself, thought the occasion thereof, he desired
him to rise from before it without endamaging England, and that he had much a
do to detain the English from taking up arms to succor it; the King
rejoicing at the Dukes prosperous success enquired of the Messengers whether
they had any commission or no to restore unto him such places as were taken
from him, and as was promised by the Duke to which they answering no, neither
will I said he quit a siege, which I hope suddenly to put an end unto
uninterrupted by these threats, be they his or the peoples; then playing with
his cannon upon the Town with more fury then formerly such was his misfortune
as a piece of Ordnance bursting in two, a spilter thereof slew him, and hurt
the Earl of Angus not hurtihg any other body, this accident did
notwithstanding break off the siege, for the besieged wanting all things
requisite, and they themselves reduced to a small number by reason of the often
assaults, they yielded themselves to the new King James the third, their lives
and goods saved.

The death of this King was accompanied by the death of Charles King of France,
which though it were not violent, yet was the strangest that ever was heard of,
being sick some of his flatterers to make their zeal appear the more, put a
conceit into his head that surely somebody meant to poison him. He forbear
from taking any manner of food seven days, and when his Physicians told him
that his weakness proceeded from his forbearing meat and not from any sickness,
he would have eaten but could not, for the channells through which his meat
should pass were closed up; whereupon he dyed, and left the Kingdom to his
son Jews the eleaventh.

The difference between the King and the Duke of York was by the Parliament,
after many disputations thus ended; that though the Crown had been usurped by
Henry the fourth from Edmond Mortimer Earl of Marsh, then living and did
lawfully descend upon him, the Duke of York as borne of Anna the heir of
Philips rights, the only Daughter to Lionell the Duke of Clarrence; yet to
withstand the evils which might arise from Henry's deposing, who had been
King above the space of 38. years; the Duke of York should be contented,
that Henry should reign as long as he should live, and that after his death,
he the Duke of York or his next heir should succeed him in his Kingdom. The
next day being all Saints-day, the King with his roabes on, and Crown upon his
head went in Procession to Saint Paul's waited upon by the Duke, who after being
proclaimed next heir and protector of the Kingdom, desired that to annull
all jealousies; the King would send for the Queen and her son Prince Edward,
the which he did, but she denying to come and having taken up arms to set her
Husband at liberty and to nullify whatsoever had been done in prejudice of
her son, the Duke resolved to prevent her; he recommended the Custody of the
King to the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Warwick. He commanded the Earl of
Marsh to follow him with the greatest forces he could get, as speedily as he
could, and he himself accompanied by the Earl of Salisbury went to Sandalls a
Castle of his own near Wakefield, where of friends and dependants, he
assembled 5000. men, the which, when the Queen heard of, she hasted to meet
with him before he about should join with his son. She had with her above
18000. fighting men, and was followed almost be all the Lords of the Northern
parts of England. Together with Prince Edward her son, the Dukes of Excester
and Somerset, the Earls of Devonshire and Wiltshire and the Lord Clifford,
with these she presented herself before the Walls of Sandall's, the Earl of
Salisbury and Sir David Hall who councelled the Duke, were of opinion that he
should keep within the Walls till the coming of the Earl of Marsh, since
she had no artillery to batter the Castle. But he more apt to generous then
discreet resolutions thinking it a shame, that a Woman should keep him shut up
within a Wall, when so many valiant French Commanders in his so many years
warfare in that Kingdom could not boast of so much, sallied forth the last of
December and descended into the fields beneath to confront her; this Castle is
seated upon a pleasant Hill, and the Queen having divided her people into 3.
parts she laid two of them in Ambush, under the Earl of Wiltshire, and the
Lord Clifford on two sides of the Hill, and with the third wherein were the
Dukes of Somerset and Excester, she met him in the plain as soon as the
Battle was begun he was environed on all sides, defeated in less then half
an hour, and himself valiantly fighting slain together with 2800. of his
men, the Earl of Salisbury was wounded and taken prisoner. Robert Aspell
Chaplain to the Duke, and Tutor to the Earl of Rutland, a child of 12. years
old seeing the ill success of businesses led his charge forth to save him, but
by the Lord Cliffords troops, and by Clifford himself, observed who saw him
nobly attired, he was by him with his dagger in hand demanded who he was, the
unfortunate Youth struck dumb with fear with hands held up, and a submisse
countenance did tacitly pray for mercy and pardon; the Chaplain who by naming
him thought to save him, told him who he was, and that if he would save his
life, he would spend it in his service, but Clifford swore fearfully, that as
his Father had slain his, so would he do him and all his race, then struck
his dagger to his heart, and went his way rejoicing at the most barbarous and
inhumane revenge, that ever cruel man took. Then casting himself upon the
Dukes dead body, he cut off the head, and crowning it with a Crown of paper,
he presented it upon the point of a lance to the Queen: the Earl of Salisbury
and other prisoners were beheaded at Pumfret, and their heads together with the
Dukes set upon the Gates of York; whilst they rejoiced, who not many days
after bewailed their own calamity as did the Queen, or shared in the like
fortune as did Clifford.

The Earl of Marsh in Gloucester received the news of his Fathers defeat and
death, but being comforted by those of the City and such as lived along the
River Seaverne, who were infinitely affectionate to the house of Mortimer of
the which he was heir; he with 23000. men ready to spend their lives in his
quarrel as they did very well demonstrate, resolved upon revenge, he was ready
to be gone when he understood that Jasper Earl of Pembrook brother by the
Mothers side to the King, and James Butler Earl of Ormonde and Wiltshire
followed by great troops of Irish and Welsh, were joined together to surprise
him; changing resolution, he made toward them and met them not far from
Hereford; on Candlemas-day, he defeated them and slew 3800. of their men, the
two Earls fled away, and Owen Teudor the second Husband of King Henry's
Mother, and Father to the Earl of Pembrook was taken prisoner, and with others
that were taken with him immediately beheaded, though some will have him to be
dead many years before by the command of the Duke of Gloucester.

The Queen at the same time with an army of Irish, Scots, and people of the
North parts of England went toward London, with intention to set her Husband
at liberty and to undo what in the preceding Parliament was done by the Duke
of Yorkes authority, to the prejudice of her sons succession. The ill opinion
the Citizens had of her, and the fear of being pillaged by those stranger
people, made them not only resolve to put an extraordinary guard into the
City, but to take up arms under the conduct of the Duke of Norfolk, and the
Earl of Warwick who carrying the King along with them did not remember that
his presence brought always ill fortune along with it. They came to handy
blows near to Saint Albans where though they were not wanting unto
themselves, the Queen not withstanding had the victory, the two Lords fled
away, leaving the Lord Bonneveile and Sir Thomas Terrill with the King, who
might have fled with the rest had they not thought the Kings authority
sufficient for their safe guard; in this Batttell 2300. persons dyed, amongst
which no person of note except John Graye who that very day was Knighted; The
Queen having recovered her Husband made him Knight; Prince Edward her son a
Child of eight years old, and 30. more of those who had valiantly behaved
themselves in the Battle, and persuading herself that having caused the
principalls to fly, dissipated their partakers and recovered the King, London
would be obedient to her, she sent command to the Major, to send her in
victuals for her men, the which he obeyed, but the people opposed him and
stayed the carts at the City gates. This examples shows the error which some
time Princes run into when flattering themselves, they promise themselves
obedience from a distasted people, and who without fear of punishment have
already begun to disobey. The Magistrate for all he could say to show the
evil that might ensue could not prevail for they still cried out the more,
that the City had not need to succor them, who came with an intention to
pillage it. This disobedience grew yet more obstinate by reason of an insolent
troop of horse, who at the same time came from Saint Albans to pillage the
Suburbs, and many of them hasting to Criple-gate, the Gate whereat the carts
were stayed and endeavoring to enter, they were beaten back, and three of them
slain to the great trouble of the wisest sort, for it was to be feared that
the Queen being in arms, and so many several ways offended would rigorously
resent it: The Major sent to excuse himself to the Council which lay at
Barnet, and the Duchess of Bedford accompanied by the Lady Scales, and some
Prelates went to the Queen to pacify her, they persuaded her, that some Lords
might beesent, with 400. armed men, who riding about the streets might appease
the tumult, and that part of the Aldermen should come to meet her at Barnet, to
bring her, and the King peaceably into the City, but all these appointments did
on a sudden prove vain, for whilst they whereupon the execution thereof came
the news of Pembrooks and Wilshires defeat, how that the Earl of Marsh and
Warwick were met, and making toward London, so as she not affying in the
neighboring Countries and less in London; went presently toward the
Northern parts; which were affectionate to her; having before her departure
caused the Lord Bonnaveile and Sir Thomas Terrill be beheaded, though the King
had promised them safety, whilst she should have used clemency to win upon
the enemy, not cruelly to make him desperate. The Earl of March on the
contrary who for his amiable conditions was in every man's mouth and desires,
understanding the Kings retreat rid straight to London, where being received
with universal applause, and all the Inhabitants of the neighboring Countries
gone to make offer unto him of their persons lands and goods, he caused a
great assembly of Lords Ecclesiastical, and Temporal to be made, and joined
unto them the chiefest of the Commons, wherein when he had laid open his
ancient pretenses and the late agreement made in Parliament between King Henry
and the Duke of York his Father, he desired, that since that agreement was
broken by Henry, Henry might be declared not to have any right thereby to the
Crown (whereas he was only King by virtue thereof) and that he might be
substituted in his place according to the said agreement, and the justice of
his claim, the which being by the assembly considered, and the title of the
honor of York judged ligitimate, it was declared that Henry having violated
the oath, and broken the accord made by the authority of the last Parliament,
had made himself unworthy of the Crown, and was by the same authority
deprived of all regal honor and title being thereof incapable, and a
prejudice to the Common wealth, that instead of him Edward Earl of March son
and heir to the Duke of York was to be acknowledged King. The people
joyfully received this declaration, and the next day (which was the fourth of
March) he went to Saint Paul's, where Te Deum being sung, he made the offering
which Kings use to do, and was in Westminster proclaimed King, by the name of
Edward the fourth.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND Between the two
Houses of Lancaster and York.

WHEREIN IS CONTAINED The Prosecution thereof, in the lives of EDWARD the
fourth EDWARD the fifth RICHARD the third, and HENRY the seventh.

Written originally in Italian By Sir Francis Biondi Knight, late Gentleman of
the Privy-Chamber to His Majesty of Great Britain.

Englished by the Right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Monmouth:

The second Volume.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Richard Whitaker, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the Readers his beloved CONTRYMEN.
I Know it is not usual to say any thing before Second parts of the Same
continued Story; nor, truly, am I so enamored of my own Pen as to write more
then according to some acception may be thought Needful. The reasons then that
drew me to this (otherwise Unnecessary) Epistle, are; First, to let my Readers
know, lest I may seem to derogate from my Author, by tacitly arrogating to My
Self, that the three Last lives of this Volume are not yet (as I can hear of)
printed in Italian, and the Author being dead, out of whose written Papers,
whilst he was here in England, I translated them; I know not whether they may
ever undergo the Press in the Language wherein they were by him penned, or
no. My next inducing reason is; That the subject of both parts of this Treatise
being Civil Wars, and this Second coming forth in a Time of Civil Wars
in the Same Country, I hope I may be excused for doing what in me lies to
persuade to a Happy Peace: whereunto I know no more powerful Argument, then by
showing the Miseries of War, which is a Tragedy that always destroys the
Stage whereon it is acted; and which when it once seizes upon a Land rich in
the plenty of a Long Peace, and full with the Surfeit of Continued Ease,
seldom leaves Purging those Superfluities, till All (not only Superfluous but
mere Necessaries) be wasted and consumed, as is sufficiently made to appear
throughent this whole History. I know no Nation in Christendom that could
(till of some late years) more truly have boasted of the blessings of Peace,
Plenty, and Ease, then this n^w Miserable Kingdom of Ours; insomuch as it may
be truly said of Us, Quae alia res civiles furores peperit quam nimia
faelicitas? Ariosto says. Non cognosce la pace e non la stima
Chi provata non ha la guerra prima.
We have now sufficiently tried both Peace and War; let us wisely betake our
selves to the Best choice, and say with Livy; Melior tutiorque certa pax quam
sperata victoria: illa in tua, haec deorum in manu est. And what though the
balance of Victory may lean some times much more to the one side then to the
other: many Checks may be taken; but the Game is never won till the Mate be
given: and if you will believe Guicchiardine, who was a Solid and Experienced
Statesman, be will tell you, that Nelle guerre fat communemente da molti
Potentati contra un solo, suole essere major le spavento che gli effetti;
perch prestamente si rafreddano gli impeti primi cemminciando a nascere
varieta de pareri, onde s'indebolisce tra loro la feed e le forze: e cosi
spesso auviene che le imprese comminciate con grandissima riputatione, caggieno
in melte difficulta, e finalmente diventano vane. If all be true that is of
late reported, ou^ two great neighboring Kings are concluding a Peace; if so,
we may invert the Proverb of Tunc tua res agitur, etc. I believe we are most
concerned when Their walls are Least on fire; and unless it please Almighty
God so to inspire the hearts both of our King and Parliament to the speedy
piecing up of these unfortunate Rents, and mischieveous Misunderstandings, as
that we may have a happy and speedy Peace, cordially agreed on by all sides; I
am afraid we may find my belief to be too true; for Civil Wars give fair
Advantage to Foreign Powers. Remember then that an honorable Peace is the
Center of War, wherein it should rest, and that when War has any other end
then Peace it turns into Public Murder: and consider that if injustissima
p^x justissimo bello sit anteferenda, as it is held by some, how Blessed will
the Peacemakers be in setting an end to that war which is by all sides
acknowledged to be Unnatural? having our Saviors word for their attestate,
that they shall be Owned for the Children of God. Ita bellum suscipiatur (says
Cicero) ut nihil aliud quam pax quesita videatur. That this may be the
endeavor of all parties interressed, is the Sincere Counsel and Humble Advise
of him who is a Faithful and Loyal Subject unto his King, an earnest
Interceder to God Almighty for a Blessing upon the Parliament, a Hearty
Well-wisher to his Country: and who will conclude all with the words of the
man according to Gods own heart^ Seek Peace, and pursue it.

Imprimatur

May 18. 1645: Na. Breut.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND In the Life of Edward the
Fourth.
WIth what ease Edward came unto the Kingdom, is worthy of observation, but
hard it is to give a just reason thereof: whether power, Justice, or the
peoples inclination. It was not power, since he was admitted of by election;
not Justice, for to decide the right of the Crown without an Assembly of
Parliament is not a duty belonging to the people, especially the tumultuous
people of a City, though Metropolitan, without the joint approbation of all the
Shires; and say it did by right belong unto him, a business of such
importance, against a King that was no usurper, who succeeded to two, who for
the space of more then threescore years (his own reign comprehended) were
acknowledged and received for Kings, was not to be decided in so short a time:
he being Son to the last, one of the best deserving and most glorious Princes
that England ever had, and being King himself ever from his cradle for the
space of eight and thirty-yeares; so as he had his goodness been as useful as
it was innocent, the Duke of York durst not have contested with him for the
Kingdom, nor Edward bereft him of it. The peoples inclination was then the
only thing which took the Kingdom from the one, and gave it to the other;
whereby Princes may learn, that long possession without the practice of
Princely actions, and the foregoing such affe^tions as are hurtful and
hateful to the people, is not sufficient for their conservation, especially
when they are not naturally endued with such virtues as are pleasing, which
Henry was not: for the first advantages which Edward had over him, were the
endowments of his mind; and the comeliness of his person, which though it may
decay, is notwithstanding essential to captivate men's affections; when
accompanied, as his was, with clemency, liberality and valor; the most
essential virtues requisite in a worthy Prince, and most efficacious to make
him be desired: and though all these were not wanting in Henry, yet wanted he
the most substantial; and if he had any of them, they were so poorly clad as
they wanted those characters of Majesty which become a King; and though they
were sufficient to content himself, yet were not they answerable to his
quality, nor such as gave content unto the world. Virtues in Princes are lights
not to be put under a bushel, but on a candlestick, to the end that they may
give light to all men. Their actions should resemble the Sun, which
generates, nourishes, and propagates. Edward notwithstanding his virtues and
good fortune was descended from an unfortunate house, he being the only one
(except Edward, son to Richard the third who died a child) who of all his
house died a natural death, after it laid pretense unto the Crown. The Earl
of Cambridge his Grandfather was beheaded at Southampton: the Duke of York his
Father slain before Sandall: of his three brothers, the Earl of Rutland was
slain at the same time; the Duke of Clarence drowned in a Butt of Malmsey, and
the Duke of Gloucester after having strangled his nephews, was by Henry the
seventh bereft both of life and Kingdom. You will meet with no Tragedy, be it
or true or fabulous, where you shall find so many various and cruel deaths as
in this family. To dye by the hands of the enemy, or by the hangman, though
miserable, is yet ordinary; but by a prodigious brother and uncle, unheard of.
As there is nothing more uncertain, nor more wrapped up in fancy, than to
affirm that destiny was the cause of this, so is it to be believed that it
proceeded only from ambition, which disturbing his counsel and advice, made it
endeavor to get the Kingdom at the cost of his own and others lives. Not any
one of them save this Edward, having enjoyed the Crown unto their end, and
that which they did enjoy they enjoyed with such losses, and so much trouble,
as that whatsoever fortune (so it be within the bounds of honor) may seem
rather to be desired than a Kingdom at such a rate. For to live happy being
the end of humane nature, it is no happiness to possess by violence what is
superfluous, but being free from perturbations, peacefully to enjoy what is
sufficient, according to a man's proper state and fortune, which might be
enjoyed, were it not that ambition the enemy to true felicity did persuade us,
that no such happiness had any thing of generous in it. We do not here
exclude all ambition, but rather commend such as does awake in us good actions.
He cannot be said to be good who is not ambitious of a good report; nor can
that ambition be had without an endeavor by our works to deserve it. Yet when
she lives solitarily, sequestered from the multitude, in silence and
philosophical habit, no man follows her, nor makes mention of her. A sound
body affords not so much matter of discourse, as does an infirm; nor a State
well composed, as one mis-govern'd. The one for all her deserts shall be
notwithstanding always neglected; and the other, notwithstanding all her
vices, pursued; so much is our vanity delighted with her luster. Moreover,
deeds of violence being those which do enrich story, and which make virtue or
vice indifferent, we covet them, always provided that our name do in some
sort live in our posterity. But the house of York stood not in need of this;
It had reason to hope for remembrance in perpetuity, and to be contented with
its own estate, her Nobility was real: She was for Riches and Title to be
envied. This notwithstanding she aspired to the Crown, she disturbed her own
quiet, and the quiet of the weal public, for one that reigned, hundred
thousands died; and all of the same house came to evil ends excep this Edward,
who for his part would not have murdered his brother, had he not made him self
King, nor had his sons been slain, had they not been to inherit the
Kingdom. And Richard the third, though naturally wicked, never had attained to
the height of all cruelty and wickedness, had it not been for the thirst of
government; so as it had been better for them to have enjoyed their natural
greatness under a moderate ambition, than by an immoderate one to make
themselves the subject of Tragedy and to be praised but for a few things in
future ages.

Edward being received for King, and for such proclaimed, immediately left
London. The condition of affairs were not such as would suffer him idly to
enjoy that dignity, the duration whereof could not be hoped for but by the
ruin of his adversary. He easily gathered together great forces, advantaged
therein by his predecessors wretchlesnesse. Each man made offer unto him of all
he had, he mustered in the field 49000 men, with the which he stayed at
Pum^ret, and sent the Lord Fitzwater to guard the bridge over the River Air,
called Ferrybrigs, that he himself might make use thereof, and inhibit the
enemy. Henry on the other side, who by having put to death the Duke of York,
thought he had now done all that was requisite, gave the charge of his men to
the Duke of Sommerset, the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford, not
so much for that their qualities did deserve it, as for that being inflamed
with revenge for their fathers deaths at the battle of St. Albanes, he could
not make choice of any more passionately his; And tarrying himself, together
with his wife and son at York, they marched on toward the enemy. As soon as
they understood that they had made themselves masters of Ferrybrigs, they made
a s^and: The Lord Clifford only advanced with the Light Horse, and setting
upon the bridge by break of day, he easily won it; the guards being all
asleep, and not dreaming of the enemy. The Lord Fitzwater awakened with the
outcries of those that were slain, and that did slay, (believing it to arise
from some tumult amongst his own men) threw himself out of his bed, and
unarmed with only a staff in his hand, went to appease them. But too late
aware of his mistake, he was there slain, and together with him the bastard of
Salisbury, brother to the Earl of Warwick. They who could saved themselves,
the Lancastrians remaining masters of the place. The Bastards death did so much
grieve his brother Warwick, (added to the unhappie success of the enterprise,
which as being the first he thought might dismay the Army) as hasting to the
King to advertise him of the sad event, he lighted off horseback, and thrust
his Sword into his horses belly, saying, Fly who fly will, I will not fly;
here will I stay with as many as will keep me company, and kissing the hilt of
his Sword by the way of vow, he put it up again. But Edward who did very much
resent this misfortune, not that it was of so great consequence in it self,
but for that being the first encounter, it might be taken as an evil omen, and
deject his men, made Proclamation, that it should be lawful for whosoever had
not a mind to fight to depart; he promised large recompenses to those that
would tarry, but death to as many as should tarry, and afterward run away,
with reward and double pay to any that should kill them. No man accepted so
ignominious a leave, they all chose rather to die than to declare themselves so
base cowards. This good success of Clifford was in the mean time of no long
continuance, for the Lord Faulconbridge had passed the Air at Castleford,
three miles above Ferrybrigs, accompanied by Sir Walter Blunt, and Robert
Horn, with intention to surprise him, as he did, though not in that place: for
Clifford being thereof advertised, whilst he thought to shun the enemy by
going another way, he met with him, and having his Helmet off by reason of the
heat of the day, he was with an unexpected shot of an Arrow one of the first
that was slain, and together with him the Earl of Westmerlands brother, the
rest were almost all left dead upon the place. This death was too good for him:
The innocent blood of the Earl of Rutland did require of him a foreseen,
painful, cruel death. But the punishment which he failed of, his son met
withal; who being saved by a poor shepherd, he lived a beggar, and unknown
during the reigns of Edward and Richard, till such time as Henry the seventh
coming to the Crown, he was by him restored to the honor and inheritance of
his family. The Duke of Norfolk, who led Edwards Vanguard was at this time
sick, so as Faulconbridge took the charge upon him, and marched by break of
day toward Saxton, to see how strong the enemy was, and finding him to be
60000 men strong, he advertised Edward thereof, who though much inferior in
number, went forthwith to encounter him. The day was Palm Sunday. Edward took
his stand in the middle Squadron, sent the Bow-men forwards, and recommended
the rere-ward to Sir John Venloe, and Sir John Dinham both of them valiant
Gentlemen. He gave command that no prisoner should be taken, but all
indiffereetly put to the Sword. The Lancastrians marched toward them, and met
them in the fields between Towton and Saxton. The first salvation was given by
Arrows, but with different event, for at this time there fell a shower of
snow, and the wind driving the snow upon the faces of Henry's men, they were
therewith so blinded, as they shot in vain, and their Arrows beaten back by
the wind, fell half way short; the which Faulconbridge observing, after the
first volley, he forbad his men to shoot, and when the enemy had shot all
their Arrows he drew up nearer unto them, letting fly at them not only with
his own Arrows (which assisted by the wind, did hit where they were intended)
but those likewise of the enemy, which in his march he found sticking in the
ground. Hereupon the Earl of Northumberland and Andrew Trolop who led the
Vanguard perceiving the disadvantage, made haste to come to handy-blowes. The
combat endured ten hours, it not being known who had the better, and all of
them fighting, as if they had overcome. Such was the hatred of the two
factions, and their resolution not to yield, as the command not to take
prisoners was bootlesse, for they resolved either to overcome or die. Nothing
does more encourage an Army then the presence of the Prince, and the Captains
example. Edward was an eyewitness of his soldiers valor, as King, and they
of his Captaine-like courage. A sight which made them choose rather to die than
not to imitate him. The Lancastrians were at last enforced to yield, by reason
of the small number that was left, not able to make resistance. They gave
back, but not as men overcome; they were still pursued, but did not still fly
away; they oftentimes reunited themselves, and though in weak Troops, they
made such resistance, as those of York could not be termed Conquerours till
the next day. Those who remained alive went toward Tadcaster-bridge; but not
able to get so far, and thinking to wade over a little rivelet named Cock,
the greatest part of them were drowned. The waters of that River and of the
River Warfe, into which it disgorges it self seemed, all to be of blood. The
number of the dead was 36776. amongst which the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, the Lord Dakers, and Wells; and amongst many Knights, Sir John
Nevill, and Sir Andrew Trolop. The Dukes of Somerset and of Exceter saved
themselves and the Earl of Devonshire was (I know not how) taken prisoner, I
believe for that they were weary of killing. Had not France had a young King at
this time, or had the new King found France in a better condition, after so
many years wars; or had not Scotland had so young a child for its King, and
distracted with intestine factions, England had run a danger, having lost the
flower of all her Warriers, who were fit not only to have defended her, but to
have made whatever difficult achievement. Edward having obtained this bloody
victory, went to York, where he caused the Earl of Salisburies father, and
other of his friends to be beheaded, as likewise the Earl of Devonshire, and
some other. This mean while Henry was got to Barwicke, and from thence to
Scotland, where he was with all humanity received, comforted, and had provision
made for him of some small pension by that young King, who likewise agreed that
Princess Margaret his sister should marry Prince Edward, Henry's son; but
this marriage was not afterward consummated, and Henry to requite these
courtesies, did what if he had been in his former condition he would not have
done. He gave the Town of Barwicke to King James, a place very advantageous to
the Scots, and long before desired by them. The Queen his wife went with her
son into France, to procure some means by her father the King of Sicily,
whereby to recover what was lost. She obtained of Lewis King of France free
access for as many English as were of her side, and banishment for those who
sided with her adversary; businesses of no great consequences. Edward returned
triumphant to London the 29. of June. He was Crowned at Westminster, in a
Parliament which was there held, he revoked all such thing as had been done by
Henry to the prejudice of the House of York, and of himself; he reformed many
enormities, which civil dissension had brought in; he created his two brothers
Dukes; George, of Clarence, and Richard, of Gloucester: he made John Nevill
brother to the Earl of Warwick, Baron, and afterward Marquess. He created
Henry Burchier Earl of Essex, who was his uncle, as husband to his fathers
sister; and the Lord William Faulconbridge Earl of Kent. All which promotions
did succeed the deaths of John Vere, Earl of Oxford, and Auberey his eldest
son, who together with others were beheaded, either through the malice of
their enemies, or that the King held himself injured by them. By reason
whereof John Earl of Oxford his second son, was always his professed enemy.
Passion makes us always abhor the authors of our evil. This happy success
of Edwards made many (amongst which the Duke of Somerset, and Sir Ralph Peircy)
to change sides: they were graciously received to mercy by the King, who
together with their lives, restored unto them their goods, making them thereby
inexcusable of second faults. The first plighted faith ought always constantly
to be observed, and if by necessity broken, it ought not to be broken again,
for so both the former and latter oaths are violated: an error common amongst
those who esteem of all advantages, breach of faith the most advantageous.

Queen Margaret did at last obtain from King Lewis (for the King of Sicily her
father could not assist her in any thing) a Troop of 500 men conducted by
Monsieur de Varennes, with the which she passed over into Scotland; but she had
no sooner landed, then she was forced to re-imbarke her self being waylaid by
the enemy. So as putting to Sea again, the Vessel wherein she was, was by a
tempest parted from the rest, and not without difficulty put in at Barwicke,
whereby she preserved her liberty, which she had lost had she kept with the
other ships. For the French being driven upon the shore, and not knowing what
side to take (the wind forbidding them to put to Sea, and the enemy to Land)
they took such resolution as nature taught them. They prolonged the ruin
which could not be escaped; they burnt their ships and retired themselves to
Holy-Iland, where they were set upon by the bastard Ogle, and defeated, many of
them slain, and 400. of them taken prisoners; Varrennes, and some few more, by
means of a Fisher-boat got into Barwicke. This bad success did not allay the
Queens courage: for adding to the Scottish forces such of England as upon the
news of her arrival were come to serve her, she together with her husband
entered Northumberland, (leaving her son at Barwicke) and winning the Castle
of Bambury; she past forward to the Bishopric of Durham. The news hereof
being come to England the Duke of Somerset, and Sir Ralph Peircy (forgetting
the late favors received from Edward) did with many others come over to her
side. And she affording all liberty to the soldier, as not having wherewithal
to pay him, did thereby invite all such as had more mind to filch than to
fight. Her courage thus increasing with her numbers, she was not aware that
such like men are seldom beneficial; especially when they want Commanders who
know how to reduce them to discipline. It fared clean otherwise with Edward.
He was not enforced by necessity desperately to hazard his affairs; but
proceeded wisely with the counsel and authority of a King, valiant in
himself, having with him the Earl of Warwick, a most understanding
Commander, followed by the Nobility, and choice men well paid, having ships
well rig'd, and well munitioned, in readiness. Thus he came to oppose her by
Sea and Land. He Commanded the Lord Nevill to go before him into
Northumberland with such forces as were most in readiness to withstand the
damages which were there done, whilst he prepared to follow him. He fortuned
to meet with the Lord Hungerford, Lord Rosse, and Sir Ralph Peircy. He
discomfited them all. The first two ran away at the first encounter; the
third; with many others who fought valiantly, was slain, and as he died,
uttered these words, That he had preserved the Bird in his bosom; as much as
to say, He had kept his faith unto Henry. Edward was a cause of this victory,
by sending unto him new Forces, as soon as he was come to York, which infused
so much courage into him, as he thought to overcome Henry, and win that
honor himself alone, which he could not do if he should expect the coming
of others, and so it fell out: for having notice that Henry was at Hexam, and
imagining that if he should offer him battle he would not accept it, he set
upon him in his Trenches, and finding him in good order, he had much ado to
overcome him; But nothing is impossible to a resolution accompanied by virtue
the mother of courage, which was in him, when it meets with desperation the
stepdame of courage, which was in his adversary. The Lancastrians were defeated
in their Trenches, and the Duke of Somerset, the Lords Rosse, Moulins, and
Hungerford, together with many Gentlemen whilst they fled were taken, and Henry
who in all his lifetime was never esteemed an extraordinary horseman, showed
himself upon this occasion a very good one; for as he fled many that were very
near him were taken, in particular some that were upon his horses of State,
and he who carried his Helmet, or (as others will have it) a Hat adorned with
two rich Crowns, which was afterward presented to Edward, whilst he yet
escaped untouched. The Duke of Somerset was forthwith beheaded at Hexam, the
Barons elsewhere, and five and twenty others at York, and in other parts. Many
there were that did hide themselves in sundry places; but at such times,
farewell friendship and faith, for Proclamations being made forth against them,
they were taken and put to death. Edward hearing of this victory came to
Durham, whither came likewise the victorious Lord, from whence together with
his brother of Warwick, and the Lords Faulconbridge and Scroope, he went to
recover such places as were yet possessed by the enemy. The Castle of Anwicke
where the Queen had left Monsieur de Varrennes Governor, was valiantly
defended by the French, and those of the garrison, affording thereby leisure to
the Scots to come in unto their succor, thirteen thousand whereof commanded by
George Duglas Earl of Angus (ten thousand horse, says Buchanan) came thither,
which the English were not able to resist, being much fewer in number, for they
were divided, and were come to this enterprise with small forces. But Duglas
not willing to trouble himself with keeping of the Castle, his design being
only to free the besieged without more ado, left it to the enemy; who on the
other side being more desirous of the Castle, than of those that did defend it,
were well contented to have it upon these terms. And leaving a sufficient
Garrison there, they took in Dustansbery, commanded by John Joyce, a servant
of the Duke of Somersets, who was sent to York and executed. They took
likewise Bambery defended by Sir Ralph Gray, who having sworn allegiance to
both sides, was before his death degraded from the Honor of Knighthood in this
manner: He had a Coat of Arms put on him reverst, his gilt Spurs were by a
Cook hewed off his heels, and his Sword broken over his head; a thing much
more ignominious than death it self, especially to a man of so Noble and
Worthy a Family. Edward having thus with a little water quenched a flame which
was likely to have set all England on fire, fortified all the Frontiers, and
built Forts upon such parts of the Sea as were fittest for landing, he
denounced heavy punishments against any who should favor or give receptacle
to Henry, Queen Margarite, or any of their associates. He forbear not to use
the like care in the other parts of his Kingdom, especially in the Southern
parts, where landing was easiest for such as should come from Normandy. In the
places of the Earl of Northumberland and Earl of Pembrooke who were fled with
Henry, he created John Nevill Lord Montague Earl of Northumberland, and the
Lord William Herbert Earl of Pembrooke. But Nevill soon after gave up this
title to the King again that he might restore it to Northumberland, who had
his pardon, and in recompense he had the title of a Marquess.

Henry together with his Wife and Son was now in Scotland, where all men, his
conditions considered thought any fortune indifferent for him, as his humor
differing from the humor of other men, made them believe a Kingdom and
Cottage to be all one to him: But we may easily err in our judgments, not so
much that we are altogether blind, as by reason of the falsehood of the objects
which we propound unto our selves; the which presumed to be permanent, do vary
either because of the alterations of the humors of the body, or by reason of
the change of opinion, proceeding from the inconstancy of imagination, which
together with the diversity of time does diversifie the thought of our
affairs. King Henry, were it either that his understanding was troubled, or
that he was impatient to live in this condition, or that he hoped by his
presence to put life into his affairs, (which required another manner of man
to work such a miracle) or that his Wife persuaded him thereunto, went
himself alone into England in disguise. I rather believe his Wife was the
cause thereof, for that if it had sprung totally from him, she would not have
suffered him to have put it in execution, knowing how little was to be expected
from his dexterity. This resolution, though it were rash, and not to be done
but by men of singular judgment and valor, was hazzardous enough: Desperate
affairs require desperate resolutions. The good King had no sooner set foot
into England, but he was known, taken, and with his legs tied underneath his
horses belly, sent to London, and met by the Earl of Warwick, not out of any
respect, but that he might the more safely be brought to the Tower, where he
was shut up, and a good guard set upon him. The Queen hearing of this
misfortune, all her hopes being frustrated, went with her Son into France, the
Duke of Sommerset together with his brother John went into Flanders, where they
lived miserably, till being long after known by Charles Duke of Burgundy, whose
Father Philip died not till the year 1467, they had a small pension whereon to
live conferred on them by him. Charles was descended from the King of Portugal
Son to Philippa, sister to Henry the IIIl. and therefore very affectionate to
the house of Lancaster. Philip Commines writes, that he has seen a Duke
following this Princes Court, bare foot and bare legged, begging from door to
door, not being known by any man, that he was the nighest a kin of the
house of Lancaster, and Husband to a Sister of Edward the Fourth; that being at
last known, he had a small pension for livelihood given him by Charles; That
the Duke of Sommerset and diverse others were there likewise. But he is deceived
in his name; he in the margent calls him the Duke of Chester, whereas there
was never any such Duke, the County of Chester belonging properly to the
Princes of Wales since, the time of Edward the black Prince to this very day.
The beggar Duke, who had to wife the sister of Edward the Fourth, was Henry
Holland Duke of Exceter, who escaped in those parts, and chose rather to beg
his bread from door to door, than to be known for fear of danger. Amongst
so many unfortunate men, none did better outlive their calamities than did the
Earl of Pembrook, Brother by the Mothers side to Henry, for though he went a
long time wandering up and down, full of fears and dangers, yet he outlived
his enemies, he saw the extirpation of the house of York, and that of
Lancaster reestablished in the person of Henry the Seventh his Nephew, and dyed
peacefully in the eleventh year of his Reign, Earl of Pembrooke and Duke of
Bedford.

Henry's imprisonment, his Wives and Sons being in France, the flight and
banishment of the chiefest of that faction did secure Edward and quieted the
Kingdom for a while. This calm afforded him occasion of reforming such
disorders as by reason of civil dissension were sprung up in Courts of
Justice, in his Revenues, in Moneys, and foraine correspondences: and to show
his liberality and gratitude to those who had served him, by distributing the
confiscated goods which were very many, as many they were who had merited
reward, wherein he dealt so fully, as there was not any one unsatisfied. By his
affability he afterward won the hearts of all men, but with some observation
of excess; for virtues when they part from their center do usually insensibly
pass from one denomination to another; for if affability become familiarity,
it loses its name; not that familiarity accompanied with decency does not
become a Prince, for if he desire to recreate himself, no recreation can be
had without some kind of domestiquenesse; but that it is sometimes to be used,
not always; and therein choice always to be made of the best, most virtuously
given, and those of the noblest sort, for they being in next relation of
greatness to the Prince, they free him of indifferency, which would make him
be despised by all men. Affability which is commendable consists in giving free
access to such as demand Justice, in listening to good counsel, and in looking
upon the people with a gracious eye; all which may be done without that excess
which was observed in Edward. To his affability he added clemency, which did
not slip like the other out of its natural precincts; for it being a difficult
matter to pardon ones enemies, he pardoned all those who in what manner soever
had formerly opposed his greatness, so as they would forsake further adhering
to such as did yet persist in their averseness to him. The part of a wise man,
for by this means he got the hearts of those who were opposite unto him
before; and he afterward found the good thereof, when losing his Kingdom, as
he did, he never had recovered it, had he not thus won upon the peoples
affections, which is the Prince his chiefest safeguard. Public affairs being
thus accommodated, he descended to what more particularly concerned himself;
which are not notwithstanding to be separated from what concerns the State.
Marriage from whence proceeds lawful successors, is the strength as well of
Kingdoms as of private families. Three marriages were propounded to him. The
first, Marguerit sister to James the third King of Scotland, whose advantages
were the breach of the marriage with Edward son to Henry, and thereby the
undoing the chiefest hopes of the house of Lancaster. That upon any new
occasion of civil broils, he should either have Scotland side with him, or
remain neuter. He should thereby free himself from the daily troubles
nourished by the obstinate enmity of so hardy and warlike a neighbor. But
understanding that she was of a sickly body, and consequently not likely to
bear children, he would none of her. The second was Isabell sister to Henry
the fourth King of Castile, his hopes by her were the succession of that
Kingdom, and by the assistance thereof the recovery of Gascony; in like manner
as by the assistance of Gascony, given by Edward the black Prince, King Peter
father to the great grandmother of this King Edward, recovered Castile. The
English writers say, that her being too young, as not being then above six or
seven years old, was the cause why that match was no further proceeded in. But
I find that she being married to Ferdinand, and dying Queen of Castile, not
when she was three and fifty years old, and in the year 1506. as Edward Hall
does calculate it, but in the fiftieth year of her age, and in the year 1504.
she must be in the year 1464. (which was the time when this marriage was
treated of) thirteen years old; so but ten years younger than Edward, so as
their years were not unproportionate. Halls calculation is grounded upon the
stories of Spain, which he does not particularize in; and upon an Epitaph
engraven upon this Queens tomb in Granado, which he never saw. Mine upon the
Spanish story written by Lewis Myerne Turquet, my father in law, a most exact
writer, and by the Jesuit John Mariana, who says she was borne the 24. of May
in the year 1451. So as some other cause made him not choose her. The third
was Bona, daughter to Lodowicke Duke of Savoy and sister to Charlotte Queen of
France, with whom she at the present was. This was embraced, the Earl of
Warwick was sent to Lewis the eleventh to demand her of him, neither could
Edward put on a better resolution. For his affairs in England being settled by
Henry's imprisonment, no fear was to be had of Scotland, without aid and
provocation from France, which was not better to be eschewed by any means than
this; for though Charlotte bore not such sway with her husband as to govern
him as she listed, yet held she very good correspondency with him. And Lewis
(whose only ends were to lessen the power of the Princes and great Lords of
France, particularly that of his brother Charles, and the two Dukes of Brittany
and Burgundy) laid willingly hold upon this occasion to acquit himself of the
impornity of Margarite Queen of England, who endeavored to persuade him to a
dangerous and fruitless war, and which was averse to his genius and designs
by withdrawing him from the other, to the which reason and his own inclination
bore him. Moreover the Duke of Savoy having been an ancient confederate and
near allie to the Duke of Burgundy, this would be a means to mar their
intelligence, for though he were his father in Law, such ties amongst Princes,
unless they be knitted with new knots, are subject to be loosed and broken by
every days occasioned interest. For these reasons this match was agreed upon
between King Lewis and the Earl of Warwick; and Monsieur de Dammartin was
sent into England to strike it up with Edward. But whilst Warwick thought he
had succesfully executed his Masters commands, he unexpectedly heard that he
was married. Edward was gone a hunting progress toward Grafton, a house
belonging to Iacoline of Luxenburg, sister to the Count St. Paul, wife to the
Lord Rivers, and widow to the Duke of Bedford, who died Regent in France. With
her was a daughter of hers named Elizabeth, widow to Sir John Gray, who was
slain in the second battle at St. Albans siding with Henry; so as having lost
a part of her Jointure by the confiscation of her husbands goods, she desired
him to confer it again upon her. She was a woman of no extraordinary beauty,
but of such conditions, as surpassing what was in her of beauty, made her to be
valued and beloved by all men. The King did not only grant her what she
desired, but growing in love with her, became her petitioner for wanton
dalliance, which she resolutely denied to yield unto. His appetite increasing
by meeting with an obstacle, he resolved to marry her, taking therein advice of
those who never counsel Princes contrary to their inclinations. Yorkes Widow
the Kings mother foreseeing the evils that were to ensue, admonished him. She
bid him beware of the injury he did his cousin the Earl of Warwick (the
Duchess was sister to Warwickes Father) whose spirit would not endure such an
affront, since the King of France would not believe that he was come to treat
of a match, but to cosen him, laugh at him, and pry into his state; nor was it
likely he could think otherwise, since that he having got the Crown by the
Earls valor and the pursuit of his friends, it was not likely that being so
near a kin unto him, and a man of so great an esteem, he should offend him
by doing so mis-becomming a thing without his knowledge. She showed him how
that the marriage of Princes had for their ends the good of their State, the
alliance of such as could or do them good or harm, and portion proportionable
to the charge of a wife, and their own reputations. That none of all these were
met withal in this which was now treated of; rather in laying a foundation for
a peace, he should offend a great King, and expose himself to so unjust a
war (the cause whereof being blameworthy) as he should not therein find any
friends or confederates. That yet if she were a maid, it might admit of some
excuse; but being a mother of children, a subject, and without portion, these
were conditions likely to produce, instead of benefit, hatred and enmity
abroad, hatred and enmity at home, danger and blame every where. Edwards answer
was, that he doubted not but that his cousin would conform his will to his;
that he was sure enough of his love; that the King of France was not in a
condition to hurt him, having other thoughts which did more nearly concern
him; that nothing could be more acceptable to subjects than to take a wife from
amongst them, since children must issue from the same blood; that for portion
he valued it not, having more than he knew what to do withal; that for all
other inconveniences, contentment in a wife, with whom one was to live and die,
did outweigh them all. His mother finding her persuasions to be of no force,
bethought herself of another means, which proved alike vain. The King upon
promise of marriage had wrought to his desire a Lady of great birth, named
Elizabeth Lucy; She alleged, that since before God this Lady was his
legitimate wife, he could not marry any other. An impediment which delayed his
satisfaction in the other, for the Bishops required proof thereof. But the
Lady Lucy examined upon oath, in opposition to the instigation of the Duchess
and her own honor and interest did depose; that the King did never pass unto
her any direct promise; but that he had said such things unto her, as had she
not thought them thereunto equivalent, she had never condescended to his will;
Upon this deposition the King did privately marry the other, the marriage being
afterward published by her Coronation.

None were pleased herewithall, the Nobility less than the Communalty: their
greatness being obscured by the sudden splendour of the Queens kindred. Her
father was created Earl Rivers, and shortly after made Lord High-constable of
England. Her brother Anthony was enricht by the marriage of the daughter and
heir of the Lord Scales, which Title was likewise conferred upon him. Her
son Thomas Gray, which she had by her former husband did afterward marry the
daughter of William Bonneville, Lord Harrington, and was created Marquis
Dorser. Historians observe many mischiefs that ensued from this marriage,
besides the death of so many that was caused thereby. Edward did thereby lose
his Kingdom; his children were declared to be bastards, and strangled; the
Queens house extirpated; the Earl of Warwick and his brother slain. But
they name not the death of King Henry and his son, which had not happened had
not the Earl of Warwick for this cause taken up Arms. King Lewis though thus
abused, did not suffer himself to be transported by passion, but making use of
his natural dissembling, expected a time for revenge. And to pacify the two
sisters, he not long after married Bona to Galiazzo Maria Sforza Duke of
Milan, son to Francis; but not with so good success as Hall reports; for her
husband being slain, she within a few years became a widow, and by her ill
government afforded occasion to his cousin Lodowicke Sforza to take from her
the government, and the government, life, and Dukedom from her son John
Galeazzo.

The Earl of Warwick this mean while wounded in his reputation, parted from
France more sensible thereof than he made show for; he could not though so
far cloak his anger, but that Lewis was aware of it. Being returned to
England, he so behaved himself with the King, as that he seemed not to be at
all distasted, whilst this present injury did call to mind many other formerly
received, which would not though have hurried him to his ruin, had it not been
for this. He saw how the King did apprehend his greatness, and grew jealous
thereof; that his design was to suppress him, when himself should be better
established; that he thought not himself King, whilst men thought him as
necessary to the conservation of the State, as he was to the obtaining thereof.
That the services he had done him were of such a nature as to shun the tie
of obligation, ungrateful people do often times desire to rid themselves of the
obliger; That the state of business was such as would not suffer him to be
debarred the communication thereof, though Edward thought he did thereby
communicate unto him his government, and made him Colleague of his Kingdom;
That he had sought after all occasions to bereave him of men's good opinion. All
which made him believe that he was sent into France to this purpose. To this
may be added (and which boiled in him more than all the rest) that Edward would
have dishonored his house by tempting the honesty of, I know not whether, his
daughter or his niece; wherein though he did not succeed, the offering at it
cease not to be mischievous and wicked, as a thing whereby he endeavored to
dishonor the family of his kinsman, servant, and benefactor. All these things
put together, begat in him such an hatred, as he resolved to depose him, and
re-inthrone Henry, as soon as a fit occasion should present it self. And
though he retired himself to Warwick, under a pretense of an indisposition
of health; yet did the King spy his discontents, though not so much as it
behoved him to have done: for he thought him not so sufficient to depose him,
as he was to raise him up; and that out of two reasons: First, that Princes do
seldom mistrust their own power, especially with their subjects; secondly,
for that they do believe the injuries they do are written in Brass by those
who receive them, whilst they who do them, write them in Sand. The Queen was
this year delivered of a daughter, named Elizabeth, who put a period to the
Civil wars, by marrying with Henry the VII.

Edward did this mean while peaceably possess his Kingdom, his enemies were
all or slain, undone, or frightened. He had 1466.
none to fear save France, and her but a little; for Lewis was more inclined
to wage war at home than abroad. He forbear not though to join friendship
with John King of Arragon, who upon occasion might by way of diversion assist
him in Languedocke, a good, though deceitful foresight: for it often happens
that many years are spent in the cultivating of a friendship, which proves
faulty in the harvest. Yet wisdom it is to manure such as put us not to too
great charge, for the opinion of having friends weighes with our enemies. This
friendship occasioned the transportation of a great many sheep into Spain,
whereby England was as much impoverished as Spain was enriched. He likewise,
for the same respect, concluded a Truce with Scotland for 15 years. But the
friendship of the Duke of Burgundy was that which most availed him, and which
re-established him in his Kingdom when he had lost it.

Philip the Duke of Burgundy did yet live, and his son Count Caralois, who by
two wives had one only daughter, (afterward the sole heir of all those
Territories) the Duke was minded to marry him the third time, hoping to secure
the succession by issue male. He bethought himself of Margaret sister to
Edward, a Princess of great beauty, and endued with a spirit not usual to her
sex; but her being of the house of York made him stagger in his resolutions:
For that the Queen of Portugal his wives mother was a daughter of the house
of Lancaster, by reason whereof her son Charles did love that house and hate
the other. But since he could make no alliance of more jealousy to France, nor
of more commodity to the Low Countries, he sent Anthony the eldest of his
natural sons, commonly called the Bastard of Burgundy, with some others,
Ambassador into England to this effect. He came with a retinue of 400. horse,
with rich Liveries and richer furniture. He was graciously received by the
King. The business being propounded in Council, none with stood it but the
Earl of Warwick. For framing the Rebellion which he had formerly plotted
with himself, he conceived this match would be harmfull to Lewis, on whom he
intended to rely, and good for Edward, whom he intended to destroy. But he
having but one vote the Ambassadors request was granted, and Edward promised
friendship to the friends of Burgundy, and enmity to his enemies; He presented
his sister to the Bastard, and other Ambassadors, who kissed her hand, as their
Princess, and presented her with very rich Jewels, which she accepted of with
terms of gratitude both to her father in law; and husband. Great were the
entertainments that were made. Challenges at Tilt passed between the Bastard
and the Lord Scales the Queens brother, and between his followers and the
English Gentry, the which I pass by, as not requisite to our story. In midst
of these revellings came the news of Philippes death, which much grieved the
Bastard, so as taking leave of the King, and of the new Duchess of Burgundy,
and being richly presented, he passed over into Brabant, and made such a
relation to the Duke his brother, of his Bride, as did very well satisfy him.
Who as soon as he had appeased the Legeois (wherein he spent some time) he
desired Edward to send her over unto him, according to the Articles of the
Contract; which he forthwith did. She took shipping at Dover being attended on
by 500. horse, and accompanied by the two sisters Anne Duchess of Exceter,
and Elizabeth Duchess of Suffolk. She landed at Slewes, and went from thence
to Bourges, where the marriage was celebrated.

The Earl of Warwick could not at length so well dissemble his distasts, as
that the King did not perceive them. But Princes are not wont to give
satisfaction to their inferiors, especially to their subjects, lest they might
tacitly confess those faults, into which as being exempt they pretend they
cannot fall; or else show some sort of humiliation repugnant to their
greatness. This increased the Earls indignation, for surposed ignorance
admits of excuse, which confessed knowledge does not; so as thinking himself
injured before, contrary to all reason, and his injury being now doubled by the
no account that was made of it, he resolved forthwith to do what he along time
before had thought upon. And so dangerous resolutions not being to be
undertaken without assistance: he judged the assistance of his own brothers
fittest, the Archbishop of York, and the Marquess. When he had begun his
discourse, and laid open the reasons which moved him thereunto, he made an
odious Parallel between Henry and Edward, magnifying the gratitude and
goodness of the former, the ingratitude and wickedness of the other. He
showed how that their house had been the forwardest to spend their lives and
livelihoods in the service of the Duke of York the father, and of Edward
himself, to make him King, who had not recompensed them according to their
high deserts, and yet durst upbraid them with having been the raiser of their
house, whilst next under God they ought their chiefest honor to Henry; that
not contented thus to vilify them, he had endeavored to dishonor their
family, and render it infamous by attempting to vitiate a daughter thereof. He
exaggerated the affront about the match with the Lady Bona, which would not
have been offered to the most contemptible man in the world; Moreover that he
had no ways excused it unto him, but passed it over in silence, not weighing
that a man's honor ought to be more dear unto him than the apple of his eye,
or life it self. Yet that he did not wonder at all this, for that Edward
judging other men by himself, he thought other men should make as small
account of their honor, as he had always done of his promises. That his
resolution was to do what possibly he could to take from him that Crown
which he had placed on his head, and place it again upon Henry, a good and
lawful King. That since they did partake with him in the injuries, they ought
likewise share with him in the revenge; which would easily be effected if they
would chearefully and heartily betake themselves unto it, as they ought, and as
the chiefest of the Kingdom would do: And that he did assure himself they
should not want assistance from Princes beyond the Seas, necessity requiring it.

This proposition as it was unexpected, so was it not at the first accepted of
by the brothers. But the Archbishop after long disputes giving way thereunto,
the Marquess, though with much difficulty, suffered himself at last to be
persuaded likewise, moved by the tie of blood, not any inclination of his own,
for he loved Edward, and was beloved by him. This ambiguity was the ruin of
them all; for he not able to deny his brothers, nor yet to betray his Prince,
did amiss on both sides. He assisted Edward, by not cordially assisting his
brother, and he betrayed his brother, by not heartily betaking himself to
betray Edward. Warwick having laid this first groud-worke of his ruinous
building, he pursued the fabric thereof with the Duke of Clarence, for seeing
him no ways pleased he resolved to try him. He seemed to be sensible of the
coolness used by the King of late to the Duke, and expected what he would
reply. But he like a Cornet which with the first breath sends the sound abroad,
answered, It was in vain to complain of things ancient and desperate. That
the King was in his own nature disobliging and ungrateful, and most to such
as he was most obliged unto. That since he made no account of his own
brothers, much less would he do it of other friends. That he more valued his
wives blood than his own. That he had disposed of three rich heirs by
marrying them to her son, her brother, and the Lord Hastings, Mushroms sprung
up in one night, not having any consideration of his own brethren. Continuing
in such like angry and threatening discourse, he gave the Earl occasion to lay
himself open unto him, who offered unto him his daugher, with equivalent
portion to those that he had named, with numberless other promises and hopes.
The Duke was so blinded with his anger as he minded not the injury he did unto
himself; that favoring the house of Lancaster (the thing now in question) he
destroyed his own. When it was more available to him to have his brother King,
than all the good could derive to him from this his ill taken advice. The Earl
more blind than he did not consider the interest of brotherhood and blood,
which being of no force then, would much prevail when his passion should be
over; since that he could not pretend to any honor which would not come short
of the condition now he was in, the which, this resolution once taken, he was
for ever to lose. Great therefore was the Earls folly to ground a business of
such importance upon two so wavering foundatious, as upon his own brother
forced thereunto, and his brother, whose destruction was desired, since he
must needs repent himself at last. The order they took was to retire
themselves to Calleis. That the Marquess and Archbishop should underhand
procure some insurrection in the Northern parts of the Kingdom, and so give
the occasion of the war, whilst they being on the other side the Sea, might
not be thought Authors of it. Being thus gone to Calleis, and having vowed by
the holy Sacrament to all things agreed upon between them, the Duke upon the
aforesaid promises and hopes, married the Earls daughter.

The two brothers being gone to York, whereof the one was president, the other
Archbishop, failed not to put in execution what was agreed upon. There was in
that City an Hospital dedicated to St. Leonard, where by an ancient
institution the poor were fed, and the diseased healed. So as there was no
owner of ground in all that shire, who moved by so good a work did not in the
time of harvest give some proportion of Corn thereunto; the which at first was
voluntary, but in the process of time custom made it be thought a due debt,
and Collectors were chosen for the gathering of it in, who were opposed by
none. Now to give a rise to the intended insurrection, and make way for their
impiety, they thought no means better to effect it, than by the way of piety,
which when disguised, mades things appear otherwise then they are. They made a
speech be spread abroad that the Hospital having sufficient revenues of its
own, had no need of the contribution of Corn, since the poor were not the
better, and that the Provost and Priests grew only rich thereby, so as it was
a folly to continue the contribution. It was no hard matter to persuade the
people hereunto, since no argument is of greater force, than self-interest.
This news passing from one mouth to another, the people did not only deny the
wonted contribution, but wounded some of the Collectors, who were forwardest in
the gathering of it in. Many being herewithall aggrieved, about some 15000 men
gathered themselves together, and went toward York. The Inhabitants of that
City were surprised at this news, not knowing whether they should keep within
the Town and defend their Walls, or salley forth and give them battle. The
Marquess eased them of this trouble, for having made a select choice of not
many, but good men, he encountered them and overcame them, killing many of
them, and taking many of them prisoners; amongst which Robert Huldurne their
leader, whose head he caused to be struck off. Some were of opinion that
having been himself the cause of this insurrection, he had done this service
the better to deceive the King, to the end that not being thought confederate
with his brother, he might the easilyer work him mischief. But this and
other accidents that happened make others think otherwise, for if such had
been his intention, he could not have wished for a better occasion; for he
might have joined with those Rebels, have ruined the King, and advantaged his
Brother; and he himself being the author thereof, as he was believed to be,
either he ought not to have occasioned it, if he had desired to serve the
King, or else not have broken it, had he desired to assist his Brother. I for
my part believe that repenting himself of the first action, he made amends by
the second. But if he were faithful to his Prince, he was a Traitor to his
own blood; not that loyalty to a Sovereign ought not to be preferred before
all other respects, but his brother doing ill, he should not have confirmed him
therein by treacherously complying with him, he should have dissuaded, not
betrayed him. And he having governed himself from the beginning of this
enterprise very uncertainely, makes me believe him to be, if not treacherous,
(which I am induced not to think since he suffered for it) yet irresolute in
his undertakings either for the one or the other side. The Rebels were not
disheartened for all this, but growing thereby more incenthey took for their
Leader the Son and Heir of the Lord Fitshue, and Henry Nevill, Son and
Heir likewise of the Lord Latimer, both of them young men, but chosen (under
the direction of John Conniers, one of the most valiant Gentlemen of all those
parts) for that the one of them was Nephew, the other cousin to the Earl of
Warwick. They would have gone again toward York, but wanting Artillery,
they marched toward London, with resolution to do what they were able, to
make Edward be deposed, as being no lawful Prince, and of prejudice to the
Commonwealth. Edward was not ignorant of all the Plots, but judging that if
the Rebels should come near London, it would redound much to his dishonor,
he writ to William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, willing him to gather together
all the Forces he could, and not to suffer them pass further on. The Earl
obeyed, not more out of gratitude for the honor he had received, than out of
his desire to do some action of merit, and most of all, for that hating
Warwick (who had hindered his Son from marrying with a rich Heir) he
coveted revenge: so as taking with him his Brother Sir Richard Herbert, a very
valiant Gentleman, and assembled together some six or seven thousand Welchmen
well armed, he went to meet them, and was met by the way by the L. Humphrey
Stafford, who led along with him 800 Bowmen. But not knowing what way the
Rebels took, he went sometimes one way, sometimes another, till being
advertised that they came by Northampten, he took that way, and being
desirous to know their Number, and their Order, Sir Richard Herbert offered to
make the discovery. He together with 2000 good Welsh Horse took shelter by a
Woods side, by the which they were to pass. They were already past by him,
when he desirous to return with his relation to his brother, his men would by
all means fight with them, neither could he withhold them from furiously
assaulting the rereward, which marching in good Order, as if they had expected
to be set upon, turned faces about, and fighting valiantly slew many of them,
and took many prisoners, and made the rest retreat, too late sorry that they
had not obeyed their Leader. The King was not any whit dismayed at this news,
but encouraging the Earl, commanded him to find them entertainment till he
should send more Forces to him, or come himself in person. The adversaries
though somewhat proud of this good success, did not become more insolent. But
considering that they were likely to meet with many such bickerings before
they should come to London, and not likely to hold out against them all, their
numbers not being answerable to the way they were to go, they turned toward
Warwick, intending to expect the coming of the Earl thereof, who being come
from Calleis, did together with his Son in Law, raise people in all parts.
But before either the King or Warwick got thither, fortune brought the two
Armies face to face, within three miles of Bambery, in a certain place, where
were three hills. In two whereof the two Armies were encampt, the third left to
the success of fortune, not assayed by the Welsh, because they could not
without much hazard make themselves masters thereof, though they had a great
mind so to do. The Earl of Pembrooke and the Lord Stafford were lodged in
Bambery; where to shun disputes which upon the like occasion might arise,
they agreed each of them to take such lodging as they first should light upon.
The Baron being lodged to his liking, the Earl (forgetting his agreement and
using his authority) would, I know not why, have him change lodging, the which
he unwillingly did, because so doing he was to quit the company of a
Gentlewoman whom he found lodged there. And having no other means to show his
resentment at the present, he together with all his people left the Town,
leaving the Earl without any Bowmen, who by their shooting were likely to be
the best advantage of the Battle. The Earl was not herewithall dismayed, but
going to the Camp, took any resolution rather than to retire. It was just the
day after St. James his day, when Sir Henry Nevill, Son to the L. Latimer,
thinking he had been too long idle went forth to skirmish early in the
morning, being followed by a company of light horse. But delighting more
therein than he had reason, he so far advanced himself, as not knowing how to
retire, he was taken, and soon after put to death upon cool blood. His
youth, nobility, and valor (the chiefest of all endowments) not being
sufficient to save him. This act of cruelty incensed the Northern people, who
resolving to revenge his death, let fly their darts at the hill where the
Welchmen lay, whereby enforcing them to come down into the plain, where the
battle began. It was not sufficient for the E. of Pembrook, who fought upon
disadvantage, to execute the part of a Commander, it behoved him to play the
part of a soldier; whilst his brother Sr. Rich. Herbert, minding nothing but
the battle, did so behave himself as the true story of his valor is not to be
exceeded by any fabulous Romanza; for making way through the enemies troops,
with his sword in his hand, he passed twice through the whole length of their
army, returning to his own men, if not untoucht, yet without any mortal wound.
The which (as I believe) was occasioned for that his worth admired by those
that saw it, did by joining delight with danger, and wonder with delight,
withold the hands of all men from injuring him. The battle did almost
totally lean to his side, when John Clapham, a Servant of the E. of Warwicks
(who had gathered together 500 of the poorest and basest sort of people about
Northampton) appeared upon the top of one of those hills with a white Bear in
his Ensign, crying out, a Warwick, a Warwick, the which did so much frighten
the Welsh, as believing Warwick to be there with all his forces, they began to
fly, Sir Richards valor not being sufficient to detain them. In this flight
(the prisoners not numbered) 5000 men were slain. The Earl of Pembrooke, his
brother Sir Richard, and many other Gentlemen were taken prisoners, and without
any trial at Law beheaded at Bambery. The Earl who was appointed first to
suffer, addressing himself to Conniers and Clapham, entreated them in the
behalf of his brother; he objected unto them his youth and comeliness of
stature answerable to his Martial mind; that his valor, even by themselves
admired, might one day be serviceable to his Country. But Sir Henry Nevils
death had so exasperated them, as that it occasioned his death, the death of
his brother, and of many others. A lamentable Tragedy presented by so worthy
men. So as it is no wonder if virtue be hated, since it is not useful, but
rather harmefull to the owners thereof. Sir Edward Herbert Baron of Cherbery
does at this time live, descended from them, a Gentleman, who has given such
proof of his valor, as well in his own private occasions in England, as in
the wars in the Low Countries, as he may justly be said to sympathize with
the said Sir Richard; but in schollership he has the advantage of adding that
glory to his Ancestors by his famous Philosophical composures, which in the
like kind he has not received from them. Their cruelties did not here cease;
for those of Northampton having chosen unto themselves one Robert of Risdale
for their Captain, and joined certain others unto him, they surprised the
Earl Rivers, father to the Queen, and his son John, in his mansion house of
Grafton, brought them to Northampton, and without more ado beheaded them. The
Lord Stafford was generally accused for the loss of this battle, who for so
slight a cause, and upon so urgent an occasion forsook the Kings service, to
revenge himself upon the Earl of Pembrooke. And to say the truth this
misfortune had not happened, at least not with the death of so many and so worthy
men, had he been there. Edward therefore sent forth Commissions to the
Sheriffs of Devonshire and Somersetshire to seek him out, find him, and upon
pain of their lives to put him to death. They were not wanting in diligence,
they found him where he thought he had been sufficiently concealed, and
executed their command. The victors this mean while had retired themselves to
Warwick, whither the Earl thereof was come with a great body of armed men.
And understanding that the King was marching toward him, he advertised the
Duke of Clarence, who forthwith joined with him, bringing along a great number
of armed men. They were likely presently to have come to blows according to
the custom of England, had not some great personages desirous of peace, and of
the good of the Weal public interposed to find some way of accommodation.
This negotiation made Edward so careless, as that confidently believing in
peace, he neglected all duties of Military discipline; whilst Warwick more
wary than he, being by his spies certified of the Guards negligence, and the
heedlesnesse of all the rest, who behaved themselves as if no enemy had been,
set upon the King by night, and without any resistance took him prisoner. A
blow likely to end the difference without bloodshed. He first put him in the
Castle of Warwick; from thence (that no man might know what was become of him)
he sent him to Medlam a Castle in Yorkshire, then in the custody of the
Archbishop his brother. But as through negligence he fell into this condition,
so by good fortune he freed himself thereout, making use of his wonted
affability, whereby he made the Archbishop treat him like a King, not a
prisoner, allowing him not only the liberty of the Castle, but the freedom to
hunt, setting but a small guard upon him, who either could not, or would not
keep him. For Edward having sent to Sir William Stanley, and Sir Thomas
Borrowes his trusty friends; that they should come with a band of good men to
rescue him, they did so, and meeting him whilst he was hunting, they rescued
him, not being at all withstood by his guardians: either for that they were too
weak, or (as it is more likely) for that they were corrupted. I know not
whether the Archbishop were hereof guilty or no (being allured by promises) but
if he were, he very much failed his brothers trust; and if he were not, his
folly was too great. He first retired to York; but not able there to raise
Troops sufficient to bring him in safety to London (the way being long and
dangerous) he stayed there only two days, and from thence went toward
Lancaster, where he was met by the Lord Hastings his Chamberlain, by whose
means he got so many men together as brought him safely to London. This
accident wounded the Duke of Clarence, and the Earl of Warwick to the quick,
falling thereby from those hopes which having the enemy in their hands they did
not vainly frame unto themselves; and being now (were it either out of
negligence or treachery) soundly derided, since in stead of having ended the
war, they were now to begin it afresh, with the hazard of their lives,
goods, and honors. The greatest part of those that followed them were already
returned to their own homes. The rest thought there had been no more need of
Arms; that they should again in peace and liberty see London, and Henry
reestablished. That all slaughter and shedding of blood had been ended in the
last battle. That Countries, Cities, and Churches robbed of their ornaments
should return to their former luster: All which were only humane
imaginations, contraried by divine providence. Fortune, and the Stars were
always contrary to the miserable unfortunate Henry. His contagious malady was
an Abyss which together with him swallowed up as many as sided with him. Many
notwithstanding, to shun relapsing into the former calamities, mediated for
peace. And because they thought to treat of it by third parties would be a way
about the bush, they agreed upon a parley between the parties themselves at
London, Edward by his word securing Warwick and his associates, though in
businesses of the like nature, he was observed sometimes to be faulty.
Clarence and Warwick being come to London, parlied with the King at
Westminster, where in stead of giving satisfaction, they fell mutually to
upbraid each other with benefits repayed by ingratitude, each pretending to be
the obliging benefactor, the other the ungrateful repayer, so as they departed
more envenomed than before.

The two confederates raised an Army in Lincolnshire under the 1470
conduct of Sir Robert Wells, son to the Lord Wells, a Gentleman of a
known valor. The King on the other side for all the ill success of the
parley, thought that business would not so suddenly have broke forth. But
finding the contrary, he assembled a powerful army: He commanded the Lord
Wells, father to Sir Robert, to come unto him, not admitting any excuse either
of age or sickness. Wells being by his friends advertised of the great danger
he ran (the King being grievously offended with him by reason of his son)
got, together with his cousin Sir Thomas Dimocke, who came to accompany him to
London, into Sanctuary at Westminster. Edward thought he should much weaken the
enemies forces, if he could bereave them of young Wells their Commander, the
which he might do by his fathers means; whom he fetched out of Sanctuary upon
promise of pardon. And causing him write unto his son, he marched toward
Stafford where Robert was expected. But he not regarding his fathers Letters,
but rather preparing to meet the King as an enemy, did so incense the King, as
not regarding his plighted faith, his promise of pardon, nor that the father
was not bound to answer for the sons faults (who had neither put him upon
this employment, nor persuaded him thereunto) he unjustly caused the old Lord
to be beheaded, as likewise his cousin, though incomparably less faulty than
the other. Wels though sorely provoked by his fathers death would willingly
have forborne coming to blows, for that the Kings forces were by much the
greater: but not believing he could defer fighting till such time as Warwick
should come up to him, fearing le^t many of his Army might be wrought upon by
the Kings presence, his promise of pardon, and reward, he gave battle, which
after a long and valiant bickering was by him unfortunately lost; himself, Sir
Thomas Deland, and many others were taken prisoners, and all of them
immediately executed. Those that were slain in this battle were 10000; And
more would have been slain, had they not been disheartened by their Captains
being taken, which made them fly. This was a deadly blow to Warwick. The few
forces he yet had were hereby much weakened. It was difficult and tedious to
raise more, since the enemy was at his back. His last refuge was to try the
Lord Stanley, who was his brother in law, but receiving an answer contrary to
his desires, he gave way to fortune, and together with the Duke of Clarence,
their wives and families, he took shipping in Devonshire, making for Calleis,
intending to land the women there, and pass further into France himself; he
hoped there to find help, trusting in the ancient friendship of that King,
since the original of his misfortunes sprung from the affront done to him in
the marriage of his sister in law, the Lady Bona. He had left Monsieur de
Vauclere, a Gascon, Knight of the Garter, his Lieutenant in Calleis, a wary
man, as for the most part are all those of that Country. This man being
advertised of the late proceedings, was not surprised, but had formerly
bethought how to govern himself in so dangerous a business. The Duke of
Burgundy had likewise been advertised by the King, who knew he hated Warwick
next after Charles: The Earl drawing near Calleis, and expecting nothing
less than to be denied entry, was driven back with shot of Cannon, and to
shun sinking, was forced to lie aloof off at Sea. At which instant the
Duchess of Clarence his daughter, was brought to bed of a son; who was the
same Earl of Warwick who was afterward put to death in the Tower of London
by Henry the VII. Great was the Earls confusion, not knowing whither to betake
himself. His daughters malady afflicted him more than ought else. He with much
ado obtained that the child might be baptized within the Town, and got from
thence two flagons of Wine to comfort the mother. Vauclere sent unto him,
willing him to retire, else he should be enforced to treat him rudely. But by
what ensued, I believe Philip Comines report to be true, that by secret message
he had desired him not to wonder at what had happened; that all was done for his
service; that if he should have suffered him to come in, he had been utterly
lost, since England, Burgundy, the Town, and a great part of the garrison were
his enemies. That his best course was to retire into France, not taking any
further thought concerning that Fort; assuring him that in due time he would
give a good account thereof. But by naming England to be his enemy, he only
meant Edward, not the generality; for never was any man better beloved by the
people, than was he; which was the only cause of Edwards aversion and fears;
for the peoples love does usually raise jealousies in the Prince. Edward seeing
him gone thought himself rid of a troublesome burden, which turned little to
his advantage, for the continuance of his jealousies would have made him more
cautelous than he was. The reasons why Burgundy hated him, were, because
Warwick had ruined the house of Lancaster, to which he was most affectionate,
his mothers mother being a branch thereof. That he was a friend to the King of
France, a Prince by him infinitely hated; and the opposing of his marriage, for
no other end, but that he thought he should thereby become too powerful for
France. The inhabitants of Calleis opposed him, not for that they hated his
person, but because the war would have broken their commerce with London; for
the Company of Wollen-drapers kept a Storehouse in Calleis, from whence the
Low Countries, and all Germany were furnished, to the great benefit of
particular men, and the King did thereby receive a yearly toll of 50000
Crowns, Comines says but 15000, and that it came all into the Earls coffers.
As for the Garrison, it cannot be denied, but that the greatest part of them
had dependence upon him: But Monsieur de Duras, a Gascon, and the Kings
Marshall being then there with a great many soldiers under his command, he
would have run danger of being taken prisoner, if he should have entered the
Town. Vauclere by his dissembling compassed his ends: for the news of this his
unexpected behavior coming to the Court of England; the King took the
command of that Town from Warwick, and bestowed it on Vauclere. And the Duke
of Burgondy to confirm him in this his charge, sent thanks unto him by Philip
de Comines, and gave him a pension of 1000 Crowns a year. Notwithstanding all
this Vauclere served and deceived them all, as the effects showed. He demeaned
himself in this manner, not out of any loyalty to the King, or love he bore
unto the Earl, but that he might have two strings to his Bow, and doubly
secure his own interest. For had he been loyal to the King, he could not
have given the Earl any hopes, nor have effected them, when he might do it
without danger; and if he had loved the Earl, he would not have denied him
entrance into the Town, it being the only place he could receive succor
from. But he not knowing which of them would prevail, chose not to endanger
himself, whilst being in good condition, he might betake himself to that
side which should be most availeable for him. Men's ends are commonly their own
interests, for the which they think it lawful to abandon virtue, which
always goes accompanied by some cross, which they abhor. The Earl of
Warwick finding that now he had no hopes in Calleis, but what were future,
sailed toward Diepe, as he was advised by Vauclere, and according to his
first intention. By the way he took as many ships as he met withal
belonging to Charles his subjects, gaining thereby great riches, which did
furnish him at his present need, and forced Charles to send a great Fleet into
those Seas, to revenge himself, either by taking him prisoner, or inhibiting
his return for England. Being come to Diepe, and by command from Lewis,
received with all manner of respect, he was by the said Lewas met at Amboise,
where causing him to be provided with all things necessary, he promised him
his best assistance, and caused a great many ships be rigged out for him, well
provided with Soldiers and Mariners. And this he did the sooner for that
Charles had threatened him if he should assist Warwick. Queen Margaret came to
meet him as soon as she heard he was arrived, and with her the Earls of
Pembrooke and of Oxford, the last of which had lately escaped out of prison,
and was fled from England. Lewis, to have the surer tie upon him, caused Prince
Edward, the Queens son, to marry with Anne the Earl of Warwicks second
daughter. Warwick taking thereby to son in law the son of him whom he had
formerly deposed, that he might now depose him that he had placed in his place.
As soon as the marriage was concluded, Warwick and the Duke of Clarence took
an oath never to put a period to the war, till such time as Henry, or in
default of him his son Edward should recover the Kingdom. And Queen Margaret
promised to make them two Governors of the Kingdom, till such time as her
son should be of years. King Edward was daily advertised by Duke Charles
what treaties were in hand to his prejudice, the Duke complaining that Edward
should more mind his pleasures than his affairs. But it was in vain to
object the fear of danger to a courageous Prince, a lover of pastimes; vain
it was to persuade him to quit his sports, and plunge himself in troubles,
since it was so unlikely that should befall him which did. He advised him to
oppose the Earl at Sea, for that if he should set foot on Land, and have his
partakers join with him, the danger and difficulty would be the greater. He
on the other side desired he might land, believing that at his pleasure he
might take him prisoner, or kill him before he could be succored. He made
diligent inquiry after such as he might suspect to be Warwickes friends; so as
those that were known to wish him well were in an ill condition. Many of them
took Sanctuary. Marquess Montaigne brother to Warwick, obtained his pardon,
and came over to the Kings side. But the wisest resolution he could take was
to send over a Gentlewoman into France, who under pretense of visiting the
Duchess of Clarence, might work upon her husband. This woman being arrived
at Calleis, made Vauclere believe that businesses were likely to be
accommodated, and that the King had sent her over to this purpose. When she
was come to Amboise, she so well performed the trust imposed in her, that
having showed the Duke what danger he was in by taking part against his
brother, she made it appear, that the house of Lancaster could never reign
void of jealousies whilst any one of the house of York were left alive; That
by endeavoring to ruin his brother he wrought his own overthrow, by quitting
the right unto the Crown, to the which he was so nigh himself. For Edward,
though he were young, had yet no son, and but one daughter, who might very
well miscarry, and such were his disorders as there was little likelihood he
should have any more. That being therefore to be presumed heir, he much
injured himself, by giving the Crown away from himself to his enemies, who
could never think themselves safe as long as he lived. These reasons and
others which the discreet woman knew how to make use of prevailed so far with
Clarence, as that he gave her his word to join with his brother as soon as
he should be come into England. Which shows of what little efficacy oaths
and alliance are, when a powerful interest comes in place. Clarence for some
slight domestique distasts, failed his brother, even to the endangering the
loss of his Kingdom: You shall see him fail his father in Law even to the
making him lose his life. Whence we are taught, that in great affairs we
ought only to trust such to whom profit and danger are univocall together with
us.

Many of the King of France his ships were making ready in Harfleur for the
Earl of Warwickes service, and some of his own likewise, where he received
sundry dispatches from many Lords of England. They desired him not to delay his
return though he were to come all alone; for being looked for by so many that
were desirous to spend their lives in his service, he needed no foraine
forces, and that his delay might endanger his friends, and overthrow the
enterprise. He acquainted the Queen and his companions herewithall, whose
opinions were that he should forth with be gone with such ships as he should
find in readiness; and that as soon as the Queens ships should be in due
equipage, (her father the King of Sicily had sent her as many as he could to
this effect) she and her son would imbarque themselves upon the first news
of any hopes of good success in England; so as having taken leave of the King,
and thanked him for so many and so great favors, he went into the Fleet,
whither by command from the King the Admiral of France and diverse other ships
were come, to guard him from Charles his Fleet, which lay expecting him in the
mouth of the River Seine; and which was much greater than the Kings, Warwicks,
and the Admirals, all joined together. Doubtless had not fortune played one of
her wonted tricks, the English had not returned to England, for the Burgonians
were many, strong, and resolute, to do all that was possible to take the
Earl. But the night before the Earls departure, the Dukes ships were by a
great tempest scattered, many of them were sunk; the rest driven into sundry
places, not any two of them being found together. So as the Earl putting to
Sea the next day with a fair wind (as if the tempest had risen, and were
allayed, to do him service,) came to Anchor in Dartsmouth haven in Devonshire,
the same place where six months before he took shipping for Calleis. Edward
was at this time busied in sports and revellings, not thinking on foraine
affairs, relying upon Charles his mighty Fleet, which lay in wait to fight
with him, and hinder his passage into England. When he heard he was landed, he
past from his first confidence to a second and worser: thinking he had him now
in a noose. He advertised Charles, and desired him to take order he should
not return again to France, and then he needed trouble himself no further,
for that he was sufficient of himself to hinder all his designs within his
Kingdom, and to chastise him. But Charles who was a wise and vigilant Prince,
was not of this opinion: he would have had him to have hindered his landing,
without the adventuring of his Person and Kingdom upon the uncertainty of
battle, and the inconstancy of his people and fortune. The first thing
Warwick did was to make Proclamations be made every where in Henry's name,
that all men from sixteen to threescore year old, upon grievous punishment
should come and present themselves armed before him, to serve Henry the lawful
King, against Edward Duke of York, the unlawful usurper of the Kingdom. He
was forthwith obeyed, great numbers of people flockt unto him, even those who
the year before were wholly devoted to Edwards service. A change, though
strange, yet not to be wondered at. Old things cause satiety, new businesses
provoke fresh appetite. Edward being in this straight, resolved to do the same
which the Earl had done. He summoned all the Peers of the Land, was obeyed
but by a few, and by those more out of fear than out of any good will. He
went to Nottingham accompanied by his brother the Duke of Gloucester; the Lord
Scales the Queens brother, and the Lord Hastings his Chamberlain, presuming
there to raise an Army answerable to his need. The Rebels this mean while
increased, and the Ministers in their Pulpits did approve of Henry's right. The
bastard Faulconbridge and the Earl of Pembrooke, the one in the West, the
other in Wales did proclaim him King. That which most troubled Edward was,
that Marquess Montaigne having gathered together 6000. fighting men, and
brought them almost unto Nottingham, he returned back, either for that he
thought Edwards affairs were now desperate, and that the ayreevery where
resounding, Long live Henry, Long live Warwick, he thought it foolishness not
to share of his brothers good fortune; or else for that he had now a just
occasion to revenge himself of Edwards ingratitude (as he termed it) who for
his service done unto him, and his blood shed for him in so many battles and
dangers, had only requited him with the bare Title of Marquess. He declared
himself against him, and brought those 6000 along with him, proclaiming Henry
King, as the others had done. I know not whether he had reason to accuse Edward
of ingratitude or no. Voluptuous people who like him are given to their
pleasures, are naturally prodigal in their own dissoluteness, and backward
enough in paying what they owe. I am very certain his other brothers could not
complain thereof, though Warwick injuriously did. The Archbishop of York
wore the second Mitre of England; and the Earl of Warwick (if we may believe
Comines) to boot with his own Revenues, which were very great, had 80000
Crowns a year coming in, in Lordships, Confiscations, and Places merely
conferred upon him by the Kings grace, which was much more in those days than
300000 would be now. But it is hateful and dangerous to Princes when
pretensions grow to that height as there is no means of recompense, and that
the only pretense of the pretenders, seeming to upbraid, does tacitly demand,
and seem to plead the participation of their Princes dignity and estate.
Edward knew not what to say to these alterations which hourly increased, and
finding no place safe for him since he wanted forces, he went not without
great danger to Linne, where he found two Holland ships, and one English; he
imbarkt himself, and was waited upon by the three said ships, and seven
hundred men, without any manner of baggage, or one penny of money. A great and
unexpected misfortune, but that which immediately after presented it self was
far worse, had he not luckily eschewed it. For had he been taken; he had
none to ransom him, so would have lost both liberty and Kingdom. Eight of the
Easterlings ships (the Easterlings were then great enemies to the English, and
did them all the mischief they could) discovering these three Ships, and
believing them to be English, gave them chase, but could not come up unto them
till they had cast Anchor before Alchemar in Holland, the ebb being so low as
they could not win the Haven: The Easterlings cast Anchor likewise, but a
good way from them, the burden of their Ships not permitting them to do
otherwise, so as they were enforced to expect the return of the tide to board
them. But Monsieur de Gretures Governor under the Duke of Burgundy in Holland,
being luckily at that time in Alchemar, and understanding of Edwards being
there, by some whom he had sent of purpose unto him in flat bottomed Boats,
forbade the Easterlings to use any manner of hostility and went himself to
bring him and all his men into the City. Edward was at this time so bare of
money, as not having wherewithal to pay for his wastage, he gave the Captain
a rich vestment lined with Sables, promising not to forget the curtesy, and to
satisfy him better afterward. A strange change of Fortune happened in a few
hours to such a Prince merely out of negligence and carelessness. He lost a
Kingdom without one blow striking, and was forced to have recourse unto a
Prince, whose only presence did upbraid unto him his carelessness, lust, and
bad government. Charles hearing of this, was very much displeased, finding
himself charged with so needful a King, and so great a retinue, whom he
could not be wanting unto in assistance, not out of any humanity, or alliance,
but for that Warwick enjoying the Kingdom, it behooved him to maintain the
contrary party, and drive him out, or else to suffer the incommodities of a
long War. Queen Elizabeth, the original of these alterations, seeing her
self abandoned, without succor, and the enemy upon her back, took Sanctuary
at Westminster, where with small attendance she was brought to bed of a Son,
named Edward; he, who for some few weeks after his Fathers death, was the V.
King of that name; and who symbolized in birth, name and death with his cousin
the Son of the Duchess of Clarence borne a Shipboard before Calleis. The
pomp of Baptism had nothing in it of royal save the Mothers tears,
accompanied by many men's commiseration, which is then greatest, when most
concealed. Many of her best friends betook themselves likewise to sundry other
Sanctuaries, who proved afterward serviceable to her, at Edwards return. The
Kentish-men prone to insurrections, seeing there was now no King; of two, the
one being fled, the other a prisoner, came to London, and sacked the Suburbs,
and it may be would have sacked the City it self, had not the Earl of
Warwick diverted them, whose coming thither was noysed, and who punished the
Accomplices of the insurrection. This piece of Justice added to his reputation,
and the peoples love. Upon the 6 of October. he entered the Tower accompanied by
many Lords: in particular his brother the Archbishop of York, the Prior of St.
John's, the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Shrewsbury; some of them drawn by
affection, some by feare^ he set King Henry at liberty after nine years
captivity; he brought him to the Bishop of Londons house, where he tarried
till the thirteenth day, and then brought him in person and in royal attire to
Paul's, carrying his train himself, and the Earl of Oxford the sword,
accompanied with the peoples acclamations, who cried out, God save the King*
forgetting that a little before they had prayed for Edward against him. A
Parliament was summoned, wherein Edward was declared a Taytour to his Country
and an usurper of the Crown, his goods confiscate, all Statutes made in his
name and by his authority annulled, the Crowns of England and France confirmed
upon Henry, and the heirs male of his body, and for want of such upon the Duke
of Clarence and his posterity, who hereafter was to be acknowledged the next
heir to his Father Richard Duke of York: and Edward, for his faults
committed, deprived of his birthright, and the prerogatives thereof. The
Earls of Pembrooke and Oxford were restored in blood and to their dignities
and goods: The Earl of Warwick and the Duke of Clarence declared Governors of
the Kingdom; Marquess Mountague was received into grace, and his fault
pardoned, since revolting against Edward he was the chief cause of his
quitting the Kingdom: those who sided with him were deprived of their Honors,
Titles, and Faculties; and such punished as in this quarrel had taken up Arms
against Henry. Whereupon John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester Lord Deputy of Ireland
for Edward was found in a hollow Tree, brought to London and beheaded in the
Tower. The Parliament being ended, the Earl of Pembrooke went into Wales, to
take Order for such Lands as he possessed before his confiscation; and finding
there Henry the Son of Edmond Earl of Richmond, with the Widow of William
Earl of Pembrooke his brother that was beheaded at Banbury, (who though held
as a prisoner by this Lady, was always nobly entreated) he took him from her
when he was not yet full ten years old and brought him to London, where he
presented him to King Henry: who after he had eyed him a while said to the
standers by; that this child should succeed him, and put a period to all the
quarrels: which afterward happening, confirmed the opinion that was held of
his sanctity, since by the spirit of prophecy, he foresaw the succession of
Henry the seventh. Queen Margaret, who was then in France being advertised by
Letters from Henry, of the regainment of the Kingdom, did together with her
Son forthwith put to Sea, but the winds being contrary drove her on Land,
and kept her there a long time, and had they forever kept her there they had
been the more favorable, for then she had not met with the mischief she
did in the loss of her Son. When Warwicks return to England and King
Henry's re-establishment was known at Callis every one took unto him the
Earls Impressa: Vauclere was the first that did so: His Impressa was a ragged
staff made of Gold, Silver, Silk, or Cloth according to his condition that
wore it. As this unexpected inclination made the Duke of Burgondy more
sollicitous, so did it inwardly displease the Duke of Clarence, who had already
altered his opinion. Neither did nature and common sense fail to suggest unto
him what injury he was to suffer by the rule of the house of Lancaster,
notwithstanding the seeming favorable proceedings of Parliament in his
behalf, he cloaked therefore his sorrow and seemed to be glad at what did
inwardly afflict him; he endeavored to fit himself to the present times till
fortune might afford some other occasion.

When Warwick had thus taken order for things at home, he applied himself to
foraine affairs: his first thoughts were to divert Duke Charles from assisting
Edward, believing that whilst he was busyed with the Arms of France in
Picardy and those of England in the confines about Callis, danger would enforce
him to mind his own affairs and not trouble himself with what concerned
other men; he sent 400 men to Callis, to make inrodes into the parts about
Boloigne, which were with all dutiful respect received by Vauclere: which
freed him of all suspicion of being any way inclined to the contrary party.
Before Edward landed in Holland, Charles was informed that he was dead,
neither was he troubled at the news, moved by his ancient inclination to the
house of Lancaster; and though Warwickes power did much molest him (not hoping
ever to gain him) he hoped notwithstanding strongly to oppose him by means
of the two Dukes of Sommerset, and Exceter, who had been by him maintained in
their miseries: but when he heard he was arrived in Holland, he was
altogether amazed, for should he assist him, he should draw upon him Henry's
enmity; neither could he deny him aid since his Wife was his Sister: Charles
knew not that Callis was at Warwickes command; building much thereon he sent
Comines to see what he could promise to himself therein; for Vauclere having
denied entrance to Warwick, and accepted of a Pension from him, he had reason
to believe him to depend upon him, the Duke, and not to be reconcilable with
Warwick; but as soon as Comines was come to Callis, he found he had lost
his labor; he was not received as formerly; all he met wore the Earls
colors; the gate of the house wherein he lay, and his own Chamber door were
marked with the White-crosse; Songs were every where sung of the firm
friendship and intelligence between Lewis and Warwick. Being by Vauclere
invited to Dinner, he met there a great many Gentlemen, who talked
neglectfully of Edward, and those most who had formerly seemed most to affect
him; none but Vauclere himself spoke modestly of him. Comines, faining the
first report of Edwards death to be true said to them that 'twas now to no
purpose to talk any more of him since he was dead; and that if he were yet
alive the Duke of Burgondy had contracted no other friendship with him, then
with whatsoever other King. That the Articles of contract mentioned only
England, and the King thereof: that the friendship between England and Burgondy
should still continue the same, the names of Edward and Henry only altered.
Charles was not displeased with this agreement, though it was not as he could
have desired: for underhand he could do what he listed whilst he was free
from suspicion of being molested by England, which was that he most feared. The
Wollen-Drapers of London wrought well for him in this business; for Warwick
having taken 4000 men into pay to send against him, the Merchants for fear the
War might overthrow their Traffic, did so behave themselves as they made him
alter his resolution: which had it not happened, much mischief might have
ensued to him; for this fell out just at the same time when Lewis had taken
from him Amiens, and St. Quintines; so as his affairs were likely to have
succeeded ill, he not being able to defend himself in two several parts,
against two so potent enemies. Charles had not yet seen Edward; their first
encounter was in the Town St. Paul, the persuasions the King used to him were;
that he himself shared with him in his loss, since that he had not now to do
with Henry of Lancaster, but with the Earl of Warwick, whose Friendship was
never to be hoped for as long as Lewis his amity did prevail; that by
assisting him he should not only assist a Brother in Law and one that would
always be his friend, but he should do a work becoming a just and a great
Prince, without exposing himself to a long and impossible business; since he
had such intelligence, such friends, and servants within the Kingdom, as he
needed only to show himself with some Convoy of Ships, armed with a few men,
rather for reputation sake then any need. These persuasions were but coldly
entertained by Charles; for the Dukes of Sommerset and Exceter showed unto him
what he owed to his Birth, he himself coming of the house of Lancaster, and
promised him what he could desire against Warwick, to whom they were both
irreconcilable enemies. Edward was not well pleased to be nourished with
hopes, whilst Charles made him, believe that his dissembling was necessary for
them both; for him, because he was not to fight with two Kingdoms at one and
the same time: and for Edward, because opportunity might render his succor
more useful. But Edward not satisfied with these put-offs, considering that
his designs were the less likely to succeed well, by how much the more
firmly Henry grew settled in his Kingdom, he caused four Ships to be made
ready for him at Vere in Holland (which being a free Haven not denied to any
one, the Ships might seem to be set forth by Edward himself) and hired 14
more for him of the Easterlings, bargaining that they should pass him over
into England, and serve him fifteen days after he should be landed. He
caused moreover 50000 Florines to be secretly delivered unto him, and that this
aid might not seem to be given by him he made it be proclaimed, that
whosoever should assist Edward should incur great punishment: hereby he
freed himself from giving suspicion to England, and come what might come,
remained friends to both sides.

Edward had 2000 men with him besides Mariners, with which having landed at
Ravenspur in Yorkshire, he sent forth some light horse to discover how the
Inhabitants were inclined: and finding them wholly turned over to Henry's side,
not so much as willing to hear him named, he changed his resolution: he gave
out that he did not pretend to the Kingdom, (Fearing lest the troubles that
might thereby arise, might alienate the peoples hearts) but to his patrimoniall
estate of York under the obedience of Henry. It cannot be imagined what good
effect this his crafty wisdom produced; for this his pretense being thought
not only moderate but just, no man opposed him therein. Equity, orany thing
which resembles it, is of so great efficacy amongst men, as that he, who, but
a little before, was banished, declared a Traitor, and had his Lands
confiscated, yet being so great a Prince by birth as he was, and having been
King, it moved all men to compassionate him, and think him worthy of that
favor which the rigor of Law had debarred him of; forgetting how much he had
made Henry suffer. With this pretense he went to York, proclaiming Henry to
be King in all parts, and stiling himself only Duke of York. The Earl of
Warwick hearing of his arrival, and of this his dissimulation wrote to his
brother the Marquess Montague (who stayed all that Winter with a great
garrison of Soldiers at Pomfret) to fight with him before he should gather
new forces, or at least that he should entertain him till such time as he
himself should come thither, and that by no means he should suffer him to
come into York; for by advancing his affairs there he would endanger theirs.
He, in conformity to this, commanded all the Cities and Towns in those parts
not to receive him, but to shut their gates upon him, and do him all the
mischief, which according to the Laws of the Land ought to be done to a
public enemy. But whilst the Earl was raising Soldiers and his Brother did
not move, Edward put forward, and was met by two Aldermen near to York, who
advised him to steer his course some other way, for that the City could not
but oppose him, and do him all possible mischief. He having courteously heard
them, answered: that he came not to fight against the King, nor any ways to
molest him, acknowledging him to be his Sovereign Lord; but that he might be
permitted to enter into the Duchy of York, his ancient patrimony, hoping that
as there was none that could justly oppose him therein, so they least of any,
being the natural subjects of his house, from whence they had at all times
received all manner of grace and favor. The Aldermen returning with this
answer and he after softly following them, in an instant the Citizens minds
were changed: those who were gotten upon the Walls to defend them against him
as against an enemy, came down to be his guides and to keep him from being by
any one injured; being come before the City, and met by many of the chiefest
Citizens he made such use of his affability, calling the Aldermen your
worships, as by the fairness of his language and his large promises he got
them to yield to what ever he would. 'Twas agreed that he should be received
into the City, if he would swear to two things; that he would treat them
according to his proffered conditions; and be obedient and faithful to all
Henry's commands. Upon these terms all parties retired themselves; the
Citizens to York, and Edward with his people to the fields; expecting the
nextday. These good people thought hereby to do good service to God, the King,
and Kingdom: but the unwary do always harm when they think to help. To
receive banished men, to restore goods, and to dispose of estates belongs not
unto Subjects. The nextday Mass was said at the gate whereat he was to enter.
He swore to the two Articles with such intention as the effects of his not
observing them did afterward declare. Wherein is to be observed Gods
Long-suffering, and Justice: the one by his not immediately punishing him; the
other extending it self not long after to his Family, which being deprived of
the Kingdom, and that conferred upon his enemy, was utterly destroyed, to
manifest unto us that the delay of punishment is not the abolishment thereof.
These sacred ceremonies being ended, with divine attestation, he entered the
City, and as soon as he had from thence received moneys (notwithstanding all
his Articles) he made himself master of it, by placing therein a good
garrison, and they too late perceived his breach of Faith: but it behooved them
patiently to endure the yoke, which with their own hands they had put about
their necks. He stayed there but a while; for having taken certain forces into
pay, he resolved to go to London: A rash resolution; had he had any thing to
lose: but being he possessed nothing and was either to regaine his Kingdom, or
lose his life (which was not to be valued since he had nothing to maintain it
with) 'twas a noble resolution and altogether worthy of the greatness of his
spirit. His nearest way lay by Pomfret, where Marquess Montague lay: he shunned
him, keeping on the other hand four miles above him; and the Marquess came
not forth, otherwise Edward and his few men had bin but in bad condition. He
suffered him to pass as if he had had no knowledge thereof. This was his
second error, the first being, that he suffered him to get into York. Some
notwithstanding were of opinion that he met him not, because he did not much
trust his people, who hating Henry as the only Picture of a King unfit for
government, and the cause of so many scandalls, inclined to Edward, a King fit
to defend himself and them. He thought not to meet with so good fortune, but
meeting with it and making use of it, he put himself again into the
roade-way, and marched on to Nottingham, where many Gentlemen with great troops
of men came to meet him: here he was proclaimed King, contrary to the tenure of
his first pretenses and his Oath taken at York. People flocked to him every
hour: he feared not to pass on to Leicester, that he might draw nigh to the
enemy, who was then at Warwick under the command of the Earl thereof
accompanied by the Earl of Oxford, he resolved either to give him battle, or
else to find out some means to join with his Brother the Duke of Clarence.
Warwick was not well satisfied with the Marquess, who by not opposing him had
advantaged the Enemy; he levied Soldiers apace that he might come to the
battle, and advertised the Duke of Clarence to the end that he might hasten
unto him; but growing fearful of his temporizing he resolved to fight himself
alone with those troops he had, and with this design he went to Coventry:
Edward, who soon after his departure from Warwick was come thither, followed
him the same way: the Earl was much perplexed; he was certain of nothing but
battle, his safety depended upon the will of Fortune: His son in Law and his
brother were corrupted: the first for certain, the second not unlikely, but
rather to be doubted then built upon. So as having intrencht himself he
expected the Dukes coming, who he understood was not far off. Edward who was
not far off raised his camp as if he meant to give his Brother Clarence
battle apart, and presented himself in battle array before him. But as soon
as they were within sight one of the other, the Duke of Gloucester ran into
Clarence his Camp, not demanding safe conduct as upon like occasions is usual;
they seemed to treat of what they had long before concluded between
themselves: peace was published, and Edward proclaimed King, and the two
Brothers embraced each other, as if there never had been any thing of
difference between them. Never was man more directly murdered then was
Warwick. All mischief is expected from a declared Enemy: but such as proceed
from a pretended Friend is as bitter as unexpected. It Is not to be denied that
enmity between Brethren is contrary to nature; but their reconcilement ought
not to be made by the violation of Oaths, the ruin of a Friend, Confederate
and Father in Law: we see the great enormities in their proceedings, but we
shall see their punishments. The Duke of Clarence sent to excuse himself to
the Earl of Warwick, offering him any advantageous conditions with the King
his Brother; but he having with much distemper heard the message accounting his
offers Snares answered: that he in all his actions had ever done like unto
himself, not like him, a false and perjured Prince, and that he would not
quit the War till either dead or revenged: words which gave assurance of
nothing but Arms. But Edward thinking the first thing he had to do was to
have Henry in his power turned toward London, of the which if he could once
make himself master he needed no more, since the City was sufficient to
furnish him with whatsoever he needed. The Earl had notice hereof, and did
accordingly advertise the Duke of Somerset, his Brother the Archbishop, and the
Council, entreating them to defend the City only for three days, whithin
which time he would come and free them from all danger, but the Citizens
(since their lives and goods were in question, if they should oppose themselves
and after be enforced to yield) consented not thereunto: and though Henry's
goodness did stir them up to assist him, yet his weakness advised the
contrary; for unfit for whatsoever action he lived in the Bishops house dumb
and stupid; not knowing how either to give or take counsel. Comines all edges
three reasons why Edward was preferred before him, which if not true may yet
seem true: first the many partakers he had in the Liberties of the City, and
that his Queen was newly delivered of a Son: the second; the great debt he
ought there, which caused the Merchants to favor him, lest they might lose
their principal: the third, the love of many of the chiefest and richest
Citizens wives, who as having had familiarity with him drew their Husbands and
Friends to favor him. Whether any of all these were true or no, or that
Henry's incapacity was the only cause thereof, the resolution taken was in
Edwards behalf; so as in stead of denying him entrance, they ran to meet him:
whereupon the chief of the adverse party hasted to save themselves. Forsaken
Henry was he alone, who void of help, dexterity, or resolution, knew not how
to escape; so as Edward being entered, and received with popular applause, six
Months after the loss of his Kingdom; he put him again into the same
prison from whence few Months before he had been taken out by the Earl of
Warwick, and wherein might he have been suffered to live he would have
been more happy, according to his humor, then at liberty governing amongst so
many alterations which did transcend the faculty of his brain. Edward in a
public oration commended the people and thanked the Aldermen for having kept
them loyal; on the contrary, he caused all such Merchants as well Citizens as
Foreiners as had assisted Henry with moneys to be brought before him, and did
with such bitter words and in so terrible a manner aggravate their fault as all
men thought their turns were served: but he who had not his like in
captivating men's minds, after having a long time held them in deadly suspense,
put life into them expressing his last words with as much clemency as he had
done his former with terror. This his clemency not procured by the importunacy
of Officers, or Supplications, but proceeding from his own mere motion, did
so win the hearts even of them that were not interested therein, as they for
the future did that out of mere love, which formerly they would not have done
but for fear. Warwick this mean while made have toward London, knowing the
City to be unfit for sieges, and much less for redoubled assaults: he thought
notwithstanding it would defend it self the time desired, and that finding the
enemy busied about winning the Town he might force him to fight upon
disadvantage. But when he heard that Edward was received in and Henry again
made prisoner, he was sorely afflicted, he saw he had cast up his accounts
wrong, and that fortune had brought him to a precipice which he could not
shun: but there was no remedy, and had there been any, he would rather have
dyed than have endeavored it. The Soldiers he had were good, but few in
comparison of those of an enemy smiled on by fortune, courageous in himself,
and obeyed by all men: He on the other side had none on whom to trust, and if
he should lose the battle he had no succor, for doubtless all the Kingdom
would incline to the Conqueror, being they were already that ways given. That
which troubled him most of all was, he knew not what to think of the Marquess
his brother, who had so often showed himself unwilling to meddle in this
war, and still continued of the same mind: He thought to have dismissed him
but it had been dangerous so to have done, for so he should not only have
lessened his Army, but perhaps have made him with his Troops go over to the
enemy; he resolved, by saying nothing, to oblige him to run the same fortune
as he should run, as he did. He stayed at St. Albanes a little, to refresh his
people, and went from thence to Barnet, where he encamped himself,
confidently believing the enemy would come to find him out: nor was he
deceived; for Edward, not willing he should come to London, (a City which he
had experienced to be subject to revolt upon such like occasions) left the
Town guarded by his confidents, and marched forth with the same Army,
wherewith he had entered the Town; whereunto was added a Troop of choice
young men armed at all pieces, so as though he could not but hope for victory,
yet was he ill advised, since he now put that to the hazard of fortune, which
by temporizing he might surely obtain: for, all the Country being on his
side, and he the supe riour in forces, 'twas in his power to have starved the
enemy, and utterly undone him without the loss of one man. But these dull
Fabian wars are seldom or never seen in England. Edward came to Barnet on
Easter Eve, and encamped himself so near the enemy, as not only the neighing
of horses, but men's voices were heard from the one camp to the other, so as
you will easily be lieve they slept not much that night. The unfortunate Henry
was brought along, to the end that his captivity might astonish the enemy, and
make him less courageous; or else, that if Edward should lose the day he
might make the more advantageous conditions. As soon as day appeared (the day
dedicated to our Saviors resurrection) the Earl of Warwick drew forth his
Army into three Squadrons: He assigned the first to the Marquess, and the
Earl of Oxford, flanked by some Troops of horse; the second he kept for
himself, accompanied by the Duke of Exceter; and gave the last to the Duke of
Somerset. Edward (observing the same order, gave his Vanguard to the Duke of
Gloucester, (a man of great courage and counsel) the Rere-ward to the Lord
Hastings, (a constant sider with the white Rose) and kept the maine battle for
himself, and the Duke of Clarence, keeping the prisoner Henry by him: he
framed a squadron of the surplus of his men to make use of upon all occasions.
Neither side wanted arguments to encourage their men: the one Rebellion, the
other Tyranny. The Archers began the battle, and the Arrows being spent they
came to handy-blowes: Edwards party prevailed in number, but not in order,
vigilance, nor valor. The battle was fought from Sun rising till almost
midday, fresh men supplying the places of such as were wounded or wearied. The
Earls squadron having the worst he reinforced it with a Troop drawn out of
the Rere-ward, with the which he made the enemy lose so much ground, as many of
them flying away brought false news to London, that Edward was put to rout:
who having stayed his own men, fighting himself a vye with whatsoever
Soldier, made the reserved Squadron come in on the flank, which gave so
impetuously on those wearied men, as that though the Earl did what possibly
he could to reinforce them, yet wanting fresh men, his voice nor example stood
him in no stead, his men, for lack of breath falling under the enemies Sword.
The Earl giving in where the enemy was thickest; either to open them, or not
to out live the loss, was miserably slain. His brother (who by unwillingly
undertaking this war, had been the first cause of this their last
misfortune) seeing him drive in amongst the enemy (all other passions giving
place to brotherly love) followed after him, to make him way to return, but
he shut it up to himself by loss of his life. This was one of the fiercest
battles ever fought by enraged men. The Kingdom and life was in question on
the one side, life and the Kingdom on the other. Henry governed in name, in
effect the Earl; but that which most provoked him, was the preservation of his
ancient renown, and his desire of revenge upon the two brethren: Edward was by
him accounted ungrateful, and perjured; Clarence ungrateful, perjured, and
treacherous. The odd Band was his undoing. Some impute his loss to a mistake
in his Van, for a mist arising which suffered them not well to discern
passages, they took the Star rounded with rays, which was the Earl of
Oxfords cognizance, and which was tacked upon each of his Soldiers sleeves, to
be the Sun, which was Edwards cognizance: whereupon setting on Oxfords men,
as on enemies, they forced them to run away; nor could the Earl of Oxford,
who fought with incredible valor, detain them. How ever it was, Edward won
the day, with the death of 10000. of his adversaries, and 1500. of his own;
amongst which, none of note save Sir Humphrey Bourchier, son to the Lord
Barnes. The cause of this so great slaughter was attributed hereto, that
whereas Edward, in his other battles was wont to bid kill the Lords and
Captains, but spare the rest, he did not so in this, being offended that they
more esteemed Warwick than him. The Duke of Somerset and Earl of Oxford fled
together toward Scotland; but fearing they might run danger by the length of
the way, they went to Wales to find out Jasper Earl of Pembrooke. The Duke of
Exceter, who was left alive among the dead bodies, got up with much a do, and
came to Westminster, where he took Sanctuary. This was the end of Warwickes
worldly glory, whose title was to make and unmake Kings. His ruin took its
rise from his father; who being cousin-german to Henry the fifth, (they being
brothers and sisters children) forsook his respect of consanguinity, for that
of affinity; (Richard Duke of York having married his sister Cecily mother to
Edward) and so lost his life: his son treading in his fathers steps, and
desirous to revenge his fathers death, deposed Henry to set up Edward; by whom
being neglected, he revolted from him, forced him to fly his Country, set
Henry at liberty, and put the Crown again upon his head: but Edward being
returned, and having changed his Lions skin to a Foxes, he fell, betrayed by
his son in law, abandoned by his brother, and at his greatest need forgotten
by the common people, who had never more superstitiously worshipped any one,
nor in their songs celebrated. Whereby the ambitious may learn not to raise
tumults, trusting upon the people, which like the Sea, are moved by all winds.
I must crave leave to answer one particular, falsely alleged by Comines. He
says the Earl had always wont to fight on horseback, that if fortune
should frown he might the better escape: that his brother the Marquess, who
was a gallant man, forced him at this time to fight on foot, and made his
horses be led away. But who shall consider the Earls actions, and his battles,
this last unexcepted, will believe him to be calumniated; for, say he should
endeavor to save himself, did they not all do so? In this battle, Somerset
and Oxford saved themselves by flight, where there was no speech of prisoners,
nor ransom, but to die by the heads-man, if not in the field. The Marquess
had less reason to fear, as one not hated by Edward, but rather by him
suborned, as knowing his appearing against him made for him; for had he fought
with him, either at York, or else at Pomfret, he never had regained his
Kingdom. Had fear wrought any thing upon the Earl, he would not have
refused his son in laws offers; he would not have resolved (the smalnesse
of his numbers not considered) to have fought at Barnet; and knowing that Queen
Margaret was hourly expected to land in England, he would have stayed for
her. That he should fear her (as the said Comines and Chesnes do both aver)
because the Duke of Somerset was with her, is false; for this Duke, who is by
them pretended to be absent, was present at this battle, as has been said:
and the Queen could not but be his friend, for the services he had done her,
and her future hopes in him; so as if he did not wait her coming, 'twas not
for any of these reasons, but of his too much confiding in himself; which was
his undoing. After this victory Edward returned in triumph to London, he gave
God thanks in Paul's Church, he there hung up the Colors taken from the enemy;
and for three days together exposed the dead bodies of the two brothers to the
sight of all men, to the end that being seen dead, no man might further trouble
him, with taking upon them the person and name of Warwioke, whose death was the
establishment of his Kingdom: So that, as he could not sufficiently express
his joy thereof, so could he not enough lament the Marquesses death, whom he
loved, and who so loved him: as for Henry, the type of all misfortune, he was
again put into the Tower.

All this while Queen Margaret met not with a good wind for her passage, which
was her misfortune; for it is to be believed, had she been come before the
battle, matters would not have gone so ill on her side as they did: at last
she landed in Dorsetshire, where hearing of Warwickes discomfiture and death,
and Henry's re-imprisonment, her wonted courage failing her she swounded,
having now no further hope of comfort; the safest course she could take was to
take sanctuary, she and her son in a Monastery at Beaulieu in Hampshire,
whither all the chiefest of her faction came to find her out; namely, the Duke
of Somerset, his brother John Earl of Devenshire, (who having been one of
Edwards chief attendants, had, to his misfortune, I know not out of what
capriccio, forsaken him) Jasper Earl of Pembroke, the Lord Wenlocke, (who
likewise had formerly been on Edwards side) and the Prior of St. John's one of
the Knights of Bhodes. They had much ado to infuse new hopes into her: she
was now no more troubled at her husbands imprisonment, nor at the loss of his
Kingdom; (misfortunes by her esteemed irrevocable) her sons safety, as her
only comfort, and the last of all her miseries, was that which only troubled
her. Her opinion was not to tempt fortune any more for fear of endangering
him: but Somerset persuaded her that if she would undertake the leading of her
people (as formerly she had done) she should find so many partakers, amongst
which an infinite number whom fear had made conceal themselves) that Edward
would not be able to defend himself against them: that King Henry's goodness,
and the expectation of his son, were deeply engraven in the hearts of all
the Kingdom. This being by the rest confirmed, she suffered her self to be
peswaded; she desired to provide for her sons safety by sending him into
France, but could not effect it, for Somerset alleged his presence was
requisite; whereupon she condescended. This being resolved upon, every one went
to make their necessary provisions; and the Queen with the French that were
come along with her went to the Bath, whither they came afterward all unto
her. Edward had hardly had time to breath after his victory at Barnet when he
heard Queen Margaret was landed, and what concourse of people flocked unto her
out of Devonshire, and Cornwall, and other Southern parts; he knew not what
to do, as not knowing in what part she would set upon him: he sent forth
some light horse to make discovery, and hearing where she was, he commanded
that the Trained-bands should come to Abbington, whither he himself came with
those of London, and thereabouts. As soon as they were come thither he
marched to hinder the enemy from joining with the Earl of Pembrooke, and the
other forces, thinking that he might facilitate his victory by fighting with
them in their present condition. The Queen understanding his design went to
Bristoll, so to go to Wales; but the difficulty of passing over Severne, and
the Duke of Somersets obstinacy caused her last ruin: her right way lay by
Gloucester, but the City being under the government of the Duke of Gloucester,
the Kings brother, she was not suffered to pass by there; neither could she
force her way having Edward at her heels: she went to Tewkesbury, with intent
to pass as speedily as she might into Wales, but the Duke of Somerset not
enduring this flight took a fancy to make an hault and fight presently, and
not wait for the coming of the Earl of Pembrooke, who could not be far
off: his reason was the danger of being defeated in this their retreat; the
Captains approved his motion of making a stand, but not of fighting: their
opinion was, that they should entrench themselves, so as they might not be
forced without apparent danger to the enemy. The Duke seemed not to be
displeased at this; for which purpose he chose the Park near to the City,
where he so well fortified himself, as that he would have made it good, had
not his impatient rashness undone him: for believing he could never quit his
Trenches without battle, he thought better to give it then to receive it; with
this fatal capriccio he marshalled his men. He and his brother John took the
Vanguard; he gave the Reare-ward to the Earl of Devonshire, and the maine
battle to Prince Edward under the directions of the Lord Saint John's, and Lord
Venlocke; the last being promoted to that honor by King Edward, and therefore
noted of treachery. The Duke of Gloucester who had the charge of his brothers
Van making use both of craft and courage set upon the trenches, and finding
them not to be forced, retreated; whereupon ensued the very thing he imagined;
to wit, that Somerset growing hereupon bold, would pursue him out of his
trenches; the which he did, believing to be seconded by the Lord Venlocke with
Prince Edwards Squadron; but he not moving, the Duke, after a long conflict
was defeated and driven back into his trenches, pursued even into them by
Gloucester; where finding Venlocke yet not moved, he called him traitor, and
with his Sword clove his head in two. The King this mean while having followed
Gloucester into the trenches, cut the rest in pieces, some few escaping into
the thickets of the Park, into Monasteries, and whether else they could fly.
The Queen was found in a Chariot half dead with sorrow and taken prisoner.
Speed says she fled to a Covent of Nuns, that she was taken thence by force,
and brought to the King at Worcester. The Duke of Somerset, and the Prior of
Saint John's valiantly fighting, were taken alive: John the Dukes brother, the
Earl of Devonshire, with some Knights, and 3000 more were slain. Prince
Edward fell into the hands of Sir Richard Crofts, who intended to have
concealed him, but the King having promised a pension during life of an hundred
pounds a year to whosoever should bring him to him alive or dead, and life to
the young Prince, if he were yet alive; Crofts not believing he would falsify
his faith, presented him unto him. Edward looked upon him, and admiring the
sweetness of his youth, and disposition, asked him, how he durst come with
flying Colors into his Kingdom, and raise his people against him? to the
which he courageously answered, that he came to recover his fathers Kingdom,
his proper and natural inheritance, which could not be denied since it fell
unto him by legitimate descent from Father, Grandfather, and
Great-grand-father. The King offended at these words, struck him in the face
with a Switch which he had in his hand, whilst Clarence, Gloucester, the
Marquess Dorset, and Lord Hastings suddenly slew him with their Daggers, who
were all repaid in due time with equal cruelty. The Duke of Somerset, the
Prior of Saint John's, and fourteen others, were beheaded on a monday. This
battle was the last of the Civil wars during Edwards time. The Queen was
brought to London, and some years after ransomed (as some say) by her father
Renatus King of Sicilie for fifty thousand Crowns, which were lent him by
Lewis the eleventh, and not having wherewithal to re-pay them, he sold unto
him his pretense unto the Kingdom of Naples, by which title Charles afterward
went and laid claim to it. Tillet is alleged for one of those who writ this:
I confess I never found any such thing in his Collection; I remember I have
therein read, that Charles the Count of Provence (who took upon him the Title
of King of Sicily after Renatus his death) made Lewis the eleventh his heir,
by virtue whereof Charles the eighth pretended to that Kingdom. The two
brothers of Sancta Martha in their Genealogicall History of the house of
France, affirm the same: and speaking of this Queen, they say, she was set at
liberty in the year 1475. having renounced all she could lay clame unto in
England by the way of Jointure: they mention the opinion of the fifty thousand
Crowns, but they believe it not to be true. However it was, she was sent back
to France, to spend the rest of her life in perpetual sorrow, not for the
loss of her husband, or Kingdom, but of her son; whose sad memory
accompanied her to her grave. After this Edward visited the neighboring
Countries, chastising in sundry manners such as had appeared against him, from
thence he went to London, to remedy an inconvenience, which if it had happened at
the Queens arrival, his affairs had not succeeded so prosperously. Authors
observe him to have good fortune in such accidents as might have hurt him,
since they happened at such times as they could not do so. Had the Queen come
before Warwickes defeat, he might peradventure have been enforced to a second
forsaking of England: if the Duke of Somerset had stayed for the Earl of
Pembrooke at Tewkesbury, or that the like accident we are to speak of had then
happened, he had met with much of danger and difficulty. The Earl of Warwick
after Edwards flight into Flaunders had given the charge of the Narrow-seas
between England and France to Thomas Nevill a base borne son to the Lord
Faulconbridge Earl of Kent, a man well known for the greatness of his
courage and Spirit. The Earl of Warwick being dead, and he having lost the
profits of his place (which was Vice Admiral) being declared an enemy to the
King, and consequently an exile void of means, he betook himself to live by
piracy, robbing all ships that past by, whether friends or foes. But thinking
that by doing little harm he could do himself but little good, he bethought
himself that Edward being now with his forces in the Western parts of the
Kingdom a fair occasion was offered of handsomely handling his affairs. With
this design he landed in Kent; he had many ships full fraught with desperate
people; and such as abhorred poverty and parcimony, not knowing how to live,
but by rapine and wickedness, flocked unto him: to these were joined
seventeene thousand men more, if not better, yet upon better pretenses: They
gave out that they would set Henry at liberty, re-invest him in his estate, and
drive out the usurper: the pretense bare with it a specious show, but their
ends were to sack London; they assaulted it on three parts, upon the Bridge,
upon Algate, and upon Bishopsgate: but not able to force the City, they were by
the inhabitants thereof beaten back, and many of them slain. Thomas Nevill
their chief Commander hearing that Edward hasted toward him, retired with his
first followers to Sandwich, leaving the rest to return upon their peril to
their own homes, but not long after having mis-governed himself in his
charge, or given some signs of infidelity, or were it that the King thought it
not safe to trust his Fleet with one of the Lancastrian faction, especially in
a time when the Earl of Richmond was in Brittany, he was arrested in the Haven
of Southampton and executed, paying for his former defaults, which to the hurt
of all men he had committed by Sea and Land. The Earl of Pembrooke was yet in
Wales after all the rest of his faction were either slain or fled; which much
troubled Edward: he commanded Roger Vaughan (a man much followed in that
Country) to kill him, in any whatsoever manner; but the Earl, being informed
thereof, prevented him, using Vaughan as Vaughan would have used him: he then
retired himself to Pembrooke, a strong place, where he thought himself safe:
but he was there besieged by Morgan ap Thomas, who so blocked up the Castle
with ditches and trenches, that it was impossible for him to get out, had it
not been by the means of David ap Thomas brother to Morgan. This man brought
him forth, and embarked him and his nephew Henry Earl of Richmond, who were
both by fortune driven into a Haven in Brittany: his intention was to have
landed in Normandy, and to have put himself into the protection of King Lewis,
who was likely to run advantage thereby, for after the war made under the
title of the Common good; Lewis was very jealous of his brother, and of the
Dukes of Burgundy and Brittany, and feared that England now free from home
dissentions might assist them. He apprehended nothing more, then that the
English should once more set footing in Normandy: so as the Earl of Richmond,
next heir to the Crown after Henry and his son, was likely to serve him as
a powerful means to keep Edward so busied at home by such as sided with the
house of Lancaster, as that he should not dream of foreign enterprises; but
being fallen upon Brittany, the Duke thereof, which was Francis the second, knew
very well how to make use of this accident to his advantage: for he was now
sure he had a pledge, which would upon all occasions enforce Edward to comply
with his desires. He graciously received them, and promised them all security;
he sent them to Uannes in appearance free and at liberty, but in effect he
set a good guard upon them. This Princes escape was the deadly blow to the
house of York; for though Edward left no mean unassayed to have him in his
hands, he could never get him. When Edward had settled the business in Kent
(he himself being gone thither to punish the faulty) he thought not himself
sufficiently established as long as Henry lived, and till he had extirpated
the root from whence did budde forth all the rebellions. Some have thought
that Gloucester put this into his head. That even from that time he began to
have thoughts of the Kingdom, and that to have hereby one less opposition
thereunto he advised his brother to it; the which I believe, but not upon that
design; there was small appearance of it, he having another brother alive,
though he himself was so wholly composed of wickedness as I shall join with
him that shall think worst of him. Howsoever it was, he went to the Tower, was
Counselor, Judge, and Hangman, and with one stroke of a Dagger slew the
unfortunate Henry. It does not notwithstanding clearly appear that he slew
him with his own hands, but it is certain this so cruel and unjust a deed was
done whilst He was present. This was the end of this good King; thus ended He
his troubles and began his rest, Divine grace having chalked out the way unto
Him by indowing Him with such conditions and peculiar virtues as are requisite
to the finding out of that permanent abode, which we all seek after. He was
beloved, but 'twas but a nominall love caused by His Religious virtues
naturally vennerable; but wanting wisdom and valor, He was in effect neither
loved nor feared by any. He was a King from his Cradle, and to boot with his
patrimoniall Kingdom was crowned King of France in Paris; an honor shared in
by none before nor after: and though He appeared not in Battles Armed and
Soldier like as did his Father, yet did not the progress of Victories for
many years cease in that Kingdom under his Name, till such time as (nature
manifesting her self in him) civil Wars arose, by which He lost France,
England, and Himself. Amongst his Christianlike virtues, three are remarked of
exemplary edification; the one of Chastity, the other two of Patience. Certain
Ladies (before He was married) daunced a mask before Him, who having their
Bosoms bare, and their Heads fantastically attired, they no sooner appeared
before Him but he retired into his Chamber, saying; He wondered they did not
blush so much to shame themselves. From this and the like cases (he not having
in all the time of his youth nor at any time after, given any the least sign
of inconstancy) some of his detractours would argue that he was impotent, and
that Prince Edward was not his Son: as if God could not be the Author of
continency without the means of frigidity and natural deficience. When he
was a prisoner he was with a Sword wounded in the side by own who was come
thither to kill him, and who did not redouble his trust, being belike struck
with horror in the very act of cruelty: who this man was, or how, or by whom
sent is not mentioned by Authors; when Henry was restored to his Kingdom, he
who had wounded him was taken and brought before him to be punished, but he
caused him to be untied and pardoned him the so doing, for that it was done to
one whose sins deserved greater punishment. To another who in the same Prison
gave him a cuffe on the Ear, he only replied he was too blame for having
struck an anointed King. Henry the Seventh had once a thought to have him
Canonized upon the relation of his miracles, but he forbear the prosecution of
it; some think, because he thought much of the accustomed expenses in such
solemnities, which being done for a King, and by a King would in all reason
have been expected magnificent, which was contrary to his frugality. Others,
(as I have been told) would have it that being informed that distinction was
made in Rome, between such as were blamelesly innocent, and such as were
Saints, he gave over the pursuit of it. Henry was a lover of learning, and of
the learned; he founded Eaton-Colledge, and endowed it with great Revenewes,
and provision for Tutors to teach Children their first rudiments. He founded
Kings College in Cambridge, whither the Scholars of Eaton are transplanted,
there to perfect their Studies in Sciences and Languages: His intention was to
make it perfectly magnificent, but his misfortunes did not permit him to finish
it: the vastness of the Chapel (a mark of his intention and zeal)
witnesses this unto us: He endowed it with a revenew of 3400 pound sterling
yearly, which since that time is increased. He reigned 38 years and some few
days, before He was deposed; and but bare six months after He was restored.
He had no issue but Edward Prince of Wales, slain as has been said. He
lived fifty two Years. His body was carried from the Tower to Paul's Church
environed with a great many Armed men, where one whole day he was exposed to
the view of all men with his face bare, to the end the people might be assured
of his Death; and there did issue forth great quantity of Blood from out his
wound a sight which moved compassion in those that looked on: being taken from
thence and carried to Blackfriars Church, his Body bled again: at last He
was put into a Coffin, carried to Chersey, and there privately buried without
any manner of pomp or Christian-like solemnity. Henry the Seventh made his
body afterward be brought from thence and buried in Westminster, where He
caused a Princely Monument to be built for him. But in these times it is said not
to be there, nor that it is known where it is.

Edward thus freed of his chiefest troubles, was not notwithstanding 1472.
in quiet; for many more arose which, though less, ceased not to trouble him:
amongst which some strange events which I forbear to name, which, though
natural, were by some superstitiously minded, thought to be prodigies of
future mischief. The Earl of Oxford, who after the battle at Barnet had got
into Wales, and from thence to France, having put to Sea with seventy five men
passed into Cornwall, where He made himself master of Saint Michaels mount,
and did there fortify himself with meat and ammunition: but living there, like
a banished man, full of fears, He capitulated to surrender it, His life saved;
the which though it were made good unto him, yet was in such a manner as He had
been better have fled again, then in hope of life and livelihood live
miserably imprisoned: for He was sent to Hammes where He was kept twelve
years, till the last of Richard the Third, all succor denied Him, even the
company of His Wife, both of them being equally hated by the King: the Earl;
for that He, his Father, and Brother, had mightily favored the house of
Lancaster: and his Wife; as sister to the Earl of Warwick, the first
disturber of his quiet: so as having taken from her all she had, she lived
upon the charity of other people, and by what she daily won by her needle.
The King forgot not the Archbishop of York, though a Clergy man; and though
when he was his prisoner he entreated him with all humanity and respect; and
by affording him the liberty of hunting afforded him the like to escape: he
sent him to the Castle of Guisnes, causing him there to be strictly looked
unto: and though some while after at the request of his friends, he gave him
his liberty, 'twas too late for him; for overdone with grief and melancholy,
he but for a small while enjoyed his begged freedom: The death of his two
Brothers, the extirpation of his Family, and the Kingdoms being in the hands
of an enemy Prince caused his death. Henry Holland Duke of Exceter (he who
Philip Comines affirms he has seen begging bare Foot and bare Legged, from
door to door in the Court of Charles Duke of Burgondy, and whose Grandmother
was sister to Henry the Fourth, being repossest of his goods when Henry the
sixth was re-possest of his Kingdom, enjoyed that happiness but a small time,
for at Edwards return he was left amongst the dead at the battle of Barnet,
but coming to himself again, he took Sanctuary at Westminster, where
hoping to obtain pardon by the intercession of his Wife Anne Sister to the
King, she was so far from entreating for him as that she desired to be
devorced; which she obtained: whereupon forsaking the Sanctuary out of
disperation, it is not known what he did with himself; his Body was found
upon the shore of Kent, no Shipwreck being discerned. The inhumanity of this
Anne, and the fraud of her Sister Margaret of Burgondy (as will be seen in the
Reign of Henry the Seventh) afford me an observation, which, but upon such an
occasion, I should not have lighted upon. It cannot be said but that the
pretense unto the Kingdom was a principal cause of the enmity between the
houses of Lancaster and York; to think otherwise were to err against common
sense, but I believe that without such respect they had been incapable of
hearty friendship, by reason of the difference of their natures, derived from
their forefathers. For, as all that was good in the House of York was wound
up in Edmund Duke of York the first Father thereof; so all the bad of the
House of Lancaster, rested in the person of John Duke of Lancaster the first
Father thereof; with this difference notwithstanding; that whereas the good was
intense and constant in Edmund, the bad was remiss and inconstant in John; the
former never did any harm, for being naturally inclined to do good it would
have troubled him to have done evil to any one; the other having ability to do
evil, and having done evil, by a virtuous resolution forbear to do so; but
this goodness ceased with Edmund, those who descended from him being stained
with fraud and malice: and evil (such as it was) ceased likewise with John,
all who descended from him proving virtuous; but as Henry the Fourth, his only
Son, may seem not to merit the name of good having usurped the Kingdom, and
to secure himself therein committed so many excesses; so Edward the eldest
Son of York may seem not to deserve the name of bad, having in virtue out
done his Father dying gloriously in the battle of Agencourt: but for all this
the observation is not erroneous; for if Henry did usurp the Kingdom, 'twas
not by consultation, or any fancy of his own, for he had never dreampt
thereof had not the people called him thereunto, and Richards ill government
enforced him. On the contrary Edward Duke of York lost all claim to
goodness, by conspiring against the said Henry to bereave him both of Life and
Kingdom, not having been any ways injured by him; for all the rest they
admit not of exception: all the Lancastrians were good; those of York, bad:
Edward the Fourth did almost always falsify his Faith, the Duke of Clarence;
first was traitor to his Brother* then to his Father in Law, Richard the Third
a monster in perfidiousnesse and cruelty, all of both houses were
notwithstanding equally valiant, Henry the sixth excepted, whose intentivenesse
to Divine things, took from him the thought of humane assaires; whereupon as
the house of Lancaster lost the Kingdom in him, through His too much
goodness, so the house of York lost it in Richard the Third through his
height of wickedness: so as it is not to be wondered at if Henry the Eighth,
proceeding afterward from these two Races, did in his first year proceed so
well being begotten by a Lancastrian father, and afterward so ill, his mother
being of the house of York; not that she was bad, but by the influence of her
blood.

Edwards revenge was not bounded with the punishment of the great ones; for,
making enquiry after such as had born Arms against him, he caused many of the
meaner sort to be executed; and, not able to inflict the like punishment on
them all, without the mark of cruelty, he taxed them all in sums of Money, some
more, some less, according to their possessions. But the Earl of Pembrooks and
the Earl of Richmonds escape did much trouble him, as that which did most
import him, since they were forthcoming and out of his reach. He sent over into
Britanny, and spared neither for promises, nor ready moneys to obtain them. But
the Duke unwilling to violate the laws of hospitality and his plighted faith,
denied to deliver them; upon promise notwithstanding to have such a care of
them, as that they should not molest him. He stood in need of the friendship of
England, for that Lewis kept him perpetually busied, so as it made much for him
to have those two Earls in his custody, that he might so hold Edward in hand
and in hope, and make him depend upon his will and pleasure with firm
resolution notwithstanding, in commiseration of their misfortunes, never to
yield them up: he notwithstanding parted them one from another, and took from
them such English as waited upon them, placing his own servants about them, to
the end that, making them safe, Edward might be the more secure, by his keeping
promise with him, and faith with them. But Edward not herewithal satisfied
(foreseeing, as it may be thought) the evil that was to ensue thereby, though
not in his lifetime) sent unto him again, under pretense of thanking him, but,
in effect, to tie him with a chain of Gold to look well to them: he obliged
himself to pay unto him a yearly Pension, hoping that the gate being once open
to the receiving of Moneys, he might easily obtain them by some great sum, when
his honesty and faith waxen old might be wrought upon by the batteries of
Bribery. But if he were deceived in the one, he was not so in the other; for
the Pension made him the more diligent in their Custody.

Charles Duke of Burgondy sent Ambassadors over into England, to move Edward
to cross the Seas and make Wars with France, 1473.
that so he might recover those Provinces which, not many years before, were
lost by the English, promising him to assist him in the recovery thereof.
Edward was herewithal much pleased; he called a Parliament, and easily obtained
Moneys, wherewith he made requisite provisions for a business of so great
importance. But before we proceed any further herein, it is requisite we take a
short view of some few years past, that we may find the Rise of this
Commotion, and so the better understand the cause and groundwork thereof.

There was so great an Antipathy between the King of France and Duke of
Burgondy, as it made them differ in all their actions: their enmity grew ever
since the King, being Dolphine, and fled from his father, did retire himself
into Flanders, where he tarried many years, defrayed, and nobly entertained by
Philip father to Charles; so as that which in others would have served as the
seed of friendship and good will, served them all their lifetime as the cause
of hatred.

The King was endued with many excellent conditions; for wisdom he was not
inferior to any of the then-Princes in Christendom; though that wisdom
(according to those who with more superstitious accuratenesse define it) did
rather deserve the name of Craft; the object thereof being for the most part
deceit. He conceived that, having himself been turbulent and refractory to his
father, his brother Charles, the Princes of the blood, and other great ones
might with more reason be like to him: That there were but two remedies for it:
To keep them under, by not committing any charge unto their trust; and To
disunite them, by sowing discord amongst them. Those whom he most feared, and
consequently most hated, were the Dukes of Burgondy and of Britanny, great and
puissant Princes; and much the more, for that they had obliged themselves by
plighted faith to run one and the same Fortune. He much feared his Brother, not
that he had any brains (for being very simple, there was small cause of fear in
him) but that, seduced by other men's wariness, he might serve for a pretense
to their ambitions; he therefore fed him still with hopes, but kept him in
perpetual poverty, to bereave him of all means whereby to make him
considerable; he never made good that which he promised him; and though he
afterward gave him the Duchy of Berry, 'twas in so dry a fashion, as having
distasted him, he fled into Britanny, whence arose the War of the Common Good,
in which they all joined against him. Philip the father of Charles, who was
then alive, did not confederate with them, but being distasted that the King
would have redeemed all such Cities as he held upon the Soame (which could not
be denied him, according to the Treaty at Arras) he suffered his son to go over
to them, who made a conclusion thereof with a Peace, not to the Common good,
but to the good of particulars: for Lewis, to free himself of them, freely
promised all they could demand, intending not to perform any thing save what he
could not choose; and waiting for an occasion to ruin them one by one, when
they should be disjoined, he restored to Burgondy the forenamed Cities, he
having paid nine months before Four hundred thousand Crowns for them; he
quitted them now for nothing, and not to be redeemed under Two hundred
thousand, and that not till after the death of Charles. He created Count St.
Paul Constable of France; he yielded up the Duke of Britanny certain Towns in
Normandy, which he had taken; and to his brother, instead of the Dukedom of
Berry, he gave the Dukedom of Normandy, which he soon after took from him,
changing it for the Dukedom of Guienne, to the end that being far from the help
of England and Burgondy, he might take it from him as he had done the former,
and as he already began to do, had he not by poison died. Lewis his Design,
after his brothers death, was to ruin the other two that yet remained, using
all possible means to separate them one from the other, as he had separated his
brother from them both. Duke Philip being this mean while dead, and he having
made new agreements with Duke Charles, his son, he kept not any one of them;
but seeing him entangled in the German Wars, he set the Emperor, the Dukes of
Lorrein and of Austria, and the Switzers upon his back; which was the cause why
Charles, not able to oppose two mighty enemies at the same time, incited Edward
against him, in like manner as his father Philip had incited Henry the fifth
against Charles the seventh, father to this Lewis. But the Duke had undertaken
to justle with a wit superior to his: Lewis was a dissembler, patient,
cautelous, accustomed to war no less with Business then with Arms, and more
by Moneys then by exposing himself to hazard; a Captain who knew how to watch
his opportunity, to meet occasion, to feed even the most incredulous with
hopes; in his Fights, fear did not render him stupid, nor good success, proud;
he was endued with a judgment void of harmfull opinions; in choosing out times
for the execution of his designs, he came not short of whatever provident and
complete General. None of which, set Valor aside, was found in Charles, the
vastness of whose imaginations gave not way to any consideration. He conceived
he might at the same time keep Lewis low, reassume his ancient Title of King
in Burgondy, extend his Dominions as far as runs the River Rhine, having in his
imagination devoured Alsatia, the Switzers and Lorrein; so as he may be
compared to those who, grasping at all, have made nothing sure but a miserable
end unto themselves. Had he not dreamt of all the rest, but only applied
himself to Lewis, his cunning would not have been able to have saved him.

Edward spent much time in putting himself in order for this Voyage, having
spent the Money given unto him for the War, 1474.
upon his own occasions; so as not knowing any more expedient means, he caused
a List to be made of all the richest and ablest men in London, of what
condition soever; and calling them before him, he by his persuasions wrought so
well upon them, showing them the necessity of his Undertaking, the honor of
the Kingdom, the profit that would redound, and the extraordinary charge
required thereunto, as they all willingly suffered themselves to be assessed,
some to gratify him, some for example, some for fear; so as he got more Money
then he needed for that purpose. A reverend old rich widow being by the King
demanded what she would contribute upon so urgent an occasion, answered; Your
Majesty's Royal and amiable presence exacts from me twenty pounds sterling. The
King was pleased with the answer and with the gift, which he witnessed by
kissing her; wherewithal the old wom^n was so well pleased, as she gave him
Twenty pounds more. When he was come to Dover, he there found fifty Ships sent
by the Duke of Burgondy from Holland and Zeland for transportation of Horse,
which was the diligence he used in this Enterprise: but such was the abundance
of all things there, as they could not be past over to Calais in less then
Three weeks; so as if the King of France had had any Ships, as he had not, he
had easily hindered them, or else have forced Edward to a double charge in
securing their passage by a Fleet at Sea. The Army consisted of One thousand
five hundred Horsemen, most of the Horses barded with Trappings, and each
Horseman had sundry led Horses: great store of Foot, but Authors do not name
the number; Fifteen thousand Bowmen, all on Horseback; infinite was the number
of men employed about the Artillery and Tents; and amongst all this number,
there was not one unuseful person.

Commines says, Never did King of England pass the Seas with a more powerful
Army, nor with better men, nor more richly armed. To boot with these, Three
thousand men were set apart to go for Britanny. Edward, before he went from
Dover, sent Gartier a Herald, and a Norman by Nation, with Letters to Lewis,
wherein he demanded the Kingdom of France as properly belonging to him; which
if he should deny, he denounced fire and sword against him, as against one who
usurped what belonged to another. Lewis would read the Letter aside, to avoid
the occasion of whispers which thereby might be given. When he had read it, he
said unto the Herald, He knew his Master the King of England came not into
France out of any motion of his own, but egged thereunto by the Duke of
Burgondy (who, having ruinated himself, thought by his means to raise himself
up again) and the Constable, who, as Uncle to his wife, had found more credit
with him then he deserved; but let him be assured they would not make good any
thing they had promised him; the Duke by reason of his impotency, and the
Constable by his disloyalty, being born to deceive all men, and to sow
distrust where he hoped for advantage: that he had made him Constable, to boot
with other favors and Acts of Grace, with which since he could not oblige him,
Edward was not likely to do it; for that it was impossible for him to tread in
any path but that of Fraud and Treachery: That Edward having to do with such
people in a season so near Winter, he might do better to agree with him, then
to hazard his Person, Reputation, and People (trusting on two whereof the one
was unable, the other unfaithful) and run hazard of too late Repentance. This
being said, he with his own hands gave unto the Herald Three hundred Crowns,
and promised him a thousand more, if the King his Master and he should gree,
whereby he obliged him to do him the best service he could. Gartier, allured by
his liberality, promised to do what he was able; but that the business was not
to be moved till the King his Master had past the Seas; that then he would
advise him to send a Herald to demand Safe Conduct for Ambassadors, who might
address himself to the Lord Howard or the Lord Stanley, to whom he would bring
him in. With this he took his leave, and was by Lewis in public (besides what
he had given him in private) presented with Thirty Else of Crimson-Velvet. When
Edward was come to Calais, he was troubled not to find Charles there, who
according to appointment was to have waited for him in that place; but he was
more offended, that whereas the War should have been begun three Months before
his arrival, he had not yet begun it, nor was he like to begin it, being busied
in the Siege of Nuz: He sent forthwith to him, to know what he meant to do.
Charles after the getting of Guelders and the County of Zutphen, was carried
away with new conceits: he was made Heir to those Countries by Arnaldus the
last Duke, who had disinherited his son Adolphus, who had behaved himself
ungratefully and cruelly toward him; so as being possessed thereof, he
thirsted after the neighboring Countries, and neglected the War of France,
which most imported him: but being confirmed in this humor by the slow
proceedings of Germany, by the avarice and wretchlesnesse of the Emperor
Frederick the Third, who was not able to oppose him without the power of the
whole Empire, he bent himself thereunto: to this purpose he procured a Truce
with Lewis for some months. Lewis his Counselors were averse to the granting
of this Truce, but himself was of a contrary opinion; foreseeing, that if
Charles were once entangled in these affairs, he would never rid his hands of
them; for by having the Emperor, the Empire and the Princes thereof his
enemies, he could not have leisure to employ himself elsewhere. Charles his
design was to get the dominion of Rhine as far as Basil, which he thought he
might do; for he already possessed all the Lands between Holland and Collen;
and between Collen and Basil he enjoyed the County of Farrata, which was pawned
to him by Sigismund Duke of Austria, the which he intended never to restore;
and this his design was occasioned by his having taken into his protection
Robert of Bavaria Archbishop of Collen Brother to Lodowick Prince Elector, who
with a joint consent was by the Clergy and Commonalty driven out, and they
placed Nortmannus Brother to Lodowick Barbarus Landgrave of Hessen in his
place: But because Nuz a Fort of great consequence Three miles distant from
Collen held with the City, he besieged it (it being defended by Henry Brother
to Nortmannus) believing that when he should have taken this place, Collen
would not long hold out. Lewis, seeing him thus madly minded, it redounding to
his advantage that he should more and more be engaged therein, prolonged the
Truce, and took from him all manner of scruple of breaking it. Charles laid
Siege to Nuz at the same time that he had persuaded Edward to war with France,
and was a whole year before it, when he thought suddenly to have taken it, and
to have been time enough to have met Edward with his Fleet, which was as fair a
one as any Prince could have. The Emperor and all the Germane Princes came to
the succor of this Town, hoping to meet 20000 fighting men there which Lewis
had promised to send, but they came not, he having need of them himself to
oppose the English, who were hourly expected in France. Lewis rather
endeavored to have peace with Charles, or to prolong the Truce, the which he
did not obtain; for Charles presumed he could at the same time take Nuz, drive
the Emperor away, and ruin Lewis, being set upon by three enemies; himself,
England, and Britanny. Lewis, on the other side, favored by the length of the
Siege, and the slacknesse of the English, as soon as the Truce was expired, took
many Cities of his, burnt all his Country between Abbevile and Arraz, and took
James of S. Paul, Brother to the Constable, prisoner: He made the Dukes of
Lorrain and of Calabria his enemies, who entered Luxenburg; and likewise the
Duke of Austria and the Switzers, who took from him the County of Farrata. He
notwithstanding all this, was obstinate in continuing the Siege, nor did he
rise from before the Town till forced by necessity, and diverse incommodities;
the which had he endured but Ten days longer (as he might very well have done)
the Fort had been yielded up unto him; for people died there of hunger: but he
raised the Siege, not knowing their necessity; and would have raised it before,
all hopes of gaining it being lost, had it not been that out of ostentation he
might say, that the Emperor accompanied by all the Princes of the Empire, as
well Ecclesiastical as Secular, could not make him raise his Siege, though the
Emperors Army was four times as great as his: but seeing his Army consumed
through long sufferings, the death of 4000 of the best Soldiers he had, the
loss of Farrata, the Duchy of Luxenburg pillaged, the Counties of Poictiers
and Piccardy burnt, the King of England so much desired by him, and so hardly
wrought thereunto, at Calais, expecting him, and threatening to return; he was
content to raise it, remitting Nuz to the Popes Legate, to dispose thereof as
the Apostolic Sea should think good. Thus having sent the remainder of his
people into Lorrein and Bar, that by sacking them they might refresh
themselves, he himself, with a very small attendance, went to Calais, where he
was but coldly welcomed, as one who was expected in a Warlike, not in a
Complemental posture.

They did notwithstanding follow him, and were by him led by the way of Bullen
to Peron, whereinto he suffered but few of them to enter, being jealous of the
place as if they had been his enemies. The Constable had sundry times promised
Charles to give up unto him Saint Quintines; but not having done it, and
meaning nothing less, he now sent to him Lewis Creville with his excuse,
saying, that if he should have delivered it up to him, he should have done him
a disservice, by bereaving him of all belief of his service in France: but that
now seeing he was joined with the King of England, he durst do it. He sent him
likewise a Letter of Credit wherewithal to serve himself with the King, and to
assure him of his best assistance in his behalf; this was accompanied with a
Writing sealed up, wherein he promised to assist and serve all the Confederates
of Burgundy, namely the King of England, against any whosoever, none excepted.
The Constable was by nature perfidious and full of falsehood, but no ways wise;
so as it is no wonder if notwithstanding all his cunning he was ruined: for
evil doings seldom end well, especially when craft and treachery are used
toward one more crafty and more powerful. The Fox loses all his wiles, when
in the Lions paws. The Constable, while he was but Count S. Paul, had served
Philip Duke of Burgundy, and gained the good will of his son Charles, whom he
governed in all his ways; the which Lewis observing, he thought to win him over
to his side, by making him his Constable, believing by this new obligation to
corrupt his former ancient friendship; whilst Charles was confident the Count
would never abandon his Cause: and both of them were deceived: For, though he
might at the same time have kept his old Master, paid all Duties to his new
one, and inhansed his deserts with the one and with the other; yet would not
his bad inclinations suffer him so to do: for instead of being a means of peace
and friendship between them, he stirred them both up to war and hatred.
Sincerity and Candor were not merchandise for his Warehouse; nor could he have
made use of them, had he been willing, whilst he believed his present
greatness could not be augmented, nor yet preserved, but by his nourishing
Discord between these two Princes, and causing all their actions to have a
dependency on him, by making himself the Needle of the Dyal, which sometimes
points to this, sometimes to that side. He was to blame to justle with two, the
one of which was not inferior to him in craft, to wit, Charles; the other
surpassing him therein, which was Lewis: the former was endued with little
wisdom, as was he; the other, with so much, as he might have been therein
master to them both. 'Twould be too tedious to number up his disloyalties: it
may suffice to say, that he fomented the War between them, that he might
necessitate Charles to marry his daughter to the Duke of Guienne: If he did it
not, he threatened him with ruin, showing uuto him Lewis his Forces; and if he
did it, he promised him S. Quintines, and to procure the Duke of Britanny and
his son-in-law to declare themselves against Lewis: whilst Lewis waging War
with Charles, and being by him egged on, not knowing what he did, made War
against himself, by enforcing him to implore their aid against him, by a
Marriage equally detested by them both. The Duke of Guienne dying, he continued
their Discord, lest, if they should agree, they might discover his evil Offices
the one unto the other, whereby that might befall him, which indeed did: and
believing that in case of danger his refuge might be with less hazard to
Charles then to Lewis, the former not being so wary as the other, he allured
him by the promise of S. Quintines, the which in time of peace, and by the
instigation of the said Constable, was by Lewis taken from him, together with
the Town of Amiens. He proposed surprisal for the way of delivering it up,
promising he would suffer it to be taken; the which Charles having diverse times
offered at, was continually mocked and deluded, and those who went against it,
were treated ill; whereat though Charles was scandalized, yet was he forced to
admit his excuses: he made him believe he had sent to surprise it at an
unfitting time; that if he had suffered it then to be taken, he should have
lost all his credit with the King and with France, to the loss and prejudice
of the Duke of Burgundy. Lewis knew part of this dissembling, and saw even into
his bosom; but he knew not how to punish him, unless he should make an
agreement with Charles: for the Constable being possessed of S. Quintines, and
having much of his own Patrimonial Lands lying round about it, being very well
followed, well allied, and of great Revenue, he feared he might lose the Fort
if he should discover himself to be his enemy. But the King of England's coming
was his bane: Edward believed that S. Quintines and the other adjacent places
might serve him for places of Gariosn the next Winter; the Constables last
promise, the Writing which was sent, and the credit given him by Charles, would
not suffer him to think otherwise. Whereupon he marched toward it, and Charles
led on the way; but when they were near the place, and some of Edwards Troops
advanced themselves, believing they should have been received in as soon as they
were within sight of the Walls, the Canon played upon them, and they might see
themselves charged by sundry Troops of Horse and Foot, which slew two or three
of them. This made the King believe he was (as indeed he was) basely betrayed.

The Duke not knowing what to say to it, went his way the next day for mere
shame, and left these new people, unacquainted with the Country, abandoned to
Fortune, in danger of not being able either to serve him or themselves: and
Edward seeing he was used but as an instrument to work the designs of others,
began better to bethink himself. His men had taken a servant of James de
Gratsi, a Gentleman who then served the King, prisoner: Edward would have him
set at liberty without ransom: and the Lord Howard and Lord Stanley having
furnished him with Moneys for his expenses, loaded him with the presentment of
their services to the King, in case he should come to speak with him, which at
his first coming he did. This News seeming strange to Lewis, who did not
reflect upon the names of those that sent him, his natural jealousy wrought
so far upon him, as that he made Irons to be clapped upon him, taking him to be
but a Spy: the which he the rather did, for that his Masters brother was in
great favor with the Duke of Bretagne: But after he had made him be privately
examined by some, and had spoke with him himself, he remembered the English
Heralds words; That if he did resolve to treat with Edward, he should send a
Herald to demand Safe Conduct for his Ambassadors; prescribing unto him, that
he should make his address to the Lord Howard and Lord Stanley. Having well
bethought himself herein, some time past before he could resolve whether to do
it or no: At last, he resolved and pitched upon a person to send, wherein his
choice seemed very strange. Monsieur de Hales had a servant with whom Lewis had
never spoken but once; he thought this man fit for the employment: he was a man
poor in aspect, but rich in understanding; who could at the same time express
himself boldly enough, and yet with modesty; whereupon it may be said that in
this his choice he showed his wisdom: He caused a Heralds Coat be made for
him, whereof there was none at that time in the Camp; for Lewis was an enemy to
Apparences, no great friend to Decency, and no ways curious in the accustomed
Formalities of Princes. This man received his Instructions, and presented
himself before the English Camp. He made known to the Lords Howard and Stanley
that he desired to speak with the King; and chancing to come when the King was
at Dinner, he was led into a Tent to dine. When he was brought unto the King,
he told him in Lewis his name, He was come from the King of France, his Master,
who was desirous of Peace with his Majesty and his Kingdom, as that which was
to be sought for by both of them, by reason of the commodity of Commerce, and
which was necessary for the Subjects both of the one and the other: That the
King his Master wondered to see him come into France, since he had never given
him occasion to wage War: That if he had favored Warwick, it was not out of
any ill will to him or his House, but in respect of the Duke of Burgundy his
inexorable enemy, who had made his Majesty of England take Arms against him,
not for that he intended any advantage or honor to him thereby, but that the
Forces of England might better his own condition and that of his Colleagues:
That the Dukes affairs needed Accommodation, not War; the which might be
witnessed by the state his Master found him in, since, being undone by a long
and unfortunate Siege, he was reduced to such a pass, as that he could not
sustain himself but at the charge of others. He wished Edward to consider that
he had Winter at his back; That he was in the Field, and unprovided of Towns,
not being come out of his own election, but called in to please his Subjects;
who if they desired War with France, 'twas out of passion; since reason showed
them there was no appearance of their reaping any profit thereby, but rather
the contrary; for building upon the Duke of Burgundy and the Constable, they
were certainly to be deceived, their Coin being of a false alloy: That he knew
the King of England had been at great expense to come into France; but that if
he would give way unto a Treaty, his Master would give him such satisfaction,
as that he, his Nobility, and Country should have reason to rest satisfied:
That if it would please him to send Lewis a Safe Conduct for a hundred Horse,
he would send Ambassadors to wait upon him where he pleased, either in any
Village, or between the two Camps; and that Lewis would not fail to send the
like to wait upon his Ambassadors. Edward and the major part of his Counsel
were well pleased with this Proposition. The Herald was suddenly dispatched
away, being presented with a hundred Angels in a gilt-Cup, and had along with
him the Safe Conduct he desired, and was accompanied by an English Herald who
might bring back the like; with the which as soon as he returned the
Ambassadors met in a Village near Amiens; the two Armies being four Leagues
distant from thence. And though the Demands of the English were exorbitant,
standing still upon their old Pretenses of demanding the Crown, and in the
second place the Dutchies of Normandy and Guienne; yet the one being desirous
to return home, the others to send them away as soon as possibly they could,
this Treaty ended upon two chief Conditions, besides such as concerned
Commerce: The one, That Lewis should pay to Edward Seventy five thousand Crowns
(Seventy two thousand says Commines) before he went from France: the other,
That the Dolphin (who was afterward Charles the Eighth) should marry
ELIZABETH, eldest Daughter to Edward (who was afterward Wife to Henry the
Seventh) allowing her for her Maintenance Fifty thousand Crowns a year; which
were for Nine succeeding years to be paid her in the City of LONDON; at the end
whereof the Marriage being to be consummated, the married Couple were jointly
to enjoy all the Revenue of the Duchy of Guienne, the annual payment of the
abovesaid Fifty thousand Crowns ceasing: And that the Peace between the two
Kingdoms should be understood to continue during these Nine years, their
friends therein comprehended, namely, the Dukes of Burgundy and Britanny.

Many blamed Lewis for these Agreements; and not looking into the reasons
thereof, imputed pusillanimity and cowardice unto him; but they did not well
understand the business. Commines says, that besides his declared enemies, who
were the Dukes of Britanny and Burgundy, and the Constable, he had so many
private concealed ones in the body of his Kingdom, as without this Agreement he
might have suffered loss. He means (as I believe) such Princes and Lords who
not approving of the Person of the King, would have caused the good o France
which Charles said once he wished her, to wit, That in stead of One King she
might have Six. But suppose there were no such dangers; there yet remains one
reason not spoken of by him, which of it self ought to have persuaded him to do
what he did. The end of War is Victory; but all Victories are not equally
profitable: there is difference between overcoming to preserve our own, and
overcoming to get what is another. The Victories of Charles the Seventh
against Henry the Sixth, were of the later sort; for he preserved his Crown,
and won what Henry possessed in France; but Lewis, who in his overcoming could
not pretend to other advantage then the driving out an enemy who hazarded
nothing, while he hazarded all, was not to put himself upon Fortune without a
proportionable recompense to his expense and loss: so as if he bought Peace,
'twas in respect of his danger, at so cheap a rate, as the Seventy five
thousand Crowns he paid down ready money, and the Fifty thousand for Nine
years, would not have served him for One bare years expense to boot with a
Thousand dangers and damages; so as he did what wisdom bad him do, not
attending the opinion of others who did not arrive at this Physical knowledge,
That real Victory is properly his who giving way to dangers that he may
withstand them, does without danger obtain his end, as he did: all this
notwithstanding, I should not praise him, had he no other enemies beside
Edward; for 'twere to propose to Princes a Maxim of Cowardice. His men
believed that Edward seemed to make an agreement, that he might the better
deceive him; but he thought not so; for Edwards occasions did not square with
such dissimulation: He had the Winter at hand, wanted Towns, was distasted by
Charles, deceived by the Constable, was naturally a lover of his Pastimes: so
as Lewis his chiefest care was how to be rid of him, not valuing Moneys, or
what others thought of him; and that he might the sooner be gone, he borrowed
of every one; he would willingly have paid more, but would not part with any
Towns or Provinces; he would rather have hazarded all. Edward gave him to
understand he would by writing give him notice of some that betrayed him. I
know not whether the Constable knew thus much or no, but he had many reasons to
doubt it; and remembering that at a Diet held the year before at Bovines, Lewis
and Charles had secretly proscribed him, to the end that he might pay for his
so many Treacheries (though, by somes means he used, Lewis afterward hindered
the execution thereof) he doubted the like in this Agreement: his conscience
accused him of his past frauds used with the other two, and now with Edward; so
as he feared lest their agreement might be his ruin: this caused him day by
day to send new Messengers to Lewis with advertisements and counsels drawn from
the Forge of his unfortunate Inventions; making himself so much the more
suspected, by how much the affected ostentation of his fidelity bereft him of
belief. He thought that since Lewis hated no Prince alive more then Charles, to
hold him in hand with hateful Reports was the means to continue him still his
enemy; and that the War continuing, the thread that was woven for his
destruction, might either be lost, or else grow knotty. He sent unto him his
Secretary, and together with him a Gentleman called Lewis Greville, who being
first referred to Monsieur de Bouchage, and to Commines, Lewis (being informed
of the business) sent for Monsieur de Contai, one of Charles his servants,
who, though he were his prisoner, did notwithstanding pass with Messages
between them: he placed this man in a Cupboard which was in his Chamber, to the
end that, hearing what he was to say to these men, he might report the same to
Charles; and placing himself near to the Cupboard, he sent for them in. Their
Message was, That they were sent from Charles to the Constable, to alienate him
from friendship with England, and that finding him distasted by the King of
England, they had wel-nigh persuaded him not only to abandon his friendship,
but to lend his helping hand to rifle him in his return. This was spoken by
Creville, who believing to be better credited by humouring him, imitated
Charles his action, stamping with his foot, swearing, and giving Edward
injurious terms. Lewis feigning as if he had been deaf, made him say the same
thing over again, to the end that Contai might the better hear him; who mad to
hear his Prince thus abused, longed to acquaint him with it. This mock-mask
ended with an advice of the Constables (who knew not that the Agreement was
fully made with Edward) that Lewis, to shun the danger which hung over him,
should make a Truce with Charles, (whereunto he obliged himself to make Charles
stand) and that he should give unto the English a Town or two, to hold them in
hopes this Winter, who could not be so wicked as not to be content therewith.
The designs of these his Counsels were, that the English by this means
tarrying in France, and the Truce with Charles being to expire the next Spring,
Lewis might be subject to the fear of War, and he might gain time by these two
Towns to pacify Edward for his abuse at S. Quintines, and to sow Dissension
between the other two; so as all three having need of him, he might, by
diversely deceiving them, save himself; and seem to oblige them, whilst he did
betray them.

As Soon as Creville was gone, Contai came forth from the Cupboard, as much
incensed as Lewis was gladded that Charles should know what sport the Constable
made with him.

I have this particular from Commines, as all the rest concerning the business
now treated on: which though it be not simply requisite to our Story, yet it is
most necessary for knitting up the business, and to make known the natures of
the abovenamed, together with the true causes which did fore-ripen the
Constables death.

A Parley and Interview was this mean while agreed upon between the two Kings,
with agreement that Edward should return for England as soon as he should have
received his Seventy five thousand Crowns, and that in pledge of his return he
should leave as Hostages the Lord Howard and Sir John Cheynes Master of his
Horse, who were to be set at liberty upon the certain News of his arrival in
England. Lewis assigned Sixteen thousand Crowns annual Pension to be given to
some of the chief English Lords, and was very bountiful in his gifts to Edwards
servants. When Charles heard of this Accord, he hasted to find out Edward,
from whom understanding what had been done, and how that he had comprehended
him in the Truce, he answered, That he had not brought him out of England for
any thing that concerned himself, but for Edwards own affairs, to the end that
he might have occasion to imitate the glorious actions of his Predecessors in
France, by recovering what of right belonged unto him; That since he was agreed
not to do it, he was no ways concerned therein: and as touching the Truce, to
the end he might see how little he esteemed it, he would not accept thereof,
till Three Months after he should be landed in England. The King would have
convinced him with reason, showing him that all the inconvenience had risen
from him: but he not listening thereunto, departed so much distasted, as there
never was after this any good Intelligence between them. If Charles were angry
at this Truce, it amazed the Constable much more, before he knew the certain
conclusion thereof; and when he knew it, he sent his Confessor to Edward, to
entreat him not to give belief to Lewis his words or promises; That he would be
pleased to accept of the two Towns of Eu and S. Valleri, which should be
delivered up unto him; That he might lodge there the beginning of the Winter,
promising him better Towns within two months space; but he named them not: He
offered likewise to lend him Fifty thousand Crowns, to the end that he might
not be necessitated to make the Agreement. But Edward answered, The Truce was
concluded, and was to be observed; if he were displeased thereat, he might
thank himself; for if he had kept his promise to him, he had not done it.

The place of Parley between the two Kings, was Pichines, a Town belonging to
the Vidame of Amiens, three Leagues distant from the City, where whilst a
wooden Bridge was cast over the River of Some, and parties from either side
were sent to view it, Edward came within half a League of Amiens, and was by
Lewis presented with Three hundred Cartload of the best Wines that could be
found, and his people had in the City free egresse and regresse. Lewis had
caused many Tables laden with all sorts of salt-Meats which might provoke to
drink, to be set at the entering in of the Gate; they were guarded by the best
drinkers of France. Besides all this, he gave Commission to all the Innes and
Taverns that they should feast the English, and not suffer them to pay a penny:
Upon which occasion, Nine thousand English came into the Town. Some of the more
cautelous French seeing this, were not void of suspicion, in so much as they did
advertise Lewis thereof: who having set people to observe their behaviors:
Finding them all singing and making merry, and the most part of them drunk, he
found no cause of fear. 'Twas a wonder that in three days, all which time this
open Court was kept, there happened not any falling out or quarrel amongst so
many drunkards. As Soon as the Bridge was fully finished, Edward marched toward
it with his Army in a glorious manner; Lewis his Army being nothing in
comparison to his. Lewis was come thither before Edward. Amongst the Orders of
the Parley, one was, That each of them shoule send Four of their men into the
company of the others, to have an eye upon what should be done, to the end that
if they should find any cause of suspicion, they might advertise their
Masters. But this was needless. The two Kings were to be attended upon the
Bridge by Twelve men only, of which those that are named, were, John Duke of
Burbon, the Cardinal of Burbon his Brother, and Commines Lord of Argenton, who
had a Suit upon him like to that which King Lewis wore; for it was his custom
oftentimes to have somebody near him clad in like manner as he himself was.

Commines writes that when Edward appeared, his very presence spoke him a King;
and that though he begun to grow somewhat fat, he was notwithstanding very
handsome, though not altogether so comely as when Warwick made him flee to
Flanders, at which time he was the handsomest and most comely man that ever he
saw. There were with him his Brother the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Lord Hastings his Chamberlain, the Bishop of Ely his
Chancellor, and others to the number of Twelve. The Duke of Gloucester came not
thither, for that having not given his consent to the Truce, he would not be
present when it was to be sworn unto. When Edward was come within Five spaces
of the Grate, he took off his Cap, which was of black Velvet, whereon was a
rich Jewel of Diamonds: they made ^owe Reverences each to other, and embraced
each other through the partitions of the Grate. Lewis was the first that spoke:
he said, He never coveted any sight so much as this, and that he blessed God
that had brought them together to so good an End. Edward having courteously
replied in French, the Chancellor of England read the Treaty, asking Lewis
whether it were the same that he had sent, and if he were therewithal content:
he answered, Yes, as likewise with that which was sent him from the King of
England. Hereupon the Masse-book and the Cross being brought, they laid their
hands thereon, and swore to observe the Truce of Nine years, comprehending
therein those that were within named, and the Marriage between their children.
This being done, Lewis said merrily to Edward, He might do well to come to
Paris, to see the fair Ladies there, and take his pastime; and that if he
should chance to commit some trivial trangressions, he would assign the
Cardinal of Burbon to him for his Confessor. This Cardinal was a young Prince,
no enemy to good-fellowship: So as Edward being well pleased with the
complemental Invitation, Lewis for a good while played upon them both. Lewis
after this commanded his men to retire; and Edwards men forth with withdrew
uncommanded. They discoursed a pretty while together, it not being well known
whereon, but, as it is believed, to the prejudice of the Constable. Lewis asked
him what he would advise him to do if the Duke of Burgundy should not accept of
the Truce (as it was likely he would not, in regard of the proud terms he had
used to him.) Offer it him the second time, replied Edward, and if he shall not
then accept of it, do what you think best. Lewis made this enquiry concerning
Burgundy, only that he might enquire of Edward (as he did) and discover what
his opinion was of the Duke of Bretaigne. Edward said, The Duke of Bretaigne
was his friend, and such a one as he had not found the like in his need: that
therefore he desired Lewis not to molest him, but suffer him to live in quiet.
Lewis was not well pleased with this answer; for his intentions were not good
toward that Prince; and he was the worse pleased, for that he knew not the
reason of it, which was his detaining of the Earl of Richmond; for it was in
Bretaigne's power to trouble Edward if he listed: for though he should neither
have assisted Richmond with Men nor Money, yet the permitting him to return to
England, would be sufficient to shake all the foundation of that Kingdom.
Lancasters faction was ready to rise, hearing of his name, and to trouble the
possession of the Crown; the which he having peaceably enjoyed since Henry's
death, he was not likely to do so, long, so opposed. Lewis was ignorant of
these interests; but cloking his dislike, they took leave each of other, having
embraced such Lords and Princes as were there. Edward returned to his Camp, and
Lewis to Amiens, from whence he sent to Edward whatever he thought behoveful
for him, even to Torches and Candles. The Duke of Gloucester, that he might pay
the dues of Civility, went to visit him, and returned presented with silver
Plate, and horses most richly caparison'd.

This King spared nothing where he might win those that might either be
serviceable to him or harmful. He met with two things at this Interview which
displeased him: the one, Edwards inclination to come to Paris; for being a
Prince amorously given, he might by falling in love with some Lady, fall
likewise in love with the Country, and so perchance take an humor to tread in
the footsteps of his Predecessor: the other, his having declared himself so
passionate in the Duke of Britanny's interest: He endeavored to withdraw him
from the later of these two; he caused him to be sifted by two several persons,
as if they had casually fallen upon this discourse; but he perceiving their
drift, said the only cause to make him pass the Seas again would be the
molestation of the Duke of Bretaigne, and therefore wished them to talk no more
thereof. Some of those that had to do in the Treaty of the Truce, went to sup
with Lewis at Amiens, amongst which the Lord Howard was one; who told him in
his ear that if he pleased, he would use some means to make Edward come and
recreate himself with him at Amiens, and perchance at Paris. This discourse
wounded Lewis his ears; but smiling, and putting a good face upon it, without
further answer he fell to wash his hands. The Lord Howard did not
notwithstanding forbear to talk of this with some others, who formerly aware
thereof, answered, 'Twas impossible for the King to make any stay in any one
place; for such were Charles his insolences, as did enforce him to wage War.
But Howard conceiving them aright, forbear the further pursuit.

Many of Edwards servants were displeased with this Agreement, believing he had
not considered his Honor therein: One of them, named Lewis de Bretailles a
Guascoigner, being with Commines, and demanded in how many Battles Edward had
been present, replied, In eight or nine, and that he was victorious in them
all, except in this which you have made him lose: for to return to England
without fighting or loss, will redound more to his dishonor then all his
former won Battles will do to his honor. Lewis being told of this answer,
swore, according to his custom, that this man's mouth must be stopped: he caused
him to be sent for to Dinner to him; he made him many offers to draw him to his
service; but he not accepting of any, he gave him a thousand Crowns: he
promised him to prefer his Brethren who were in France; and he made Commines
tell him in private, that if he would endeavor the continuance of the good
intelligence and friendship between the two Crowns, to boot with the doing an
office worthy of a man of Honor, he should oblige the King of France to reward
him. These Artifices did Lewis use. One day after Dinner being come into his
chamber, and laughing at Edward for having suffered himself to be caught with
presents, he turned himself round, and saw at his back a Guascoigne-Merchant
who lived in England, and was come to beg leave for the transportation of
certain Gascoigne-Wines without the paying of a certain Impost; he was somewhat
out of countenance, perceiving he had heard all he had said: he therefore
granted his request, and caused him to be brought to Bourdeaux, where he gave
him a good Office in that City, to the end that he might not return for
England; and to that Office added a thousand Franks, by means whereof he might
send for his wife and children, and would not suffer him to go himself for
them, but made him send his brother. His having been too careless of his
speech, and his fear lest the Merchant should tell what he had heard, forced
this liberality and favor from him against his will. One named Rapines, a
servant of the Constables, was come to Amiens before Edward departed thence,
with Letters of Credence, at the same time when Monsieur de Contay was likewise
returned from Charles. His business was to complain of his Masters misfortune,
who was subject to the misreports of wicked men, whilst the King had no one
servant more faithful, nor more affectionate to his service then was he. He
made the same offer as formerly had been made in the Constables name, To make
the English in their return be set upon by Charles: But being told this was not
to be done, since the agreement was concluded, Lewis gave him a Letter written
with his own hand to deliver to the Constable, and made him read it before it
was sealed up: so as Rapines thought his dispatch was very gracious. He, in
this Letter by way of trust, made him a relation of what had past, and added
That he was so over-burdened with the present affairs, as he stood in need of
having by him such a head as was his. A conceit which Rapines did not truly
understand: but Lewis explaining himself to some of his familiar friends that
were about him, said, He stood in need of such a head, but without the body; to
the end it might no more deceive him. As Soon as Edward had received the Moneys
agreed upon, he went his way, leaving with Lewis the forenamed Hostages: and
although in some of his passage he was waylaid by Charles his people, yet he
arrived safely at Callis. It seemed strange to many, that he having past the
Seas, with the fairest and most powerful Army that ever King of England did, so
small a sum of Money should make him return. Commines believes that his avarice
to pocket up the Moneys he had received from his people for this Enterprise,
was the cause thereof: but he is deceived; he had almost spent it all; nor had
he as yet (though afterward he did) given occasion to be noted of this vice.
The true cause was the failing of the foundation of the Enterprise, by the
default and negligence of Charles, and the Constable his cozenages. Charles
believed that when Edward was once in France, he should be enforced to fight
whether he would or no: and that he would entertain Lewis whilst he might do
his affairs elsewhere; just as his father Philip did with the Duke of Bedford
under Henry the sixth; but the condition of affairs was altered. Edward could
not make War alone, as did Bedford. The English did then possess in France all
that lay between the River Loire and the Sea, and a great part of Guienne; now
scarcely Calais: Henry the sixth was born King, and a King by Succession,
having then no Competitiours; Edward a new King, a stranger to the Crown,
perturbed with jealousies of the contrary Faction, chiefly of the Earl of
Richmond the head thereof; who though at his request he were detained in
Bretaigne, yet did he not live free from fear of him. The expenses of those
times (besides that France did contribute thereunto it self) what was by way of
aid given by England, did not much burden the Country, which did abound in men
and all things else; the now-expences were to be drawn from England only,
which being exhausted by Civil Wars, could not well furnish things needful to
so important an Expedition; so as it was great wisdom in Edward, if failed by
the Duke, cheated by the Constable, and allured by Lewis with Moneys, Pensions,
and chiefly with the promise of so honorable and advantageous a Match, he did
withdraw himself, shunning thereby such snares as the contingencies of War
might make him fall into, as well at home as abroad.

Edward was not well landed when Lewis began to rid his hand of what other
business he had to do; which was the Truce with Charles, and the Constables
ruin. The later was now no longer to be evaded: his wife Mary of Savoy, sister
to the Queen of France, she who always made up the breaches between her husband
and brother-in-law, was dead: and his friends of all sides forsook him, amongst
which the Count Dammartin, and Messieurs de Tremoville, and Lude, who were very
powerful at Court; so as imagining the King would come to S. Quintines, as he
did, he withdrew himself from thence, and abandoned that place, not affying in
the Garrison, which immediately yielded up the Town. Passing from hence to
Varuins, he there received Charles his Ambassadors, who were come to treat of
the Truce, and were waited upon by handsome and well armed Troops. There were in
the Kings train, besides the English Hostages, many Gentlemen of the same
Nation who bare them company; and who wondering to see the Ambassadors so well
attended, one of them said to Monsieur de Commines, that if the Duke of
Burgundy had been accompanied with such men when he came to Calais, Edward
would not so easily have made an Agreement. Monsieur de Narbone who was then
present, in a jesting manner replied, They were too simple to believe that the
Duke of Burgundy wanted such men as those, but that their desire to return into
England Six hundred Tun of Wine, and a Pension, had made them believe any
thing. This sort of jesting pleased not the English Gentleman, who answered,
that it was true that he had heard that the French gybed at the English; but
they might gybe so long, that their being gone might not hinder them from
returning back again: and although Monsieur de Commines would have smoothed
over the business, the Englishman did notwithstanding complain thereof unto
the King, who being of a contrary humor to Narbone, chid him, as detesting his
ill-advised indiscretion.

After much Dispute, the Truce was at last concluded for nine years; and all
who had forfeited their estates by following the contrary party, were suffered
to return and take possession of them, except Messieurs de Commines, de Renti,
de Chasse, and de Baldwin a Bastard of Burgundy: the Duke, who was inexorable
in the behalf of such as had once quitted him, would not be persuaded to suffer
them enjoy any such privileges as others did. The chiefest Articles of the
Truce were, That the King should renounce his League with the Emperor and City
of Collen, should slight some forts, that he should proceed against the
Constable by way of justice according to the Treaty of Bovines; that he should
restore S. Quintines to the Duke, and that he should not assist the Duke of
Lorrein. When Edw. understood that Charles would not accept of the Truce made by
him, he sent Sir Tho. Montgomery to entreat Lewis not to make any league with
him save what was answerable to that which was made between them two; and that
he should not restore unto him S. Quintines; and that if he were to make War
against him, he would cross the Seas again to fight on Lewis his behalf on two
Conditions: the one, That he should satisfy him for the loss he should have
in his Customs of Wools at Callis, which being taken from the Commerce of
Dutchmen, who were Charles his Subjects, were worth unto him Fifty thousand
Crowns a year; the other, that he should pay half the men which Edward should
bring over. But Lewis, thanking him for his offer, said he had already made the
same Truce for nine years with him, without any difference save the giving of
Letters apart. With this answer did Montgomery return, and together with him
the Hostages. But Lewis would never have accepted of this offer, though he had
stood in need of it; he thought it ominous to have the English in France;
besides, the Commerce with Flanders, and the ancient pretense to France, might
happily without much difficulty make Edward join again with Charles against them.

The Constable this mean while, sinding himself abandoned by them who
foreseeing his ruin absented themselves, he knew not what to resolve upon, nor
whither to retire himself: he durst not trust himself in Han, though it were a
very strong Fort, and for the like occasions so fortified by him, as it was
thought almost impregnable, because the Garrison thereof were all Burgonians and
French: to flee into Germany with Moneys and Jewels would be dangerous: at
last, after many consultations privately with himself, he resolved to have
recourse to Charles, to demand Safe Conduct, and under color of important
affairs to get access to him, and win his ear. Having got it, he went to Mons
with not above Fifteen or Twenty Horse, where, contrary to all faith, he was at
Lewis his request detained and sent to Peron. The Duke according to the tie of
his Articles was either to deliver him up unto the King within eight days after
he should be his prisoner, or else to see justice done upon him himself: but he
detained him longer, cavilling from one day to another for above the space of a
month; not, out of Charity, but for fear lest when the King should have him,
he might break his word with him, and hinder him in the taking of Nanci, which
he then besieged; but making his account to take it on such a day, he gave
order that on the same day he should be delivered to the Kings Officers, as he
was. Perceiving afterward that he had cast up his accounts amiss, Nanci
holding still out, he revoked his direction the very same day by an express
Post, who, though he made all possible haste, came three hours after the
Constable was delivered up; who being brought to Paris, examined, and out of
his own Letters to the King of England and Duke of Burgundy convinced of high
Treason, he was beheaded in the Greve, a place where malefactors are put to
death, paying so at once sufficiently what he ought sundry times to have done
for his so many deceits. He was descended from the most illustrious Families of
Christendom, the Families of Emperors and Kings; allied to the chiefest
Princes; son-in-law to the Duke of Sav^y; brother-in-law to the King of France
and Duke of Millan; Uncle to the Queen of England: rich in Fee farms,
Copie-holds, Rents, and Moneys; but so full of tricks, ambition,
perfidiousnesse, and deceit, as nothing but ruin could betide him: whereas,
had he served Burgundy and France with such loyalty as he ought to have done,
amongst Princes he would have been thought worthy of the title of a Prince, and
amongst Captains, been esteemed one of the chiefest of his time. His father had
served England, and so had he; but leaving her in the recesse of her Fortune,
he became one of Charles his favorites, (then Count Carolois) and was not
likely to have fallen from thence; but an ambition having brought him to the
eminent place of Constable, the next man to the King in France, Generalissimo
of his Forces, and at whose command even Princes did obey; enriched, besides
his Office, with Pensions and Commands; there remained nothing more for him to
covet, had he not (like sick men) by longing after what was hurtful for him
(contaminating his faith and honor) put a period to his life and honor. In
this many err: increase of honor or riches, causes still a thirsting after
more: such examples have been before and since the Constable, and shall be as
long as the world endures: for the avarice and ambition of such as come to what
they formerly were not, makes them see amiss; and whilst they think to go
beyond the period of their Fortunes, thinking to transport it from its natural
circle to an imaginary one, (as he who should think to pass from the Sphere of
the Moon to that of the Sun; for that, as it is of a larger circumference, so
is it of a more elevated and lasting efficacy) they in their passage tumble
down headlong, and break their necks. Happy is he who possessing the favor of
his Prince with temperance, enjoys an alway-permanent Fortune, grounded upon
the justice and integrity of his own actions; and if he prove not as rich as
Croesus, yet need he not to be ashamed of his riches; which if they be but
small, the greater sign it is of their being well come-by: whilst the Princes
favor, the testimony of a good conscience, and the being able to do good to
others, are the most glorious and most advantageous riches the world affords.
In such extraordinary Fortunes, it is better to sympathize with Agrippa and
Maecenas then with Sejanus.

Edwards Ship had cast Anchor in a place secure from all winds 1475.
save such as blew from Bretaigne, which were those alone that were able to
split or overwhelm her. He enjoyed his estate with out the disturbance of
foreign enemies by means of the new Treaty with France: Burgundy's enmity did
no ways trouble him; for though the desire of subduing Lorrein, and the humor
of provoking the Switzers (which cost him his life) had not been predominant in
Charles; yet the interest of Flanders (to which Commerce with England was
necessary) did secure him. Scotland was in a condition not to be doubted, by
reason of the Truce which yet endured, of the quality of her present
Government, and her not being stirred up by France, for the most part the first
causer of her movings. At home he found himself freed of all such as might have
harmed him, who were come to their ends either by the Civil Sword, or by the
Hangman; wherein he was not sparing. Clemency and faith are banished when
Kingdoms are in question: and Kingdoms in contention shut the doors upon all
virtues as may cause alteration or suspect. The life of young Henry Earl of
Richmond was that alone which did molest him: he could not possibly live
content, and attend such pleasures as he was naturally given unto, so long as
this worm did gnaw upon his heart: he was the only remaining relike of the
House of Lancaster, likely enough to deprive him of his quiet and Kingdom,
should he not be taken from the world, whereby himself, his house and children
might live secure. He esteemed the good offices he had done the Duke of
Bretaigne with the King of France, sufficient to deserve such a favor: he sent
unto him three Ambassadors, the chief whereof was Doctor Stillington. They
desired the person of the Earl of Richmond in way of Honesty and affection,
concealing their cruelty and evil intentions: neither could they proceed
otherwise with Francis the ^econd Duke of Bretaigne, one of the best Princes
that Fame celebrated in those times. These made him believe that the King
desi^ous to abolish the enmity of the two Factions, and quiet such spirits as
were affectionate to the House of Lancaster, there was no more fitting means to
effect this, then by marrying the Kings eldest daughter to the forenamed Earl,
who was Heir to that House. They desired him to lend his helping hand to so
good a work, assuring him that as Bretaigne in former times had found no more
advantageous nor more faithful friendship then with England, so should she
find it every day more and more, by this obligation of delivering up the
person of this Prince. The Marriage did not at the first appear unto the Duke
to be the cause of this their so fervent desire; it did not correspond with
sense; 'twas a favor not to be expected from an enemy; especially since the
Earl himself had never been treated withal therein, nor had heard any news
thereof before: but they reiterating their desires, and adding to their
efficacy by a great sum of Gold which they presented him withal, he was
persuaded to let him go. But they were not well gone for S. Malo where they
intended to take Shipping, when the Duke, looking narrowlier into the
business, repented the surrender of him. Polydore says that John Chenlettes,
a very upright Gentleman, and therefore beloved of the Duke, was the cause of
this: Argentres says the same; but he says he finds it not in the Chronicles
of Bretaigne, nor knows he from whence Polydore Virgil has it. Chenlettes was
in the Country when he understood of the Ambassadors coming, and the delivery
of the Prince; so as zealous for his Masters honor, he hasted to him to lay
before him the blame he was likely to incur by having delivered up the Earl of
Richmond (after having received him into his protection) to his chiefest and
most cruel enemy: how that the obligations of assisting and giving
entertainment one to another was reciprocal amongst Princes; that many of his
Predecessors had in the like case been received in England and Flanders, and
had tasted the loyalty and nobleness of others in like manner as Richmond
ought to taste his; the which if he should not do, his reputation would thereby
receive so much the deeper stain, by how much his past-goodnesse and greatness
had been to all men known. The taking his Remonstrance in good part, answered,
that this his resolution could not redound to his blame, since the Earl was to
be the Kings sonin-law, and to be readmitted into all his possessions. Che^let
replied, He was deceived; for that the Ambassadors being sure he never would
have delivered him but upon fair terms, had made this pretense lest they might
have been gainsay'd: he told him he had given up the Lamb unto the Wolf, and
that he might be sure as soon as he was out of Bretaigne he should be miserably
put to death; since the King of England could not bear him any such affection
contrary to his own pretended end: That the King was not so simple as to marry
his daughter to an enemy who laid claim unto the Kingdom; nor was it likely he
could believe that* Affinity would root out Jealousies, but rather increase, so
as it would not make for him to nurse up this Adder in his bosom. The Duke
listened to these reasons, and finding them to be true, commanded Peter Landois
his Treasurer, who by chance was then present, to post after the Ambassadors,
and (come what come will) to bring back the Earl. He found them ready to imbark
themselves at S. Malo, and the Earl sick of a violent Fever occasioned by the
apprehension of his approaching death: He told them the Duke was surprised by
their request; that every honest man would blame him for it; that he could not
deliver unto them this Gentleman without a great stain to his reputation; that
therefore the Duke desired them they would be pleased he might put such Guards
upon him (the which he promised to do) as that he might not go out of that
Sanctuary whither by reason of their unadvisednesse he had had recourse (the
Earl had taken this Sanctuary by the secret means of Peter's servants) or that
if he did, he would put him in so safe a place as Edward should have no
occasion to fear him. The Ambassadors were not well pleased, after having
found him out, and paid for it, to lose both cost and labor. But they durst
not complain thereof; the Earls promised imprisonment being of more worth then
their charges. And though the King was thereat displeased, yet the belief he
gave to the Kings promise freed him of that suspicion, which likewise freed him
of all other trouble; so as according to his humor he gave himself up to all
familiarity; yea, sometimes with such as were far unfitting company for him. He
invited the Mayor and Aldermen of London a hunting; he ate and drank with them,
and at the same time presented their Wives with Venison and Wine, to the end
that they might likewise recreate themselves: the which though it relisht too
much of familiarity, yet was it not prejudicial, since used to such as might be
serviceable to him. As there is no better means to win upon men's affections
then affability; so when it falls into excess, it causes such a loathing as
quantity of meat causes to weak-stomacked people. He was not sparing of
himself to any whatsoever woman, he had three Concubines besides such by whom
he had had children: 'twas usually said when men would be bold with him, that,
the one of them was delightful, the other wild or fantastical; the third,
holy; who was so termed, because she could not be drawn from forth the Church,
but when sent for by him. But natures too much given to the pleasures of Sense,
are, if they be offended, bitter in resentment: For example; as he was hunting
in Warwick shire in the Park of one Thomas Burdet who was servant to his
Brother the Duke of Clarence, amongst many other Deer, he slew a white Buck
which Burdet made much account of, insomuch as (not knowing how otherwise to be
revenged) he wished the horns in the Kings belly. This wish was adjudged
Treason; and he, together with his white Buck, lost his head and all that he
had.

I must spend the year 1476 in the misfortunes of Charles Duke of Burgundy,
since England was then unemployed, and his affairs 1476
altered the face of business amongst Princes. Charles answerable to the
Agreement made with King Lewis, had received S. Quintines, Han, Bohaine, and
all the Constables moveable goods, together with the shame of having under
trust betrayed him: his brain full of vast designs, bore him to difficult
undertakings, which chewed by imaginary confidence, caused in him such evil
digestion as we shall see. His first wrath and the first expressions thereof
were against Renatus Duke of Lorrein; wherein succeeding luckily, as in the
taking of Nanci and the rest of that Duchy, he was blown up to fresh
undertakings. Because the Switzers had assaulted Burgundy, and had taken many
places under James Count de Romont Brother to the Duke of Savoy, whilst he was
at the siege of Nuz, he resolved at one and the same time to revenge his own
and the others injuries: nor could they pacify him, though they offered to
renounce all other Confederacies; namely, that of France; for the heavens
having ordained him to ruin, did obdurate him in the wilfulness of his
obstinate humors; making him deaf to all honorable and advantageous offers.
He entered their Country with Five thousand fighting men; he took Iverdon;
besieged Granson, where Four hundred Switzers of the Canton of Berne not able
to defend it, retired themselves into the Castle; they yielded it up, their
lives saved; but not observing the Agreement, Eighty of them were hanged, Two
hundred drowned, and the rest put to ransom, whilst Eighteen thousand of the
same Nation were come in unto their succor. The Duke taking it in disdain that
they durst raise their Colors against him set upon them forthwith; he lost the
Battle, his Artillery and Baggage, the particulars whereof were by him esteemed
at three Millions of Gold, in Tapistry, Silver vessels, and Jewels, which for
ostentation and pomps sake he had taken along with him. This was the first of
his three mortal misfortunate blows which (not being accustomed thereto) made
him fall sick: this sickness changed his constitution and nature; insomuch as
where before he drank nothing but water boiled, and used Conserve of Ros^ to
qualify his natural heat, his melancholy had now so much cooled him, that his
Physicians made him drink lusty Wines with out water, and applied
Cupping-glasses to his heart to heat hi^ and excite blood; but, what is most
remarkable, his Senses were hereat so weakened, as that his Judgment was
disquieted; so as the blow which would have infused understanding into any one
not totally void thereof, did not so to him who was become in capable of it.
Gathering therefore greater Forces, he went with Eighty thousand fighting men
to besiege Morat a Town not very great, some two leagues distant from Berne,
belonging to Cou^ Romont, but usurped by the Switzers. The Switzers came to the
succor thereof with Thirty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, accompanied
by the Duke of Lorrein; they gave Battle* and though the Dukes Artillery made
very great breaches upon their Battalions, yet did they not break not stop
thereupon; but making good the empty places, they passed on, cutting in piece
very many of his men, and making the rest either run away o^ drown themselves
in the Lake; the Duke with much ado saving himself. In my Travels through those
Countries, I have see^ the relics of that Victory. If my memory deceive me
not, there is upon the brink of the Lake a Chapel, near unto which lies a
great heap of dead men's bones; but there having perished in the Battle Eighteen
thousand, and as some will have it Two and twenty thousand, methought those
bones, though very many, were not answerable to so great a number. Here I was
like wise told, and the place was showed me where Charles on horseback swam
over the Lake, and where one of his Footmen fastening himself to his Masters
horses tail, as soon as he came ^n shore was by Charles slain for having
endangered his drowning, since 'twas sufficient for a horse to swim so far with
an armed man upon his back, without the dragging another at his tail. But I
meet not with this relation in any History. He retired himself to Rivieres upon
the confines of Burgundy, where he lived secretly six weeks, in which time the
Duke of Lorrein being come to the Siege of Nanci, the Town was surrendered to
him two days before Charles came thither, from whom they had demanded succor,
and expected his coming till the last minute. The Duke of Lorrein, who found
himself weak, would not contest with him; but leaving him to besiege the Town
again, retired himself for aid to the Switzers, from whom he had forthwith what
he desired: for King Lewis paid to him Forty thousand Franks for this end; and
many French came Volunteers to him: with this Army he came to S. Nicholas Two
Leagues distant from Nanci, in the coldest Winter-season that had been known
many years before. Charles his Army was in a very bad condition, and became yet
worse when the Count de Campo Basso, a Neopolitan, and of the Aniovin-Faction,
and therefore banished that Kingdom, had relinquished him, having had
intelligence long before with the Duke of Lorrein; but when he would with his
men have come over, the Switzers abhorring the assotiation of a Traitor, would
not admit of him. Charles seeing his affairs brought to so bad an exigent,
(contrary to his custom) listened after the opinion of others: he was advised
not to fight, since his men were few and no ways valiant, he not having, upon a
true Muster, Twelve hundred good men: they advised him to retire to
Pont-Mousson; since the Duke of Lorrein being only able to victual the Town
for a small time, and the Switzers being likely to depart for want of pay, he
might with a better choice of men return thither the next Spring. A most
excellent counsel, had he embraced it; but he would fight. The Conflict was
short; a handful of men wearied with a Siege, disheartened by former Defeats;
and by the present unadvisednesse the readier now again to be defeated; many of
them were cut in pieces, many fled away, and but few of them were saved: the
Duke endeavored to save himself, but was slain in his flight, wounded twice by
the Pike and once by the Halberd; he was rifled and left naked, not known by
any one save some-while after by a Page of his by certain private marks; for it
was impossible to know him by his face. The circumstances of this Defeat are at
large set down by Commines and the French Writers, to whom I refer my self. I
may perchance touch upon something again in its proper place, whilst returning
for the present to our Story, we shall meet with a Tragical adventure, no
less strange nor compassionate then what we have but now heard.

The Duke of Clarence, second brother to King Edward, a Prince of greater
spirit then did become a brother and a subject, 1477
ended his days in the Tower, leaving it to dispute whether his death were
occasioned through his own default, or through the Malice of his enemies: for
though he were condemned by ordinary course of Justice, yet was there not any
one full fault found in him; so as it was thought there was nothing of Justice
in it more then the name; and that Malice was indeed that which took away his
life. Three things were of most consideration in this affair: The Kings
Suspicion, The Queens Hatred and Suspicion, and His own Fault, which was not
sufficient to have condemned him, had it not been for the former Two. His
having rebelled, made Confederacy with the Earl of Warwick; and contracted
Alliance with him, to bereave his brother of the Kingdom, were faults which
though they were old, and freely forgotten, 'twas feared that his old
inclinations, laid aside more in respect of his own concernment then out of
reason or love to his brother, might be reassumed by him, and he thereunto
provoked by pretense of the Agreement made at Paris, that he should succeed
unto the Crown, if Henry the sixth his Heirs should fail, as already they had
done. This consideration wounded the Queen to the very soul; she thought that
if her husband should die before her, her children should not succeed to their
father: she was confirmed in this opinion by a Prophecy I know not how
divulged, That G should be the first letter of his name that should succeed
Edward; and the Duke of Clarence his name being George, 'twas thought he should
be the Butcherer of Edwards sons, which Gloucester afterward proved to be.
With such like equivocations does the devil delude our simplicity, if it be
granted that he knows any thing of what is to come. To these were other reasons
added which made the former the more suspected: his having pretended to marry
Mary the only daughter to the late Duke of Burgundy; and indeed he had written
to that effect to the Dowager Duchess who was mother-in-law to the said Mary:
but the Queen crossed him therein, and did what in her lay to have her married
to her brother the Earl Rivers: so as their distastes and the Kings jealousies
were augmented: But the imputations which gave some color to the justification
of this his death, were, That he caused a rumor to be raised among the people
that Thomas Burdet was unjustly put to death; That the King used Necromancy and
Poison, to bring such as he hated to their ends; That Edward was a Bastard, and
not begotten by the Duke of York; That he had procured many to swear obedience
to him and his Heirs, not reserving the due obedience he ought unto his
Brother; and That he had pretended to the Crown by virtue of the Contract made
with Henry the sixth.

These Accusations being brought into the Parliament, and by 1478
the Parliament judged guilty thereof, he was condemned to die; and chose, as
the easiest death, to be drowned in a Butt of Malmsey. But howsoever, 'twas
generally thought that the malice of his enemies, the Queens and her kinreds
fears, and the Kings jealousy, were the causes of his so miserable end: of the
which Edward did afterward repent, insomuch as when he pardoned the life of
any at the importunacie of some one or other, he was wont to say, O my
unfortunate brother, that had not any to intercede for him! He left behind him
two children born unto him by the Earl of Warwick daughter; Edward Earl of
Warwicks, and Margaret Countess of Salisbury; both of them born under the like
unfortunate Constellation; for He lost his head in Henry the sevenths time, She
hers, in Henry the eights.

King Lewis, when Charles was dead, thought to make himself master of those
States; believing he could not meet with any obstacle, since all the men of War
were almost slain in the three Battles of Granson, Morat, and Nanci: neither
had he been deceived, if he had persisted in his resolution of marrying that
Princess to the Dolphine his son; of working upon her Counselors by gifts,
promises, and additions of Honors; and of winning the peoples good will by
feeding them with hopes of being well treated: but his thirsting after this
Conquest (which to him appeared easy) diverted him from the means of coming by
it lawfully, and was the ruin if not of all, yet of his most principal
designs. Abbeville was the first City which fell into his hands, but as of
right belonging unto him, being one of those which were to be surrendered to
him after Charles his death. Han, Bohin, S. Quintines, and Peron, out of the
same reason, did the like. Arras was by agreement delivered up unto him.
He^ine, Bullein and Doway yielded themselves. All this progress of affairs
appertained to Picardy. In Burgundy he employed the Prince of Orange (a man of
great power in those parts) and Monsieur de Cran with a distinct Army, who in a
few days brought the County and Duchy to his obedience: Neither did he pretend
usurpation in this; the Duchy was the Patrimony of the Crown; given in
Fee-farm to Philip the bold, by his father John the second, King of France,
upon condition it should revert again unto the Crown in default of Issue male:
such Grants not falling (according to the French phrase) unto the Distaff. And
he had some pretenses to the County, though not from the Crown. The Infant
Princess seeing her self thus hardly dealt withal, all her Embassies,
Supplications and Submissions nothing availing her, she sent a Dispatch into
England to show to Edward what prejudice he suffered by having the King of
France so near him, possessed of Abbeville, Bullein, Hedine, Arras, and other
places upon the Sea near Callice, and in the face of England. But though in all
reason he ought to have assisted her, his private interest made him
notwithstanding be a Spectator of all those ruins without budging: his
Counselors being almost all of them Pensioners to Lewis, preferred private
interest before all reason of State. Edward (though) sent Ambassadors to
mediate that no more harm might be done; a very good means certainly, before a
Prince has put on a resolution of War; but as ridiculous as unprofitable
without a man's sword in his hand. The hopes of marrying his daughter, the Fifty
thousand Crowns which were ready to be paid, and his chief men being won by
Pensions, were the obstacles which withstood all good Resolves. Lewis received
the Ambassadors courteously, and was bountiful to them at their going away; so
sent them away without any answer, the which, he said, he would send by
Ambassadors of his own, who a good while after were sent with directions to
spin out the business, upon pretenses of having no Instructions; working by
this means his own desired ends, and hindering Edward from doing (had he been
so disposed) what he ought to have done: and though many free from corruption
advised him to the contrary, showing the damage he thereby received without any
hopes of advantage; (for if Lewis had any mind to make the Marriage; he would
have sent for the Princess away, after the first year, according to the Treaty
sworn at Picquigny, diverse years being now past, and she not sent for) yet were
they not listened unto. Any the least obstacle (to boot with the defense made by
the Infant Princess) would have been sufficient to have made Lewis keep within
his own Precincts; and if nothing else, his unwillingnesse to see the English
in France, would have slackned his proceedings; and though he invited Edward to
pass over into Flanders, whilst he busied himself elsewhere, and seemed to be
content that the English might win Flanders and Brahant for themselves; he did
it for that he was sure, by reason of the many strong places that were there,
they would make but a slow and costly progress: and when Edward seemed to
accept of this invitation, if in stead of such places as he should win in
Flanders Lewis would deliver unto him those he had won in Picardy (namely
Bullein) no more was heard of the business. Edward would willingly have
assisted the Princess if she would have married the Earl Rivers brother to his
wife; and she needing assistance, would have married him; but the disparity of
their conditions would not permit her Counselors to suffer her so to do: so as
Lewis found none that crossed his Fortunes, nor she any that would assist her in
her misery, which made her conclude the Match with the Archduke Maximilian son
to the Emperor Frederick the third, not listening to any other that was
propounded to her: not to that of the Dolphine, for that he was but nine years
old, and she twenty or one and twenty; and for that she hated his father: not
to that of Charles Count d'Angoulesme (who was afterward father to Francis the
first) because Lewis would not consent thereunto, being jealous of the Princes
of the bloods power: not to that of the Prince of Cleve, because she liked him
not.

Edward had this mean while prodigiously altered his nature: from being affable
and liberal, he became austere and a varitious, 1479
to the great wonder and worse satisfaction of his people. The Laws of England
grant many things in favor of their Kings (as their penal Laws) which the
Kings themselves make no use of, as being too full of rigor. He by virtue of
those Laws took such penalties as those that were rich fell into by their not
punctual observance of them: and making no difference neither in respect of
Blood, Quality, or Title, he put the Kingdom into a great fright, making them
believe he would become formidable: for having abated the courage of other men
by his Brothers death, there was not any one that durst contradict him. But the
greedy heaping up of Money, which he used was so much the more monstrous in
him, by how much it was contrary to the constitution of his nature: so as such
a change showed his death to be at hand.

Ambassadors were frequently sent from England to France, 1480
and from France to England: the former, that according to their Obligation,
the French might send for the betrothed Princess; the others, to excuse their
delay, laying it upon the Wars of Burgundy and the Low Countries, in the which
all the principal men of the Kingdom being employed, she could not be sent for
in manner becoming the dignity and greatness of both the Crowns: so as he who
earnestly desires a thing, is by nothing more easily deceived then by the
confirmation of new promises; Edward did easily believe, and Lewis made
advantage of his falsehood, and brought about his ends without contradiction:
which had he carried the business otherwise, he could not have done. But he
who says the English have won more honor by Fighting then by their Treaties,
says not amiss; for they are more aptly disposed to the former.

At this time did James the third reign in Scotland; who coming 1481
to the Crown at seven years of age, met with lewd education and most villainous
corrupters; so as not being wicked of himself, but made so by them, as he grew
in years, he increased in his lusts, cruelties and rapine, and rewarding the
authors of his Disorders by the sale of Goods belonging to the Church, he
purchased the hatred of his Nobility, and of his whole Kingdom. From these his
excesses he did not exempt his own Family: he dealt badly with his brother, and
incestuously violated his youngest sister: he let slip the opportunity he had
to trouble England, it being divided within it self, and was himself vexed by
his subjects; the worm of conscience not working upon him in the cessation of
his Rebellions, not yet the fear of such pains as Heaven inflicts for
punishment upon incorrigible sinners. Tthese things for what concerned him: And
for what concerned Edward, his jealousies of the Lancastrian Faction, caused
their peaceful living together, even from the very beginning of their Reigns,
through a Truce of Fifteen years: but the Truce being now well-nigh expired, and
James having put one of his brothers to death, and imprisoned the other, which
was the Duke of Aubeny, thinking he could not defend himself against his
domestic enemies without fastening himself to strangers, he was desirous to
interest Edward in the conservation of his Dignity and Person. To this purpose
he demanded Cicely Edwards second daughter for wife to his son James Prince of
Scotland; and he obtained it with this Condition, That though the Marriage
could not yet be consummated (both of them being children) Edward should pay
down part of the portion; for the repayment of which, in case the Marriage
should not go on, he had the chiefest Merchants of Edenborough bound. The King
of Scotland thought himself now to be safe by this shadowie Alliance; but the
Duke of Aubeny having escaped out of prison by means of a Cord made of linen,
and made his Addresses to Lewis; who would not receive him (for he held some
secret Intelligence with James against Edward) he passed over into England;
where having represented the King his brothers general injustice, to make him
appear wicked, and his particular injustice to his brothers, to make his
wickedness appear unnatural and cruel: he prayed aid of Edward; and his
entreaties were made the more efficacious, being accompanied by those of James
Douglas (who was likewise a banished man) which moved the King to wage War with
him; whereunto he could not have been persuaded, had not King James himself
given him the occasion.

Lewis, who, having covenanted another Match for the Dolphin, thought Edward
could not choose but be revenged; endeavored to divert him, by making the King
of Scotland engage him in a War; and the King of Scotland persuaded thereunto
either by hopes, or Moneys, or both, violated his late-made Affinity and Peace,
not regarding the injustice and dishonor of the action, nor yet the danger he
put himself into, he being so detested both by God and man, and not able to
raise Forces without the assistance of his Country; yet affying more in France
then he had reason to do, he did what of himself he was able, to please Lewis.
He sent some Troops to make Inrodes upon the Confines of England, which did
rather provoke then harm the enemy: so as Edward finding himself enforced and
offended on the one side, and humbly entreated on the other side, he raised a
powerful Army, and sent it into Scotland under the command of his brother the
Duke of Gloucester. King James had not the like ability to resist as he had to
irritate; for being abused by the flatteries of three wicked personages who had
drawn upon him the general hatred of all men, he durst not gather the whole
Nobility into a Body, lest being united they might take some strange resolution
against him. Necessity, notwithstanding, constrained him to summon them and
raise an Army, not altering though the form of his Government; for mistrusting
all the rest, he made use only of the Counsels of his forenamed flatterers,
not calling his Nobility to any Counsel or Deliberation: an indignity which
they not able to endure, they met together a little after midnight in a Church,
where, being persuaded by Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, they would have the
first War made against these men, as those that were their Countries most
dangerous enemies: and had not the wiser sort moderated the more hasty, the
King might have run hazard in his own person. The chiefest of them went toward
the Court not making any noise, followed only by as many as might serve to do
the business. The King was advertised of this Meeting at the same time 'twas
made; so as rising up hastily to see what was to be done, he sent Robert
Cockeran one of the Triumviri, to make discovery; but being met by them, they
detained him, set a Guard upon him, and passed on to the Court, and to the
Kings Chamber, seizing without any manner of resistance upon all such as were
about the King, except John Ramsey for whom the King interceded, and who being
very young, was not polluted with their enormities: The rest were led into the
Camp, where (the Army crying out that they might be put to death) they were all
hanged without any legal proceeding; and not having any Ropes in readiness for
so sudden an execution, each man strove to make offer of his horses halter or
reins; and those whose offers were entertained, thought themselves much
honored thereby. This business bred such a difference between the King and
his subjects, as each of them retired themselves to their own homes, not
thinking any longer to defend the Kingdom: and the King, with some few others,
did to little purpose shut themselves up in the Castle of Edenborough: for had
they been evilly minded toward him, they would have taken him in the Lander,
the place where this business happened.

The Summer was well advanced before the Duke of Gloucester entered Scotland; he
laid siege to the Castle of Berwick defended 1482
by the Earl Bodwel, the Town having yielded to him without resistance: he
would not lose the season by staying there himself, but environing it with Four
thousand fighting men, he passed forwards to Edenborough, not permitting
(through the Duke of Aubeney's desires) any harm to be done there; a contrary
course to what had been formerly taken: and because it was impossible to treat
with King James, who did not suffer any one to come into the Castle, he made a
public Proclamation to be made in the chief Market place by Garter King at
Arms, that if he would not make good to Edward what under his hand he was by
agreement obliged unto; if he did not before September next make satisfaction
for the damages and injuries done to England; and did not put the Duke of
Aubeny in his former condition without the diminishing of his Possessions,
Authority, or Offices, he would put his whole Kingdom to fire and sword. But
the King returning no Answer, neither by message nor writing, being equally
unfit either to give satisfaction or make resistance; the Nobles (who had
encamped themselves at Haddington with a great number of men) being abandoned
by the King, and not willing to abandon themselves and Country, sent
Ambassadors to the Duke of Gloucester, offering, for what belonged to them, to
effect the Marriage, and requiring the like of him: promising that it should
not fail on their sides, if all the Articles agreed upon were not put in
execution, and an inviolable Peace for the time to come were not made between
the two Kingdoms. To the which Gloucester answered, that the Match was broken
by means contrary to the end for which it was made: That he did not know the
King his brothers intentions, and whether he was not resolved (as he had good
cause) not to think any more of it: That his Instructions were, To demand
restitution of the Moneys, the which he did, requiring speedy payment: for what
concerned the Peace, That it was not to be had, unless they would promise to
deliver up unto him the Castle of Berwick, or unless in case they could not do
it, they would oblige themselves not to assist the besieged, nor molest the
besiegers, till such time as it were either taken or surrendered. These Demands
seemed very hard to the Scots. They answered; The cause why the Marriage was
not effected, was by reason of the young couples years, not through any default
of theirs: That the Moneys could not justly be demanded, the time of repayment
being not yet come: That if the security given in for the repayment of them did
not suffice, they would give in other: That Berwick was situated upon the very
Bound of Scotland, built by the Scots, and by just Title always possessed by
them; nor was their claim thereunto the weaker because the English had made
themselves Masters of it, since violence does not prejudice the right of a just
ancient, natural and primary possession. But the Duke of Aubeny put an end to
all these differences; for Gloucester permitting him to go into the Scottish
Camp, and the Lords there promising him that if he would submit himself to the
King, they would procure his pardon, and the restitution of all his goods; he
was declared, under the King, Lord Lieutenant of the Kingdom; and it was
resolved (though not without much opposition) that the Castle of Berwick should
be surrendered; and a Truce for certain months was agreed upon, to the end that
the Peace might be treated on without disturbance o^ hostility; so as the Duke
of Gloucester having recovered Berwick One and twenty years after Henry the
sixth had given it to the Scots, he retired himself to Newcastle, where he
expected directions from his brother: who having weighed the concernment of
this Match, the Kings decaying condition, the danger he was in of being deposed
(he being hated, and the Duke of Aubeny beloved) he demanded his Moneys, which
were forthwith paid him, leaving Scotland to its turmoils, the which though
the Duke of Aubeny did sincerely endeavor to quiet, by remitting the King his
brother to the plenary possession of his Kingdom, yet could he not reconcile
the King unto him. For if the remembrance of injuries be never to be forgotten
by men of perverse natures, good turns are the more easily forgotten:
ingratitude being an enemy to all Christian and Moral virtues. King James his
mind was so contaminated and depraved, as it would not suffer him to think
well of his brother, though the effects demonstrated the contrary; nay, he was
likely to have made him follow his other brother, had he not by his friends
been advertised thereof, which made him flee into England; from whence (having
delivered up to Edward the Castle of Dunbarre) he went to France, where running
at Tilt with the Duke of Orleans (who was afterward Lewis the twelfth) he was
unfortunately slain by the splinter of a Lance which wounded him through the
sight-hole of his Helmet.

Edward had long suffered Lewis to take his advantage not only 1483
in such parts of the Heir of Burgundy's Country as were far distant from him,
but even in those which were near to Callice; permitting him, contrary to all
reason of State, to make himself master of Bullein, and other Forts upon the
Sea, only out of the hopes of his Daughters marriage: but growing too late
suspicious of it, he sent the Lord Howard to France to sift out the truth: who
though he saw the solemn receiving of Margaret, Daughter to the late heir of
Burgondy, and Maximilian of Austria; and saw her married to the Dolphin in
Amboyse, yet when he took his leave, Lewis according to his wonted
dissimulation, confirmed unto him his former promises, as if a new match
contracted with all the Church-Ceremonies and the Bride in the house did not
prejudice the former, so as being returned to England he truly related the
difference of what his Eyes saw and Lewis told him. Lewis had handled this
match according to his wonted craft not seeming to be therein obliged to those
of Gaunt, who had concluded it maugre their Prince, the Brides Father, and they
did it willingly; for taking from him the Counties of Artois, Burgondy, and
Carolois, the Counties of Macon, and Auxorres, which they gave in portion to
the Dolphin, they made him the less able to offend them; they would likewise,
if they could, have given him Hainault and Namours, not considering that these
Provinces in the hands of so great a King were like to form the chain of
their servitude. But Fortune favored them beyond all expectation; for this
marriage so advantageous for that Kingdom was together with the Bride, yet a
Virgin, not many Years after, renounced by Charles the eight, that he might
take to Wife Anne the Daughter and Heir of Francis Duke of Britaigne, and
thereby to possess himself of that Dukedom: and the aforenamed Margaret,
borne under an unhappy constellation for matter of Husbands, was in a very
short time Widow to three; To Charles who did yet live, and to two others who
died; John Prince of Aragon, who lived not many months; and Philibert the 8th
Duke of Savoy who within a few Years dyed; so as she had no issue by any of
them.

Edward was so sensible of this his great abuse as that he resolved on revenge:
every one with cheerfulness provided for War; the Clergy supplied in moneys
what they could not do in person: but whilst he was taking order for so
important an expedition, he fell sick being suddenly struck with a great
melancholy (others say of a Surfeit) and knowing he could not live he caused
all the Lords to be sent for to him, who by reason of the intended War, were
then in great number at Court. He recommended to them the young Princes his
Sons and together with them Peace; showing them that being young they would
need good Counselors, which in the distraction of private contentions would
hardly be found; that they having all a relation unto him, some by blood, some
by affinity, all by good will and duty, they were to join in a reciprocal
love one toward another, to the end that the conformity of their minds might
beget the like in their actions, and in their ends, necessarily conducing to
the service of an infant King, to the good of the Kingdom, and to the peace
and quietness which he did chiefly desire amongst them; he put them in mind
of the evils caused through civil dissensions; he desired God of his
goodness that no such might be hereafter, but that this favor was not to be
hoped for without the forgiving of past injuries which made him in the name of
the same God, and as the last comfort he should receive, desire of them all
forgiveness of any injuries done by him. All that were present wept; and those
who bare more rancour one to an other then did the rest, shook hands in token
of their last obedience due unto him even to the last minute of his Life: so as
satisfied with this their outward expression (their inward minds unknown) he
died the ninth of April 1483, in the 41 Year of his Life, having Reigned 22
Years one month and five days: and was buried in a Chapel, built by him at
Windsor.

He was a Prince who could not have had his like had he not been vitiated with
the contagion of civil factions; the gifts of mind and nature strove for
priority in him: He was of all men the handsomest; and of all fortunate men the
most valiant: having in as many Battles as he fought always had the Victory.
He had by his Wife three Sons and eight Daughters: his third Son dyed an
Infant; we shall shortly hear of the compassionable end of the other two. Of
his Daughters; Elizabeth was married to Henry the Seventh Cecily to Viscount
Wells and after to another, but had issue by neither: Anne, to Thomas Howard
Duke of Norfolk, whose children dyed all young. Bridget was a Nun in Dartford;
Mary promised to the King of Denmark, dyed before the Marriage; Margaret dyed
young. Catharine was married to William Courtney Earl of Devonshire, to whom
she bare Henry Marquess of Exeter, and he had Edward E. of Devonshire, who
died without issue in Padua the Year 1556; and Elizabeth dyed young. Besides
these his legitimate children, he left behind, two Bastards, Arthur
Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, and Elizabeth; Arthur had three Daughters: and of
Elizabeth is come the L. Lomley.

The end of Edward the Fourths Life.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND In the Life of Edward the
Fifth.
I Now should write the Life of Edward the Fifth, Son to the last deceased King,
as I have done the Lives of the rest; but he being taken from this World in
less then three Months, by such cruelty, as greater has not been heard off,
I have not whereout to frame a History: in lieu thereof, I will write the Duke
of Gloucester his wickednesses, which are such as may raise a doubt, whether
cruelty be an habit of Nature in man, or rather a raging fury: since Nature in
her operations does nothing in vain; and such Beasts as live not by Rapine,
kill not other beasts for Preyes sake, as he to devour the Kingdom slew his
Nephews. But considering that there is not any Creature which is not in some
sort addicted to this vice, I believe it proceeds from two causes, the one
useful and necessary which is Selfe-defence, and wherein habit consists; the
other vain and harmefull, which is the coveting of superiority (a passion more
prevalent in men then in other creatures) and this is fury; whence if the World
were void of ambition, or other differing qualities, it is not thereout to be
averred that the strongest would not insult upon the weaker, as always they
have done: the which being manifest, bruit beasts declaring it by their
examples, it is much more proved so to be when we take into consideration the
inaequality of Fortune and Honor.

Many were the causes of the cruelty whereof we are to treat, since practiced
in sundry manners; (War not cast into the account) To kill Beasts, to punish
Malefactors, are permitted and commanded by the rules of Government; but what
arises from private hatred, is by the Laws condemned, though through the
corruption of affection, or frailty of humor, executed by men. Butchers and
Hunters kill cattle, and wild beasts; which should they not do, the beasts
would devour us; and through the great increase of beasts, and their
destroying of the ground, we might be famished: did not the Executioner put a
period to the lives of such as are condemned, our lives and livelyhoods would
lie at the mercy of evil livers. But the enemy which kills his enemy, though,
in it self considered, the fact be inexcusable, rests yet excused. Sudden
chances, puntillioes of honor, and injuries for which satisfaction is not to
be given, do so far incense men, as humane nature may seem somewhat to
Analogize with cruelty; since though it be absolutely to be abhorred, it is not
absolutely condemned. Now that Richard Duke of Gloucester a Prince by birth, an
uncle by nature, and by the Laws a protector, should become the Butcher, the
hangman, the enemy of Edward the Fifth, and of his Brother, being his Nephews,
is yet somewhat more; which not falling under the capacity of humane fury
befell him having disrobed himself of humanity and nature. Of all execrable
examples he is the only one without parallel. All cruelties mentioned of the
Ancients are, in comparison of his, mere inventions, not true events. Nature
in the framing of such subjects does usually transgress her ordinary rules; to
put a difference between them and others; to the end that having set a mark
upon them, we may the better know how to be aware of them; she allots them
awkward and disproportioned shapes, thereby intimating unto us that being
crooked and falsely shaped, their works are false, and their inclinations
crooked. This Richard came into the World with his feet forward, his Mother was
cut up, yet outlived him: she brought him forth deformed; insomuch as, his
brethren being the handsomest and most comely men of that age, he was the most
misshapen that those times produced. He had a cloudy and a despitfull
countenance; he was of a low Stature, one of his shoulders was greater then the
other; he was malicious, envious, injurious, neither had he any just
proportion, save what was from his Extrinsecall to his Internal, so as if a
man would have judged of him by the rules of physiognomy, he could not judge
amiss if he judged bad enough. For what remains, he was valiant, advised,
bold, courageous; praiseworthy qualities, but not in him: since he made no use
of them to good ends, but to make his wickedness the greater and more
efficacious. It is not, as I believe, to be denied that all bad actions spring
from two wicked Mothers, Malice, and Ignorance: wicked actions from malice;
from ignorance, such as are common to the simpler sort of people: a difference
so much the more to be bemoaned, as that malice increasing by years, and
ignorance decreasing, the evil which is caused by the increase of the One, is
more detestable, then is the good advantageous which we receive by the decrease
of the other: the evil extending it self to objects which are infinite, the
good confining it self to the agent which is an individual. Had Richards
actions taken their source from both these, so as a mixed composition might have
been made of them, they might in some sort have been tolerable; but being
occasioned merely through malice, they were so abominable, as being augmented
not only by process of time, but by his thirst after Government they arri^ed
at such a height of wickedness as was not to be outdone. When his brother
died, he was in the Northern parts of the Kingdom: it is not known whether
his desire of usurping the Kingdom sprung up then in him, or whether he was
possessed with it before. Those who believe him to have been formerly possessed
therewith, allege for their opinion the death of Henry the sixth, and of the
Duke of Clarence; accusing him to be both the Promoter and Executioner of the
former, since King Edward was never minded to put him to death, which had he
been, he might have found other instruments enough, without making use of his
brother. They verify this for that he boasted by means of this parricide he
had settled the Crown upon the house of York; for he imagined there was no
more left of the house of Lancaster; either for that the Earl of Richmond was
only of that house by the mothers side, or else that being out of the
Kingdom, and in custody, no account was to be made of him. It is certain had
he not formerly had this design, he would not have been the butcher of a
King, to settle the succession only upon Edwards Sons; since Edward himself
dreamed not of it, who was sufficiently secure of Henry by his imprisonment,
and his having no issue: his fears rose not from him, but from the Earl of
Richmond. Richard, on the other side feared not the absent Earl, but Henry who
was present and had been King. Should he have kept him alive, to have killed
him at the same time he killed his Nephews, his scandal would have been the
greater: and should he not have killed him, he might have been
re-established. Things which all of them might succeed, his brothers disorders
foretokening his death to be at hand. It Is related, that Edward being dead by
night, a certain man ran presently to a friend of his, who was a servant of
Richards, to give him notice of it: who answered; if Edward was dead, his
master Richard would be King: which it is not likely he would have said, had he
not had some inkeling of the design. In Clarence his Death it is thought that
whilst he seemed to favor him, he wrought all he could under hand that he
might die. It Is clear, that when he was condemned he should have procured his
Pardon, and did not: which caused Edward in vain afterward to complain, that
others had such as would intercede for their Lives, but His poor Brother could
find none to mediate for his: so as to meet with the truth, I think it is best
to judge the worst. The cunning of all other Architects, who might perhaps have
omitted some One thing which he did not, would not, have sufficed to have
perfected so difficult a building; rather he being so excellent in doing
evil, it had been a wonder if he had not done it.

For his Ambition being thereby to be satisfied as well as his Cruelty (the
springs from whence did flow his other vices) should he have refused it, men
might have thought the soul of Socrates had been transmigrated into his body;
since that Socrates being naturally given to all vices, abstained from thence
merely out of the Love of virtue; which was not reason sufficient to make Him
to abstain from vice, though, being borne a Christian, he might better do it
then Socrates: for Evangelicall virtues, as they are more excellent, so do they
more incite to well-doing then Moral; but these transmigrations being but
fables, and he, if not altogether abandoned by his good Genius, at least not
sufficiently admonished thereby, as was Socrates, it is no wonder if he dyed
the same that he was borne; who never took delight in any thing but in the
plotting of mischief: nay it had been less trouble to Him to have fought
against whatsoever well armed enemy, then to have withstood the weakest of his
lewd inclinations.

Many were the difficulties which in this business were to be overcome; the
means two: Cruelty, and Infamy. Through Cruelty he was to put his Nephews to
Death, neither was that All: their Sisters were yet to succeed before him; and
two others; the Son and daughter of the Duke of Clarence; which forced him
upon Infamy. To attain to the uppermost Roonge of the Ladder of Government, he
must at one leap get thither from the Nethermost: he being the lowest Roonge,
and Eight at the least being before him, besides Bridget the Nun at Dartford.
But in wickedness there is no difficulty which may not be overcome by Him, who
having Power and Malice, has not Honor nor Conscience to restrain him. He
at first resolved to govern himself according to the Fable: the Wolf could
not hope to get the flock into his power, did he nor first possess himself of
the Dogs which were its defense. The King before his Death had sent Prince
Edward into Wales, to the end that his presence might reduce that people to
their duties, which though they were not Rebels, were yet grown to such
disobedience as that their Governors and Magistrates were not able to
suppress the great dissensions and Robberies there committed: the disorders of
the late War had put them so far out of Tune; that by how much they were
farther from the King, they were the like, from Remedy. The Sun beats not
with like force upon the Poles, as it does upon the Zones which Neighbor upon
his beams. A wise foresight. For Wales being very affectionate to the title of
their Principality (a memory of their ancient Liberty and Dominion) showed such
obedience at the coming of their Prince, though but a Child, as they had not
formerly done to their ancient Magistrates. The King had appointed to him for
his Governor, his Uncle, the Earl Rivers, Brother to the Queen, a wise and
valiant man; he had likewise given him for his attendants almost none save such
as were of Her kindred; to the end that when he should die, she, by their
assistance, might the better preserve her self against the Dukes authority and
force. A wise foresight too; but which succeeded ill: for this extraordinary
preferment, as it made them be hated and envied, so was it the cause of their
Ruin. The Queen and her Brother Rivers had declared themselves enemies to the
Lord Chamberlain Hastings: the Queen reputing him to be an instrument of her
Husbands disorders; and Rivers, for that the King having promised unto him the
Governors place of Callice, had recalled his word, to bestow it upon Hastings:
so as Edward doubting least these distastes might breed an ill effect in his
Sons service (though not the very bad one which it did produce) did on his
Deathbed make that exhortation to Peace which has been said; at the which
(Rivers, who was gone with the Prince into Wales, not being present) the
Marquess, Dorset Son to the Queen by the first Husband, did in his Unkles
behalf shake hands with Hastings: both parties having the same end in this
Act, which was to satisfy the King, but not to make a real friendship: for
Hatred had taken formerly so great a rooting, as there was no place left for
true Friendship.

All these things made for Glocesters designs; wherein not likely to prosper
but by their ruin (since in process of time 'twas likely they would be
equally His enemies) he thought that by seting them together by the ears they
would undo one another, and that the one of them being borne down would make
way to the others overthrow. But the sequel showed; that such fabrics of
Government as are grounded on machinations, are for the most part ruinous. And
if there were no other proof of this: to live free from suspicion and to
secure ones self from successive contentions, within the Haven of a quiet
life, ought to weigh against whatsoever Ambition or Avarice can produce: since
They afford us nothing but injustice, and the more they be practiced, the
farther are they from God and Nature, whose chiefest Law is the Peoples Safety:
and if humane mutability enamored on fantastical opinions has caused an
ear to be lent to such as maliciously and ignorantly have taught the contrary,
consider that the Idea propounded by these Doctors is of such Princes as have
come to ill ends, not any one of them, by their rules, having had good
success. I know that this my opinion will not be embraced by Many; it will
suffice me if by a Few, so they be Good: and if any man do believe the World
is not to be governed by Philosophy; let him observe that Usurpation and
Tyranny are the Foldes or Plyes of a more intricate philosophy: and as the
First, arising from God and Nature, does by the means of Justice and other
virtues lead us to live happily; so the Second procreated by Force and Pride,
promise nothing to us but perturbations; Injustice and her attendants producing
only such effects as are conformable to themselves.

The Duke might easily contrive his design considering the hatred the chiefest
Lords bare to the Queens kindred, so as treating thereof with those that were
present, and communicating his mind by writing to those that were absent, he
showed them, How that the dangers were remediless if the Kings tender years
were to be governed by those people: that all Honors and places of Account
would be conferred on them: that Their authority would eclipse the authority
of all other men; especially if the Son, resembling his Father, (as by some
signs already in him might be imagined he would) should suffer himself to be
governed by Them; so as in stead of One King they should have many: that old
injuries are not apt to be forgotten: that by the increase of authority
remembrance thereof would be increased; and that they would pretend offense if
they were not more observed then formerly: that the consideration of the
Queens no so great blood (being only made worthy of that degree, because the
King would have it so) had not made them any whit the less proud; the rather
being come to the height of their presumptions, (while the King should be at
their disposal) they would become insufferable: they would cloak their
covetousness with the Royal Robe; and the Crown, which the King wore only
for show, served really to honor Them to the shame of Nobility, and Scorn of
the Blood-Royall; and though their Birth and the Laws did less privilege
Them then Others, (there being so many Lords both by Descent and Desert
worthyer then They) yet their unlawful Authority was likely to cause such
mischief, as the deepest wisdom would not be able to Prevent it, if they were
suffered to continue in the same posture they now were in with the King.
Whether these persuasions took effect as being apparently useful, or for that
Envy was the cause thereof I know not: The first that were hereunto persuaded,
was the Duke of Buckingham and Hastings the Lord Chamberlain; who, though they
were not very great Friends, the likelier were they to join in Enmity against
the Others.

They resolved to remove them from about the King; if they could find no other
pretense (as none other they had) to declare: that being their enemies they
could not suffer them to be about His Majesty without apparent danger to their
Own persons. They, this mean while ignorant of their Practices put themselves
in order to bring the King up to London: and, to the end that his train might
be answerable to his Regal dignity, they got together a great many men.
Whereat the Duke of Gloucester doubting, that if he should come so attended
on, he should not without noise be able to effect his wickedness; he found
means whereby to represent unto the Queen, That so great an Assembly of men
would be dangerous: For the King not needing them, it would stir up jealousy
in such, who formerly having had some difference with those of Her blood might
believe it to be done against Them: since the King, by reason of his tender
Years not being like ly to be the Author of it, it would be attributed to
those that were about him; and it would be believed that they did yet retain
the hatred pretended to be washed away at his Fathers death: that her son was
to meet with no oppositions; for all the Lords strove who should show him most
affection and obedience: so as to appear armed and in an awful manner, would,
together with the memory of ancient fewdes, raise so great jealousies, as those
who could not think themselves safe, would take up Arms, and disturb the
Peace: the which if at all times it be to be desired, certainly it is chiefly
to be coveted in the succession of an Infant King. These reasons seemed good
unto the Queen who discovered not the venom thereof. Whereupon she wrote to
her Brother, exhorting him to cashire all the armed extraordinary attendants,
and that he should come along only with her sons Household servants, thereby
to shun the raising of suspicion in such, who having had reason formerly to
hate him, would now have cause to accuse him, as one Seditious and of small
Trust. These admonitions wrought the effect which Gloucester desired: and so
much the rather, for that he having written with all manner of Submission to
the King, and in most affectionate terms of Friendship to Rivers, it wrought
so as they took their journey without Arms or extraordinary Retinew,
directing their course toward Northampton; where they were met by Himself,
Buckingham, and a great many Lords; and pretending they should be incommodated
for scarcity of Lodgings if they should keep all together there; they made the
King go twelve miles farther toward London, to Stony-Stratford; but the two
Dukes stay^d behind; and under pretense of Honor kept with them Earl Rivers,
and Feasted him with such demonstrations of Joy, as, not being usual, he
might easily have discovered the deceit, had he not been betrayed by the
blind folded good opinion he had of Himself. When he was gone to his Lodging
to rest all night, the two Dukes caused the Keys of the City to be brought to
them, to the end that no man might get out: They slept little, spending the
greatest part of the Night in counsel and advise: they rose early, and sent to
all the Villages thereabouts, where their servants were billeted, willing them
to be ready on Horseback, and sending some to keep on the way betwixt that and
Stony-Stratford, with order to send back all passengers that should go that
way. A strange diligence, which yet wrought no impression in such as observed
it: for they believed it to be done that none might come to the King before
Themselves. But Rivers was of an other opinion, for if there had been any
reason for it, they should have communicated it to him: after many several
conjectures, he resolved to go Himself and find out the bottom of the
business; but no sooner did he appear before them, then that picking a
quarrel that he had an intention to keep them from the King, and ruin them;
the which he should not be able to effect; not suffering him to reply, but
tumultuously interrupting him when he was about to speak; they committed him
to the custody of some of their own Servants; and hasted to Stony-Stratford,
and got thither just as the King was putting foot in stirrup; kneeling down
before him, who cheerfully received them, not knowing their designs: they
addressed themselves to Richard Gray, Brother to the Marquess Dorset,
objecting to him that he together with his Brother and his Uncle, had aspired
to the Government of the King and Kingdom, by raising of Divisions, and by
bringing under some of the Nobility, that they might destroy the Rest; that the
Marquess, to make his insolences the more feasible had taken out of the Tower
of London all the Royal Treasure, and had sent men to Sea, to the end that
none might oppose him. Both which were true, but in a contrary sense: it being
so ordered by the Counsel, for the Kingdoms service; not his own. The King
having heard the Accusation, showed how judicious a Prince he would have
been, had it been his fortune, to have lived: for not knowing how to excuse
the Marquess, being ignorant, (by reason of his long absence) of what he had
done, he thought he might excuse the rest, since they had been continually
about him. So as not giving Richard leave to reply, he said: for what
concerned the Marquess, he knew not what to say, since he might be deceived;
but as for his Uncle Rivers and his Brother Richard, he was very certain they
could have no hand in any such business for that they had always been in His
company. To the which Buckingham replied; His Majesty was deceived; that their
designs were not known to His Majesty, and that they did not deserve to be
excused by so good a Prince. Immediately, in his presence, was the said Richard
seized upon, as likewise Sir Thomas Vaughan, and Sir Richard Hawte; and the
King, in stead of going forwards, was brought back to Northampton; such of his
attendance as Gloucester durst not assy in, were removed, and others put in
their place; whereat the young King did complain and was much greived: having
only the Name of a King, and not being of age to defend Himself, much less
his Kindred and Servants. And that Dissimulation might not be wanting, (though
now 'twas needless) the Duke of Gloucester, the next day sent a made dish from
his Own Table to the Earl Rivers with a message; that, he should not be
troubled at his restraint, willing him to be of good courage, for very
suddenly all things would be to his good liking. How much of this Rivers
believed may easily be imagined: but baulking the injury, and apprehending
worse, he returned thanks for the honor done unto him, desiring the Messenger
that he would carry it to his Nephew, Richard; for that being young, and not
accustomed to such accidents as these, he needed the more this favor. This
feigned courtesy was like the lightening which fore-runnes Thunder; for after
many change of Prisons, they were brought to Pomfrect, and there beheaded; as
in its proper place shall be told.

The next night with great diligence this news came to the Queen, who
presently guessed at the Dukes design: she too late repented the counsel
given to her brother to disband his forces: she apparently saw her own
danger, but much more the danger of the Duke of York, and her Daughters. She
at the very same hour fled from her Palace, and took Sanctuary in
Westminster, and lodged in the Abbey; to the great compassion of such who at
that time of the night saw Trunkes, Beds, and other things carried up and down
in the streets, in such haste and fear, as the servants hindered one another
in their service, not knowing what would become either of their Master or
Themselves. The Lord Hastings had received the like advertisement, but with a
contrary resentment: he rejoiced at the Queens sufferings, all which were
answerable to his wish; but imagined not that Gloucester would proceed any
farther: for he having loved King Edward, loved his Children, nor would he
for* all the World that any harm should have befalne them. Being thus
satisfied in his Own belief, he, at the same instant, it being past midnight,
dispatched away a Gentleman to the Archbishop of York, Lord Chancellor of
England, who found him in his first sleep: he would not suffer him to be
awaked; but the servants not obeying him, he was brought in, and acquainted him
with what had been done to the King, Rivers, Gray, and the Kings household; he
concealed not the Queens betaking her self to Sanctuary, adding that he
should not be thereat troubled, for all should be well. The Archbishop
differing in opinion from the Chamberlain, answered, He knew not what good to
hope for from such demeanours. The Gentleman being gone he rose from bed, made
all his Family get up, caused them to Arm themselves, and taking the great
Seal along with him, he went unto the Queen: he thought he was come into a
Palace newly pillaged; he saw nothing but confusion, and people justling one
another for haste, some carrying in stuff, some going out to fetch in more;
sighs and tears he met with everywhere. The Queen was set upon the floor,
no more now what she formerly had been. It added to the immensity of her
affliction to see her self bereaved of her eldest Son, and other kindred who
were her only stay; to consider that though she were sorely oppressed with Pre
sent evils, yet was she to expect greater oppressions. Whence it may be
gather^d that foresight is the bitter fruit of most mature wits: a gift which
graciously conferred for a Relief to mankind, works a contrary effect: the
present imagination forestalleth future evils, and afflicts the apprehension,
which ought only to be caused for what has already happened: So as it can
hardly be decided whether the fore-fight of Evils through the excellency of
judgment, be not a bad effect of a good cause; and whether* at this rate,
stolidity be not rather to be chosen then the most refined understanding,
since such as are dull and stupid suffer only in the present Act of their
misfortunes. The Chancellor having comforted the Queen with such reasons as
in such desperate occasions hopes may suggest, acquainted her with what the
Chamberlain Hastings had let him know; supposing that Hastings who had been
obliged to the late Edward, would side with his Children and Family: but the
Queen loathing to hear that Name, replied; he was in an ertour to believe
him to be her friend, who hating her blood indevour'd the utter extirpation of
it. The Archbishop, not able to persuade her to the contrary, discoursing from
the least of dangers to the greatest that might happen, bad her be assured that
if any other King should be crowned then that King which now they had in their
hands, they would crown the Duke of York, who was now in her possession. And
that you may be hereof certain, Lo Madame (said he) the Great Seal of
England: his Father, your Husband, gave it me; I give it you, that you may
keep it for your Son; and if for the present I could give you a greater
Testimony of my good will, you should have it. Which being said he left the
Seal with her, and departed about break of day, not weighing of what
importance the thing was that he had done, and how prejudicial it might be to
him. But being come home and seeing the Thames, out at his Window, full of
Boats, which were filled with Glocesters Servants who observed if any went by
water toward Sanctuary, and hearing that there was parttaking, and tumults
raised in the City, Lords and other people appearing in sundry Assemblies
Armed; he bethought himself that if any extravagant courses should be taken,
his delivery of the Great Seal to any whosoever without the Kings Command,
since it was delivered to his custody, might redound much to his damage,
whilst the Queen could reap no advantage thereby; whereupon he privately sent
for it again, and when he had it, carried it according to custom, openly in
the sight of all men.

This mean while commotions in the City did still continue, it being believed
that the proceedings at Northampton were not only caused for what concerned
Rivers, but out of a design to hinder the Coronation: and troubles had been
likely to have ensued, had not the Lord Chamberlain assured them that those
Lords were imprisoned for certain Conspiracies plot ted against the Dukes of
Gloucester and Buckingham, as would be made appear by due process of Law. That
no doubt was to be made of the Duke of Gloucester since he had always continued
constantly faithful to the King: but that, to suspect it, might be of
dangerous consequence, if they would not lay down their Arms, with the same
facility they had taken them up. This Testimony quieted the greatest part of
the people, especially when they understood the King was coming, waited upon
by the Duke his Uncle with all manner of respect: as also that amongst Rivers
his carriages certain Barrells full of Arms were found: which though it were
not believed by the wiser sort, yet Gloucesters followers insisting much upon
it, it raised doubts in some who otherwise would not have been persuaded to
it. For nothing is more prejudicall to Truth, then Falsehood boldly affirmed,
with Confidence and Obstinacy.

The King was met by the Lord Major of London, the Sheriffs and Aldermen, all
in Scarlet, accompanied with five hundred Citizens on horseback clothed all
in purple. Gloucester showed such appearance of Reverence and Love to the King
his Nephew, as he changed their former suspicions, into a great good liking of
him: insomuch as when a Protector was to be chosen, as usually is done in the
minority of Kings, he alone, without any manner of contradiction, was named
thereunto; not only as he was Uncle, and the next Prince of the Blood; but as
he that was loyal, most loving, and of all others the fittest for a charge of
such weight. Many were forthwith removed from their Offices; whereof the
Archbishop of York was one of the first, not without sharp reproof for
having left the Great Seal with the Queen. Doctor Russell, Bishop of
Lincoln, a man of Laudable conditions succeeded him in his place. Earl
Hastings was continued in his place of Lord Chamberlain. All which were
businesses of small importance not being those which troubled Gloucester: and
though to have won the Peoples good will and obtained the Protectours place was
the right way to his designs; yet were they not things he could have missed
of, the peoples good opinion depending upon his natural dissembling, and the
Protectours place upon his neerenesse of Blood Royal, and consequently without
Competitour. That which most troubled him was, that he could not rid his
hands of the One brother without the Other: for if the Elder brother were made
away, the Duke of York was to succeed. In this it was that he was to use his
best wits; for the Queen being jealous of him, and the Duke of York being in
a place not to be violated, he could not come by him but by Deceit and
Sacrilege. But it was no hard matter for him to overcome these difficulties: a
fraudulent persuasion eased him of the trouble of seeking out Other means. He
at the Counsel Table spoke against the Queen in these or the like words, That
there was no malice could parallel hers: since to work the Kings Counsel into
an ill opinion with the World, she together with the Duke and Princesses had
taken Sanctuary, as if there were apparent cause of doubt: that it mattered not
much what became of Her or her Daughters; the King might live without them, but
not well without his brother, whose company was absolutely necessary for His
Majesty; That the people, upon so unexpected a resolution, could make no other
conjecture, but that she was doubtlesly in danger, and her Enemies possessed of
all manner of power, since her own quality and her childrens were not
sufficient to secure her, unless she should fly to Sanctuary; a refuge
usually for guilty people, and if at any time for such as were innocent, only
for such as wanted other means of protection. That she seemed by Enemies to
mean none but the Privy Counsel, since they were highest in Authority. That
to believe their intentions were to oppress the Queen, the Duke of York, and
the Ladies of the blood Royal, so as they were enforced to take Sanctuary, was
an injury not to be tolerated: That whosoever should approve of such scandalous
proceedings, did not love the King; neither did he believe that they did
disapprove thereof, who would not help to remedy it: since the King himself,
being a Child, could not do it. That it behooved them to look to it, who were
chosen to look to the preservation of the Kingdom, and the Kings health; nor
were they disengaged from the many duties they were bound to by the payment of
One debt. That the consideration of health was the chief thing they ought to
have in regard; and rather the health of the mind then the health of the Body:
for the former being lost, the latter could not long continue; for that
sadness of mind did dry up the Bones, especially in a young Prince, who if he
should not be straightened in honest recreations, muchlesse, from Honest
Company. And though it fits not Kings to have companions, yet no conversation
being to be had without some sort of Equality, to whom did it more properly
belong then to an only Brother? And if this alone argument might not be of
force as it ought, he propounded this consideration unto their wisdoms; that
the Coronation could not be proceeded in without scandal, whilst the Duke of
York (who was to have the first place next to the King in that great
solemnity) should not be there but in a Sanctuary, a shelter for Delinquents;
affording matter to the common people to judge according to their Ignorance,
and to Foreign Princes according to the appearance of false supposalls; which
must needs redound to the shame and prejudice of them all: to their shame; for
that it was not to be credited, that the only brother of a King should for his
safeties sake be necessitated to make use of the privilege of Sanctuary
without just occasion; To their prejudice; for that, give this necessity for
granted, great troubles were likely to arise thereout, it not being likely that
there would want those who would willingly lay hold on any occasion to disturb
the State: That, in his opinion, some one should be sent to the Queen, whom
she did not mistrust, yet such a one as, would be zealous of the honor of the
King and Counsel; who might rectify her, and let her know what wrong she did
unto them all: To the King, by bereaving him of his Brother: To the counsel,
by her thus tacitly accusing them of an evil that never fell into their
thoughts: To the Kingdom; by kindling a fire which was not suddenly to be
quenched. And that if this should not prevail, the Duke of York should by
Regal power be taken from Prison and brought to the King his brother; where
being more made of then with Her, he might reproach unto her her mistrust; and
how she had been the occasion of making others do the like: her malignant and
sottish suspicions tending to the Counsels shame, the Kingdoms Harm, and her
Own Confusion. He propounded the Cardinal Archbishop of York, for this
enterprise, remitting himself to their pleasure, if they should not approve of
him, from the which he professed he would not dissent. They all commended his
opinion, and agreed with him, that, if he could not be had from thence,
inconveniences might ensue. But the Cardinal having first taken the employment
upon him, was, together with as many Ecclesiastical persons as were there
present, of a contrary opinion, for as much as concerned his being taken from
the Sanctuary by force: alleging, the Sanctity of the place was inviolable,
as well by the many reiterated grants of Popes and Kings, as for five hundred
Years before (as is testified by tradition) it was by St. Peter, assisted
therein by Angels, miraculously consecrated. He hoped, however, it would be
needless, the Queen in reason being to deliver him up willingly; the which if
she should not do, the fault was neither to be attributed to Her, nor Him:
Not to Him; for he would not be failing in his duty: Not to Her; she being
therein to be excused in respect of her Motherly affection, and the weakness
of her Sex. But Buckingham, not approving these circumspections, swore: The
Queen knew well enough she had no occasion of fear; that her fears were
merely fictitious, and of malice; and if she would be believed because her
kindred were hated as they well deserved to be, she should distinguish between
those who were of kin to Her, and who were the like to the Blood Royal. That
her kindred had afforded reason wherefore to be hated, as she her self had
likewise done through her malignity; but in her extending it to the Duke of
York, the distribution was too large and odious. That he likewise had the
honor to be a kin unto him, neither would he in his zeal to his service give
way to any one, no not unto his Mother: since she desired to keep him, not
without danger and scandal in the Sanctuary, to please her malicious humor,
whereas he counseled he should be taine from thence, to the end that all
scandalls being removed, the danger of his health might be prevented, and other
men's troubles. He discourst upon the use and abuse of Sanctuaries, all the
Counsel joining with him in opinion: whereupon it was resolved; that if the
Cardinal could not prevail with his Persuasions, he should be taken from her
by Force. The which being agreed upon they went to the Star Chamber to expect
there, as in the nearest place, what would be the issue. The Cardinal
accompained by a great many Lords, either for that the Protector would not
trust a business of such weight to One only man, or that the coming of so
many might make the Queen perceive it was not He alone that desired the
delivery of her Son; and that, if she should refuse, they might Force him
from Her as was resolved. The Cardinals words were these; He was sent by the
Protector, and the Privy Counsel to let her know how much her detaining of
the Duke of York in that place was of scandal to the publque, and of Dislike
to the King his Brother, it being an action which must needs produce very bad
effects. That the King was grieved at it, and the Counsel offended, as if one
brother did live in danger, and could not be preserved but by the others life.
That he desired to have the Duke, so to set him at Liberty, and free him from
that Prison (for in respect of him it could be accounted no better) to bring
him to his Brother, where he might live answerable to his Condition and
Degree. By delivering him up she would give peace unto the Kingdom,
satisfaction to the Counsel, and Advantage to those she desired to help
(meaning her Brother, her Son and the other Prisoners) to boot with the
Honor and Content the King would thereby receive; and Comfort to the Duke of
Yorkes self, who in respect of health could be nowhere better then with his
Brother: their Years and Nature had appropriated them one for the other; and
their Loves would be the more confirmed, by their being brought up Together, as
well at their Book as at their Sports. Here the Cardinal paused a while
expecting what answer the Queen would make; who, repeating some things he had
said, confessed; There was no better company nor more pleasing friendship then
that of Brothers, as is shown by nature in her Ordinations, by her
recommending them in their most tender Years to the care of motherly
affection: the which, as it deceives not, so does it not spare for any thing
in the performance of that duty. That all Other loves did couple men together
Only as far as conduced to self interest; Brotherly love shared in
selfe-interest, Friendship and Blood: This conjunction of love was that which
was to be desired between her two Sons the King, and Duke of York: but as
their Age did not render them capable of such conversation as was ripened by
Years, so was it likewise the cause why the Mothers care, more passionate and
pliable to their tender humors, was of all others the most necessary and
proper for them; and though the King, being the first borne, stood not so much
in need thereof; having been taken from her Government ever since his going
into Wales, yet the Duke of York did of necessity require it; who being a
Child lately sick, now upon the mending hand, and in danger of a Relapse, there
was none knew so well how to Govern him as she his Mother, who, as best
knowing his disposition, was fittest for that employment. The Cardinal
approved of all she said, so as she would take upon her the care of them Both
in a place Befitting Her and Them: he said the Counsel would be herewithall
satisfied: Nay; they would Beg it of her: but in a Sanctuary this was not
good; it stood not with the Kings Honor, Her own, nor the Counsels: This
parting of the brothers, the one of them kept in Sanctuary, afforded occasion
to the People of strange and scandalous conjectures: All this might be remedied
if she would return to Court; which if she would not do, she might think
it the same thing to have the Duke of York taken Now from her, as it was to
have the Prince (now King) taken out of her charge, when he went into Wales.
The Queen replied the case is much differing: the Prince was then well in
Health; the Duke but about to be so, and in danger of falling ill again:
besides if the one were taken From her the other was left with her: She
wondered much the Protector did so much desire to Have him, since being not
well and that possibly he might die, he should, in reason, Refuse to take him
though he were Offered, so to avoid the suspicions his death might cause: She
likewise thought it strange that his being in Sanctuary should be ascribed to
the Puntillioes of Honor, as if he might not with his Honor be in a safe
place and with his Mother, with whom doubtless it was best for him to be: As
concerning Her going from Thence she would not forgo the place, least she
might fall into the like danger that Others had done: she wished it had pleased
God that They had been with Her, where they might have been safer then she
should be with Them. The Cardinal was not pleased with this discourse: and
thinking it might be dangerous for him to hear the Protector accused
(especially in what he did not believe) and he not take notice of it, thought
to stop her mouth by saying it could not be but she must needs know some Reason
why she should believe them to be in danger since she did so confidently
affirm it. The Queen, finding the Cardinals drift, answered: she too well
knew a reason, but not according to His sense: That she was more then certain
that their intended ruin was not occasioned out of those reasons which He
pretended she knew. He perceiving she was somewhat offended, and desirous to
make her believe he had said nothing with an ill intention replied; He hoped
that when the business should be well debated those Lords would so well
justify themselves that there should be no occasion of fear: and for what
concerned Her Royal person, there neither was, nor was there to be any manner
of danger. 'Twould argue great simplicity to believe either the One or the
Other, replied the Queen: for if the fault of those who were imprisoned were
only that wherein she shared as deep as They, her fault consisting in her being
Mother to the King, as Theirs in being a Kin to him, (the only reason why they
were hated) it was impossible for them to justify themselves; and 'twas more
impossible that their enemies should love Her the Original of their Hatred,
and hate Them who were but the Appendices: so as their fault being such and
their imprisonment caused only for being allied to Her, and consequently to
the King, their ruin was unavoidable; for Nature could not undo what she had
done, nor, contrary to her order, annull the relation that was between Them,
Her, and the King. For what remained; she was resolved not to quit the
Sanctuary; and to keep her son There, till she saw how the current of
businesses would go: and her fears were much increased by this their great
desire of having him There. The Cardinals reply was; That others had the very
like fear of Her whilst she detained him in her custody, for that she might
send him into some part beyond the Seas, and no man know where: he therefore
wished her to know that the common opinion was, that the Sanctuary was no place
of privilege for Him, he wanting Arbitrament, and will to demand it, as well
as Fault whereby to make it necessary for him: so as the taking of him from
thence by Force (which would ensue if she would not willingly deliver him)
would be no violation to the place, for that the Protector his Uncle who most
entirely loved him, was resolved to have him away before he might be conveyed
from thence by others. Is then his Uncles love so great (replied the Queen) as
that he apprehends nothing but that he should escape his hands? She affirmed
for a truth that she never had any thought of sending him elsewhere: not but
that she would willingly have done it, had she known any place of more safety,
but for that she thought no place could be so secure as the Sanctuary; having
never heard of any so diabolical a Tyrant as thought it lawful to violate it:
That children were not capable thereof in respect of their want of Will or
Fault, was an opinion as erroneous as Hellish; Innocents being thereby denied
the benefit granted to Thieves and Murderers: Did he deny the Danger, and
pretend it to be Fained? She prayed God the Event might not manifest it; which
should it do, all remedies would come too late and be of no use: That for what
concerned shame, it belongs to those who unjustly do it, not to those who
undeservedly suffer it. To affirm that since Princes do not disport themselves
but with children of their Own Condition and Blood, it was requisite the King
should have his Brother, and that if he should be denied he had cause enough to
take him away by Force, was a simple reason to allow of Sacrilege: who ever
saw that young Princes did not more willingly play with their Inferiors then
with their Equals? since they seldom or never meet with their Equals, and
if ever, but for a short time: If children nobly borne and others too,
oftentimes were not admitted to disport themselves with Princes; and that
Princes should never play but with such as were every way their Equals, Few or
None of them would know what belongs to play. Coming then to the causes of
violating Sanctuaries, she said they were most False. For let all be granted
that could be alleged, as want of Years to Demand it, and will to Desire it;
together with their contraries, to wit the faculty of Choice and Will to Leave
it: there was no cause why he should be taken from thence against Her will: For
being by Nature and the Laws void of election, he was subject to his Mothers
arbitrament: whereupon nothing wherewith she was trusted, being to be taken
from her under the Privilege of Sanctuary, much less her Son, which was the
only cause of her flying thither: That if this was not sufficient, it might
suffice that she was his Guardian: The Laws of England allow unto the Mothers
the Guardianship of such as hold nothing by Knights service: so as having
demanded Sanctuary for her self, she had done it likewise for her Ward, which
being by the Laws committed to Her charge was not to be taken from her: for he
not being able to demand it for Himself, it was Her duty to demand it for him;
since the Laws deliver over the care of the Person before the oversight of
goods; goods serving for the use of the person, and therefore administered unto
by Guardians: she could allege examples enough of this, but her Own example
might serve the turn: This was not the first time she had taken Sanctuary:
when the King her Husband was banished and driven out of the Country she being
great with child, had recourse to Sanctuary, and was there brought to bed of
the (now) King, who was There safe: she wished it might please God his Royal
Palace might prove as free from danger to him now that he did Reign, as was
that place then, although an Enemy King did Reign; who might have made use of
such suppositions as Now were made use of, but did not: so as being warranted
by the Laws of the Land, which, together with the Laws of Nature, gave unto
her the oversight of her children, and by the Divine Law, which did privilege
Sanctuaries, and the Sanctuary her Son; she was resolved, since the Eldest
was out of her power, to keep the Younger: for if the uncle had Both of them,
and both of them should chance to miscarry, he might the easilier pretend unto
the Crown; notwithstanding his Neeces were between him and home; the which
afforded her just occasion of Fear: for since the Laws inhibite the
Guardianship of a Ward to such as are Next Heirs, though but to a small
Revenew, how much more when a Kingdom is the inheritance? The Cardinal,
perceiving her to wax Hot, and likely to say more then he would have her,
answered; He was not come to argue with her; that he demanded the Duke of
York from her; whom if she would deliver up to him, and the rest of the Lords
that were there present, he would pawn his own Body and Soul for the Dukes
safety: if she would not do this, he would be gone; seeing her fixed in her
belief that all others (her self excepted) wanted either Wit or Loyalty: Wit;
by her thinking them such fools, as not perceiving the Protectours intentions,
they should suffer themselves to be abused: Loyalty; for that if they were
conscious of any such intention in him, they should be very wicked to serve him
as a means whereby to effect so great a Treason. These words did much perplex
the Queen, weighing with her self the diverse hazards she ran, whether she
Delivered him, or did not deliver him. By Delivering him, she considered the
Danger he together with his brother was to run: in Not delivering him, two
things presented themselves unto her mind: the one, Force, that as soon as the
Cardinal should be gone, the Protector would come in person and take him away:
she wanted Time to provide for this: Many things were required in sending of
him elsewhere, none of all which were likely to succeed, she not having thought
thereof before: she knew not whether to send him; she had not appointed people
to conduct him; she had not time enough to keep the secret undiscovered, and
him unintercepted: The other; she might be Deceived in her suspicions:
whowsoever it would be more disadvantageous to her, to suffer him be taken from
her by Force, then willingly to surrender him: she did not doubt the Cardinals
good intentions, not yet Theirs that were with him: She was sure they were not
corrupted, but not sure but that they might be deceived: Her appearing to
believe in them, would Oblige them: So as, taking the little Duke by the hand
she said: she was not so ill advised as to mistrust their Fidelity or Wisdom:
she would give a testimony of it; being sure she should not be deceived unless
they should through the malice of others be deceived: the which if it should so
happen, her Sorrow would be rendered incapable of Comfort, the Kingdoms Ruin
remediles, and she should have just cause to complain of Them: That, not
withstanding whatsoever objection, she was sure she might keep her son in the
Sanctuary free from all violence; but as she doubted not but that her blood was
so hated by some, as if they thought they had any share therein, they would
open their veins, and let it out: so was she most certain the thirst of
Government knew no kindred: for if brothers had not been spared, much less
would Nephews escape: That the lives of her dear children depended the One
upon the Other: If the One were safe, Both were safe: That notwithstanding her
unfortunate foreknowledge of thus much, she resolved to resign One of them
into Their hands, which was as much as if she should resign Both of them to
them, that she might at all times redemand them of Them; both before God and
man: She knew that for what concerned Them, they would render her a very good
account, she being not ignorant of their wisdom and and fidelity: but that this
was not sufficient; that Force and Resolution was requisite, if need should
require: whereof they had no lack, nor yet Others upon the like occasion: but
if they should doubt of this, she desired them to leave her son with Her;
conjuring them by the trust the King her Husband had in them, and for what she
at the present trusted them withal, that they should not think her too
unnecessarily Timorous upon this occasion, but rather believe themselves to be
too Credulous and Confident: Then tourning to her Son: Farewell, said she,
my sweet Son; the Lord be thy Protector; let me kiss thee before I leave
thee, least I never kiss thee more. Having kissed him, and blessed him, she
Weeping turned Her back, leaving Him in their custody, who when He saw his
Mother quit Him, burst forth a Weeping.

He was presently brought to the Star Chamber, where he was with much longing
expected by his Uncle. He took him in his Arms with the like affection as
does the Wolf the Lamb. He welcomed him with Words and Kisses, wherewith he
artificially disguised his intended Treason; he led him to his brother, who was
lodged in the Bishops house near Paul's; from whence with great Pomp they were
brought to the Tower, whence they never came forth. Some thought the Duke of
Buckingham was not only an Assister, but the chief Agent in this business,
having written concerning it to the Duke of Gloucester at the instant of King
Edwards Death: but those who knew him were of an other opinion; that Buckingham
knew nothing of it till after Gloucester had gotten both his Nephews into his
custody; who then discovered himself to those he most confided in; chiefly to
Buckingham: for winning Him to side with him he needed not to fear what ever
Other forces: so as to win Him, was to win the Prize. For if He should have
opposed him, all the rest would have followed his colors; so just a
withstanding of so wicked an endeavor being sufficient, at the least Nodde, to
draw the whole Kingdom after it. The reason which caused Buckingham to side
with the Protector, was; that he had offended the King in imprisoning his
Kindred, so as he had no reason to hope for safety. For should they be put to
Death, it were an injury the King in likelihood would never forget, but would
be ready to revenge when He should be of Years: and if they should be set at
liberty, their Authority was likely to be so great, as he might despair of
Life. The Protector had provided himself of a Guard; for businesses of this
nature are not handled without Praecaution, and Jealousies. He armed himself
whilst no man thought of it, and trusted the mannaging of his affairs to none
but such whose fortunes did totally depend upon Him. Trust in blameable actions
is constantly Inconstant. He set Spies about Buckingham, thinking it impossible
he should be equally wicked with Him, not having the like Designs; and was
resolved, if he should find him Faulty, to be his immediate ruin. He made
use of Buckinghams most professed friends; and no wonder if they were Traitors,
since the Conformity of evil Inclinations had caused the friendship between
Them and their Master; a thing not without danger amongst such men; the least
shadow of suspicion being sufficient to make either rob other of their Lives.
The secrets of Friendship are not tasted by such, who have their tastes
contaminated by the bitterness of Ambitious interests. Yet had not Buckingham
joined herein with him, unless upon very advantageous conditions; for when he
obliged himself to make Gloucester King, Gloucester obliged himself to take
the Dukes daughter in marriage to His only Son, promising him to boot with
this the Earldome of Hartford, pretended unto by him, as his Inheritance: the
which being denied him by the late King, was the first cause of this his so
lewd resolution, thereby revenging himself upon his Children. He moreover of
his own free motion, promised him a great part of the Treasure left by Edward,
together with a very large proportion of the Wardrobe he had left to furnish
his House withal. These things being agreed upon, they erected a New Counsel,
compounded of the Chiefest, to treat of things appertaining to the Coronation;
to the end that they and the people might be entertained with a belief
thereof: and to the same end, they commanded such Lords as were absent from the
City, to come to London, and assist at the Solemnity. They on the other side,
with a Counsel compacted out of their Own Followers, treated of the means
how to bring the Protector to the Crown: So as whilst the Cardinal of
Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Stanley, the
Lord Hastings, and others, did busy themselves how by a not un-necessary
ceremony to Establish a naturally Lawful King, They treated how to depose him,
and by wicked treason to establish in his place an Unlawful Tyrant for King.
The first counsel was composed of Many of the Best rank; the second of Few,
and those of the Worst condition. But his dealings not being to be penetrated
into by all, people began to murmr, although they could not guess at the
real mischief intended. 'Twas impossible that from so many circumstances and
vain delays, as were by This Counsel propounded unto the Other, jealousies
should not arise, as usually they do from things done out of time, and without
occasion.

To this was added, the taking from the Tower all the Kings servants, whose
places were supplied by the Protectours Houshold-servants; and if any one
desired to see the King, he was in private wished the contrary, for the
Protector would have no man see him, save such as He sent: So as the King was
not only left Solitary, and destitute of all manner of Company; but likewise
of all Magnificence, and Regal Splendor: both which were conveyed over to
the House and Person of the Protector. Amongst those who were admitted into
the Secret Council there was one Catesby, a man very well skilled in the Laws
of the Land: this man being employed by the Lord Chamberlain, in all his
affairs, and by his favor advanced in the Court, had won such credit with
all men, especially in Leicestershire, where the said Lord was very powerful,
as nothing was done there without Him: so as being a creature of his, and by
his means in a fair way of advancement, the Chamberlain thought he would
not fail to advertise him of any thing of moment should be done in That
council, especially of any thing that might be prejudicial to Him. But
gratitude, disdaining to associate with one who together with his Conscience
had renounced his Loyalty, and all other duties, forsook him; and in place
thereof stepped in Ingratitude, which acquitted him from discharging the debt he
ought to his Benefactour; which was the original of all the ensuing evils. For
Stanley, doubting this Cabinet Counsel, had endeavored to cross it, by the
favor and assistance of many, who likewise began to fear it; had not the
Chamberlain, upon conference had with him therein, secured him, relying upon
Catesbyes fidelity. The Protector did naturally love the Chamberlain, he
having always been his friend, and one from whom he had received friendship,
in the King his Brothers time: nor had he resolved to ruin him, had he not
feared, that if he should discover his secrets unto him, he would have
withstood them. He therefore willed Catesby to use his utmost endeavor to
draw him over to their side. But Catesby either did it not at all, being likely
to reap advantage by his downfall; or if he did it, gave the Protector so
sinister an account, as changing his Love into Hatred, he resolved to have his
life; yet treating him with his wonted confidence, he thereout got two
advantages. He made him Slower in putting on such resolutions as he might
have done against him, and He the better brought about his Own ends to the
Others ruin, whilst he least thought of it. Insomuch as the Chamberlain
having acquainted Catesby with the jealousies which this Counsel had raised in
many, thinking to work out of him some assurance, he did not only give him
no satisfaction, but he persuaded the Protector to dispatch him out of the
way as soon as might be, as if his life were pernicious to his designs. An
advice well taken by Richard, though not given out of any zeal to His service,
as it seemed to be; but that by his death he might enter into the plenary
authority, which the Chamberlain solely had in his Country. The Protector
not needing any instigation to do mischief, that he might be rid of him,
came on the thirteenth of June, three hours before Noone into the Counsel,
where they loytered away the time in discourse about the Coronation, the day
whereof drew near. He at his first entrance civilly saluted all the Lords
that were there, excusing himself for his coming so late; and passing from
one discourse to another, he desired the Bishop of Ely to send for a dish of
Strawberries from his Garden at Holborne, saying he had never eaten better.
The Bishop taking it for a great favor, sent presently for them, whilst he
soon after rising up desired them to dispense with his absence for a while;
and within less then an hour returned so full of anger and bitterness as
made them all amazed. Being set down, with angry eyes, and frowning look, and
biting his lips, he for a good while said nothing: at last he asked them,
what punishment they deserved who had plotted His death, notwithstanding that
he was next in Blood to the King, and by Office, His and the Kingdoms
Protector? This question startled the Counsel, not knowing by whom it was
intended, though each ones Conscience told him it was not by Him. The
Chamberlain seeing them all hold their peace, and thinking it behooved him by
reason of his familiarity to break the Ice, said, They deserved to be punished
as Traitors, no man or condition whatsoever excepted. The which the rest
agreeing unto, the Protector said, It was his brothers wife (disdaining to
call her Queen) and others with her: whereat those who favored her were
troubled. But the Chamberlain, who feared some friends of his might have been
concerned, was overjoyed when he heard the Queen named: he was not, though,
well pleased that the Protector had not acquainted him with it; since their
imprisonment and death (which was that very day to ensue, and whereat he was
glad) was not resolved on without his consent: little thought he to be himself
that very hour beheaded. The Protector continuing his complaint, unbutton'd
his left sleeve, and stripping it up to the elbow, showed a fleshlesse dry
arm, appearing to be nothing but skin and bone, saying, that the cruelty of
the Queen and of Shores wife, who was her counselor, and coadjudresse in
that wickedness, had thus spoiled and bewitched him. The Lords who knew his
arm had never been other then what it was, imagined presently this calumny was
invented to some wicked end: they knew the Queen to be too wise to think upon
so foolish an action; and if she should have any such thought, it was not
likely she should make use of Shores wife, the woman of all the world she
hated most, as being by the King her husband doated on, even to his death. The
Chamberlain had been long in love with this woman; but his Respect unto the
King, as his Master; and his Truth unto him, as his Friend, had mortified his
passion; but when the King was dead, he took her home unto him; so as the
Protector not knowing any other invention wherewithal to lay him low, pitched
upon this; and the Chamberlain thinking it behooved him to speak, since he
had made the first answer, said: If it were true, they were both worthy to be
severely punished; believing that if this imputation should be tried according
to Law and the course of Justice, it would vanish of it self, and not need his
assistance. But the Protector, who in the present affairs had no regard
either to Justice or Law, answered with an angry countenance: that he stood
upon Ifs and Ands; but that he told him it was true, and that he would make it
good upon his body Traitor that he was: then giving a great blow with his hand
upon the Table (which was the appointed sign for those that waited without)
Treason, Treason, was heard from without, the door was forced open and the
chamber was instantly full of armed men; one of which making a great blow at
the Lord Stanleys head, had cleft him to the teeth, had not he (perceiving it
coming) fallen underneath the Table; yet fell he not so soon but that he was
therewithal wounded, and the blood ran down about his ears. 'Twas thought
the Protector, not finding any objection whereby to put him to death, had
taken this order, to the end he might be thought to be casually slain, in
that confusion. The mere shadow of Shores wife was sufficient to move the many
for what concerned the Chamberlain: whom he arrested by the name of Traitor;
and being by him in all humbleness demanded whether he spoke to Him, or no?
Yes, to Thee traitor, replied he. With what face the Author of this treachery
could give this title to the party betrayed, would not be a discourse much out
of purpose, since the world abounds in so many of the like. Being in this
manner arrested, the Protector swore by Saint Paul he would not dine before
he saw him dead: so as haste being to be made, for the hour of dinner drew
nigh^, and the Protector was too religious to break Such an oath, the
Chamberlain was forced to make a short confession to the first Priest could be
found, for the usual form would prove too long, and being led from the
Chapel to a green Court, he had his head struck off, and was afterward
buried at Windsor, near to King Edwards Tomb. The rest of the Council, who
in this uproare were kept locked up in the Chamber, were conveyed into
several places, being reputed by the Protector to be averse to his designs,
and more particularly the Lord Stanley.

A miraculous presage of this misfortune is related; by which, (if it be true)
is seen what care the Heavens have over Us, advertising us by dreams of
imminent dangers, which might be shunned, if, together with them, we were
endued with the spirit of Joseph, or Daniel, to interpret them. The night
preceding this mischance the Lord Stanley dreamed that a wild Poare had
wounded both Him and the Chamberlain in the head, so as the blood ran down
both their shoulders: whereupon awaking he thought this wild Boar must be
the Protector; the Wounds and Blood some imminent danger of their lives: in
this affright he forthwith arose, and sent to acquaint the Chamberlain with
his dream, (who was fast asleep) resolving to be instantly gone (it being but
a little past midnight) so that in the morning he might be so far from
thence, as to be in safety: he advised him to do the like, to the end that
their danger being alike, their safeties might be so too. The Chamberlain was
not subject to melancholy, and therefore not superstitious; so as laughing at
the message he answered the messenger: that he wondered his Master should give
belief to such follies; he bade him tell him from Him, that Dreams were
Dreams, and suppose they were to be allowed as foretellers of future evils,
they were so uncertain, as they might no less harm then help. Who could
assure him that the danger that was to be feared might not consist as well in
their Flight, as in their Tarrying? and if as they fled away they should be
taken, and brought back (as might very well happen) would it not afford the
wild Boar an occasion of wounding them with his Tuskes? for their flight
could not but be imputed to an evil conscience, and to some faults, if not
committed, yet intended: He desired him therefore to appease himself, and
fear nothing, for there was no danger: and if there were any, they would
rather be met withal by running away (as he had said) then by Tarrying: that
he was as sure of the man he doubted (meaning the Protector,) as of his own
Hand. The Gentleman returned with this answer; thereby making his Master forgo
his former resolution; with less harm to himself who Feared so much, then to
the Chamberlain that was so Confident. Many things were observed before his
death: as he rode toward the Tower, his horse stumbled twice or thrice under
him even almost to the endangering of a fall: A very vulgar observation; for if
all stumbling horses should presage misfortune, the number of those who should
perish would be very great. As he was making himself ready to go thither, a
Gentleman of good quality came to him, who was purposely sent by the
Protector, to persuade him to come in case he should not intend it: this man
seeing him tarry to speak with a Priest, (a friend of his) as he was upon the
way, fearing least he might come too late, hastened him, telling him the time
passed, and that as yet he needed not a Priest: knowing that within two hours
he would have need of one. Being come to the Tower, he met a Pursuivant near
the place where he was beheaded, and calling to mind that he had met him in
the very same place, whilst, being prisoner by procurement of the Earl Rivers,
he much doubted his life: he asked him whether he did remember that he had
met him in that place, in a time when he was in great danger? the Pursuivant
answered, Yes; praising God that the author of his affliction got not much
thereby, and that he suffered no harm at all. Thou would say more (replied
the Chamberlain) if thou knewst as much as I know, (meaning that that very day
Earl Rivers was to lose his head.) I was never so afraid, as then: matters are
well amended: mine enemies are now in danger, as I was then; as ere long thou
shall hear: and I more joyful, and more secure then ever. Oh the poorness
of our confidence! which ignorant of what is to come, takes one thing for
another, and does not think it self deceived. He apprehended Death, when he
was to Live; and was confident of Life, when he was to Lose it. The
Chamberlain was apt to flatter himself, and to be mistaken. Those who are
given to Pleasures, are commonly free from Suspicion, and from believing what
themselves would not do. And if he concurred to the evils that befell Rivers,
it was not in him either Malice or Treason, having always openly Professed
himself to be his enemy; nay had he imagined that his death would be cause of
the like to the sons of his Master King Edward, he would have ransomed them
from death, not only by preserving Rivers alive, but with his Own Blood: for
his favoring them cost him both his Blood and Life; the impossibility of
alienating him from them, was that which made the Protector resolve his death;
the former affection he bare unto him being cancelled by Ambition and Cruelty:
affections which at all times did superabound in him. I observe, that of all
his plots and windings about, there were only two that can be said to savor
of Wit: his persuading the Queen to make her brother lay down his Arms, that
so he might seize on him unarmed; and his making the Cardinal and the rest
believe, that his desire of having the Duke of York, was an effect of Charity
and Love. In other things the art he used was of no availment; it was as soon
Discovered as Used: so as if he had not won the reputation he had by Valor,
which made him to be feared; by the privilege of his Blood; and by Buckinghams
favor; he assuredly had effected nothing by his Cunning.

It behoved him to find out some color of Justice whereby to make good the
Chamberlaines precipitated death: not knowing how to do it otherwise; after
dinner he sent for some of the chiefest Citizens to the Tower. Before they
came, he and Buckingham had put on two old rusty Armours, fitter for Ruffians
then men of their quality; for he thought, should they have put on handsome
Arms it might have been imagined that time and commodity must have gone to
their so going, whereas the rusty ill-shaped Arms would argue a surpisall,
which being discovered enforced them to make use of what came first to hand.
Being come he told them that the Chamberlain with some others had that very
day indevour'd to kill them both as they were in Counsel, whereof they could
not guess the Cause nor Design: that he came to know of this Treason a little
before Dinner, so as they had no time to Arm themselves otherwise then as they
saw: that God had protected them by turning upon the Authors of this evil, the
mischief they intended to Them: that he had sent for them, to the end that
being informed of the Truth of the business, they might inform others. There
was none so simple but knew how the business went: but being circumspect
through Fear, they went their ways not making any Reply, or further Inquiry.

The Protector having put off his Armor, sent a Herald into the City, to
publish a Proclamation, the contents whereof were: That Baron Hastings Lord
Chamberlain, accompanied with some other Conspiratours had an intention to
kill him the Protector, and the Duke of Buckingham that very day as they sat
at Counsel, that so he might usurp the Government of the King and Kingdom:
hoping that when these two Princes should be dead there would be none that
would oppose him. But because this bare Narration without Witness, or other
circumstances, was not likely to work any great effect, he aggravated it with
complaints no ways relating to the matter in hand: That he had been an evil
Counselor to the late King: that he had persuaded him to many things
contrary to his Honor and the good of the Kingdom: that by his example he
had given him occasion to debauch himself, particularly with Shores Wife; who
as she was partaker of all his secret Counsels, so was she a complice in
this abominable Treason: that the last night (which was his last) he lay with
her; so that it was no wonder if having lived ill, he dyed ill; that the
sudden Justice done upon him was by Order from the King, and his faithful
Counsel, he having deserved it; and to the end that His accomplices might be
prevented from daring to raise a dangerous insurrection to set him at liberty:
the which being wisely foreseen was the only means, by Gods Providence, to
restore the Kingdom to its former tranquillity: It is to be observed that
there was not much above two hours space between his Execution and the
Publishing of the Proclamation; so as the contents thereof being Long, well
dictated, and fairly written out in Parchment, every one knew it must needs
be written before he was put to Death, the interim of time between the
Execution and Publication not being sufficient to write it out, much less so
Handsomely to digest the matter, though to the Swiftness of hand had been
added the Readiest wit: The which occasioned diversity of discourse, whereof
some said it was written by the Spirit of Prophecy. But the Protector having
accused Shores Wife as an Accessory and an Adviser, sent to her House and made
her be plundered of all she had, not out of Avarice but Malice; and that such
a demonstration might make the falsehood seem the more likely, and the
imputation the more probable, she was committed to Prison, and examined by the
Counsel, where she answered so well for her self as not the least likelihood
appearing whereby to make her guilty of what she was accused, they fell upon
her dishonest and scandalous course of living, the only thing indeed wherein
she was faulty: the which would have been winked at in any other, by the
Protector, and imputed to the frailty of Nature: but to exercise his cruelty
upon Her, he was contented to be held an Enemy to Incontinency. She was
delivered over to the Bishop to do Public Penance in the Cathedral Church,
the which she did the next Sunday morning, being led by way of Procession,
with a white Sheet about her, with a Wax Taper in her hand, and the Cross
borne before her: In which action though she were destitute of all manner of
Ornament, yet she appeared so lovely and handsomely behaved, as her blushes
adding to her Beauty, all the lookers on did not only blame the severity, but
were taken with her comeliness, which was the cause as well of Their
Compassion, as of her Ignominy: and if any one hateing her past Life, was
contented to see her punished, yet did they not praise it, as not proceeding
from the Justice of an upright Judge, but from the Malice and Cruelty of a
Passionate and Unjust Tyrant. She was well borne, and civilly brought up; her
ruin was her being unequally Married: not that her Husband was not of good
esteem amongst the Citizens, and according to his quality well to live: but
for that she being of riper Years then he, the love which uses to be
between equals was not between them; so as it was not hard for the King to
win Her; He being Handsome, Lovely, and from whom Preferment and Respect
(things much coveted by young Women) was to be hoped for. The King being Dead,
the Chamberlain got possession of her: she was yet alive when Sir Thomas More
wrote this History, but so much altered as it could not be said she had been
handsome; though in her youth she wanted nothing of Beauty, but a little more
Stature. Her outward gifts though very excellent were out done by the inward
gifts of her Mind, which are much more esteemed when accompanied with a
handsome Body. She had a Quick wit, was of a cheerful Humor, Prompt,
Facetious, and Eloquent; borne to do Good, not Harm to any one: She obliged
many who being fallen from the Kings good Opinion, were, for her sake, received
again into favor: She caused confiscated Goods to be restored to many,
without any manner of Avarice: she was more desirous to oblige others, then to
enrich her self; more to Do good turns then to Receive them: Her Ambition was
to be esteemed, and well thought of: She was always affable, never insolent.
All of them conditions abundantly to be praised, but by which her fortune
received no relief: for being first reduced to Poverty, and then to Old Age,
her beauty lost, and her good turns Forgotten, she begged of those, who, if
they had not formerly begged of Her, would have been more beggars then she.

The Protector had given Order that on the same day whereon the Chamberlain
was beheaded at London, the Earl of Rivers, and Lord Gray, the one brother,
the other son to the Queen, (and brother, by the Mothers side to the King)
should lose their heads at Pontefract: the two Knights that were seized on
together with them at Northampton, bare them company in their punishment. The
execution was done in presence of Sir Richard Ratcliffe, a favorite of the
Protectours, and one that partooke of his designs: who being naturally wicked,
and known by him to be so, he thought he could not trust the managing of this
business to one more wicked, and consequently more faithful then he. He made
them be brought out of Prison, and being exposed to public view as Traitors
they were beheaded without any other manner of Justice. He would not suffer
them to speak, least their innocence being made known, and commiserated,
might make the Author thereof more odious. These being rid out of the way, as
likewise the Chamberlain; and Stanley being hurt and a Prisoner, there
remained no further obstacle; every man looking to himself, not troubling
themselves with other men's affairs. And say there had been other rubbes, they
would have come out of time; the design being to be effected before they could
be prepared to hinder it: and though there was neither pretense, nor least
appearance thereof, every shadow or color would serve the turn; for force if
it be not able to make things be believed, it is sufficient to make Belief be
Fained. It Is dangerous for an unarmed man to dispute, and worse to give the lie
to one that is in the posture of striking. But as the success of things cannot
be represented upon a Theater without the concourse of several personages
requisite to the composure of the Story; so did it behove him to make use of
many others besides the above named, to the weaving of this Treason. Amongst
the rest Sir Edmund Shaw, Lord Major of London, his brother John Shaw, and
Pinker, Provincial of the Augustine Friars, were some: the first to draw the
City to the Protectours will, and to suppress tumults; a very fit personage
for this purpose, whose vanity did aspire to greatness, though by what so ever
precipitious way, and whose ambition for the like cause did not detest the most
enormous misdeed: the second and third Doctors of Divinity, and by the people
esteemed famous Preachers; chosen to give Authority and Fervor, as is usual
in such like actions: for such men pretending integrity of Profession, and
minding nothing less, are the best means to seduce and irritate the People.
But had not the fear men stood in of the Protector been of more force then
their preaching, little progress would have been made in the business; for by
their endeavors they had raised so Universal a hatred against them, that from
the estimation they formerly were in, they fell into such a Detestation, as
Doctor Shaw dyed for grief. The knot of this business lay in finding out a
means to exclude the heirs of Edward the Fourth: and though he made no great
account of the Duke of Clarence his heirs, yet did he not altogether contemn
them, though they were but young, without or Friends or Favor. The pretenses
found out to this purpose were two: the first, that King Edward and the Duke of
Clarence were both of them the issue of Adultery: that they were not sons to
the Duke of York, whose only legitimate heir the Protector was. The second;
that Edwards children were not only Bastards, as Children of a bastard, but as
borne in an illegitimate Marriage; he having, before he married their Mother,
engaged himself, by word to the Lady Lucy, who if she did not make good her
claim, when she was interrogated thereupon, it was for fear; so as the
Duchess of York Mother to them all three, laid it afterward to Edwards
conscience: therefore such Marriages being illegitimate before God, did exclude
all Children therein begotten, from all pretenses due to the lawful Heirs. I
write not the Particulars of this Matrimonall dispute, because they have been
sufficiently spoken of in the Life of Edward the Fourth, whereunto I refer
the Reader. These pretenses were to be to Preachers the subject of their
Sermons, especially to Shaw, the introducer of them; and from the beginning
partaker of the Counsel: the Augustine Friar, was afterward employed therein;
both of them behaving themselves in it with so barefaced flattery as they
nauseated the ears of their auditors. And because the First of these two
points was out of measure scandalous, the whole House of York being thereby
injured, and the Protectours Mother in particular defamed; they resolved not to
Treat thereof in downeright terms, but by way of circumspection, as if it
should seem to be done out of a fear of offending the Protector. In the
second point they were not mealy-mouthed, but did at large expatiate
themselves. Shaw Preached at Paul's* Cross taking his Text out of the Wisdom
of Solomon: Spuria vitulamina non agent radices altas. The bastard slippes
shall take no deep rooting. Whereupon he discoursed amply, it being a subject
plentiful in Examples, Sentences, and Apophthegmes taken out of both Holy and
Profane writ; and seconded by the agreeing diversity of Fathers, Philosophers
and Poets: He showed Gods blessings to such as proceeded from lawful
Matrimony; his Curses to such as were Adulterously begotten, the usurpation of
Goods belonging to the lawfully begotten being an abomination in his Eyes: that
therefore God would replant the lawfully begotten, and root out the contrary.
Here falling upon the praises of Richard Duke of York, he made a long
Panegyric; repeating his Titles to the Crown, confirmed by Parliament, and
declared King after the Death of Henry the sixth; that the now Protector was
his only legitimate Heir, as the only issue descended from him; King Edward
and the Duke of Clarence, being by such as knew the secret passages of the
House, not esteemed His: that they resembled Others who were very well known,
more then Him; and did likewise so far differ from him in Virtue, as they
could not descend from Him: That there was no dispute to be made of Edwards
Sons, they being the Issue of a Marriage contracted whilst the Lady Lucy His
First and True Wife was alive: so as the Protector was the only Legimate
offspring of that house, in whom might easily be discerned his Fathers manners,
Image, and Valor: that therefore he was only to be looked upon: as he on whom
the Laws by Nature, and the Heavens by Grace had conferred all their favors.

The further Order herein taken was; that when Shaw should be entered into this
Encomium, the Protector should appear; to the end that the People, hearing
these things said at the instant of his arrival, might think Shaw inspired by
the Holy Ghost, and might cry up Richard King: but he coming somewhat late,
and the Preacher being past on to some other matter, he quitted it at His
appearing, turning disorderly and from the purpose, to what he had formerly
said: This (said he) is that Noble Prince, the mirror of Chevalry; this is he
that naturally represents the noble Duke his Father as well in the Lineaments
of his Mind as Countenance: this is his very Figure, his true stamp, his
undoubted Image, his full Resemblance; whose memory will never die so long as
this man lives. Had he who says Vox Populi, Vox Dei, the Peoples voice is
Gods voice, seen how hushed all the Auditory was, he would have said The
Peoples silence is Gods silence: for being amazed to hear such bold and
shameless impudence, they stood like so many Statues: in so great a concourse
of People no one Voice or Gesture of applause was heard or seen either for
Protector or Preacher, their conceived hopes were rendered vain; so as both
of them being utterly out of Countenance the one returned much confused to his
Palace, the other very Resolute to his House, where understanding by his
friends how exceedingly He was blamed, He, a few days after Died for mere
shame.

The Protector for all this, ceased not to pursue his intent, being resolved,
come what would come, to effect His desire. Audacity, Importunacy and Violence
might effect that which Fraud, Calumny and Persuasion could not: so as having
put the Chamberlain to death on the Thirteenth of July, and indeavored three
or four days after by Doctor Shaw's Preaching to seduce the People, on the
one and Twentieth of the same Month he sent the Duke of Buckingham,
accompained by many Lords and Gentlemen, to the Major and Aldermen of London,
with whom were likewise the Common Counsel of the City commanded purposely to
attend. Where (being a very well spoken man) he made a long Narration of the
last Kings Actions, thereby to make his memory odious, and his Children
incapable of succession. He said, He was come to propound unto them a weighty
business, and of inestimable advantage to the whole Kingdom, and every Member
thereof; the which contained in it the security of their Lives, their Wives
Honesty, and the safety of their Goods, which till that time had been subject
to so many Robberies, Taxes, and Impositions; which being imposed without
necessity, there was no hope of ever seeing an end of them: the ablest men
amongst them were most subject to these miseries, as better endowed by Fortune
then were the rest: and because these grievances were not sufficient to satisfy
Avarice, great sums of Money were raised under Title of Benevolence: the
Title taking from both the Name and Nature, that not being given with Good
Will, which being not in the power of the Giver to withstand, was given by
violence: the Good Will remaining only in the King, in His Desiring it,
Receiving it, and thereby enriching his Coffers: things which though they were
all insufferable, yet might they be endured, were they not come to that height
as that Impositions past on to Punishments Punishments to Ransomes, denial of
the Benevolence to Contempt of the Laws, such contempt to Treason, which was
the Trap-hole whereinto did fall the Lives and Livelyhoods of the impoverished
and evilly treated Subject: so as so long and exemplary a Patience was not
longer to be endured. He instanced in the Names of sundry that had come by
Sinister ends, that their Goods might be seized on: he called the Auditors to
witness; not any one of them being there, who had not had some feeling of
these proceedings either in themselves or their friends. That plots had not
been wanting to endanger their Lives and Goods: little things had been made
great; mere Chimeras, and imaginations, though in themselves vain, were made
capable of Pretense: none was so poorly spirited or void of sense, but might
invent some; any superficial color being sufficient to ruin the People. Then
falling upon discourse of the late Wars, he showed how his access unto the
Crown was through much blood: That he came to it before his time; for during
Henry the Sixth his Life He had no pretense thereunto: The very imputation of
being of the contrary faction was enough to make a rich Man a beggar: Great
were the number of those that were impoverished; the one half of the Kingdom
at least being then Lancastrians. He bad them consider how long the War
endured; which if it were deplorable between two several Nations, and in a
foreign Country, how much more miserable was it at Home, where the Son
should be found to be against the Father, one Brother against Another, friends
becoming Enemies? He forgot not to urge his flight into Flanders when he had
lost the Kingdom: and how many Men's lives his return cost, as well of those
who adhered to Him, as of His opposers. He called to mind the many fought
Battles, the cruelty used in Victories, the desolations of Cities, and
Provinces; the Slaughters of so many of the Nobility, which were not for number
and Valor to give way to whatsoever Empire, and which was not to be regained
but in a long revolution of time: more blood being spent in a short time to
lose themselves, then was lost in so many Years for the winning of France:
That they had been but little bettered by Peace; rich Men not being secure of
their Lives and Goods: an avaritious Tyrant, neither trusting nor loving one
that had Power and Means: not trusting nor loving His Brother, he put him to a
miserable Death. For what concerned Woemens reputation, it never had a more
insnaring Enemy, or Persecutor: since not contented to have deceived the Lady
Lucy with promise of Marriage, and to have taken away the Wife of Shore, a Man
of such esteem; (and here, though from the purpose, He fell to praise Shore,
to captivate the good will of his fellow Citizens) he never cast his Eye upon
Woman in his Life, that he desired not to enjoy; not regarding either the
fear of God, nor his Own nor other men's Honor: trampling the Laws under
foot, and those of Friendship and Blood; whilst a Prince, who is the Father of
his Subjects, should abstain from so doing, as from Incest; his Women Subjects
being his Daughters: Hence proceeded the Earl of Warwickes distastes; the
illegitimate Marriage (if Marriage it might be called) with a Widow full of
Children; and the renewing of a Civil War the cause of so many evils: and
if reputation (which is for its own sake to be desired) were not the chief
Ornament of Women, the establishing of Families, and of more worth then all
Worldly Treasure; he ought to reverence it, if not as the general duty of All
Princes (to whom it is not permitted to usurp what is another Man's, much less
his Honor, the chiefest of all possessions) yet as his own Peculiar duty;
being Obliged to the noble City of London the Metropolitan of so great a
Kingdom, for that she had taken part with the House of York, assisted it in
so many Wars with Expense, Blood and Danger; and not to repay it with
Ingratitude, rendering evil for good, shame for Honor; and charging himself
with an ignominy neither to be cancelled in this World, nor forgotten in the
World to come, without the extraordinary mercy of God, but was to be punished
with like punishment as Tyranny, Lust and Ingratitude. But it was not to be
wondered if He were such a Man; He was like to little Rivulets, which deriving
themselves from Ditches and Marsh-grounds are thick and muddy: since not being
of the House of York, He could not partake of the worth thereof; his actions
showing He descended from some low and stinking original. That therefore they
were to praise God, who drying up the Puddle, had given them a Spring, which,
issuing from its undefiled Fountain, would not only water with his favors
such as had deserved well of His House, but would make them bud forth by the
opulency of his rewards. That He was sorry He could not fully express
Himself upon this occasion; since the Duchess of Yorkes reputation was
therein concerned, as well Mother to the Protector (whom he feared to offend)
as to King Edward: but necessity had enforced him to say more then willingly
He would have done. He referred himself therein to what the Preacher had said
the preceding Sabbath day at Paul's* Cross; whose integrity was not to be
contradicted, he being a Messenger of the Word of God, so wise, intelligent,
and endowed with so much worth, as it would not suffer him to say any thing
(especially upon such an occasion and in such a place) which was not certain
truth: that great was the efficacy of truth, which had opened his Mouth,
formerly shut up by the way of circumspection: that He had fully laid open the
claim which the Protector Duke of Gloucester had to the Crown; since Edwards
Children being illegitimate, as the issue of an unlawful Marriage, the
Kingdom fell to him: the which being maturely considered, and therewithal the
Valor and Worth of so gallant a Prince; the Nobility and Commons, especially
them of the Northern parts, being resolved not to be governed by Bastards,
they had resolved humbly to Petition Him that He would vouchsafe to take upon
Him the Government of the Kingdom, which by Nature, and by the Laws belonged
unto Him. For his part he knew not whether he would Accept of it, or no; for
being free from all manner of Ambition, and sufficiently acquainted with the
troubles of Government, he was afraid he would refuse it. Howsoever the
necessity of the Kingdom being great, King Edwards Children not only excluded
by the Laws, but very Young, he hoped that the threats of the holy Scripture,
(Woe be to the Kingdom, whose King is a Child) would move him to condescend to
the general supplication of the State; which needing a Prince of mature age,
who might be Wise, and of Experience, would never cease to call upon him till
they were heard in what they desired: That he had taken upon him the charge of
delivering the Petition, but considering it might be the more graciously
accepted if the Citizens of London would join with him therein, he was come
to entreat them that weighing the Public good, and their own particular
advantage, they would be the first that might do it; and that their
forwardness herein would make him more favor the City then all the preceding
Princes had done.

His Speech being ended, and expecting when the people, applauding his
discourse, should cry up Richard King, he was amazed to find the contrary: he
found he was abused in his hopes of the Lord Majors having prepared them for
it; so as drawing near unto the Major he asked him what might be the reason of
the peoples so great Reservednesse and silence? who not knowing what to say,
answered he thought his Grace was not well understood: whereupon, believing
that that might be the cause of their silence, and that his eloquence might yet
prevail with them, he in a louder tone and in other words repeated all he had
said before; whereat all that heard him marvelled; for he could not have spoken
better though he had penned it, and gotten it without Book. But for all this
the people altered not their silence. He then would have had the Recorder of
London to repeat once more what he had said: wherein he desired to be excused,
as being but lately entered upon the Office, and not having as yet had any
occasion to speak unto the people: but the truth was, he did not like the
business, thinking it to be unjust. Yet notwithstanding, the Major urging him,
and alleging that the Dukes too eloquent and Court-like Speech was not well
understood, he unwillingly obeyed; interposing ever and anon this Parenthesis
(He says) to the end they might not believe his Vote went with it. But the
people still more deaf then formerly, the Duke said unto the Major; He never
met with so obstinate a silence; and preparing to speak a third time, he said,
He was come hither to persuade them to concur in a business, wherein
peradventure their assistance would not be requisite: for the Nobility and
Commons of the other Provinces would do it without them; but that he bearing a
particular affection to that Noble City, did not desire it should be done
without them, but rather would have them have the first part therein. He
desired them to say, whether in conformity with the rest of the Kingdom, they
would name the most Noble Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester, at the present
Protector of the Kingdom, for their King. To the which, though no man
answered, yet was not the silence so great as before: for one whispering in
another ear, a noise was heard, much like the noise of a Hive of Bees: but in
the lower end of the Hall, where were many servants, and shop-boyes, who in the
crowde were gotten in, they began to cry aloud (the Dukes servants being the
Ringleaders) Long live King Richard: throwing their Hats up: but the Citizens
turning about to see what the matter might be, continued their former silence.
The Duke wisely making use of this disorder, and being seconded by the Major,
said: He was much overjoyed to hear, that with so much conformity, and
without one Negative voice, they had desired this Noble Prince for their King;
he would acquaint him with it, so as it should redound to their advantage. He
wished them to be ready; for the next morning he would present him with their
supplication; to the end that the Protector might be persuaded to accept of
the Kingdom, so much desired by Them, and by the Kingdom. Which being said,
he went away, few or none appearing well pleased. The next morning the Major
assembled all the Aldermen, and chief of the Common-Counsell of the City into
Paul's Church, from whence they went to Baynards Castle, the place where the
Kings of England had formerly kept their Courts, where the Protector now lay,
and where according to appoinment made came the Duke of Buckingham, accompanied
with a great number of Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who sent word to the
Protector, that a great many men of great account were ready there to wait
upon his Grace in a business of great importance. The Protector seemed
unwilling to come down the stairs, and give them admittance (as if the
business had been New unto him) feyning as though their unexpected coming,
the cause not known why, had made him somewhat jealous. Buckingham by this His
refusal strongly argued the Protectours integrity, as being far from
imagining what the business now in hand was. He sent him word again, that
the business was not to be imparted to any save Himself; securing him in so
humble and submissive a way, as was sufficient to have wrought belief in one
who had really doubted. He at the last appeared, having two Bishops by his
sides, in a bay-window, which looks out upon the Hall. The Duke of Buckingham,
making a low reverence, begged two things of him: the one, that he would suffer
them to make an humble supplication to him: the other, that he would pardon
them, in case it should not prove acceptable to him; for though it aimed at
nothing but his Honor, and the good of the Kingdom, yet he was afraid his
Modesty (he being a Prince endued with so much worth) might take it in a
contrary sense to their intention. The Protector answered: He was so confident
of their integrity, as He hoped they would say nothing that might displease
Him; He therefore granted the Leave and pardon they demanded. Buckingham,
after having made a long digression of the Kingdoms grievances, which were not
to be cured but by a Prince of his virtue and endowments, said: That they were
expressly come humbly to desire him, that the unlawful birth of his brother
King Edwards children considered (not daring to touch upon the birth of Edwards
self) he would vouchsafe (for his own innate Goodness, for the Zeal he had
ever borne to the Weal of the People, and for the Compassion, which upon this
present occasion, more then upon any other whatsoever, was to shine forth in
him) together with the Government of the Kingdom, to accept of the Crown, to
the glory of God, and Countries safety: being he might rest assured, that never
did any Prince reign whose people did think themselves so happy, as would His
people think themselves most happy under Him. The Protector, as if offended
at this request, with angry look, answered: That though much of what he had
said was true, yet the love he bare to his brother King Edward, his affection
to his Children, and his regard unto his own Honor, would not permit him to
accept of such a burden: for it was to be believed, that should he depose his
Nephews, and make himself King, the ignorant and malignant would accuse him
to all the Princes of the World, as if he had done it not out of the right
pretense he had thereunto, or being enforced to it by the Peoples importunacy,
and necessity of the Kingdom (which, to say truth, could not be in worse
condition then it was) but through his own Ambition: Yet knowing their good
intentions, he did not only pardon them, but returned them thanks, since he
conceived it proceeded from the love they bare him; the which he desired might
be turned to the King, under whose government they now lived, whom he with his
person and best advice would serve; hoping to put the affairs of the Kingdom
into so good order, as they should not have any thing to wish for: as (he
praised God) he had given some testimony since his being Protector;
notwithstanding the malignity of some, which had rather been suppressed by Divine
Providence, then by Humane Wisdom. This answer being given, the Duke of
Buckingham stepped aside, as if to consult with the Noblemen, the Lord Major,
and the Recorder of the City: the which being done, he desired pardon again;
and having obtained it, he said with a Loud voice, as if he were somewhat moved
or heated: That the Kingdom was absolutely resolved not to permit Edwards
Children to reign; not so much for that they had proceeded so far in their
requests they were not to hope for Pardon, as for that the Public good
required it: That therefore he beseeched him to accept of the Crown, which if
he would not do, they should be enforced to offer it to one that would not
refuse it. The Protector seemed to be afraid of these threats; he seemed
sorrowful, that they should have so ill a conceit of his brothers issue: He
confessed he could not govern or reign without their good wills; therefore
their resolution being such, and there being none to whom the Crown did of
right belong but to Him, being legitimately descended from the Duke of York:
and that to his Natural and Lawful Titles, there was added his now Election,
the chiefest of all the rest; He yielded to their entreaties and requests: by
accepting the Crown, and taking upon him from this time forward the State and
Regal pre-eminence of the two Kingdoms of England and France: the former
whereof should be Commanded, Governed, and Defended by Him and his Heirs: the
other by Gods assistance and theirs Regained; that so it might be in perpetuity
established under the obedience of England, whose greatness and reputation he
so much coveted, as he desired God he might live no longer, then his life might
be serviceable to this end. The which being said, they cried aloud King
Richard, King Richard, the Artillery playing their part. The Lords went up to
him where he was, to kiss his hand, whilst the People departing, spoke as
leudly of him as they might: being displeased at nothing more then at the
counterfeit carriage of the business, which being plotted and resolved upon
long before, there had notwithstanding been so many stage-like actions used
therein, as if it had never been thought of till then: and as if choice had
been made of the Spectatours as of so many of the most senseless and stupid
people of the Land.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND In the Life of Richard the
Third.
Kingdoms which belong to others are not usurped without violent means; of
all which War is the least blameable, though the most harmfull. A valiant
usurper is like your Highway robber who bids the traveller stand, and if he
take away his purse does it with his Sword in hand. Richard took not this way
in his usurping the Crown: not that he wanted courage (for of the good
qualities he was endued withal, Valor was the only one which was not
counterfeit) but because he found none that did withstand him. Deceit, fraud,
cruelty, and treachery were the means he used: one or two of which being
sufficient to other men, they did not all serve his turn; for he invented one
beyond imitation or example; the defaming of his mother. Had he who wrote the
book De Principe met with this subject, he would have quit Duke Ualentine, and
taken this man for the pattern of his tyrant. Not that the difference between
them was great, but for that that was, was in the most essential points.
Valentines vices, if they were not more execrable, yet were they more
dishonest. Richards were more execrable, but more secure. And though both were
bad beyond belief, yet Richard by the death of a few infused terror into the
rest, and made himself a King; where Valentine by the death of very many could
keep his own Principality. And if it be said, that Richard weakened the
Kingdom and its forces by taking off the heads of such as might have made
themselves heads of the people, and so have withstood him; that being of the
Blood-royall, he had many that sided with him: whereas Valentine on the
contrary, had Provinces, Princes, and Republiques for his enemies: the wary
wickedness of the one will be the more remarkable, who knew his advantage; and
the unwary rashness of the other, who assisted only by Ecclesiastical
forces, terminable with the Popes death, undertook what was not to be
effected, or at least not long to be made good.

The ambition of getting the Kingdom began in Richard during his brothers
life: and having formerly plotted the whole affair, he laid the first
groundwork thereof by the death of Henry the sixth, and the Duke of Clarence;
and in process of time, he finished the Fabric by putting those to death who
were likely to oppose him: and by terrifying the rest, he made his election,
which was made by the baser sort of people, be as available as if it had been
legally resolved upon by the whole Kingdom: and which is further observable,
he pretended not to accept of it, till entreated and enforced. Arguments of a
headpiece, which had it been employed in good enterprises, instead of proving
the most lewd might have been the wisest then to be found. For all things else,
there was no evil which he committed not: He betrayed his Nephews, and then
slew them: he cheated his brothers wife; and together with her, those whom he
made use of as instruments to remove the little Duke of York from the
Sanctuary: in the height of cruelty and irreligion, he counterfeited the
perfection of piety, and tenderness of blood: All his actions were larded with
fraud and lies: the Queen and her brother were by him persuaded to lay down
their arms; the later whereof he imprisoned and beheaded: in like manner he
incensed and slew the Chamberlain: He sacrilegiously divulged his mother to be
an Adultresse in a place appropriated for preaching the Word of God; declared
his nephews to be Bastards, counterfeited the good he had not, concealed the
evil he had; was like to none but to himself. Encomiums worthy of such
qualities; (and qualities unworthy of that Crown, which consisting of Honor,
was whilst he wore it dishonored by his wickedness. He omitted not any show
of sorrow at his brothers death: he solemnised his Funerals at York, with the
rites of mourning. But whilst aiming at usurpation, he seemed to be fond of his
nephews, whom he intended to betray, he minded not divine admonitions, which
manifesting themselves by sundry ways, are wont by way of observation to
advertise us of dangers, to the end that reforming our selves we may change our
lives and thoughts from bad to good: for Christian virtues are able to
frustrate that which the Ancients called Fate, by withdrawing us from vice and
procuring the divine Providence to protect us. The observations here meant are,
that all the (Kings) Richards, and all the Dukes of Gloucester came to violent
ends: an observation redoubled in him, being by name, Richard; and by title,
Duke of Gloucester. Such like observations, though they be not superstitiously
to be believed, yet are they not slightly to be despised. But the proud man
considers no other interest, no not the concernment of his life, so his
ambition may be satisfied: upon which his spirits were wholly bent; and upon the
arriving whereunto he out did himself. He made his vices virtues. He became
courteous liberal, and affable, especially to Lawyers: he studied nothing but
justice, observance of the Laws, and the peoples indemnity: by which arts he
prevailed so far, as the Crown, which was tumultuously conferred upon him,
was legally offered him by the Parliament; which with base flattery entreated
him to accept of it, out of these reasons. That the Kingdom of England had
been very happy under the government of wise Kings, assisted by understanding
Counselors: but when their successors began to govern themselves according to
their own fancies, she fell into all manner of misery: The chiefest of which,
and from which all the mischiefs of the present time did derive, was Edward
the fourths unfortunate praetended marriage with Elizabeth widow to Sir John
Gray (who did still assume to her self the title of Queen) which had perverted
all the orders not only of God and the Church, but of nature and the Kingdom:
there being now no more propriety, nor any condition which was not subject to
fears; since the Laws either abandoned or abused were rendered useless and
of no protection. Hence proceeded faults of all sorts; murders, extortions,
and such oppressions as men had no security neither of their lives nor
fortunes; much less of their wives or daughters: all women were subject to
violence; nor was any one though she should refuse, safe in her Honor. To this
might be added the blood of so many of the Nobility, of hundred thousands of
the Communalty, shed in the late wars, to the universal prejudice of all
men, and to the greatest sufferance of the most innocent. That the forenamed
pretended marriage was Clandestine, made without the knowledge or consent of
the Nobility: the Devil was the author thereof, witchcraft the means,
Elizabeth the chief agent, and her mother, the Duchess of Bedford, her
coadjutrix: that so it was believed; and when time and place should serve it
would be proved. But that which chiefly aggravated this business, was, That
King Edward was long before married to another Lady, when he took her to his
wife; so as in living with her, contrary to the Laws of God, and of the
Church, in continual adultery, his sons by her were bastards, and, as such,
incapable of succession. That by this so heinous sin, and to the prejudice of
the true heir, he had provoked Gods anger, who had therefore forsaken him,
and brought the Kingdom into all those miseries. For these and other reasons
they were enforced to elect a King, who by nature, and by the Law was undoubted
heir unto the Crown. And because the Duke of Clarence convict of high treason
in the seventeenth year of the reign of his brother Edward, had by his
Attainder rendered his issue incapable of succession* therefore the Protector,
being the only undoubted son and heir of Richard Duke of York, He and no
other was undoubted successor; not reckoning in his virtues which were such as
of themselves made him worthy of the Crown: he being so richly endowed,
especially with justice, wisdom, and valor, witnessed in so many actions and
battles, wherein he had personally been, showing his natural inclination to
the common good. Whereupon having no other respect but the peace and
tranquillity of the Kingdom, his prosperity and ancient reputation, they had
chosen him their King and Sovereign Lord. Entreating him to accept the charge;
as well by Title of Inheritance, as of Election: they promising for their parts
that they would be his good and faithful Subjects* ready upon this and any
good occasion to live and die with him: for the oppressions and extortions they
had suffered, contrary to the Laws of God and the Kingdom, had made them
resolve to run what ever danger, rather then to live in the miseries they
hitherto had done. They called upon Alinighty God the King of Kings, to inspire
him with his light, and to continue unto him in his Regal dignity, those
praiseworthy parts, by means whereof he deserved to be King, though he were
not. And that though his right needed not any public Acts of Parliament (he
being King and heir unto the Crown without them) yet in regard the people
might be ignorant of the cause of the deposing the one, and assuming the other;
for this cause, and to remove all doubts that might arise, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parliament, had in full Parliament
pronounced, decreed, and declared, that Richard the third their Sovereign
Lord, was whilst he should live the undoubted King of England, and of all
that within or without belonged thereunto; and after him his heirs: That the
high and mighty Prince Edward his son was his heir apparent; and after him
those who should descend from him. This decree being registered among the Acts
of Parliament and approved of by King Richard, with order to be held
authentical in all the parts thereof, made it be understood, that the Kings of
England have power to do what they will; when they are either loved for their
virtues, or feared for their force. For what concerns love, there is no proof
in this present case; but of fear, sufficient, fear being the prinium mobile
of this business. Richard having by the assistance of the Duke of Buckingham
and their adherent raised a powerful faction; the lawful King being a Child,
and prisoner; the Tyrant a man of brains, welspoken, and of reputation in
arms, not likely to undertake such a business unless certain to effect it:
all men doubting themselves: since their forces being cut off, and those put to
death which might have reunited them, they were exposed to the violence of so
cruel a man as Richard; who had given proof of his cruelty by his detaining
the King, by his taking the Duke of York from the Sanctuary, by his impudence
in declaring them to be Bustards, and by his shamelessness in publishing his
mother to be a whore, to boot with the death of so many Peers. This fear was
that which gave a mask to the flatteries of Parliament, and which furnished it
with some color of pretense drawn from Doctor Shaw's Sermon, and the speeches
made by the Duke of (...) in the City-Hall. Richard being thus confirmed and
believing to settle his tyranny by resting it upon un-accustomed circumstances,
he went into Westminster Hall, sat him down in the Kings Bench where in
doubtful cases the Kings of England had wont anciently to sit, and where he
avowed his accepting of the Crown: the which he expressed in a formal Oration,
and in a manner so well composed as those who had not known him, would have
thought England had never been blessed with so good a King: and to color with
the show of clemency his innate cruelty, he caused one Fogge who had taken
Sancturary, and whom he had always mortally hated, to be brought before him;
he took him by the hand in fight of all the people, and made professions of
loving him now as much as he had formerly hated Him: by which act he made a
great impression in the simpler sort; but those who were better advised knew
that this was but a Bait wherewith to catch better fish. In his return to his
Palace, He courteously saluted such as He knew loved Him not, thinking by
this servile flattery to infatuate their minds, and to establish his
government. Yet for all this he durst not rely upon his present fortune; He
ascertained His Coronation by unaccustomed forces; causing five thousand men to
come from the Northern parts of the Kingdom, in whom he trusted, as well for
that they took part with the House of York, as likewise that living in remote
parts, they were not acquainted with his actions, as were the Londoners; who
having him always in their eye, abhorred Him. These Northern men appeared ill
clad, and worse armed, which made them be but laughed at: for it was thought that
if He should have occasion to make use of them, they would not serve His turn;
and that it was neither these forces not yet greater but a mere Fatality which
had precipitated England into so dire and miserable a subjection. The last act
of His possessing the Crown was His Coronation, all things thereunto belonging
being ready, as prepared for His Nephews Coronation. He went with his Wife and
His Son to the Tower; where the next day He created the Lord Thomas Howard,
Duke of Norfolk; Thomas Howard, Son to the same man He created Earl of
Surrey: He made William Barckley Earl of Nottingham; and the Lord Francis
Lovell Viscount and Lord Chamberlain: and He made seventeene Knights of the
Bath. The Archbishop of York, the Lord Stanley, and the Bishop of Ely had
been prisoners in the Tower ever since the Chamberlain lost his Head; He set
the first at liberty, finding himself peaceably possessed of the Kingdom,
otherwise He would not have done it; for being an honest man he would never
have given his consent to the deposing of the true King: He freed the second
out of fear; for His Son, the Lord Strange was raising great forces in
Lancashire (a place wherein He had great Power and was mightily followed) it
behooved him to appease Him: but He did not set the Bishop of Ely at liberty,
who was a faithful servant to King Edward; for He was certain He would
never condescend to his Childrens deprivation, nor to the unjust ways whereby
He usurped the Kingdom: whereof He had made trial in the Counsels held in
the Tower, whilst by oblique means He set the business on foot. The Bishop
was of no great birth; but having lived a long time in good repute in Oxford,
he was taken from thence, being but bare Doctor, by Henry the sixth, and made a
Privy-Counsellour: Edward, knowing his integrity, kept him still in that
condition, and chose Him at His death to be one of his Executors. Richard
therefore, fearing Him, would have kept Him still in Prison, though He set the
others at liberty; had not the University of Oxford (which He did always very
much favor) interceded for Him: so that desirous in part to satisfy the
University, He was content to take him from the Tower, as being too public a
place: but that He might not have His free liberty, He committed him to the
custody of the Duke of Buckingham, who sent Him to a Castle of His in
Brecknockshire; where they jointly laid the first groundwork of Richards
ruin.

He together with his Wife was Crowned in great pomp the sixteenth of July:
his Wife was daughter to the great Earl of Warwick, who had made and unmade
the two preceding Kings, and Widow to Edward, Son to Henry the Sixth Prince of
Wales: to whom she was give in marriage, when Edward the Fourths ruin was
agreed upon in France. So as being destined to be a Queen, it was her ill
fortune to be one by his means who had slain her former husband, and married
her only for that she, together with her Sister, Wife to the Duke of Clarence,
were great Heirs.

I will not treat of this Coronation; it tends not to our purpose. The
solemnity being ended, he dismissed all the Lords that they might return to
their own homes: recommending to such as were in Office, the due Administration
of Justice without extortion or injury, the execution of the Laws, and Liberty
of the Subjects as not willing to have any thing ill done but by himself He
dismissed not the Lord Stanley, till such time as his Son Strange had disbanded
the forces he had raised. He also dismis^ the five thousand which he had
caused to come for his Guard from the North having spoken them fair and
rewarded them: whereupon they went away so well pleased, as becoming thereupon
insolent, they forced him to go in person into those parts, to appease the
tumults they had there raised, the which could not be done but by the death of
many of them. He forthwith sent to Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, touching
the continuance of the League made with his brother Edward: but his Ambassador
arriving after his Nephews death, Lewis would not afford him audience,
esteeming his friendship unworthy of any humane correspondency.

In what concerned their death, he demeaned himself in this sort. He first
withdrew himself to Gloucester, the place of his Patrimony and Title, his
conscience not permitting him to be in the place where his cruelty was to
surpass the cruelty of all other tyrants. He might have kept them prisoners
without any manner of danger, since they had no friends: and so he might not
have arrived to the height of hatred he did after their death. But he, not
esteeming himself King, whilst they were alive, sent his trusty servant John
Green with Letter to Sir Robert Brakenbury, Constable of the Tower, wherein he
commanded the to put them to death; who, abhorring the act returned answer: He
would rather die himself then obey him therein. Richard hereby perceived he
was not arrived at that power he thought he had been; since any one durst
disobey him in any how unjust soever a Command: so as not able to quiet
himself, nor to take any rest in his bed, his page who usually lay in his
Chamber, desired His Majesty he would be pleased to acquaint him with the
reason of his disquiet. To whom he replied, he was miserable, not having any
one on whom to trust: that he was repaid with ingratitude, and his service
denied by those, who having been befriended by him, should think themselves
happy when blessed with an occasion of doing him service. The page not knowing
the cause of his complaint, but well acquainted with his nature, thought the
command must be horrid which any one durst disobey: and calling a Gentleman to
mind who lay on a pallet bed in the Ante-chamber, he named him to Richard;
and told him, there was not that thing of danger nor difficulty which he would
not undertake. His name was James Tirrell: He might have past for a
well-conditioned man, had he not been corrupted by dishonest ambition; he had
left nor did leave no stone unturned whereby to get preferment in Court, which
was his element: but was discontented being held back by Richard Ratcliffe and
William Catesby, who governed the King, and werenot desirous of a third
companion, that surpassing them in audacity, might surpass them in fortune and
put them from the favor they possessed. This Page was a friend of his, and
knew his discontents; so as thinking to do him a good turn (whilst he could
not have done a worse) he propounded him to King Richard: who knowing his
quality, rose out of his bed to make trial of him; and throwing a night-Gowne
about him, he went where Tirrell lay, and Thomas Tirrell, his brother by
Blood, but not in conditions. He awaked him; and acquainted him with what he
desired craving his aid therein. James was not at all amazed, but undertook
the business; and was the next day dispatched with Letters to Brakenbury,
wherein he was commanded to deliver up the Keys of the Tower for one night to
this Tirrell, to the end he might do what he had in command. The Constable
obeyed and delivered the Keys. The two innocent children had been more
strictly kept after their uncle had quitted the title of Protector, and
assumed that of the King: they were not only debarred visits, but had their
servants taken from them; and had each of them two assigned to wait on them
whom they knew not: and that rather in place of Guardians then servants. The
Prince knew what was done to his prejudice: he knew he was no longer King:
that his Uncle was crowned. Nature pointed forth unto him his danger; the
apprehension and fear whereof was augmented by his tender age, subject to
weakness: he thought no longer of the loss of his Kingdom, neither did he
much value it; he though only on his Life: which being by the instinct of
nature desired, and to be hoped for, (though as a prisoner) it might, in all
reason, have been granted him. He sighing said to him that brought him the
first tidings that his Uncle had bereft him of his Crown, He did not greatly
care; so as together with it he would not take his Life away. After this time
he never put off his clothes, nor ever went out of his Chamber; but being
together with his brother full of sad thoughts he kept his Chamber till the
coming of this miserable night. Of the four that waited upon them, Tirrell
chose Miles Forest, a man from his youth brought up in blood; to whom he gave
for his companion John Dighton, the groom of his stable, a lusty strong
rascal. He made them go at midnight into the Chamber where they slept, and
where wrapped up in their Bed-clothes, they stopped their mouths with the Bolster
and Pillowes, and so stifled them. The business was soon dispatched. Tirrell
forthwith buried them under a great heap of Rubbish at the staire-foot in a
deep hole: which being done he hasted to horse, to acquaint the King with what
had past; who together with other favors did at the instant Knight him (as
some relate) being well pleased with all that had been done, save their
Burial. He had no scruple of mind to usurp their Crown, they being the true
Heirs; nor to murder them, being innocent: but He was troubled that being the
Sons of a King and of His blood, they should be buried in so contemptible a
place: whereupon the Chaplain of the Tower took them from thence, and buried
them elsewhere; but he dying soon after himself, 'twas never known where he
laid them. Some will have it that he put their bodies in a Coffin of Lead, and
sunk it in the Thames mouth. It Is certain that Tirrell being imprisoned in
the Tower for treason in Henry the Sevenths time, confessed what had been said,
after the same manner it is here, not knowing what became of their bodies after
they were taken from the place were he had buried them. He suffered for other
faults the punishment he deserved for this: as did likewise the rest. God does
not always punish all faults in an instant; but seldom suffers evil actions
to have good ends: for being approved of neither by men nor by the Laws, if
they escape one punishment, they fall upon another; and for their second fault
receive the punishment due for the former. As long as Richard lived after this,
He was both outwardly and inwardly troubled with fears and agonies; and
according to the relations of some that were most inward with him, He after
this so execrable act, enjoyed not one hour of quiet: his countenance was
changed, his eyes were troubled and ghastly, He wore coats of Male underneath
his clothes; and had almost continually, His hand upon His Daggers-hilt ready
to strike, as if He had then been stricken: He spent whole nights in
watching; and if at any time He chanced to take a little rest, He would be
wakened with fearful Dreams, which would force him to quit His bed, and so
walk up and down His chamber full of prodigious fears. The other two though
they escaped humane Justice, yet were they met with all by Justice from above:
for Miles Forest dyed having almost all his members first rotted, and then cut
off: if Deighton fared not altogether so ill, yet was he in daily expectation
to be made an exemplary spectacle by some ignominious death; for it is affirmed
by one who writes of him, that in his time he was alive in Callis, but so
universally hated and detested by all men, that he was pointed at as he went
along the streets: Others affirm that he lived and dyed there in great
misery. The first intestine troubles which Richard was afflicted withal, were
occasioned by the bad intelligence which was held between Him and the Duke of
Buckingham. What the occasion thereof might be is only known by conjecture;
yet such as is not likely to err: They were both naturally proud; therefore
prone to break; and though Buckingham first endeavored Glocesters friendship
before Gloucester His, he did it not in respect of his alike Genius, but fearing
least he might fall from the greatesse he was in, under the authority of the
Queen and her kindred; to shun this Rock, he gave against the Other: which
though it were the more dangerous, yet did he rather choose to submit himself
to a Superior who was borne great, then to his Inferiors who had acquired
greatness. It is said that Edward being dead, he sent his servant Persall
presently to York where Richard then was; who being privately admitted by
night, made offer unto him of his Masters service in this change of King; and
that if need should be, his master would come unto him in Person waited on by
a Thousand fighting men: that he made the same be said over to him again when
he came to Nottingham: and that when he returned to York he went to visit him
attended by three hundred horse; where a close friendship being contracted
between them, things followed as has been said, even to the Usurpation of the
Crown: after which they cooled in their affections, to the amazement of those
who observed their friendship: for they came to the point of not Trusting one
another; and 'twas thought moreover, that in the last journey to Gloucester,
Buckingham ran hazard of his life. The cause of their distaste was supposed to
arise from some claim Buckingham had to the Duke of Hertfords Lands, for that
reputing himself to be his Heir, he thought that Richard would not have
denied them unto him, neither in Justice nor yet in Recompense of his service.
But these Lands were so linkt to the Crown as that being fallen from the house
of Lancaster upon the late deposed Henry, and from Him upon the Crown, they
were to be free from any private propriety or pretension; which still continuing
in the Duke, Richard feared least his thoughts might exceed the condition of a
Subject: insomuch as when Buckingham demanded them, he received so sharp, so
threatening, and so scornful a denial as not able to endure it, he fained
himself sick, that so he might not be at the Coronation; and Richard sent him
word that if he would not come, he would make him be brought thither: whereupon
he was forced to go in all the rich and stately Equipage which at an
Extraordinary charge he had prepared before their distasts. Others
notwithstanding will have that the distasts between them rose after this, not
having as Then any being: that the King standing in need of him, would not have
hazarded the losing of him in that manner; and that the Duke, very well
acquainted with his Nature, would not have hazarded his Life, being assured
that upon any whatsoever occasion, he could not expect better dealings then his
Nephews had met withal. Notwithstanding the first opinion was thought true, in
respect of his proud behavior; as likewise for that in the very act of
Richards Coronation, he turned his Eyes another way as Repenting he had bin the
occasioner of it: and that Richard though he knew him to be distracted, treated
him civilly, and presented him at his departure to Gloucester; but his
Alienation grew after he was come to his house at Brecknock, and had had
discourse with Dr. Morton Bishop of Ely.

This Bishop was a learned man, and of a good life; a constant part-taker with
Henry the sixth, neither did he ever forsake him even till his imprisonment. He
fled with the Queen and Prince into France, and returned with them into
England. But their affairs succeeding ill, and Edward being established in the
Kingdom, He was by him received into favor for knowing him to have bin Loyal
to his First master, he thought he would be the like to Him; so as leaving him
Executor of his last Will and Testament, he continued his wonted loyalty to his
Children: which Richard knowing to be such as was unalterable, he put him in
the Tower, and afterward assigned him to the custody of the Duke of
Buckingham, with whom discoursing of Richards iniquities, he gave the rise to
his Ruin: for they found the true way to put a period to the Civil wars by
marrying Henry Earl of Richmond to Edwards eldest daughter. But having retired
himself to Rome with intention not to meddle any more in Worldly affairs, he
returned not till sent for by the said Earl when he was King: by whom he was
made Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England; and who likewise
procured him to be made Cardinal: in which Honors he died as virtuously as he
had lived.

This man at the Dukes return found a great alteration in him toward Richard.
He hoped to work some good effect thereout; not by propounding any thing, but
by seconding his opinions: in which he governed himself so well, as the more
averse he showed himself to what indeed he did desire, the more provoked he an
eagerness in the Duke to discover what he sought to hide: so as exagerating
Englands happiness fallen into the government of so wise a Prince, whilst under
the government of a Child, guided by persons interessed, and hated, it must
have been ruinated; The Bishop answered, He must confess the truth; (being
sure that by doing otherwise he should not be believed) that if things lately
passed had been to be decided by Votes, he should have voted that after Henry
the sixths death, the Crown should have gone to his son Prince Edward, and
not to King Edward: but that both of them being dead, it had been great folly
in him not to comply with the new King, since the dead do not revive: That he
had behaved himself to Edward in all things as a faithful Subject and Servant
ought to do to his King and Master: That he would have done the like to his
Children, had they succeeded Him in His Kingdom: but God having otherwise
disposed of them, his pretenses were not to raise up that which God would keep
down: And for what concerned the now King, formerly Protector --;Here he held
his peace, as if he had unadvisedly fallen upon that discourse; but after a
whiles silence he pursued to say, That he had already too much troubled
himself with Worldly affairs; 'twas now time to retire himself, and consider
nothing but his Books, and his own quiet. The silence that unexpectedly
interrupted the discourse which the Duke desired to have heard finished, made
his desire thereof the greater; so as thinking he had held his peace, as not
being confident of him, he desired him to speak his mind Boldly, assuring him
he should be so far from receiving Damage thereby, as that it might redound
more to his Advantage then he imagined: That he had begged his Guardianship of
the King for no other end, but that he might better himself by his wise
Counsels; and that if He had been in any other man's custody, He could not have
met with one that would have set such a value upon his worth, as did he. The
Bishop thanked him, replying, That it was not his desire to speak of Princes
since they made the world to be not what it was, but what it seemed best to
them. Then when the Lion banished all Horn'd-beasts out of the Woods, one that
had a little Wen in his forehead fled away with the rest; and being demanded by
the Fox, why he fled? he answered, because of the proclaimed banishment. Yea
but thou have no Horns (said the Fox.) It Is true, I have none, (said the other
animal;) but if the Lion should say this Wenne were a Horn, who durst say the
contrary? In what case should I be? The Duke was well pleased with a Fable, yet
could he not persuade him there was no Lion should do him any harm. The
Bishop said: It was not his intention to dispute the Protectours title, who was
now King: but since their treaty concerned the Commonwealth, whereof he was a
member, he wished it an addition of perfections to the many it already was
endowed withal; and amongst these, some of those with which God had adorned
Him (the Duke.) This being said, he held his peace, much to the others
displeasure; who was grieved, that whilst the Bishops discourse promised Much,
he had said just Nothing: whilst the comparison between the King and Him
required not so dark but more intelligible explication. He told him, these
many clouds of Diffidence injured their friendly communication, assuring him,
that whatsoever he should say, since it proceeded from a personage he so much
honored, it should be as if it had not been said at all. Upon these words the
Bishop resolved freely to unbosome himself; encouraged by the Dukes vanity,
who loved to hear himself praised, and by the Hatred he had now discovered he
bore unto the King. Whereupon he said, He had read, that man was not borne for
Himself alone, for his Friends or Parents, but Chiefly for his Country; that
this consideration had moved him to take into his thoughts the present
condition of this Kingdom, his native soil; the which, (in comparison of
former times) 'twas a wonder if it were not utterly ruined. That there had been
Kings under whose government it had happily flourished, the love between them
and their Subjects being reciprocal; their interests being the same: At home
Peace, Justice and Security; Abroad Victory, Honor, and Trophies: But now the
world was much altered; there was but only one hope left, which was in Him
(the Duke) for considering his Public Zeal, his Learning, his Wisdom, Wit,
and so many other endowments, the Kingdom in the midst of so great misery
could have recourse to none but Him: and that it had no Haven wherein to save
it self during this tempest in which it was agitated, but the safe Rode of His
government, out of which it was certain to suffer Shipwreck: That it could not
be denied but that the Protector (who now styled himself King) was endowed
with Virtues, which made him worthy of the Kingdom, did he not reign: but
that these his virtues were corrupted by so many Old and New vices, that they
had lost both their Quality and Name; a wicked Prince converting Virtue into
Vice, as Vipers and Toads do Nourishment into Poison: That there was no
example in the usurping a Crown comparable with his for Wickedness: He had
procured it without any pretense of Law: contrary to the laws of Humanity,
making his way thereunto by the Death of so many Worthy and Innocent persons:
contrary to the law of Nature, by calumniating his Mother; whom he would have
to be honest only when she conceived him: contrary to the Laws of the Church;
by declaring his Nephews to be borne in Unlawful Matrimony: contrary to them
All together, by being their Executioner; so as their Blood, crying to Heaven
for Revenge, warned every man to beware of his life; for if to possess
Himself of a Kingdom, he had not spared Their lives who were Nearest in
Blood unto Him, he would muchlesse spare the lives of Others that were Nothing
at all unto Him, so to usurp what belonged to them. To shun therefore the
Rocks they were likely to run upon, he humbly desired him, That as he loved
God, his own House, and his native Country, he would accept the Crown; free
it from the captivity whereinto it was fallen; and if he would not do this, he
conjured him by the obligations he ought to God, that he would do his
uttermost to change the Government; since upon whomsoever it should fall, it
must needs redownd to the public service: but if He would assume it, God
would be therewithal well pleased, He and his House secured, the Kingdom
obliged; and all the World would thank him. When he had ceased speaking, the
Duke stood a good while pensive with his eyes fixed: whereat the bishop was much
astonished; insomuch as his color changed. In such like matters men are not
satisfied with silence, nor mental replies, which argue peril and prejudice.
But supper time broke off their discourse, which the Duke adjourned till the
morrow morning: and perceiving the bishop to be much troubled, he entreated him
not to be disquieted at this delay, assuring him he would keep promise with
him: which did not notwithstanding satisfy the Bishop, who was as desirous to
know the Dukes intention now, as the Duke was earnest to know his the day
before. But he failed him not in what he had promised him: for having
handsomely and methodically gone over all that the other had said, he laid his
Hat upon the Table, and calling devoutly upon God, he thanked him for that they
being amidst so many tempests and dangers, in a good, but ill-governed ship, he
had been pleased to enlighten them, by affording them a means how to provide
themselves of a Steersman, who being one that would give satisfaction, would
bring safety and welfare to the Kingdom. Then taking up his Hat, and putting
it on his head, he thanked the Bishop for the affection he had ever found in
him, especially at this time, in this their weighty and trusty communication:
his fidelity and zeal unto his Country, together with so many other unfeigned
circumstances, and void of selfe-interest, rendering him worthy to be esteemed
the honest man that all men thought him: He was sorry his deserts had not met
with a fortune worthy of him; but he assured him that if God should at any time
bless him with means to show his gratitude, he would not fail therein, but
give it the precedence of all other duties. That now he came to his answer,
wherein he would conceal nothing, being so taught and obliged to do by his
example. He wish him then to know that the reason of his alienation from King
Edwards children, was their fathers discountenancing of him upon all occasions,
without any cause given; whilst they two having married two sisters, he might
have expected to have been more friendly treated: he therefore thought himself
free from all bands of humanity, since the King used none to him, having not
only excluded him from all Offices and Honors, but treated him after a manner
not worthy of his quality. The first thing then that after his death came into
his thoughts was the miserable condition of the Kingdom, under the government
of a woman and of a child; not so much in respect of the ones sex and the
others age, as that her brother the Earl Rivers, and the Marquess Dorset her
son were to exclude from all authority and preeminence, not only the Dukes
and great men of the Kingdom, but even the brother to the deceased King. He
thought it therefore requisite for him, as well for the public, as his own
private good, to join with the Duke of Gloucester; whom he then thought as
free from all dissembling, injury, and cruelty, as he now knew him to be most
dissembling, injurious, and cruel man that ever was borne. Upon this false
opinion, at the first Council held in London he was by his means created
Protector of the King and Kingdom: and after having by fraudulent pretenses
gotten the Duke of York out of the Sanctuary, he had the boldness (not
without sprinkling some threats) to demand the Crown of him and the other Lords
that were then in Council, till such time as the King being full four and
twenty years old should be of age to govern it: but that meeting with some
difficulties, (the like thing not having been formerly heard of, and that it
was unlikely any man would be found so moderate, as to lay down the Crown,
become a Subject, and submit himself to Another government, after He had
governed of Himself so long) he presented them with certain Writings
authenticated by Doctors, Notaries and Witnesses, by which it appeared Edwards
sons were Bastards: which was then believed to be as True, as it is Now
known to be notoriously False; the false witnesses being by recompenses and
promises, drawn to so great a treachery. This writing being read, he said unto
the Counselors: My Lords! I am assured that being Wise and Faithful, you will
not suffer my Nephew to receive any injury: but I am likewise confident that
being Just, you will see no wrong done to Me. That which you have heard is
either true, or false; if you believe it not, clear your selves in the point;
and if you believe it, which of you will deny Me to be the undoubted Heir to
Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, declared by the Authority of Parliament to
be heir unto the Crown? since the Duke of Clarence's Son is by his Fathers
Delinquency made incapable thereof; and his Father more then He, being reputed
a Bastard, and upon good presumptions held for such a one in the house of
York. Not any one answering him, much less opposing him, he was (chiefly by
the assistance of Him, the Duke of Buckingham) of Protector, made King; he
having first received his plighted faith there, which afterward was confirmed
to him by giving of him his hand in Baynards-castle, that he would provide for
the Lives of the two Princes in so good a manner, that He and All the world
should be therewith satisfied. Now where is that Prince that after such a
Service, would not of his own free will have sought out some means how to
have gratified him, unless it were Richard, who being demanded a thing which
was not His, and which was not in Justice to be denied, denied it him out of
mere ingratitude? The things he required of him were; the Office of
High-Constable of England, which having been enjoyed by his Forefathers, it
was a shame for Him to go without it; and the Lands belonging to the Earl of
Hereford, which had been wrongfully detained from him by his brother, King
Edward: the which he did not suddenly deny unto him, but held him a while in
Hope; till being constantly solicited therein, he absolutely denied him,
objecting that such a demand pretended to set on foot again the pretenses of
the house of Lancaster, since Henry the fourth, who was heir thereunto, having
wrongfully usurped the Crown, and by his usurpation united them to the same,
they were not again to be taken from the Crown, unless that together with
them pretense were had unto the Kingdom: the which it should seem was by him
intended: since that, being fallen by the death of Henry the sixth upon him,
(Buckingham) according to the Common Law (in what concerns private men, but
not the State) he did again revive the tacit pretense thereunto. Of the which,
in good faith, He never had the least thought. Whereupon suppressing within
himself the base injustice of so ungrateful a man, he had much a do to
keep himself within the bounds of Patience; till he heard of the Death of the
two dispossessed and innocent Princes: of the which he took God to witness He
was so innocent, as it never entered into his imagination; and that when he
heard of it, he was so heartily grieved, as it was impossible for him any more
to look upon the King, abhorring his sight, and being resolved never to
return to Court, till he had wrought Public Revenge: but that finding it
hard to get from him, (for Tyrants have no more faithful nor vigilant
guardians then their own Suspicions) he at last so far prevailed, as
dissembling the True cause, and finding excuses to make his journey seem
necessary, he had got leave, Richard believing that he went away very well
satisfied, whilst in truth he was much discontented. That, wherewith he
entertained his thoughts in this voyage, was to find out a means how to
depose Richard; but a Successor being to be found out, he could not light upon
any one more lawful then Himself: for having made a mental scrutiny, and
finding that his Grandfather Edmund Duke of Sommerset was Twice removed from
John Duke of Lancaster, the Founder of that house; and Henry the sixth, Thrice;
it followed that His mother, daughter to Edmund, being removed as Henry the
sixth, He (her heir) should, after Henry the sixth, be the undoubted
Successor; the line of Sommerset descending from the said John Duke of
Lancaster in like sort, the other having only precedence by Birthright in
Henry the fourth, the fifth, and sixth: so as feeding himself with this
imagination, assisted by Vanity and Ambition, he though he might have grounded
Richards ruin upon the foundation of his Own pretense not finding any
opposition therein. But meeting with the Countess of Richmond (wife to the now
Lord Stanley) between Worcester and Bridgnorth, his ill-grounded Fabric was
soon overthrown. For calling to mind that she was the only daughter and
Heir to John Duke of Sommerset, elder brother to his Grandfather Edmund, it
followed that Her son the Earl of Richmond, was the true heir and
pretender, which he had formerly thought Himself to be. And that believing
himself to be so, he had proceeded even to the point of weighing the Dangers,
and amusing himself about what means he were best to make use of: whether of
his natural Right, or of Election: and though the Laws both of the Kingdom
and of Nature appeared sufficient to him, for what concerned his Natural
Right; yet the Succession having been Interrupted, and the house of York in
possession, he had thought it requisite for him to have the Votes of the Lords
and Commons, for that the general lawful Election would corroborate his
particular Right, and exclude the Tyrant. Touching Dangers; he found they would
be great in a litigious Kingdom, in which let the title be never so apparent,
some will not be wanting who will oppose it; particularly upon the present
occasion; the house of York reigning, Edwards daughters being well Beloved,
and by reason of their Unkles evil intreatment, Pitied by all men: so as
though they might have a great desire to free themselves of a perverse King,
yet was it not such as to make them favor Another to their prejudice who were
held the true Heirs. But the seeing of the Countess having made him aware of
the Injustice of his pretenses, and that if he should continue Obstinate
therein, dangers were likely to increase, if Edwards daughters joining with the
Earl of Richmond, He were by their partakers to be set upon on both sides, he
had changed his mind. Not that the Countess had spoken to him of it, who had
no such Thought, but that he had observed Here a Nearer Propinquity. The
discourse she held with him was; To conjure him by the Neerenesse of his Blood,
and by the memory of Humphrey Duke of Buckingham, his Grandfather, and sworn
brother to John Duke of Sommerset her father, that he would entreat the King to
reassume her son the Earl of Richmond into his favor, and suffer him to
return to England: and that for her part, she would oblige her self to make
him marry which of Edwards daughters the King would please, without Portion or
any other thing, save only his re-patriation. The which he promised to do;
whereupon they parted: she with New Hopes, and he with New Thoughts. For,
calling to mind the Earls claim, with the same apprehensions which were by
Him (the Bishop) propounded the night before; he fell upon a resolution to
assist him with all Might and Means, as true Heir of the house of Lancaster,
in the defense whereof his Father and Grandfather had been slain; upon this
condition notwithstanding, that he should marry Elizabeth eldest daughter to
King Edward: for that this marriage joining together the two houses of
Lancaster and York, in the two persons who could only pretend unto the
Crown, the Kingdom would be established, and all occasion of War or Civil
Dissension would be taken away for the time to come. The which marriage, if the
Mother and the Son of the House of Lancaster would accept of, on the one
side; and the Mother and Daughter of the House of York on the other; none
would be to be feared but the Boar that wounded all men with his Tuskes, and
who would doubtlesly be soon destroyed; since all men were to join in a
work, from whence were to issue both Public and Private ease and quiet.

It cannot be conceived how overjoyed the Bishop was to hear this his
Conclusion, being the same he desired: so as praising the Dukes Goodness and
Wisdom, and now longing to see the business on foot, he asked him with which
of the two he intended to treat first? who answered, with the Countess of
Richmond; for that it was necessary first to know the Earl her Sons mind.
Which the Bishop approving of, he offered to bring unto him Reynold Bray, a
Houshold-servant to the Countess, a wise discreet man, and who being verst in
the negotiation of great businesses, would be fittest to be employed in this.
The which the Duke approving of, he wrote unto him, and sent the Letter by an
Express, wherein he desired him to come to Brecknock, for a business which
concerned the Countess his Mistress. He forthwith obeyed who 'twas sent for
him. The instructions he received were, that considering the Kingdom could not
be brought to quiet but by advancing the Earl of Richmond to the Crown, by
means of uniting the two houses of Lancaster and York by marriage; that the
Countess of Richmond should treat thereof with Queen Elizabeth, and having
obtained Her good will, and Her eldest Daughters, she should send into
Brittany to treat thereof with her Son: who if He would promise to marry Her
after He should have obtained the Crown, they engaged themselves, by joining
the Forces of the Factions, to make him King. Bray being dispatched away with
this Embassy, the Bishop took leave likewise of the Duke: the Duke was loath to
part with him, needing his Advice; but he resolved howsoever to be gone: and
whilst the Duke fed him with hopes, under pretense of raising men who might
secure him in his journey, he stole away disguised; and getting luckily to Ely,
he provided himself of moneys and past over into Flanders: where being Absent,
but in a safe place, he furthered the business more then he could have done,
had he, not without danger, stayed in England. Yet did his departure prove
unfortunate to the Duke: for, wanting His advice, and some too early notice
being gotten of the Design, it proved his final ruin.

Bray acquainted his Lady with the business, who approved of it, encouraged
thereunto by the great quality and condition they were of who were the
promoters of it: but the Queen being in Sanctuary, and it not befitting the
Countess to go to her in person, she sent to her her Physician Lewis, who
being a learned man, by birth a Welchman, and one of the greatest esteem of as
many as were of his profession, was fitter to be employed in this business
then any one of another condition; for the Queen stood in need of such men,
being continually troubled with new indispositions of health, caused either for
want of bodily exercise, or by the superaboundant exercise of her mind; so as
willing him to visit her as of Himself, she wished him to acquaint her with
the business; not as it was Digested and Concluded, but as a conceit of his
Own, not hard to be effected if She would approve of it. The Physician
consented; and going to London upon some Other pretense, he went to visit her,
being well known unto her: and having occasion to speak of her Afflictions, he
desired leave to acquaint her with a Thought which since it proceeded from a
good Heart, he hoped that though it might appear to Her to be Vain, and not
Feasible, yet she would not be the worse for knowing it. The Queen permitting
him to say his pleasure, he told her; That since the Death of King Edward of
glorious memory, and of the two innocent Children her Sons, and since the
Usurpation made of the Kingdom by Richard, the most detestable of as many
Tyrants as ever had been heard of, he could never be at quiet within himself
till he had found out a means whereby to put the Kingdom in Quiet, the just
Heirs in their Possession, and to bring the unjust Usurper to ruin. But that
having considered many, he bethought himself, that so much blood having been
spent between the two Houses of Lancaster and York, the best way was to unite
them both by Marriage; giving the Lady Elizabeth heir to the house of York,
for wife to the Earl of Richmond heir to the house of Lancaster. A match
wherewith all the Kingdom was to be satisfied, for that Peace being thereby
likely to ensue, the two Houses were to be accorded, to the Destruction of the
Tyrant, and the restoring of Her self, Family, and Children, to their former
greatness.If things naturally good of themselves are apt to content such as
are endued with Reason, and especially those who are thereby to receive Ease
and Comfort, great reason had the Queen to be herewithall pleased; who being
laden with so many miseries, saw in this her desperate condition, an evident
means of restoring her Self and Family. She thanked God, acknowledging that
if there remained any hopes of consolation to her, there was none in humane
appearance, more likely then this. After she had thankfully acknowledged her
Obligation to the Physician for his so wise and discreet advise, she prayed him
that since he had been the first inventor, he would likewise put it in
execution: that she knew of what esteem he was with the Countess of Richmond;
to whom she bad him say in Her behalf, That if the Earl her Son would bind
himself by Oath to marry Elizabeth her Eldest Daughter; and in case she should
Die, her Second daughter; she promised to assist him, by all friends and
adhaerents, in getting the Crown. The Physician having told the Countess thus
much, she presently went to work. Reynald Bray dealt with such as he knew
faithful, and fit for a business of such importance; whilst the Queen
negotiated with all those who hated the King, and wished for nothing more then
an opportunity of doing her service. Those employed by the Countess, besides
Bray and the Physician, were Sir Giles Aubeny, Sir John Cheinie, Sir Richard
Gilford, Thomas Ramney, and Hugh Conway. The Physician had preferred one
Christopher Urswick to be her Chaplain; a wise man, and who having served on
the behalf of Henry the sixth as long as he lived, might safely be relied
upon, as well for his Fidelity as for his Wisdom. She had purposed to have
sent him into Brittanny to her son; but being the Duke of Buckingham was the
promoter of the business, she thought it was fitter to employ some one of a
better quality: she therefore sent unto him Hugh Conway, who with a good sum
of Money took his way by Plymouth through Cornwall; whilst Sir Richard Gilford
sent Thomas Ramney for the same end through Kent; to the effect that if the one
should miscarry, the other might do the work: but Fortune was so favorable
to them, as they differed not many hours in their meeting in Britanny. Their
Embassy was: That he was sent for as King, Named thereunto by the Great ones,
and desired by All: The marriage agreed upon by the Queen and the Duke of
Buckingham: That he should come away with all possible haste, and land in
Wales; where he should find Aid and Friends sufficient to render himself
powerful in an Instant; both factions being for him. The Earl, fashioned out
by nature to be King, communicated the business to the Duke of Britanny (who
after King Edwards death had given him his liberty) desiring his assistance in
so necessary an expedition: he being called in by a freeborn people, professed
enemies to the Tyrant, whose cruelty was so detestable to all the world;
promising him that if God should so far favor his cause, (as he well hoped
he would) he would be answerable unto him with such Services as befitted an
obligation never to be forgotten. Richard had by means of his Ambassador
Thomas Hutton, yea by the proffer of certain sums of Money, dealt with the
Duke not long before, to keep him in safe custody: but the Duke detesting
Richards wickedness, did not only do nothing therein, but made good all his
promises of Favor to the Earl upon this occasion. So as confident of good
success, he sent Conway and Ramney back to his mother, with answer that he
did accept of the invitation; that as soon as he should have provided things
necessary, he would come for England; that in the mean time order might be
taken for the affairs there, to the end that he might find the less
impediments. Upon the hearing of this, they who sided with him took courage,
and began to prepare for the business. They sent into requisite places people
fit to make them good; and disposed of other Commanders in other places, that
they might be ready upon occasion: Others underhand solicited the people, to
the end they might be ready to rise when time should serve. The Bishop of Ely
wrote from Flanders to such as he knew hated Richard, promoting the business
by the sole authority of his Letters. So as though amongst as many as were
therein employed, there was not found one Unfaithful person, yet the affair
being to pass through so many mouths, and to come to so many Ears, it was
impossible but that some Whispering or confused Notion thereof should reach
Richards ears; who judged things the Greater by his not knowing them: for
ignorance cannot Obviate, since it does not foresee. He was not ignorant of his
being generally hated; and was not sure that no man out of his own inclination
would discover any thing to Him; so as all his intelligence must proceed from
his own Diligence and quick Foresight. So as placing Spies everywhere, he
took Arms: and though he knew not which way to bend his course, yet was he in
readiness to march whether necessity should compel him. But such commotions
never wanting a prime Ringleader, he thought the Duke of Buckingham must nee^s
be the Primum mobile of this: he therefore was of opinion, that the chiefest
provisions were to be made against Him; but resolved first, to try him with
offers, which if they should not take effect, then to make him an Example to
all such as had or should hereafter conspire against him. He sent an express
messenger to him with Letters full of Courtesy, wherein he desired him to come
unto him* giving order to the Gentleman that carried them, to promise him he
should have what ever he could demand. But these proffers, the Larger they
were, the more Suspicious were they, and out of time: the Duke would not hear
on That ear; he knew Richards nature, and that he had proceeded on like manner
with all those he desired to abuse. He therefore desired to be excused,
alleging the indisposition of his Stomach, which having taken his Appetite
quite away, did likewise rob him of his wonted Repose. Richard not herewithall
satisfied, wrote to him in terms clean contrary to the former: he commanded
him in a reproachful manner, that all delays and excuses laid side, he would
come to him. The which the Duke not being able to digest, and being resolved
upon the Rebelion, he forgot all manner of Artifice, and in downright term
told the Gentleman that brought the Letter, he would not come: that he esteemed
him as an Enemy, and that he had never been befrinded by him. Thus all
dissimulation laid aside, they prepared for War; and advertised their
friends, to the end they might raise the People, and make them take Arms. The
noise hereof made the Marquess Dorset son to the Queen Dowager, quit the
Sanctuary where together with his Mother he was, and go to Yorkshire to raise
forces. In Devonshire and Cornwall Sir Edward Courtney, and his brother Peter,
Bishop of Exceter, did the same: and Sir Richard Gilford, assisted by many
other Gentlemen, began the war in Kent. Richard was not taken at unawares,
having formerly provided for himself; but this Bore not making any account of
these little Beagles (for such he reputed Gilford, Courtney, and Dorset) he did
not disunite his forces, that so he might lead them All against the Duke, who
was the chief Mastiffe of this Bore-baiting, whom if he should beat, he
assured himself, he should easily tear the other in pieces. Thus resolved, he
took his way toward Salisbury, whilst the Duke (who had gotten together an
Army of Welshmen, more by Threats and Haughty Demeanor, then by money or fair
entertainment) marched toward Gloucester, that he might pass the Severne
there, and so join himself with the two Courtneys, and the rest of their
adherents: which could he have done, Richard had been undone. But whilst he
marched along with this design, the Severne, through the extraordinary Rain,
had so overflowed its banks, as that it became not only impassable, but men
had therewithal been surprised by night in their beds, children carried away
in their Cradles, and the tops of Hills were covered with waters, so as flocks
of sheep were not there safe. This deluge of rain continued for the space of
Ten days, leaving an unlucky name behind, of the great waters of the Duke of
Buckingham. He then finding the passage shut up on all sides was enforced to
stay a while; whilst his Soldiers almost drowned with Rain, famisht for want
of Victuals, and having no Pay, took a resolution to disband of themselves:
the Duke had no authority to keep them together, his Entreaties were not
heard, his Persuasions were of no efficacy, his promises vain and
unprofitable; insomuch as he was left almost all Alone, not knowing what way to
take, or where to save himself. He dismissed all his attendance and resolved
to go near Shrewsbury to the house of one Humphrey Banister, a servant of his,
who having been beloved by him and well rewarded, he thought he might expect
from him such service as by obligation and gratitude he was bound unto; till
such time as he might either gather new forces, or pass over into Britanny to
the Earl of Richmond. But he failed in his design; for in this so great
necessity, Banister who ought him all the Obligation that one man may owe
another, was faulty to him.

The disbanding of his Army being known, and it not known whether he were Alive
or Dead, such fear was thereby apprehended by those of Kent, Devonshire and
Cornwall, as laying down their Arms, they thought only how to save themselves,
some into Sanctuaries, some beyond the Seas. The Bishop of Exeter, his brother
Sir Edward Courtney, who was by Henry the 7th afterward made Earl of
Devonshire, Thomas Gray Marquis of Dorset, the L. Wells, Sir John Bourchier,
Sir Edward Woodvile a gallant Soldier, and brother to the Queen Dowager, Sir
Robert Willougby, Sir Giles d'Aubeny, Thomas Arundell, John Cheyny, with two of
his brothers, and Richard Edgcombe, (all of them for the most part Knights)
fled into Britanny; and were followed by Captain John Hollowwell and Captain
Edward Poynings. Richard hearing of the Welchmens retreat, the Dukes flight (it
not being known whether, and the rest of the Conspirators design to save
themselves) he sent to all the ports to the end they might not be suffered
either to come in or go out at any of them; making Proclamation, that whosoever
should discover or deliver up into his Hands the Duke of Buckingham, if he were
under the condition of Villenage he should be enfranchised; and if otherwise,
together with a general pardon he should have a Thousand pounds ready money
given him. Together with this he made strong preparations at Sea, being assured
by Thomas Hutton, who had been Ambassador in Britanny, that, without all doubt
the Earl of Richmond was to be assisted by the Duke thereof both with men and
money: he sent many Ships well furnished with men and Guns to the Coast of
Britanny, with intention either to fight with him, or hinder his landing on the
English shore. In other parts he left no place unprovided for; people were not
suffered to land without diligent search, that so some news might be had of the
Duke of Buckingham. Banister (into whose hands the Duke had trusted his safety)
hearing of the Proclamations, and the Rewards therein promised (were it either
for Fear or Avarice) discovered where he was to the Sheriff of Shropshire:
who going to Banisters house, found the Duke in a Day-labourers apparel
digging in a Garden; in which habit he sent him well guarded to Shrewsbery,
where Richard then was. He denied not the Conspiracy, he hoped by his free
confession to have gotten admittance into ^he Kings Presence; some think with
an intention to beg his Pardon; others, to kill the King with a Dagger which he
wore underneath his Cloths. But Richard not suffering him to be brought unto
him, he was beheaded on All-soules* day without any other manner of Process,
in the Market place. To Banister (the chiefest of all ungrateful Traitors)
nothing that was promised was made good: Richard who was unjust in all things
else was just in This; denying him the reward of his Disloyalty: which amongst
his many Faylings worthy of Blame, was the only one worthy of Commendation.
Punished thus slightly by man, he received much more grievous punishments from
God: his Eldest son died mad; his second of Convulsion fits; his Third son was
Drowned in a Standing poole; and his Daughter a very Beautiful young Woman was
crusted over with Leprosy: he himself in his later Years was convict of
Manslaughter, and condemned to be Hanged, but was saved by his Book. The Duke
was in his death accompained by many others; amongst which, by Sir George
Brown, Sir Roger Clifford, and Sir Thomas Saintlieger, who was the last
husband to the Duchess of Exeter the Kings sister.

The Earl of Richmond assisted by the Duke of Britanny, had got together five
Thousand Britons, and forty Ships furnished for all purposes, wherein he
embarked himself and made for England. But the next night he met with a
terrible Tempest which dispersed all his Vessels, carrying them into several
places, insomuch as there remained only One with him, with the which he found
himself near the Haven of Poole in Dorsetshire: where he discoverd the shore
all over pestered with men, whereat he was much afraid; for they were placed
there to hinder his landing, in like manner as others were sent for the same
purpose to other places. He cast Anchor, expecting the arrival of his Other
Ships: he commanded that none should go on shore without His leave, and sent
forth a boat to see who those men were: when the boat was come within Hearing,
those on shore said they were sent to conduct them to the Duke of Buckingham,
that was not far from thence with a great Army, expecting the Earl of Richmond
so to give chase to Richard who had but small forces with him, being abandoned
almost by All men. But the Earl finding out the cosenage (for had it been so,
they wanted not Boats to have sent some known man abord him) no news being
heard of the rest of his Fleet, and the wind being reasonable fair for him to
re turn, he hoisted Sail, and with a fore-winde landed in Normandy. Charles
the Eight Reigned then in France, his Father Lewis being not long before dead:
the Earl was desirous to return by Land to Britanny, and being to go through
France he durst not adventure without a safe conduct: he therefore dispatched
away a Gentleman to the King for one: he was graciously heard by the King; who
commiserated the Earls misfortunes, and together with a safe conduct, sent him
a good sum of money; by means whereof he past safely into Britanny, whether
likewise he sent his Ships. But understanding there what ill success his
affairs had in England, how the Duke of Buckingham was dead, and that the
Marquis of Dorset with the rest of his companions (who having many days
expected some news of him in that Court, grew now to despair thereof,
believing some mischief had befalne him, and therefore had withdrawn
themselves to Vennes) was come, he was much grieved and took this frown of
Fortune at his first beginning for an ill Omen: yet was he comforted at the
arrival of his Friends, promising some good to himself through their
safeties. When he was come to Renes, he sent for them and welcomed them with
terms of Curtesy and Thankfulness. The condition of affairs being well
weighed, they resolved to effect what formerly had been but spoken of: to wit,
The war against Richard, and his deposing: and the making of Richmond King;
upon Condition that he should promise to Marry the Lady Elizabeth Daughter to
Edward the Fourth. These Articles were agreed upon and sworn unto by all
parties on Christmasse day in the Cathedral Church of that City; where
likewise the Marquis, with all the rest did Homage unto him, as to their
actual King, swearing to serve him Faithfully, and to employ their Lives and
Estates in endeavoring Richards destruction. The Earl failed not to acquaint
the Duke with all these proceedings; and to make known unto him the cause why
he undertook this business, and what he stood in need of to effect it: the
cause was; his being sent for, Called in, and Expected; Richards government
being grown intolerable: that he stood in Need of was Another Fleet, and
supplies of money; he having in setting forth the Former* spent all that his
Mother had sent him, and what he had gathered amongst his Friends: he therefore
desired the Duke to lend him some moneys promising (to boot with the never to
be forgotten Obligation) suddenly to repay him, when God should have given a
blessing to his just endeavors. The Duke was not backward either in Promises or
Performance: so as the Earl had convenience of furnishing himself with Men
and ships; ^hilst Richard did what he could in England to hinder his design:
though to no purpose, for if God keep not the City, the Watchman watches but
in vain. He in sundry places, put many who were guilty or suspected to death:
and having returned to London, He called a Parliament wherein the Earl of
Richmond and all that for his cause had forsaken the Land were declared enemies
to the King and Kingdom, and had their goods confiscated. They being many and
the richest men of the Kingdom their confiscations would have been able to
have discharged the War against them, had not Richard been formerly too
liberal in his Donatives, thereby endeavoring to reconcile men's minds unto
him, and to cancel the uncancellable memory of his cruelty to his Nephews: so
as though the Sums were great which hereby accrew'd, yet were they not
sufficient; nor did they free him from laying insufferable Taxes upon his
people. 'Twas a wonder the Lord Stanley was not in the number of the
Proscribed, his Wife Mother to the Earl of Richmond being chief of the
Conspiracy: but he freed himself from any the least sign of guilt; and
Richard seemed not to valve his Wife, least if He should embrue his Hands in
the blood of a Lady of so great quality, He might yet more incite the Peoples
hatred. He was contented she should be committed to the custody of her
Husband, with order that she should be kept in some private place of her House,
and that none should be suffered to come to her, who might conveigh Letters to
her Son, or Messages to any Other. He also caused William Collingborne, who had
been High Sheriff of Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, to be executed, for having
written by way of jeare That a Cot, a Rat, and Lovell the Dog, did Govern
England under a Hog: alluding by Cat, to Catesby; by Rat, to Ratcliffe, and by
the Dog to the Lord Lovell, who gave the Dog for his Arms, as did Richard the
Boar for His: and these three were His chiefest Favorites: Some were of
opinion, He was put to death for having had Intelligence with the Earl of
Richmond, and with Marquis Dorset; for he was convict to have proffered Money
to a certain man, to carry Letters into Britanny; wherein He persuaded them
to come Instantly, and Land at Poole in Dorsetshire, whilst He assisted by
others would raise the People.

To keep himself from troubles out of Foreign parts, and that He might the
bette^ mind his Home-broyles, Richard thought necessary to hold good
intelligence with the King of Scotland, who often troubling Him with Inroades,
diverted him from his Home-affaires wherein consisted the preservation of his
Life and Kingdom. This business was treated by Commissioners, who agreed upon
a Truce for Three years, each of them being to keep what they were possessed
of; except the Castle of Dunbarre which was given to King Edward by the Duke of
Albany, the last time that He fled from Scotland: which the Scots would have
restored. And that he might have a double tie upon them, he concluded a
Marriage between the Duke of Rothsay Prince and He^e of Scotland, and his
Niece Anne of Poole Daughter to John Duke of Suffolk, and his Own Sister
Anne, a Lady so affectionately beloved by him, as his Only Son the Prince of
Wales being dead, he made Her Son John Earl of Lincoln be proclaimed heir
to the Crown, disinheriting, of mere hatred; his brothers Daughters, and for
that having declared them to be Bastards, his Own title was preserved by the
continuance of their such repute. All these precautions did no^ notwithstanding
free his perturbed mind from those furies which leaving their natural
habitation, had brought Hell into his Conscience; so as though Buckingham were
dead, and so many others Dead and Banished, yet could not he have any Security:
his (...) committed, his deserved Hatred, and the Earl of Richmond, would not
suffer him to enjoy any one hours rest. And albeit in his contriving how to
usurp the Crown; he made no account of Him, whilst his brother liv^d, his
mind being then fixed upon Henry that had been King, and was then in Being,
yet Times and Persons being changed* He likewise changed Opinion: the one being
Dead, the other Alive and at Liberty, and who was the only man that with Right
and Justice could do that to Him which he unjustly and against all Right had
cruelly done to others. He therefore indevour'd again to have the Earl in
his possession, or at least that the Duke of Britanny by bereaving him of his
Liberty (as he had done in his brother King Edwards time) would secure him from
the Mischief that might ensue by his coming into England: and not believing
he was likely to obtain a favor of this nature by way of Friendship, much
less for any Rights sake, he grounded his demands upon the basis of Profit and
Interest; the only means to obtain ones desire from such as have no feeling
of Justice. He loaded his Ambassadors with Moneys and Presents to present unto
the Duke: together with Them he offered him Richmondshire, and all the Revenues
of the Earl, as likewise all that belonged in England, to all those that were
fled over to him into Britanny: the which being very much, would have sufficed
to have corrupted any other save Duke Francis the second one of the Noblest and
most virtuous Princes that lived in those times, as he was held by all men.
This is Arge^es his relation, who affirms he has found among the Records of
Britanny the grant of this County, together with the Names of the Churches,
Monasteries, and Priories therein: but if the Duke should die without heirs of
his body, the Reversion should fall* to the King. The Ambassadors or Deputies
(as He (...) them) could not have access unto the Duke, being come to a
season that He was beside Himself an infirmity He was often subject unto)*
whereupon they made their adresses to Peter Landais, who had power to dispose
of the Prince and State as He pleased. The large sums of English money made him
listen to what they propounded: his base mind (not valuing Honor) made him
accept of the Offer, but not in such manner as it was propounded. For He being
the man that was to deliver up the Earl (the Duke not being in condition
either to yield him, or to detain Him) He would have Richmondshire to
himself; whereupon many Messengers were sundry times dispatched for England,
which was the Earls safety: for these practices being discovered in England,
and the Bishop of Ely being adve^tised in (...), He speedily gave the Earl
notice thereof advising him immediately to depart from thence, for that He was
bought and sold between Richard and those who were of chief authority in that
State; so as if He did not suddenly save himself* He would fall into his
enemies hands. The Earl received this advertisement when* He was at Vennes,
from whence he sent (...) France (...) a safe conduct, which was by the King
thereof without delay sent him: and it being impossible to save Himself and
all his Partakers, at the same time, he feigned to send the Lords that were
with him to visit the Duke at Rennes; giving order to the Earl of Pembroke,
who conducted them, that when they should be upon the Confines, He should
immediately quit the Country; as he did: whilst He himself, feigning two
days after to visit a friend of his not far from Vannes, got on horseback,
waited on only by Five servants; and when He was entered the Wood, He put on
one of His servants Coats and got by By-ways out of the State, and arrived at
Aniou whether the Earl of Pembroke with the rest were, but long before, come.
His escape was the easier in that it was not suspected; having left above three
Hundred English, all of His Retinue behind him in Vennes; otherwise it would
have gone ill with Him: For Peter had already raised people, and appointed
Commanders over them, who were within three days to have been at Vennes to
have detained Him; hearing (by what means I cannot tell) of his Departure, he
dispatched so speedily after Him, as those who had the Commission to stay Him,
got to the uttermost bounds of Britanny not above an Hour after He was gone
out of them. The Duke, being this time returned to His perfect sense, was
displeased hereat, thinking this might redound to his Dishonor: He chid
Landais; and commanded that all the English that were left in Vennes should be
suffered to depart, making them to be defrayed not only whilst they were in
His State, but till they came to their Master; to whom He likewise sent the
Money He had promised, by Edward Woodvile and Edward Poinings two English
Gentlemen: for the which the Earl returned Him many Thanks; saying, He should
not be at quiet till Fortune had befriended Him with some means whereby in
some sort to requite His infinite Obligation to the Duke* by whose favor only
He lived. King Charles was then at Langres; whither the Earl went to Him and
acquainted Him with the reason of His flight from Britanny, and how the
Nobility and People of England had sent for Him to free them from Richards
tyranny. He entreated his assistance; which was not hard to obtain from so
generous a Prince as He was, against one who for his notorious wickedness was
abhorred by all men. The King bad him be of good comfort, promised to assist
him, and brought him on his way to Montargis, treating the Lords that were with
him with hospitality becoming a King; whilst thus he was ordering his
affairs, Fortune, the better to encourage him, sent unto him a man, not only
forgotten but who was little better then thought dead; John Vere, Earl of
Oxford, who after the Battle at Barnet, had gotten into Scotland, from thence
to France, and from thence had made himself Master of Saint Michales Mount in
Co^wall: where being besieged, and yiedling up the place, King Edward had sent
him prisoner. This Nobleman had so far prevailed with Sir James Blunt
Captain of that Fort, and Sir John Fortescue Porrer of Callis, that he did not
only obtain his liberty, but got them to forsake their commands, and go along
with him to put themselves under the conduct of the Earl of Richmond. But
Blunt having left his Wife and all his goods in Hammes, he fortified it
compleately, and added to the usual garrison an extraordinary number of
Soldiers, to the end that if they should be besieged they might defend
themselves till Fortune had turned her back upon Richard. The Earl took this
unexpected Liberty of the Earl of Oxford as a good augury: for being of Noble
Blood, of esteemed valor, of praiseworthy constancy, (having been always a
sider with the House of Lancaster) one in whom virtues disputed for precedence,
in whom wisdom and valor were rivalls; he thought God had given him his
Liberty at this so necessary time, that he might assist him. The King being
returned to Paris, the Earls retinue increased; all that were fled from
England, as well as all the English that were in those parts, either as
Scholars in the Universities, or returning from their Travells, flockt unto
him: amongst which one Richard Fox a Secular Priest, a man of very good parts,
who was shortly after advanced to great places and dignities.

Richard this mean while was not wanting to Himself; his spirits were bent
upon his Own Preservation, and the preservation of the Crown which he
unworthily wore: and though he saw both Heaven and Earth conspired against him,
yet he thought by his own Will nesse to make his party good in despite of them
both. But when he understood the Earl was fled out of Britanny, he was much
amazed; his safety consisted in his hopes of having Him in his power, which
now failing him he began to fear: his enemies forces consisted now of both
the factions; for by the Match with the Princess Elizabeth, he had united the
faction of York to his own of Lancaster; so as the claim of York falling
upon him by his Marrying the right Heir, he was sure to meet with great
Opposition: His only remedy was to break the Match; but barely to break it
was not enough: he must do more, and by fore-casting the vvorst, do what was
best for Him. He thought how to strengthen himself by the same pretenses,
notwithstanding his being therein opposed, by the Laws, Blood and Enmity; he
would marry his Niece: Incest would serve but as a Laurel to crown all
other his abominations: He could easily without any scruple rid himself of
his present Wife: His conscience was so stecled over as it could not suffer
compunction: As for the opinion of the World, who regards not Honor, values
not shame: His subjects hatred was not to be respected; so long as with a Rod
of Iron he could keep them in obedience. That which he pitched upon was,
Deceit, Slaughter, and Incest: for Deceit; with Allurements and fair Promises
to sweeten the Queen Mothers distastes; and thereby to make way for the other
two; his Wives Death, and his Marriage with his Niece. He chose people fit for
this office. They excused what was past; they made her believe the King was
much troubled for his much beloved Neeces: that he was sorry they should make
themselves voluntary prisoners, that they mistrusted the naturrall inclination
and love of an Uncle, who, as if he were their Father thought of nothing but
their Good: That his chiefest desire was to treat them according to their
Birth and his Affection: to have them in Court; to find out good Husbands for
them, and see them well bestowed: and that if it should be his fortune to lose
his Wife (whose indispositions were such as there was no great hope of her
Life) his resolution was to make the Princess Elizabeth his Queen: that the
Neerenesse of Blood would prove no impediment; Laws were not without some
Exceptions, and were to be dispensed withal, when the Necessity of the State,
the Quiet of the Kingdom, and the Peoples safety did require it: They forgate
not the Marquis Dorset promising him Mountains of Gold if he would return to
England: they showed how the way he was in was dangerous; that he should rather
hope upon a fortune already made, then to be made; that old ways were plain,
and sure; New ones, slippery and Precipitious. These men with these and the
like conceptions knew so advantageously to behave themselves, that the Queen
at the very first Onset gave them Hearing, and began to Melt; and at the
second, gave consent to All that the King desired: forgeting her sons deaths,
her Husbands Infamy, who was divulged to be a Bastard; her own shame, her
marriage being in the Pulpit said to be Adulterous, she a Concubine, and her
Daughters illegitimate; and (which most imported) the Promise she had made to
the Countess of Richmond concerning the Marriage of her eldest daughter sealed
with an Oath: All these things were to her as if they never had been: Ambition
so far prevailed with her, as to make her faulty to her own Honor, to the
safety of her Daughters, to the Generosity of her past actions, and to her
conscience; not regarding Oaths when put in balance with the Persuasions of
him, who had always done her mischief. Being thus abused she dispatched away
a Messenger to her Son Dorset, who was in France, commanding him that he
should leave the Earl and come for England; telling him that all past injuries
were forgotten, and forgiven, and were to be repair^d with Honors and
Preferments; for that the King desired nothing more then how to give him
satisfaction. Richard having obtained the First of his three designs (having
reconciled his Sister in Law, and his Neeces being come to the Court, where
they were by him with great Solemnity received) the other Two remained: the
Second would be imperfect without the Third; and the Third was impossible
without the Second: He could not marry his Niece, except his Wife were dead;
upon this therefore he wholly bent his thoughts, He considered that by
putting her to a Violent death he might alienate his peoples hearts, which he
somewhat gained upon by his hypocritical proceedings, which made them believe
he was changed in life and disposition: so as a Relapse would prove dangerous
to him, and make him not to be believed in what for the future he was to
counterfeit. He lighed upon a means never dreamt of any Devil in Hell: that
Grief, Melancholy, and Fear, might jointly work that effect in her without
Scandal, which Sword nor Poison could not do but with Scandal. He forbear
her bed, nor would he Speak with her; not only denying her his Company, but
his Sight: He began to bewail his misfortune, in that he had a wife that was
Barren, who would bear him no Children; a curse which did so wound his Soul,
as it would in short time cost him his Life: he made known this his great
sorrow to the Archbishop of York, whom he had newly set at liberty, being sure
he would acquaint his wife with it, and hoping it might work the Effect he
desired. The Archbishop, who was a wise man, and very well knew Richards
disposition, spoke hereof with some of his most intimate friends, judging the
unfortunate Ladies life to be of no long durance. The King shortly after made
it to be noised abroad that she was Dead, to the end her death when it should
happen, might be the less strange, men's ears being accustomed thereunto; and
he made the brute of her death arrive at her own ears: all this was done, in
hope that the violence of Grief would kill her; or if not, that he might with
the less Noise make her away, who had been so Often thought Dead. The Queen,
who was a Tender Lady, and not able to resist so many machinations, was hereat
much dismayde, knowing that Tempests use to follow Thunder, especially in so
perverse a Climate as that of her Husbands: she ran much afflicted to him, to
know wherein she had so Highly offended him, as that he thought her not only
worthy of his Hatred, which was apparently seen, but of the Punishment which
being to befall her, the world thought her dead Already? His answer was
pleasant in words, but of sad Sense, mingled with Smiles, which gave her more
cause of Suspicion then of Comfort. She went back to her own lodgings, where
not many days after she departed this life: whether of Grief or Poison, it is
not certain; those who judge by likelihood, think the last. This Princess
was borne under an unhappy Constellation, as well in respect of her Self, as
of those who did any ways appertain unto her. She was daughter to Richard
Nevill Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, a Peer of greatest Power and Repute
that ever England had; her Grandfather was beheaded, her Father and her Uncle
were slain in the battle at Barnet; her Nephew, Son to her Sister the
Duchess of Clarence was beheaded by Henry the Seventh; and her Niece his
Sister, by Henry the Eighth, both her Husbands came to violent ends; the First,
Son to Henrys the sixth, slain by this her second Husband; and He by others
(as we shall shortly see). She was in her Life time bereft of the only son
she had by him. Lastly, as for her own death what ever it was, it could not
but be happy for Her, she being thereby freed from the hands of so cruel a
Monster.

Two of Richards designs being obtained, the Third yet remained, his marriage
with his Niece. He began to make love unto her, but it was not love that
troubled him (though he would have it so believed) he was troubled with
thoughts of another nature: To see so many of the prime Nobility fled into
France to the Earl of Richmond, to see himself so nauseous to his People, as
they were ready to vomit him out, and that the Conspiracy Discovered, but not
Extinct, had made the Conspirators the more wary; these were the businesses
which excluded his feyned love; love being fed by Idleness, Delights, and want
of other affairs whereon to employ ones thoughts. He was jealous of none more
then the Lord Stanley, father in law to the Earl: his brother Sir William
Stanley, Gilbert Talbot, and hundreds of others did not so much trouble him as
did He alone: insomuch as this Lord Stanley being desirous to return to his
Countrey-house, under pretense of some domestical affairs, (but in effect,
that he might be ready at the arrival of his son in Law whom he daily
expected) he would not suffer himto go, unless he would leave his Eldest
son George Stanley in Court, reputing him a sufficient hostage for his
Fathers loyalty.

When he understood of Blunts rebellion, how that the Earl of Oxford had
escaped out of prison; and how that Both of 1485.
them having betaken themselves to the Earl of Richmond, they had delivered up
unto him the Castle of Hammes; he gave order to have it besieged by the
garrison of Calais; and Richmond sent the Earl of Oxford with a great many
Soldiers to raise the siege; who having encamped himself not far from the
Besiegers, passed Thomas Brandon with Thirty commanded men into the Town, which
so encouraged the Besieged, as that the Enemy being shot at, at the same time,
from the Town, from the Castle, and from Oxfords camp, offered a Blanke paper,
into which they might enter what Conditions they pleased, so as they would
surrender up the place. The Earl of Oxford who considered that the possession
of Hammes was not of any consequence to the getting of the Kingdom, which they
were in pursuit of; and that it was succored only out of a desire to save the
Garrison, and James Blunts wife, together with their Goods, willingly
surrendered up the place; taking from thence the Men, Munition, Victuals,
Cannon, and all that was there of any value, which he brought all safe to Ba^is.

Richard was so puffed up with this appearance of victory, as he believed that to
be true, which was falsely informed him: That he Earl of Richmond, weary of
the large promises made him by Charles to assist him with Powerful succors,
was feign to content himself with very small ones, in which he likewise found
himself to be abused. Whereupon thinking his men of war upon the Narrow
Seas, and the troops of men he had disposed upon the Seacoasts, to be
superfluous, he recalled his ships, and disbanded his men: judging that the
Nobility which inhabited the maritine parts (particularly those of Wales) were
sufficient to take order that the enemy should not land unfought withalland
unbeaten.

The information which was given to Richard, though in effect it was false, yet
it bare with it so many likelyhoods of Truth, as were sufficient to make him
believe that the Earl of Richmond, abandoned by Charles, was not likely to
trouble him with any forces he should receive from Him; and this was the
occasion: Charles being in his Fourteenth year of age under the government of
his Sister Anne, wife to Peter of Bourbon, Lord of Beau-ieu; and according to
the Ordinance of Charles the fifth his predecessor, free from Guardian-ship;
the Princes of the Blood did notwithstanding aspire to the Regency, under
pretense of the weakness of his Constitution, and of his being ill brought up,
he having till then been only brought up in Childish sports, not being taught
so much as to Read. The pretenders hereunto were, the Duke of Orleans first
Prince of the Blood, and Peter of Bourbon in his wifes right, she being
thereunto named by the late Lewis: and great troubles were likely hereupon to
have ensued, had not the State, by committing the Kings person (according to
his fathers will) to his sisters custody, determined that the Kingdom should
have no Regent, but should be governed by the Counsel of State, composed of
Twelve personages, to be chosen for their worth and Quality. So as France being
in this condition, the Earl could not obtain what was promised him, since it
was not the King Alone that could effect it; and the Twelve, though willing to
assist him found many Difficulties therein, but were especially hindered,
through fear of a Civil war within themselves.

At the same time the Marquess Dorset attempted to escape away; his Mothers
advertisements, which filled him with high hopes, and the rubbes he saw the
Earl met withal made him tacke about, and side with Richard. He went out of
Paris secretly by night, taking his way for Flanders, that from thence he
might pass into England: but the Earl being informed thereof, and having
gotten leave from the King to stop him wheresoever he should be found, sent
into all parts after him, and Humphrey Chenie had the fortune to light upon
him, who with Persuasions and fair Promises brought him back: otherwise he
might have proved very prejudicial to them, for he knew the very bottom of
all their designs. But this chance made the Earl very much apprehend, that
through delay he might either Lose or Ruin his friends; he therefore judged it
necessary to attempt that with a Few which he could not with Many. He borrowed
money of the King, and many others, to whom he left as in pawn Sir John
Bourchier and the Marquess Dorset, whom he did not assie in, to have him
near him. Thus having assembled together certain Soldiers, he went to Roan,
expecting there till the ships came to Harfleur which were to carry him over.
Here he understood of the death of King Richards wife, how he had resolved to
marry his niece, who by her mother was promised unto Him; and that Cecilie the
Second daughter was married (which was false) to one of so base condition as
his pedigree was not known: hereat he was much troubled, as were likewise all
the Lords that were with him; since the hopes which they had built unto
themselves upon the Yorkish faction were vanished by virtue of the aforesaid
marriage. Consultation was held what was to be done; it was judged a rash
resolution to undertake so dangerous a business with such a Handful of
people: The resolutions which they pitched upon were; not to stir till they
should have new advertisements from beyond the Seas; and to entice over to
their party Sir Walter Herbert, a Gentleman of a great family, and of a great
power in Wales, promising that the Earl should marry His sister; and to send a
Gentleman to the Earl of Northumberland, who had married the Other sister; to
the end that he might negotiate the business. But nothing ensued hereon; for
finding the passage shut up, the messenger returned not doing any thing.

But having much about the same time received Letters from Morgan Ridwell, a
Lawyer and a Confident of his, with news that Sir Rice ap Thomas and Captain
Savage, two men of great retinue in Wales, would declare themselves for him;
and that Reynald Bray had in his possession great sums of money to pay the
Soldier; so as he should do well to make haste, and land in Wales, since
delay might be prejudicial to him: he took shipping on the fifteenth of
August, having but a few ships and two thousand Soldiers with him. In seven
days space he landed at Milford-haven in Wales; from whence passing on to
Dale, (a place wherein all Winter long troops of Soldiers had been kept to
hinder his landing) he went to West-Hereford, where he was entertained with all
sort of content by the inhabitants. Here he understood that Sir Rice ap Thomas
and Captain Savage had declared themselves for Richard, which if it had been
true, the business had been ended. Upon such like occasions diversity of
News uses to be spread abroad, good or bad according as people hope or
suspect. Those who were with him were much amated at this, till they were
comforted with a later advertisement. Arnold Butler a very valiant Commander,
and one that in former times had been no great well-wisher to the Earl, gave
him to understand, that those of Pembrokeshire were ready to obey Jasper Earl
of Pembroke, his uncle and their natural Lord: that therefore he might make
use of this advantage: the Earl being herewithall encouraged, marched on to
Cardigan, his camp increasing every hour, by people which flocked unto him.
But here he heard news again that Sir Walter Herbert (he whose sister the
Earl had thought to have married) was in Caermarthen, with intention to oppose
him; the which did much affright him, for he did think to find him an enemy;
so as whilst they betake themselves to their Arms, with an intention to fight
with him, the Scouts who were sent before to discover the Country, returned
with news that there was no enemy to be seen, the Country being open, free,
and void of Opposition. This contentment was augmented by the coming of
Richard Griffith, and John Morgan, with a great many fighting men: and though
Griffith was a confederate of Sir Walter Herberts, and of Rice ap Thomas (of
whose inclinations he was doubtful) yet the Earl forbear not to march on,
fighting with, and beating as many as opposed him, that he might leave no
enemies behind him. But seeing himself reduced to such terms as he was not to
hope for safety but by victory, it being impossible for him to Retreat; and
that Sir Walter Herbert and Rice ap Thomas drawing near him, to hinder his
passage, he could not without more help make any long resistance; he wrote to
his Mother, to his Father in Law, and his Father in Laws brother, and to Sir
Gilbert Talbot: That being come upon Their Advice into England, it was Their
Aids that must sustain him; for he having but a Few people with him, if he
were Once defeated, he was defeated for Ever: That the Country he was to
pass over, was of a great Length: That reason required he should pass the
Severne at Shrewsbury, to come to London: That they should think how to
succor him in Time; otherwise their succors would be too Late for Him, and
Ruinous for Themselves: That their communication being necessary for his
Counsels, they should come Suddenly, least Delay might mar All: That
Temporizing was the Ruin of Designs: That if Dissimulation had been requisite
till Now, it was now no more So, but Harmefull: for that thereby those who yet
had courage would be disheartened. This dispatch being sent away by a faithful
servant, he resolved to fight with whoever should oppose him: it was the only
way to work his ends; Regality was not to be had but by Regal valor. He
took his way toward Shrewsbury, and in his march met with Rice ap Thomas, who
with a considerable number of Welshmen swore Fealty to him, the Earl having
two days before promised to make him President of Wales, as soon as he
should be King, (which accordingly he did.) Being come to Shrewsbury he met
with an answer from his Mother and the Others, according to his desire. From
thence he past on to Newport, where Sir Gilbert Talbot with two thousand men
came to meet him; as likewise did Sir William Stanley at Stafford, where he
made some stay to refresh his people. Sir William after he had a long time
consulted with the Earl, returned to his Troops, which being defrayed by his
brother, were not far of. The next day he came to Litchfield, where being
come by Night, he lay in the Field; and the next day was by the Townsmen
received into the City as their Prince. The Lord Stanley had been there two
days before with his Soldiers, and was gone from thence to make way for the
Earl, and that he might not be seen in his company: he was cautelous in what
he did by reason of his Son who was left Hostage with Richard, and who
otherwise would have lost his life.

Richard (who at this time was at Nottingham) knew of the Earls arrival; but
with such a relation of his inconsiderable forces, as he made no Account of
him. He thought he was come only with those who had fled to him from England,
and that his Forces consisted merely of Banished men, who grown desperate,
betook themselves to their last refuge: as for others, he persuaded himself
there would not be any one that durst declare himself for him: so as the
rashness of a desperate man was not worthy his trouble: he thought it would
be beneath Him to take Notice of him; and that Sir Walter Herbert and Rice ap
Thomas were sufficient of Themselves either to beat him, or to make him
ignominiously surrender himself. But afterward well weighing the
Consequences, he was of another mind: his affairs appeared to be in a
condition not to be trusted to Other men's directions, by reason of his being so
generally Hated; and the wicked means used in his usurping of the Crown. He
therefore thought it not safe for him to confide in Others; and having a
Scrutiny of such as were most Interressed in the preservation of his Person and
Dignity, from out the not many he chose John Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Northumberland, and the Earl of Survey; giving them Commission to gather
together the best and most trusty of such as did depend upon them, and come
unto him: and he gave order to Robert Brackenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, that
he should raise all the force he could, and bring along with him as his
companions in Arms Sir Thomas Bourcher and Sir Walter Hungerford; not for that
he expected any service from them, but that being jealous of them, he feared
lest they might conspire against him. All these his foresights did not satisfy
him, when he understood the Earl had past the Severne. He then began to
mistrust his affairs, and to complain of those who had promised to defend the
passage: Now it was that he saw his business was not to be trusted to any
Third party; and growing to distrust all men, he went himself in Person in the
head of his Army to give him battle: executing Himself the duty of a Sergeant
Major. He came by night to Leicester upon a white Steed, environed by his
Guards and great number of Foot, with a staring and threatening Countenance
answerable to the speeches he uttered against such as forsaking Him, had
denied him to be their King; or who by abandoning him Hereafter, were to do
so. The Earl hearing of his approach, encamped himself near to Tamworth,
where in the midway he was met by Sir Thomas Bourcher and Sir Walter
Hungerford, who fearing Richard, had privately stolen from Brackenburies
forces. The like from Other parts did diverse personages of good condition; who
it may be would have proved his Enemies, had not their Hatred to Richard moved
them to take part with Him. Yet this Concourse of people wherewith he ought to
have been comforted, freed him not from the much melancholy caused by the Lord
Stanley, who kept far from him, and in a posture (as it appeared) rather to
be Doubted of then Hoped in. As he rode thus pensively in the Rear of his
Troops, he was so transported with sad thoughts, that he was not aware how
he was left behind, with not above twenty Horse with him: the Army being
passed on, and having encamped it self, whilst he through the Obscurity of
the Night had lost the Tract thereof. He wandered up and down a good while,
hoping to meet with some of them, or to hear their noise; but neither Finding
nor Hearing any thing of them, he got into a little Village, fearing lest he
might be known, taken, and carried to the Enemy: and not daring to ask the
Inhabitants any questions, he continued in these fears till the Break of
Day; whilst his camp was more troubled then He, not dreaming that he had
Lost his Way, but fearing some strange Misfortune had befalne him. 'Twas his
good luck not to meet with any enemy: but when he was come to his Army, he
did not tell them that he had lost his way through Musing or Carelessness, but
that he stayed purposely behind to Speak with some he had received
advantageous advices. From hence he went to find out the Stanleys, who with
their Militia were quartered in Aderston; he understood the falsehood of his
suspicion; and how that the Lord Stanley could not openly declare himself for
Him, till the very last Up-shot, for fear lest his Son might suffer for it:
after diverse consultations it was resolved to give Battle, if Richard would
accept it. At his return he found Sir John Savage, Sir Brian Stamford, and Sir
Simon Digby, who having left the King, were come with their forces to serve
Him. Both sides were equally inclined to fight; moved thereunto out of their
Several fears; Richard, of being abandoned; the Earl, that his followers
might grow weary, either by the Incommodities they might suffer, or by their
Expenses; since he had no Authority but what they of Free will gave him. But
Richards condition was by much the worse of the two, for still Some or Other
fled from him; so as seeking out a fit place to fight in, he encamped himself
near a Village called Bosworth, not far from Leicester, where having
refreshed his people he prepared to fight. They say that the night preceding
he in his sleep had certain strange fearful Apparitions that he believed to
be Devils, which troubling him, broke his sleep, leaving him so affrighted, as
every one wondered at it: whereupon he who had always wont to appear
Cheerful in fight, thought that if now any Sadness should be discovered in
him, it would be accounted Cowardice; and that therefore it was necessary for
him to tell his Dream. Hollingshead lays this to his sting of Conscience, the
which as it is credible, so is it incredible that when a man draws near his
End, he is by some internal motions admonished thereof.

Day being come, Richard drew forth his Troops, putting them into such a
figure as for terror sake might make the greatest show. He made the Ranks of
the Vantguard very long, which was commanded by the Duke of Norfolk, and his
Son the Earl of Surrey: he Himself led on the Second, wherein were the
choicest and best armed men; and which was guarded on the Flanks by the Horse,
and on the Front by Bowmen. For all his Boasts their whole number was but very
Small, not worthy to have decided the controversy for a private Castle,
muchlesse a Kingdom. But it behoved him to hasten; as well for that His Forces
were by much greater then the Earls; as likewise, if he should have Tarried
expecting More, he might have run hazard of Losing those he had: for
Savage, Stamford, and Digby had carried along with them a great many fighting
men. The Lord Stanley stood as stickler between them, who having taken his
stand between the two Armies with three thousand Soldiers, afforded Hopes and
Fears to them Both: for being desired by his Son in Law that he would come
to take the care of Ordering and Commanding his men, his answer was: Let him
do that office Himself; he would come when he should see convenient time:
and to Richard (who swore by the passion of Jesus Christ, that if he came not
over to him, he would cut off his Sons head before Dinner) he answered: Let
him use his pleasure; howsoever I have More Sons. This ambiguity was
notwithstanding his Son Stranges safety; for Richard having commanded that
he should be beheaded, he suspended the Order; not so much in that he was
Advised thereunto (it being time to Fight, not to play the Executioner) as that
he feared lest Stanleys Cloud which threatened a Tempest might shoure down
upon Him; as it did, in a season when he could not with danger to the other
avoid it. The young Strange did for all this account himself as a Dead man,
being assigned over a prisoner to those who kept the Tent Royal: and
certainly he had suffered death, had not God saved his Life by the Kings
Death. The Earl was not troubled at his Father in Law's answer: He ordered
his Soldiers. He placed the Bow-men in the Front, under the Conduct of the
Earl of Oxford: he gave Sir Gilbert Talbot charge over the Right-wing; and
Sir John Savage command over the Left: He kept for Himself and His Uncle the
Earl of Pembroke a good proportion of Horse, but few Foot: with intention to
join with the Troops which were kept as a Reserve, to come in and succor
where need should require. All his Forces exceeded not the number of five
thousand, and his Father in Law had not with him above three thousand; Richard
having Twice as many men as Both they put together. The One and the Other of
them made long Speeches to their Soldiers. Richard had much ado to color
over his Cruelties, which not being to be Denied, he slubber'd them over, not
naming them; hoping thereby to get Absolution. For what remained he said, That
he had governed the Kingdom by means of their Advice and Valor: He had
punished such as were Seditious and Rebels according to their Merits; he hoped
to do the like upon the same occasion: He held the Crown of Them, 'twas They
that ought to make it good unto him: An unknown Welshman contended with him
for it, begotten by a Father less known then Himself; whose Forces consisted
of Banished Delinquents, and certain Britons and beggarly French, come to
plunder their Goods, ravish their Wives, and kill their Children: A better
occasion then this could not be met withal, wherein to exercise their Valor,
and to grow angry without Sin or Offending God; since thereby they were made
ministers of his Justice, and their Own Revengers, for which they should be
praised of all Nations: As concerning victory, it was not to be Doubted; since
they were to fight against a Handful of two sorts of people so often Overcome,
of which these were the very Scumme, led on by Necessity, appearance, and
Number; a number notwithstanding so Small as would make up the third part of
Them: for Himself; he promised all that could be expected from a generous
Prince, and a Valiant Commander; which the Effects should Witness; for he
resolved not to quit the field till either Conqueror or Dead.

The Earl on the Other side, being got to the highest part of his Camp
pleaded the Justice of his Cause; showing how necessary the Extirpation of so
cruel and monstrous a Tyrant was, for Public and Private good: That there
was not a more praiseworthy action, nor more conformable to whatsoever Law,
then to punish Him who having destroyed his Own house, by the Effusion of so
Innocent Blood, and Defamed it with so False defamations, had Slain,
impoverished, and brought to an ill end so many of the Nobility, only out of a
desire to Tyrannize: For what concerned Himself, he would say nothing; from
whom the lawful inheritance was usurped, which had been so long possessed by
the house of Lancaster; all whose Kings had been men of Reputation in the
World, and of Glory to the Kingdom; and if there were any thing amiss in the
Last, they were not his Faults, but superabundant Goodness abused by wicked
people: It was to be believed, that their adversary Outwardly assailed by Their
forces, and Inwardly by his Own faults, must needs fall; since Gods judgments
the Longer they are in coming they fall the Heavier, the weight of Heavens
scourge being (according to the orders of Divine justice) inevitable: It was
not to be endured, that to the excess of so many enormities, Incest should be
added; the Only sin remaining for him to have run through the whole
Catalogue of wickedness: That he pretended to marry his Niece the Princess
Elizabeth, to honest by some colorable Title, his unlawful possession of the
Crown; the which being due to Him, as only true Heir, and therewithal the
said Princess (who was promised to him in marriage) 'twould be great error in
Them to permit either the One or the Other: That since God had freed him from
so many Treacheries, been gracious to him, in suffering him quietly to pass
the Seas, to be peacefully received in England, and brought to confront His and
the Common Enemy, he would not be now wanting to work the confusion of that
Enemy, through Their valor; since he makes use of Good men to punish the
Wicked: Their rewards were to be Great, all goods Confiscable should speedily
be distributed by Him, who was to be Judge of each man's valor and desert: They
ought not to be terrified at their own Small numbers, and the Many of the
Enemy; for as divine Justice was the first argument of Victory, so those people
which they saw were led on by the Lord Stanley, were all for Them; as likewise
were many Others, who now appearing under the Enemies Colors would in the
heat of the battle show themselves Friends. For Himself; he promised all
that could be expected from a Soldier, and Commander; He desired them only to
Imitate Him in what belonged to the Soldier; that whilst he fought, They
should fight; and when He should forbear to fight, that then they should
Forsake him: The sum of all his considerations and reasons were; That as the
Victory consisted in their Valor, so if they should be Failing to themselves,
were to fall under the power of an Enemy, who not being to be paralleled for
Cruelty, 'twas better for them to Die Honorably with Sword in Hand, then
Ignominiously to Languish under a Tyrant, that had not forborne his own
Nephews. This being said, with a Confident heart, and with Cheerful
countenance he gave on upon the Enemy, and was as cheerfully follovved by his
men.

Richard fared otherwise: no Jollity was observed in his march nor yet
willingness, save in such whose fortunes depended upon His: all the rest were
wavering and divided into Three several opinions; some thought to side with
the Earl, some with him of the two who should Overcome, and some, neither with
the One nor the Other, but to be mere Lookers-on. Richard being now King found
like loyality in his subjects, as whilst He was a subject, he used to the King
his Nephew.

There stood between the two Armies a piece of marish ground with some causey
ways that had been made for the convenience of Passengers; and though the
season (it being the 22 of August) had hardened it, yet the Earl, knowing the
situation thereof to be for his purpose, to secure his small number on that
side, he hastened to be first Master thereof: and having it on his right hand
he won the Sun, which was in face of the Enemy; who advancing, the fight
began. The Earl of Oxford being himself so far advanced that he was in
danger to be cut off, commanded his men not to stir Ten foot from their
Colors: whereupon They forbearing to fight, that they might close together;
the Kings Vantguard did the like, being desirous either Not to fight, or that
the victory might be theirs against whom they were Enforced to fight. But
Oxford being returned to his charge, returned to Handy blows. At the joining
together of the two Armies, their several inclinations were quickly seen:
those of the Kings side that Fought fought Faintly; and those who fought Not,
withdrew themselves, and forsook the Camp. The King had commanded those he
most relied on, to have a care that businesses might be carried without
Disorder, and that they should advertise him of any Danger that should appear;
These seeing how some were Negligent, and how other some withdrew themselves,
advised him to save himself, judging that he was betrayed. But Divine Justice
would not suffer him to listen to such advice; no not when Victory appearing
evidently on the Adversaries part, they presented him with a Fleet horse
whereon to escape: the which he would not do saying, That that day was to
terminate either the War or his Life. Understanding afterward that the Earl
was not far from him guarded but with a few Gens de Arms, he spurred on
toward him and knowing him by some marks, he ran at him with his Lance in
Rest; the Earl was not displeased with the encounter, judging it the true way
to decide their controversy: but he could not meet him hand to hand, being
thwarted by some of his own men. They gave against the Standard, slew Sir
William Brandon the Standard bearer, and advancing forwards, Sir John Cheiney
stopped his passage, whom he bare to the ground, though he were a Gentleman of
much strength and valor. The Earl with his Sword in hand stopped his fury, at
the very instant when the Lord Stanley investing the Kings squadrons afforded
occasion to such as had a mind thereunto to runaway: the which when Richard
perceived, he left the Earl, and thrust himself into the thickest of the
fight, either to reunite his own men, or die the sooner: the later of which
befell him; for fighting valiantly, he fell with his Sword in hand all
besmeared with blood. All things made for victory on the Earls behalf, to
counterpoise the smalnesse of his numbers: in himself, Prudence, Diligence,
and Valor; in those that sided with him, Despair of safety if they should
lose the day, and the Regaining of their Goods, Country, and Honors, if they
should Overcome. But all this was not likely to have sufficed; for the Kings
desperate valor, who encouraging by his example, kept his men in their duties,
had brought the enemy in the two hours space which the battle endured to such
a pass, as being but few and out of breath, they began to give back: whereupon
if the Lord Stanley (who kept himself to decide the day) had not come in to
succor, they were likely, all of them, to be lost. We have hitherto spoken ill
of Richard, though not so ill as he deserved: yet now we must say, That though
he lived ill, he dyed well, according to the esteem of humane generosity. His
end bore with it heroical effects: Wisdom and Fortitude were two lights which
if they did not illuminate the actions of his past Life, they did illustrate
his present Death. When he saw himself abandoned by all; that those who yet
stayed by him, served against their wills; but very few willingly; he thought
it would be base in him and prejudicial for him to run away, since thereby
he should lose his reputation with the People, whereon his welfare did depend.
He therefore resolved to do his uttermost; for should he Overcome, all things
were likely to succeed well unto him; and should he lose the day, Death would
be advantageous; he having no hope at all of safety: Enemies on all sides;
Scotland (his only refuge) was but a fading hope, notwithstanding the new
Peace, and lately contracted Marriage; well might he trust thereto if his
fortune should prove Good, but not if otherwise: and say it should Favor Him,
He had but little hopes of getting thither untaken by the way, being so
generally hated; and 'twas impossible for him to pass unknown, for his
features and shape of body were such, by those that had never seen him. There
is to be discerned a confused mingle-mangle of virtues in this; wisdom, in
knowing his Danger to be such as was unavoidable; and Fortitude, in resolving
to die since he could not eschew danger: so as Writers have great reason to
affirm that he wan more Honor in these two hours by his Death, then he had
done all the time of his Life. For what concerns his Souls health; God is
able of Stones to raise up children unto Abraham, but this is but when he
pleases: and although there be no differences to be made in Him of Easy or
Uneasy (since He framed the whole World by his bare Word; He spoke and it was
made; He commanded and it was Created) yet let it be permitted according to
humane conjecture to say, That it is, I will not say more Easy, but more usual
for him to save one who is naturally Good, then one who is naturally Bad: since
natural Goodness may be said to be the Materia Prima of Salvation, containing
in her that Disposition, which, that we might be saved, was of His mere mercy
bestowed upon us gratis. So as though the rule of Christianity teaches us not
to Judge any one to the Damned, yet it forbids us not to Doubt of a man's
Salvation; as we do of Richards: for as in the good Tree that bears good
Fruit, some may be Wormy and Rotten; so in Mankind, man created to the
fruition of Heavenly Glory, may notwithstanding be damned, if he be wormeaten
with wickednesses and rotten with the obstinacy of sin.

His Death afforded invitation to those who yet fought to save themselves; and
the rest that, like Spectatours, had not moved from their station, came to give
obedience to the Conqueror; by whom they were graciously received, as likewise
were those who laying down their Arms, submitted themselves unto him. Of the
number of the Slain it is diversely written: some speak of a Thousand, some of
four Thousand. Sir Gilbert Talbot in an account which he gives to his
friends in writing, says there died only Ten of the Earls side: Hall says
a Hundred. Of the Peers on Richards side were slain, the Duke of Norfolk and
the Lord Ferrers of Chartley: of Knights Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and Sir Robert
Brakenbury, Lieutenant of the Tower: but few Gentlemen. The Duke of Norfolk
was persuaded by his friends to withdraw himself from the Battle; the which
he denying to do, two Verses were fastened to his Chamber door the night
before the Fight, wherein he was advised not to engage himself in the behalf
of a King that was Bought and Sold; but he, having been true to him in his
Life would be so likewise in his Death: and was praised for it. The Prisoners
were many amongst which was Sir William Catesby (he who betrayed the Lord
Hastings) a man of great esteem among the Professors of the Lawyers, and the
chief of the Kings Counsel. He was with some Others beheaded two days after
at Leicester. Of those that fled away the most considerable were Viscount
Lovell and the two brothers Humphrey, and Thomas Stafford, who got into the
Sanctuary of St John's in Gloucester. Of those who would not fight, was the
Earl of Northumberland; who coming to acknowledge the Conqueror, was
therefore by him received to grace, and afterward made Privy Counselor.
Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, Son to the deceased Duke of Norfolk, was not
received into favor, though he laid down his Arms; but was put into the
Tower, where he stayed a good while; the inward friendship he had had with
Richard doing him no good; but being afterward received to grace, he was
created Treasurer of England. The Earl after the Victory made Te Deum be Sung.
He praised his Soldiers valor, and thanked them, promising to reward them
according to their Loyalties. He gave order to bury the Dead, and to cure such
as were wounded. He Knighted such as he thought did most deserve that honor:
the which being done out of his Own mere motion, did so inanimate his
Soldiers as they cried him up King; whereupon Stanley took Richards Crown
which was found amongst the Booty, and put it on his Head: so as he was chosen
King by the Soldier, according to the ancient custom of diverse Kingdoms.
The Lord Strange, who as we have said, was delivered over to the custody of
those who guarded the Tents Royal, that when the Battle should be ended he
might be given in charge to the Hangman, at his guardians entreaties,
interceded for them: the King granted him their Pardon, received him with much
Honor, and his Father with much Joy. He went from thence to Leicester where he
stayed two days to refresh his men and take order for his going to London. The
day before, Richard went from that City in great Pride and Pomp, waited on by
so many Lords, Knights, and Soldiers as made the World to wonder: he returned
thither whether the next day like a slain Buck laid acrosse upon the Croupe of
a Horse, his Head and Arms hanging on One side, his Legs on the other,
Scorned and all Naked (save his Privy Members which were covered with a course
piece of Cloth) besmeared with Blood and daubed with Dirt, a Horrid sight to
behold. The Heralds name that carried him was White-Bore, and the White-Bore
was Richards Impresa, the which was torn and cut in pieces in as many places
of the Kingdom as it was found. His Body lay naked two whole days upon the
bare Earth in a Church of the Minorites in Leicester, whither it was carried:
nor could the People be satisfied with that sight, which being Gastfull in any
Other, was in Him Pleasing and Delightful, so much had his actions exasperated
them against him. He was buried in the said Church without any manner of
Solemnity or Funeral rites. King Henry shortly after made a Monument be made
for him with his Statue of Alablaster which represented him to the Life: the
which at the suppression of that Monastery was broken in Pieces: the place
where He was buried is since overgrowne with Weeds and Nettles, so as it
cannot be now said Here was Richard Buried. The only Memorial that remains
thereof, is the Stone Coffin his Body was buried in, which now serves for a
Trough for Horses to drink in, in a Neighboring Village. They say the Body
being taken from thence, was with much derision buried again at the foot of
Bow-Bridge in Leicester: and many other things are said of it, which I rather
believe to be the Peoples Invention, then that there is any thing of Truth in
them. In Richard the Line masculine of the House of York ceased: some except
Edward Plantagenet, Earl of Warwick, Son to the Duke of Clarence, whom I do
not account upon, since fifteen Years after He likewise died without any
Heirs Male: As we shall see.

The End of the Eighth Book.
The Ninth BOOK OF THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, In the LIFE of Henry the Seventh.
OUr Discourse leading us to treat of the Occurrences of a Kingdom, the
Government whereof passed now from one Family to another; it will be necessary
to know what pretenses the present King had to lay claim to the kingdom, to the
end there may remain no scruple touching the Justice or Injustice of the
Alteration. Henry the Seventh was by his Genealogy so remote from laying any
claim to the Crown by right of Blood, as the common opinion is he had no right
at all thereunto. His father Edmund Earl of Richmond, was son to Owen Teuder
and Queen Katherine the widow of Henry the fifth, whose Houses had no affinity
nor relation of Kindred to the House of Lancaster. By his mothers side somewhat
may be said for him; since Margaret Countess of Richmond (only daughter to
the first Duke of Sommerset, and grandchild to John Duke of Lancaster, the
father of Henry the fourth, the first King of that House) pretended that in
case the then-present Succession should fail, she and her son were to succeed,
as rightly descended from the said John, the father as well of the house of
Sommerset as of that of Lancaster. But this meets with two oppositions: The
one, That the House of Lancaster had no right at all to the Crown: The other,
That, say it had, the House of Sommerset did not partake therein, though sprung
from the same Head. The reasons why the House of Lancaster had no pretense are
these: Henry the fourth usurped the Crown from Edmund Mortimer descended from
Philippa, daughter and heir to Lionel Duke of Lancaster, elder brother to the
Duke of Lancaster, upon whom (King Richard the second dying without sons, as he
did) the Succession fell: So as the usurpation having continued from father to
son in Henry the fourth, the fifth, and sixth, 'twas impossible for them to
transmit that right to Others, which they Themselves had not. That the House of
Sommerset, though the Other had had right, did not partake therein, is thus
proved: The Duke of Lancaster having had three wives Blanch, Constance, and
Katharine, the due claims of his children had by them, were not the same,
forasmuch as concerned Inheritance, in respect of the several Dowries, and
different Qualities of the three mothers. Blanch brought with her the Duchy
of Lancaster; Constance, the pretenses to the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon; and
Katharine, nothing at all, being but a mere Waiting Woman to the abovesaid
Blanch: So as if Henry the fourth and the daughters born of Blanch, could not
pretend to the kingdoms of Castile and Leon, in prejudice to Katharine daughter
to Constance; nor Katharine to the Dukedom of Lancaster, in prejudice of Henry
the fourth and his sisters; much less could the children of Katherine have any
pretense at all, in prejudice of the children by the former two wives, unless
what you will allow them merely in respect of their Fathers Inheritance;
wherein must be considered their disadvantage of being the last born, therefore
not to enjoy the prerogative which the Laws give to the firstborn: To this may
be added, that they were born whilst Constance yet lived; so as they were not
only Bastards, but in such a degree as does aggravate the condition; they
being on the Fathers side born in Adultery: And though after the death of
Constance, he married Katharine; (which subsequent Marriage was made legitimate
by the double legitimation both of Pope and Parliament) yet, they not being of
the whole Blood, the House of Sommerset had nothing to do with the House of
Lancaster, in what belonged to the Inheritance of the Crown, their legitimation
making them only capable of their Inheritance by the Father: So as Henry the
fourth being established in the kingdom by the Authority of Parliament, and by
the same Authority his sons and such as should descend of them being declared
his lawful Successors therein; he (in case his succession should fail) made no
mention at all of his Half-brothers, or such as should descend from them. So as
let it be granted that his Usurpation was no longer an Usurpation (it being
allowed of by a Public Act of Election) yet had not the House of the Sommerset
(though descended from the same father) the same pretense; since not being able
to pretend to the Dukedom of Lancaster, much less could it pretend to the
Crown, the father having no pretense at all thereunto. And if Henry, his eldest
son, obtained the Crown, it was by Purchase, and so as none should enjoy after
him but such descending from him as he should specifically name: So as the
Crown (according to the Laws of England) belonging to the House of York, by the
Marriage with Anne, sister and heir to the aforesaid Edmund Mortimer, there
remains somewhat of doubt whether the Parliament could invest the House of
Lancaster to the right of the Crown, in prejudice to the first Mortimer, and
consequently to the House of York. If it could not Then justly do it, neither
could it justly do it after Henry the Seventh's pretense unto the Crown: and if
it could do it; in the same manner and by the same right as it did operate to
the prejudice of Mortimer and the House of York, by making Henry the fourth
King; it might do the like to the prejudice of the House of Lancaster, by
making Edward the 4 King. So as Henry the Seventh (be it either by Election or
by natural Descent) is totally excluded from any right unto the Crown: which
exclusion notwithstanding rests only in his Own Person, not in those who have
descended from him. For having married Elizabeth the true Heir of the House of
York, his sons begotten upon her were true Heirs to the Crown. And if in this
particular we desire to be any thing favorable to him, let us say, that if the
House of Lancaster had any such pretense, it had it by the Mother, who was Heir
to the House of Sommerset; and if the House of Sommerset be different from that
of Lancaster, so as he Thereby have no color of Claim, yet may he have it
Another way; being chosen King by the same power of Parliament as Henry the
Fourth and Edward the 4 were: So as the legal Right being in Elizabeth
according to Natural Descent, and in Him according to Election; and it being
sufficient according to the laws of Nature and of the Kingdom, that the right
be in any one of them, it matters not in which; since either of them having it,
there is none that suffers wrong thereby. It Is a wonder notwithstanding that it
could so much as fall into his imagination to pretend thereunto before this
Marriage; and that Edward and Richard should without any cause be afraid of
him: but the reason is, because, as Head of the Faction, he might be troublesome
to them. For though Henry the Sixth and the Prince his son were extinguished
(they being the last of the House of Lancaster) yet was not that Party or
Faction extinguished; which could not be revived again, save under his conduct
who had the nearest Relation thereunto. For this it was that the last Duke of
Buckingham (not calling Henry to mind before his meeting with his mother)
thought he himself had reason to pretend thereunto. In such a case, the right
and lawful title of King imports not so much as the lawful Title to be Head of
a Party: the first is communicable by Fortune, Force, or favor of Parliament;
the other only by Descent: for upon such occasions, Law is not sought after,
but a Pretense: To Pretend, is that which is desired, and which suffices. And
this it was that moved the two Brothers to solicit to get him into their
Tuition from the Duke of Britanny: for as for any thing else, they had no
reason to fear him. The Lancastrian Faction had never been likely to have been
revived, had not Richard been a Tyrant; for Edward, through his Affability, had
grounded such an affection of the People toward the House of York, as neither
would Richard's wickedness, nor Henry's goodness, have been able to have
rooted it out: nay, Henry would have had none at all to have sided with him
(though against a man so much abhorred) had it not been for his promise to
marry Elizabeth, the Heir of the House and Kingdom. The troubles which
afterward befell him, sprung from hence; for he always showed himself but
lukewarm in his affections toward his wife, and an irreconcilable enemy to
her House; insomuch as having gotten the Victory and slain his Enemy, he grew
obstinate in his will not to be King but by his Own Title: he deferred his
Marriage, and Her Coronation, till such time as being crowned Himself, and
established by Parliament, he had only accepted of the Title of Lancaster, as
the First and Chiefest Fundamental; and of the other two (Conquest and
Marriage) but as Accidental, or as Adjuncts. Nor ought this to be imputed to
him as a Fault; since it was not caused by any Hatred he bare to the House of
York, but out of the Love he bare unto Himself, and through a cautelous
Foresight. For a noise being rumored that the Duke of York was alive
(preserved from death by those who had the charge to kill him) his claim by his
Wife would have failed him, if her Brother had been alive, who could not have
been excluded but by the litigious Title of Lancaster. And suppose this News
were false, there remained yet Other doubts: for if she should die without
children, the bare Title of Marriage would not make good the Crown unto Him,
which was to fall upon her Sisters: And if she should die, leaving children by
him behind her, the Crown would fall upon Them: so as many inconveniences
might have happened to him thereby. For, suppose that his Chrildren and the
Parliament should both of them have been contented he should have continued in
the Government, there is a great Difference betwixt reigning by virtue of Birth
and Law, whereby he was not obliged to any; and the doing of the like by virtue
of Another's Consent, which obliged him to Every one: In the first, he was Free
and Independent; in the second, of Courtesy, and Dependent. To make use of his
Title of Conquest, was Dangerous, and which might alienate even those that
sided with him: for thereby he had authority to take what he would, from whom
he would, to make what Conditions he pleased, to make Laws at his pleasure, to
disannul Laws already made, when he liked; and to dispose of men, not as a King
of Subjects, but as a Lord of Slaves. And though the Title of Lancaster were
condemned by Parliament as Usurped and Unjust; and that he himself was called
unto the Crown, not by virtue of his Own Title, but that by marrying with the
Princess Elizabeth, the true Queen and Heir to the House of York, all those
Disputes might be ended; yet moved by the abovesaid Considerations, and not
valuing the inconveniences that might arise, he declared himself King by virtue
of his Birth, not naming the Princess Elizabeth in any thing; as willing to
run whatsoever danger, rather then to be King by his Wives Courtesy, while she
should Live; by the Good Will of his Children, if she should Die; and by the
Permission of Parliament, if he should have no Issue by her.

He began his Reign the Two and twentieth day of August, 1485
1485, at the same time that Richard ended his: from whom he did very much
differ in Conditions. They were both Constant, the one in Wickedness, the
other in Worth: insomuch as had he not had too great a desire to increase his
Treasure, he would hardly be outdone by whatsoever praise-deserving Prince; he
was deservedly praised for his Wisdom and Valor. The Lord Chancellor Bacon,
who has written his Life, calls him England's Solomon, not so much in that he
brought Peace thereunto, as that being Wise like Solomon, he was, like Him,
very Grievous and Burdensome to his People, never wanting some invention or
other to draw Moneys from them.

The Princess Elizabeth, and Edward Plantaginet Earl of Warwick son to the
Duke of Clarence, were in Sherifhutton-Castle in Yorkshire, where they were
both kept by Richard's command. King Henry commanded that the Princess should
be brought up to London, to the Queen her Mother; whither she went attended on
by Lords and Ladies: But the Earl of Warwick, he gave order that the keeper of
the Castle should deliver him unto the custody of Sir Robert Willoughby, to be
by him brought prisoner to the Tower; for though he were very Young, yet was he
not a person fit to enjoy his Liberty in such litigious times. For if being a
Prisoner, there wanted not some who feigned themselves to be Him, taking his
Personage upon them; what would have been done, had he had his Liberty? Henry's
resolution therefore in this point, did not proceed from a violence of Will, or
weakness of Judgment (as is the opinion of some Writers) but from exact
Wisdom; choosing of two evils the Lesser and least Dangerous.

He went from Leicester toward London, without any ostentation of Victory or
Conquest: his Journey was peaceful; all Military insolences were forbidden,
and forborne: he marched not like a New King, but like one who had been so Long;
welcomed wherever he passed with Shouts of Joy. His taking up the Olivebranch,
and laying aside the Palm, did enhearten the People; who did now promise
themselves that quiet which since Henry the Fourth's time till that present
they had enjoyed but by Fits; being subject to so many Alterations, as had not
those Evils ensued which did ensue, the very Expectation and Apprehension of
them was an intermitting Fever for the space of Fourscore and six years. In
like manner made he his entrance into London: for though he was met by the
Mayor, Magistrates, and Citizens (besides the Nobility and Gentlemen which
accompanied them) notwithstanding, dispensing with the Pomp usually observed at
the first entrance of Kings into that City, he made his entry in a Coach
undisplayed; to the end it might not be thought that having reinvested himself
into his Country by the favor of Arms, and gotten the Crown by the Kings
death, he had any intention to Triumph over the People. His entry was upon a
Saturday, the day of his Victory; which day he solemnized all his lifetime, as
being always the happiest day to him of all the days of the week. He alighted
out of his Coach at Paul's Church; where he made Te Deum be sung, and caused the
Colors taken from the Enemy, to be there hung up. He pretended to no other
Trophies; neither did he own this as the Effects of his Own Valor, or from
Fortune, but as from God, the only Fortune whereunto Sacrifices ought to be
made. He lodged in the Bishops Palace which joins unto the Church, as not being
far from the Tower, from whence he was to come to his Coronation. And because
it was said he had given his word to marry Anne the daughter and heir to the
Duke of Britanny, (which in respect of the favors he had received from that
Duke, was believed to be true) he in an Assembly of the chiefest Lords of the
Kingdom, which was called for that purpose, did ratific his promise to marry
the Princess Elizabeth: by which he stopped the Whispers and Fears that were
had of him: yet did he defer the Consummating of it without any manner of
scandal, till being Crowned, and in Possession by his Own Title, he might avoid
being called King in the right of his Wife. He made his entrance into the Tower
on Simon and Iude's eeve, and on the Feast Day made Twelve Knights Bannerets.
He created his Uncle Jasper, Earl of Pembroke, Duke of Bedford; he who having
brought him up of a Child, saved him from Edward the Fourth, by carrying him
into Britanny. He created his Father-in-law, the Lord Stanley, Earl of Darby;
and Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire. He was Crowned in the Church at
Westminster on the Thirtieth day of October with the accustomed Solemnities,
and joyful Acclamations both of the Nobility and People. Cardinal Bourchier,
Archbishop of Canterbury, executed that Office. He held a Parliament Seven days
after, wherein he annulled all the Decrees for the Confiscations of the Lives
and Livelihood of such as took part with him; and made the like Decree against
the chiefest of the Other side: and to take away all suspicion from the rest,
he granted out a General Pardon, which freed such of fear, who had cause to
fear: for his having condemned those whom he would not pardon, did secure
These, and 1483
was a sure sign he would pardon the rest; so as quitting the Sanctuaries, and
places where they had hid themselves, they swore Fealty to him, and did their
Homage answerable to the tenure of the Declaration, and reentred into their
Possessions. Afterward as concerning his Title (which was the chiefest
Concernment) he governed himself with such cautelousnesse, as that the
Princess Elizabeth not being named therein, he would have the Act that was
made to contain a Double sense: that the inheritance of the Crown should remain
in Him and in his Children lawfully to be begotten, not declaring whether it
were his by Nature, or by Conquest; it sufficing him that whatsoever
interpretation was made of it, it must make for his advantage. He would not
prescribe any Succession in case he, and those that should lawfully descend
from him, should fail, because it should not be thought to be done of purpose
to exclude the House of York: he therefore left the decision thereof to the
Laws. He, in the same Parliament, conferred more Honors: he created Monsieur
de Chandos (a Gentleman of Britanny, who during his being there, had been his
familiar friend, and would needs accompany him in his Expedition for England)
Earl of Bath: he made Sir Giles Aubeny and Sir Robert Willoughby, Barons: he
restored Edward Stafford, eldest son to the Duke of Buckingham, to his Blood,
Dignity, and Goods: and though his Confiscation were great, yet his Father
having been the First Promoter of his greatness, and having thereupon lost his
Life, he restored all unto his Son: which won him the reputation of being
Grateful. And though Kings do seldom call Parliaments, without demanding some
Aids by Moneys, and doing some Acts of Grace unto the People, he thought it not
fitting to make any such demand at This time, as not having any Grace to
confer, fitting to the time: for though the General Pardon was an Act of Grace,
yet would not he pretend it to be such, but rather a Correspondency to the
satisfaction they had given him, in receiving him to be King by his Own Title.
Besides, he not having War with any one, and having many great Confiscations
fallen unto him (the which he so moderated as might become a favorable
Confiscator, and be expected in a good Government) he was willing to spare his
Subjects purses. And though his intention was to govern in such sort as his
People should have no reason to hate Him, nor He to fear Them; yet knowing he
had Enemies, he instituted a Guard of Fifty Archers under the Command of a
Captain; which was a New thing in England, where their Kings are only guarded
by the Laws and their Subjects affections. So as to take away all Jealousy, he
declared the Institution to be Perpetual: moved thereunto by what he in the
time of his Exile had observed others to do: and, for that the want of a Guard
does misbecome the Majesty of a King; and is requisite to be had, if not for
Necessity, for Decency.

The Parliament being dissolved, he forgot not that he had left the Marquess
Dorset and Sir John Bourchier as pledges in France for the Moneys wherewith he
paid the Forces he brought with him into England. Willing therefore upon this
occasion to try the inclination of the Citizens, he commanded the Lord
Treasurer to desire the Lord Mayor of London that the City might lend him Six
thousand Marks: and after sundry consultations, the business was decided by
the loan of Two thousand pounds sterling; the which though it came short of the
sum that was desired, he took in good part, supplying the Remainder (which was
much) out of his Own moneys, to the end the Hostages might return for England,
as they did. He forgot not the services done to him by John Morton Bishop of
Ely, and Richard Fox Bishop of Exceter, for which he made them both of his
Privie-Councel, and gave unto Morton the Archbishopric of Canterbury, which
fell void by the death of Cardinal Bourchier: he made Fox Lord Privie-Sea;
promoting him from the Bishopric of Exceter to that of Bath and Wells, from
thence to Durham, and from thence to Winchester, the richest of All the rest.

Having now no impediment to hinder the performance of his promise, he married
the Princess Elizabeth, to the peoples so 1486
great joy, as he was not much therewithal pleased; ror he never had any great
inclination to the Match: his inveterate enmity to her Family prevailed more
with him, then did the Goodness, Fruitfulness and Beauty of so worthy a Wife.

Soon after Henry's coming to the Crown, England was afflicted with a disease
not known in former times; so as the remedies not being known, many perished of
it: of a Hundred scarcely One escaped, till experience taught the Way how to
cure it. Men were taken with a deadly Sweat, with Pains in the Head, and
Burnings in the Stomach, which rendered them dry and desirous of Cold, they were
by the one and the other of them dispatched in Four and twenty hours: for,
casting off their clothes, and drinking cold Beer as it came from the Cellar,
they died irrecoverably. But some few relapsing twice or thrice into this
Malady, it was found that taking Cold and not drinking Warm drink, were the
causes which made it mortal. The Cure then that was found for it, was, To
endure the Heat Four and twenty hours, in such manner as the Sweat was neither
Irritated, nor kept Back; and to drink Warm drink a little at a time, rather to
Allay then to Extinguish thirst. This Sickness began in the midst of
September, and continued all October: it hindered not the solemnity of the
Coronation: it begot no Swelling nor Sores, and became curable if the remedies
were Timely applied: neither was it Contagious but the Fever which did
accompany it was Pestilential. It was judged to proceed from a Malignant
vapor, which stuffing up the Vital spirits, was wrestled with by nature, to
drive it out by Sweat. An Author of good quality says it could not be called
Epidemical, though it so generally spread it self: and that if sprung from a
certain malignity of the Air, occasioned by the Unseasonablenesse of the
weather. But Fernelius, who wrote of it at the entreaty of an English
Ambassador, calls it Epidemical. Those that esteemed it a Prodigy, would
have it to foreboad a Hard and Troublesome Reign. But Polydor Virgil's opinion
is not to be rejected: That the King should be troubled even till the Last day
of his Life; since from the beginning to the end, he Never had any quiet. A
Divination which was not likely to prove false, being made After the Event; nor
did the Other which was made Before it.

All things having succeeded according to his wish, Henry thought now he should
meet with no more oppositions: He was King by his Own Title, in his Own Right:
he had married the Princess; and by his General Pardon and Restitution of
Goods, he had reconciled such as were his Professed Enemies: yet the Northern
people, bearing still a love to the House of York, and to the late Richard, he
thought it requisite for him to go into those parts; hoping by his Presence to
cure their infatuated imaginations. He kept his Easter at Lincoln; whither he
was hardly come, when he understood how the Lord Lovel and the Two Staffords
(brothers) Humphrey, and Thomas, had forsaken Sanctuary, it not being known
whither they were gone: but as soon as he was come to York, he understood that
the Lord Lovel was not far from thence, with good store of men about him: and
that the Staffords, having raised Forces in Worcestershire, were marched
toward York to assault him. This second information, though it did a lit tle
trouble him, yet he took it to be but the remainder of Richard's yet panting
spirits: but he was more confused to think that he was amongst a people that
did not affect him, that sided with the House of York, and of whom, without
danger, he could not make use. Amidst these difficulties, he mustered out of
those that followed him, and such as had relation to them, Three thousand
fighting men, on whom he might affie; which being sufficiently ill armed, he
gave in charge to the Duke of Bedford; giving him for his Vant-guard a General
Pardon, which like Cannon-shot might ruin the Enemy; as it did. For the Duke
being come in sight of him, and the Heralds having published the Pardon, he was
therewith so stricken, as doubting not only to be Abandoned, but to be yielded
up Prisoner, he fled the same night toward Lancaster; and from thence into
Flanders, to the Duchess Dowager of Burgundy: whilst the rest, laying down
their Arms, yielded themselves to the Duke. Whereupon they that were with the
Staffords, their hopes being lost, dispersed themselves into sundry places; and
the two brothers got into the Sanctuary at Colnham near Abington, where they
found not the safety they imagined: for the privilege thereof not extending to
save Traitors, they were taken from thence. Humphrey was executed; and Thomas
was pardoned, for that, as the Younger brother, he was enforced to obey the
Elder.

The King having quieted this Rebellion, and reduced these Northern people to
his Obedience, returned to London. The Queen in September brought him a Son;
who lived, though born in the Eighth Month, contrary to the rule of Common
Observation: it may be there was some Error in the Calculation; for it is more
likely that Women may be deceived in the time of their Conception, and in the
Counting of their Months, then that Hippocrates should be deceived in his
Principles. He named him Arthur, in memory of the ancient Britons, from whom he
descended; Wales (as has been said) not being any part of the Angli-Saxones,
which possessed all the Rest of the Kingdom; but of the Original people of the
Island, the residue of the Britons, which saved themselves by fleeing into
those Provinces: and from thence came the First so famous Arthur, who really
and without any manner of Fable or Romanza, was a very valiant Prince: so as
Henry to revive his memory, called his Son after His name.

There lived at this time in Oxford one Richard Simond a Priest, indifferently
well educated, but of mean birth: and who (abounding with strange ambitious
fancies) durst do that which another could never have dared to do. This man
took upon him to bring up a young Boy of so Sweet and Ingenuous a Countenance as
one would not have thought him to be a Baker's Son, as he was: his name was
Lambert Symnel. There were then Two rumors noised every where, and which were
spread abroad by such as out of Faction or out of Envy could not endure that
Henry should reign: the one, that the Duke of York, son to Edward the 4, was
Alive; the other, that the King was resolved to put the Earl of Warwick, who
was prisoner in the Tower, secretly to death. The First was divulged, to nurse
up Hopes in such as were ill affected; the Second, to increase Hatred against
the King, as if, equally cruel with Richard, he were about to treat the Earl of
Warwick, as Richard had treated his Nephews. Whereupon Simond meeting with so
fit an occasion, bethought himself to make Lambert personate the Duke of York;
but presently altering his Opinion, he judged it fitter for his purpose to have
him personate the prisoner, the Earl of Warwick: and that if his endeavors
should succeed, and that Lambert should be made King, he himself should be
recompensed with the Chief Miter of England, and the Government of King and
Kingdom. Neither did he think to meet with any great Obstacle herein; since
that the love to the House of York remaining yet in the hearts of Most of the
Kingdom, they could not possibly endure that the King having married the
Princess Elizabeth, he should not suffer her to be Crowned as she ought to be.
Resolving hereupon, he began to give such instruction to Lambert as such a
business required; and met with an Aptness in him fit to receive whatsoever
documents: but considering afterward that his pupil was to represent the
person of one that was known to many, and not known to him, he thought it was
unpossible to be done without the Assistance of somebody who was conversant in
the Court, who might be informed by those that had served the Earl, of his
childish conversation, and of all things that had befallen since King Edward's
death; at which time he was but Ten years old. None being fitter for such an
Office then the Queen Dowager, she was imagined to be the Instructresse: for
she was but little satisfied to see her daughter so little beloved, and so
coolly treated as a Wife, and as a Queen, wanting the usual Marks of that
dignity; (for Henry had neglected her Coronation, though he had lately born him
a Son) not that her intention was to make Lambert King, but to make use of him,
to Depose her Son-in-law; to substitute the infant-Prince, the lawful
Successor, in his place; and, in case she should meet with too great
oppositions, Lincoln, or Warwick; which were Both of the House of York. That
which made people of this opinion, was, Her being shortly after confined to a
Monastery, upon no weighty pretense; as we shall see. The King thought it
expedient to punish her under the color of a Petty known fault, for a heinous
one which was not fitting to be known. Howsoever it was, Lambert took upon him
the gestures and behavior of a great Personage, with so miraculous
punctuality, as that these being joined to his Natural Sweetness, a True
Prince could not be formed out with more true Perfections then were these false
ones which appeared to be true in Him. The reasons which made Simond change his
first design and choose rather to have his Comedian personate the son to the
Duke of Clarence, then King Edward's son (though he that was Dead might
easilier be counterfeited then he that was Alive) was, That when a speech went
of his being escaped out of the Tower, he observed so Great Joy in the People,
as he thought he should have more to further him in his design, and that it
would be easier for him to insinuate a falsehood in the Person of This man;
falsely supposed to have made an escape, then in that Other whose escape would
the hardlier be believed: for in it Two Impossibilities were to be supposed;
Pity in the Varlets that were to murder him, which could not, without danger,
enter into such souls, especially under such a King as was Richard; and the
Escape from the Tower, which augmenting the danger, took from the belief of any
Compassion in Them, or Life in Him. But that which chiefly made him resolve
upon This, was, that whilst he was doubtful what to do, 'twas said for a truth
that Warwick was Dead in the Tower. Now to act this Comedy well, he did not
think England a fit Scene, a proportionable Distance being required in things
which must be taken for what they are not: unavoidable difficulties were to be
met withal upon the place, which might be avoided abroad; where no Witnesses
being, to convince; nor Acquaintance; to confound; boldness* becomes
impudence: without which, Cheats of this nature can hardly be effected. He
resolved to go over into Ireland, a Kingdom affectionate to the House of York,
and wherein King Henry at his coming to the Crown had altered nothing; neither
Deputy, Councellor, nor Officer; the same commanded there, that were there
placed by Richard: a negligence to be blamed in so Prudent a Prince as He was,
who knew the inclination of that Kingdom and People, wherein if alterations
chance to happen, remedies are hardly come by; none being to be had from within
it Self, and all External helps (the Sea interposed between them and home)
being Difficult, Dangerous and Slow. All which made for Symond's purpose; who
coming before Thomas Fitzgerald Earl of Kildare, who was Deputy (a man
ill-affected to Henry, as he was well-affected to the House of York) presented
his pretended Prince unto him, using such illusions as Lambert not having any
one part in him which did not gainsay his mean Extraction, the Deputy believed
him to be what his Masters speeches, and his Studied Nobility made him appear
to be: insomuch that acquainting some of his trustiest friends with this Secret
under the Seal of Confession, he found them, and together with them, the
People, prone to Rebellion. They received this fancied Prince with great
honor; they gave the Castle of Dublin to him for his Lodging; and few days
after proclaimed him King, by the name of Edward the Sixth. There was not any
one Province that denied him obedience; and all of them joined in declaring War
against Henry: whilst on the contrary side, there was not any one that spoke a
word, or drew a sword in his behalf. But that Kingdom being but bare of Money
and Arms, and but meanly furnished with Soldiers, they hoped that such in
England as were friends to the House of York, and Margaret Duchess of
Burgundy, would, in a business of so great consequence, assist them with their
Supplies: whom they advertise that Edward Plantagenet is escaped out of the
Tower and come into Ireland, where he was received and proclaimed King; that
they were purposed to bring him into England, his hereditary Kingdom, if they
would be ready with their assistance, to secure his Entry; and that his Aunt of
Burgundy would assist him with Money, Soldiers, and Commanders. Margaret, by
reason of her virtue (for she had nothing in her blameable but her inveterate
hate to the House of Lancaster) was in great esteem amongst the Flemings: she
was the third wife to Charles Duke of Burgundy, who being slain before Nanci,
left no Heir behind him save Mary (born to him by Elizabeth of Burbon, his
second wife) who was married to Maximilian of Austria son to the Emperor
Frederick the third, to whom she bare Philip and Margaret, which (their mother
being dead) were brought up with much charity and affection by this window, she
doing for Them, as she could have done had they been her Own children: which
caused the Subjects, moved thereunto by her so great Charity, to honor and
obey her, as if she had been their Naturally-reigning Princess. Her husband
had left her a very great Dowry; so as she having had no other occasion of
Expense, saving her frugal Domestic affairs, she might by the Moneys she had
gathered in so many years, of her Self, unassisted by any Other, undertake this
business. She therefore willingly listened to the Embassy: not that she was
Ignorant of the Falsehood of it (for she knew her Nephew so strictly kept, as he
could not escape) but that she might have an occasion to trouble Henry. His
marriage with her Niece, which should have reconciled her to him, did the more
Incense her against him, since it was the way to Establish him in the Kingdom,
and to take it from Her House, without any Hope of ever Recovering it again:
whereupon she readily Promised Assistance; and, in it is due time, Sent it more
Readily.

The King, when he heard of this Rebellion in Ireland, was very much troubled;
being too-late aware he had done ill to leave that Nation under the Command of
such as depended upon his Predecessor. And though he could not have imagined
such an accident as This, yet was he not to be excused; for Wisdom ought to
foresee not only Evident; but Contingent dangers: neither was it Contigency,
to trust Ireland in the hands of such as were Well-wishers to the Adverse
party; it was not to be believed, that together with their Prince they would
change their Inclinations; for Hatred in inveterate Factions, is seldom
changed. But having no ready remedy, nor being able to exercise his own Valor
upon this occasion, as he had done upon Others, by reason of the Sea's
interposal, he called his Council together, to know their Opinions, and to
resolve upon what was to be done. They propounded and concluded upon Three
expedients: First, a General Pardon for All faults (Treason against the Kings
Person not excepted) to all such as within a Prefixed time should Confess
themselves guilty: a thing most Usual upon Other occasions, but necessary at
This time; since Ordinary Treason, which is usually pardonable, was not Now
treated of; but treason grown to such a Height as makes the partakers therein
Desperate, even to the Uttermost Hazard; their welfare being incompatible with
the welfare of the Prince. This Article was resolved on in consideration of Sir
Thomas Broughton, who had saved the Lord Lovel: for, being a powerful man in
his Country, he might have assembled many men, who, joined to the rest, might
have done much harm: and though there was no doubt of his Correspondency with
the Irish, yet it was Now no fitting time to proceed against him with Severity;
it was thought fittest for the Present Danger, not to put him to Desperation,
not to Provoke him to Mischief, and to show him a way to save himself.
Secondly, that Edward Plantagenet should be taken out of the Tower, and shown
to the People, to the end they might know he was not dead; and that the
supposed Plantagenet in Ireland was a mere Chimaera, framed only to trouble
the State. Thirdly, that the Queen Mother should be confined to the Nunnery of
Bermondsey, and that her goods should be confiscated; for that having promised
the Princess Elizabeth to the now-King, whilst he was in Britanny, she had,
contrary to the Articles of Agreement, delivered Her, and the rest of her
sisters, up to Richard. The issue of these three Resolutions, were; Broughton
bit not at this bait of Pardon: Edward Plantagenet was led in Procession to
Paul's, being by the way discoursed withal by diverse of the chief of the
Nobility that knew him, especially by such of whom the King had any Suspicion;
to the end they might be convinced in their reason. The which though it availed
in England, yet did it no good in Ireland: where the King was accused, That,
out of an intent to rob Edward the Sixth of his Inheritance, which he had
Tyrannously enjoyed, he had showed to the view of the People, a young boy who
was somewhat like him, to the end they might believe a Falsehood, thereby
cheating the World, and by an unparalled Imposture profaning the Church, and
sacred Ceremonies. The resolution concerning the Queen was that Alone which
took Effect, though not without Scandal: for there being no other cause then
what was alleged, the punishment savoured too much of Avarice and Cruelty: of
Avarice, because the King got thereby her Confiscation, which was very Great;
of Cruelty, because the Weakness and Vanity of a Woman (the Weakness caused
by the Threats, the Vanity by the Promises of a Tyrant) and the Irksomeness of
a Sanctuary (an End whereof she was Never to expect) did not deserve so Severe
a punishment. Not but that her fault was very Great, since she did what in Her
lay to render the Kings return vain, and to make those Lords for ever lose
their Country, and their Possessions, who upon her promises were gone into
Britanny: but the Difficulty of so dangerous an enterprise under the conduct of
a Young man, without Forces; against a powerful King, a skilful Warrior;
together with the Example of the Duke of Buckingham, who first began it with so
Unfortunate Success were able to have made a Stronger mind then Hers to have
Waver'd: the sufferings of her Body and Mind, made her covet a Quiet; which
she could not hope for from a few Exiled People: and if This were her Only
fault, wherefore was she not at first proceeded against, before her daughter's
Marriage, and the Prince's birth; in all which time the King showed no distaste
against her, neither held her as a Delinquent? But in my Opinion it is to be
thought that the Kings nature, though Covetous, yet not Wicked, did not move
him to deal so injuriously with her: rather that he was induced to these
proceedings out of some Hidden cause; and that those Forces above mentioned,
which made her guilty in the highest degree, made him so exceeding Severe: else
he would have punished her Before, as in Justice he might have done. But Princes
Imaginations are not as manifest as their Actions. This Queen was one of
Fortune's greatest works; whose Inconstancy in the enterchanges of her Felicity
and Misery, proved Constant: from being a widow to a bare Knight, she was made
wife to a great King; who being fled away, deposed, and banished, she was
enforced for the Safety of her Self and the Prince her son, which she bare
there, to take Sanctuary; her husband not many months after returning home
Victorious, and Triumphing, she likewise returned with him, and during his
life, lived in her former Greatness and Felicity: when he died, she fell upon
the like necessity, as formerly, of taking Sanctuary; her Brother-in-law having
usurped the Kingdom from her Sons, declared them to be Bastards, and cruelly
put them to Death; for her yet greater grief, her Brother, and one of her sons,
had by her Former husband, died under the Hangmans hands: in less then Three
months space, she was wounded with the death of Three Sons and a Brother: her
eldest Daughter being married to the new King, moved by her womanish anger to
practice uneffectible Chimaera's, she lost her Honor, Goods and Liberty; and
shortly after died unhappie; not visited by any whilst she lived, abandoned by
her friends. She was endued with Rare Qualities; but her ruin proceeded from
her abuse in the Choice of them: Wisdom and Wiliness being of the like Habit
and Aspect, are easily mistaken One for Another; she took the Later for the
Former; which she would not have done had she well considered them, for they
are of Differing Liveries; the one's is bordered about with Virtue, the other's
with Deceit. Queens College in Cambridge is her foundation, and so called
from her at this hour.

The Earl of Lincoln fled at this same time into Flanders: he was son to John
de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, and Elizabeth, Eldest sister to the Two Brothers
Edward and Richard. Richard had declared him to be his Successor, in case he
should die without Children; for having published King Edward and the Duke of
Clarence to be born in Adultery, he could not (if he would maintain the
pretended justice of his Own cause to the Crown) but reject their issue;
especially having injured them so heinously. The Earl, upon these hopes, flew
High in his conceits: he was a man so well conditioned, as had his Title been
just, he deserved to have attained at what he aimed. His designs, which were
born to the ground by Henry, who by his Uncles death had gotten the Crown,
began to renew again at this Irish news: for knowing the pretended
Plantagenet's falsehood, he thought the troubles that were thereupon like to
arise, would bring him to what he desired; for Henry being once overcome, it
would be easy for Him to bear down the Impostor. The King had oft-times had
him in his thoughts; for being a Bird fit for the Cage, to let him fly loose
Abroad, might prove pernicious to Himself and to the State: but the Earl of
Warwick's imprisonment, at which the People were offended, was the cause why he
imprisoned not Him; which should he do, they would take yet greater offense:
and he hoped, though He were at Liberty, he could not hurt him so long as the
Other was in Prison: Warwick's pretension was Just, and according to the Laws;
Lincoln's was Illegal, obtained from one who had no Power to give it: and the
more it was Questionable, the less was it to be Feared; for it was not likely
that by the difference of Two disagreeing Pretendants, any One of the parties
might by Concord be established. In which if he was deceived, it was not to his
Prejudice. For Lincoln being fled (not without the knowledge and appointment of
Sir Thomas Broughton) he went to his Aunt the Duchess, who after diverse
consultations, sent him into Ireland, accompanied by the Lord Lovel and other
Fugitives, with a Regiment of Two thousand choice Dutchmen commanded by Martin
Swart, a Valiant Captain. She thought this ready succor would produce many
good effects; as the Confirming of the Rebels in their Obstinacy; the Securing
the Counterfeit King in Possession, and the Encouraging of his Party in
England, by making them Ready at their arrival to set upon Henry, to fight with
him, and to put him to flight: for the Feigned Edward the Sixth was to be Held
up, as long as need required, and not Yet to be cashiered, and the True Edward,
which was in the Tower, put in his place. She had no thought at all of Lincoln
in this business, knowing he had no Right of Pretense, unless she would have
Seconded her brother Richard in his Declarations, to the Shame of her House,
which she was very far from.

The King, when he understood of his flight, was much perplexed; he saw, that,
the Duchess having declared her self in the behalf of the Rebels, he must
defend his Crown with the Sword. The first provisions he made, was to make the
Seacoasts on that side be well guarded, to the end that Others might not
follow Lincoln's example. He raised a Great Army, and divided it under Two
Generals, the Duke of Bedford, and the Earl of Oxford; believing to be set upon
at one and the same time, both from Ireland, and Flanders. And though he
expected not this before the Spring, yet forbore he not to make a journey
almost in the midst of Winter into Suffolk and Norfolk, to take order for
necessary provisions. And understanding by the way, that Marquess Dorset was
coming to him, to clear himself of some imputation which was falsely laid upon
him, he dispatched away the Earl of Oxford to meet him by the way, with order
to carry him to the Tower, and to tell him, That this was not done for that he
had Deserved it, or that the King had any Ill opinion of him, but to Free him
from the Danger of being Persuaded to undertake any thing which might redound
to his Prejudice; so as though he could not choose but think such a provision
very Hard, he wished him to take it Patiently, promising him he should have
Honorable and Satisfactory reparation. The King kept his Christmasse at
Norwich; and went from thence by way of Devotion to our Lady of Walsingham, and
from thence returned by Cambridge to London.

The Earl of Lincoln's arrival in Ireland, with so many good men with him,
added to the Rebels hopes: they were very proud 1487
to see themselves favored by the Duchess, by her sending of such ready
Helps, and Two so great Lords, as were Lincoln and Lovel. At their coming, King
Lambert was Crowned, being formerly but Proclaimed King. Being in Council, they
differed in Opinions, whether the war were to be made in Ireland or England:
Those who would have it made in Ireland, alleged for their reasons, That
Henry being necessitated to pass over thither in Person, lest he might lose
that Kingdom, he would meet with many disadvantages; amongst which the most
Considerable would be, his giving way for the Faction of York to Spread it
Self, the which being already Great, would Increase and grow Greater in the
Absence of the King, and such Forces as he must carry along with him; so as the
Faction of Lancaster consequently growing Weaker, it would run danger of being
Destroyed, and diverse would be encouraged to Abandon it, who Already were
prettily well Inclined so to do: which if it should fall out, he would be able
to do but Little good in Ireland, since he would want Supplies, being likely to
have None from England, which, peradventure, he might Lose. They were but Few
that were of this opinion: for they wanted there all the chief Ground-works of
War, strong Holds, Arms, Money and Soldiers; an Enemy could not be Stopped
without strong Holds, nor Themselves Secured; without Money Soldiers were not
to be had; nor could they encamp themselves in Open field without Arms. Reason
persuaded to pass the Seas and make the war in England: Henry had done the
same with Greater and Lesser company, and yet had had Good success; it was to
be believed, that not having any One that sided with him in Ireland, he would
have but Few in England; where, if the Greatest part were affectionate to the
House of York, whilst they had No Head to follow, what would they when they
should have a lawful King, attended on by a whole Kingdom? an agreement which
would invite and encourage England to do the like. But all these arguments,
though Sufficient, were not efficacious enough to make this resolution be
taken: the only reason: which bare sway to have the war in England, was the
Want of Money wherewithal to pay the Dutchmen, and their no hopes of Enriching
themselves by fighting in Ireland. The needier sort of people flockt to the
beating of the Drum; those who had nothing but their Lives to lose, were
contented to venture them upon hopes to better their fortunes in so Rich a
Country. They embarked themselves better furnished with Hopes then with
Weapons; and landed with Lambert, clad in kingly apparel, at the Pile of
Fowdray in Lancashire; they were conducted by the Earls of Lincoln and Kildare,
and Viscount Lovel, followed by the Dutchmen under Colonel Swart. Broughton met
them at their landing, with but a few men: they marched toward York, and
passed peaceably where they went, to show that Lawful Kings come to Ease, not
to Oppress their Subjects: but shortly after, their hopes began to grow cool,
when they saw not any one come in to them in their Solitary March; especially
since they could not with more reason expect any to side with them in any Other
Country then in that which was so much inclined to the House of York, and to
Richard. But Viscount Lovel not having found any safety there the year before,
they might believe, They were not now likely to fare better. Some were of
opinion, that the Alienation of those people proceeded from a Distaste they
took that Two Foreign Nations, the Dutch and Irish, should pretend to present
them with a King made by them: and though Henry the 4, and Edward the 4, and
the Now-King had in the like manner been presented by Strangers, yet the case
differed: They (the first and last) were called in by a Part of the Kingdom, to
free them from the two Richards, the 2 and the 3, the One for diverse reasons
more hated then the Other; and Edward came of himself, building upon the
People's Love: neither had Henry the 7 given any occasion of Hatred whereby to
be driven out; rather the opinion of his Worth, and his having Matched with the
House of York, had established him: moreover, the Procession made to Paul's,
wherein the True Plantagenet was seen, made them not mind the False one.

Lincoln being brought to that pass as he could not retire without ruin,
resolved to perish generously by hazarding a Battle. He marched toward Newark,
minding to make himself master thereof: but Henry, who at the first news of
their landing, was advanced to Coventry, sent some Troops of Light Horse abroad
to take Prisoners, that he might learn News: a superfluous diligence; for he
had Spies amongst them, who advertised him of all their proceedings. Being come
to Nottingham, a Counsel of War was held, wherein it was discust where 'twere
better to protract time, or to Fight: the King was for giving Battle, being
encouraged by the access of 6000 fighting men, most of them Voluntaries, under
70 Colors: the Earl of Shrewsbury and the Lord Strange were the chief
Commanders; and that the enemy might not take the advantage of Newark, the King
encamped himself between them and the Town. Lincoln, seeing himself so closely
pursued, went to Stoke; planting himself upon the side of a little hill, from
whence he descended as soon as the King presented him Battle: the which was
valiantly fought on Both sides; but of the Manner how, there is but Small or
very Obscure knowledge. It Is held, that of the King's Three Battallions, the
Vantguard only fought, and the other Two moved not at all; which seems the
Stranger, for that having fought even to the Last man (the one Half of the said
Vantguard being Slain) the King would purchase the Victory at so Dear a rate;
which, if he would have suffered All his men to have fought, he might have had
it better Cheap. All the Chief of the Enemy were slain; Lincoln, Kildare,
Lovel, Broughton, and Colonel Swart: great slaughter was made of the unarmed
Irish, who budged not one foot from the posture they put themselves in at the
Beginning of the fight: the Dutch, who were well armed, and understood their
work, died not unrevenged. The Conflict endured Three hours; not likely to have
endured so Long, had the Main-battel and the Rere-ward fought. It Is said the L.
Lovel sought to save himself; but finding the Banks of Trent too high for his
horse, they were both drowned, as not able to clammer up. Others will have it
that he got over the River, and that he lived a long time in a Cave. The King
was displeased at the Earl of Lincoln's death, not that he Loved him, or out of
desire of further Revenge; but that thereby he was bereaved of the means of
working out of him, what Correspondency the Duchess Margaret had in England.
There died, Four thousand of the Enemy, the One Half of the Kings Vant-guard;
and the Other half were work for the Chirurgions: So roundly were they dealt
withal. Not any one of Quality was slain on the King's side. They took many
Prisoners: amongst which king Lambert Symnel, otherwise called Edward the
Sixth, and Simond his Tutor and Seducer: 'twas thought he should have been
rigorously proceeded against; but his years (he not being full Sixteen years
Old) freed him from the Highest of faults. He confessed who he was and the
Meannesse of his Birth; that the fault proceeded from his Governor, whom he
was not wont to disobey. His punishment was the Kitchen; where he was put to
the vilest employments; his Scepter and Crown were turned to Spits and
Fire-forks: he continued in the office of a Scullion, till by what means I know
not, he was preferred to be one of the King's Falconers, in which condition he
died; not giving any further occasion of Story. The King showed herein his
Wisdom: for had he put him to Death being so Young, and for a fault not of his
Own Choosing; Severity might have had the face of Cruelty, and Justice of
Injustice; and together with his Life, his Memory would have been Lost:
whereas, by Pardoning him, he gave life to a testimony of his Own Clemency, and
Others Wickedness; and instructed the People upon other occasions. The being a
Priest, saved Simond, though worthy of whatsoever punishment: the King was
pleased to afford him Penitence and Penance; by giving him leave, during his
Life, to bewail his sin in Prison. There is a great difference between Polydor
Virgil's calculation of this Battle and that of Other Writers: he affirms it to
have happened in the year 1489; the rest, in the year 1487, on the Sixteenth of
June, on a Saturday, the day which was observed to be happy and propitious to
the King. I follow the Later. The King went not from the Camp till he had given
humble thanks to God for the Victory; the which he did likewise three days
together at Lincoln; with Processions, and other religious duties; and he sent
his Standard to our Ladies Church in Walsingham, whither he had vowed it. He
caused some of those that were taken to be put to death; doing the like in
Yorkshire, where diligent search was made after the Rebels: and since it would
have been a kind of Cruelty, to have punished so Many for One fault; he was
contented to commute the Blood of their Veins for the Blood of their Purses,
imposing great Pecuniary punishments upon them, wherewith both He and They were
satisfied.

He went to Newcastle; from whence he sent Ambassadors to the King of
Scotland, to invite him either to a Treaty of Peace, or to a longer Truce. His
being but newly settled in his kingdom, and the Inveteratenesse of the Faction,
counseled him to be at quiet with his Neighbors, especially with Scotland:
for these two kingdoms being almost Naturally given to be Enemies, they did
much harm one to another by fomenting Rebels, and nourishing of Seditions. Yet
was this peace more requisite for King James then for Him. For being a friend
to men of Mean condition, and an enemy to the Nobility, he never wanted cause
of Fear; so as it behoved him to have Peace with England, that he might punish
the Contumacious, and revenge himself upon his enemies. He therefore
courteously received the Ambassadors, letting them know there was nothing
which he in his heart more desired, then that which they came for; but that
there would be great difficulty to make the Parliament condescend thereunto:
for that there was an ancient Law which did inhibite Peace, lest the people,
growing careless, through Idleness, and losing their natural vigor, which
was conservable by the Use of Arms, might become Lazy; to the prejudice of the
State: that therefore they must content themselves with a Truce for Six or
Seven years; which being obtained, they might Renew from time to time, without
much difficulty: for what concerned Himself, King Henry might assure himself he
would Always be his friend: he entreated them howsoever, to keep secret his
free Communication with them; otherwise they would ruin the business; for
nothing would be granted which should be known they had desired of him. Henry
was contented with a Truce of Seven years; which being obtained, he returned to
London; where, being taught by the last events, that his hatred to the House of
York had been the cause of all the disorders that had ensued, he prepared for
the Coronation of his Wife; which was effected the Five and twentieth of
November; which was in the Third year of his Reign, and almost Two years after
he had married her. 'Twas generally believed this resolution proceeded from Any
thing else rather then from Good Will, the affections wherewith we are born
being as hard to be concealed, as to be laid aside. Neither is it to be
marvelled at if Henry born during the time of Hatred and Civil wars, wherein he
had lost his estate, and been kept Prisoner till he was Ten years old; carried
Exile into Britanny; demanded from thence by Edward and Richard; granted and
sold to the former; to the Second sold, but not granted; and saved, as it were
by miracle, from the hands of Both of them: it is no marvel, I say, if the
Remembrance of these things did confirm him in the abovesaid hatred, and that
that Hatred was converted to his very Nature and Blood, against the Blood of
those who had laid traps to Ensnare and to Destroy him. But neither did his
memory fail him in what concerned Good Turns; for the cloud of Dangers and
Suspicions being blown over, he set the Marquess Dorset at liberty: and that
he might know his imprisonment had proceeded from the Jealousies of the Times,
and not from any Evil he had Done him, he suffered not those Ceremonies to be
used to Him, which usually are to such as are imprisoned for any fault.

His affairs being thus quieted, he dispatched away an Ambassador to Pope
Innocent the Eighth to give him advertisement thereof, and to thank him for
having honored his Maariage with the assistance of his Nuntio, offering
Himself and his Kingdom to be upon all occasions at his Service: for which the
Pope, by way of correspondency, gratified him, by Moderating the Privileges of
Sanctuaries, and other Priviledg'd places; and by sending him a Bull; which was
welcome and advantageous to him; for thereby Traitors became less bold. We
have hitherto, spoken of the affairs Within the kingdom; we must now pass on
to External businesses, to the which the King could not Before attend, being
busied about Home-affairs which more concerned him.

The designs of Lewis the Eleventh King of France, father to Charles the
Eighth who at this time reigned, were to establish himself within the limits of
his own Kingdom, and such bounds as confined upon his kingdom, by readjoyning
unto it whatsoever at sundry times had been dismembered from it, either by
Appennages, or Otherwise; and to beat down the Authority of Princes and great
Lords that hindered him in his design, which was to become Absolute: to bring
this to effect, it was necessary for him to collogue with England (which was
the only place able to disturb him) and prodigally to present it; whereby
having laid it asleep as he desired, he reunited to the Crown the Dukedoms of
Burgundy and Anjou, the Counties of Bar, and of Provence, together with all the
best places of Piccardy. He intended to do the like to the Dukedom of Britanny,
but not effecting it, he left the care thereof to his son Charles, who though
very Young, did fully bring it to pass. For Peter de Landois, a proud and
insolent Officer of the Duke of Britanny, having incensed the Nobility of the
Duchy, and called in Lewis, Duke of Orleans, to his aid, by making Anne (the
Eldest daughter and Heir to that State) be promised to him in Marriage by her
Father; the Barons had recourse unto Charles, who being entered with Four
several Armies, into Four several parts of their Country, made them too late
perceive, that they had not called him in to Assist them, but to Destroy them.
The Duke of Britanny, who knew his Forces too weak to withstand the King's, had
recourse to Henry, to whom Charles had already sent Ambassadors to show him,
That the chief Princes of the Blood and greatest Lords of his Kingdom being
retired into Britanny (under pretense of Refuge, but in effect that being
joined to that Duke, they might mischief Him the more) he was forced to take up
Arms, and necessitated to war for his Own Defense, and to Prevent him that
sought His ruin: that the war was Defensive on His side; that he pursued
Rebels in a Prince's Country, who owing Homage to Him, ought not to have
received them, and much less to have Conspired against him with them: wishing
him to remember, that if the Duke of Britanny had done him any favor, he had
marred the merit of it; since it failed on his part, that he might have been
utterly ruined, by being delivered up to Richard: that he did not pretend to
remember him of the Assistance and Favors he had received from Him, which were
done out of mere Affection, and contrary to what Reason should have persuaded
him to for his Own good; since it had been better for him, that a Tyrant, like
Richard, should have reigned in England, then so virtuous a King as was he:
That if he would rightly weigh both their good turns, he should find His
proceeded from true Friendship; the Duke's, from Self-interest: That he did not
desire a Requital of Assistance, knowing that he was but Newly possessed of the
Kingdom, which he had purchased with great Expense and Trouble; but only that
he would stand Neuter: That he would not, by aiding the Duke, hinder the just
progress of hi^ Arms, justly to punish Rebels; and to give due correction to
him that had, contrary to all Law, received them. He herewitha^ acquainted him
with his having taken some certain Towns from the Archduke Philip in Flanders;
affirming he had not done it out of any Ill Will, but for that it behoved him a
little to Quell him: the difference between them, for any thing else, being
Little or Nothing, they being Neighbors, and he to marry his sister. He said
this to dissuade Henry from believing that he made war in Britanny to Possess
himself thereof; and to honest the Usurpation by Marrying the Heir, as he
intended, and as he did: and to make him believe this the rather, he discovered
unto him (as a business of great Trust) his designs upon the Kingdom of
Naples; as if the attempt upon Naples, which was but an imagination in Future,
were not compatible with his Present Real attempt upon Britanny.

Henry was displeased at this Embassy, Two Princes being therein concerned, of
which he knew not whether to prefer, being obliged to them Both, and equally
favored by them Both. He knew Charles did but Dissemble; that the injury he
did the Duke was unjust, and hurtful for England: that France might
peradventure have reason enough to be Offended with Britanny, but none to
Subdue it: The danger was great: The Duke was Old, Sickly, and for the most
part out of his Wits: He had no issue Male; Females, the weaker they are and
Marriageable, the fitter are they to serve for an occasion of Oppressing the
Country: The Nobility was Mistrustful; the People, wavering: He objected to
himself, that the Duke having preserved Him so many years, against the
Treacheries of so many Enemies, he was, in Honor, obliged to do the like for
him; wherewithal it likewise became him to preserve the freedom of Commerce
unto his Kingdom; which would be Lost, or much Lessened, should it fall into
the hands of such a King, who if by reason of what he already possessed, he
were of so great might as he became formid able to his neighbors, and those
that lived further from him, what would his greatness become when it should be
Augmented by the Addition of a Dukedom equal to a Kingdom, rich in Nobility,
People, Seas, and Ports? But having been likewise Obliged to Charles, he could
not (without the Badge of Ingratitude) treat him like an Enemy. To do then what
he ought to do (which was not to Declare himself Against the One, nor Suffer
the Other to be Undone) it behoved him to have Evident Reasons (should he do
Otherwise) whereby it might Appear that he was Perforce induced thereunto. His
Obligation being Equal, his duty of gratitude could not be Dispensed withal to
Either of them: so as, desirous to carry himself Indifferent where
Circumstances were Equal, as in his Obligations; it behoved him to do
Otherwise, where Circumstances Differed, as in Interest of State, and Justice;
Two ponderous weights, Both of which were put into the Duke's Scale. Having
then answered the Ambassadors in matters of Lesser importance, as in the
business of Flanders, he told them, He found himself bound in a Like bond of
obligation to the King and to the Duke: That the cause of his flight from
Britanny into France, was not from the Duke, but through the wickedness and
malice of his Officer, Landois: He must confess he Often has owed his Life unto
him, having had diverse treacherous plots contrived against him by the
corruption of his Servants; that He never failed him, neither in Will, nor
Deed: So as finding himself in this condition with them Both, he hoped that his
Interposing himself as a Friend between them, might produce that Peace which
was to be desired; and to which end he would forthwith dispatch away an
Ambassador to him. They being dismissed with this answer, he bent all his
endeavors to work a Reconciliation between them, that he might not be Enforced
to take up Arms; the which if against his will he Must do, he was resolved to
employ them to Preserve Britanny: neither did he believe fortune would prove so
favorable to Charles, but that He might have time to Negotiate this business,
grounding his Confidence upon the great Oppositions he had; on the one side,
Maximilian; on the other, the Forces of Britanny; and the Orleanists in the
Bowels of his Kingdom ready to raise a Civil war, which he was not likely
Quickly to quit his hands of: together with the Inconstancy of his Young years,
able to make him Change his mind; especially he being environed with men of
Mean condition, who rather make their fortunes in Court-changes, then in
Chances of War. Upon these supposals (which proved all false) he sent his
Chaplain Christopher Ursewick into France: he gave him order that if he found
Charles disposed to Peace, he should instantly go to Britanny, and conclude it
in the best manner he could. Ursewick came to France, where Charles made him
believe he did passionately desire Peace, whilst he was far from it; he
therefore past on into Britanny, thinking he had done Half of his work; but he
found he was deceived; for the young King handled the business with so much
Subtlety, as he that had been longest Experienced and Verst in business, could
not have done it better. He seemed to be very desirous of Peace, knowing that
Ursewick's pains would be to no purpose; for the Duke of Britanny was not in
case to rely upon his Own Judgment (having indeed None at all) and the Duke of
Orleans would not hear of it; for being injured by him, it was not likely he
should trust him. He on the other side, should by this means justify himself
to Henry; since the making of peace stuck not at Him; so as he should not have
any occasion to enterprise ought against Him, the fault (in all appearance) not
being His. Ursewick being come to Britanny, found the Duke so very ill, as it
was impossible for him to treat with him, who had lost almost all the faculties
of judgment: it behoved him to treat with the Duke of Orleans, whom he
acquainted with the King his Master's desire, and with the good inclination he
found in the King of France thereunto; so as there remained nothing to
establish a good Agreement, but to conclude upon the means, to every one's
satisfaction. The Duke being far from any such thought, knowing that Charles
his intention was other then he made show for, and he himself thirsting to make
war with Another man's purse, and with the hopes of getting the Duchy of
Britanny, answered, He wondered that so Wise a King as Henry would suffer
himself to be overreached by so very Young a King as Charles: and that those
reasons, to which he was bound by Honor and Gratitude, bore no sway with him:
that he should do well to remember the Duke of Britanny had been in lieu of a
Father t^ him, from his Childhood, till his promotion to the Crown; to the
which (though Nature, Birth, and the Kingdom had played their parts) he had
Never attained, had he not used that charity toward him, which obliged Henry
to do the like for Him: that the present Mediation did not correspond with the
business: that it was Destructive; but Useful for Charles; who thereby would
gain time to do that which otherwise he could not: that Aid was expected from
Henry worthy of the Greatness of his Mind, of his Tie of Friendship, and of
the imminent Danger: the fair Appearances of France were nothing but Fraud and
Cozenage; 'twould be too Late, Dangerous, and Dishonorable, to know it by the
Event: that if Henry would believe Charles to be of as Candid a mind as was He
himself, he might do well to believe it with his Sword in Hand; so that if it
should prove Otherwise, he might be ready to Chastise him that had abused him:
by doing this, he should acquit himself on All hands, nor could any one have
just cause to complain of him: And if the reasons of Gratitude (which were the
same with those of Honor) were not of force enough to persuade him, he ought
to do it out of reason of State; and take upon him that defense in Time,
without Offending Any One, which, should he undertake Unseasonably, would be
offensive to All Three; to France, by opposing it in Open War; to Britanny, by
giving it too Late succor; and to England, by permitting a Great King to
Increase in Power, State, and Situation, hurtful to that Kingdom; who was set
upon on all sides, subject to the discretion of England, upon whose pleasure he
depended, having Seas, Ports, Commerce, and all that could accommodate, or
incommodate; secure, or endanger England. Ursewick was ready to answer, That
Princes could not choose but in some sort believe one another, especially where
an Obliged friendship plays the part of a Surety; not that Wisdom may not have
her Exceptions, but that she should too largely dispose of her self, if where
there is Parity of Friendship, and Obligation, she should believe a friend to
be what he ought not to be: that Henry's obligations to France arose from
Britanny's failing him; which if it were not through any fault of the Duke,
'twas through the fault of Landois, Fortune, and Chance: 'Twas Chance, that
when fleeing from England, he would have gone to France, brought him into
Britanny: Fortune, when he would have stayed in Britanny, brought him into
France; whither he would not have gone, nor have had any obligation to the King
thereof, had it not been for danger of being sold to Richard by Landois: He did
not accuse the Duke of this; but neither ought the Duke to accuse him, if
Fortune bore him to Divide between Two, that obligation which was formerly due
to Him alone: He could not but confess this without the mark of Ingratitude;
neither could he take One of them into his consideration, and leave the Other
neglected: More time was required to arm by Sea and Land, then to send an
Embassy; the One did not hinder the Other: That an Ambassador served for a
Soul to such businesses as were to be brought to Life; no resolutions of
importance being taken between Prince and Prince, but by Mediation. But
Ursewick not being suffered to say This, nor what more he would have said (for
the Duke arose from him and would not hear him) he returned to Charles; who
told him, He had rightly foretold that the Duke of Orleans would not,
un-enforced, yield to any Pacification: that he would endeavor to force him to
it, as his obstinacy required; in the mean time he desired Henry not to desist
from doing good offices: for by continuation thereof that Peace would be
effected which He desired; to which he, for his part, would Never be Averse:
and that, under such conditions as Henry should prescribe him. Lewis, the
father of this Prince, would never suffer this his son to be taught more Latin
then Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare; wherein he so well profited, as
not having his brains troubled with any Other lesson, and being thought by
reason of his rough nature, to have but a blunt judgment, he deceived all men,
especially Ursewick; whereby the King, his Master, was likewise deceived. Some
think that Henry's credulity was but feigned, that he might have an Excuse not
to intricate himself in a War he Hated, and which would be of great Trouble to
him. But if he were not Deceived, he deceived Himself: for hoping it would be
hard for Charles to make any Progress in this business (being unable at the
same time to beat the Forces of Britanny, and Orleans his party) it proved
clean Otherwise.

The French Army being entered Britanny, and brought in by the confederate
Barons, made them soon repent it. The Articles greed upon between them were
instantly broken; Cities besieged, taken and Sacked; no difference being put
between the grounds and territories of the Confederate, and Not confederate:
whilst the Duke, abandoned by his Subjects, and not assisted by his friends,
escaped narrowly being taken at Vannes, from whence with much ado he got to
Nantes; where being besieged and destitute of hope, he sent the Count of Dunois
and Viscount Coteman, to get aid from England: who having ridden by night
through Forests and desert places in great danger, the Country being wholly
possessed by the Enemy, got to S. Malo; where they unluckily put four times to
Sea, and were as often driven back; so as they gave over their employment,
believing the succor they went for would come too Late, and that therefore
they must look for some from Elsewhere; but it was more then needed: For the
Frenchmen, despairing to win the Town, gave over the Siege.

Charles whilst he besieged Nantes, had sent Bernard of Aubeny into 1488
England to re-assure the King of his desire of Peace: and he either believing
it, or seeming so to do, named the Abbot of Abington, Sir Richard Tunsdal, and
the former Ursewick, his Commissioners, to treat thereof; giving them full
Authority, though the circumstances afforded little hope. Which Edward
Woodvile, Uncle to the Queen, a gallant Gentleman, perceiving, he desired leave
to go to assist the Duke with a Troop of Volunteers, with which he would
Privately steal over, so as the King of France should have occasion to complain
of none but of Him. It is not known whether the King did Privately give way
thereunto or no, but in Public he denied his request, charging him not to
depart from Court: notwithstanding he went to the Isle of Wight, where of he
was Governor, and raised there Four hundred fighting men, with which he sailed
into Britanny; causing thereby such an alteration among those of the Court of
France, as the Commissioners would have been evilly entreated, had not Charles
(whose conscience accused him) seemed to believe that Woodvile was come of his
Own head, since the Reputation of England, and the Need of Britanny required
Other manner of aid then Four hundred men. The Commissioners having discovered
his mind, returned to England, and acquainted the King, that Charles his
desire of Peace was but counterfeit, the better to gain time, and to make him
lose the opportunity of hindering him from the Usurpation of Britanny.
Whereupon Henry resolved to Call a Parliament; wherein succor being resolved
upon, he raised Moneys and mustered Soldiers, sending word to Charles, that
his Kingdom liked not this war with Britanny made by him; there having always
been an un-interrupted Friendship between that Duchy and England; wherefore
they could not now abandon it, since their Own commodity was concerned in the
Loss thereof: that He therefore could not oppose his People, as Charles
himself might judge: that he thought good to give him Notice hereof, as well to
the end that his Moving or Marching might not be News unto him, as likewise to
entreat him that he would take away the Cause of his so doing; which if he
would not, he assured him that his succor should only tend to the Defense of
Britanny; from whence if the French would withdraw themselves, they should not
be Pursued by his men, nor fought withal, Out of Britanny: so as their
Friendship was not to go Less in the said War. The Ambassadors arrived when
Charles had brought the business to such a pass, as he needed not greatly
weigh the Late resolutions of England; having received news of the surrender of
Ancenis, Fougeres, Saint Aibine di Cormier, and not long after, that the Armies
had met, and that the Britons were discomfited. The Frenchmen thought that the
Duke's Army would bend themselves for the Recovery of Saint Albine; as they
did: whereupon following them, and coming up to them not far from thence, they
fought with them, and had the Victory: they slew the Four hundred English, with
Woodvile their Commander; took the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Orange,
prisoners; who would not have purchased their Liberties at so Cheap a rate as
they did, had it not been for their Wives; (Orleans his wife being the King's
sister, and Orange's wife sister to the Duke of Burbon) for after diverse
Removals from one prison to another, they, by the Intercession of their Wives,
obtained Liberty and Pardon. Henry, understanding of this defeat, sent Eight
thousand fighting men into Britanny under the Conduct of the Lord Brook, which
joining themselves with the Duke's Forces, marched toward the Enemy, who
knowing they loved not to Encamp themselves, but to come to Blows, thought to
cool their heat by Intrenching their Army, and sallying out with their
Light Horse; which they did; but with more Loss then Gain.

This mean while Francis the Second, Duke of Britanny, died, leaving Two
Daughters behind him; the younger whereof died not many months after, and left
the Inheritance wholly to Anne: but the subversion of her State was caused by
her father's death. A month before this, the Duke was constrained to Compound
with Charles, and subscribe to the Articles of Agreement, remitting the
Difference to Arbitratours. Charles pretended to this Dukedom out of Two
reasons: by the pretenses of John de Brosse and Nicholas of Britanny, which
were yielded up to his father Lewis the Eleventh; and by the rights of the
Viscount of Rohan, descended from Mary of Britanny, sister to Margaret, the
first wife of Francis the Second, the which right or claim the said Viscount
had surrendered up to this Charles: and these Two sisters, being Daughters to
Francis the First, would in succession have preceded Peter the Second, Arthur,
and Francis the Second, had not Women been excluded from men of Name and Coat
of Britanny, as were the Three abovenamed. The which being then brought into
question, made the dispute more intricate; though it should not so have done:
for the Former Two's grant was annulled in the Abbey de Victoire, by a Treaty
made with Lewis himself: and the Viscount Rohan's relinquishment (made by him,
not that he believed he had any Right thereunto, but to please Charles) was of
no Validity, since he descended from Women, and the Nullification of such
pretenses appeared in his Contract of Marriage, in the Wills of the Dukes, and
in the Decrees of the State of Britanny. Reasons which though they were all of
force enough, yet were they not able to weigh against the force of the Weaker;
for the weakest pretenses are sufficient, so they have power enough to prove
their right by force. The King was Young, and every one about him pretended to
get an Armful of Wood by the fall of this Tree; the Sister, for her part had
already, in her conceit, devoured the City of Nantes: the Britons, who were
Partakers, pretended to participate therein; whilst the rest that saw their
fortunes and welfare depend upon the Weakness of an abandoned Orphan Maiden,
and under the Sword of a Powerful King, resolved to Declare themselves for him,
before they were by force Constrained so to do. Whereupon the English, not able
to Save what ran to so Headlong a Ruin, returned into England, after they had
spent Eight months in Britanny, and done nothing.

The Parliament had given certain Subsidies for the payment of these men; which
were readily paid by all the Shires save Yorkshire and the Bishopric of
Durham; which Two Counties flatly denied to pay any. They alleged that they
had suffered great grievances the Last years past; and for the Present they had
not backs to bear any More. This contempt proceeded from the Love they bore to
the House of York, and their Hatred to the present King. The Commissioners for
the Assessing and Gathering of the Subsidies wanting means whereby to enforce
them, knew not what to do; for all and every one of these Two Counties agreed
in a joined Negative to the Parliament's Decree. They went to advise about it
with the Earl of Northumberland, who wrote thereof unto the King; and received
answer, That the Subsidies were given by Parliament, and paid by all the rest
of the Kingdom; and that he would have them of Them, without the Abatement of
one Penny. The Earl, calling together the prime Gentlemen of the Country,
acquainted them with the King's answer; who believing he had framed it of his
Own head, broke into his house, and slew him, together with many of his
Servants. This being done, they chose Sir John Egremond for their Head; and
appointed John a Chamber to him for Counselor; both which were Seditious men.
Their conceit was to meet the King, and give him Battle in defense of their
Liberties; the which the King understanding, he commanded Thomas, Earl of
Surrey (lately before taken out of the Tower) to compel them; which he did by
Discomfiting them, and taking a Chamber prisoner. Egremont fled into Flanders
to the Duchess Margaret; a Chamber was hanged upon a high Gallows at York;
and some others of the Chiefest of them, were hanged round about him, but
somewhat Lower. This was the end of this Rebellion.

James the Third, King of Scotland, and friend to Henry, died this year; who
was brought to a miserable Period, rather by evil Counsel, then evil Nature. He
had naturally good inclinations, but they were poisoned by the practice of a
kind of people which has always been Ominous and Pestilential to Princes: an
inconvenience which always has been and will be whilst the World lasts. His
thirst after Absolute Sovereignty, was as great as is the thirst of one sick of
a Burning Fever, not to be quenched by all the water of Nilus. He valued not
Legal authority, but sought for that which was not permitted by the
Constitutions nor Laws of the Kingdom: His ruin arose from hating Liberty in
such as gave him Good Counsel: and in loving Flattery in those who advised him
Ill; the which they did, not to incur the danger of his Disfavour: and so made
him fall upon his Own Ruin. Amongst the chiefest of his injuries to his
Nobility, was his breach of Faith; so as they not believing any more in him,
nor trusting him, there ensued a Rebellion; and wanting a Head for a business
of so great Consequence, they thought to make use of the Prince, a Youth of
about Fifteen years of Age; and under the shadow of the Son, to send the Father
to eternal Darkness: but the Prince being endued with much Worth, would not
accept so detestable a Charge: whereupon they made him believe they would give
themselves up to England, deprive him of his Birthright, and possibly of his
Life: so as, thus threatened, he gave way to their Will. James, this mean while,
having made means to Pope Innocent the Eighth, and to his Two Neighbour-Kings
of England and France, might have been succored all in good time, had he had
patience to expect them in the Castle of Edenborough, a safe place: but he
judging Strivelin to be a more convenient place to receive those in, whom he
enpected from the Northern parts of his Kingdom, was in going thither, fought
withal, and beaten; whereupon retyring to a Water Mill, with intention to save
himself in certain Ships, which were not far off, he was miserably slain: and
James the Fourth, his Son, by way of Penance girt himself with a Chain of
Iron, to which he added one Link every year as long as he lived. Pope Innocent
had dispatched away Adrian de Corneto, upon this occasion for Scotland, a man of
noble conditions, who came to London Two days before the news of this
unfortunate accident: he thought presently to have returned; but was detained
by the King enamoured of his good parts, which were by Morton, Archbishop of
Canterbury, commended unto him. Neither were they any whit deceived; for being
a man greatly Experienced in the affairs of the world, to boot with his
Learning (Polydore gives him the attribute of the Restorer of the Latin
tongue, and the most Eloquent next Cicero) he came to the highest degrees of
Preferment. The King gave him the Bishopric of Hereford; which he refusing, he
gave him that of Bath and Wells, and made use of him in all his businesses
depending at Rome: which made him (being promoted to be a Cardinal) acknowledge
his favors, and give him continual Advertisements of the affairs of Italy.
This man afterward through ambition of being Pope, ruined his Honor, his
Fortune and Himself: it being verified in Him, that Learning is unprofitable if
the End thereof be not how to lead a good life. The reason of his ruin was,
that Cardinal Alphonso Petrucchio, having together with certain other
Cardinals, his Confederates, plotted the death of Pope Leo the Tenth, there
were Three that were not Of this Confederacy, but Knew of it; Riario, Soderini,
and this Adrian: who not meddling in the business, did notwithstanding Wish it
might take Effect; for each of them aspired to be Pope. Paulus Iovius relating
the causes which made Riario and Soderini hate the Pope, when he comes to speak
of Adrian, says: But Adrian, not moved by Hatred, but by a vain Desire of Rule,
wished Leo's death because he had conceived a hope to be Pope by reason of the
words of a Woman-Soothsayer; who having long before this (being asked by him)
told him many things touching his Own fortune, and the Public affairs of the
World; told him for a truth, that if Pope Leo should die an unnatural death, an
old man called Adrian, should succeed him, famous for his Learning, who
building only upon Virtue, had without any Help from his Ancestors, gotten the
highest Ecclesiastical preferments: and it seemed all this was found in Him.
For being born at Corneto a poor Village in Toscany, of mean mechanical
parentage, he by his Learning had arrived at all the preferment of Holy Orders.
Neither did the Old woman foretell a Falsehood: for one Adrian an old Dutchman,
son to a poor Artificer, famous for his Learning, was by much good fortune,
made Pope after Leo. And a while after he says; Soderini by voluntary Exile
withdrew himself to the Territories of Fondi; but Adrian being fearful and
suspicious, not trusting to Leo's clemency, went from Rome in a
Countrey-fellow's habit; and not being pursued by any, changed from place to
place, still seeking to hide himself, till he died. And Guicchiardine speaking
more clearly of him, says; Adrian and Volterra were not any ways troubled, save
only that they underhand paid certain sums of money: but neither of them
daring to trust their Safeties in Rome, as neither did it become their
Dignities; Volterra with leave from the Pope went to Fondi, where he staid till
the Pope's death, under the protection of Prospero Colonna: As for Adrian, he
privately stole away, it never being known what became of him. I was desirous
to relate the entire History of this great man, for our instruction: for Two
distinct species of ambition are therein comprehended; the one Praiseworthy,
the other Not: which may be compared to Two Horses; the Praiseworthy is like a
stately well-managed horse, which in due time does all things by obeying the
hand: the other like a hairbrain'd ill-ridden horse. Adrian rid both these: the
first brought him Safely and without Danger to his old age; the second
overthrew him, and lost him to the world. A rare example, and unparalled in a
man of so much Worth: for to perish and die in Persecution, is that which at
all times befalls Many; but I have not heard of Any man that perished and for
Fear of death Died, whilst Alive, save this alone.

The affairs of Britanny after Duke Francisco's death were so encumbered, as no
good was to be expected. The Duchess was Young, her governors Unfaithful,
the greatest part and best of the Barons Alienated, the Others upon designs
respecting their Particular interests; and the State as it was by many
pretended unto by Marriage, so was it by many Practiced upon. The father had,
at sundry times, promised the now-Dutchesse his daughter to Three several men:
first, to Maximilian, who lost her through Negligence: after, to the Duke of
Orleans (though he were married) who lost her, by being taken Prisoner: lastly,
to Albert, who had her not because She would not have Him. But Charles, a
tacit pretender, got her; who seemed not, till long after her father's death,
to have any intention toward her. Her first inclinations were to Maximilian, to
whom she was solemnly promised; her second, to Orleans, she being made believe
that his First marriage was Invalid. She abhorred Charles as an Enemy and
Perturber of her quiet, and the Destroyer of her State: a natural Antipathy, or
rather Ambition to be Queen of the Romans, made her not regard Albert. Honor
and Title are able to do much; and Albert, though he was very Noble and not a
Subject, yet was he Vassal to the Crown of France. He was descended by the
Mother's side from the House of Britanny. Margaret daughter to John the Fifth,
wife to Alaine the Ninth Viscount of Rohan, had Three daughters, the Second
whereof was Mother to this man, surnamed the Great Alaine: the Eldest was
married into the House of Rieulx; and the Youngest to John of Orleans, Count d'
Angoulesme, who was father to Francis the first, King of France. Duke Francis
had offered him his daughter upon hopes of great succor; which proved but
Small and Tardy: for he judging it necessary to interest Ferdinand and Isabella
in this war, to the end they might not annoy his son the King of Navar, (they
being offended that in the marriage of the Queen, he was preferred before the
Prince of Castile, for whom they would have had her) he went to them to
Valencia; and complaining that Charles had seized on his State for having
brought the interest of his son to the Crown of Navar, against the Viscount of
Narbonne, whom Charles favored; he desired them to take him into their
protection, and together with Him the aforesaid King; as likewise the Dukes of
Orleans and Britanny, to defend them from the violence of such as abused the
Authority of the King of France: offering in their names to cause the
Territories of Rossillion and of Cerdagna, which John the King of Arragon had
pawned to Lewis the Eleventh, to be restored to Catalonia. Having obtained what
he demanded, and moreover certain Troops under the Command of Gralla, the
Steward of their House, he returned to Guascoigne; and joining these Forces to
his (which all together made about Four thousand men) he would not pass the
River Garonne till the promise of Marriage was confirmed unto him: which if it
had been done, the Reward had much exceeded the Service; the promise being
made, with intent to have Forces able to Repulse the enemy, which he had not.
whereupon Henry, considering that the King of France was likely by this
Marriage to make himself master of Britanny, unless he should meet with some
great obstacle, he counseled Maximilian to pursue it again; since, Orleans
being excluded, Albert refused, and Charles (who seemed not to pretend
thereunto, being already married) not likely to get her, His hopes might be
good. There was none that more molested the Orphan Princess, then did her
Governor the Marshal of Rieulx; for quitting his Obedience, to Force her to
marry Albert, he had put the remainder of her estate, not yet possessed by the
French, in confusion. But she (resolved rather to take a Cloister then to marry
Him) sent into Flanders to Maximilian, and to Ferdinand of Spain for succor:
she sent at the same time to Henry of England, who sent her the Eight thousand
men; whilst Maximilian not able to pursue the Match, was less able to Succor
her. For the Dutch had so shut him up, as he was not able to help Himself, much
less to assist Her. His wife had left him Two children, Philip and Margaret:
the inhabitants of Gaunt and Bruges had taken them from him; and had given Four
Tutours of Their ordaining to Philip, and married Margaret, an Infant of Three
years old, to Charles, during the life of his father Lewis the Eleventh: and
contrary to all reason of good Government, they cut off Artois and the French
County from the States of the Low Countries, and gave them in Portion with her:
they likewise kept him Prisoner a long time; and granted him not his Liberty
till he had Sworn to Pardon all Offenses, and Never to take Revenge for them.
And though his father the Emperor (not liking so Unworthy agreements) came to
his Succor; yet did he not at all help him: for he returned to Germany, not
having done any thing but irritated the more those people (of whom Monsieur de
Ravestein had made himself Head, backed by the Governor of Piccardy, who went
immediately to besiege Desmunde) and left him in case hardly able to Defend
Himself, much less to Assist Others. But Henry not willing to Break with
France, nor yet to let Flanders be lost; sent the Lord Morley to Monsieur
Dawbeny, Governor of Callis with One thousand men, under pretense of a Supply
for the Garrison on that side the Sea; but with secret order to succor
Desmunde; the which he so well obeyed, that to those Thousand another Thousand
being added, which he drew from the Garrison of Hammes in Guisnes, he passed
over the water of Graveling by night, and got into Newport; where augmenting
his Forces with Six hundred Germans which he found there, and led by a trusty
guide into Desmunde, the Enemy (which lay on the other side) not perceiving it:
he set upon them unawares, and was victorious; slew Eight thousand, and got all
their Artillery and Baggage. The cause of so great slaughter, was this; Morley
being the only man who amongst so many fought on Horseback, was unhors'd and
slain; whereat his men were so enraged, that they slew their Prisoners, and
together with them, all those that could not flee away: not above Two hundred
of Them being slain. Monsieur Daubeny returned to Callis, having left his
wounded men and the booty at Newport; affording thereby a thought of Recovering
it to Monsieur Cords who was at Ypre: he brought Twenty thousand men with him
thither; played upon the Town, and gave an Assault. The Defendants did their
parts Manfully, and were helped by such as were left Wounded there: after a
long fight, they lost one Tower upon which Cords planted the French Colors;
and was likely to have won all the Rest, had not Fortune disfavour'd him at
that very Instant, by a Small Succor which entered the Town from Callis: for
Dawbeny knowing the slenderness of the Garrison, had embarked Fourscore chosen
Soldiers to Abet them, till such time as he might send Greater Forces to Free
them Altogether. These men arriving in the Heat of the fight, whilst the
Defeudants fought out of Mere Courage (for New wounds being added to what they
had Formerly received, they could scarcely stand upon their legs) they ran to
the Walls, drove back the Besiegers, regained the Tower, and this with such
Forward Valor, as Cords believing them to be a much Greater number, raised
the Siege: whereupon this Personal Disgrace added to his former National
Hatred, he swore, He would be content to be Seven years in Hell, so he might
have the fortune to take Callis from the English.

Henry, not contented to have assisted Maximilian with Arms, endeavored to do
the like with Counsel: he persuaded him to reassume the business of the
Marriage, and to Conclude it with the Duchess, as has been said. Which
counsel he presently embraced, and sent Four Ambassadors to her, to whom he
gave the Count de Nassau for their Chrief, with Commission, that when all
things were agreed upon, the Count should marry her in His name, as he did; and
used therein a Ceremony not accustomed in those times for ought I know: The
Duchess being laid in her Bed, the Count (in the presence of many Lords and
Ladies) put one of his Legs between the Sheets in sign of Consummation of the
Marriage, holding, all the while, Maximilian's Proxy in his hand. Belforest
denies this Marriage by Proxy; and to boot with the reasons he alleadges for
his opinion, one chief one is, That if it had been so, the Annals of Britanny
would have made some Mention of it: I confess I have not read Them, nor do I
know the Author's name: I have read Argentres, the last who has written
thereof, and he alleadges for his Testimony the Records of that Country: he
says, That the Duchess after this Marriage assumed the title of Queen, and
that the public Acts and Proclamations were made in the Names of Maximilian
and Anne by the Grace of God, King and Queen of the Romans, Duke and Duchess
of Britanny. But Maximilian did not pursue this his advantage with requisite
effects; for believing he had so Consummated this Marriage as it could not be
Broken, he neglected the sending of Aid into Britanny: so as leaving it to
Fortune, which favors the Provident, it did frown upon Him, who Negligent in
his affairs, did not almost ever do any thing, which, though it might Begin
well, had a good End. He was endued with very Excellent qualities; but
abounding with Bad ones likewise, by which his good parts being born down, all
his undertakings proved, for the most part, unfortunate. His Valor, Knowledge
in Military affairs, and his good Understanding in matters of Counsel, became
un-useful to him through his ill Government. He never raised Moneys for making
of a War, but that he had Spent them before the War was Begun: he was one of
those that can tell how to Propound, but not how to put in Execution: wise in
Discourse, foolish in Action: so as if it had been possible to have furnished
him with one to have Executed his Projections, nothing had remained to have
been desired in him. I have sometimes thought it impossible, that the
understanding Conceiving aright, should work Evil Effects; and that it being
our Directour, it should not be of force enough to make our Actions conformable
to those Idea's upon which they depend: but daily practice shows me I was in an
Error.

He then not having done what he ought to have done, Charles 1490
believed it behooved him to do what became him: wherefore Charles betook
himself to a double remedy: To the Duchess, in Countermining her Marriage
with Maximilian, by endeavoring to marry her Himself; for so he was advised to
do by those who bore the greatest sway with him: and to Henry, by sending
Ambassadors to him, who were Francis Lord of Luxenburgh, Charles de Marignan,
and Roger Gaguine the Writer of the French Story. Their Instructions were to
treat a League or Peace with him; which was desired by him, not that he
(Charles) might the more securely turn his Forces upon Italy, but out of an
Affection that he bore unto him (Henry) from the first day he saw him, either
out of Natural Sympathy, or Heavenly Constellation: He knew there was no
Enmity between them, but that the casual encounters of their Subjects in
Flanders, and in Britanny, did require a Confirmation thereof: that he did not
accuse his actions in this behalf, it being a thing certain, that Frontire-wars
draw Princes to them, as Wounds do Humors; so as such effects being Natural,
they ought not to be esteemed the motives of Ill Will: that for such he
esteemed them, and so interpreted them; wherefore he likewise desired to be
excused; for if he had made war upon Britanny, 'twas for that his Honor, and
the Preservation of his due Prerogative, would not suffer him to do otherwise:
and if upon Flanders, still out of the same considerations; because those of
Flanders, being under the Sovereign Protection of France, oppressed by their
Prince, and fleeing to Him for Succor, he could not choose but assist them: and
though the casual encounters of the French and English Nations, had not
thereupon raised a Formal War, yet a Consolidation of Friendship between those
Two Nations was requisite, to the end that when he should have turned his Arms
elsewhere, the World might not rest in doubt of it: that he would acquaint him
with his more Secret designs, as an Earnest of the Confidence he would always
use with him; that his intention was not to conquer the Kingdom of Naples, a
Kingdom which of right belonged to him; and that from thence (by God's
assistance) he would pass into Turkey and wage war with those Infidels; a
thought worthy to be favored by all Christian Princes, much more by a
Christian King, and a Friend, as was Henry: and for that the war with Britanny
might move some jealousies in him, the true Reasons whereof not being known, he
gave him to understand, that, that Country being Feudatary to him, it became
him in his reputation to preserve his rights therein; amongst which one was,
that the Heir could not marry without his Consent: that the Duchess having
done otherwise, in freely disposing of her self without the Consent of Him her
Sovereign, it behoved him (with his good leave) to match her so as might not be
prejudicial to his Crown; to the which he hoped He would give way, as to a
thing becoming the reason of State and Justice. Henry, perceiving that the King
of France would have him swallow up a bitter Pill wrapped up in Leaf-gold, caused
answer to be made to the Ambassadors, That Peace ought not to be treated of
thereby to make War upon one's Friends; that to Demand it was Unjust, Most
unjust to Grant it: He had too much of interest with Britanny, to abandon it:
That the proceedings held by Charles, were not like those of a Lord, who
intends to keep his right of Fee-farm; but like those of an Enemy, which
intends Usurpation: That his Correction (say it were just and necessary) needed
not to be imposed by so Unjust means, and such Unnecessary Arms against a
Maiden: That he did not dispute whether it were Charles his Right to marry her
as he pleased or no; though he thought few Presidents could be given thereof:
That Britanny's tenure in Fee was not subject to the Justice, Laws and Will of
the Lord thereof, as were Other Common tenures: That Gascoigne and Normandy, in
Former times, and Flanders, at the Present, were not under so Servile a
Subjection: but say they were; Marriages ought to be Free, not made by Force,
the parties not Constrained; otherwise they would be against the Laws, both
Humane and Divine: and suppose his disposal of her did not contradict the Laws,
it might yet be averse to the interest of Other Princes; who, peradventure,
might be content he should marry her to some Other, and not unto Himself. As
for Flanders; he wondered so Wise a King as Charles, should use such slight
Arguments in so weighty a matter; that he should term the Oppression of the
Prince, the People's Oppression; the Rebellion of the One, the Injustice of the
Other: that after having so many months detained him prisoner, slain his ser
vants, bereft him of his Son, and injuriously put him under their own
Government, they should pretend by Injuring to be injured; being protected and
confirmed in their Rebellion by Charles himself: A thing which had not formerly
happened, and which now fell out opposite to the Interest and Dignity of All
Princes; for in time that might happen to Each of them, which now befell This;
so as all Princes were bound upon such like occasions reciprocally to Help one
another; the which if it became Others, much more did it become Charles, who
being Sovereign, ought to chastise Rebellion in the people; not to Authorize
and Nourish it: He thanked him for his acquainting him with his Secret
designs; which were So secret, as not only Italy, but the whole World knew of
them: For his ends of Passing into Macedonia to make war upon the Turks, they
were not only Christian, but Generous; so as if in stead of his demanding
Peace, he would grant his request in accepting of Him for a Companion in so
holy an Enterprise, he should think himself happy: but that his arguments were
of too Repugnant a Construction; God did not command Evil to be done that Good
might come thereof, nor that what is offered on His Altars should be taken from
Another's flock: Yet if he thought he might with Justice, set upon the Kingdom
of Naples, and that his pretended right thereunto was good, merely by the
Renunciation of the House of Anjou; what might He think of himself, that was
bereft of Normandy, Anjou, Gascoigne, and All France (which falling upon his
person by natural Inheritance; not by Another Renounsal, was his Legal
Patrimony) if, being instructed by him, He should not do the like? He would
therefore follow his example, and run the same carreer he had traced out to
him: Therefore if he would have Peace, he might have it upon condition, either
that he would Renounce that which by an unjust title he Possessed, or else pay
such a Tribute as might be proportionable to what he should hold. The
Ambassadors, not expecting such an Answer, said, They had no Commission to any
such purpose; but that they were sure their King's Sword was able to defend his
Crown from losing any the least of his Flower-de-Luces: that for what concerned
his marriage with the Duchess, he never had any such Thought, being already
married to Maximilian's daughter. To which the King replied, He looked for such
an Answer; and that he would send Ambassadors to him, the better to be
satisfied therein: whereupon he dismissed them; and Gaguine stayed in England
till he had dispatched Thomas Earl of Ormond, and Thomas Goldenstone Prior of
Christs-Church in Canterbury, Ambassadors into France for that purpose.

Charles this mean while, labored to remove from the Duchess Ann: all
scruples and detestations which withheld her from taking him for her husband.
He employed people of all conditions; Divines, Ladies, Lords, Counselors, and
all such as had access unto her. The Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of
Orange, newly freed from their imprisonment, pleaded for him; so did the Count
Dunois, who after Orleans was taken prisoner, turned again to the King's party.
The Marshal de Rieux, Chancellor Mountalban, the Ladies and Gentlewomen that
were familiar with her, and almost the whole Counsel were his instruments
herein: Madame de Laval her Governesse and Lady of Honor took more pains
herein then All the rest. Much ado there was to persuade the Duchess to
forget how unworthily she had been dealt withal for Three years together; how
the Agreements made with the Duke her father, and after with her Self, had
never been observed; that Charles had destroyed and sacked her Country; that he
was married to the Daughter of the King of the Romans, and the King of the
Romans married to Her: So that if the Divines were troubled to remove from her
her Scruples of Conscience, Madame de Laval was no less troubled to rid her of
the Hatred she had conceived against his Person. She at the last yielded
thereunto upon the remonstrance of Peace, the Necessity of embracing it, and
that there was no other way to compose it then by this Marriage; Maximilian
being Far off, and reduced to such Poverty, as in a time of so great need, he
could assist her with but Two thousand men: Charles on the contrary was Near at
hand, Powerful, and not likely to give over, till he had bereft her of her
Country, and brought her to Poverty and Misery; the which if it should so fall
out, Maximilian would no longer care for her; whose end was to possess himself
of Britanny, and not barely of her Person: that Promises of Marriage, yea,
Marriage it Self, were to be dispensed withal in cases of Necessity: that the
Pope would not be found difficult herein, since Blood, War, and Desolation
would otherwise ensue, which by Peace might be prevented; and Peace was to be
had only by this Marriage: that Maximilian's daughter was no impediment, since
she was not of Years either to Consent or Dissent: For her Marriage with
Maximilian's Self, though Promised, yet was it not Consummated; the Solemnities
used therein were mere Ceremonies invented to dazzle the World; they not being
valid by whatsoever Law either Canon or Civil: And if nothing else would
prevail with her, the Preservation of her State, here is and Charles his
Proportionable Youth and Years, and her being to be the Chief Queen of the
World, ought persuade her. Weary at last with so many Onsets, she gave way,
though not yet freed of the Scruple of her Promise-breach to Maximilian; but he
being accused of having failed in his Duty, and of not having kept any one
whosoever near her (which he would not have done to the meanest Princess
alive) she was likewise quitted of That.

The Ambassadors which were sent to Charles being come to Callis, met with the
Bishop of Concordia, sent from the Pope to reconcile the Two Kings; for through
the molestation of their Wars, Christendom was in great danger of the Turks,
who made daily further progress thereinto. The Bishop having dispatched his
affairs with Charles (who feigned a willingness to Peace) came to England,
where he did nothing; for the Marriage with Britanny being published, the
Treaty was broken off, and each King sent for his Ambassadors home. Henry not
in honor able to suffer any longer dissimulation, and being by Maximilian
promised strong succors from the King of Spain, called a Parliament, and there
propounded war with France; not to be made any more by Deputies, as was the war
of Britanny, but by Himself in Person, to recover those Provinces lost under
Henry the Sixth, against a Prince who for his Pride, and for his pretending
over every one, was unworthy of All men's Friendship; since having possessed
himself of Britanny by Force and Fraud, and maintained the Rebels in Flanders
against their Prince, he pretended now to bring Italy to his Subjection; that
he might aftewards trouble all the Princes of Christendom: honesting his thirst
after Rule, and his conceived Usurpation of the Kingdom of Naples, by saying he
did it with an intent to carry his Arms against the Infidels on the other side
of the Adriatic Sea: he told them it would be dangerous to let him advance so
much; for that England being already girt about with Piccardy, Normandy, and
this new purchase of Britanny, it would be easy for him to molest her; if
suffering her self to be Flattered as hitherto she had done, she should be
abused, as she had been: that the French forces were not unknown to the
English; as had been witnessed by their Battles, Victories, and the
Imprisonment of one of the French Kings: and if the English had at last had
unhappie success, 'twas not be attributed to Their Valor, but to Civil
Dissension, which like tempestous Hail, had beaten down the Fruit, upon the
very point of Ripening: that his claim to that Kingdom was manifest: that
Fortune did second Justice, and Valor accompany her: that Their generous
resolution would serve for an Invitation, and an Example unto Others; to
Flanders, and Spain, for their Own Interests; and to Britanny, for that being
won more by Corruption then by Arms, there wanted not such as were evilly
affected; the People were discontented, and the greatest part of the Nobility
not willing to subject themselves to a Prince whom they abhorred: the Pope
would join with them; for detesting to have Italy molested, Diversion was that
which would free him from Danger: All which were thus presented not as the
Groundwork, but as the Adherences of an Enterprise which was not to be resolved
on, upon hopes of Assistance from Others: that England was of it Self
sufficient; neither did it stand in need of any other Forces then her Own; it
being to be supposed that by the Death of those Ancient warriers, the natural
courage of those which Descended from them was not extinct, but that they would
make it appear to the world they did not degenerate from their Predecessors:
and though Honor have no reward worthy of her self but Her Self, yet it was to
be considered that this was a War to be made in a Country full of whatsoever
Nature did afford; sufficient to maintain the Public expense; to adorn the
Nobility with Lordships, Virtue with Employments, and to satisfy the Soldier
with Booty and Riches: Riches which were to be shared out by sundry ways (as is
the Blood from Vein to Vein) to England in general: and that those who for the
present should contribute toward it, were to enjoy in the future, abundant
Increase for what they should Now part withal: that the war was to be made, not
as at the First, at the expense of the Kingdom, but at the cost of such Cities
and Provinces as they should Conquer; it had been done so Formerly, and should
be so Now: so as they that would contribute toward it, he wished they might do
it Readily; for he was resolved not to have any thing from the Poorer sort, but
from such as without any incommodity might expect the Re-imbursing of their
Moneys.

The War with France was with much cheerfulness approved of in Parliament:
They thought the Honor of the King and Kingdom had suffered somewhat in the
Loss of Britanny. But the King's intentions were not such as he made show of:
he knew Maximilian's Forces were not to be built upon, nor yet those of
Ferdinand; for the Wars of Granada had exhausted his Coffers; and the recovery
of Rossillion without Cost (which he aspired unto) was not to be effected by
fighting with Charles, but with Seconding him. He knew moreover the
constitution of France was not Now as it had been Formerly; when divided into
Two Factions, it made way for the advancing of the English Forces: it was now
United; the Burgundian Faction was fallen to the ground, and the Orleanists
depended upon the Regal authority; that she has now brought her self to a
custom of encamping Leasurely, and to fight no more with Violence, but upon
Advice; so as he should Weary his people, Weaken his Forces, and Impoverish his
Kingdom. Feigning notwithstanding the contrary, he seemed to Desire, what he
Detested: he so wisely fitted himself for what might happen, as satisfying his
Honor with the Appearances and Beginning of War, he was sure to make Peace
when he listed: for Charles would be Desirous of it, that he might bring to
pass his intended Designs; and he Himself would Accept of it, as not being
deceived in his opinion of Maximilian's Impotency, and the vain hopes from
Spain. Yet he was sure to make Charles buy peace Dear, who had his mind so
fixed upon the Conquest of Italy, as he did not care to part with a Certainty
for an Uncertainty: so as getting Moneys from Him, and Benevolences from his
Own Kingdom, he was likely to be a good Gainer by the bargain. Besides, his
affairs were not so secure at Home, as to let him think on Foreign business;
for he had discovered how the Duchess of Burgundy was hatching another Plot
to trouble him: so as though Profit (whereunto he was Naturally inclined) had
not been concerned, yet was he to have an eye to the Dangers wherewith he was
threatened.

Great store of Moneys coming in by the means of Benevolences (for he took a
great care none should be exempted that were 1491
able to lend) he in a small time raised a mighty Army: and knowing that
Charles had renewed his ancient Confederacy with James the Fourth, King of
Scotland, with a reciprocal obligation to be assistant one to another, he
proclaimed War against them Both; but not without fear that Maximilian would
fail him at his greatest need: for though his Weakness and Wants were capable
of remedy, if he should be succored against his Subjects which molested him,
yet his Nature was incapable thereof. It was impossible for him to maintain Ten
thousand fighting men, for Two years together, upon his Own Purse, according to
his promise: though being Madded (as then he was) at the Double affront; of his
Daughter's Repudiation, and the Usurpation of his Own Wife, he hoped to do
Somewhat out of Nothing. That which did yet more weaken this Prince, was the
Rebellion of Philip de Cleves Lord of Ravestein, who being upheld by Charles,
had raised such Combustions in Flanders, as having possessed himself of Gaunt and
Bruges, the chief Cities of that Country, he had forced such as favored
Maximilian to quit those Towns: and reaching further, he had made himself
master of Sluice, and of the Two Castles which were it is Security, seizing upon
all Ships that went upon the Sea, hindering the Commerce of Antwerp, Brabant,
Zealand and Freezland, and taking such as came from England and the Northern
Countries; to the general prejudice of All Nations. Albertus, Duke of Saxony,
Lantsgrave of Misnia, governed Flanders at that time, under Maximilian; it
being left unto him by the Emperor his father, when he went from thence. This
man foreseeing he could not force Ravestein unless he should get Sluice, nor
that he could win Sluice, without having the Dam, by which succor came to it
from Bruges, he feigned to make for Bruges, for matters concerning that
Province; and not being to take such a journey, unless well followed, and in
good Equipage (he being the man he was) he sent some Troops before, which
entering peaceably in, went to the gate which looks toward Dam, as if they
would quarter in the Neighboring Villages, and not incommodate the City. Dam
was not above a Flanders-mile from thence; the inhabitants whereof thinking
these Troops had been sent from Bruges, let them in: and they making themselves
Masters thereof, Bruges was in a manner besieged, and Sluice deprived of
Succor. The Duke, for all this advantage, had no hopes to get Sluice without
Forces by Sea: he sent news hereof to England; whereupon the King, who had had
many complaints made him by the Merchants of the Insolences of Ravestein, and
desired to uphold Maximilian, sent unto him Twelve Ships well furnished with
Men and Ammunition under the Command of Sir Edward Poynings; who having shut up
the Haven of Sluice, besieged the Town by Sea, whilst the Duke did the like by
Land; and played with his Cannon upon the Two Castles wherein the Loss or
Preservation of the Town consisted. They were valiantly defended for the space
of Twenty days: the Earl of Oxford's brother was slain in a Sally which they
made: and longer would they have held out, had not the Besiegers (in the dark
of night) burnt the Bridge which Ravestein had built between the Two Castles,
which not being able to succor one another, he was enforced to surrender them,
and together with them, Sluice. Bruges being reduced to it is obedience, was the
occasion of many Other Towns doing the like.

Henry, this mean while, past the Summer in Ordering his 1492
men that were to go for France; and finding himself in a condition to pass
over; he sent Sir John Risloy and U-sewick to Maximilian, to agree upon the
place where they were to meet: but they found him so Unprovided, as having no
hope, they were ready to return; yet they did not so, judging it fitter to
advertise the King, and expect his Commands. The King, who feared the same,
praised their discretion, and commanded them not to return till they had
received new Directions, and that they should conceal that Prince's weakness,
for fear of Disheartening his men. His Army was composed of Twenty thousand
Foot, and Sixteen hundred Horse: the best men flocked thither; some to purchase
merit, and some as thinking it not fitting to stay Behind when the King went
in Person. He landed at Callis on the Sixth of October, the wiser sort
marvelling that he would undertake so difficult a War in so unfitting a time;
for the Forerunners of Winter began already to be felt: but these difficulties
served him to make men believe he desired that which indeed he did not: to wit,
That being to begin a tedious War, the Season was of no importance, since he
had Callis, from whence he might draw out his Army in the Spring without any
manner of difficulty; and to transport it then from England, would be a long
business, and, in respect of the Winds, uncertain. As Soon as he was Landed,
he sent for his Ambassadors back, and Maximilian's weakness was publicly
made known, and that no Other help was to be expected from him then his
Good Will; wherein he did as much abound, as he was defective in any other
manner of assistance. At the hearing hereof, the Soldiers courage was somewhat
Cooled, though not altogether taken Away; it served to dispose them beforehand,
for Henry's designs: to work the same effect, there came Letters from
Seignieur de Cords, wherein was made an overture for Peace on Charles his
behalf; which containing in it Reasonable conditions, it had been Unreasonable
not to listen to it: From other parts it was confirmed that Ferdinand and
Isabel were Agreed with him, having received from him the County of Rossillion,
without repaying the Three hundred thousand Crowns for which it was pawned to
him: this made all men see a Necessity of Peace. Henry notwithstanding, playing
his game handsomely, deputed the Bishop of Exceter, and the Lord d'Aubeny to
give Cords a hearing; whilst he, without delay, on the 19 of October, planted
his Camp before Boloigne; a Town well fortified, wherein was a great Garrison,
and good store of Artillery; so as it was not to be taken but in a Long
process of time, with the loss of many men, and much blood. He had hardly
sat down a Month before it, when a Breach being thought fitting to be made,
and the Soldiers ready to give the Assault, News came that Peace was
concluded, to the great Dislike of the Army, and the Madding of such who having
sold their possessions upon the hopes of this War, found themselves deceived.
One cause which made Henry willing to accept of Peace (to boot with what have
been already alleged) was for fear lest Charles might foment a New Duke of
York; who began then to show himself. The substance of the Agreement was; That
Charles should pay Seven hundred forty five thousand Crowns for diverse
considerations; for satisfaction of the Fifty thousand Crowns Yearly, which
ought to have been paid, but were not after the Death of Edward the Fourth; as
also, for the Succors he had sent into Britanny, which the Duchess Anne
acknowledged her self to stand indebted for; and for the Expenses he had been
at in this Present war. The French Historians agree upon the same sum, but they
do not specify the Causes why. Polydore affirming that the Peace was concluded
by the payment of a great sum of money, adds Five and twenty thousand Crowns a
year for Succouring of Britanny; which after Charles his death and Henry's,
were paid to Henry the Eighth by Lewis the Twelfth and Francis the First, who
durst not deny the payment of it, for fear of being set upon by him, whilst
they made war in Italy. Charles did moreover, in imitation of his father, give
Pensions and Presents to the chief of Henry's Court, that they might either
favor him the more, or hinder him the less: whereat Henry connived; for it
behoved him to interesse the Greatest of the Kingdom in the Peace, which was
but badly construed by the Rest. He endeavored likewise to satisfy those who
for their own particular respects were discontented; by showing them what
Blood, and Loss of Lives, would have ensued in the assaulting of Bullein,
together with the Small hopes they had to come off with Honor: and that if he
had been Successeful therein, yet had he deserved Blame; since what was to be
gotten did not answer to the Loss of the Valiantest of his Army. He made use
of the same arguments to make others persuade Him to make Peace, that it might
be thought to have ensued from the Motion of Others, not from Himself.

This Peace was good for Both the Kings: for Charles, by securing to him
Britanny (which by occasion of this War was like to have Staggered) and opening
a way unto him to agree with Maximilian, as he did: so as his Confines being
secured on that side (they being formerly secured on all Other) he might with a
quiet mind totally intend the getting of Naples: a resolution which proceeded
not from Lodowick Sforza, who first incited him thereunto, but from his natural
Genius, which compelled him to undertake it, (notwithstanding the many
Difficulties he was to meet withal, especially the Want of Moneys) without any
real foundation. Fortune, when she pleases, is able to make impossibilities
possible. 'Twas good for Henry; for he thereby filled his Coffers, and was
freed from the danger which the new Fantasm, representing the Duke of York,
might have brought unto him, had it been so strongly backed by the King of
France, as it was witnessed by the Duchess of Burgundy, and seconded by the
King of Scotland. He feared some Insurrection from those which favored the
White Rose: for the love which the people had born him in regard of their
Hatred to Richard, was grown less, so as he was now to subsist only by his
Own worth: and his Wives faction failed him, he having failed Her in those
respects which his desire of being King in his Own Right, would not permit him
to use unto her. His Camp being raised from before Bullein, he returned by
Callis for England: having written to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London,
before he took Shipping, his reasons for Ending the War; not touching upon
those we have spoken of, but such as he thought would Please; especially that
the enemy had purchased Peace at so High a rate: this notwithstanding pleased
not those who had been liberal to him in their Benevolences; it is true, their
distaste was lessened by his returning with his Purse full; which made them
believe he would not of a long time expect any thing from Them.

Alphonso Duke of Calabria, eldest son to Ferdinand King of Naples, had
entreated Henry to admit him into the Order of the Garter, 1493
believing the War between the Two Kings to be Endless. He thought that to
have the Honor to be of the most famous Order of Christendom, would make him
be respected amongst Princes, and reverenced by his Subjects; especially at
such a time: he hoped that if France should stir against his Father, the King
of England with opportune assistance would discharge the duty of the
Fraternity: but he was deceived; it does not dilate it self to so prejudicial
an Obligation. Honors are the Alchimy of Princes, which like Gamesters
Tantoes, are worth as much, as they are made to be worth; they are not
burdensome to the giver, enrich not the receiver: Mines are not dug up for
them, treasure is not exhausted; neither have they any other Being then what
Opinion gives them: he that has not merit enough in himself to deserve them,
is like a Sumpter-horse marked with the mark of a stately Courser. The King
being come to London, sent him the Garter, and Robes belonging to the Order, by
Ursewick. The Order was received by Alphonso, with the greatest Pomp that could
be invented by any one who believes that Ostentations dazzle men's eyes, and
bring things to their designed Ends: which happening but Sometimes, did not
befall Him: for neither did This, nor any Other industry preserve him from
ruin. But for that his success belongs not to Our Story, we refer the Reader
to Guicchiardine's Relation.

The King at his arrival in England heard that the Duke of York was not slain
in the Tower, as he was believed to be; but that he was with his Aunt Margaret
in Flanders: the which though Henry understood when he was in France, and, in
his agreements, had made Charles, with whom he then was, send him away; yet he
did not think the noise of this fiction was to be despised, since it might
breed great troubles. We will relate the Beginning thereof, and the resolution
which he thereupon took. The Duchess Margaret had, together with her Milk
sucked in hatred against the Red-Rose-faction, enemy to the White, from whence
She descended, insomuch as she spared not either for Injustice or Fraud, so she
might oppress it; neither did Religion, or any other Scruple, withhold her
from doing what in her lay to destroy it. She might have been contented that
her Niece Elizabeth was Queen of England in default of her Two Nephews who
should have inherited the Crown; since they failed therein, not through the
cruelty of the Lancastrians, but of her brother Richard: yet was she not
satisfied; but favored Lambert Symnel, one unknown and Meanly born, by whose
means she endeavored to bereave her Niece of the Kingdom, so to deprive Henry
and her Nephews begotten by him, (by her rather reputed Enemies then Nephews)
her innate Hatred was of more power with her, then her Love to her Niece, and
those that came of her: but failing in that design plotted by a Priest, she
would contrive one Her Self; and make thereof so hard and intricate a knot as
that neither Henry's Wisdom, nor Sword, should be able to untie it or cut it
in sunder. There are some that term her his Juno: for as the ancient Fictions,
one never ceased to persecute Eneas, till fatal destiny made her aware that she
vexed him but in vain; so this New and True one never ceased to persecute
Henry, not perceiving that she contended with divine providence, which
intending him for the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, did in despite of her,
defend him from her malice. This new Duke of York was a poor lad, by whom she
thought to effect that mischief, which she could not bring to pass. His father
(who dwelt in Torney) was a Jew turned Christian, named John Osbeck, who
necessitated by some occasions, went together with his Wife, to London, where
she bare him this son; who being Christened by King Edward in his Own person,
'twas thought he would not have done so great a favor to so mean a child, had
he not had some Secret interest in him; and (his mother being very fair) some
were of opinion he had begotten him. He was named Peter, which according to the
Custom and Diminutive of the Dutch Tongue, was converted to Perkin. Those who
knew him not from his beginning, called him Warbeck, his true name of Osbeck
not being known, till after enquiry had been made into it: so as the name of
Warbeck, which was first given him out of Ignorance, by Custom continued to
him. He was but very young when his father returned to Flanders; when he was
somewhat Bigger, his father sent him to Antwerp, and from thence to Other
parts: His travels and conversation with Diverse Nations, had not only made him
skilful in many Languages (English being his Natural tongue) but apt to fit
himself to other men's Humors and Customs. This lad being met withal by some of
Margaret's Officers, and by them judged very fit for what was to be done, they
presented him to her: it cannot be said how much she was therewithal satisfied;
for all conditions requisite for her purpose, were met together in him; Years,
beauty, wit, comeliness of feature; I should say Majesty, but that was a
quality of her Addition: She took an affection to him for his being God-son to
her Brother; and the rather for that (being very fair) she thought him a
by-scape of his: an opinion which made her form and transform him with the
greater care and diligence. She bethought her self of all that she was either
to instill into his mind, or affix in his actions: she omitted not any thing
whereby to make him personate to the life the deceased Duke of York; she
deciphered out unto him, as in so many well-drawn Pictures, the Delineaments,
Semblances, and Behaviors of those of the Blood Royal: of the King, Queen,
Prince, and Princesses; of the first he was to speak, as of his Father and
Mother; of the rest, as of his Brother and Sisters: she bethought her self what
Questions might be asked him; fitting him with Answers thereunto, such as might
become his Youth: she did the like for what concerned such past businesses as
might have fallen within his knowledge: she forgot not the particulars of the
Sanctuary; how the Queen fled thither with the Duke of York; how he was taken
from thence; how much Richard made of him when he had gotten him; his resorting
to his brother in the Tower; the Manner of their living there; what Servants
waited on them; their Fears; and the manner of his pretended Eseape; the names
of the Lords, with each particularity, which to such a purpose had happened:
she chiefly taught him how to counterfeit innate Nobility; in which he was so
tractable, as he thought himself the very Duke of York whom he personated. She
fitted the places of his peregrination with the times, to the end that when he
should discourse of what had there happened to him, they might be believed. And
finding him generally of a miraculous capacity, and in judgment much beyond
his years, she took delight to instruct him, and was pleased in her Own work,
happily invented, as she thought. She kept him continually in her most private
lodgings, not trusting him to the air; for the chiefest article of this mystery
was, to make the world believe she had never seen him. When she had brought her
work to Perfection, she laid before him as his object the purchasing of the
Crown of England; wherein if he should not prosper, then the chief place in her
Court; for that he was to be reputed, not what in truth he was, but what for
her honor he was to be believed to be: she being obliged to uphold him, to the
end her favors might not be accounted the effects of Malice, but of Blood.
When she afterward perceived that Henry proceeded on in the affairs of
Britanny (so as he must of necessity break with France) she would not keep him
any longer with her. She sent him into Portugal, under the conduct of an
English Lady, where he tarried for almost the space of a Year: and this she
did, to the end that when he was to appear, it might be from a Third place: he
had then directions sent him to pass into Ireland; for Henry having now
declared War against France, 'twas a fit time to molest him: and the White-Rose
saction being great in Ireland, he might get Assistants, and give a beginning
to his Metamorphosis.

He obeyed; he passed into Ireland: he made his abode in Cork; where at first
sight, he was esteemed a man of great consequence: for his comely demeanure,
and his plenty in all things (the Duchess having furnished him in great
abundance for his better appearing) were sufficient to make the people take one
thing for another. Having a while held them in suspense, he acknowledged
himself (but as if he were enforced thereunto) to be the Duke of York, who
having escaped out of the Tower, and run diverse fortunes, was come to that
Kingdom, hoping that the affection it had always born to his House, would now
continue firm to him. Henry was not at this time passed into France, being
retarded by the difficulties of so important an Expedition; so as Charles
hearing of this apparition in Ireland, he thought it might make for his
advantage to have him with him; that so he might trouble England if Henry
should continue in Hostility; and if he should not continue therein, he might
make his Peace upon better terms. One Steven Frion was Secretary to Henry for
the French tongue, who being discontented, and holding Correspondence with the
Duchess Margaret, fled into France, as soon as the War was proclaimed: this man
gave Charles the first advertisement of Perkin: Charles sent Him together with
another, as Ambassadors, to Perkin, inviting him to come into France, and
offering to assist him in the regaining of England. An Invitation which
augmented the hair-brained vanity of this Impostor: for being chosen by the
Duchess of Burgundy, a wise Princess, to a business of this weight,
received by the Irish (undoubted enemies to the House of Lancaster) and sent
for by a King whose interests were concerned in His, he believed, That Fortune
never undertook any great business without finishing it; not minding that
Beginnings and Endings conform but Seldom; and that Princes preserving
themselves by their Own strengths, it is usual with Fortune to ruin such with
the more certain praecipice, whom she has by unusual steps raised to the
Highest point of her Wheel. When he had acquainted those whom he most trusted
in Ireland with this Invitation, and thereby won more credit with them, he went
to France, where he was by the King received with all honor due to the Duke of
York: he called him by that Title; and according to that degree, fitted him
with House, Servants, and Expenses; and with a Guard of Soldiers under the
Command of the Lord Congreshal, to make him the more respected: Sir George
Nevil and Sir John Tailor, with above a Hundred other Englishmen, waited
continually upon him; and the Court it self, which follows the Prince's
example, showed him the like respect, not but that the greatest part of the
Courtiers, and especially the King, knew who he was; but because it was
expedient for them not to know him. The Imposture was apparent, not by his ill
governing himself, or through any default of his Person (for he abounded in
Decency and Majesty) but by the true story of the true Duke of York; by the
Unlikelyhood and Impossibility that he should escape the hands of a Crafty,
Malicious, Dreaded Uncle: Yet did he not Long enjoy this glory; for the
differences being ended between the Two Kings, it behoved him to be gone. Henry
would have had him delivered into His hands; but Charles esteeming it an
unworthy action, would not do it. He commanded him to depart his Kingdom; which
he forthwith did: for he very much apprehended the being made the Offering in
the Sacrifice of this Peace. He withdrew himself into Flanders, where the
Duchess and he counterfeited their parts Strangely well: he seemed as if he
had never been in those parts before; and she, as if she had never before seen
him: He feigned to be fled thither as to a Sanctuary under the protection of an
Aunt, who for the Neernesse of Blood that was between them, ought to profess
her self his Mother; She counterfeited Fears of being Deceived, being made
cautelous by the example of Lambert Symnel; and this might be a counterfeit as
well as He: She sent oftentimes for him, feigning to make an Exact scrutiny: at
first, she seemed to be Doubtful; afterward not Clearly satisfied; then more
Inclining to Believe well: at Last, she broke forth into an Admiration, and
Thanksgiving, praising the Divine Providence which had had commiseration on
that innocent Blood, and had vouchsafed to preserve him so miraculously,
showing the wonderfulnesse of his blessings to him: She then, with much seeming
Passion, called him Nephew; the Bud of the White-rose; the Hope of the House of
York; and the Restorer of the Honor and Justice of England: She assigned unto
him a Guard of Thirty Halberdiers for his safety. Now every one began to think
him Really to be what he personated, not imagining that a Woman could be
capable of so much Cunning: insomuch as if he were respected in France as a
foreign Prince, he was little less then Worshipped in Flanders, as Nephew to
the Duchess, and almost as much as if he had been her Son. This news being
brought into England, it was there greedily listened after; for men do
naturally love to believe things unlooked for and incredible: Passions
augmented this belief in such as were of that Faction, in those who desired
Novelties, in the Discontented: as also in those who loved Equity: for the
Crown had neither belonged to Henry, nor yet to his Wife, if her Brother had
been alive. Hereupon arose Whisperings, liberty of Discourse and Complaints:
the present ill Government was in every man's mouth; the endless Impositions,
the King's insatiable Avarice, which was the cause of a Shameful Peace, after
Britanny had More shamefully been suffered to be lost: The Nobility were no
less distasted; they were grieved at the small account the King made of them;
so that All men's conceits fell upon the same point, That God being a just
Judge, had preserved the True Heir to seat him again in his Throne, which had
been Twice usurped from him: for Henry had no right thereunto of Himself, and
had Waved his Wives right that he might reign Alone; that therefore it was not
to be wondered at, if after so much injustice, God had raised up his
Brother-in-law to punish him. Nor did this business end only in Discourse:
for there were some personages of Great quality, who would sound the Bottom of
it; amongst which were the Lord Chamberlain, William Stanley, brother to
Henry's father-in-law (he who had assisted him in the battle against Richards,
and may be said to have made him King) the Lord Fitz-water, Sir Simon
Montefort, and Sir Thomas Thwaites: these made choice of some people of quality
to send into Flanders, that upon their relation, they might ground their
resolutions: but of many there were only Two that would hazard themselves to
undertake the business which was shunned by all the rest; for if the business
should prove fictitious, they were likely to lose their Goods and Country.
Robert Clifford and William Barley, were the Two; both of them of good
Families, especially the first. When they came to Flanders, the Duchess
Margaret received them with much honor, and having discoursed long with
Clifford, that she might the better inform her self of their intentions that
sent them, she brought him to the sight of Perkin: with whom after he had
discoursed many days, he wrote back into England, that he was the Duke of York;
and that he knew him as well as he knew Himself.

The King was troubled at these men's going, since it could not 1494
but produce dangerous consequences: but the greatness of his spirit being
averse to fear, he forbear to make any extraordinaty provision against it, so
not to augment the credit thereof, which his seeming neglect might lessen. Yet
he forbear not to shut up the Ports, and to place such guards there, as he
might know who came in and out; endeavoring to discover what correspondency
the fugitives had. He feared not the Imposture, being certainly informed how
the Duke of York was, together with his brother, put to death; but it behoved
him that Others should likewise be certain thereof: wherefore he put, as
prisoners, into the Tower, Sir James Tirrel, and his servant John Dighton, who
were the only Two that remained alive of the Four which were conscious of this
cruelty; for Miles Forest (the Second rogue that slew them) and the Priest
that buried them, were dead: they deposed, That Tirrel saw them Dead after they
were Smothered; that he made them be buried underneath a stair, and covered
them with a Stone; from whence, by order from Richard, they were afterward
taken, and reburied by the Minister of the Tower; but in what place they knew
not, the Minister being Dead. But the King, not satisfied with these
testimonies, that he might divert the danger, and satisfy the World, he
bethought himself of some other means whereby he might discover the Impostors
condition and descent. He made choice of some, and scattered them thorowout all
Flanders, directing them what they were to do: Those who were not to stay in
any settled place, were ordered diligently to enquire after his Birth, and to
give Him daily advertisement of what they should learn: which makes men believe
he had some glimpse of it before: the other, who were to make their abode where
He was, were (by his direction) to seem as if they were fled away, so to shun
the danger they should incur, if they were discovered to be well-wishers to his
party; and to profess they were come to run the like fortune with Him: they
were, as the Other, to make Discovery, but more particularly to find out the
Designs and Correspondencies; they were to grow familiar with those whom
Perkin most confided in, and to show them the Vanity of the Undertaking, they
having to do with a wise King; not easily to be beaten without extraordinary
Forces; that the Dutchesse's favors were not answerable to their need; that
they wanted assistance, and were not certain of what they presumed to be
Secure; which was the assistance of the party, and the peoples inclination,
both which were unuseful: for that such accurate and diligent provision was
made, that all men would forbear to declare themselves, unless they might be
encouraged by the sight of a Great army, which the Duke of York was not likely
to show them; no not if all Flanders were to declare it Self for him. But their
chief care was to sound Clifford by tasting him with fair promises; for if they
could win Him over, the deed was done, he being the Cabinet of secret
Correspondencies between Flanders and England: neither were they much troubled
to effect it; for, being come to the knowledge of this imposture, he was
wrought upon by them; with promise of Forgiveness, and of Rewards, proper
baits for such a fish. Henry, this mean while, had made all those whom he had
sent, to be excommunicated in Paul's, and their Names to be registered in the
Book of the King's enemies (according to the custom of those times) to the end
that no man might suspect them: neither did he forbear to solicit the
Confessors of the greatest men, that he might learn how they were inclined; not
weighing the Profanation of Religion and holy things, since his particular
interest was concerned, though in all Other things he was reputed a Pious
Prince. At last they came to the perfect knowledge of Perkin's Birth, Name,
Surname, Country, Employments, and Voyages, till coming to the Duchess, he
was metamorphis'd into the Duke of York: they likewise won over Clifford, who
gave them such proofs of his repentance, as the King was therewithal satisfied.
Perkin's Genealogy was published in the Court, and thorowout the Kingdom: and
Henry not esteeming it fitting that a Mechanic should with such ostentation be
protected in Flanders, under a false name, and which redounded to His injury,
he sent Ambassadors to the Archduke Philip (Maximilian being gone into
Germany) who were Sir Edward Poynings, and Sir William Warham Doctor of the
Civil Law. The Council gave them audience, the Archduke being yet a Child:
their Embassy was, That Flanders being confederate, and in friendship with
England, the King could not but resent that she should nourish an Impostour who
durst call himself Duke of York, and pretended unto his Kingdom: that such a
Belief must needs admit of some Malignity, since the Duke of York's death was
too manifest to the world; which were it not so, very Conjecture were
sufficient to put it out of doubt: the Nature and Craft of Richard the Third
was not such as would encourage the Executors of his cruelty to save One
brother, and murder the Other: Mercy was not to be supposed in such Rascals;
and if it were, not without Reward, and freedom from Punishment: Reward was not
to be expected from a Child destitute of Hopes, and who getting out of prison,
had not wherewithal to feed himself: but say that mere Compassion had moved
them to save him; such compassion must be either in One or in All of them: it
was impossible it should be in One of them, and the Rest not know of it; and it
was incredible it should be in All of them, for that three such wicked ones
could not so far trust one another, as not to live in perpetual Jealousy: And
give this likewise granted, how could a child, ignorant of the ways, wanting
direction and counsel, pass undiscovered, that the Night-guards which are
usual in all the streets of London, should not stop him, should not take him?
or that some other difficulty should not hinder him? 'twas impossible a tender
child of Nine years old, alone, in Lord-like looks, and apparel, could pass
on, unknown by any: Certainly this could not have befallen the True Duke of
York, much less could it have happened unto the Counterfeit, whose true name
was Perkin: that the King knew him well; knew his Country and his Extraction,
that the Nurse or rather Mother of this, the Duchess of Burgundy, knew it
well enough, who emulating the ancient Fables, had brought him forth (as Jove
did Mercury) out of her Brain, feigned him to be her Nephew, given him
instructions and taught him how to lie: that she could not tolerate that her
Niece should reign, being joined to the House of Lancaster; her hatred being
thereunto such, as rather then to suffer her to be a Queen with such a Husband,
she would bereave Her and her Children of a Kingdom, and give it to Perkin,
begotten by a Jew turned Christian: They desired, that after the example of the
King of France, they would chase him out of their Country; and that if the
useful friendship which was between the two Nations, should persuade them (as
well it might) to do More, they should do like true friends indeed, if they
would deliver him up into Their Hands. The Answer was, That they desired to
preserve friendship with the King; that they would not assist the pretended
Duke of York: but that they could not hinder the Duchess (who was absolute in
her Country) from doing what she listed. Henry was not pleased with this
answer; knowing that Princesses Dowagers have not the like Prerogative over the
Countries where they govern as had their Husbands: for if they were endowed
with Absolute Sovereignty and Dominion, they might wage War, put the State into
Combustion, and utterly lose it: but having learned that she had great power in
the Council, and that the Archduke could do no otherwise; whilst the world
would believe that Perkin was protected in Despite of Him; he recalled the
English Merchants from Flanders, and banished the Flanders Merchants out of
England, and transported the Staple of Cloth and Wool from Antwerp to Callis:
the which though it were to the great loss of the People, and that Philip knew
they would exclaim against it; yet did not he forbear doing the like, by
driving the English out of his Dominions. The King moreover upon advertisements
from Clifford, imprisoned the Lord Fitz-water, Sir Simon Montfort, and Sir
Thomas Thwaites, William d'Aubeny, Robert Ratcliff, Thomas Cressenor, Thomas
Astwood, William Worseley Dean of Paul's, and certain Friars, amongst which two
Dominicans: he would have shut up More, but the scandal would have been too
great. Montfort, Ratcliff, and d'Aubeny, were convinced of High Treason, and
beheaded; the Lord Fitz-water being sent prisoner to Callis, not in despair of
Life, by his endeavoring to escape, lost both his hopes and life: the rest
were pardoned.

The King had created his second son, Henry, Duke of York, in Westminster,
where, as is usual at such Solemnities, diverse Knights 1495
of the Bath were made: but when he heard that Clifford was landed in England,
he withdrew himself to the Tower, that he might hear him There; to the end that
if he should accuse any of extraordinary quality, they might be imprisoned
without any great noise. Clifford being admitted to his presence, threw himself
at his feet, and begged his pardon; the which being formerly granted, he again
confirmed unto him: and being commanded to speak, if he had any more to say
concerning the Conspiracy, he named the Lord Chamberlain Sir William Stanley:
at whose name all the standers by were startled; it not being likely that a man
of his quality, rich, the Favorite, nearest to the King, and the chief
instrument of his Assumption to the Crown, should be a Traitor: whereupon
being advised to think Better what he said; he without Haesitation or Altering
his Color, accused him as Before. Stanley was shut up in his Chamber, and was
the next day examined by the Council: he denied some few Circumstances, but
confessed the Fault; affying his Former actions, for which he presumed the King
would pardon him: but he was deceived. Deserts and Mis-deserts weigh not alike,
when they are of a like Excess: though he had Put the Crown upon his head; by
negotiating how to take it Away again, he nullified his Former deserts: his
Repenting for the Service done, cancelled the Obligation; the which though it
were very great, was in some sort rewarded: Recompense cannot be given for a
Kingdom, by conferring Another Kingdom to the Donour; or by resigning over to
him the Same: the Inequality of the Persons, equals the Disparity of the good
turn: the Riches, and Honor he received from Henry, were equivalent to the
Crown which Henry received from Him: (if it may be Formally said that he did
receive it from him) the one was Born for It, the other for Meaner things. Yet
was Henry in great doubt with himself, whether he should put him to death, or
no: the love and reverence which he bare to his Father-in-law, pleaded for
Clemency; Example, and the Condition of the Times, put in for Severity; but if
it be true which some Authors write, his Riches bore down the balance: he being
esteemed one of the greatest moneyed men in England. Neither were men deceived
in this their opinion; for in his Castle of Holt were found Forty thousand
Marks in ready money (his Jewels and Movables not therein comprehended) and in
Revenues and Pensions he had Three thousand pounds a year; a considerable sum
in those days. Whereupon after having deferred this business some Six weeks,
to the end that his Brother and the People might have time to Examine it, he
was condemned to die, and lost his head. His execution afforded matter of
diversity of discourse: those that were not of the Court, who were ignorant of
the Secrets of Government, and made their conjectures upon Circumstances, and
doubtful Relations, esteemed the case, if not wholly void of Fault, at least
not worthy of the Highest punishment: a belief which was occasioned by reason
of a Rumor that was spread abroad, That in his discourse with Clifford
concerning Perkin, he should say unto him, That if he should for certain know
he were the Duke of York, son to Edward the Fourth, he would not take up Arms
against him: A manner of Speech which though it did not Openly declare any
ill will to the King's Person, yet such was it as did not sound well in His
mouth; his Example being sufficient to alter the whole Kingdom; and the words
not admitting of any other interpretation, then his Opinion of Henry's unjust
title to the Crown; which derogated from the Pretenses of the House of
Lancaster, and from the Authority of Parliament. The reason which alienated him
from the King, is said to be, That he desiring the King to make him Earl of
Chester (a Title, and County which the Kings of England do for the most part
give to the Princes of Wales, their firstborn Sons) the King did not only
Deny his request, but was Offended with him for it; thinking him now arrived to
those pretenses which did exceed the condition of a Subject, after he had
rewarded his services with equivalent rewards: having made him Privy
Counselor, Lord Chamberlain, given him daily whatsoever he demanded, assigned
Pensions to him, and in the day of Battle wherein Richard was slain, seemed not
to take notice that he appropriated unto Himself the Prey and Booty of the
whole Camp, of which He himself stood in Need, being but a New King: permitting
all things to him, to the end that when he was grown Rich, he might satisfy
his own thirst of having. This man's death put all the Court in a Quandary, one
man durst not trust another; each one feared lest all his friends might prove
Cliffords: Yet such was the spirit of Backbiting, that they made use of pen
and paper, to utter what for fear of danger they durst not do with their
tongues; Libels were written against some of the Council, and against the King
himself, the authors whereof could not so well conceal themselves, but that
Five of them miscarried, paying for their Error with the loss of life.
Perkin's party this mean while decreased; no man durst so much as think any
more of him, and they were but very few that tarried with him in Flanders:
amongst which, Barley, Clifford's companion, was the chiefest, who
notwithstanding, afterward, altered his opinion, and together with his Pardon,
got leave to return home.

But the death of the Conspirators, and the dissipation of the Accomplices, were
not sufficient to make Henry rest in quiet, unless he should destroy the Nest
which was in Ireland; seeing that Lambert first, and then Perkin, had been so
affectionately received there. It behoved him to settle his authority there in
such manner as it should be undoubted: he made choice of Two to serve him in
Two several Offices; the Prior of Langton with title of Commissioner, that he
might look to the Civil Government of the Kingdom, making him Chancellor; and
Edward Poynings, who was to have charge of the Militia, giving him a great many
Soldiers, with Commission to be Marshal, and Lieutenant, to which the Deputy,
which was the Earl of Kildare, was subordinate. The Prior met with no
difficulty; the Laws being his Arms, and the peaceful people the matter of his
jurisdiction: but Poynings, who was to deal with Stubborn men and Rebels, had
not the like fortune: for Ireland being full of Woods, Boggs, and Desert places
(the happiness of the poor people consisting in Idleness, in so much as the
ground is there for the most part unbroken up) he was to make War, just as men
do Hunt; for those whose consciences and courages mis-gave them, retiring
themselves into places inaccessible for strangers, and unknown unto them, he
spent much time there to small purpose; killing some few, and taking some few
prisoners, which made not much for the main enterprise; so as being angry with
those, who having no intention to withstand him, had no cause to fear him, he
laid the fault upon the Earl of Kildare, as if he had succored them
underhand. He sent him prisoner into England, without any other Proof against
him, save his Own Suspicion: and the Earl did so fully justify himself, as
that he was declared Innocent, and re-established in his former Government. But
if Poynings had no success with those which stood out against him, yet was his
fortune such with the rest, as he persuaded them to accept of all Ordinances
made in England till that day, which in former times were not of power in that
Kingdom. This Declaration was and is called Poynings his Law. Ireland therefore
is governed by the same Laws as is England; for so many as were made till the
Tenth year of Henry: but such as have been made since are not admitted of,
there.

The Conspiracy thus unsuccessefully ended, did not so quell Perkin's spirit,
but that he thought the affections of those of his Party, were rather
Oppressed, then quite Dead; and that a new spirit would so revive them, as
Henry should not be so fortunate in suppressing them, as he had been. Thus
flattering himself, he assembled together certain Troops of men of desperate
fortunes, who either for Debts, or other misdemeanors, durst not show their
heads; and embarking them, he came to Anchor before Sandwitch, landing some of
his men to learn news, and to discover how the people in those parts were
affected, giving out that he had great Forces which were coming in a Fleet
after him. The King at this time was gone his Progress, and was now with his
Mother in her house at Latham, whom he went to visit; and that by his coming
thither, the world might know, that the death of Sir William Stanley had not
made his father-in-law think the worse of him: here he heard of Perkin's
arrival; whereby he received this advantage, that he having so behaved himself
as his People esteemed him to be a politic Prince, they thought nothing befell
him which he did not foresee: and that his retiring himself into the Northern
parts, was one of his cunning fetches; for knowing he had left the South-parts
free from danger, he intended to allure Perkin to land, that so he might be
sure not to escape. But whatever the matter was, at the first news he resolved
to return; and was not well pleased at the Second, which informed him that he
was gone again; for he perceived this trouble would continue longer then he
imagined. The cause of Perkin's departure was this; the Kentish-men had well
observed the condition of those whom he had landed; and that there were but few
English amongst them, and those few of no worth nor consideration; wherefore
they took counsel with the Chief of the Shire, concerning their taking Arms;
the which being agreed upon, they showed a part of their men upon the Sea
shore, to invite him to land; and scattered the rest abroad, some here, some
there, as if they were ready to run away: but Perkin perceiving their drift,
budged not a foot; wherefore the Kentishmen gave upon them that were on the
shore: slew some of them, took other some, very few of them getting back to
their Ships.

At this time died Cecilie Nevil, Duchess of York; who, born to be
unfortunate, outdid the miseries of her daughter-in-law Queen Elizabeth, who
was very unhappie: she bare to her husband Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York,
Eight sons, and Four daughters: all her Sons died during her life; Four of them
died natural deaths, while they were Young; of whom we make no mention in our
Genealogy, because our History speaks not of them: of the Other Four, the
Three Last came to a violent end, and the First died not well; for King Edward
died in the strength of youth consumed by disorder; Edmund; Earl of Richmond,
was, together with his Father, slain at the Battle at Wakefield; George, Duke
of Clarence, was put to death in the Tower by his brother; and Richard the
Third was slain at Bosworth-field: She had been the less to be pitied, had the
Funerals of her family ended in her Husband and Sons; but they extended
themselves to her Grandchildren male; all which she outlived, save Edward
Earl of Warwick, son to the Duke of Clarence, who being shut up in the Tower,
was not to expect any other death then Violent, but to share therein with the
rest, as he did: so as being made unhappie by so many miseries (any One of
which had been able to have made her so) fortune would yet render her fuller of
calamity, by making her lose her Honor, her own Son declaring her to be an
Adultresse, thereby to make himself King: and though there were no true color
for it, yet was the stain true, wherewithal she was asperst, by a Basilisk that
issued out of her own bowels; which was a misery above all other miseries, and
of all wounds the most sensible.

Perkin, being retired to Flanders, if he should tarry there, he must needs be
discovered for an Impostour; and the Duchess of 1496
Burgundy, should she detain him there, must be known to be fomentresse of the
Forgery: so as it behoved him to be gone from thence, and her to send him away,
to go on with the work which they had both so unluckily begun. This resolution
was befriended by the distaste which Maximilian, and his son Philip took at
Henry, for taking the Commerce of England from their States; and by the like
distaste taken by Charles, King of France, for his having entered into league
against him, concerning his affairs in Italy. But Perkin's missing of
entertainment in Ireland, which he expected (for Poynings had an eye to the
actions of the Rebels there) he met with it in Scotland; whither he went,
grounding his hopes upon the natural enmity of those Two Kingdoms, and upon the
recommendation of the Three above-written Princes: he had solemn audience given
him by the King, in the presence of all the Lords that were then at Court. His
Lordlike looks, which (together with his being thought the true Duke of York)
were augmented by Art, and by the gifts of Nature, captivated the good will of
the standers by. Having in a grave manner done his Obeisance to the King, he
told him, That he was the unhappie Richard Plantagenet, son to Edward the
Fourth, who drawn by fraudulent promises from his mother's bosom (she having
taken Sanctuary at Westminster) was brought to the Tower of London, there to be
smothered with his brother Edward; but that charity arising in the breast of
those who executed that cruel office, they were contented with the death of his
Elder brother, and saved Him, giving him life, liberty, and means how to escape
away: he desired to be pardoned if he did not tell the Manner how, for that the
interests of those that had saved him, who were yet alive, would not suffer him
so to do: that Fortune had posted him into diverse places, and God had given him
the grace to conceal his condition, lest being known, the evil might have
befaln him which the vigilance of a wicked Uncle threatened, who having usurped
his Kingdom from him, knew he could not enjoy it but by his death, which he
thought had already happened: but that his Uncle being by divine justice
rewarded according to his deserts, and he grown in years after many
circumvolutions he had withdrawn himself from France, to his Aunt, the
Duchess of Burgundy, who being a widow, and on the Other side of the Sea,
could not give him such assistance as was requisite for the recovery of his
Kingdom; which being fallen from One Tyrant to Another; from an unnatural Uncle,
to a Kinsman who was naturally his Enemy, he stood in need of some to assist
him; Arms being the only Tribunal whereat pretenses to Kingdoms are disputed:
that England knew very well his claim, and his being; which some of the
chiefest there had witnessed with their bloods, betrayed by their false,
corrupt friends: that Corruption was easily effected, where Jealousy and
Suspicion made men, who were naturally covetous and sparing, (as was Henry)
liberal and profuse: that Ireland was not ignorant of this, but that being
grievously oppressed, her weakness was such, as she could not show her fidelity,
and obedience to the House of York, and to Him the true heir thereof, as she
formerly had done, and would again do; neither was it to be doubted, but that
if he could find a place to take footing in, and any one that would protect
him, he should, both from the one Kingdom, and the other, receive such
assistance; as might make the regainment of his own an easy business: that the
Duchess, Emperor, Archduke, King of France, and Himself, finding there was
no other whereon for him to take footing, then Scotland, nor other Protector for
him, then the magnanimous King thereof; they had advised him to present
himself before his Majesty, they being afterward ready to join with him in
so just a cause, in defense of an Orphan, and to the assistance of a Prince
betrayed, usurped upon, and driven out of this Country as was He. Here
enlarging himself upon Henrye's illegal pretenses, upon his base, ignoble
descent, vilifying his Grandfather Tewder as descended from the Scum of the
poorest sort in Wales; he said that his title was in no sort good unto the
Crown, nor yet his Wifes title as long as He the Duke of York (and of right
King) lived: that Henry had endeavored to have him given up into his hands by
Charles, when he was in France; but that being by Charles denied, he had not
spared for Treachery, Arms nor poison to bereave him of his life, by the means
of diverse of his Ministers, more particularly by Robert Clifford the wickedst
of them all; so as when all his diabolical designs failed him, his last
refuge was to slanders, and to new inventions drawn from hell, thereby to
obscure the splendor of his Birth; to the end that, being believed to be what
he would have him to be, his tyranny and usurpation might not be withstood:
that if he were such a one, King Charles, nor his aunt the Duchess would not
have counseled him to have had recourse to the powerful tuition of the King
of Scotland, with hopes that he would succor him, as his generous
Predecessors had formerly done the afflicted Kings of England; whose name,
worth, and Kingdom since he inherited, he hope he should inherit the like
benefits as they had done; that he might show himself (having recovered his
Kingdom) to be the most useful and truest friend, that ever did or shall
deserve to be celebrated for gratitude.

Perkins expressions, the compassion of his case, the recommendation of so many
Princes, and their promises; or rather the Occasion to wage war with Henry
(whereunto he had a great desire) moved the King to promise him his assistance:
the which he readily effected, though many, who knew the Imposture, dissuaded
him from him; and moreover he did not only appoint unto him an Attendance and
Entertainment every way befitting a Duke of York, but that it might be
believed he took him to be so, he gave unto him for wife his nearest
kinswoman, Katherin Gordon, daughter to the Earl of Huntley, a Lady of
excellent beauty. Such provisions being made as the enterprise required, he
with a good 1496
Army entered Northumberland, where Perkin, under the name of Richard Duke of
York, the true and lawful heir to the Crown of England, published a
Declaration, the Contents whereof were;

That being by the Grace of God, and Favor of James the fourth King of
Scotland, entered into his Kingdom of England, he declared his coming was not to
make war upon his subjects, but to free them from the tyranny wherewith they
were oppressed: that it was known the Crown belonged to the Regal house of
York, of which since after the death of Edward the fourth, there remained no
other pretender then Himself, his Son; He and no other was the lawful heir
thereof: that Henry Teudor had usurped the Crown from him, and by in humane
ways sought to betray him, and bereave him of his life: that he had vaunted
himself to have eased the subject of a Tyrant, but by excluding the Duke of
York, their rightful King, he had made himself their Tyrant: that Richords
tyranny was so much the more excusable, in that his Nephews being supposed to
be dead, he had some Pretenses to color it with: the difference between them
two was, that Richard, a true Plantagenet, had for his aim the Honor of the
Nation, and the Subjects Tranquillity; Henry, meanly born, (not regarding the
Honor of the Nation, nor the Peoples Tranquillity) had sold the Kingdoms best
friends for ready money, made dishonorable peace, and not only oppressed the
subject, but unjustly put to death the Lord Chamberlain Stanley, and diverse
others, who were likely to have withstood his oppressions. Ambition had moved
Richard to tyranny, Henry, Avarice; Ambition had made use of cruel means;
Avarice not only of Cruel, but Base, extortive means: his Cruelty was
witnessed by the death of so many, and by the imprisonment of the Earl of
Warwick, Son to the Duke of Clarence; his Baseness and Extortion, by such
extraordinary grievances, Tenths, Subsidies, Taxes, and Impositions, under the
name of Benevolences; and by the wars and peace he made, only that he might
heap up treasure: and because his unjust possession of the Crown made him live
in perpetual fear and suspicion, not only of Men, but even of Women, he had
married Ladies of the blood Royal to people of mean condition, amongst which a
sister of Him the Duke of York, and a sister of his Cousin the abovementioned
Earl of Warwick, that he might have the less reason to fear: so that, as he
now came to free them from violence by such forces as God should assist him
withal, so by his plenary Regal authority, he did at that present free them
from all Grievances, by Revoking and abolishing in perpetuity, All that had
hitherto been imposed upon them, contrary to all Law and Custom; and to the end
that the good will of his subjects might not be prejudiced by the Law, for
having illegally obeyed the Tyrant he granted to them a General Pardon for all
their transgressions, upon condition they would submit themselves to Him, and
acknowledge him for their King; the which they that should be the Forwardest to
do, should be the First that should enjoy the Maidenhead of his Regal favors:
that he would maintain all that his Ancestors, more particularly his Father
Edward of glorious memory, had sworn unto; which was the Preservation of their
Privileges, and Liberty, the Franchise of the Clergy, Nobility and People: He
promised a Thousand pound in ready money, and Five Marks a year of Inheritance
for ever, whosoever should take or kill Henry: he declared that the King of
Scotlands assisting of him was not done out of any Bargain or Promise made
Prejudicial to the Kingdom of England, but out of the near love to Justice, a
virtue wherein he excelled; and that when he should have put him in a condition
or posture that he might be able to defend himself by the forces of his own
English subjects, he would return to Scotland, pretending to nothing else but
the Honor of having Raised Him up.

This Declaration proved like seed sown on the sands: whereupon King James,
after he had long in vain expected some Commotion, be took himself to plunder,
and destroy with as little mercy as the Scots had wont to do in former times;
and Perkin, who till now had played his part extremely well, failed in This,
showing too much Affection therein. For having desired the King not to suffer
his men, contrary to the Laws of Arms to commit such outrages, for that no
purchase whatsoever could be acceptable to him, which was got with the Blood
and Ruin of his own subjects: the King, who either had before informed himself
of his being; or else began to suspect it by this his so Affected and
Impertinent request, answered him, smiling; That he took too much care of what
did not at all belong unto him; and that to endeavor the preservation of an
Enemies country, was the most that could be done by a Perfect Christian.
Having enriched his soldiers, he returned back, knowing that great forces were
coming down upon him, and that it would be dangerous for him to stay till they
came, finding himself encumbred by that great booty he took along with him.

Merchants were much troubled at the breach of Commerce between England and
Flanders; insomuch as, meeting with a fit occasion, they began to treat
thereof with their several Princes; since that the reducing it to the former
condition, would make for the advantage of Both sides, and therefore was to be
desired by Both: by the Archduke; for being informed that Perkin (the cause of
the disorder) was a Cheater, he should have wronged his Reputation in favoring
him any longer; and have much injured his Subjects and Himself, by the evil
that might there hence have resulted, by Henry; for not valuing now Perkin any
more, the breach of correspondence with Burgundy was not only prejudicial to
Private men, but even to Himself; since that thereby his Customs (a
principal arrow in the quiver of Princes) were diminished: notwithstanding
though he did desire it, he would not seem to do so, but appear to be drawn
by the instance of others. Commissioners were sent from both sides, who renewed
their friendship, and reestablished the commerce in a better way then formerly:
and to the articles touching this business, and the Freedom of Fishing, was
added an Inhibition of either side to entertain the Rebels of one another; in
which article the Lands belonging to the Duchess Margaret were by Name
inserted, to the end that such as did adhere to Perkin might not be sheltered
there.

The affront offered by the King of Scotland, stuck yet in Henrie's stomach,
which was not to be revenged but by war, war was not to be made without money,
nor was money to be had without a Parliament: wherefore he called a Parliament,
and therein acquainted them with the Losses he had suffered by the King of
Scots in Northumberland; who having no cause of enmity with Him, had taken upon
him for a Pretense, to protect Perkin, though he knew him to be an Impostour;
how the injury was aggravated by the Affront; for finding that country unarmed
and void of defense, after having ruined and burnt up the country, he had
safely retired himself, laden with booty, into Scotland. This business was
judged worthy of the Kings consideration; (such injuries not being without
shame to be put up) wherefore the Parliament decreed unto him good store of
money, to be raised according to the usual wont; which being paid in all parts
else, was only denied to be paid in Cornwall; the Inhabitants thereof thought
this an unjust exaction; and that the Scottish Commotion was so far from Them,
as they were not thereby to be obliged as were the countries thereby
detrimented; asif when the Head aches, the Legs and Feet be not concerned, but
may put over the execution of their duties to the Arms and Neck, as nearer
thereunto. To make good this mutiny two mutinous heads appeared; the one a
Farrier by his trade, the other an Attorney, each of which had their ends;
Michael Joseph the Blacksmith was moved by Ambition, believing such a
seditious action would add luster unto him, and that his clownish loquacity
would procure him the first place amongst the Country people: Thomas Flammock,
the Attorney, having gotten credit by his profession, had so far won upon their
opinions, as they believed the denying of this Subsidy, and their mutiny
thereupon to be Legal, and meritorious: his opinion was of authority
sufficient to interpret the Power of King or Parliament: he had instructed them
that they were not bound to the payment of any Subsidies for war with Scotland;
that the Law had provided for it by other means, so as this Subsidy was
invented to fleece the People: he therefore advised them to present a Petition
to the King, who for the example of other men could not choose but punish the
Inventors of it: they both offered themselves to lead them on, till they should
find some man of Quality, under whom, they, with the hazard of their lives,
would continue to serve them; but that for matter of Life, there was no Hazard
at all, their demand being so Just, as it would be approved of by all the other
shires; since the public good was treated of, from which the Kings particular
interest could not be separated. Hereby encouraged, they took up arms; and
because they were not all provided of Bows and Arrows, they armed themselves
with such Tools as belonged to their several Trades. They entered by
Somersetshire, and passed through Devonshire, not offering any manner of
Outrage: when they came to Taunton, they slew one of the Commissioners for the
Subsidy, who had showed himself more busy therein then the rest: at Wels they
met with the Lord Audley, who having had former intelligence with their two
Leaders, was chosen their General. They would go into Kent, out of an opinion
that that country (which never having been conquered, was according to
Flammock, the Freest part of England) was likely to join with them: but
finding the contrary, some wondered at it, and other some were mad thereat: the
former handsomely drawing their neck out of the Yoke, returned home; the others,
passing forwards, thought, that since they had met with no opposition in so
long a march, the King and the City would suffer them to make their Own
Conditions: and with this foolish imagination they encamped themselves within
sight of London, between Greenwich and Eltham.

The King was troubled at the first news of this mutiny, fearing lest he should
have Three Irons in the fire at once: the people of Cornwall, Perkins secret
Intelligence, and the war with Scotland. He took up arms as soon as the
Parliament was ended, thinking to go toward Scotland; but crossed by the other
occasion, he suspended that resolution: and because he had sent the Lord d'
Awbeny (whom he had made Lord Chamberlain in lieu of Stanley) with some forces
to the confines of Scotland; he sent for him back, to take such counsel as
necessity required, and sent in his stead the Earl of Surrey with order to
defend the country, in case the Scots should fall in upon it: he moved not at
the very First (as was his wont) against the Rebels; for the Country, not
being by them endammaged, did not require it; and he was confident that wanting
Money and Ammunition, they would, of themselves, Disband as they had already
begun to do, when they failed in their hopes of the Kentish men: but when he
saw them encampt, he resolved to fight with them; moved thereunto, by his
apparent Advantages, by which foreseeing what might be effected, he freed
himself from all the hazards of Fortune: He divided his forces, which far
exceeded Theirs, into three great Battalions: he assigned the First over to the
Earls of Oxford, Essex and Suffolk; the Second, to the Chamberlain; and he
commanded the Third, Himself: he appointed the First to place themselves
behind the Hill where They were encamped, and to secure all the Passages save
that toward London, that being enclosed like wild beasts in a toil, they might
not know how to escape: he ordered the Chamberlain to give them battle in the
Front, having given unto him the Best and most Experienced Soldiers in all the
Army, being it was on Them that the greatest burden lay; he Himself stayed
with the Third between London and Them, to supply them, if it should be
needful, and to fight with them that should dare march toward the City, as
the citizens apprehended: The fear hereof had caused much confusion in London;
citizens were seen to run armed through the streets, some to the Walls, some to
the River, minding what they had to do: for they could not think they were
come from Cornwall, the uttermost bounds of England, with other intention then
to enrich themselves by the sacking of that opulent City; and they did not
hold that their having past quietly through all other parts, ought to be taken
for an argument to make them believe the like upon This occasion: but
understanding the good order which the King had taken, how that he had
interessed his own Person in the danger; that the enemy was to win Three
battles, before they could come to the City; and that the Commanders were not
only Faithful and valiant, but such as they confided in, they laid aside their
fears. The King had caused it to be noysed abroad (to the end that he might
take them the more unprovided) that he would not fight with them till the
Monday following; but toward the Saturday Evening, the Lord d' Awbeny set upon
some troops, which (not looking to be fought withal till Monday) were upon the
side of the Hill, who though they resisted valiantly, yet being but Few in
number, they could not make good their Station; so as quitting it, it was easy
for the Kings Forces to clime the Hill, make themselves Masters of the Plain,
and give on upon them: they (though taken thus at unawares with their troops
out of order) received the assault so handsomely, as the Lord d' Awbeny,
fighting in the Head of his men, and playing the part rather of a Common
Soldier, then a Commander, was taken Prisoner; but was presently rescued: for
the Rebels being ill armed without Commanders, Artillery, or Horse, they could
not so far resist, but that in a short time, two Thousand of them were slain,
and a great many taken Prisoners. The General Audley, and the two Seducers,
(the Attorney, and the Blacksmith) suffered themselves basely to be taken
alive. Three hundred of the Kings side were slain, all of them almost by
Arrows; for the Cornish had strong Bows, and very long Arrows. The King came
thither to make many Knights Bannerets; and others he made in St. Georges
fields where he was encamped: he gave the goods of such as were taken, to those
that took them, to be disposed of as they listed. Audley was beheaded upon
Tower Hill, having on him a Coat of paper torn, with his Arms painted thereon,
the wrong side upwards. The Attorney and the Blacksmith were brought to
Tibourn, where they were Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered; the Blacksmith not
ceasing to show his vanity and vainglory at the very last; believing in future
times his name would be big in story.

The King would not have their quarters be sent into Cornwall, as he had
appointed; for, hearing that they were not totally appeased, he thought it was
not good to incite them any further. To all the rest he gave a General Pardon;
so as in so scandalous a rebellion, there were but Three that suffered: those
not being cast into the number which were slain in the Battle, who perished
rather by Fortune, then by way of Punishment.

The King of Scotland, hearing of this rebellion, made use of it: he went to
besiege Norham Castle, plundering the country. This Castle belonged to Fox,
the Bishop of Durham; who foreseeing it would be besieged, had doubly
furnished it with all sorts of Munition, causing the herds of Cattle, and what
else might be helpful to the Enemy, to be withdrawn into the greatest
strengths. The Earl of Surrey, who was ready, upon all occasions, in
Yorke-shire, not far from thence, hasted thither, accompanied with good store
of Soldiers: the which when King James understood, he withdrew himself, and
was pursued by the Earl; who not able to over-take him, sat down before Hayton
Castle, one of the strongest Castles between Barwick and Edenborough; the which
he quickly took: and not meeting with any opposition, he returned to
Yorke-shire, not doing any more; these two actions having produced no matter of
Note, but the Preservation of One Castle, and the winning of Another.

At this time came Pedro d' Aiala, a man of praiseworthy conditions, to Henry;
being sent Ambassador from Ferdinand, and Isabel, King, and Queen of Castile.
The pretense of his Embassy was, to compound the differences between Henry,
and the King of Scotland: but the true cause was to negotiate a marriage
between Katharine, their second daughter, and Prince Arthur. My opinion is;
that these two wise Princes were cautious of entering into a business of this
nature, till by this peace they might see Henry's state settled: for considering
him to be a New King, they did not a little weigh the machinations of an
Impostour, which being grounded upon the appearances, though but of a False
name, were upheld by the King of Scotland; who if he should forsake him, they
would soon vanish. Henry willingly embraced the Offer, being no way inclined to
the unprofitable wars with Scotland; by the cessation whereof, two great
advantages were to redound to him: the one; he would unkennell Perkin from out
the Kingdom, with hopes to get him into his power; or else, that, wanting that
leaning stock, he might easily end the business Himself: the other; his desire
to reign in Peace, being weary of so many molestations, which rising one in the
neck of another, had always troubled him. So as agreeing to whatsoever d' Aiala
should treat of (his Honor, and all wherein it might be concerned, always
preserved) he suffered him to go into Scotland: where having rough-cast the
business, and persuaded the King to listen to Peace, (for his endeavors were
seconded by the Counsel, who favored England) he writ to Henry to send some
discreat man, who, together with Him, might end the business with the
Commissioners of Scotland. The King gave his Commission to Fox, Bishop of
Durham, who was then at Norham, and sent him. When they met together in
Iedworth they could not agree, by reason of many difficulties that arose: Henry
demanded to have Perkin delivered up unto him; and James could not do it,
without a great aspersition to his Honor: for, though he knew he was but a
Iuggler, yet having called him the Duke of York, made war in his name, and
married him to a near kinswoman of his own, the doing of it would injure his
own Faith and Reputation. On Henry's behalf, was likewise demanded
satisfaction for the Loss he had suffered, and the Restitution of such Booty
as had been taken from England; which was impossible to be had: the booty was
dispersed amongst the Soldiers; and the King had not of his Own wherewith to
give satisfaction for the Losses suffered: it was more possible for the one to
suffer the Loss, then for the other to Repay it. But all of them being met
together with a Desire of Peace, 'twas easy to find a way to accommodation;
wherefore leaving off the Treaty til another time, they agreed on a Truce, upon
condition that Perkin should be dismissed Scotland. The Kings were here withal
contented: Truce working the same effect. King James, calling Perkin to him,
showed him; that, according to his promise, he had done what lay in His power
for him; which He had not correspondently done, in any thing he promised: for
having made him believe, he had a Party in England, not so much as one man had
appeared to side with him after Two attempts made: that he (the King) had
together with his person hazarded his Kingdom to a perpetual war: The Scots
would none of it; neither would his Occasions permit it: that he had reason to
complain of none but of Himself, who in a business of so great importance, had
not cast up his accounts aright: that the Emperor, Archduke, Duchess of
Burgundy, and the King of France, had been faulty both to Himself, and Him,
that he could not do all of Himself, whilst they, far from Danger, looked on
from safe places, without either damage or expense: though this were a
sufficient cause, yet should it not have been of force enough to have made him
change his former resolution, had there been any one that would have
acknowledged him for the Duke of York, as there was none that would
acknowledge him for so much as an English man: He would no farther examine his
Genealogy, nor make himself Judge of another pretenses whilst there is not
any one that dreams, much less believes him to be Son to Edward the fourth:
that he had given him for wife a Noble Lady, his near kinswoman, to the end
the Scocs might be moved to favor him, and the English might take courage to
own him; and if the second design which depended on Him, (Perkin) did not
succeed well; the first which depended on Him (the King) failed not: that his
Kingdom would have Peace; which they could not have so long as He stayed in it:
that therefore it behooved him to be gone; for having denied to Deliver him up
to the King of England, as was by the said King Demanded, he could not deny to
send him out of Scotland; which should he not do, it would be contrary to the
interests of One of them, and repugnant to the affairs of the Other: He told
him; Times did alter; so as if he were the man he gave himself out to be, it
was impossible but the Time would bring the Truth to light: that though Fortune
were Powerful, yet was she not able to prevail against a certain Truth; if
therefore his Pretense were such, he could not want Friends, and Furtherers; if
otherwise, it behooved him to look to himself, and to put on apparel fitting
his condition. Perkin, though convinced, seemed not to be so; casting all his
bad success upon the Averseness of Fortune. And assuring the King, he would
never be unmindfull of the favor he had received from him, he embarked himself
together with his Wife, and such whose desperate condition necessitated them to
follow him, in three ships which the King gave him, and made for Ireland, for
he had no hopes in Flanders, by reason of the new friendship between the
Archduke and Henry.

The Cornish men understanding that he was come into Ireland, entreated him to
come over to them; professing their obedience, their Lives, and Lively-hoods,
for the advancing of his pretenses to the Crown. They who were taken Prisoners
in the last Battle, were returned home; having ransomed themselves at small
rates from such as had taken them: and the Kings clemency had wrought contrary
effects in them, making them more enraged; for they did not interpret it as
proceeding from Kindness, but Fear: so as falling upon new conceits,
believing that all the other shires would follow them, they received Perkin
with great applause; who Landed there with four little Barks; in September,
having with him not above a Hundred and Forty men. Three Thousand of the
Cornish presented themselves before Him in Bodmin all armed: from whence he
sent forth a Declaration under the name of Richard the fourth, King of England,
promising great matters for the ease of the present Tyrannical government. He
had with him Three chief Counselors come with him; a broken Mercer, a
Tailor, and a Scrivener: Secretary Frion had left him, when he saw none appear
for him in England: these three, seconded by the rest, were of opinion, the
first thing which was to be done, was to win some good Town, which might make
for his Safety and Reputation, and might encourage the rest. They pitched
before Exeter, which being a great and rich City, the hope of Booty invited
other to come unto Perkin. They made fair promises to the Citizens; amongst
which, That King Richard would make their City a new London, in recompense of
their Fidelity, and for their being the First that did acknowledge him for
their King: but wanting Artillery to force them, bare words were not sufficient
to persuade them. The City sent news of the siege to the Court, and demanded
succor; the which Perkin feared, and therefore did all he might to make
himself Master of it before the succor could come: He assaulted it by Scaling
Ladders, and set fire on one of the Gates, endeavoring to enter by one way or
other; but the walls being well defended, the fire quenched, and many of the
Assaillants slain, the danger past over. The King, when he heard of Perkins
arrival, and that he had besieged Exeter, was exceeding glad, hoping to free
himself from rather a Troublesome then Dangerous molestation. He suddenly
dispatched away forces to releeve it under the Conduct of the Lord Chamberlain,
accompanied by the Lord Brook, and Sir Rice ap Thomas; with directions that
they should make it be given out that he was following himself in Person. But
the Lords that lived in those parts, knowing they should do an acceptable
service, if they should come into the field unrequested, assembled many troops.
The Earl of Devonshire, with his Son, and the chief Gentlemen of the County on
the one side; and the Earl of Buckingham on the other; so as being joined
together before the Chamberlain began to march, they advertised the King of
what they had done, desiring to receive his commands. Perkin, understanding
these preparations, raised his siege and went to Taunton, though the Cornish
did much encourage him, promising not to leave him whilst they had a drop of
blood in their bodies. But, were it either through fear, or that Wariness had
taught him not to trust to such promises, he would be gone; having about seven
Thousand men with him, and seeming howsoever to be courageous: But forsaking
all these the next night he fled, with Threescore and Ten horse, to Beaulieu;
where with some of them he took Sanctuary. The King, hearing of his flight,
sent five hundred Horse after him, fearing lest he might escape away by Sea;
but finding he had taken Sanctuary, they used no other violence, but to keep a
good Guard over him till they should receive new Commands. The troops which
remained in Taunton, yielded themselves to the Kings mercy; who pardoned them
all, save some Few, which being the most seditious amongst them, were put to
death. And because the Lady Gordon, wife to Perkin, was left by him in
Cornwall, at Saint Michaels Mount, as in a safe place, the King sent to take
her from thence; not so much out of Civility to so Noble a Lady, as fearing
lest she might be with Child; which should she have proved, it might have
been a new occasion of farther trouble: but it was Gods goodness to them both
that she was not. She was with all possible Honor received in Exeter; the
King did much compassionate her excellent Beauty, which, deserving a true
Prince, was fallen into the hands of a cheating Impostour, whom she
notwithstanding loved, as not believing him to be so. He sent her to the
Queen, and assigned her a good Pension, the which she enjoyed during his
life, and many years after.

He made a solemn entry into Exeter, where having thanked the Citizens for
their Loyalty, he took off his sword he wore, and gave it to the Major, with
power to have it carried before him. He sent express Messengers to the
Sanctuary, to Perkin, with promise of Pardon, who seeing himself destitute of
all hopes of safety, yielded himself; and coming forth of Sanctuary, put
himself into their hands; and was brought to the Court, but not to the Kings
Presence, though oft-times, for Curiosities sake, he would see him out of the
Gallery window. Diverse Commissioners were named to proceed against such as had
sided with Perkin; who were Punished with Pecuniary mulctes: the world not
being deceived in their opinion, that he was better satisfied to let the Purses
blood, then the Veins. The Scorn and Mockery which Perkin received from the
Courtiers, and from such as ran to see him, as if he had been a Monster, would
have been a greater punishment to a man of Honor then a Thousand Deaths. When
he came to London, he was led on Horseback through all the City, to the
Tower, and from thence brought back again to Westminster; suffering by the way
a world of opprobrious and injurious Language. For his greater ignominy, they
led another bound near unto him, who was Farrier to the Kings stables, and who,
next to the three abovenamed, having been one of his chief Counselors, had
in his running away put on the habit of an Hermit, hoping to escape better
thereby, then by Sanctuary: but being known, taken, and brought to London, he
was hanged, after he had accompanied his New Master in this Procession. Perkin,
upon examination, declared at full his whole Genealogy; his Father, Mother,
Grandfathers, Uncles, Cozins, their Occupations, and Country; his voyages,
together with many other superfluous things: concealing, or not setting down in
writing, what was most Essential; as, that his Father was a Jew; that he
himself was born in London, held at the Font by King Edward; and the Duchess
of Burgundy her practices. He confessed his going to Portugal; but not, that
he was sent by Her: In like manner he confessed his journey to Ireland. Whereupon
the Confession, being first written with his own hand, and afterward Printed,
did not satisfy the Peoples curiosity; since they saw the name of the
aforesaid Duchess (the chief Actor in this Comedy) purposely concealed. But
the King would not irritate her any farther, thinking it sufficient punishment
for her to be so diversely spoken of as she was; together with her own
vexation, that her inventions not succeeding should be made evident to the
world.

The Civil wars whereof I write, ought to end with the death of Richard the 3.
without any further progress: but the fire thereof though quenched, having left
hot ashes; and caused the alterations of those two Impostours, Symnell and
Warbeck; it was requisite for me to write This life likewise, though with
intention to end it (according to the Object, and Title propounded to my self)
with the Imprisonment of the Later of the two; the last exhalation of all these
Heats: But it would have mis-become me to have left it abruptly off (there
remaining so Little of it) without discovering the fountains head from whence
the Kings of Scotland derive their lawful succession to the Crown of England;
and without setting down the punishment of Warbeck, and of the Earl of Warwick,
the last Male of Plantagenets race, whose death freed the Kingdom from
Pretenders. I will then proceed, with the greatest Brevitie that may be.

The truce between England and Scotland was no sooner made, but that an
unexpected accident happened, which had well nigh broke it, and turned all things
to their former troublesome condition. The Castle of Norham is parted from the
confines of Scotland by the river Tweed: so as neighborhood having caused
conversation and friendship between some young men of Scotland, and of England,
the young men of Scotland had wont to pass over the River, and come to drink
and sport with those of Norham: the Soldiers of the Garrison growing
mistrustful of this custom, (their grudges not being totally extinguished by
the Truce) did not think their coming proceeded from Friendship, but out of a
desire to pry into the Fortifications; whereupon falling first to Words, and
then to Blows, the Scotch-men by the disadvantage of place, and ods in number,
were hardly treated; and some of them were slain. King James, taking this as
done purposely to injure Him, dispatched away an express Herald to complain
thereof; and, in case the King should not give good satisfaction, to denounce
War. Henry, who minded nothing but his quiet, answered; That he was sorry for
the Accident, which he neither knew of, nor did allow of: that he would
inquire into the Actors of it, and give them such punishment as there should be
no occasion to break the Truce. But, time passing on, and nothing done, James,
thinking this was but his Dissembling, with intention that Delay working
Forgetfulness, might exempt the faulty from Punishment; was more offended then
formerly: and certainly, somewhat of mischief would have happened, had not the
Bishop of Durham, who was Lord of Norham, wisely taken order in it. For,
knowing that the injury was done by His men, he wrote in so civil a manner to
James about it, as that he rested satisfied, and desired the Bishop to come
unto him, that they might treat upon the present occasion, and upon certain
other things that concerned both the Kingdoms. The Bishop acquainted Henry with
this, who gave him leave to go: he therefore went to the Abbey of Melrosse
where the King then was; who at their first meeting complained of the injury
done. The Bishop answered; that could not be called an injury, where there was
no intention of Offending: He confessed the too much Rashness of his men
occasioned by misfortune; not out of any intention to offend Him: the offense,
(if any there were) must needs proceed, either from the King, or the Garrison;
not from the King; for he was not of such a nature; which if he were, it was
not likely he would make a Truce, to Break it immediately, without any
Advantage or Occasion: nor did it proceed from the Soldiers, who were sure to
be Punished for it: a chance, unthought of, caused by suspicion, could not be
termed an Injury; not, that he did not confess the Authors Guilty of it; but
with the Distinction allowed of by the Laws, between Accidental, and
Premeditated faults: that, as the Later were worthy of severe Punishment, so
were the Other of Clemency and Pardon; obtainable upon request from so generous
a Prince as was His Majesty. The King being pacified, said; He pardoned the
offense, in respect of the Friendship contracted, the Continuance whereof he
desired. And then, drawing him aside, pursued to say; His desire was to have a
Long and Good peace: the which if Henry likewise desired, the true way to
effect it would be, by Henrie's giving him for wife his Eldest daughter
Margaret; for that thereby, the friendship between the two nations would be
perpetual: that this was the reason why he had desired him, to come into
Scotland, hoping that by his wisdom he might bring the business to a good end.
The Bishop, after having modestly answered for what concerned Himself,
promised him all the Furtherance his service could do him, in effecting his
desire. Being returned to England, he acquainted Henry with the King of
Scotlands desire, wherewith King Henry was much pleased. The business being long
debated in Counsel, the match was agreed upon, so as Peace might precede it;
which was done; Peace being concluded during the lives of the two Kings, and
for one Year after: and the Marriage was to be celebrated, but not Yet; the
Bride, who was born the 29. of November, 1689. being too young.

Charles the eighth King of France, died this year, on the 7. of April; whose
Funerals were with great pomp celebrated in London; the King being very
sorrowful for his death, as calling to mind the Favors he had received from
him.

Perkin was this mean while in Prison, but so carelessly looked unto, as,
cosening his Keepers, he made an Escape. Not knowing 1498.
whether to fly for safety, being followed, and diligently sought for, he
returned to London, and presented himself before the Prior of the Monastery of
Bedlam, a man of great esteem, desiring he might be received into that
Sanctuary; the Prior acquainted the King with it, desiring him to pardon his
life: the Counsel were, for the most part of a contrary opinion; desirous that
he should be taken from the Sanctuary and executed, so to end their fears; but
the King, at the Priors intercession, pardoned him his life; being contented
that he should stand in the Pillory, from whence he was brought with Irons
upon his feet to Westminster yard, where he again read his former Confession,
the which he likewise did at Cheapside. He was again put into the Tower to be
better looked unto, but he could not forbear relapsing into his former
error. For, growing great with four of his Keepers, who were servants to Sir
John Digby, Lieutenant of the Tower, and making them believe he was the true
Duke of York, he so far prevailed with them, as that they persuaded the Earl
of Warwick to escape away with Perkin; which by their means he easily might
do, when they should have killed the Lieutenant, and taken from him his Keys,
Moneys, and best Movables. But the plot was discovered, and he again put over
to Commissioners.

At this time an other Earl of Warwick appeared in Kent, in imitation 1499
of Lambert Symnell. Lambert took upon him the person of the Earl of Warwick,
by the direction of a Priest; and Ralph Wilford (for so was this second
supposititious Earl called) by the direction of an Augustine Friar named
Patrick: but this was soon ended; for the Friar puffed up with a foolish
confidence, and believing that businesses of this nature ought to be fomented
in the Pulpit, he by inciting the People destroyed the building before the
Groundwork was laid; so as they were both taken; Wilford was executed, and
the Friar, in respect of his Habit, was condemned to perpetual imprisonment.
This accident gave the King occasion, to rid the true Earl of Warwick out of
the world: whereupon it was thought that Perkins first flight, and this his
second endeavor to do the like, were wrought by His cunning; he giving way to
the First, that he might put Perkin to death; and stirring up means to plot
the Second, so to rid his hands of the Earl, and Perkin, both at once. But,
howsoever it was, Perkin being convinced of this second business, and judged to
die, was hanged at Tybourn; where, by word of mouth, he confessed his Imposture.
The rest, who were involved in the same fault, suffered likewise with him. And
Warwick, being accused before the Earl of Oxford (who, for this occasion was
made High Constable of England) to have conspired together with Perkin, against
the State and Person of the King, being proved guilty by his own Confession,
was beheaded upon Tower Hill. And thus in him ended the Male Line of the
Plantagenets. This caused the King to be blamed, and hardly thought of, as
having no reason to condemn him: for, having been Prisoner from the Ninth
year of his age till the Twenty-fourth, and always in fear of Death, he was
kept in so great Ignorance, that he did not know a Duck from a Capon; and
therefore so little capable of the fault, that he was altogether incapable to
Dream of it: and his Confessing it, was out of a belief he was persuaded to,
that by so doing he should be pardoned. Henry endeavored to lay the cause of
this death upon the King of Spain, showing his Letters, wherein he said; He
could not resolve to marry his Daughter to Prince Arthur: since as long as the
Earl of Warwick lived, he was not certain of the Kingdoms succession: which
might be a reason of State, but not of Justice; in so much as God would not
give a Blessing to that match; the which that virtuous Princess, Katharine,
Knew very well; for Prince Arthur dying shortly after, and she being
repudiated by King Henry the Eight after Twenty years marriage, she said. It
was no wonder if God had made her Unfortunate in her Marriages, since, they
were sealed with Blood: meaning thereby, the Death of this Earl.

The King, though he were no longer subject to the Apparitions which the
Duchess of Burgundy had raised up by her Enchantments in the Transformation
of People, yet was he not free from Influences common to other men; the Plague
raged so terribly in London, that it forced him to quit the Town; and
afterward by reason of its Universal dispersing of it self over the whole
Land, to go over to Callice; together with the Queen. The Archduke Philip,
hearing of his being there, sent Ambassadors to him, to congratulate his
Arrival, and to know if he would be pleased that he Himself should come to
visit him: upon condition notwithstanding that he might be received in some
Open place; not for that he durst not Trust himself in Callice, or in what
ever other Town; but for that having refused to speak with the King of
France, within any Walled place, he would not by this Difference give him any
occasion of Offense; nor that the example might prove prejudicial to him in
the future for any thing that might happen either with the same King, or with
any other. The Ambassadors were graciously received, and the Condition fairly
interpreted, and St. Peter's Church, not far from Callice, was appointed for the
place. He likewise sent Ambassadors to the Archduke, who appeared at Mass
in the midst between them, all of them kneeling upon the same cushion. As he
was coming toward Callis, the King went out to meet him; and he alighted
suddenly from Horseback, as if he would have held his stirrup: the King
likewise alighted, and, having embraced him, led him to the Church which was
appointed for their parley. The causes which brought this Prince thither, were
two; his own Good nature, for that he had offended him by Protecting an
Impostour; which fault though it was not His (he being then a Child) yet was it
the fault of his Counsel, depending upon the Duchess Margarets passion: so
as he omitted nothing whereby to give the King satisfaction: the other; the Advice of his Father, and father in Law, who counseled him to make firm
friendship with Henry, for the advantage of the Lowcountries, and for his own
Safety against the Violences of France; but most for that they both hating that
King (which was Lewis the Twelfth, who succeeded Charles the Eighth) they hoped
for many Advantages by his Friendship. The Archduke failed not to use all the
art he could, though by nature he was not given to Dissembling: terming him his
Father, his Protector, his Leaningstock. The things agreed on between them
were; the Confirmation of the former Treaties, and two reciprocal Marriages;
the one, of the Duke of York, the Kings Second Son, with the Archdukes
Daughter; the other, of Charles, the Archdukes Eldest Son, with Mary, the
Kings Second Daughter: but all of them being either Children, or Infants, these
marriages ensued not, but did evaporate through Time and Interest. The Archduke
was hardly gone, when the King of France sent the Governor of Picardy, and the
Baylife of Amiens to visit Henry, acquain ting him with his Victories, together
with his getting of the Duchy of Milaine, and his imprisonment of Lodwick
Sforza, the Duke thereof. The Plague being, by this time ceased, Henry returned
to London, well satisfied with the Testimony he had received, of how good esteem
he was held by the confining Princes.

At the same time Jasper Pons, a Spaniard born, a learned, and well bred man,
came into England, being sent by Pope Alexander the Sixth, upon the occasion of
the year of Jubilee; for since they only received the benefit thereof, who went
to Rome, he thought it fit that it should be commuted for by Remote countries,
the inhabitants whereof could not make so Long a journey: in so much as they
staying at Home, might receive the same indulgences which those did that went
on Pilgrimage to Rome, if they would give a certain sum of money to be
employed in the wars against the Turks, whose advancing Hungary, Germany, and
Italy, did much apprehend. This man did so wisely negotiate this af fair, as he
thereby got a great sum of money, without any manner of grudging or
murmuring, save against the Kings Person; who being naturally given to Extort
from his People, it was thought he would not have suffered these moneys to
have been gathered, had not he Himself had a share therein. An opinion which
was known to be false in the time of Julius the Second; who making it a
difficult business to grant Prince Henry a Dispensation to marry Katharine, who
had been wife to his brother Arthur, Cardinal Adrian de Corneto, who
endeavored the obtaining of it, alleged amongst the rest of the merits of
King Henry, his Father, that he had not pretented to share in the moneys raised
by Pons in that kingdom. Neither was there any dissimulation used in this, by
Alexander, at least there Appeared none: for he propounded this war in the
Public Consistory, in the presence of as many Emssadours as were then resident
in that Court; with design to set upon the Turkish territories in Three
several places: in Thracia; by the Hungarians, Bohemians, and Polanders: in
Greece, by the French and Spaniards; and at Constantinople by him Himself,
accompanied by the King of England, and the State of Venice: and he sent
Nuntioes to All Princes, that they would join their Forces and Moneys
according to their Abilities, in so pious a work. The Answer which the King
gave to Pons, was; That he was ready to Accompany his Holiness, but that it
was impossible for him to do it in that manner; the remote Distance of his
country would put him to Double the charge of any of the rest: that the Kings
of France, and Spain, were first to be made Friends; which if it should not be
effected, all other designs would prove but vain: that when they should be
made friends, 'twas they that best might accompany him, as being Nearest him,
which if they should Refuse to do, He would wait upon him, Himself, not
considering either Expense, or other incommodity: upon Condition he might have
some Cities upon the Seaside in Italy, delivered into his possession, to make
use of what ever chance might happen. This answer, and, it may be, the Like of
other Princes, made this undertaking vanish away to Nothing; when the
Proposition was such as might very well have been effected.

Cardinal Morton, who was likewise Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor
of England, died this year. We have spoken of him formerly. He was a man of
great Integrity, yet somewhat given to Gripplenesse, which made him be ill
thought of, for it was believed he had nourished in the King his humor of
Impositions. But, time proved the Contrary; and had he left no other laudable
memory behind him, his being the First agent in the uniting of the two Roses,
is a merit whereby to render him Glorious to all Posterity.

John, Earl of Lincoln, (he who was slain at the battle of Stoke) left his
brother Edmund, Earl of Suffolk, heir to his Humor, and his Misfortune: in so
much as calling to mind that he was Son to Elizabeth, who was sister both to
Edward and Richard, he thought he might be as bold under This King, as he had
been under the Other two his Uncles. He had slain a man; in such a manner
notwithstanding, as the Circumstances did not Aggravate the fault. Henry gave
him his Pardon: but so, as he was to pass all the course of Law, and Justice,
and to appear before the Judges, and receive Sentence of Condemnation. This
manner of proceeding against him did so touch him to the quick, as reputing the
Favor that was showed him, Ignominy, he suddenly left the Land, and went into
Flanders, to his Ant Margaret: at which though the King was offended, yet was
he resolved to apply Lenitive salves, giving order to his Agents in those parts
to offer him his Pardon at the very First; so as he would return; knowing that
Despair in banished men begets thoughts in them of Little service to Themselves,
and of much Trouble to Others. It succeeded according to his imagination; for
accepting the Pardon, he returned to England; the Duchess not opposing him
therein, either for that she thought his Genius inferior to the Kings; or else
that she was satisfied that in Perkins public Confession, her name was
concealed. But arrogant and proud natures (such as was that of this Earl)
leading men into Dangers, brought this man at Last to his Ruin, under Henry the
Eighth.

The match between Prince Arthur, and the Infanta Katherine of 1501
Spain, which had been treated on for the space of seven years; received this
year its maturity; the King her Father sending her, nobly attended into
England. The tediousness of this negotiation proceeded from Both parties: for
the two Kings being endued with equal wisdom, before the establishing of the
Affinity, would see each others fortune established, the Infanta had for her
Portion 200000 Ducats, without any covenant of Restitution either to Her
self, or her Family; and in lieu thereof she had set out for Ioynture, the
third part of the Principality of Wales, of the Duchy of Cornwall, and of the
County of Chester: and if she should come to be Queen, she was to have as much
as any other Queen before her had had. The marriage was solemnized in Paul's:
the Bridegroom was Fifteen years of age; the Bride, Eighteen. The Festivals
being ended, they returned to keep their Court at Ludlow in Wales; but their
abode there, was but for while: for the young Prince died there, on the second
day of April in the year 1502. five months after he was married; having
lived 15. Years, 6. months, and 13. Days. Nothing more is to be said of him:
Authors write nothing of him; since he lived not long enough to be known. All
that is related of him, is: That being naturally given to study, he was learned
beyond his Age, and the Condition of a Prince. This his death did much molest
the King: the Infanta Katharine was left upon his hands; and if Prince Henry
were to marry Another wife; he was to find out a second Jointure; a thing
repugnant to the merit of State, and to his Frugall honor: whereupon,
resolving to marry him to the same Katharine, he wrote concerning it, to Spain
and Rome. Ferdinand was contented; but he met with Difficulties, in procuring a
Dispensation from the Pope, and in getting his Sons Good Will; who, though he
was then but Twelve years old, had courage enough to oppose his Father therein
a Good while. It proved an unfortunate marriage: miserable Changes, and
Troubles arose from the Divorce which thereupon ensued.

The marriage of the King of Scots with Princess Margaret, which was treated
of some years past by the means of Bishop 1503
Fox, was celebrated this year; which together with the preceding year, was
remarkable for two Marriages, and two Deaths: for the marriage of Prince
Arthur, and his Death, the Preceding year; and for the marriage of the King of
Scotland, and the Death of Queen Elizabeth, this Present year: the Queen
dying in Childbed; and the Child dying likewise, not long after. This marriage
was published in London, in January, for which Te Deum was sung in Paul's, and
great Joy was had in the City. The cause of this long Dclay was by reason of
the Princess her tender age; who at the Consummation thereof, which was in
August, was not above Fourteen years old, Besides; many of the Counsel had
opposed it; for if the Second Prince should dye as did the First, England was
to fall under Scotland; which they much abhorred: but the King cleared this
opinion; for if it should fall out as was proposed the clean Contrary was like
to happen: the King of Scotland would live in England; the Lesser being to give
way to the Greater: which would not have happened, if this Princess should have
been married to France, and the succession should have fallen to her Children.
Every one being satisfied with this reason, there was not any that opposed it.
And this is the match which has given the lawful succession of England to the
Kings of Scotland, which has happened without any opposition, in these our days.

The King now finding himself at quiet on all sides, his Neighbors being his
Friends, and having extinguished all Intestine broyls, he fell to be exceeding
avaricious: so as those virtues, which placed before in a Benign aspect, gave
forth happy beams, were by the Interposition of this vice found to be in the
shadow of a prodigious Eclipse. Princes meet easilier with fitting Ministers
for what is Bad, then for what is Good. Henry met with two pernicious
instruments who Nourishing Covetousness in him, did Increase it in him by
unjust means, and by drawing blood from the Purse-veins of Thousands of
Innocent people. These were Edmund Dudley, and Richard Empson; the first being
borne a Gentleman, did by his wickedness obscure the splendor of his Blood:
the other, being the Son of a Shoo-maker, made good, that from Filth and Mire,
nothing but Pollution and Stinch can be expected. They were admitted to the
Court, being both of the same profession, Lawyers; and they by alike means got
alike Preferment, being Both made Privy Counselors: so as their Ambition
being satisfied, their Avarice remained to be so likewise; which is the drift
of Ambition, in Basely-minded men: but because Ingenuity and Justice, though
they may nourish the moderate, cannot satisfy the Insatiate, they would not
make use of Them, but of their Contraries; that from the Rivers of Gold which
sprung up in the Kings Coffers, they might derive some Channels of the same
metal, which might run into Their Purses, at the charge of King and Subject.
The Laws, at that time, either by reason of the Civil Wars, or through the
Negligence of the Judges, were either Forgotten, or grown out of Use; and the
Patrimony of the Crown, enjoyed by many, by virtue of Long-Leases, being
become almost as good as Feesimple to the Enjoyers, moved the King to look into
them; and these two, who were thought the most Learned, and best Practiced in
the Law, were by him chosen to this purpose, and had full Authority given them.
But there was never any so Good or Wholesome Law, which has not been profaned by
Malice and Corruption. They raised up many Accusers; and the Accused being put
in Prison, and there kept (the time appointed for their justification, being
maliciously Prorogued) they were enforced to Purchase their Liberties, with
Great sums of Money: Others, being cited by Them, or their Delegates, the
usual course of Law not being observed, were Condemned; they abounded in False
Witnesses, and False Pretenses, whereby they impoverished the wealthy: Wards
was not suffered to enter upon their Lands without vast disbursements: Such
Judges, as, swayed by Integrity, resisted Their wills, were either better Taught
by Imprisonment, or Ruined by Amercements: Laws which had at sundry times been
enacted by Parliament, more for Terror then Punishment, (a great part whereof
were Repealed too) were without any manner of remission, rigorously put in
Execution: in so much that the King himself, being a little before his Death
told by conscionable men; what Injustice had been done; he left it in his Will,
that such as had unjustly suffered should have Ample Satisfaction made them;
Which he Himself ought to have done in his Life time; but did not: for when
Covetousness has once taken possession of a man's heart, the Offices of
Conscience have no Power; the Law of the Flesh which opposes the Law of the
Mind, does captivate us under the Law of Sin; where withal being ensnared we
cannot get loose again. I recount not All that is written to this effect; I
will only relate One passage, which may serve for all the Rest. The King as he
came to Henningham, a Castle belonging to the Earl of Oxford (one whom he was
wont to make use of, both in War and Peace) he was there received and feasted
with much Splendor, and Magnificence: all that, by whatsoever title, held any
Land of the Earl, came at that time to give their Attendance on him; of the
which many were Gentlemen, many Yeomen: these and the Gentlemen likewise, wore,
all of them, the Earls Blew-coats, and Feathers in their hats, of the Earls
colors: for the rest of their apparel, they were all richly clad, every man
according to his Condition: when he King came forth, they placed themselves in
two Rows, making a gallant show in the Great Hall: He, looking wistly upon
them, asked the Earl, if they were All his Servants? who smiling, answered; No;
for then he should be thought an Ill husband; but that they were all his
Tenants, who were come, upon this occasion, to wait upon His Majesty: the King
having thanked him for his Good Entertainment, said unto him; that the Report
of hospitality came short of the Truth; but that he could not suffer his Laws
to be broken in his Presence, without resenting it: and that his Attorney
general should talk with him about it. The Lords were then to give but a
Certain number of Liveries, or Blew coats; which Law whether it stand still in
Force, or no, I know not. This business cost the Earl Ten Thousand Pounds (for
for so much was he compounded with the Kings Officers) besides the Charge he
had been at, in his Entertainment, which was very Great; and which might have
Freed him from the Punishment he was run into, had the Kings Gratitude been
answerable to his Covetousness, in emptying the purse of one of the Noblest
and Best deserving subjects he had.

We related a little before, how the Earl of Suffolk returned to England,
where he tarried all this time, the King treating him Well, and he not having
any occasion of Discontent: but, were it his own Misfortune which would be his
Overthrow, or the Expenses he had been at, at Prince Arthurs marriage which had
dipped him deep in Debt, or the Hatred he bare unto the King, which could not
suffer him to see him reign in Peace; he fled away into Flanders with his
brother Richard; to the Peoples great Discontent, who thought that certainly
some great Disorder must ensue thereupon: many of the Nobility being ill
affected, and which already began to propose New hopes unto themselves, and to
plot Insurrections. The King being accustomed to such like passions, and
seeming as if he minded it not, wrote to Sir Robert Curson, Captain of Hammes
Castle, that, feigning to Rebel, he should pass over into Flanders, to the
Earl of Suffolk. He, forsaking his Command, seemed to steal away; he went
unto the Earl, who with much joy welcomed him; discovering unto him all his
Designs, and who they were that sided with him in England. Curson advertised
the King hereof; who imprisoned them, putting the Chiefest of them in the
Tower: amongst which, William Courtney, Eldest Son to the Earl of Devonshire,
(who, having married Katharine, Daughter to Edward the fourth, was become his
Brother in Law) William de la Poole, brother to the Earl of Suffolk; the Lord
George Abergavenny, Sir James Tirrell, Sir John Windham, and Sir Thomas Green.
The issue was; William Courtney was detained Prisoner during the Kings Life:
not for that he was Guilty, but, for that, having Relation to the house of
York, he might serve as an Instrument, if there should be any design of
Troubling the State. William de la Poole was likewise kept Prisoner though not
so strictly: Abergavenny and Green were set at Liberty: Tirrell and Windham
were Beheaded: the rest of inferior quality were Hanged. This was that Tirrell,
who had his hand in the Death of the two Princes that were smothered in the
Tower, by commission from Richard the Third. He came to too good an end; Fire
and Torture was not sufficient for him: but he died not for That, 'twas for
this Last fault that he suffered death. The Earl was grieved at the punishments
his Accomplices under went; and at the Imprisonment of his Friends and Kindred,
who were fallen into this captivity, not for any Fault of His, or of Themselves:
but merely out of Suspicion; for otherwise they should have walked the Same way
as did the Rest. The King, that Cursen might be the better believed, and that
he might the better pursue His Directions, made him, together with the Earl and
Others to be proclaimed Traitor at Paul's Cross; but he having no more to do in
Flanders, returned almost presently into England; where he was well liked of by
the King, but not by the People. Such offices though of Trust, for what
concerns the King, are in respect of Others, Detestable. His departure much
abated the Earls courage, who now saw he was Betrayed: he therefore
endeavored to procure help from Foreign Princes; he went into Germany; from
thence into France: but his Labors proving Vain, he returned to Flanders,
under the protection of the Archduke Philip: which was the Last of his
Misfortunes.

Many Laws were made in the Parliament, which was this year called; and an
Entire Subsidy was given unto the King, who had 1504
no Need of it: he being Rich, Frugall, without War; having no cause to Demand
it, nor to have it Granted him. Not herewithall contented, he required a
General Benevolence, which brought in Much money unto him; as did also the
Alteration of the Mint; for certain coyns: the City paid him 5000. Marks for
the Con firmation of their Liberties; and Ferdinand paid him Last payment of
the Portion: so as all other Casualties, too long to number up, being
comprehended, his Extraordinaries did much surmount his Ordinary Revenue;
wherewithal his Coffers being filled, he might have been contented: whilst
his subjects, who wished him of Another humor, could not alter the Constitution
of his Nature.

He was much troubled at the Death of Isabell, Queen of Castile, 1505
which happened in the month of November, the year Before; by reason of the
Resemblance that was in the Government of their kingdoms, between Ferdinand and
Him; both of them reigning in the right of their Wives. And though he never
admitted of his Wives Right (having obtained the kingdom under the title of the
house of Lancaster, having won it by the Sword, and having it Confirmed unto
him by Act of Parliament) yet he could not but fear, that Ferdinands yielding
up the Crown to his Daugh ter, might by way of Example prejudice Him, and make
for his Son Prince Henry: the case was the same, and the formerly alleged
reasons were of no weight, in comparison of Natural Extraction; which is to be
preferred before all other claims. Isabell left the Administration of the
Kingdom to Ferdinand during his life; though Jane were the immediate Heir which
distasted the Archduke Philip, for being become King of Castile in right of
his Wife, he thought he was injured, as being reputed unfit to govern without
his Father in Laws Assistance, and Superintendencie: he pretended the Mother
could not dispose thereof to the Prejudice of the Daughter; that the Authority
of Predeces sors ended with their Deaths; else seldom or very Late, would
their Heirs come to Reign: that the Reverence and Respect to Parents, did not
amongst Private men, bereave their Children of enjoying their Private
Inheritances; much less ought it to do so with Kings, for what concerns
Kingdoms: that the government of Wives, and all that belonged unto Them,
belonged to their Husbands, when they were of Years, as He was; the interest
of Children that are Heirs, belonging to their Fathers, who are nearer in
degree unto them then are their Grandfathers. He took offense at his being
Forbidden to come into Spain, without his Wife, as knowing the cause thereof:
for he kept her from the sight of All men, the more to conceal her Infirmity,
(which was a spice of Lunacy) so as it was believed he would not Bring her
along with him, lest her weakness being made Known, might not give force to
the Will: wherefore he resolved to carry her thither the sooner, pretending to
take Possession of what Nature, and the Laws, had given him: for having
married upon hopes of that Kingdom, it would be imputed to Rechlesnesse in
him, if it now being Fallen to him, he should not obtain it. But, Ferdinand,
having called together the States of Castile, and caused the Will to be read,
Ioane was sworn Queen, and Heir to her Mother; Philip was sworn King as her
Husband; and Ferdinando as Administrator. The Queens disabilities sufficiently
appearing, they entreated Ferdinand, that He would Govern them as he had done
Before; in which respect All the Kingdom concurred, except some of the
Nobility, who had greater hopes under a New Young King then under an Old and
Ancient one; who being sufficiently informed of their Humors, knew they were
given rather to Tyrannize, then to be contented with Respect from their
Inferiors. These Disputes caused great jealousies on all sides; specially in
Ferdinand: for, Philip following the advice of his Father, the Emperor, he
feared lest if they should happen to corrupt Consalvo (as they had endeavored
it) they might take from him the Kingdom of Naples: wherefore he recalled 2000
Spaniards from that Garrison, under pretense of sending them into Africa, and
making the Germans be dismissed, he weakened the forces thereof, that he might
have the less cause of fear. Amongst diverse rumors which were spread abroad
to discredit him with the Castillians, one was; that he intended to marry
Ioane, who was thought to be Daughter to the last King Henry who had been a
Competitresse for the Crown with his Wife Isabel; that so he would undertake
the Defense of Her claim, which formerly he had oppugned, and thereby make
himself King of Castile: which he never Dreamed of, It Is true; he pretended the
claim of a Father, to whom the Guardian-ship of children under Age belongs, of
which number though Ioane were none, in respect of Years, yet in respect of her
weakness, she was to be accounted one: The very self same thing was granted
in the Kingdom of Navarre, to John, King of Arragon, this man's Father. The
rumor of his intention of marriage was not vain; for he Himself had caused
it to be spread abroad, from the first Beginning of the distastes, that he
might thereby mortify Philip; for in case she should have any Sons, he
deprived him of all the Kingdoms wherein He had any Propriety, especially of
Naples: He pretended likewise to the Kingdom of Granada, or at least to Half
of it, having gotten it with his Wife. These conceits proceeded from the
Dislike he had, that during the Life of Isabel, Maximilian and Philip should
make Peace with the King of France, without His knowledge: and that of the
Articles, These were some; The Marriage of Claudia, Daughter to Lewis, with
Charles, Philips eldest Son: the investing of Milaine upon Lewis and his heirs
male, if he had any; and in case he should have none, upon Claudia and
Charles; and if Charles should happen to Dye, upon Philips second Son, marrying
with the same Claudia, so as willing to pay them with the same coin, he, not
making Them acquainted therewithal, made his Peace with Lewis; who gave unto
him for wife, Germana de Fois, his sisters Daughter, and by title of Dowry,
renouncing unto him that part of the Kingdom of Naples, which belonged unto
Him; with this obligation on the other side, that Ferdinand should pay unto Him
700000 Ducats within ten years, for the expenses he had been at in that
Kingdom, and should give in Dowry to his Wife 300000. more. A business which
incens't Philip, and made him undertake his voyage into Spain.

The first contentions begat both Fear and Hope in Henry: Fear; that the
Emperor, Arch duke, and King of France joining in League together against
Ferdinand, he should not only fall from being Arbitrator between those Princes
as till then he had been: but also (to boot with the Prejudice that might
redound to Him, by their Confederacy) from the advantage of his friendship
with Arragon, which now being left Single, might be to his disadvantage: Hope;
for that intending to marry Ioane, Queen of Naples, Dowager to the last
Ferdinand, he believed, that Kingdom would be assigned over to Him, as a
Feoffee in Trust; whilst the other two were in contention. There were at this
time in Naples two Dowager Queens, the Mother and the Daughter; both of them
but young. The first, who was sister to Ferdinand King of Arragon, was second
Wife to Ferdinand the first, King of Naples; by whom she had this second
Ioane, who was both Wife and Ant to Ferdinand the Second; for she was sister,
by the Fathers side, to King Alphonso, who was his Father. Hereupon Henry built
his Design. He sent Ambassadors, by way of Complement, unto them Both; and
Katharine, who was Widow to Prince Arthur, being Niece to the One of them, and
Cousin to the Other, he gave unto them Letters from Her; giving them particular
Instructions to examine the conditions well, and see what, by virtue of such a
Match, might be hoped for in that Kingdom: from thence they were to pass into
Spain, as they did. But when they returned, he gave over that Design, having
learnt that she lived merely upon Pensions from Ferdinand, without other Lands
or Jurisdictions. The advantage he got by this Embassy was, to know how he
might keep the friendship both of Ferdinand and Philip, and to free himself
from fear of Philips joining with France, and of the Marriage of Charles, the
Son of Philip, to the Daughter of Lewis; as was formerly a greed upon; for
Ferdinands Secretary had secretly treated with the Ambassadors, that the
Princess of France being taken from Charles, contrary to the First
capitulation, that she might be married to the Duke of Angonlesme, heir
apparent to the Crown; their king should give Mary, his Second daughter, for
wife to Charles: A business which he was much pleased with, for Charles was the
Greatest match of Christendom, being to inherit all that his Father, Mother,
and Grandfather possessed: and to this purpose, he endeavored as much as in
himlay, that there should be no breach between them in the future. Amongst so
many of their relations, he liked not to hear that Castile desired Philip, and
detested Ferdinand, by reason of the great Taxes and Impositions which he put
upon them; it being his Own very case: so as, upon the like reason, he thought
his Son might be desired and He abhorred; the grievances imposed by Him, much
surpassing those of Ferdinand.

Those who took part with Philip did much importune him to come into Spain,
before Ferdinand should be settled in his pretended 1506
Administration; but he desirous to come thither unexpected, took shipping
together with his Wife, in January, when 'twas thought he would not have taken
his journey till the next Summer. He had hardly quitted the coast of Flanders,
when, taken by a sudden tempest his Navy was dispersed upon the coast of
England: he himself lighted upon Waymouth, and was brought a shore in a little
Frigate: His Counsel would not have had him landed, since by loss of Time, he
would miss of his design of coming unexpected unto Spain; but he being
sea-sick, would by all means come on shore. The great number of his ships had
given an Alarm to the Country, so as many troops of armed men came to
Waymouth, not knowing what his Fleet was, nor what he would do: Sir Thomas
Trenchard, and Sir John Carew, who were their Leaders, understanding the reason
of his coming, desired him that he would rest himself in Sir Thomas
Trenchards house till such time as they might advertise the King of his being
there; to which he gave way, being certain that otherwise they would not have
suffered him to depart. When Henry heard hereof, he sent the Earl of Arundell
by way of complement unto him, and to let him know that he Himself would
presently come and visit him. But Philip, fearing, lest, if he should wait his
coming, his stay would be too long, resolved to go Himself to Henry, making
his Queen come at leisure after him. He was met six miles from Windsor, by
Prince Henry; and One mile from thence, by the King: who received him with all
terms of Honor and Friendship. He treated with him of the marriage of their
Children; and of his own marrying with Margaret the Dowager of Savoy, Philips
sister: he renewed all Confederacies made between them the preceding years
which were Then made with him by the name of Archduke Philip, Duke of
Burgundy; Now, by the name of King of Spain: they had better success for the
English, then had the former, especially in the Fishing-busines; at which the
Flemmings were much offended: he with much ado obtained the person of the
Earl of Suffolk, who lived under the protection of Philip; Henry knew so well
how to persuade him, by passing his Word he would not put him to Death, that
Philip sent for him into Flanders: the one desiring to have him before the
other departed; and the other not to depart, till he were arrived; that it
might be believed he had been Enforced to deliver him up. As Soon as the Earl
was come and put in the Tower, Philip departed England; and was received in
Spain, without any manner of Resistance; Ferdinand totally quitting the
Government to him: but he enjoyed it but for a while, for he dyed soon after.
The Englishmen will have it that his death was Prognosticated by the Fall of a
golden Eagle, which standing upon the top of Paul's steeple, was blown down by
the same wind, which drove him into Waymouth, and brake down a sign in the
Churchyard, wherein was a black Eagle. Ferdinand, being called for, and
entreated by the Kingdom, returned to the Government thereof; this Death of
her Husband, having so oppressed the fancy of the Queen, his daughter, as she
was never after good for any thing: not without suspicion, that her Father did
not greatly endeavor her Recovery, that so he, of Himself, and without
Trouble, might manage the Scepter of Spain.

The Earl of Suffolk being in the Tower, Henry was now freed from all manner
of Trouble and Molestation: so as betaking himself to Domestical affairs, he
sent Thomas Wolsey (he who was Cardinal, and of so great Power under Henry the
eighth) to Maxi milian, to treat of the marriage with the forenamed Dowager of
Savoy: but it took no effect by reason of Henrye's indisposition of health
which shortly ensued. The marriage of Charles King of Spain, with Mary,
daughter to Henry, stirred up some jealousies in Ferdinand: for though He was
the first that had mentioned i^, yet his Son in Law being Dead, and Charles
being come to the Crown, he feared he should meet with Two Competitours in the
Government; with Maximilian as Grandfather, and Henry as Father in Law; which
though neither of them dreamt of, yet did He fear it: but This match had no
better effect then had the Other; the tender years of the young couple, and
the alteration of affairs in following times broke it quite off. The
expectation hereof, nevertheless, made Henry live contented the little while
he lived: for having married One of his daughters to the King of Scotland, and
the Other to the King of Castile, Duke of Burgundy, he thought himself more
safe, then if his Kingdom had been compassed about with a wall of Brass. He,
the mean while, began to draw toward his End: the Gout, a disease more
Troublesome then Mortal, was the Forerunner of a Distillation, which falling
upon his Lungs brought him into a kind of Consumption, which perceiving he
began to give himself totally to Pious Works.

He set all Prisoners at Liberty, who were in for Debt of not above Forty
shillings, he himself paying the Creditours: he 1507
gave Alms in greater measure then he had done formerly: but though he felt
great Remorse at the daily complaints made against Empson and Dudley, for their
Oppressions; yet did he not seek to Remedy them. His Conscience and his
Covetousness wrought contrary effects in him: many for very slight causes were
troubled in their Estates and in their Lives: one died in Prison, before his
cause was heard; another, being imprisoned for denying to pay what Contrary to
the Laws he was adjudged at, was not let out till Henry the eighths time; and
then Empson was put in his place.

To make good the usual custom of promising obedience to 1508
New Popes, he sent Sir Gilbert Talbot with two other Ambassadors to Pope
Julius the second, which he had not formerly done, though he were created in
November 1503. They pressed much for the Canonization of Henry the sixth; but
could not obtain it for the reason formerly given, in the life of Edward the
fourth. Being dismissed by the Pope, they carried the Garter, and Robes of that
Order to Guido Vbaldo, Duke of Vrbin, whose Father, Frederick, had likewise had
it. This Prince sent into England to be installed for him, according to the
Institutions of that Order, the Count Balthazar Castillion, he to whom the
noblest Courtiers owe so much.

The finishing of the Hospital in the Savoy, was one of the last of Henry's
actions: he would not alter the name of it, this fabric having been, in
former times, the habitation of Peter of Savoy, Uncle to Eleanor, the Wife of
Henry the third; by whom Peter of Savoy was created Earl of Richmond: but he
resigned the Earldom, when Savoy fell, by inheritance to him. The
Lancastrians lived in this house, and King Henry converted it into an
Hospital. Besides this, he built three Monasteries for the Conventuall Friars
of Saint Francis order, and three for the Observantines of the same order in
diverse places. When he knew he he must die he disposed himself thereunto. He
had lived almost all his time in Troubles; but always with prosperous and happy
success: he found the Kingdom involved in Civil wars, he left it in a settled
Peace: his subjects, who were impoverisht by the past disorders, were
(notwitstanding his Taxations) by reason of his good Government, become Rich:
he did not only free the Crown out of Debt, but left it rich in Treasure; his
son found in Richmond house, a Million, and eight Hundred Thousand pound
sterling; so as he was thought the richest Prince in Europe. He granted out a
General Pardon; and ordered by his Last Will and Testament, that all such
moneys should be Repaid as had unjustly been levied by his Officers.

He died at Richmond, the twenty second day of April, in the year of our Lord
1509 and was buried, by his wife, in the sumptuous 1509
and stately Chapel built by Himself, in the Abbey Church at Westminster. He
lived two and Fifty years, and Reigned three and Twenty Years, and Eight
months. The Children which he left behind him, were Henry the Eighth his Heir
and successor in the Crown; Margaret, Queen of Scotland, from whom the Kings of
Great Britain do descend, and the Prince and Princesses of the Electorall
house Palatine; and Mary married to Lewis the twelfth, King of France; by whom
having no issue, she, after his death, married Charles Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk, by whom she had Henry Earl of Lincoln, and two Daughters, Frances
and Eleanor. The Earl dyed without issue in his Fathers lifetime: Frances was
married to Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, and by him had the Lady Jane Gray; who
being married to Guilford Dudley, son to the Duke of Northumberland, and
constrained to call her self Queen, was beheaded in Queen Mary's time: she
had by him moreover two Other daughters, Katharine, and Mary; who dyed without
issue. Eleanor was married to Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland, by whom she
had a daughter, named Margaret; who was married to Henry Stanley, Earl of
Darby, and had by him two sons; Ferdinando and William: both of them, in
succession one of the other, Earls of Darby. Earl William dyed this present
year 1642. leaving his son James behind him, to inherit his Honors and his
Estate.

The End of the Second and Last volume of the Civil Wars of England, between
the two Houses of York and Lancaster.
FINIS


