The Divine and Spiritual AMBASSADOR Described in a SERMON Preached at the
VISITATION AT ALISBVRY, Com. Bucks. October. 14. 1662.

By J. B. B. D. sometimes Student of Christ Church in Oxford, and now Rector of
Cheddington in the County of Bucks.

Tertul. de praescrip. adversus haer. cap. 43. Vbi Deus ibi metus in Deum, qui
est initium sapientiae. Vbi metus in Deum ibi gravitas honesta, and diligentia
attonita, and cura sollicita and adlectio explorata, and communicatio
deliberata, and promotio emerita, and subjectio religiosa, and apparitio
devota, and processio modesta, and ecclesia unita, and Dei omnia.

LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for Robert Pawlet, at the Bible in Chancery
Lane, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1663.

I have perused this Sermon, and think it fit to be printed.

Geo: Winton.

IMPRIMATVR.

Martii 18. 166^/^. M. Frank. S.T.P. R.P.D. Ep. Land. a Sacr. Domest.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN Earl of BRIDGEWATER. My most honored Lord and
Patron.
My Lord,
IT is now somewhat above fifty years from the day that this Rectory was
bestowed on me, by the singular bounty of your ever admired and most honorable
Grandfather, then our great Lord Chancellor. And ever since I have enjoyed it
with much comfort, under the favorable aspect of your Noble Father, and the
gracious influence of your own continual goodness. In which regard I am sorry,
that I could not so freely and frequently gain the opportunity to tender my
bounden duty and thankfulness; partly, by the crossenesse of the Times;
partly, by the crasynesse of my age; and partly, last year, by the appointment
of our late and learned Diocesan requiring me to preach at his Visitation; and
yet when the time came he confessed, that by the multitude of an Old man's cares
afterward he had quite forgot it. So that I was put off till our next
visitation; upon the fourteenth of October last, at Alisbury, then to preach
this sermon. Where it was so respected by the greater part of the Auditors,
that they desired a copy thereof, whereby it might be further published. Upon
which motion I made some pause, till I was more encouraged by some judicious
persons of higher rank and reputation, to get the sermon longer lived, then the
short time, wherein it was uttered. Wherefore seeing it is now come to the
Press, I humbly implore the shelter of your constant favor and goodness, for
leave to present and dedicate it to your right Honorable Patronage and
protection; in token of the fidelity which I owe to our gracious God, loyalty
to our dread Sovereign, charity to our native Country, zeal to the glorious
Gospel of our blessed Savior, and peace of his Church, with the duty and
devotion, in which I am deeply engaged daily to seek and sue for the health and
happiness of your excellent person, with your virtuous consort, and all the
Noble branches of the hopeful Family; toward whom I rejoice in all
concurrences of dutiful correspondence, still to continue,

Your Lordships most humble Orator, and thankful Servant. John Bird.
Ched. this March 26. An. Dom. 1663.
THE Divine Ambassador
2 COR. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ.


IN giving audience to Ambassadors, great expectation is a great prejudice to
gracious acceptance, Sen. ad Lucilium ep. 60.
unless that when we have said all that we can, we be interpreted to signify
more then we have utterance to express. Of other Ambassadors we find, that
carping Pytheas, to disparage the Athenians, said thus, Like as we presume,
that there is some sickness in the house whither we see Asses milk brought, so
must that town of necessity be sick, whither the Ambassadors of Athens go:
Plutarch. Demosthen.
and that loyal Demosthenes retorting his comparison, made answer, Indeed, they
brought such milk where there was need to recover health: And even so the
Ambassadors of Athens went to heal those that were sick. But, certainly, both
are more co^fortably verified of Christ's Ambassadors; whithersoever they go we
may presume that there is some sickness; for this is the terminus a quo, and
therewith also we must hope, that there are good means and medicines of
recovery; 2 Cor. 5 18, 19.
for this is the terminus ad qu^m, for which they are sent, even to reconcile
those that were enemies, to save those that were lost, to heal those that were
sick, and to restore life unto those that were dead. This is the main scope and
sum of all our ministration.

And now, then, we are Ambassadors for Christ.

2. If Timanthes had this facility in painting, that the spectators, by marking
the carriage of his hand, understood more of his workmanship in the rasa tabula
of their own imagination, Lips. cent. 1. ep. 13.
then he was able to express in the picta tabula of his imagery; why may not I
likewise hope, that my auditors, by experience of Gods mercy in the cure of
their own misery, will grant me the felicity to conceive higher of the worth of
our embassage, then I have any faculty to explain it? Origin says of the
Spirit in the Canticles, that he does that often through the whole Song, which
unless a man feel it in himself, being touched with a Divine Dart, H^mil. 1.
in Cant.
by the spirit of Love, he can hardly be able to understand; and so, though our
Apostles meaning cannot be worthily expressed by any less then some Apostle; yet
(methinks) it may be conceived of you all very fitly, as if he had accourted
his Disciples in plainer terms, to this purpose.

3. It Is a wonder, that any of you should be in Christ, and not prove a new
creature, ^ Cor. 5.17.
when old things are past, and all things are become new Even God himself, who
said to Israel, Mal. 3.6.
I am the same, I change not, and therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed,
is now, in the tokens of his love, so new to us, that we may say of him, He is
not the same, he is changed; and will not ye sons of Jacob, be reconciled? His
old love to the Jews went only thus far, that he compared himself to a Lord,
who having let forth his Vineyard, Luke 20.14.16.29.
would demand fruit of the husbandmen, the first, second, and third time, by
his servants, yea last of all by his only beloved Son; but when they should
not only cast away the Servants, but also kill the Son and Heir, that then he
would no longer brook them, but destroy those husbandmen, and give his vineyard
to others* Thus his old love to the Fathers would not endure them any longer;
but to us now, when he has been already murdered by our sins, he seeks and
sues afresh after he is risen again. Which may be attractive, to move those
that are dead in sin, to rise again and embrace his motions, with all love to
himself, and reverence to his Apostles, and Ministers.

It were much for a King, sufficient in power, wisdom, and goodness, to cast
his affection on a foul, foolish, poor, peevish, and Rebellious Beggar; more,
to offer himself, by diverse Messengers, to be thrice ask't unto her;
Chrysostom. ad. popul. Antioch. homil. 48.
more after double and triple denial, to come himself in Person, giving his
blood to be shed, and his body to be slain by her and for her. But after so
deadly feud, with a most cursed death, still to rise, and return with more
love tokens accumulated and annexed to his former suit; this is (...), able,
not only to silence the tongues of the wisest men, but also to dazzle the eyes
of the greatest Angels. And yet now he does thus woe and sue to you all;
inwardly by his Spirit, outwardly by his Word, continually by all the Prophets,
Apostles, and Ministers thereof. And now then we are Ambassadors for Christ.

4. So that, if I, had time, I might amplify this circumstance of time with
that of Moses. Deuteronomy. 4.32
Ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day
that God created man upon the earth; and ask from the one side of Heaven unto
the other, whether there has been any such thing as this great thing is, or
has been heard like it. But lest in hoising sail too high upon this adventure
I should suffer in portu naufragium, by incurring the blame of the long-tongu'd
Roman Praetor, Pogg. facet.
who coming Ambassador to Florence, was so tedious in rehearsing the
occurrents of his journey by the way, that the last hour of his Commission was
almost expired before he came to his Errand.

I shall briefly in this my message propound unto you these three parts,
wherein the Apostle offers unto your observation, first the Persons sent in
this message, even other men like your selves; now such we are.

Secondly, the message itself, even a solemn and honorable Embassage; now
then we are Ambassadors.

Thirdly, the Person, from whom, and for whom, this Embassage is sent; no Son
of Perdition, but the Son of Righteousness with healing under his wings;
M^lac. 4 2.
even the brightness, of his Fathers glory, which is Christ in you the hope of
Glory; Coloss. 1 27.
now then we are Ambassadors for Christ.

In the first of these, you may note Gods gracious condescension in sending to
you not after a stern or stately manner, by means of his dreadful Angels,
but familiarly, by the ministry of men, James 5.17. 2 Cor. 1.4.
subject with you to the same passion of afflictions, and therefore to the same
compassion of affection in all things. Now these we are.

In the second, your felicity in being sought unto, not as fugitives, or
subjects, by common Messengers, or Nuntio's of mean note: But as free States,
by Ambassadors of singular account, and authority; now then we are
Ambassadors.

In the third, our fidelity in standing bound to execute this Function, not for
any Son of man, the Lords anointed, but for the only begotten Son of God,
Psalm. 45.7.
the Lord himself, anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ

6. Wherefore of these, while that I deliver my message to point at some
Character of our Divine and spiritual Embassour, Jeson ad ver. Jovin. lib. 10.
resolving with the ^ather, that I shall offend none that are good, quia eos
peccati conscientia non remordebit: I hope, I shall not need stand long to
entreat your patience and mod^ration. It Is the Law of Nature and Nations, to
afford Ambassadors the patience of Audience. And if any think much to yield me
so much, the God of Nature and Grace enjoins them more, upon the Allegiance
they owe to his pleasure, and their own peace.

According to our Apostles argument, in this place, that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself, not inputing their trespasses unto them,
who has committed unto us the word of reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5.19.
and now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, So that first, we are to begin
with ourselves to consider, who We are here meant by the Apostle, saying; Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ.

7. We, as magnificent Princes in their benefits and favors consider not so
much the deserts of their favorites, what they are worthy to receive, Sen. de
ben. lib. 2. ep. 16.
as the dignity of their own fame, what is sit and honorable for them to give;
so the Lord here chooses us, and looks upon you, seeing that we here are
meant with a double exception. First, generally, We, even men, excluding the
Angels; which may seem very strange, why the Lord should so forget Majesty, as
to sue to you with misery by messengers of your own metal, rather then by his
honorable Courtiers, the Angels of Heaven. Is it unkindnesse, that the
ministration of condemnation might be more glorious, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8.
being delivered by Angels, then the ministration of righteousness delivered
by men, your fellow creatures? Or is it weakness, because he stands in need of
our assistance to help him out at a dead list? Far be it from us to impute
either of those unto him, who is all-sufficient. For spiritual ends he makes
use of corporal means, as a stately Potentate commanding for attendance, and
not as a weak Agent, going a begging for assistance; for your convenience and
congruity, not for our efficacy or condignity (as Saint Bernard says
excellently) it is his indulgence of his rich mercy, In Cant Sermon. 5
not his indigence of our poor Ministry.

8. Indeed he gave the Law by Angels, but their apparitions were always so
fearful to our nature, corrupt and conscious of its own unworthiness, that the
people seeing it fled, crying to Moses for meaner Ministers; talk thou with us,
and we will hear, but let not God talk any more with us lest we die. And the
Lord answered, They have well said, Deuteronomy. 5 27.28.
all that they have spoken. Whereupon Moses prophesied shortly after, Deuteronomy
18.15. Acts 3.21.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you from among your brethren,
like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things. Which though it be intended
principally of Christ, yet it must be extended, secondarily, to the whole
sesies and succession of all his Prophets and Ministers to the worlds end. John
13.20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
So that he who contemnes such weak instruments, and murmures against God,
because he is not taught with those glorious apparitions and visions of Angels
under the Law, betrays himself, in pride, to be a miserable miracle; not
unlike that foolish wanton in the Poet, Ovid. Metam. lib. 3.
who desiring Jupiter to come to her in the same glory that he used to
accompany with Juno, was in all her bravery consumed and brought to naught.
Which danger might well be avoided, if people would remember, how God, in his
goodness toward them, has deputed us to supply the room of his Angels. And
now, then, we are Ambassadors for Christ.

9 Again, more particularly, we are here intended, who are the Apostles
successors, Hieron ad C^^eanum.
even the right Reverend Bishops, with those that are regularly constituted and
ordained by them to this ministration. Touching which, an old Statesman has
left this sound note; Non est ars sui juris, cui precarium fundamentum est; Sen
ad ^u^ilium ep. 89 Tert. de preser. cap 20. Vinc. Li^. ca. 16
and an old Churchman has given us as good a rule, Omne genus ad originem suam
censcatur necesse est. So then, though some admirers of their own devices brag
much of their own antiquity, Vbi semper fuit plus admirationis, quam
utilitatis, plus famae, quam experientiae; yet we, that know their extraction,
Intus and in cute, are sure that they crept up at first precario, entreating
toleration in that straight, which was then made a case of necessity. And now
that they, who at first were content to be held tolerable, should mistake this
for the incomparable Helena, or rather implacable Bellona of the age, for which
they ought to strive, tanquam pro aris, and focis; and thence take upon them to
prescribe against all Churches for intolerable, that are not clipped by their
mould, this is such a strain of ingratitude, that can hardly be digested by
any who have well concocted the Antidote of Saint Austin, Confess l. 10. c. 28
Nemo quod tolerat amat, et si tolerare amat; No man loves that which he
tolerates; although he loves for a while to make a virtue of necessity in
tolerating it, yet he could be glad, fairly to be freed from that necessity
which binds him to such toleration. Luther, Calvin, Zanch. Beza, Scultet.
Moulin.
As diverse of the more learned, judicious, and moderate, among themselves, have
confessed, not only in their private conferences, but also in their public
writings. John 10 1.
And therefore seeing that we desire, endeavor, and frame our selves by
entering in at the door, and not climbing up any other way, to retain the
Ancient, Regular, Canonical, and Apostolic discipline of the Church; Now then
we are Ambassadors for Christ.

10. Ambassadors, There is no need to hunt after any various acception of the
word in the Original, or other languages, as savouring of curiosity more
Critical then Christian. It is enough to our purpose, that the Romans gave this
Title of Legates especially to two sorts of men. Both to those that were
Lievtenants, and Assistants to their Consuls and Generals, in their Provinces
and Wars; and to those that under assurance of Public Faith, established by
the Law of Nations, were employed with dignity to represent their Lords
persons, and with authority to negotiate with foreign Princes and States
touching their affairs.

11. So that here, by the way, both these are sufficient, to stop the passage
and proceeding of those arreptitious Enthusiasts, 1 Reg. 13.33.
who delighting in Jeroboams Reign cared not for this, but whosoever would
fitted his hand, and he consecrated them, and so they had leave to make
themselves, of the lowest of the People, Priests of the highest Places. It will
be in vain for such hastings to run with Ahimaaz before they are sent and have
any true tidings to bear, 2 Samuel 18, 27.29.
though some demure carriage may cause some of them to be mistaken; (as he was)
for good men bring good tidings; yet their own tongues (like his) will in the
relation argue them capable of nothing, but making a noise and tumult. Of which
also seeing themselves at length, with Ahimaaz, are driven to confess that
they know not what it means, all who know what our Apostle means by such as
turn aside (...), 1 Timothy 1.6.
may well relinquish them with those, That would feign be counted Doctors of
the Law, 1 Timothy 1.7
and yet they underst^^d not what they spoke, nor whereof they affirm. What
will it avail them with the Gibeonites, to work wilily, and to counterfeit
themselves Ambassadors, with old sacks on their asses, and wine bottles, Josh
9.4, 5, 6.
old, rent, and bound up, with old shoes, and clouted on their feet, with old
clothes on their backs, and all the bread of their provision dry and moldy, as
though they came from far? seeing that when they are found, upon due
examination, to be only mere conterranean Natives, of the illiterate pragmatick
sanction round about; wise and faithful J^shua may surly judge them to be fitly
dealt with, Josh 9.21 27.
in being allotted the task of the Gibeonites, with which some of their trades
have made them already so long acquainted, that it needs not here any further
enlargement, but only to give them this Item, That when they ranted it at the
highest, none of them durst then take upon him the office (...) Legate, either
in Martial or Mercurial expeditions, without special commission from the
General, notwithstanding their pretended rare and excellent parts. And must the
office of Christ's Ambassadors be prostituted to the lust of every one's
intrusion, when we are taught by his Word and Example, Heb. 5 4, 5.
That no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron; And so Christ also glorified not himself, to be made an high Prist,
but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? Apoc
9.11.
Surely this was the craft of the cruel Angel of the bottomless pit, the great
Apollyon, to turn all things upside down, by crossing and confounding all
orders; and no good could be thence expected from the hands of such deforming
Reformers; ^ap. l. 1 ep. 7.
where (as the blessed Martyr complains) Contractare praesumunt pudorem
incesti, fidem perfidi religionem prophani, divina terreni, sancta sacrilegi.
But seeing that (as his Master has noted) the most exercised in the Scripture
cannot lose any thing by them, Nisi vocem in contentione; Tertal dep^script
cap. 17.
nor get any thing by them, Nisi bilem de blasplematione, we leave them who
have no leave of God to usurp this calling; and so passing by the former kind
of Legates in war, pitch upon the latter of those in peace, which more properly
concern us, who, by Gods blessing, are now therein Ambassadors for Christ.

12. Where, of these again, we have evident resemblance in two sorts of
Ambassadors, much made of for transacting the high mysteries in Princes Courts.
Either such as are sent for some rare and extraordinary affair, with most cost
and state, being to return again as soon as that business is dispatched (like
to whom we suppose those extraordinary Prophets under the Law, and those
miraculous and immediately gifted persons in the primitive days of the Gospel)
or else such as are called Ligiers, and Legates a latere, 1 Cor. 14.12.
who lie longer by it, upon all occasions, during the pleasure of their Prince;
like to whom we conceive the high Priests, with the rest of the Priests and
Levites under the Law, and since under the Gospel, Hier. ad Euagr.
the Apostles and their successors, even Bish^ps, with their Presbyters and
Deacons, in their Cathedral and Parochial employments.

13. Yet so, that herein we find this difference, that worldly Pirnces have
always used this proviso, Nec a subditis, nec ad subditos recte mittuntur
legati. They that are sent by a Prince into his own Dominions are called
Commissioners; and those whom Subjects send to their Sovereign Lords, are
called Deputies; but to vouchsafe the title of Ambassadors to any such, was a
name so harsh to the stately ears of worldly States, that Tully counted it, not
only foolish lightness, but open madness. Insomuch, Phil. 5, and 6.
that in his Philippicks, he sharply reproved the whole Senate for debasing the
majesty and severity of their Order, in sending Ambassadors to Mark Antony,
forgetting that a rebellious subject was to be enforced by legions, rather then
to be entreated by Legates. Nay, some Christians now adays will scarce
vouchsafe Ambassadors to Princes, who are not of so supreme and sovereign state
as themselves, but they call their Messengers rather by the name of Agents.

14. Which the more I consider, the more I admire, and stand amazed at the meek
and shumble condescension of our gracious Master, Christ Jesus, Lord, what is
man, Psalm 8.4.
that thou art mindful of him? or the so^t of man, that thou so regardest him?
to grace him with thy Ministry, like Aoth, that (...), Hieron. aduers. Jovin.
lib. 1.
to be thy Ambassador on both hands, in prayer from men to thee, in preaching
from thee to them. In both these respects, thou have made us somewhat superior
to the Angels, and little inferior to thy Self. O that men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.
Psalm. 107.
Christ himself has noted concerning others, that there is no wise King going
to war against another King, Luc. 14.31, 32
that fitteth not down first, and consulteth, whether he be able with ten
thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand. Or else,
while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an embassage, and desires
conditions of peace. And does he himself, who is able to come against us with
more then twenty thousand thousand chariots of Angels, Psalm. 68.17. Job 9.3.
now send his embassage to us his unworthy vassals, desiring conditions of
peace with such vile rebels, who are not able to meet, and answer him with one
for a thousand? Is this embassage then (my brethren) for his own sake, because
he fears us, or is it not rather for our sake, because he loves us? even for
your sake, doubtless, it is written, that ye should ever remember to accept and
stand to the covenant and conditions that we bring from him, Gal. 4.14.
receiving us, as the Angels of God, even as Christ Jesus, and whenever we
tender unto you his word of reconciliation, that ye receive it, not as the word
of men, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works in them
that believe. For this is here more fully warranted to be expressed further in
the next word. And now then we are Ambassadors for Christ.

15. For Christ, as the worthiness of the Prince that sends them makes much
for the dignity of his Ambassadors; so the weightiness of the business adds
more to their acceptance and entertainment with the Prince and people to whom
they are sent.

Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ both ways.

First, We are Ambassadors sent from Christ as the primum mobile in this
motion, even in his room and stead: As if the Apostle had said, according to
Chrysostom, what Christ himself should and would have done, if he had been
present, that he has sent us to undertake, In locum.
and execute in his Room. And as God the Father before entreated us by his Son;
so Christ his Son now entreats you by us, as unfeignedly and effectually as
if himself spoke our language with his own mouth, Psalm. 45.1
and subscribed to every sentence with his own hand and seal.

16. Again we are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 4.5.
as the end and object of our Embassage, to entreat and negotiate on his
behalf, and for his business. As who should say, according to St. Ambrose,
Since our Parson is in Heaven, In locum.
we are his Vicars upon Earth; to seek and sue him out a wife, even the Church
his spouse, 2 Cor. 11.2.
to present her as a pure Virgin unto Christ. And that not upon whatsoever
conditions fancy her, or humor us, to do every own whatsoever seems good in
his own eyes (as if we had neither God nor King to reign over us) but upon
those which himself has either explicitly appointed, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Jud. 17.6.
Jud. 21.25.
or implicitly approved in the grand commission of his revealed Word. By the
Civil Laws, as it is high Treason, Tul. pro ^ox. Ros. Amer.
for an Ambassador to go beyond his Commission; saying, I have done wiser and
better then I was commanded; so its impudent rebellion to come short of his
Commission; saying it was foolish and needless to do so much as I was enjoined.

Against such presumption histories are fraught with examples, not only of
diverse Princes, Bodin. de repub. lib. 3.
that have punished their greatest servants, but also of some parents who have
abandoned their dearest Sons for such contempt. The old rule in Policy is now
out of date, and shall have no room with God in matters of piety; mitte
sapientem, and nihil dicito.

The Lord our God has not sent us, Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.
as the Emperor Tiberius sent Drusus, nullis certis mandatis, ex reconsulturos;
but for the matter of our Embassage, he has butted, and bounded our commission
within the compass of his written word: Accordivg to that strict and fearful
charge, Vin. li^. cap. 12 Gal. 1.8, 9.
not only including the whole chorus of his Apostles; But also reaching to all
the company of his mighty Angels, by that impossible supposition; Though we, or
an Angel from Heaven preach any other Doctrine then what we have received, let
him be accursed.

If we, for our own ends, take upon us to pick and choose in Gods Commandments,
which we will promote, and which put down, Isa. 33.7.
the Angels of peace on earth will be driven for this to weep biterly, But if
we be faithful in our charge, without partiality, to have respect to all Gods
Comandemements; the Angels of Glory in Heaven will be ready to rejoice and
greet us, with their right hands of fellowship, against all affronts and
opposition, that therefore now we are Ambassadors for Christ.

By which it is evident, how far we ought to be from the insolence of those,
which under this claim of Christ's Ambassadors, for their own pride, and
primacy in temporals, play the parts of the deepest plotters, and politicians:
intelligencers and incendiaries; seducers and subverters in the World; when as
in the mean while, for spirituals, they mind nothing so much as by purgatory
traditions of addition, and expurgatory indices of substraction, to m^r all.
But why should I tear the time about those that are absent? I am called hither
for you that are present; wherefore in Gods name, give me leave, for Christ's
sake, in this mixed Auditory, to do my Errand to you all, according to your
several callings and this our special Commission; wherein now we are to
approve our selves Ambassadors for Christ.

18. First then, to the Right Reverend Fathers in Christ, our wise and worthy
Governors, here may be a motion very necessary in these days, wherein none
are sent for Ambassadors to Earthly Princes, save those that have past through
the highest degrees of desert and dignity. O that they would admit of some
caveat touching those, who are so far from honoring this calling in others,
that they like it in their own children who affect it far worse; unless it be
(...) under this color, hoping to beguile God, and blind the eyes of the
World, with two other kinds of Embassage long a go scorned and scoft at by
the Romeans.

19. They had a kind of Embassage called honesta Legatis, because it was
bestowed on those to whom they would not offer the utmost disgrace of an Exile:
and this Court trick, Tacitus says, Annal.
that Crafty Tiberius put upon the despised Agrippa, sending him away with the
title of Ambassador, that he might rid him far off from the Court. Now we may
meet with many parents, in these days, which though they have little holiness,
are yet full of this kind of honesty. When their Children are stammerers,
dolts, blind or lame, in body, or, which is worse, in mind, they will
purchase them some place of profit in the Church, to rid themselves, and the
Country, from being further troubled. But who is so blind that sees not; as
when the Romans sent three Ambassadors into Bithynia, whereof the first had
his head full of gashes, the second was lame of the Gout, Pl^^ in Catone
and the third was a fool: that wise Cato well mocked them for sending an
Embassage, that had neither head, nor foot nor heart; even so Solomon teaches
us to slight and shake often these; He that sends a message by the hand of a
Fool, Prove 26 6, 7.9
is as one that cutteth off the Legs, and drinks iniquity. The legs of the
lame are not equal; so is a parable in the mouth of Fo^les. Nay, as a Thorn
goes up in the hand of a drunk k^^d (who knows not when it came in; nor how to
get it out) so is a Parable in the mouth of Fools.

20. The other Kind of Embassage was called libera Legatio, because it was
conferred on persons of quality, that they might be more highly respected
abroad under this Commission and suffered more freely in foreign Countries to
follow their own purposes under favor of the Law of Nations. So too many
worshipful Patrons, and some Country misers, with right of presentations, when
they have many children (for whom they will by all means prole what they can)
are very greedy to thrust some of them into the ministry, like as Stratocles
and Dr^moclidas were sent in rempublicam tanquam ad auream messem, Plut
depraecept. reipubl^ger.
not so much for God as for Mammon's sake, that they may engrosse all the
Church-preferments in their gifts, which they will not by any means impart to
others (though far better deserving) but under the double crime of Bribery and
perjury. A course contrary to the Law of Nations, ut qui^ sua reiergo legatus
esto; contrary to the Law of Nature, quid enim turpius, Tull. de de Leg. lib.
3. Isaiah 56 11. Tull. ubi supra.
quam sine procuratione senator, legatus sine mandatis, sine ullo reipublicae
muner^; contrary to the Law of God, who protests that he will by no means
endure those that look after their own interest, every one for his own gain
from his quarter. Wherefore, as the Roman Orator writes, that he would have
taken this kind of Embassy utterly away, if he had not been strongly opposed,
but for all that, he brought it from perpetual, to be only annual: So it were
to be wished, that our Governors would curb and cut short such Ambassadors
among us which undertake this Charge, but seldom do discharge it, unless it
be for their own ends; Phil. 1.15.16. 1 Timothy 3.5.
some for constraint, others for contention: some for envy, others for
ambition: some for lusty liquor, others for filthy lucre, but few of a ready
mind, for Christ's sake. Whereas he should be the Alpha and Omega; the first and
the last, the author of our Commission, and the end of our calling, withal our
carriage therein. And therefore now we are Ambassadors for Christ.

21. I come next to you my dear Brethren and Colleagues in this charge. You see
how God has graced you by calling and counting you serviceable, putting you
into the Ministry; O let it be your study, to seek especially for that double
qualification commended from the highest Court of Faculties, Mat. ^4.^5.
that herein wisdom and faithfulness may meet together; Chrisost. de sacerd.
l. 2
that discretion and Devotion may shake hands; that learning and labor may
kiss each other. Bern in Cart. ser. 23.
You must be wise, lest you be deceived your selves, and faithful, lest you
deceive others; you must be discreet to temper your devotion, and devout, to
make use of your discretion; Hieron ad Ocean
you must be learned, that you labor not at random, and laborious, that you
learn not in vain. All these must agree at all times, but especially in
providing matter, Pr^v 10 26.
with premeditation, before you do your Embassage; in ordering it with
moderation when you utter it; and confirming it with resolution, when you have
ended it

22 Concerning the first, ye know that the days are now past, and the persons
dead, to whom it was said, Mat. 10 19. Mat. 13.52.
dabitur in illa hora; but we are compared to the good householder, which
brings forth out of his treasury things new and old; Jer. 48.10. Maat. 12.36
being subject otherwise, not only to the curse of him, that does the work of
the Lord negligently, but also to the confusion of him that for every idle word
which he shall speak in any place, especially out of the Pulpit, Hieron. ad
Fabiol. de vest s^cerd.
shall be sure to be called to a strict acco^mt at the day of judgment.

Now then if the judicious have well noted it for a singugular token of great
love and reverence in the famous Demosthenes, and Augustus Caesar, toward their
people, Plut. et Senetan.
that though they could both speak handsomely extempore yet they would never
propound any thing in public to their Auditors without due premeditation; nay,
if Christ himself had not at every turn his mouth always open, Mat. 5.1.2.
but as deliberating in silence on that which he was to speak, when his
Disciples came to him, being set in the mount, then he opened his mouth and
taught them; what a token of neglect, scorn and irrevence must it be both to
God and men, when some that are scarce fit to speak in public with
premeditation, dare openly proclaim their own rashness, with this evil and
idle protestation? That they have had little or no time to provide themselves;
many of their trim points came into their heads since they began to open their
mouths, and yet they can do thus many hours upon any day. Hieron. Pammich ad.
versus error. Joh. Hirros.
Quasi ingenium ^n numerato haberent; adeo ut de cunctis ecclesiae
quaestionibus uno linguae rotatu sole clarius coruscarent. (Besides that such
ex-tempore Declaimers, by making too much haste, are prone to stumble at any
error, and when they have fallen upon it, some become broody to hatch and
hurke, it up into a heresy; Is not this, in the Fathers language, dissipare
bona Domini, Bern. de consider.
potius quam dispensare? marvel not that I call this evil, because it does
other Ambassadors this injury among all their auditors bred in ignorance, that
hence they are ready to condemn all for drones, and dumb dogs, who are not so
sudden and slippery-tongued as these men.

I say further, that it is idle, because it does themselves this justice among
the learned, to answer such glorioso's, with the magnificat of Apelles to the
Painter who boasted of his picture, Plut de educan. liberis. Sueton in Julio.
Laps. epist. 65.
that he made it on the sudden, Video tacente etiam te, sed id miror, quod non
plures tales tanto temporis spatio pinxeris. In these affairs we must not brag
of Julius Caesar's expedition, Veni, vidi, vici, lest we be tuckd up with Julian
Caesar's exprobration, (...), vidi, legi, damnavi. And lest we be compared, not
only to Demades Bagpipes, which being puffed up with wind, as soon as they are
pressed break forth presently into squeaking; Epist 61.
but also to Lipsius Chameleons, which because they feed on no solid meat, Plu
Apoth lac.
but on the empty air, are still found with open mouths, always gaping Quid
tanto dignum fe^et hi^ promisso^ hiatu? unless it be to carry home from their
Auditors no better answer then either that of the Seniour King Agas to the
Ambassadors of the Abd^rites and Perinthians; tell your Masters, that as long
as you pleased to speak, so long I thought good to hold my tongue. Or that of
the French King to a talkative Italian, Pluta^. Ibid.
Venis de natione verborum; or that of the Spartans, to the tedious and
needless speech of the Samnites, that they had forgot the beginning, understood
not the middle, and disliked the end. How much better were it for us to stand
in awe of the Lords own warning? Jer. 23 28.
the Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my word,
let him speak my word faithfully. That we may not be, 2 Cor 2.17.
(...) but that as of sincerity, but that as of God, in the sight of God we may
speak in Christ; Pl^t de multit. a^ni^.
let us in our preaching strive to equal the care and diligence of the acurate
Xeuxis, in his painting; when being challenged for being so long about it, he
made answer, that he was therein the longer, that his works might last the
longer. So let us be studious to bestow the longer t^me in delineating and
portraying our works, that they may be more ponderous and powerful to make the
deeper impression, ^ Cor. ^.2, 3.
and last the longer, engraven, not in tables of wood, or stone, but in the
fleshy tables of men's hearts. And so these shall prove our letters of credence,
known and read of all men; that therein now we we are ambassadors for Christ.

23. Next, it is meet to add thereto Moderation, in addressing our selves
discreetly, according to the circumstances of time, place, and persons with
whom we have to do. Inrespect of the time, as it is a caveat in State Affairs;
Plut. in Demo.
Mentitur legationem, qui nomen legationis non praefert suo tempore. So
Demosthenes said well to this purpose, We give them not swords, or weapons of
war to manage, but words. Of which Solomon tells us fitly, that a word spoken
in due season, Prove. 15.23. and 25.11.
is like apples of gold in pictures of silver. To make us careful in observing
the opportunity of the time, in taking heed of their miscarriage, who despising
that of the wise, Eccles 22.6.
Musica in luctu importuna narratio, long always to run counter to the time,
turning fasts into festivals, and festivals into fastings, as if they were led
with the spirit of contradiction against all that comes under the injunction of
superior authority. Lest we be slighted, as the Trojan Ambassadors were in
coming to bemoan the Emperor Tiberius for the death of his son, when he took
it to be too late, and therefore jeered them with this answer, Sueton in Tiber.
That he much more condoled with them for the loss of their excellent Citizen,
the valiant Hector, dead indeed many hundred years before any of them were
born. Whence we should pray unto the Lord God from morning to morning, Isa 50.4.
to give us the tongue of the learned, that we may know how to speak a word in
season to him that is weary.

24. Again, in respect of the place, though it be true, that the place honors
not the man; Agesilaus.
yet it was the saying of a great and witty King, That a wise man will be
careful to honor his place. The neglect whereof has been noted to have
blemished some, otherwise, of worth, that being called to do their message ad
clerum, who deserve non modo scripta, sed etiam sculpta, have marred a good
tale in telling it, feeding them with such indigested crambes and coriated
crudities, as were unseemly to trifle with young schoolboyes, much more
unworthy to tire out judicious men of ripe age and profound understanding. And
again, being sent ad populum, who require (as Saint Austin says) Nutritoria
potius, De catech. rud. c 15. and lib. 2. de advers legis Sueton in octav
Tacit. annal lib 1.
quam peremptoria; or (as S. Bernard) Apta, non alia, have either foiled them
with the strong-lin'd extravagances of Antonius, Quae homines mirentur potius,
quam intelligant; or else puzzled them with the curious impertinent digressions
of Tiberius, fuller of dignity then of fidelity, standing upon nothing so much
as the duties and defects of our Ambassadors, when there have been none of that
function there present to hear them, but only the leering crowd of their
popular Corona, to laugh at them in their sleeves, for seeking to curry favor
with them, by picking so many holes in their own coat. Which makes some of
them suspect, if there were a convention of Christ's Ambassadors in presence,
that they would not be so bold As the Spartan said to the Theban, which upon
the victory at ^^^ctra glo^ed against his contrymen, Plutar. incert. Apo^h.
saying, Where now are the Spartans? friend, all that hear you may be sure;
that they, after whom you are so inquisitive, are far enough off, else you
durst not be so audacious. Wherefore it were good for such hot-spurs to be
sust^^mminated, that they may slack their careere, and listen more soberly to
the sage vote of Radolf Lord of the C^m^^nes, to such an Ambassador at
Florence, when he told him that he was a Doctor of the Civil Law, Pogg. ^a^^t.
which ^e had studied ten year, Quam velim (inquit) ut saltem annum,
discretionis studi^ vacasses If this be their man^e^ to cast away to their
flocks that portion so out of season, which might be fitter for their Pastors;
when such one sha^^ come to his trial, 2 Timothy 2 15.
it is to be doubted, he will hardly be able to show himself approved unto God
a workman that n^ed not be ashamed, (...). For indeed, what discretion can
there be, in seeking to teach those, that being absent are no hearers? if thou
tell other men of my faults behind my back, this (says S. Jerome) is not to
salve my malady, but to satisfy thy own malice. Rather, if I be to blame, tell
me in private; Or if we need public reprehension, Ad Ruster. M^nach.
and there be any Rabshakeh that will needs be shooting his bolt, in squibbing
at our persons, or quibling upon our names; as Hezekiahs Courtiers said to that
messenger, so let him give us leave to entreat him; Speak, 2 Reg. 18.26.
we pray thee, to thy servants in the language of the learned, for we
understand it, and not any moaning tone or dialect of the vulgar, In au^ibus
populi, sive super, sive circa muros.

25. Furthermore, in respect of the persons; Hieron. Oc^an^ de unius u^oris
vire.
Caput artis est, d^cero quod facias. As a wise Ambassador considers, whether
he be sent to a Monarch, or to a m^xt and popular State; so it highly concerns
us to be very careful and circumspect in regarding the quality of the persons
with whom we are to treat. That we fall not into the folly of Demochares, Sen.
de ira lib. 3. cap. 23.
for h^s rudeness firnamed Parrh^sites, who being kindly entreated by King
Philip of Maced^n, left him with that request, which was so far unworthy the
Majesty of a King on his throne, that it was unfit for a malefactor in the
prison. 2 Samuel 12.2, 3, 4.
When we should rather follow the modesty and mannerlinesse of the Prophet
Nathan, who did not so grossly tell David, Thou art the man (as some imagine)
but first he prepared him by a p^rable very pertinent, more deeply to resent
the horror of the crime in a third person, that finding himself therein
mortally guilty, as being deprived of all excuse, Acts 16.25.
by unseigned humiliation in a short confession, he might obtain speedy
absolution. According to our Apostles words of truth and soberness, to the
noble Festus, and King Agrippa, in this exercise the holy men of God have gone
before with diverse patterns, so to behave our selves in the Church of God, that
if there come in those that are unbelieving, 1 Cor. 14 24.
or unlearned, they may be convinced of all, and so the secrets of their hearts
may be made manifest; that falling down on their faces, they may worship God,
and report of us, that God is in us of a truth. And thus far again, we are
Ambassadors for Christ.

26. These conditions being observed, it remains, that we be resolute with all
correspondent conversation to make good every branch of our Doctrine and
Exhortations. Tull Or^tor.
If other Orators extol their action in the elocution we should much more set
off and endeare our elocution by the operation of the things which we speak for
the best flowers in our Rhetoric. As those who have learned, not only by
experience in the light of nature, Sen. ad lucil. epist. 6.
quod homines amplius oculis, quam auribus credunt, adeo ut longum sit itey
docendi per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla, but also much more by the
Eternal Word, when he came to be the true light of the world, Aug. confess.
lib. 10. cap. 4.
and yet accounted it a small thing, si loquendo praeciperet, nisi and faciendo
pr^iret. Herein our Apostle behaved himself so, that he became Boni domini
bonus samulus, Salv. de providen. lib. 3.
and singularis magistri praclarus imitator, qui in vestigiis Domini sui
ambulans patentiora quodammodo and expressiora pedibus sui^ fecit Domini sui
esse vestigia.

And herein it shall be happy for the Ambassadors of Christ, Senec. ibidem
epist. 53.
qui vitam docent, quandoquidem cum dixerint quid faciendum sit, ipsi faciendo
probant. When the man of God can take his Auditor^ by the hand, leading them on
with his own practice, to every good word and work; without check of
Conscience, Phil. 3.17.
taking up that compellation of this Apostle; Brethren, be followers together
of me, and mark them which walk so, Idem. epist. ^6.
as ye have us for ensample. Ille officium suum implevit, Eusebius. hist. l 6.
cap. 3. Ruff. hist. l. 11. cap.
qui and cum videa^ cum and cum, andias, idem est. As Job found it his comfort
Job. 29 11. when the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me,
it gave witness to me, like devout Origin, who went on carefully with the
character, that this was he, qui tale habuit verbum, qualem habuit and vitam;
qui, quae decuit egit. So shall we with excellent Nazianzen, teach multa
verbis, plurajexemplis; especially, if we continue constant, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, without starting aside for any
temptation; as the grave Fabricius demeaned himself in his Embassage to King
Pyrrhus; when he was tried with sufficient provocation to be seduced, Plat. in
vita.
both by hope and fear; and yet answered, neque heri aurum tuum, neque hodie
bellua me movit.

27 Whereas on the contrary, non est animus ejus in recto, Sen. ibid. epist. 34.
cujus dictis acta discordant; that man can never be a fit Ambassador to go,
either from a Prince, or to a people, whom he has highly offended, by
prevaricating in the cause which he has undertaken chiefly to plead for. Woe,
then to those that bring nothing to this calling, but (as St. Ambrose tartly
styles it) that nomen inane, De dlg. sacer. cap. 3. De consider. lib 2.
et crimen immane, which St. Bernard calls monstrous, in sede prima, and vita
ima, of a theological profession, stained with a Diabolical conversation. Which
moved censorious Salvian to cry out, quid est dignitas in indigno, De provid.
lib. 4.
nisi ornamentum in luto? even no better then a jewel of gold in a Swines
snoute, or a pearl in the head of a Toade; perdit authoritatem decendi, cujus
sermo opere destruitur; Hieron. oceano.
he shall never be able to persuade the Kings Subjects to obedience, who as
soon as his message is ended, betakes himself to the practice of open rebellion.

When his black works cast the foulest blot upon his fair words, men believe,
that he speaks, Tacit Annal. lib. 11.
magis in speciem adornata, quam ut penitus sentire crederetur. And they are
ready not only to censure him in private, that he is of the mind of
Metrodorus to King Tigrants, Plaut in lucullo.
exhorting to one thing as a pulick Ambassador, and wishing the contrary as a
private counselor; but also to check him openly, as Melanthius did Gordias;
Idem in precept. c^njug.
art thou the great news-monger to inquire after the peace of other Nations,
who have no care to keep peace between thy self, thy wife, and thy Servant,
only three in thine own house. So unto the wicked, says God, what have thou to
do, to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy
m^^^h? Psalm. 50.16.17.18.
Seeing thou hate to be reformed, and casts my words behind thee. When thou
saw a thief then thou consented'st with him, and have been partaker with
adulterers. Thou sit, and speak against thy Brother, and by thy debosht
conversation, no less then by thy profane communication, thou have caused a
public slander to be cast upon thine own Mothers Sons. Ecclus. 34.23.24.
When such an Ambassador shall pull down that with one. hand, which he built
with the other, what profits it. When such a messenger, while he is in this
house shall with one breath bless God, even the Father, and as soon as he is
gone out, turn himself with another breath to cursing and sw^^ring, to
libelling and lying, to defaming and slandering, not only against his peers,
but also princes and governors, who represent the authority and Majesty of
God, Genesis 2^.22.
whose voice should the Lord hear? Jacobs soft voice with Esau's rough hands
may easily beguile dim-sighted Jsaac; Joh 6.70. Luke 23.44.
but they shall not so blind his eyes who can discern his own Apostle for no
better then a very Devil, though he salutes him at length with the fairest
token of friendship, Plut in camil^ Val. Max lib 5 cap 6 Prove 13.17.
betraying the son of man with a kiss; which may be a principal reason, that
as Fabius Ambustus breach of peace was the overthrow both of himself and most
of the clan of his name and kindred; so Solomon assures us, that a wicked
messenger falls into mischief, but a faithfu^l Amb^ssa^^r is preservation.

28. Wherefore it will be a good preservative against this mischief in
ourselves, Val. Max. ubi supra.
to make good the constancy of the ^^^lene Brethren, who chose to be buried
alive, rather then to ^a^^e of any thing in their power, committed to their
trust: Which we shall rectify the better, by seconding it with the resolution
of our Apostle, as more canonical; though we hear of no thanks for our pains,
but bonds and afflictions abiding us; Act. 20 23 24.
Yet not to be moved with any of those things at all, that not only in our
doctrine, but also in all our doings and sufferings; neither to count our life
dear unto ourselves: so that we may finish our Course with joy, and the
mini^try which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of
the grace of God. And so his Spirit shall testify to our spirit, that which
the Apostle here tells all the World; now then every way we are Ambassadors
for Christ.

29. Whence I proceed unto you, our Dearly beloved Auditors, 1 Timothy 5.17.
and disciples of the laick communion, to require at your hearts and hands,
that double honor, of Reverence and maintenance, which beseems the
Ambassadors of the Lord of Hosts, even the King of Glory.

It Is written of the Spartan Ambassadors, when they came to the Court of the
Tyrant Lygdamis, (...) Ap^th. (...)
who commanded some about him to give them notice, that he was not well at ease
to grant them Audience, that they answered; Atqui non colluctatum advenimus,
sed collocutum. And so whatsoever some pretend, to stand aloof in state, and
keep us off at a great distance, yet may they soon be at ease to give us
audience, if they will consider, how we come not as Champions, to quarrel, or
combat for our selves: but as Ambassadors, to confer, and treat with them for
Christ. Unto whom you are all every way so bound, that you may not think it
sufficient only to let us alone, without hurting, Amos 7.13.
or hindering us to do our message at all, as Amazias dealt with the Prophet
Amos; and as Francis the French King rejected the Herald of the Emperor Cha^l^
the fifth, Bodin de repub. 15.
seeking to stop our mouths by threatening otherwise presently to stop our
breath.

Much less may ye malign or murder us, when we have delivered our message;
Mark 6.27.
as Herod more bloodily cut off John Baptist. And Helena the Queen of Russia
most barbarously abused the Ambassadors of the Prutenes, Bodin. Ibidem.
burying the first company alive, causing the second to be b^rn'd in a common
fire, and making the third all drunk at a Feast, to be slain more savagely by
the sword. Till that at last being driven into despair with the horror of her
outrage, she drowned her self with all her malice in a wh^rlepool. 1 These.
5.13. 1 Timothy 5.17.
But ye must esteem us very highly in love for our works sake, counting us
worthy of double honor; and that not only while we are in the pulpit, but in
all places during life.

30. It is not with us, as Polycratidas with his associates, being demanded,
whether they came as public or private persons, answered, as public, Plut.
ub supr.
if we obtain our desire, and as private, if we receive the repulse. But every
repulse, every reproach, every spiteful afront cast upon us redoundeth to the
contempt and dishonor of our great Lord and Master Christ Jesus who is so
sensible thereof, L^uk. 0.16.
that he has taught us plainly; he that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. Therein no doubt expecting no less respect from you toward his
Ambassadors, then which your selves are wont to yield the common Ambassadors
of worldly Princes; Tull. de Autusp. respond.
concerning whom it is a received sentence; Jus Legatorum, cum hominum prasidi^
munitum sit, tum etiam d^vino jure esse vallatum

In so much that the calling of such Ambassadors is so honorable among us at
this day, that by the custom and courtesy of the land (I take it) he that has
once been employed therein, takes place above all men of his rank, which have
not done their Prince the like service. Why should I recount so many noble
families in this Nation, raised to great estates for their dexterity in these
expeditions? when by the law of nature, the very Heathens have highly honored
them, though they came from Countries of which they were sure, that they wished
them no good.

As we read especially of the Persians, how they made all the Grecians wealthy
who came to them in this kind, heaping such honorable presents and
preferments upon them, that the Athenians condemned Timagoras to death for very
envy, Plutar^ in Pi^opid.
rather then for justice, seeing that (as the Historian justly notes) they
patiently endured Epicrates, a drudg and tankard-bearer, when he did not only
confess, that himself had taken gifts of the King of Persia, but also profess
openly, that he would make a new law, as they did yearly choose nine officers
to govern the City, that so they should choose nine of their poorest and
meanest Citizens to be sent Ambassadors to the King of Persia, that they might
return home joyfully enriched with his gifts. Nay, Val. Max lib. 6. c. 5, 6.
which is more notable, the Romans dismissed some with honor and rewards,
which had been somewhat too busy in tampering against their own state, and
Ambassadors. To move you, Velut si eg^egi^ reprendas corpore navos. Hoc. l. 1.
Sat. 6. 1 Cor. 4.1.
though some slips should escape us unawars, yet not to take all advantage or
the worst exception against every wart, or mole in a fair body; but with more
tenderness of conscience to attend our Apostles counsel; let men so esteem
of us, as the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the Mystries of God, lest
the evil spirit rise up in judgment against all that deny us our due honor,
putting them to silence with that often repeated confession; Act. 16.17.
These are the Servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
Salvation.

31. The consideration whereof might procure among all men greater favor, and
respect toward us; if it were not for a pack of shuffling Momes, and
Malcontents, who cannot abide to hear these things spoken; but presently they
cry out, that this is a common place in which every one can be eloquent for
himself, and we may spare our labor of telling them that which they know
already, so well as our selves: May not this fitly call to mind that excellent
pill to purge their choler? Horat.
Tacitus pasci si posset corvus, haberet plus dapis, and rixa multo minus,
invidiaeque; It Is to be feared, most of them wish our silence in this subject,
not because they intend to give us our dues without asking, but that they might
carry them all away, without any noise, or check, or control; not only in
private contempt and disgrace to our persons; but with open violence to our
estates and patrimonies. Which some think more cleanly carried by the
three-headed Cerberus of multiplied impropriations, customs, and prohibitions;
But to make up the mess, a fourth sort have outstript all, pretending most
against Popery, and yet deluded with a Popish design of reviving Abbas Joachims
Monastical conceits, Platina. Et Guliel. de sancto amore. In test. verit. temp
p. 468. Et M. Sulli. de de Monach. cap. 8. fol. ^4.
for propagating their Apocryphal Evangelium aeternum, to evacuate all the
canonical Oracles of God. Which device has drawn them aside to associate, and
bandy together in a direful League, to weary, and weed up all, both root and
branch, Moses and Aaron, Kingdom and Church, Law and Gospel, all together to
be feld and stockt up at one blow.

Howsoever some endeavor since to excuse, and daube up the matter, that they
never intended it should have come to that pass; yet the more indiscreet, and
unadvised they; who pressed the plot so fiercely, Jud 12.6.
for the Shibboleth to try their Brethren, and expose them to the spoil; when
they should have built up Jerusalem, Psalm. 47.2.
and gathered together the Outcasts of Israel, never forecasting that it must
needs have proved thus in the event, if as Histiaus sewed up the garment, Gr.
Nazlan. ad versus Julian Orat. 4.
so Arist^goras might have had leave to put it on, and liberty to have marched
forward under the Banner of self-denying ordinances to subdue all unto the
bondage of their self-seeking Yoke.

32. A strange adventure, though sometimes privately attempted, Hieron ad
E^agr. and quaest. Heb. in Genesis
yet never openly abetted, since the Grace of God first saluted the Nation.
When the Hebrew Doctors hold this tradition, that all the first born of Noah
from Shem to Aaron managed the Sacerdotal with the Sovereign power, when Saint
Jerome has left us this observation, De quast. Hebr. in Par^l.
that in the Books of Kings, the Sons of David, the Priests, are recorded in
the Chronicles to have been principle at the Kings hand; and both (says he) to
the same sense; for their nobility and priority in the sight of the King. When
Jeboash King of Judah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his
days, 2 Reg 12.2.
wherein Jehoiada the Priest was at his hand to instruct him. When Joash the
King of Isra^l came down to the prophet Elisha sick to death, 2. Reg. 13 14.
and wept over his face, saying, oh my Father, my Father, the Chariots of
Israel and the horsemen thereof; therein confessing that the Prophet had been
to him a father indeed, procuring more blessing and comfort for him, then he
could find in any of his own chariots, 2 Reg. 13.16.
and horsemen. At which time also when he was directed to put his hand upon the
bow, Elisha put his hands upon the Kings hands; thereby pointing, as with the
mark of a hand in the margent, to this memorable note; that the Kings hands are
never so powerful and prosperous, as when they are assisted with the Prophets
hands though weak in body, yet strong in the Spirit; when the cruel enemies of
the Church in their ^^rest persecutions, have made strictest inquisition
against Bishops, as the surest Pillars and supporters of the right and sound
Faith.

Because they cannot be ignorant of this custom always prevailing in the
Church; Vine. Lir. C^m. monit. cap. 1.
ut quo quisque flore^et religiosior, eo premptior novellis adinventionibus
contrairet. At whose subversion all Novelists still aim, and march on with the
same grudge, who strike most at these, that with Vitellian fury they may feed
their own eyes, Sue^on. in Vitell^.
in seeking to make a Covenant with us, on the condition of Nahash the
Ammonite, that they may thrust out the right eyes of Gods heritage, and lay it
for a reproach on all Israel. 1. Sam. 11.2.
When the wisest Emperors and Kings, ever since they owned Christ, have
acknowledged his Ambassadors for their ableest agents and assistants in all
their weightyest affairs; especially where Church and Kingdom are so involved,
that the one seldom thrives without the welfare of the other. Nay when the
first General Counsels were never tainted with the depth of Satan's policy, in
plotting reformation, Apoc. 2.24.
to blast and blow away the whole order of Prelacy out of the Church; Hieron.
advers. Lucif.
but they held it a sure and supereminent power against all sects and
innovations, to keep it up at the height, with that Canon in the famous and
great Council of Calcedon, decreeing it no less then sacrilege to bring down
a Bishop into the degree of a Presbyter. Can. 29.
Now, cur omnium sit culpa paucerum scelus? That these, who have been, and are
many still, Sen. Hippol. Act. 2.
so true to their God and his Christ should be all cried down for
Antichristian; that these, who have been, and are many still, so tutelary and
salutary to their Princes and Countries, should be all likewise condemned for
useless and unfit to have any vote or suffrage, or to give any consent or
counsel to the contriving and constituting of Laws for the governing of Christ's
people, (though these new found Politics have declared to all Posterity, ipso
facto, how near they trod in the steps of their ringleader Caiaphas, Joh.
11.51.
because as he prophesied of Christ, so they proclaimed of his Ambassadors
before they were aware, and under that sentence of condemnation gave them these
letters testimonial of commendation, that they were useless indeed for their
turn, being in no wise likely to become sceleri tanto materia facilis, Sen. ubi
supra.
but ready still to prove better men, quam esse quenquam tyranno expediret);
yet that these, I say, Sen. de ben. lib. 2. cap. 20.
should be all thus cried down, and condemned by those that cry out against
Tyranny; This, will it not be a flash of wild fire and sad reflection, in the
eyes of all, that if they will but open them and look into it, may presently
perceive, that the great promise was not so much to all the disciples or Church
in general, as to the Apostles and their successors in particular, when they
were sent to this Ministration with his commission, adding it for the apex,
colophon, and Crown of all comfort, Mat. 28.20.
that therein, he would be with them always, even unto the end of the world.

33 Which promise can in no wise be thought truly performed, De praescrip.
cap. 2^.
by that heap of arguments in Tertullian, si interea perperam evangelizabatur,
perperam credebatur; if so many thousands of thousands were baptized amiss, so
many works of faith and charity wrought amiss, Vbi omnes tument, omnes
scientiam pol^icentur.

Ante sunt perfecti catechumeni, quam edicti.

Ordinationes eorum temeraria, leves, inconstantes; nunc neophytos collocant,
nunc seculo obstrictos, nunc Apostatat nostros, ut gloria e^s ^bligent etc vide
Tertul. de praescript. cap. ^1.


so many virtues and graces of the Spirit dispensed amiss, so many
Pries^hoods, and Ministryes ordered amiss, so many Martyrdomes crowned amiss;
If all were lost, and led in blindness (as they say); and none of the holy
fathers, none of the faithful confessors, none of the constant Martyrs, none
of the prime and general Counsels knew any thing aright, concerning the
public preaching of the Word, and worship of God in prayer, concerning the
administration of the Sacraments, concerning the conferring of holy orders,
concerning the power of the keys, and discipline of the Church for fifteen
hundred years together and more, till these innovating (...), were spawned and
sprung up with the choking smoke of their new links to deface and besmeare all.

34 But the more we muse at them, the more we are bound, not only to admire and
adore the infinite goodness of our gracious God, when his church among us was
in acie novaculae, ready to be quite cut off, for his miraculous arising in the
nick, so to maintain his own cause, that though they associated themselves they
are broken in pieces; though they took counsel together, Isa. 8, 9, 10.
it is come to naught; though they spoke the word, it cannot stand; for it was
thy Land, O Jmmanuel; But also to invoke and implore his greater blessing upon
those truly Royal, loyal, judicious, and religious hearts, ever to be renowned
for renewing and settling that course, wherein God may be honored best in the
beaty of holiness, Psalm. 96.9.
and we his messengers at length lookt' upon again, and reputed still, as now
Ambassadors for Christ.

35. But to forbear particulars, what unkindness or indignity has Christ our
good Lord and Savior offered them? why we, whom he accounts the salt of the
earth, to season, and keep them sweet, should in all their Joys and Festivals
be set below the salt, contemned, ^sleighted, and thrust down under all. Det
Galenus opes, Det Justinianus honores, and much good may they do their
followers with their due Minervals. But that we touching our genus in our
superiors, and touching our species in their inferiors should be debased and
debarred of all, this is hard measure in the judgment of all, who take to
heart the comparison, which in this case must never be counted odious, That the
health of the body, which belongs to Galens cure, Mat. 16.26.
does not so far excel the safety of the estate which belongs to Justinians
care; but the saving of the soul, which belongs to our charge, is more precious
then both And if Arrianus held himself so much greater then other Historians,
Bodin. Method.
by how much the all-dar^ng Alexander of whom he wrote, was greater then other
Kings and Alexander himself, after the conquest of Pers^a, thought the Wars of
the Grecians no more then battles of Frogs and M^^e, in comparison of his own
exploits; must we be cast off, and valued under all, eo nomine, because we are
not sent, as the E^hiopian Ambassadors by the sea, Isa 18.2.
in vessels of bu^-rushes, to speak to you for any Machiavilian petty Prince of
Italy; but as Ambassadors for Christ we come to treat with you for him that is
more precious then all the Gold of Ophir, and both the Indies, 1 Timothy 6.15.
for the blessed Prince and only Potentate, even the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords? And because we train you up, not to any base, or butcherly battle of
Frogs and Mice against flesh and blood, but to that great and glorious battle
of Michael and his Angels, fighting against the dragon and his Angels; Apoc.
12.7. Ephesians. 6.12. Qu^nt Curt^ Isa. 44.26.
that ye may be able to wrestle against principalities, against powers, against
rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places? Where our presence with you is not, as that of the Carthaginian
Ambassadors, to the besieged Citizens of Tire, Tacitus annal. lib. 2. Philip.
4.17.
Magis solatium quam auxilium; but the Lord by us confirms the word of his
servants, and perfo^meth the counsel of his messengers.

36. Non ad invidiam ista, sed conciliandae misericordiae refere. As S. Paul
exhorted his Philippians to be bountiful, not because he desired a gift, but
because he desired fruit, that might abound to their account; so we admonish
you, in this case, to be dutiful, that ye may avoid the punishments by all laws
enacted against the disobedient. Et enim nomen legati epusmodi esse debet,
Tull. in Verrem. lib. 3. Val. Mac. lib. 6. c. 6.
ut non modo inter s^ciorum jura, sed etiam inter hostium arma incolume
versetur. Insomuch that the Romans delivered the^r own fr^ee^s and neighbors,
who had but justled their enemies Ambassadors, bound into their own hands to
punish them. And when other Nations refused to do them like justice, all men
have held the way more lawful and open to right themselves. As we see by the
grievous tortures, which, for ^ur^^lling his Ambassadors, David, with the
overthrow of their King and Country, inflicted upon the Ammonites, by putting
them under, 2 Samuel 12 3^.
sawes, and under harrowes, and axes of iron, and making them pass through the
tile-kilne; nay, when men were disabled, God himself has by other helps
assisted them. Witness the overthrow of Corinth, Carthage, Val Man l. 2. c 2.
Thebes, Tire, Tarentum, especially in avenging the cause of his own
Ambassadors, upon the contempt of his own people. Both in their first
captivity, of which we read in the end of their own Chronicles, That the Lord
God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising betimes, and
sending, 2 Pa^ 36.15, 16.
because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. But they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no
remedy: And also in their second captivity, of which our Apostle writes to the
Thessalonians, That they killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and
persecuted us (says he) and they pleased not God, and were contrary to all
men; forbidding to speak to the Gentiles, 1 (...) 2 15, 16.
that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always; for the wrath came upon
them to the utterm^st.

37. There is no need there to object Idu^ Cassianum, Cui bono. Tull. pro
Milone.
To what good is all this alleged? if you will needs have it in plain terms,
it is all to this end, even to make good that voice in S. Cyprians vision, for
no vain illusion, but a divine and sure prediction, Qui Christo non credit
sacerdotem facienti, postea credere incipiet sacerdotem vindicanti. Cypr. l. 4.
ep. 9.
These (my brethren) are the causes why you are called upon so often to take
heed of these sins, because there is nothing so sacred, which may not sometimes
meet with the sacrilegious, Quando sacrilegia minuta puniuntur, Sen. de trarqu.
lib. 2. cap. 3. Aul. Gel. lib 3. c. 9.
magna in triumphis feruntur, lest you should deceive your selves in seeking to
escape, by riding away in post haste upon the sequestered race of Sejanus horse,
with the plundered gold of Tolouse.

In which case, the Lord has threatened such fugitives; that because they will
flee upon horses, Isa. 30.16.
therefore they shall flee; and seeing the^ will ride upon the swift, therefore
they that pursue them shall be swifter; Even to overtake and arrest them, with
the Proverb of Sol^mon, which imports a snare, worse then that which strangles
at the place of execution, Even a snare to devour that which is consecrated,
Prove. 20.25.
and after v^wes to make inquiry, whether it has been d^ne well or no.

38. Otherwise, for our selves, we do not only know, that as they which wait
on the Altar, are partakers with the altar, so the Lord has ordained (far
doubtless above all ordinances of men) that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. But we have also learned, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14 Phil. 4 11.
in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be content. And yet, as we read of
the Statute of the Romans, in honor of those that miscarried by any untoward
calamity, in the time of their ambassy abroad, how they erected Statues and
Monuments for them at home, Tull. Phil. 9.
to the credit and comfort of their friends and kindred, whom they left behind;
so we doubt not, but that God has provided better things for us. Though we
labor in vain, and spend our strength for naught among men, yet surely our
judgment is with the Lord, Isa 49 4.
and our work with our God. And though the contempt of our calling be, with too
many, swollen to that height, that they make it their grand question, whether we
may with safe conscience take of men any reward for our pains; yet as
Ambassadors may, Plut. de quaest. Romans 43.
without question, by consent of all Nations, receive from the people to whom
they are sent, tokens of honor, regard, and support (anciently called Lauteia)
for their costliness and daintiness; but they expect their proper maintenance
and wages chiefly from their own Masters; so we believe the case stands with
us. And beside the present maintenance allowed in his Word, (liberal enough, if
rightly weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary) the Lord himself will make it
openly manifest in his deeds at length; When every man shall receive his own
reward according to his own labor, Where they that are wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, 1 Co^n. 3.9. Dan. 12.3.
but they that turn many to righteousness shall shine in a higher degree of
glory, at the stars, for ever and ever. And therefore in this hope being
supported by the word of truth, by the power of God, 2 Cor. 6.7.
by the armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on the left; yet we
continue, and hold out to this day, as those who still are now Ambassadors for
Christ.

39. Fourthly, and finally, reverend and beloved, high and low, old and young,
one with another, give me leave now, for conclusion, to commend one virtue more
profitable upon all occasions, that nothing may be lost, but all tied up fast
in the bond of perfectness. Col^ss. 3.14.
Though God, who c^mmanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ; yet our Apostle would have us mindful, how we carry this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power maybe of God, 2
Cor. 4 5, 6, 7
and not of us.

Now (absit verbo invidia) by the space of above 53. years (wherein I bless his
holy name, for making use of my poor talent in this function) I have observed,
that such vessels hardly clash one against another; Jerem. 13.11. Gal 5.15
but when the weaker is dashed in pieces, the stronger sometimes receive such a
flaw, which can seldom be sodered up again. As then all good Ambassadors leave
all private envy, jarrs, and animosities to promote the public good; so before
ye go to your, next home, and so long as ye are going to your long home be
careful, to follow the frequent, and friendly counsel of the Holy Ghost. See
that ye fall not out by the way; Genesis 45.24. Ephesians. 4 3. Romans 16.17.
but be diligent to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye
have received, and avoid them.

40. Whether they be such as delight to run their descant upon the Corinthian
division, saying, I am of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.12.
and I of Apollo and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Now that Christ's Church with
us is like a weak Patient newly revived from an epidemicall and dangerous
epilepsy, to be more fairly and gently nursed up again; let not that tearing
voice of the harlot be in request with any among you, nec mihi, nec tibi, sed
dividatur; lest you suffer again, 1 Reg. 3.36.
as you have done of late with too many forced thanksgivings; if a man bring
you into bondage, if a man devour you, 2 Cor. 11.20.
if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smites you on the
face; ubi insidiosissime nocet, cui gratiae aguntur pro injuriis: Sen. de ben.
lib. 5 c. 20. 1 Cor. 4.6.
but as this Apostle writes, that he transferred these things in a figure to
himself, and Apollo for your sakes, that ye might learn in us, not to think of
men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up, for one
against another; so suffer me, with the same Apostle, to add this further to
every one of you; Romans 12.3.
that none of you think of himself more highly then he ought to think, (...)
according as God has dealt to every man, not the fullness, but the measure of
Faith.

41. Neither be ruled by those that take offense at the manner of some men's
expressions, because all do not deliver their message after one and the same
kind of method; who can say that all have the same gifts and graces of the
Spirit, when our Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.7. 1 Cor. 12.11.
that every man has his proper gift of God one after this manner, and another
after that; according to the manifestation of the Spirit, dividing his gifts to
every man, several as he will; And his Brother call's upon us, as every one
has received, not all gifts, but the gift, 1 Pet. 4.10.
so to minister the same one to another as good stewards, (...); S^hel. in
Hieren. adversus. Jov. lib 1. Apolog. Orat. 1.
where I am sure that the mention of (...) imports, not only the toleration of
the necessity, but also the commendation of the excellency of various, and
several gifts. Whence Nazianzen divinely infers, that above all students, we
in the ministry have need of the art of Arts, and science of sciences, that we
may be able to treat and prevail with man who is the animal above all, maxim
varium, and multiplex. And St. Austin thereupon resolves it to be more, both
material, and majesticall, for the message it self to be handled by diverse men
diversely. Where because his expression is both elegant and pertinent, and time
will not suffer repetition, I shall only refer you to his own words, in the
twelfth of his confessions, cap. 26. And therefore I say again, with this
Apostle; Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, 1. Cor. 11.29.^1.
are all Teachers, do all speak with tongues, do all interpret! But cov^t
earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellnt way.

42 That is, in fine, that ye much more take heed of those, who going further
seek an open schism and separation, in regard of certain harmless ri^es and
ceremonies of order and decency, In rebut de quibus nihil ce^ti statuit
scriptura divina, ^^s populi Dei, vel instituta majo^um pro lege tenenda sunt.
August. epist. 36.
of ornament, and indifferency, in the Church. (According to the excellent rule
of the forenamed Father) who knows not that Ambassadors, in going to several
Princes, with the same errand, are always advised, for outward ceremonies, to
comply with the received customs and constitutions of the Nat^ons to whom they
are sent? As in common Courtship, Ambassadors go to most Christian Princes, and
converse with them, keeping their hea^s covered. They are led to the Grand
Signior by the arms, between two Bashaws, with their faces looking toward the
ground. But if they come before the rough and rugged Russian, they must stand
bare, unless they will have their Hats nailed to their heads. So, in Gods
service, the Ambassadors of some Reformed Churches speak to their people with
their heads covered; which custom, notwithstanding, if any should seek to
press upon us, without the Authority of the Church, I doubt you would all
judge it fitter, to have his hat nailed to the block. And why may not we have
the same liberty in other ceremonies also? Hieron ad verse. Jovin. lib. 1.
which the Ancients conceive conveniently recommended, both by Joseph's coat of
many colors, the token of his fathers greater love, Genes. 37.3.
and by the Kings Daughter, who is all glorious within, and yet her clothing
is said to be of wrought gold; Circumamicta varietatibus. Psalm. 45.13.14.
Insomuch that our Apostle requires no less, in joining both these together,
as the sovereign salve, for all sores in this kind, that all things be done
(...). But if any desire to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God. 1 Cor. 14.40.


43. The sum then of all is this, when you enter into this calling, the holy
prophet tells you, that the Lord looks for such Cadu^tators, especially among
you, who should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before the Lord for the
Land. Ezech. 22.30.


Do not then, O do not you, prove the foremost to make the breach wider, under
which the Land has been too sorely shaken already, by seeking to patch any new
piece of homespun cloth into the ancient and venerable coat of Christ, John
19.23.24. Cypr. de simpl. plat. Prove. 17.11.
which was without seame woven from the top throughout, to imply the Mystery of
unity in the Church. So that the barbarous Soldiers, which crucified him,
refused to rend it; lest that Proverb of Solomon fall heavy upon you. An evil
man seeks only rebellion, therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against
him.

But for discharge of your loyalty, which binds you to be subject for
conscience sake; for more grateful correspondence to our Dread Sovereignes
most gracious condescensions, wherein he has, to the wonder of the world, made
himself all things to all men, that he might by all means possible win the
more; for kind satisfaction to your kindred and native Country, which have a
long time waited and longed for a settlement in peace, Romans 15.7.
that they might, at length, with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the Passion of Christ, who has so dearly
bought you, Colos. 1.20.
that by making peace through the blood of his cross, he might reconcile all
things unto himself, both in earth, and in heaven; for the compassion which ye
owe to your tender Mother the Church, which has so dearly born and bred you
up, that ye might follow the things which make for peace, Romans 14.19.
and things whereby ye may no more ruin, but edify one another; set your
selves, even set your selves with Moses, in the breach before the Lord for the
Land, Psalm. 106.23.
to turn away his wrath, that he may not come against us any more to destroy
us. Take your censers, with Aaron, and go out quickly, Number. 16.46.48.
and put on the incense of pure hearts, and hands, lift up to the throne of
grace on high; that while ye stand in this posture between the dead and the
living, the plague that has been so long raging among us, may be stayed.

If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men. Romans
12.18. Phil. 2.1, 2.
And consider with how many powerful bonds this Apostle himself adjureth you;
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill our joy, that ye
be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind.

44. This, I hope, you will do, not only in your best devotions, Psalm 122.6.
daily praying for the peace of Jerusalem, by which you shall be sure to
prosper, but also in your constant behavior, and consonant devoirs, humbly
submitting your selves, and suffering the peace of God to rule in your hearts,
Coloss 3 15.
unto which ye are called in one body, Psalm. 126.3.
and striving always to be thankful for the great and wonderful things which
the Lord has begun to do for us already toward this hopeful end, whereof we
rejoice; still remembering, how all the Worthies, both in Heaven and Earth,
conspire to combine us hereunto. God the Father, from whom we are sent, Heb.
13.20. Isa. 9.6. Ephesians. 4 3. Luk^ 1.14. Isa 33.7. Luke 10, 5. Romans 10.15. Ephesians
2.17. John 14.27. Phil. 4.7. Isa. 32.17.18.
is the God of peace; God the Son, for whom we are sent, is the Prince of
peace; God the Holy Ghost, with whom we are sent, is the Spirit of peace; the
Angels of Heaven, that guard us in this message, are the Chanters of peace; we
the Messengers therein guarded by them, are the Ambassadors of peace; the
Message it self, with which we are sent, is the Gospel of peace; the People, to
whom we are sent, are the Heirs of peace. And the price at which we are to aim,
is the rich, precious, and peerless Legacy of the peace of Christ, which
passes all understanding; That the work of righteousness may be peace, and the
effect thereof quietness, and assurance for ever. That we and Gods people may
dwell in a peaceable habitation, in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting
places. Wherefore I say no more, but take my leave, and shut up all with the
phrase and farewell of our Apostle. 2 Cor 13 11.
Finally, brethren, farewell; Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of love and of peace shall be with you.

FINIS

