Mataeotechnia Medicinae Praxews. The Vanity of the Craft of PHYSIC. Or, A NEW
DISPENSATORY. Wherein is dissected the Errors, Ignorance, Impostures and
Supinities of the SCHOOLS, in their main Pillars of Purges, Blood-letting,
Fontanels or Issues, and Diet, etc. and the particular Medicines of the Shops.
With an humble Motion for the Reformation of THE UNIVERSITIES, And the whole
Landscap of PHYSIC, And discovering the Terra incognita of CHYMISTRIE. To the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

By NOAH BIGGS, Chymiatrophilos.

Pauca vigent hodie prisci vestigia very.
Vae his qui nesciunt experiri nisi in hominibus.
Rog. Bacon. Dii vendunt sudoribus, non lectionibus solis, Arts.
London, Printed for Edward Blackmore, at the sign of the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard 1651.

To the PARLIAMENT.
THe report that I received from the sound of your own Act, Parliament of
England, of the high pitch of noble enterprises, and undaunted courage and
resolution, your vast and renowned Genius, moved by a lusty wheel, bear'd ye to
make us a Commonwealth; and that both in the right Constitution, and in the
right Reformation of a Real Commonwealth, the things that I now move for, did
call for speedy redress; and considering your active endeavors in seeking to
wipe off the imputation of intending to discourage the progress of true
Learning; and now taking notice (then which was nothing more) that that gallant
and victorious Commander, the Lord General Cromwell, desires in his late Letter
to your selves, Noble Senators, as a signal and acknowledgement of thankfulness
to God for the late victory over the Scot, That ye would reform the abuses of
all Professions; Your actions also manifestly tending to exalt the Truth, and
to depress the Tyranny of Error and ill Customs, both Religious and Civil;
whereof to this day ye have done well, whereof not to repent, were the cardinal
motives that induced me to present your worthy notice with a discourse,
conscious to it self of nothing more than of diligence, and firm affection to
the Public good. And that ye would take it so, as wise and impartial men,
obtaining through the good hand of God so great power and dignity, are wont to
accept in matters both doubtful and important what they think offered them well
meant, and from a rational ability, I had no less then to persuade me. By the
same nourishment then, by which they first took life, I seek to preserve them,
from which Sea this rivulet took its rise; on the swinge and rapt of which most
potext alliciences, I dare to expose as freely what fraughtage I conceive to
bring of no trifles. And having had an experimentate opportunity to know, that
the public Head has always an ear open, and stands ready to salute and
receive every glimpse and dawning of knowledge, or at least cherish those that
do so, and looks every ingenuous Head should strike and vail, and commands the
best of every man's thoughts; what can be expected but that I should dedicate*
not according to the swelling Epidemick custom, though not the Punctilio's, yet
the puncta's, the full points, and marginal hands in the folio of my burdened
thoughts? Dedications* I confess, though of themselves they be of little worth,
and by me esteemd light and vain, as being the adulatory prodromes for a
mendicant assistance of a shoulder, or serene brow to the ensuing ma^ter, yet
they have that command in the respects of (...) by reason of that which they
use to signify, by reason of their impression, that like brass farthings, the
stamp of the Royal Arms and Crown makes them go the curranter, though the
matter a^baseth them; that some whose minds are below the performance of
nobler endowments, that look no further then bark and outside, do seek
reputation by the Patronage of a great Personage; yet in things of so high a
nature, and general concernment, as the redress of old neglected grievances and
customs, never enough to be lamented; yea, the Reformation of the body of a
whole Art that has layn long eclipsed and deformed, so worthily and so nearly
concerning your knowledge, I fear to be so unnaturally cruel to my own
reputation, and the Minerva of my labors, as to neglect the tenders of my
endeavors to your high notice. It Is true, I have long traveled with a desire
humbly to remonstrate to you Worthies in Parliament, but have had all along
the unhappy indisposition from various affected thoughts, to fear to disturb
and call you from your emergent occasions, the capital Remora that I have not
adventured to l^nch forth: but considering that public actions are commonly
uncertain, which do put on several countenances according to the variety of
occasions; and considering that it is always a feasible opportunity, and no
time lost nor ill spent in assuming th^se thoughts in the midst of your most
urgent dangers, to lay a model and draw the lines of happiness and security for
all posterity; and seeing that without presumption, I may confidently believe
the contents considered, shall not want the just length of your, either ^ars,
or faith; nor have I whither to appeal, but to the concourse of so much Piety,
Wisdom, Learning and Prudence housed in this place; or who more concerned in
it, and so much the more to be urged then the healths of such as you who sit at
the Helm, on whom, as on our Deliverers, all our grievances and cures by the
merit of your eminence and fortitude are devolved? Or to whom could I better
declare the loyalty which I ow to that Supreme and Majestic Tribunal, and the
opinion which I have of the high entrusted judgment, and personal worth
assembled in that place, then to your own selves? He whose civil and serious
accomplishments and desires has led him forth to await to obtain any thing from
the public, it is not enough to be so penurious to blurt out an occasional
word of it in his Dedication or Preface of his book, not praying, or absolutely
saying that he desires it and expects it; nor giving them proofs not only that
he deserves it but that they ought for their own sakes and posterity to grant
it, in regard they may expect great profit by it. For it is an error extremely
disadvantagious to the enlargement of the Empire of Truth, and an error of
weakness, rather than a becoming shamfac'dness and modesty, yea, a vicious
humility, which will prove a kind of baseness and weakness, for a man to
neglect his virgin thoughts, and the impetus of his sparklie inclinations, or
withold through faintness his worthy requests, or conceal Meridian-truths,
which would so much conduce and disseminate to an universal benefit, under the
covert and eclipse of a bashful silence: and if he know and well consider the
gentleness and freeness of those to whom he addresses to hear reason speak, he
has no reason to be ashamed of any, unless they degenerate into
irregularities, and exorbitancies, being such as he makes merely for his own
peculiar benefit, to those from whom in Justice he ought not to exact any.

That it is not thus with me (Honored States) in my harmless, innocent and
humble requests, though otherwise according to your high exalted dignity and
renowned merits variously asserted, let the Series and purport of this
discourse bear witness; which, if necessity be not to pass unconsidered, and
charity be not quite shut out of doors, cannot, at the threshold, be
over-looked. Charity therefore beggs, desire seeks, commiseration melts
necessity requires the whole people of the earth (chiefly heads of a larger
siz^e than the vulgar) emulously to contribute to this undertaking (of which
only a hint shall yet be offered) namely, to the reformation of the
stupendous body of Universal Learning Languages Arts and Sciences especially
this of Physic, as to the most important thing in the world, wherein they have
all an equal interest. And I hope it may happily alight into the hands of some,
who have both power and will to make this desire and expedient effectual. Let
not England forget her precedence of teaching other Nations how to live; let
her have the honor and happiness, as in all great assertions and undertakings
she has been, to be the leading Card, and her first turned up practice, to be
Trumps to all the world; for it seems as her alone Charter before any other,
that out of her should be proclaimed, and sounded forth the first tidings and
Trumpet of Reformation to all Europe.

What was it ye intended, Worthies in Parliament, by Reformation? Was it the
Reformation of some Roman Prelatical abuses, and violences to Religion, and the
Consciences of men? Was it the Reformation of Pluralities of Benefices, (when
Fellowships need as much) the unfrocking of a Priest and the paring of a
Presbyters mils? Or was it more General Reformation? That that shall deserve
the name, and look like Reformation; as of things Moral, Oeconomical, and
Political; and as of things for the health of the soul, so this of the body,
except your heads be amused by same unexperienced Dictator, frozen Sadduces, or
some others (...) worse name, who are lethargically content to snore and please
^selves with the reverend nothings, follies, and dreams of (...) Forefathers,
thou all is well enough: such being fit to be rank^^ among these who say, that
this of Physic and health of the body, is the proper tendence and
Metropolitan work of School-Doctors and the College. It Is true, though it may
be answered, That the Reformation in Divine things, in Religion, in Worship,
was the Cardinal work of School-Divines and Ministers; (yet we are not of
opinion that the tenth part of Learning stood or fell with the Clergy) yet we
see Your selves, honored Patriots, gave heat, warmth, motion, and life to the
same, or else, in Humane Reason, it might have proved abortive: They were the
Door to show the way, but ye the Hinges on which it turned: It Is not denied,
but gladly confessed, we have cause to send our thanks and vows to heaven
louder then most of Nations, for that great measure of Reformation and Truth
which we enjoy: but he who thinks we are to pitch our te^ts here, and have
attained the utmost prospect of Reformation, That man, by this very opinion,
declares himself to be far short of the banks of it, and of what the desires
and thoughts of good and ingenuous men look for. Let England then keep that
honor which hitherto she has had vouchsafed her from heaven, to be the
Cathedral to other Nations, to be the Foreman to lend and give out Reformation
to the world, both in Religion and Arts: it is great pity she should now flag
in the Rere, and thereby have her metempseuchos'd Genius transmigrate into
another People, to carry away the Garland of Honor that for above a
demi-Myr^ad of years she has sat crowned with, and now become the latest and
backwardest Scholar, of whom God offered to have made her the Teacher. It Is as
true, renowned Parliament, that through long Custom radicated in the nonage
of People, revolutions of Ages do not often recover the loss of a rejected Truth,
for the want of which whole Nations fare the worse. That I therefore, among
others, may pay the duty that is tributary to the Frame and right Constitution
of that present Government, under which we now have the leisure (which God
continue) to revolve what may make it famous, and will tend to the Weal of it,
have not refused the pains to be so studious and diligent to show some
Grievances and Abuses in that Science, a through Reformation of which, I have
laid out my best wishes and poor endeavors not to loose, for the want of a
seasonable and well-grounded speaking. And, to exercise the natural endowment
of your wonted gentle-brooking spirit, in acknowledging and harkening to the
voice of Reason, from what quarter soever it be heard speaking, let me tell
you, in that plainness, yet with that seriousness as becomes one speak^ng to so
great and grave an Assembly of Censors and Senators sitting in Parliament, That
the common allowed Plysick, which is at this present day prescribed and
practiced in this Nation, the Inventors of it, some of them, were such whom ye
will be loath to own, and of whom one day, and perhaps not long, we shall be
perfectly ashamed. As though our souls and heads were not our own; as though
there were no Smith in England, but we must thus Foot it over to the Times of
Trajan, and City of P^rgamus; to the Romances and Directories of such
uncircumcised Philistims, is such Barbarism and Rudeness to the lofty Genius of
this Nation, worse then Indian. That we should pin our faith and knowledge upon
the Cabin of an Amen-corner, when the Rialto, or Palace Royal of Galenical
Physic, where they have crowned him with the Title of Parent and Monarch
thereof, stands unhung with any experiment of real good, and divested of all
real, solid and substantial virtue of Medicine. Certainly the Father of lights
has given a divine and singular testimony of this gift of healing, that it is
worth the laying to heart: That he which has created all things, yet
singularly glories to be the Creator of the Physician; and he to whom all glory
and honor is due, has yet commanded to be honored only our parents, and the
Physician by him created. When I consider the slow progress has been made in
Physics, and how it has stood at a stay for these many Decads of years; and
been obscured and eclipsed, and see how other Arts daily have sensible
increases, and receive new additions, new light, and further perfections, (as
to the proportion of things as they now are) and the healths and lives of you
our Governors considered also, and so much the more I press it, noble
Senators, could do no less then urge me to call to you, honored and memorable
Parliament, as to a hand to help, as to an arm to uphold, hold out, and give
command to an undertaking of that lasting memory, that shall speak loud, and be
a stately Parliamentary Monument of your magnanimous example to succeeding
Ages: and the annuary Registers of aftertimes, shall insert it in their
Ephemeris, and in their Catalogue of notable things; and though not the
Dominical, yet is such Capital letters, that they shall compute, and reckon,
From suc^ a time, so long. I know you know, that notwithstanding the man
overtures that have been made, and stout lifts have been given toward this
main design, yet there are many things left to your hands to do; and I wish it
were in my power to show, and your patience to hear them, or view them in their
large particularities, which must be set down in a general draught only. And a
high enterprise (worthy Sirs) a high enterprise it is, and a hard, and such as
every seventh son of a seventh son does not venture on; yet in the boldness of
Truth, I shall proceed fearless. Wherein is our Universities reformed, or what
amendment of her Fundamental Constitutions? How ill disposed are those few
Colleges in this Land, that should be collateral or subservient to this
design? Or wherein do they contribute to the promotion or discovery of Truth?
Where have we Professors and Lectures of the three principal Faculties, and how
cold and lazily are they read, and carelessly followed? Where a serious
disquisition of all the old Tenants? Where have we any thing to do with
Mechanic Chymistrie the handmaid of Nature, that has outstript the other
Sects of Philosophy, by her multiplied real experiences? Where is there an
examination and consecution of Experiments? encouragements to a new world of
Knowledge, promoting, completing, and actuating some new Inventions? Where
have we constant reading upon either quick or dead Anatomies, or an ocular
demonstration of Herbs? Where a Review of the old Experiments and Traditions,
and casting out the rubbish that has pestered the Temple of Knowledge? How are
Mechanics countenanced and encouraged, in the concrete, but not in the
abstract, when the illiterate, rude, and the dregs of men, and but a
farraginous Syndrome of Knaves and Fools hudled together, their habilities not
being tempered, nor consistent to enlarge the Territories of Truth and
Learning, whose unqualified Intellectuals unable to rectify the errors of
their Reason, cannot reach unto half the advantage of their Knowledge, and are
only fit to maintain Error and their present Practice, of which many of them
can give no reason, and commonly but the apish Prentices of some old dotard
Citizen, who have as much wit as their Masters, and that, like knotty and
crabbed blocks has been writhed into them, being tawed open by wedge after
wedge, and know only what has been hammered into them by ill Methods and
thumping Tutors, are the only white boys, while the rare Founders and
Inventors, whose labors have been salt unto them, who have spent much sweat
and oil, or persons as well in every degree qualified and seasoned with
sprightly industrious endowments, who carry Mines and Forges in their heads,
and have a greater vivacity of more sublime and refined spirits, and
understandings above theirs that taught them what they know, are dejected, as
being disengaged from ingenious enquiries, and proofs of their towardly and
man-like abilities and endowments, by a cold requital of their several
redemptions of Truth, and dismission of their Intellectual and Rational or
Mechanic Manufactures, with censure and obloquie of Singularities; or a cold
encouragement to perfect their begun Idaea's into actual existence and real
entities and substantialities. That this is not then (Honorable Heroes) the
disburdening of a particular fancy, or the humorous complaint of one so
addicted to the made of Melancholy, as to render him distracted, testie, or
troublesome, but the common grievance (and I do but now make their suspirations
articulate) of all those who have prepared their minds and studies, and took
their flight above the low pitch of Vulgarity, to advance Truth in others, and
from others to entertain it, thus much may evince and satisfy. And in their
name I shall for neither friend nor foe conceal what the general murmr is,
That Truth, and the once-lovely body of Learning, is become a deformed and
ill-favored Medusa, with her tresses full of Add^rs, and her limbs, like that
of Osiris King of Argives mangled body, lies torn and scattered in as many
pieces; and that they are as hard to find and reunite as his was. That there
is no public encouragement given to the sad friends of Learning, such as dare
appear in a day of need, those gallant industries, imitating the careful search
that Isis made for her Osiris violated form, that go up and down and endeavor
to gather them up limb by limb as they can find them, and as much as may be,
re-compose them. This were the near utter disheartning and coffeehouse, not
of the mercenary crew of falfe pretenders to Learning, but of the free and
ingenuous sort of such as evidently were constellated to Study, and love
Virtue and Learning for it self, not for lucre, or any other end, but the
service of Truth and their Country, if they were not really prejudged and
possessed, and easily assured of your gallant intentions and enterprises, with
your active endeavors in seeking to wipe off the imputation of intending to
discourage the progress and advance of Learning, and to confute all the
scandals of your deadly adversaries, who have been stout Subjects to the
Anarchy of Detraction, and have took all liberty to speak you worse then Goths
and Vandals, and the utter destroyers of all civility and Literature, by the
serious composing your selves to the design of cherishing of either. And when
we make reflection back of what great things you have done for us, equal to
what has been done in any Nation, either stoutly or fortunately, and what
steps you have made forward in this great design, we are led to believe a
gallant progress you will make, and bring us back from that great distance we
have run in a line from the first point of error, to almost its largest
latitude and dissomination from the Equator of Truth, into the true Caus-way,
and unto our journies end. Now, how this may be effected, I have neither vanity
nor impudence enough to direct you. But he whose heart can bear him to the high
pitch of your noble enterprises, it cannot but tell him that the power which he
addresses himself unto, cannot not only do it in a better manner then he can
think of, but in a fuller; and may easily assure himself that the prudence and
laudable far-judging industrious diligence of so grave a Magistracy sitting in
Parliament, who have before their eyes the ruins of Learning, and cannot be
insensible of the cruelties and unsuccesfulness of the Medical profession, on^
main limb of Universal Learning, cannot reject the cleanness of these reasons,
and these allegations both here and within offered them, nor can overlook the
necessity that there is of reforming this piece of Knowledge, and studying more
probable means, and finding out more whole, some, expert, and rational ways of
Healing. Conceive it, I pray, worth your patience and notice to consider, that
those Arts we speak of, are Theotechnal, the Arts of God, or the handy-works of
that Protoplast, in his Counter-type, or Second, Nature: not those petty
Rattles or ^up^etri^^, nor th^se laborious industrious Trifles proceeding from
the Ar^s publicly professed, and to the disadvantage of Truth allowed, whose
effects are false, and fit for nothing but corrupt and violent ends, or to be
Quacked forth in Bartholmew-Fayr, among the numerou^ ^^y of those serious
Bables, the spawn of the Head or Hand, which are no Subjects to the prudent
Scepter of Nature, nor of her Fundamentals, or the Retinue to her Commonwealth,
but only the wild, violent, irregular productions of the Anarchy of Fancy.
Give me leave to tell you, and I will henceforth labor to obtain to have it
believed, That the Art which in the simplicity of Nature God has revealed, is
true and natural, truly Physical, Nature's Autergie, not a whit below her
self, though they seem never so mean, by the which we may attain to all the
secrets and mysteries in Nature. And this is the Art, the center of the
Physics of the ancient Philosophers; because Natural Philosophy is the Basis
or main Fundamental of Medicine: for where Philosophy ends, there Medicine is
to be enterprised, whence it is clear, that such as is the insight of a
Physician into natural things, (namely, whether it be superficial, or profound)
such also will his perfection be in Medicine. For He who is ignorant of the
mystical Arcana's of Physics, of necessity it will follow, that the more
occult secrets of Medicine shall be hid from his eyes. This is not in the
spurious productions, and Colossian Library of Galen, that God should turn it
over to him and the Apothecaries. Insecta ex putredine Galeni. It Is a base
unworthy, and terrible thing truly, to prefer Aristotle to Emepht, and condemn
the Truth of God, to justify the Opinions and Traditions of Man. This is an
Humor that runs not in their Euphrates, and they are wholly unacquainted with
any of its Tackling. Their Writings are so superficial, and so remote and alien
from the Center, and true Marrow of this Science, that the mysteries and
secrets of Physics being omitted, or by ignorance neglected, we catch at only
painted Butter-flyes, and speculate not the Magnesia or substantiality of
Physics, but rather its Vmbrage; not the Body, but the Bark, and superficial
outside. It Is not rare, but very frequent with them, (and surely they are
taught from their own experimental unsuccessfulness) to admire, and mouth out
the supposed perfection of their Art; and yet they have nothing in their
mouths but Ars longa, Vita brevis; and true enough: for they cure either late,
or never, which makes their Art long: but they kill quickly, which makes life
short; and so plowing with their heifer, the Riddle is expounded. A Sect there
are of people in this Nation, who make a great famous buz of the Spirit, but it
is but like some Dor; who say, they see God in all and every thing. I wish it
were true; but let me deal plainly, An evil spirit is gone out, to seduce them
to lie unto themselves, and to the Truth of God. For those things they see,
hear, taste, and handle, they know not what they are, neither without nor
within themselves. He is too inward in the private Cells and Recesses of his
Creatures for their shallow and unhallowed eyes to penetrate; and none of them
all can see him without fire, not the Chemists Kitchin-fire, but the true
Philosophical fire, Or that which freely encompasseth all,
And makes but one bare Individual.


There Is none sees him, but he who as if he were looking steadfastly on him when
he was about his hebdomadal work of the Hexameron Fabric, can face him in his
several operations and productions. And if yonder Sun ride sure, so shall he
know all things that Art and Nature can tutor him in. The God of all grace and
good gifts grant then, that we may seriously compose our selves to apply to the
declarations of Himself in his works of the Creation, and lead me by the hand
to receive Truth from himself, and give it out to others. What I have to offer
then, must be but short, (and like a Mercury, only point) yet to the purpose,
because I have but something to say.

Be pleased therefore not only to make some steps forward, wherein ye do well,
but a sound progress in setting upon the effectual advancement, not the bare
permissive propagation of Learning, and to that end to promote an Academy of
Philosophic freedom, to call together the wise counsels of prudent and
well-instructed men, of what Liberal Profession soever, of eminent spirit and
breeding, joined with a diffusive and various knowledge of Divine and Humane
things, able to balance, and deputed to define Good and Evil, Right and Wrong,
that they may make it their design, and join their counsels, and lay out their
endeavors to work off the inveterate blots and obscurities wrought upon our
minds, and brought upon the Literary Republike of Universal Learning,
Languages, Arts and Sciences, by the subtle insinuating of Error and Custom.

Secondly, That you would call forth some, and enable them with Authority to
see the Universities reformed and laboriously rummig'd in her stupendous bulk
of Learning, that so the great Ocean of Universal Knowledge flowing from those
two Promontories, may run pure and fair in this Nation; and that they may be
reduced to their primitive Constitution, and serve to a nobler end then to
water and nurture the young Nursery of green sprigs only, but the Oaks also,
and well-accomplished Subjects of the Commonwealth of Literature: That so our
Youth may not be trained up, or instructed, nor receive in their Pupillage the
seeds of Error, and the destruction of men. For so long as they are tutored in
those untrue Notions, and corrupt Elements, Doctrines, Opinions, and Principles
of Naturalities, and that of Pagans and Infidels too, till the body of Physic
be changed and reformed, there is little hopes that a better Sanation of
Diseases, or a Melioration of the languid condition of men and women will
follow, then what has been hitherto* and what that has been, let the clamours
of the Sick, and standers by, the cries of Widows and Orphans, and the ocular
unsuccessfulness of Physicians in their own practice, decide, whether the
things that I now move for, chiefly as to this, and the promises within
considered, do not groan for a Reformation; therefore deserve not to be
overlooked, if the most urgent and excessive grievances, happening in the
Medicinal Profession, be worth the laying to heart, which, unless Charity be
far from us, cannot be neglected.

Thirdly, That you would reform, as was hinted before, the abuses of all
Professions.

Fourthly, That the Temple of Aesculapius might like that of Janus, with his
two controversal faces, be set open. And that it may be allowed and granted for
the glory of this Nation, and the good of the people thereof, that the whole
Systeme of Practical, as well as Theorical Physic, may be calculated by the
Astrolabe of clear Reason and Experience, to see if the Light and Knowledge
thereof cannot square to a greater measure and perfection, beyond the Lines of
Galens degrees and complexions, or the Peripateticks Elements, or the
constituted discipline of Coe: or whether the Cruse of the knowledge and power
of Healing, can run no other Oil then what is sublimed and drawn off by an
Alembick of a Colledge-Dispensatory.

Fifthly, I would obtain to have it appear, that the daily insight of
Physicians into the unsuccessfulness of their own practice from that vessel of
Physic, which was not long ago broached, and exhibited from their new and late
polish't Pharmacopoeia, do not deserve to be thought worth our patience to
expect, and study and labor to attain to a richer liquor of knowledge, of more
refined spirits then what the Sympos^cks, or Galenical bruage, and dry banquets
of the College (whose-fashion it is, like the belly-Priests, not to take
notice of any that is beneath them in clothes) have sewr'd in, and ushered to us
in the Cratera of their Dispensatory; and that a life wholly addicted to
studies and practice in the mechanic operations of Pyrotechnal Science, ought
to open the windows of its Intellect Eastward, if he expect a greater light in
Physic then what Galen has beaconed up to us, and comes Occidental in at the
Colleges Casements.

Sixthly, That the most excellent and natural Art of Chemistry, scarce yet
beyond seeming uncouth, and unheard of, as being the Terra incognita in the old
world of Physic, may be called from her Ostracism, and may with eye open and
allowed be called to the bar, to the touch, and her readings revived, and
operations gratified with your countenance; for they whom this thing concerns,
will not receive these things from a private instruction, whereby it easily
appears that it is not reason now adays that satisfies and suborns the common
credence of men. Perhaps in time to come, others that respect a public good,
and have not their understandings devoured and made insensible by the itch of
gain, will know how to esteem what is not every day put into their hands, when
they have marked events, and better weighed how hurtful and unwise it is to hide
a pernicious rupture under the ill counsel of a bashful silence. If no body
will after me thus second their own occasions, they may sit hereafter and
bemoan themselves, to have neglected through faintness the only remedy of
their heavy sufferings. What have I left to say, but your own goodness to
essay, and to attend when you shall be invited from those poor reflections to
take the advice of more noble thoughts and vast considerations? It remains,
that I express* my self to wait for the accomplishing of these things wrought
into me by your own designations and consequencies from your laudable
endeavors, by making good wishes, and breathing after these huge attempts, the
pursuance whereof shall embalm your memories to all posterity. And now I draw
toward an end, I feel my self (as those who at the beginning of no mean
endeavor are heightened and depressed) variously affected, and might have
rested nameless, but that an undertaking of that nature, not inferior to the
highest pitch of a true-bred manliness, and the very attempt of this address
thus made, and the thought of whom it has recourse to, has got the power
within me to a passion, (though otherwise retired) far more welcome then
incidental to a Preface, which has excited me to pray, That the fate of
Learning may tarry for no other Reformers, and has nurtured me to that growth
of gratitude and due respects in acknowledging by whose indefatigable virtues,
extraordinary prudence, and laudable actions and resolutions, I have the
freeness, quiet leisure and good will to subscribe my self

The Honourer and strict studious Observer of their noble Worth and Goodness,
Noah Biggs.

COgnitio Naturae and essentiae, non sumitur ab effectibus impropri^s
adjacentibus, and accident^libus; sed a cognitione Principiorum, and Seminibus
rerum, quae hactenus Schola Peripatetica ignoravit.

Nam ut ut natural ingenium and acumen judicii Philosophus habeat, nunquam
tamen ad rerum naturalium radicem, aut radicalem scientiam admittitur nisi igne.

Per nostram Mechanicam scientiam intellectus est rectificatus, vi
experientiae, respectu oculi, and verae notitiae mentalis. Imo experientiae
nostrae stant supra probationes phantasticas conclusionum, ideoque nec eas
tolerant: sed omnes alias scientias ostendunt vivaciter intrare in intellectum;
unde deinceps intelligimus per naturam, intus illud, quod est, and quale est.
Quin per talem scientiam, Intellectus stat denudatus superfluitatibus and
erroribus, qui ipsum ordinario removent a veritate, propter praesumptiones, and
praejudicata, credita in conclusionibus. Hinc enim nostri se direxerunt ad
intrandum per quamlibet scientiam in omnem experientiam, per Artem, juxta
Naturae cursum, in suis univocis principiis. Raymundus Testamenti, c. 26.

Per hoc genus demonstrandi, fugiet a te omnis obscuritas, and acquiretur tibi
omnis fortitudo fortis vincens omnia subtilia, and solida penetrans. Tabula
Smaragdina.

To his honored Friend, The Learned AVTHOR.
THy youth's adorned much like an ancient Sage,
And Plato's spirit flows the row every page.
I much admire thy virtue, Heroic soul,
That dares so many Anakims control;
Whose hoary-headed Custom well might stay
Thy well-tuned Spheres, until a springing ray
Of Truth approach, exposing forced Disguise
To the perspicuous view of vulgar eyes:
Then might thou calmly pass, and in thy zeal,
Free from all letts, thy active fires reveal.
But since thou art fearless, go forth, noble Heart,
Virtues Emblem, Elia Lelia's Art.
W. R. Mystica-Physophilos.

To his honored and well-accomplish'd friend, on his Mataeotechniatria,
vulgaris.
HOw like the morn the Harbinger of Day,
Thy Lines in the blushing East their rays display!
And ancient Hyle in form, appears light,
The great Preserver of all earthly Might:
Whereby we know that in the Center sleeps
A quickening Spirit, which, all-seeing, keeps
Bodies sweet consort: yet the darksome mind
Of most's to Outward Remedies inclined:
Compositions crude, and undigested,
As Nature's sole Guardians, are invested.
But seeing they do break the sacred Bound
God set to Creatures, and their folly sound
Th'rowout the Earth, I Will sum their fate, and call
This Book, as it shall prove, Impostures Fall.
Abusers must be whipped when once they aw
Natures own Edicts by a Colledge-Law.
That Simple honesty they scorn, has Fame,
And dares meet any that has breath or name
In Reasons Lists: and for fond Ignorance,
Time turns the Wheel, till Wisdom up advance.
Scandal in Print, by them on others cast,
Shall come to naught; it is Truth can only last.
Whose child this is, will own it: let them say,
It Is neither Truth's nor Errors, Night nor Day,
Lest by Conclusions they too soon declare
Who Is ignorant, and who the knowing are.
Humors are natural in them; their skill
In Physics runs in Elements. My Q^ill
Is to seek the Seminalty of things
That Is covered in these Lines; the pleasant Springs
That lead unto the Fountain's bubling head,
Whose bleeding tears drop after drop has fed
The flames of her Joves fires, till one in one
Sprouts forth, mantl'd by all, though seen by none.
A mystic Birth. Dame Nature in a cloud.
A midnight-sun; but not without a shroud.
How unlike are the Potions most do hug,
Which flow from corrupt Roots, and mortal Drug
That invade Sol's own Throne, with dismal fear!
Which if reduced to the ONE, would truly cheer
The wearied parts with rest, and quickly lend
Such unseen fires, Corruptions veil should rend.
Nature's sweet Parent, that in thy first Dress
Sendst forth such Sweets, as all that know, possess.
What Is for the vulgar eyes unfit, here Thou
In shades to wise men, secrets do allow
To be expressed: most happy is that heart
Seeks without vanity to bear a part
In thine own Q^ire: for Mysterie's musick's sweet;
(So silent groans with Heavens Echoes meet.)
Where Virgin-earth modestly does cover
Male and Female, Loving and a Lover.
These shadowed glories do here represent
The image of thy Mind, so much intent,
That from one Principle, already past,
Does to the acmie Light with speed make haste,
And from the Mother, to the Father hie:
For Lamps burn dim, to him who Sol does spy.
Damn not these Glories then, y' ostents of Pride,
Who leidger lie at Censures; nor deride:
Whose Brains wear midnight, never shall see those showers
Of sweet Perfumes that spring from Nature's Bowers;
Where Cab'nets unlocked stand, that would benight
Critic spectators with redundant light,
And lead men the row the clouds, unto a Sun
Shall never set till Nature's course be run.
Which Burnings no man sees, that can depart
Till in those flames he sacrifice his heart.
Who sees this, will soon, with me, allow
This Work, and to the Author's Spirit bow.
James Villwiers,
Jes. Coll. Cantab.
To his ingenious Friend, N. B. On his MATAIOTEXNIA.
'TWas boldly ventured against the Idol (Art)
Thus, since you meant to strike, to pierce to the heart:
Nor less discreetly in you to despise
Old reverend Errors for Truth's Novelties.
You Have undeceived the world; reduced in one
What once lay scattered in confusion;
Taught single preparations to supply
Mixed monster-Forms of multiplicity:
Not in so large nor nauseous Dose to state
A succedaneum to Methridate;
But more successful (in whose Extract lies
No lurking drugs of discord qualities.)
Yours in Life's lowest Ebb might raise a flood,
And resublime the spirits of the blood:
Or (Phoenix-like) Man's ashes seem to turn
Into New Man, calcined in his own Urn.
Our baffled Maxims now at last may tell
Us, we mistook them for infallible;
As if whole Nature had in pupillage been
Unto one Galen or an Avicen.
The Act for such observance we repeal,
As void, 'cause never signed with Hermes Seal.
But what needs all this Train? which does but run
Like Lucifer before the rising Sun;
And with our dimmer Tapers strive in vain
To show thy Luster in the Meridian,
Who shinest best by thy own light, whilst we
Shadow thy praise with our obscurity.
It Is only our Ambitions hither clime
T'inrol our names, and bind them up with thine.
The honor's great enough for us, if we
Are only read by such as admire Thee.
Our memories might else been drowned in the dark,
Had they not swum for refuge to thy Ark.
R. B. Iatrophilos.

The SUMMARY.
1. THe difficulty of discourse without the knowledge of the Mind, without
which, it is but a discursion only.

2. The Author pressed with abundance of matter, and the thoughts of being
tedious in this work.

3. Some reasons of his Appeal to the Magistr^e.

4. A natural disposition, and unnatural distemper in us to swallow implicitly
those things which are as poison to us, and with a naus^ous reluctance to kick
at good food.

5 The common fate already adjudg'd of the Authors intentions, and this his
undertaking, by ignorant and unadvised pretenders.

6 His being tempted to be silent, and leave these things to time.

7 The Authors protestation.

8 Every point in Physic, cannot in this work be touched; and more, is a work
too low for the Author.

9 The Science of Physic at this Day, found to be a mere imposture.

10 Its authority is more from our deluded credulity, then its own real verity.

11 The two grand Sectaries in Physic, and their clashing described.

12 They have made it a hard uneven path, and dangerous way.

13 Some had rather be not good, then not great Physicians.

14 Those twins, grave obstinacy, and formal ignorance, are the cause of the
slow progress in Physic to this very day, and of all the misery attends and
follows it.

15 The profession of the Author, why he fell ^ight down on the practick part
of Physic.

16 The Studies, Books, Councels and practices of Physicians sound of nothing
but trifles.

17 A brief Summary of the grand helps, and universal remedies of Physicians at
this day.

18 The Authors shame, that we should both in Philosophy and Physic be the
Apes and Zanies of ignorant fellows in Nature.

19 The Archetype not being good, in the understanding, our imitation of it,
must be as bad.

20 Nature loathes the impurities and crudities of our common medicines at this
day in the shops.

21 The diseases of the medicines are first to be cured.

22 Custom and her adherents, another reason of the little profit in Physic,
especially the pharmacentick part.

23 The r^spect had to Antiquity, another error extremely prejudicial to the
advancement of Sciences.

24 The necessity of acquiring new knowledge in, and perfecting the Art of
Physic, is demonstrable from the defect thereof.

25 Physic a Science which should teach a man so perfectly to understand
Nature, that it might be ease for him to exempt himself from all kinds of
diseases.

26 It ought to be the subject of our lamentation, that other Arts and
Professions every day receive new light and further perfection, and this of
Physic little or none at all.

27 The tedious Lectures of Anatomy for these two thousand years, with the
curious inspections, have not bettered the Physicians of this day, one jot in
the sanation of diseases.

28 The Author desires this may not be published, to the dishonor of this
Nation, for the faults of some few.

29 The time is a coming, when it shall be a byword and shame to be a good
Physician.

30 Reading no way conducible to knowing.

31 Galen not at all known in Pyrotechnal Phylosophie, nor never saw Rose Water.

32 The falsity of that saying, The D^sease known, it is half way to the Cure.

33 The vanity of the Physicians applying themselves to the Galenical
temperaments of heat and cold, in the vulgar Physic of the shops.

34 All the medicines of the shops in Antipodaean position to our bodies, and
the diseases of our Country.

35 The Schools ignorant of the Quiddities and Dihoties of things.

36 The Schools have introduced, and Physicians know only a palliative Cure of
Diseases.

37 The bald shifts of the schools in rendering diseases as incurable, and
turning them over to the simple rules of diet.

38 Physicians begin to be sensible of their own delusions, their
unsuccessfulness, and infelicity of curing.

39 The Galenical Physicians fear to be out-gone by the Chemists.

40 Speculation has darkened the glory of practice, and is the pattern of
idleness.

41 The eff^cts of Physic, more like a Shambles, then a Sanctuary.

42 Among all Arts, none more inhumane then Physic.

43 The Authors study.

44 Too much of opinion in the intellectual Art of Chemistry, as it is handled.

45 The Author not troubled at either the difficulty or censure of this work.

46 The Conclusive proposition.

47 This work, though strange and paradoxical, yet honorable.

48 He that shall attain to restore Physic, (such as is declared in figure 25)
to it is pristine glory, shall deserve to be thought the highest and chiefest
Benefactor of humane life.

49 Two Hydra's of several oppositions, discovered.

50 The Authors requests of his Judges.

51 That he might not be mistaken, but that the reformation in Physic may be
orderly and legal.

53 A distinction between the gray-hair'd Physic of the Ancients, and the old
scurf of Galen.

54 The dotage of them who dwell upon Antiquity.

55 Who are the only Cathedral Doctors and Physicians of the times.

56 What kind of honor is due to the Physician.

57 A fourfold ignorance of Physicians.

58 The Authors excuse for his roundness and plain dealing.

59 A Metamorphosis in the whole System of diseases.

60 A censure of a rash kind of men, who ^oldly rush into Physic, of whom the
Magistrate ought to take care, or a description of several Physicians or Sects.

61 Galen, an Empyrick, and his Master Quintius.

62 Every disease Curable.

63 All things cry out for revenge against the Galenical contemners of
Pyrotechny.

64 The preparation of true medicine is not proper, nor does not belong to our
Apothecaries or Pharmacopolists.

65 The original of Dispensatories, and the medicining at this day.

66 A touch of the describers of Simples.

67 Indians and Barbarians excel the Europaeans in the matter of berbs.

68 The custom of Galen in stealing privily from others inventions.

69 The Sexes of Herbs brought upon the stage.

70 Signature of Herbs ridiculously cast upon Chyromancy.

71 Endowments of Simples from the Creation.

72 A foolish invention to refer Herbs to the Zodiac, and their virtues to
positions of Heaven.

73 A discourse touching the causes of Sympathy and Dyspathy, that in them
lies all the knowledge of occult properties. Examples of the same. Why a Drum
made of a Sheeps pelt, will not sound if another Drum of a Wolfs hide be beaten
a pretty distance.

74 That is least looked into, which ought to be most considered.

75 A shameful thing to measure the endowed gifts of Simples from the degree of
heat.

76 The stumbling of Herbalists.

77 No remedy against the defects of Simples as yet found out, besides the
contemptible decoctions of the shops.

78 The true deputation of Simples has remained hitherto raw and undiscovered.

79 Cruor and Sanguis differ also in Plants.

80 Quercetane deceived in Ice. The Father of lights the only giver of
knowledge infused without the observance of effects. The means to the knowledge
of the virtues of Simples vain.

81 A specific sapor in some things, besides acid, sharp, bitter, salt, etc.
that is appropriate to the Seed.

82 What things are required in the knowledge of Simples.

83 Pyrotechny opens and discovers the way.

84 The diversity of Agents in Nature.

85 The curious activity of Spagyrick medicines.

86 Balsome preserving juyces of herbs from putrefaction, without the
alteration of propriety.

87 An opinion of extracts and magisteries.

88 The strange and ridiculous confusion and plurality of Simples.

89 The shameful practice of Physicians in their S^cced^neums.

90 Dispensatories are good for nothing but expedition: not, appropriation.

91 Patients gulled, the Authority of the Magistrate not preventing.

92 God composes something which man may not separate, nor add a third to them.

93 When is Conjunction or Composition to be admitted.

94 The Authors opinion of the value of Dispensatories. That they have more
hurt then good in them.

95 The virtues and strength of many things are dulled by sweet things.

96 An answer to the objections for sweet things.

97 The vanity of Syrrups.

98 Chemistry preferred before all other Professions.

99 The use of Transmarine things.

100 The importation of Transmarine Drugs inculcated against by an instance of
the matter of that foul vice of drunkenness being taken away.

101 The weakness and defaults of decoctions.

102 The defects in Electuaries, Pills, and Consections.

103 Against the confusions of simples.

104 An Examination of Purgers, and Solutives.

105 The first confession of the Schools of their Purges.

106 The fraud of Correctives.

107 Another Confession.

108 A third.

109 The excuses of Physicians.

110 A fourth conf^ssion.

111 A deceit and cheat in the name.

112 It Is explained what it is to give a Laxative, while the humors are
turgid, and how full of fraud it is.

113 Nine notable things to the damage of the Schools.

114 A fifth Confession.

115 The vain and beastly subterfuge of the schools.

116 An Argument of poison from their stink.

117 An experimental proof.

118 The same out of Galen.

119 A probation from the effects.

120 The Schools impugn their own Theorems.

121 The Schools Hypotheses being firm, no man should ever die by Fevers, and,
it would be false that Purges are not to be given at the beginning of Fevers.

122 That this Aphorism includes deceit, and the inadvertency of Hippocrates.

123 What a true Luxative is.

124 Objections concerning Soluives, answered.

125 A threefold Character of a true and good Purge.

126 What kind of preparation of simpl^s is to be despised.

127 The boiling of odoriferous things to be condemned.

128 The burning of Hearts Horn ridiculous.

129 The fatal correction of many things.

130 The faults of Simples, and absurd Miscellanies in the confection
Lithontri^on, Aurea Alexandrina, and those two pillars, Mithridate and Treacle.

131 The whole Earth has poisons.

132 Under poisons lurks most powerful Arcana's.

133 An error in the Castration of Asarum. And another of his crudity.

134 No true poison in ens primum.

134 An examination of Vipers.

135 Arsenicals by what means they are the remedy of ulcers.

136 How poisons may be made wholesome remedies.

137 The Chymick medicines of the shops. And an examination of gold and gems in
healing.

138 An Objection of the Solution of Pearls and Coral.

139 How the things dissolving are separated from the dissolved in the Stomach.

140 To precipitate, what it signifies in Chimistry.

141 The objection repeated, a subterfuge to the softer tophes or stones of
animals. What is the action of gems in us. What it is that operates in a softer
stone, its powder remaining whole.

143 Mechanic experiments.

144 An examination of Bezoar stone.

144 The Galenists beat with their own weapons.

145 An unknown danger in the Schools by the use of Pearls dissolved.

146 Mechanic demonstrations of some abuses of the same.

147 An Axiom founded upon verity.

148 The Pearls which are dissolved in the shops, are not Pearls.

149 The restaurative virtue of an old Cock, an old woman's dream.

150 Clysters why an enemy to the Intestines.

151 Clysters never reach to the Ileon.

152 Poisons are hurtful under what title or way of reception soever they be
ingested.

153 Fevers are never drawn forth by Clysters.

154 Nourishing Clysters a sottish opinion. The use of Oils.

155 What goes away in clarified Sugar. The manner of applying externals.

156 The gathering of Simples.

157 An examination of Simple distilled waters of the Apothecaries. Great light
come unto Physic by true distillation.

151 A description of our distillation.

159 The great ignorance and error of the College that is committed in the
making of extract. Rudii.

160 A shameful, yet a common saying in Physicians.

161 An objection of the clouted-shooe Distillers, for cold herbs to be
distilled in a cold Still.

162 The Authors answer.

163 There is in all things lumen vitate, and in Cychory, Plantain, etc. as
well as any hot herb.

164 All vegetation is from the spirits.

165 An Analysis of Cychory. A great error in Physicians concerning opium and
anodynes.

165 An excellent Medicine made (...) Cychorie in the Jaundise.

166 Vegetables draw Mineral and metallic spirits unto them.

167 An examination of Vinegar in its generation or production.

168 What Tartar is.

169 Distilled Vinegar very bad.

170 The foolishness of Physicians in their Preparatories.

171 That rule of the schools concerning the activity of Simples, is concisely
argued.

172 A paradox is proved against the schools.

173 The explication of virtues, by what means it is made.

174 Whence it comes to pass that the virtues of medicines are alienated from
the schools.

Fol. 136. Fig. 195. The grand help of Phlebotomy or blood-letting is examined.

178 Blood-letting was at first learned from a Horse.

179 An universal proposition for Phlebotomy according to Galen.

180 A Syllogism against the same. A Logical probation.

183 That a Plethora of good blood is impossible. Cannot be said to be in a
neutral state of blood.

184 Phlebotomy cannot be demonstrated from the Theses of the schools.

185 What a Cacochymie is properly in the veins.

186 The endixes or co-indications of the schools in the place of proper
indication, and opposite to contra-indication, do but badly agree.

187 A proposition against blood-letting in a Fever.

189 The schools do infame their laxatives by their probations of Phlebotomy.
The end of Co-indications.

190 An advertisement of the Author,

191 The Turks and a great part of the world know not Phlebotomy, and yet are
cured.

192 How blood-letting does refrigerate.

193 A lamentable story of the hurt by blood-letting.

195. The essential state of Fevers.

195 An explanation of the precedent argument of refrigeration, and the
subtersuge of the schools.

197 That, not to go from one extreme to another, is badly urged in Physic
from demonstration

198 An Elenche, or sophistication in healing.

199 The argument of the Thesis of the Schools is opposed.

201 Nature the sole Aesculapius of diseases, and the strength, the Lord
paramount of indications.

202 Hippocrates is urged concerning Athletick bodies, but perversely understood.

203 The differences of depletions.

204 The Fever hurts less then blood-letting.

205 An obligation of Physicians.

206 The general intention in Fevers, and to it, blood-letting is opposite.

207 Mathematical demonstrations to prove that Phlebotomy greatly hurts.

208 The inconstancy and instability of Physicians argues the defect of
principles.

209 Phlebotomy cannot take away, nor diminish the cause of Fevers.

210 An argument from a sufficient ennumeration.

211 Another from the quality of blood.

212 Whither are the Schools hurried.

213 The vain hope in the mutations of the blood being let out.

214 That fictum impossible of the Schools, the putrefaction and corruption of
the blood in the veins, strictly arraigned.

215 The proposition, That the blood never putrefies in the veins.

216 Putrefaction what it is, according to the Peripateticks.

218 The native property of the veins.

219 Either Nature, or the Doctrine of the Schools is ruined.

220 A Paradigme of the diversicoloration of the blood.

221 The ridiculous Table of blood emitted.

222 An argument from the Plague against the custom of the Schools.

223 Another from the Plurisie.

224 The turbulency and effervescency of the blood do not declare its vitiosity.

225 The blew deceptions of the Schools.

226 An example that the blood putrefies not.

227 Corruption whence.

228 The haemorrhoidal blood not putrid.

229 A wonderful remedy against the Hemorrods.

230 The so much magnified successes of Phlebotomy examined. The vain
Co-indication of Phlebotomy as well in a Fever a Menstrua's.

230 D^rivation sometimes is useful in To pick diseases, but in the Topic of
Fevers impertinent.

231 Blood-letting hurtful in the Pluresie.

232 Revulsion a rule in Fevers.

233 Revulsion considered.

234 What the Physicians may learn from this Head.

235 An examination of Fo^tanels or Issues.

236 Cauteries or Issues nothing but permanent wounds.

238 The name of a Fontanel a cheat.

239 What God saw was good to be whole, is commended by the Schools to be
divided.

240 The childish and ridiculous promises of a Fontanel.

241 The denegation of the improbability of Catar^hes, denies the use of
Fontanels.

243 What is excreted or purged by a Fontanel. Nine conclusions against the
institution of a Fontanel.

244 The vain and foolish desires in a Fontanel:

245 To whom Fontanels are hurtful.

246 The indistinction of the Schools

247 The scope or end of Fontanels vanishes.

248 The world is basely cheated by Fontanels.

249 A Fontanel has no sympathy or communion with the Brain.

250 Absurd consequences about the doctrine of Fontanels.

251 The only sanctuary and refuge of the Schools.

252 An answer to that.

253 Fontanels driven upon Rocks.

254 What the Schools answer when they are driven to difficulties.

255 The multiplication and election of a Cautery, by what boldness it has
risen and been usurped.

256 Some facete jesting trifles of the Schools.

257 The Gout makes a mere mockery of Physicians.

258 Fontanels are foolish and ridiculous.

259 Wholly frustraneous in their desperate cases.

260 The Schools have not yet concluded in what cases Fontanels are helpful.

261 The cases in which Fontanels may be helpful.

262 The cruel and filthy remedy of Cauteries and Fontanels how they may be
prevented.

263 A Fontanel an unworthy thing to a Physician.

264 The examination of Diet.

265 They prescribe a Diet in diseases, who are ignorant of diseases.

266 Diet suspected to be an imposture.

267 Some errors about the rules of Diet.

268 Sanation is not under Diet, nor an effect of the Kitchen.

269 An opinion of the Author.

270 The object of Diet.

271 A proof from common event.

272 Oblique and sinister ends.

273 From an enumeration of the parts.

274 Diet does secretly accuse an ignorance of better means.

275 The just complaint of the poor.

276 The ridiculousness of Diet.

277 Bread is not so much Cibus as obsontum.

278 Why Bread is mingled with meats.

279 The main point of Diet.

280 A certain rule.

281 Why the Rules or Commands of Diet are faithless and treacherous.

282 Ten Theses or positions of the Author.

283 How far the virtue of Parsimony and temperance extends it self.

284 The necessity of Mastication.

285 Whence is the variety of things digested.

286 An examination of Ptisans.

287 Some precautions.

288 A question of the Ferment of of the Stomach.

289 Digestions prescribe the Rules of Diet.

290 There is in no Art or Science in the world such trisles and fopperies as
in that of Physic.

291 An examination of that universal intention of healing by Contra^ies.

292 Which is not found but in irascible entities.

293 Why any one nauseates Cheese, and how it comes to pass.

294 Heat is not contrary to cold, nor fire to water.

295 An examination of another universal intention of healing by simility, or
things like.

296 Of medicine made out of the Chemists Ter^^ry of Sal, Sulphur and Mercury.

297 What was the ancient and primitive method of healing.

298 When Chymick Medicines may justly take place.

299 Two sorts of people are out of the way concerning Chemistry.

300 Objections against Chemical medicines.

301 Answers to them.

302 The essential oil in aromaticks, or the crasis of the same, how it may be
made an Elixir, by a hundred times more powerful.

303 Most of the common used Chemical medicines of the shops adulterated, and
nothing worth.

304 The old way and method of Poysick called Galenical, good for nothing but
to fill the world with impudent Q^acks.

305 The Conclusion and desires of the Author concerning the Reformation of the
Universities in all its Sciences and body of learning, and of the chief subject
of this Book, Physic.

The PRINTER to the Reader.
REader, you are to take Notice, that by reason of some Accident happening
while the Book was under the Press, and the Authors absence, some faults have
escaped; and particularly, the transposition of the Figures, which must be read
as they are set down and directed in the Summary. Other faults mend as
follows.

ERRATA.
In the Epistle. page 4. line 5. read affected. p. 5. l. 18. r. lead.

In the Book. Page 5. line 20. read precipice. p. 11. l. 14. r. For he. p. 37.
l. 7. r. a species. p. 43. l. 2. r. denudate. p. 60. l. penult. r. morbifick.
p. 101. l. 11. r. saline. p. 103. l. ult. r. circumvolution. p. 119. l. 22. r.
empyreumate. p. 156. l. 16. r. veins. p. 169. l. 1. r. themselves. p. 190. l.
28. r. of a Fontanel. p. 196. l. 29. r. sanation. p. 197. l. 15. r. of the.

Mataeotechnia Medicinae. THE Vanity of the craft of Physic: OR A NEW
DISPENSATORY, Discovering the errors and weakness of the Grand universal
remedies of the Schools; as Blouding, Purging, Issues, Diet, etc. And the
particular Medicines of the Shops.
AS the defection of our Natures is such, we cannot look upon Nature with a
Optics except our eyes be anointed with the true eye salve; such also is our
shameless prostitution to that habituated Custom to the wild discursions only
of our tongue and pen, that we cannot fix to any real discourses, but what the
wanton and inconstant womb of putation has generated, and what the Labirynth
of weak fancy has coined, or what has been forged and circulated in the
Poniterium or Laboratory of our running, rambling Invention, being wyerdrawn
and obtruded upon us by the frighted remains of that caduce, specious and
seductive chameleon, Reason; So that it is now a difficulty, not barely to
think, not to talk and prate; the greater difficulty to discourse solidly,
except our tongues be touched with a coal from the Altar of God; and our
Cognition of objects in the verity of their essences be indubitate, flowing
from the serene and omni-lucent fountain, the Intellect: yet as to this my
Undertaking, I must in sober verity, and in all humility; without offense to
any, seriously profess, That, that which is the only discommodity of speaking
in a clear matter, the abundance of argument that presses to be uttered, and
the suspense of Judgment what to choose, and how in the multitude of Reason to
be not tedious, is the greatest difficulty which I expect here to meet with.

Schools or College, except they will stand to vye with the high Tribunal of
this Nation, chiefly when things of this Nature, bulk and size, are worthy of
the high notice of that supreme Court and power, and is their due by that grand
Charter of Philantie and selfe-concernment; more especially, when some of them
have undergone the lash of miserable experience; and Physicians themselves must
volent nolent subscribe to their own unsuccesfulnesse. And lastly the slow
progress they have made for these many years together in the principles and
practice of Physic, wherein as much refractorinesse also is observed, as of
former ages; and which is to be pitied, an Antipathy of their spirits for the
most part to this present government: all which, with much more may be said,
gives us small hopes of ever effecting our design with any good success,
without the help of them, to whom, as to all humane affairs, our addresses and
redresses are to be had.

Those that are come to that unnatural D^scrasie,

For alas! what shall I get by this undertaking? It is Minerva from the
needless causes of his purgation.

Neither mine ear nor thoughts have, I may safely obtest the highest, been
courted with the tickling affectations of praise, or deterred by dispaise or to
be accounted unworthy, evil, not knowing or rash, for the good of the Creation
of God, and so be my farrago, that bulkie and unwieldy part of blind learning,
as to distect each artery, vein, and nerve of the whole Edifice of Physik: For
every principle is not fatal to be thoroughly fifted, neither have I vowed my
life or pawned my studies to cleanse this Augaean stable by an Herculean
interpreting and detecting others dreams and dotages, a work too low, and too
hard for me; but yet perhaps such, as shall do more then whisper to the next
Ages. It is calculated for the Meridian of fifty two degrees, Northern
latitude, but may indifferently serve for the greatest part of the Europaean
World.

Polyus head, wherein there are observed to be (...) yea, more with pity, then
rashness we speak it, we find it to be a mere imposture, and scarce an Oedipus
in the world able to understand this knotted Sphynx, to which man's credulity,
through a conceived hope; has easily subscribed; religio medica, has begotten
it authority; because for the most part, we too easily believe, what we too
greedily wish or desire for; but yet it may as readily be made appear, that our
confidence in the Theorem's of physic at this day, stands more upon our
concessions then its patrons confessions.

hotly like a Lady, Physic is courted and cring'd to, at this day. Her chief
courtiers and contenders, are the old stercoratian and snaile creeper the
Galenist, and the upstart single fangl'd Paracelsian; these two, like Peter and
John, seek to out-runne one another, till they have out-runne their Breath,
their Books and the Constable, their Reason; if the good man ore take them to
see the peace kept, he bids them, with his staff his alone Charter and
prerogative, stand; at which, like Paul and Barnabas, the contention's so hot,
they evaporate in fumo, and one takes one way; and the other* another, so that
they come no agreement, but this, that it is all the mode d' Physic, every one
to follow his own Jnventions, and kill cum Privilegio.

These two between them, would precipitate and rationality in physic, from out
the open-common, and upper region of Ingenuity and light of Nature, into the
low marrish puddle enclosures of their own particular modes; and thereby have
made it like a percipice, or razors edge, to walk on: In which game there are
some of that temper, the pulse of whose art, skill and learning, beats after the
old rugged mode of Galen, who had good then not great Physicians; so that
through an imbecility of mind, not knowing how to make a departure from the
gravity of their usual pace, do oftentimes meet with and undergo the lash of
miserable experimentate miscarriage, by those twins, their grave obstinacy and
formal ignorance.

Hence is that flow progress in Physic! hence the lamentable and dreadful
effects! that men are either fatted up for the slaughter, or live walking
ghosts, a life of languishment and misery; who think it mercy to knock them on
the head, and cry out for an exit from the tragedy and more th^n back-burden of
cruelties, their bloody butcher, act, and load upon their carcasses, the scene
of all their blew experiments and trials: which has cast me perpendicular on
the Pharmaceuticall part of Physic: Quae enim in schola and Cathedra aliquando
praeter rationem, plerunque ad acuenda ingenia Juventutis in theoria
proponuntur, sunt toleranda: Quae vero ^n praxi For unto us, and any Judgment
that is not of a cast with those subjected to the tyranny of Custom and
Prescription, it seems very grievous, that the studies, books, Orations,
Councels, Conversations Chairs and practices of Physicians sound of nothing but
trifles healing, seems now adays to be moved upon the slender hinges of
purgations, phlebotomy or blouding, scaring scarifications, boxing, cupping,
bath, sweatings, fontanels, Cau^eries; and in short, upon no other then the
diminution of strength, and emaciations of the body, and abbreviations of the
life, or exsiccation of Rheumes, the only complement in Physic now adays.

Europaean world, has not had one sober consult with thought, to consider what
postern-door for evasion or any escape there will be left, that for so many
hundred years down to posterity they have been the apes and monkies, the mimes
and zanies of poor heathenish literalism, both in Philosophy and Physic, that
they have sat like the dull praecisian poedagogues to the ferula and pedantick
Tyranny of the Stagirite, and ethnic Dispensatories, the mothes and Scarabe's
of Physic: For if the Archetype be not good which is in the understanding, the
imitation of it will hardly prove capable of success, or perpetuity; and if
the constitution of remedies, in their bulk, in their entity, in their
horizon, do square to an ill-affected, or ill-aspected position; what will not
the diseases of them too, in their crudities, heterogenieties and impurities,
add to the affliction and grief of our languishing brother? It Is Nature to seek
help from an Enemy, from a second disease, excentricke, as bad, and sometime
worse then the Inherent, the foul disease of the medicine; whereby she must
needs fall into a greater peril, then if she were to try the combat only with
the sickness: but she despises these dreams of Physicians, and does loath
them and fly from them: Insomuch it appears, that the hectic of this age, but
our very constitution: and not so much the constitution and temper of our
remedies, and medicines, but the diseases of them, and sic e diametro, are to
be complained of, and worth our serious tears: all which Author then Custom
and her Adherents, which has been extremely disadvantagious to the whole round
of Physic, and in nothing more, then in the Pharmapoietick part. Its an error
tributary to the Custom House of most in the Sciences, better then what has
been found out by the Ancients, and some conceive not so much as what the
meaning of Physic is, or what they are good for. Now I know, I shall be sooner
des^i^ute of leisure, then of proof sufficient to evince, that the too great
Reverence born to Antiquity, is an error extremely prejudicial to the
advancement of Sciences, yea, so prejudicial, that till it be rejected, it is
impossible any new learning can be acquired; which may be one reason to prove,
that we are far from knowing all we are capable of. But there is physic: for
although that no man doubts that God has furnished this Earth with all things
necessary for man to conserve him therein, in perfect health, until an extreme
old age; and although there be nothing in the world so desired as these things,
so that her^tofore it has been the studies of Kings and Sages; yet experience,
and a few papers show, we are so far from having it wholly, that oftentimes a
man is chained to his bed by small diseases, which the most learned Physicians
understand not, and only make them rage more by their remedies, when they
undertake to expel them; wherein the defect of their art, and the necessity of
perfecting it, is so evident, that for those who understand not what the
meaning of Science which should teach so perfectly to understand the nature of
man, and all things, that may serve him for nutriments or remedies, that it
might be ease for him, thereby to exempt himself from all kinds of diseases.

It is to be lamented seriously, and the subject of other professions and
mechanic arts, and how they daily receive advancement, and ascend by the
degrees of new discoveries, nearer toward their perfection; but in this of
Physic, how cold, and dull they are in their most serious disquisitions
hitherto, though charity toward our neighbor be p^enally commended, that it
is now in its Apogaeo, or retrogradation, except it meet in Cazimi, in
conjunction with the body of the sun of truth: for all things have remained
most obscure, and for the most part, most false, and those things which should
chiefly conduce to the scope of healing, are not touched with so much as a
finger.

To what end tends the Anatomy of these two Ancients, and if we may not make an
emendation of those things that are past?

Let it not be told in Gath, nor publishd in Askelon Genius of the English
Nation, now made a Commonwealth, should be so low, so base, and so beggarly,
to dance after the pipe of mere whiflers, to be the Hinch-boys of Aristotle,
and confine themselves to the principles of those, who are as a dark lantern
in a thick night; as if we had no brick to make, without raking the straw, and
stubble of Galen, Hyppocrates, Mesine and other huddle of tongue Physicians; or
as if the whole batch of medicines would be dowe, without the Leaven of these
Tare-gatherers. Have we no Smith in England that we must thus foot it over to
the land of such uncircumcised Philistims? Its reported of Caesar, that he on a
day seeing wealthy strangers have little dogs and monkies in their arms, and
that they made mavelous much of them, he asked them if the women of their
Country had no Children? wisely reproving them by his question, in that they
bestowed their natural love and affection upon bruit beasts, which they should
have bestowed upon rational Creatures. Antisthenes answered one very wisely,
that told him Ismenias was an excellent player on the flute, but he is a
naughty man, said he, or else he could not be so cunning at the flute. I shall
leave the application to whom it concerns. So Philip King of Macedon, said to
his son Alexander, when at a feast he sung passing well, and like a Master in
Music; and art thou not ashamed son, to sing so well? And thereto we hope,
byword, and ignominy to be a good Physician, that is, well read in Galen, and
to be a proficient Galenist. Knowledge and learning without experience, is like
the statue of Polyphemus, which wants an eye. The hand is the instrument of
skill, and all contemplation. Such, (says an Author) as speak of matters of
state and government, but especially of matters of war, say we, chiefly of
matters of Physic, by the book, speak but as book-knights, as the French
proverb terms them, after the manner of the Grecians, who call him a
book-Pilot, which has not the sure and certain knowledge of the things that he
speaks of; meaning thereby, that it is not for a man to trust to the
understanding he has gotten by reading Galenists then, be accounted as a
sacrament, seeing their Parent in Physic, was not at all known in pyrotechnal
Philosophy: or Fhe poor man had never in all his life the happiness to see so
much as Rosewater. His ambition to be Principate in Physic, in such a poverty
of knowledge, had bin a little excusable, if once at least, he had had the
knowledge and skill, to extract any real principle out of any thing, and so
might have proceeded, and been cring'd to, as Monarch of Physic; and not so
easily exposed himself, to be a laughing stock to posterity and ingenious heads
of his time, by his huge volumes and blew Comments on diseases.

I wish I had not occasion to bewail, when in the concentrations of my mind, I
am led to consider the falsity of that saying, not less vain and unsuccesful,
then common; that when the Disease is known, it is half way to the cure; so
that the other half, is left as the alone, and proper work of medicines, but
how unable, lamentable experience will testify. This is that has amused me,
that the Schools in the Remedies of Diseases, both of simples and their
mortarian labor of Compositions, have applied themselves to the threed-bare
and short-coated descriptions and discourses of Heat and Cold; both in the
Crasis of things, with the Nature, Elements, temperament, humors, powers; that
as out of the Monocracy and single-sol'd intemperature of the Liver, they have
rendered us perhaps two hundred Diseases; so out of this Binary of Heat and
Cold, they have builded their indispensable Dispensatory, and uttered to us a
thousand medicines, in antipodaean position to the diseases of our Country.
What more gross and palpable thick darkness, and ignorance? As if the whole
make of the universe, with such an infinity and alterity of Natures, were to be
patch't up with the two fig leaves, of Heat and Cold: quiddities, and Dihoties
of things, as of that one the essence of the blood, with that Diananizing of
those Terra del' fogo's or incognita's, the scene of humors, beyond the line
and America of Nature, and solid truth, has obtenebrated the whole table of
Physic, by undue indistinction; so has it been a means to usher in that
incongruous form of unadaequat remedies, and thereby to become a laborious
cherisher, to devolve and heap up one huge half of all the languishing
miseries and Calamities on man since Adam.

systeme, or batch of medicines of the shops do to that copious company of
incurables, that they have ranged and reckoned, as desperate: For of them they
have given but a slight touch, and made a little and maiden-like bashful
mention, and introduced only a palliative cure, and left the rest to the
providence, protection and completing of Nature, and kitchin-Physick: so that
in the end it appears, how full of nature, or make any assault and battery upon
the Eenemy; when they shall bring almost all diseases into the Catalogue of
incurables, or turn them over to serve out their prenticeship, with the number
of them, who are to be cured by change of Air, diet and kitchin-Physick; that
for the most part some of those (...) or Triacle sellers, or some old woman
must cure, whom the great learning and skill of Physicians have left as
uncurable, and then go about to excuse their ignorance and temerity, with a
salva inobedientia aegrorum circa dietae regulas non stricte servatas. Ah alas!
how many absurdities and abuses are committed with these deceits, which to the
world are not yet sufficiently known.

But we have just cause to hope, at least to wish, Thysitians will now at
length suffer themselves to be instructed, from the autopticall
unsuccessefulnesse of their own practice, what straw devices, what lean, idle
sleights their thoughts have suggested to flatter their starved hopes: And to
me it is an Argument not to be slighted, that the schools, and Physicians of
our days, begin to be sensible of the ignominy cast upon them, and their art,
by the sling of vulgar tongues, from their infelicity of curing; that they now
are persuaded, to look a little back to chymick remedies; that now there is a
bridge from Galen to Paracelsus, and they can easily remove their Landmarks,
and neglecting the foundations of their own art, they can as indifferently and
promiscuously use any chymick remedies, and most miserable poisons, as those,
which their Dispensato ries have described, and taken upon Galenists fearing to
be outgon, what by the Collier Chemist and the Chymaericall contemplative
Chemist, and perceiving the dullness both of the remedies, and Theorems of
their Patron, can a little bend the hams suppled with the oil of smooth and
implicit credulity, and an idle lazy subscription, and have now stooped to
that infatuated principle of Tartars of Paracelsus his own coin.

experience; have forsaken her standard principles, and have reduced man's mind
from the greatness of works to the smalnesse of oblique and circulatory way of
intelligence, speculation, idleness, and laziness, which weakly understood,
and violently put in practice, has made a Shambles, rather then a Sanctuary,
to butcher men violently, and devour and destroy them insensibly, then give
ease or succor.

humane Arts, through so many ages undertaken and usurped, then that art, which
by a concentrick subscription does make new experiments by the deaths of men,
where the Earth covers the vices, the errors and fraud of its professors; who
having never touched so much as to the bark and utter shell of knowledge, and
although they creep on their bellies all days of their lives, and feed upon
the dust of the earh apt to be blown away by every puff of solid truth, yet
think they are in the third heaven of Physic, and light of nature, and by
reading of Galen and Aristotle, conceit they have rifled her rich Treasuries,
traced her footsteps to a hair, and exactly surveyed the whole field and round
of Nature. But verily they who think so, if they be such as have a mind large
enough to take into their thougts a general survey of natural and humane
things, would soon prove themselves in that opinion, far deceived, and would
soon tie up their tongues, discerning themselves all this while, like the high
flown, selfe-conceited Laodicea. For while they presume and deem they keep the
keys of the science, do yet neither themselves enter into the Closet and inner
parlour of Nature, nor will they admit willingly others that would.

I thought once to have becalmed this Sea of distraction Trident of chymicall
Theorem's, whom as a Lady of honor I have courted, and devoutly kissed, and to
whom, I am not ashamed to profess I ow my strict observance; but alas and alack
for woe! I could find no rest here: I found too much of the leaven of
Chrysippus, who was the first that pulled Plato's days, and the line it seems
is not yet extinct. Because therefore I cannot fool my own credulity so far,
as to sit down to an implicit conformity, coopt up and immured within these
paper walls; and finding it a slaughterhouse of humanity, and to conspire to
the extirpation of whole families and Commonwealths, (the best part of the
world,) and seeing I plow in the same field, I shall endeavor, and am resolved
by the knife of chiropona^ pyr^techny to cut the throat of these Pe^ty-toggers
and let ^ut the heart-bloud of the blind Physic of this Nation, who deserves
to be the leading card and do humbly conceive Crocodile, who seems to weep
for, and offer help to, the afflictions and languishing miseries of men, and
yet destroies them, might spend its utmost date in this Commonwealth; and that
there might be some course taken in the body of Physic, in this Nation, that
the squalid diseases of Physic and medicines might be cured; without which, no
hopes of ever curing the sicknesses of the body of man: this therefore shall be
the steerage, the task and period of this discourse, to prove,



I think, I shall have no just Cause to complain of any thing but that it is
indeed too copious to be the matter of a dispute, or a defense, rather to be
yielded, as in the best ages, a thing of common reason, not of controversy.

is most honorable, for he that leads, has this advantage above others, if
others follow him, he has the glory of it, if not, he has the excuse of
prejudice.

He therefore who by adventuring shall be so happy,

In which work, he whose courage can serve him Hydra's of several oppositions;
the one, from them, who would exact the tunnage and poundage of all knowledge
and skill, and excise all ingenuity and Autergie; who have sworn themselves to
long custom, and the affected tedious scrible of Galen; whose whole sphere of
reason, art, skill and practice, turns in Galens Zenith, and his accomplices,
will not out of the road: The other from those, whose formal ignorance gross
and vulgar apprehensions, together with their grave obstinacy, ('twixt whom an
entire league has ever been held) conceit but low of Physic, whose cloudy and
imperfect optics, could never Mysteries of Nature, and in the work of healing,
think they have all. This only is desired of them who are minded to judge
hardly of thus maintaining, that they would be still, and hear all out, nor
think it equal to answer deliberate reason, with sudden heat and noise;
remembering this, that many truths, now of reverend esteem and Credit, had their
birth and beginning once from singular and private thoughts, while the most of
men were otherwise possessed, and had the fate at first to be generally
exploded and exclaimed on, by many violent opposers: Nevertheless it shall be
here sought by due ways and means to reclaim, and bring it from under the
rubbish of gentilish and anarchicall principles, into the Monarchy of
pyrotechnall Images, in the zeal of their hammers often violating the sepulchers
of good men; or rudely break up, not

The Apollinian science then, or art of Physic, is every where brought upon
the Stage; and made the laughing stock of the sick-brain'd vulgar; because
Physicians, who have heterodogmatiz'd, and ancient Physic, and them who wear
her honorable silver livery, from the old scurff of Galen and his accomplices,
benighted to the clouds of ignorance, and that Tatterdemalion Lanostema of
Peripatetical and Galenical predicaments of qualities; whereby, to heads of a
larger size, they seem to have put out their own eyes, and willingly subject
themselves, like Mill-horses to grind in the Mill-house of custom and
Tradition, and aforehand, to have staked themselves to a resolution to confine
to the Custom of the Schools, and sit down to a precise Conformity, to lap up
the prodigious vomits of Aristotle, Galen and other illiterate Ethnicks, and in
effect to prescribe all the heads of the present age, as Pupils to the dull and
doting advisoes of the ancient, precedent Paper-stuffers; and then no less to
say, as in supernatural things they are wont, so in natural, to make it a
kind of blasphemy, at least presumption, to step one hairs breadth from the
cried up and vulgar received way: So hardly in good sooth can the dotage of
those who dwell upon antiquity, allow present times any share For we are not
overbold to suppose what they read, they believe, and what they believe, they
leave to the confection of an Apothecary and family, without any manual or
mechanic experiment. For who among the foremost of them, can justify their
positions and rules by practice; not by their hands, but fancies. Hence it is
that every druggist and old woman, with Mother Midnight, and of every
occupation sally forth, and dare to intrude themselves into the practice of
Physic, putting an affront upon Physicians, because oftimes in many things
they excel them. For of old they are wont to reserve somethings to themselves,
as a pledge of their fame and family: But after that the slothful and lazy
disquisitions of Physicians prevailed, and the itch of Gain turned Physic into
a plow, to make long furrow's on the backs of poor mortals, by the just
judgment of God all things went to wrack.

The Schools will have the shuffling and cutting physicians, so that the whole
pack of those that by them are accounted worthy, are they who have subscribed
to the ignorance and unskilfulnesse of Ethnicks; that the Cathedral of all
reason, learning, skill, Philosophy and all judgment, might vail to them, and
they keep the keys; and man's life it self should be committed to them. So
that if he be but an Academick, though a mere mammothrept, and perhaps a Midas,
if they can but hide his two ambitious ears, which they can easily do, by his
implicit conformity, he shall pass for Cathedral Doctor, a Physician in
folio, with an imprimatur on his back, as if he were the microcosmall Council
of State's chief Physician, cum privilegio custod, salutis populi: so that upon
the posts, and frontispeice of the medicall conclave is written like that of
Plato's Academy, with a Nemo huc ingrediatur nisi etc. Whereby all others are
like a pawn at Chesse, fill up a Room, and that is all. This is now handed down
to us Europaeans, and is in possession and practice among English men, that
has carried away the bays from all others, that they will not be befooled of
their liberties, nor blinded in their understandings, by any devise: so that
charity is grown cold, and sloth introduced under a more fafer seal, and long
use has confirmed this begotten ignorance, pretending the right of
prescription. And we wish it do not prove a kind of staple merchandise, to be
sealed and stamped like our Broad-cloth, or Wool-packs; and that Art and
Ingenuity become not tributary to the Custom House of error, opinion and
Customs, and that the Factors or Farmers thereof, do not so monopolize, or
monarchize, to put truth at the bottom of the sack, and their own inventions at
the sacks mouth; whereby God should withdraw his gifts, and those which Paul
would have widows to be honored, that were widows indeed, in good works;
according to the command, which has ordained the Physician to be honored, who
shall truly be a Physician in good works, and so shall testify that he is
created, and chosen of God; whose works shall follow him, worthy of his
vocation, as letters patents, as signs and merits of his honor: which text
being considered we find honor to be appointed to the Physician because of
necessity; which necessity does presuppose bringing forth fruit, otherwise in
vain: not that the force of the precept, runs so in necessity, as, that when a
sound man does not need a Physician, that then he is to be honored: For then a
Judge, Counselor, Lawyer, Soldier, Husbandman, Weaver; etc. should be
prescribed to be honored, by the same right of necessity. Honor therefore is
ordained to the Physician, created by the goodness of the highest for the
necessity of the sick, to heal them: But the necessities of a soldier, Judge,
Executioner, weaver, etc. are not considered, as chosen by God, but as promoted
by men, to execute those offices, that are requisite, and that from the malice
of men.

medica^ profession, and has lef^ it without honor* namely, the ignorance of
causes, the remedy, the manner of making it, and coaptation of it. Truly as
pyro^^chn^ does open bodies before our eyes, that are locked; so also it opens
the gate unto natural Philosophy Under the ignorance and sloth of the Schools,
the true medicine has lurked so depressed, that that which should have brought
the greatest light unto the Physician, seeing the whole work is accounted
mechanic, the want whereof is his blindness, and unskilfulnesse, that through
pride and long Custom, is transferred out of his own hands, into the hands of
an Apothecary and his servants; that now he sees not with his own eyes, nor
handles with his own hands, nor understands with his own Intellect and
judgment, so that here lies the mystery of iniquity.

forma R. P. both in the very name, nature, right constitution and right
reformation of it; as also from the effect of the disputation, when it comes in
competition with life, with diseases, with my neighbor, my Friend, my brother,
my vocation, with the truth, with good, with hurt, with things so truly
serious, and of such moment. For I propound not to my self the thanks or favor
of any man, having also learned to run through good report, and evil report.
For my own understanding tells me, that the Art of Physic has stood a long
time at a stay, as is a shame to think; without any progress made; because we
had rather stand to, and bring honor to, and deck and polish the Inventions of
Foreigners, Greeks, Barbarians and Ethnicks. In the mean while there is a
metamorphosis systeme of diseases; new diseases arise, which Galen and
Hippocrates never knew; and the old ones with stranger and crueller symptoms;
for they rise again disguised, therefore appear illegitimate, not answering to
the descriptions of the former: And that such a thing as this should stand at a
stay, without any progress, is both shame and lamentation; while our healths
and lives call greatly for an increase of the knowledge of healing. How much,
and to what end has that lazy, dull and ungenerous kind of Physicians hindered
the light of Physic, from breaking forth, who are wise only from an another
Comment, and deny, that the art can increase above what they know: And
therefore what they know not, they drive with a certain desperation, into the
Catologus of incurable. As if our Ancestors resting places, were to be like
Hercules pillars, inscribed vith a Ne plus ultra; as if they had attained to
the Meridian of all knowledge, by the fixed North Pole of all perfection; and on
that Axletree must turn the whole Globe of posterities knowledge, with the
whole Hierarchy of lesser and greater increasings: as if the wits and spirits
of the present times would serve for nothing, but to go a wool-gathering in the
wilderness or wild fields of the foregoing sheep-shearers; or were fit for
nothing, but to sit with their hands in their pockets, in a lazy, and implicit
conformity to this medical statue of Aesculapius; and rather then to correct,
add, increase, perfect, purg and reform the present mode and practice, had
rather subscribe to it, and be an obedient son of the former Physick-fathers,
believe it cannot be amended, orits very difficult to go about, and the way is
not clear, and such like obstacles as these they put; as if the inventions of
our Grandfathers had ramm'd up the way of our own industry, and had occluded
the Treasuries of wisdom; or as if she had now forsaken the thirsty and
laborious inquirer, to dwell against her nature with the arrogant and shallow
babbler. Such is the sweetness of gain, that every one brags of, and with love
admires their confusions and m^scellanies of medicines, which they call
magistrall Receipts: But the more secret things, which in times past rendered
Physicians that were lovers of labor very famous, by the stupify'd drowsiness
of Physicians, contracted by the opium of dull ignorance and sloth, are now
slipped into the hands of Apothecaries, and old women.

Physicians are those, who truly are not educated and instructed to this, but
prompt of nature, whose Genius leads them to it, say they, and are cut out, and
are configurated for it, whose bare inclination, and the tickling itch of gain
is the Ascendant, daring any thing, which they have heard to have profited
others, without any disquisition, cognition, and discrimination of causes: For
thence have almost all the experiments of the Schools flowed forth: which Galen
has confirmed by the example of his master Quintius. For making experiments by
the deaths of men, the Schools call their graduats most expert. Others, that
are vulgar Physicians, had rather heal vulgar only, and to these they give
their Counsels: some also of favor only, and being asked; but the most part
for the ambition of honor that they might be esteemed as wise men, possess
this innate kind of vice. Of the same sort are those deceivers, who would seem
to be rich, and therefore give all their ministrations gratis, to the
destruction or casual health of people. To these succeed they, who covet not
moneys, but gifts, lest they should seem below the condition of great and noble
men, and deserve nothing they say, but do it for a common good. The like to
these are they, who confess truly that they are not Physicians, but have great
skill in Physic, and have their secrets and receipts from Kings, Emperors,
Queens and great Ladies: For these are wont to suborn the middle sort of
people, which do extol the price of the medicine. Others there are who turn
themselves into Physicians, who have been old Soldiers, and now left the
wars, brag of, and show their wounds, and thereby think, and persuade
themselves they have got great experience. Some of the Clergy also, Priests and
poor Scholars, that have nothing else to do must now turn Physicians. Some
silenced ministers and outed of their benefices, lay hold upon Physic, and
commit force and violence to her body, that if one fails, the other may hold, and
think their Latin, and their Coat, the grand Charter, to entitle them to the
practice in Physic. There are a generation also who pretend to Astrology,
Chiromancy, (and why not to Coscinomancy) to Physiognomy too, dare tamper with
Physic, and by schemes, Angles, and Configuraions predict not only diseases,
but the Cure also, and so think themselves able Physicians, and the rather,
because they are now masters of Art, in, and instituted by, the heavenly
Academy, and College of stars. Others scrible upon paper, (not the innoxious
words of Solomon,) but Characters, charms as they call them, whereby Diseases,
as well as Devils are chased away, and cross themselves before and behind,
least the Devil should take him away, writing powerful words. There are also,
who are well known in diverse Idioms, and pretend to speak Chaldiack, Arabic or
Dalmatick, and are laden with many arts; at last vaunt only de mathesi or
historiis: Many of these know nothing less then to make the Philosophers
stone, and carry about them propagable mines, with a perpetual ferment. There
are they again who pretend to be baptized Jews (more wicked then the not
baptized) who have learned from the Kabala to mortify mercury diverse ways,
and also to prepare poisons variously, which are good against all diseases, and
many more. They brag of the Hebrew tongue to contain the fundaments of all
sciences, and the grand secrets of States, and Commonwealths, and are big with
the foreknowledge of futures: They often cite their Rabbines, the book of
Nebolohu, with the little key of Solomon, from whence they can read things
past, as well as to come. Others also assert the medicall art to be hereditary,
and to run in the line of their own prog^ny although they be all fools or
Knaves. And then at last if these cannot be accounted of among men, they have a
sure Card they think to play, and to be sure they will be received among women;
and to that end brag of the cosmetick faculty, of sweet ointments, oils and
perfumes; and the art to preserve their beauty, or repair it if ruined: And a
hundred to one, if they have not a fling at the Caelestiall stone too, of
Armenia, whereby they can cure a large catalogue of diseases: for these are cut
out of the same hide with Greeks and Jews; any thing will ^erve, to cheat the
credulous vulgar of their money, when it is known to all that know any thing of
Physic, that that divine blew stone, is but Roman vitriol, that is to be had
at every Druggist and Apothecaries shops, and is used by every horse-leach.
There is also a fugitive kind of men from the family of the Chemists, who while
they brag of select and precious things, sell nothing less then poisons, and
take all liberty of lying to the deluded ignorants: These fugitives being
apostate Idiots from the Chemists furnaces. But the Schools do with greater
security, and above all, with a most liberal authority impose their things
upon mortals. For when we shall come to show by the inevitable determination
of truth, that they have been hitherto ignorant of the knowledge of diseases,
and their remedies, not knowing the essence of a remedy, in its true nature,
end and use; as also ignorant of the knowledge of simples* (as we shall show
anon) their preparation, conjunction, and appropriation: In the mean time, they
promote their Scholars: This man because he has Latin and Greek, a Doctor or
Chirurgian to his Father: Another because he is made a master of Arts, has
heard and read lectures: Another also because he holds to Euclid's elements,
and brags he is for him; or that he has learned to dispute or rather scold
from Aristotle: Another has his call to practice Physic, from his daily
reading of books, and subtle problematicall disputing upon every proposition;
so that in three years they are changed into very learned men: Wherefore they
read the voluminous books of Galen, Avicen and the interpreters. Then they
revolve Herballs, wherein the shapes of herbs are deciphered to the life; the
which if they have not yet known very well, they are sent to the shops, and
gatherers of simples, with this mandate, that when they have well known the
effigies of the simples, they may return to their lections, which, with much
and long study they have collected out of diverse Authors, that they may learn
the powers of simples and compounds together with their applications: They see
also cadaverous sections, and hear and learn the Galenicall Lurrey, the method
of healing, the use of the parts and differences of pulses, and then when they
have thus learned to sol* fa, they lanch forth into the sea of diseases to cure
them, with that confidence and presumption, as if they had been at it a score
of years, and look for salutations 12 score off. We pity the miserable
condition of mankind obnoxious to so many internal calamities, and exposed to
so many external outrages and violences of such ignorant pretenders; who when
they have cruelly killed any Magistrate or great man, under the black and
dismal rules of the Schools, they fly to their Sanctuary, and take the liberty
and boldness, as of law, to bring him to, and call it the incurablenesse of
his disease, and every where have their patrons and accomplices: So much the
more miserably do poor mortals trust to them, because they hide their ignorance
among the vulgar, under the cloak of promotion and swearing; because they swear
they will faithfully help infirmities, which alas they are wholly ignorant of,
as also of the remedy; yea, that Hercules of Physic, Galen, their Prince, has
not Empiricks, howsoever he triumphs in his blew, and childish Throry of
complexions and degrees, tam secundum genera, quam loca. For Quintius Galens
master, was wholly an Empirick, and every where implored by his Scholar. Let
not the Schools then contemn practice and experience; but fling away their
pride and sloth, and it is easy to cure that disease among them, namely, the
uncurablenesse of diseases. By this means shall the power and virtue healing
stand upright under every weight; that is, all diseases with her are of one
price, and no diminution can be made by any disease. For God as he has not
made death, so neither does he rejoice in the perdition of the living: For he
made all Nations of the world easy to be cured, nor is there an exterminating
medicine. It may be granted, that sometimes some alimentary diseases may be
healed by the remedies of the shops, to wit, they which admit of spontaneous
consumptions, and easy resolutions: but in dangerous, difficult, strong
diseases, in which are fixed and chronicall roots, the use of them does more
hurt then good. Hippocrates truly left to posterity, the inquisition of higher
remedies; because our Ancestors lived in more happy Ages. But the Schools and
Physicians of an idle and lazy nature, have not respected the greater
necessities of mortals, but content with Galen and his Quintius, have not
perceived the defects of mortals, seeing gain has carried them away and they
are sure to have it, whatsoever the event be. To this carelessness and sloth of
theirs is witness, that they have not yet once thought of a medicine for the
stone, nor a poor Ague, or pain of the teeth.

The powers of things, as well as the thundering bespeak their ignorance: as if
the powers and virtues of medicine, were put into things by Nature, and the God
of Nature, only as a box to contain them, and not to be opened, and their
excellencies to be communicated. That Science then, through the shop of
medicine, the topic tabernacle of natural powers, and teaches to unlock
bodies that are shut, and to draw forth their hidden virtues, is not peculiar
to the family of Pharmacopolists, nor truly is the Pharmaceutick part a
handmaid to it (as is the talk of ignorants) but is a powerful Tecmarsis of
natural history.

Pharmacy truly began at first from the Merchants of simples, and collectors of
herbs; but then when the Physicians perceived, that it was not fit for every
one to boil, condite and prepare simples therefore that business also, was
committed to the seller of simples. In the mean while the more choice and
secret things, Physicians kept to themselves, whereby they purchased honor to
their posterity. But at length the sloth of Physicians increasing, they were
content to run through the streets, from house to house, to make a feat of gain,
by their frequency of visitations: Then at length chopped in Dispensatories, and
select forms, that they should be kept in the shops, and set to sale, rather
for expedition then propriety: whence at last Physicians joining compounds with
compounds, they administered to the sick sometimes a miscellany of a thousand
simples, that if one would not help, another should; at least, they would be
sure to excuse themselves, because they had carried on the cure of the sick,
according to prescribed rules. This is the medicining at this day, from which
how much the chymick Philosophy differs, they know who have but saluted the
same at the threshold, and but warmed at the hermetick fire.

Before the threshold of the shop, we cannot choose Describers of Simples. For
though there be no field more spacious, plentiful and pleasant on the whole
face of the Earth, nor where the mind may be more intent or delighted, then in
the matter of herbs and vegetables, the Earths Embroidery, and dame-Natures
revels, when in her Virgin vernall beauty, she bids Holy Day and rants it in
her great silken simple wardrobe of sundry vestments, bestudded with the
Pearls and Diamonds of lovely Flowers, yet notwithstanding less progress has
hardly been made elsewhere. For the Arabians, Gentiles, Barbarians, salvages,
and Indians, simples and things growing among them, then all the Europaean
world besides. Since, even from the days of Plato (wherein Dioscorides a
military man lived) there has almost nothing bin added to the vegetable
Commonwealth, or matter of herbs, but very much taken away, and the Tyranny of
we know not what strange Monsters of Physic introduced. Galen like Plagiary and
sneaking Filcher* suppressing the name of Dioscorides, makes use of his words,
which Pliny in the mean time besprinkles with many trifles, as being of a poor
and shallow judgment* and unable to distinguish that which is likely from that
which is true, and that which is false; by which means he heaped up a multitude
of things, that by the bulk of his book, he might equallize the fullness of his
name. But to this very day, even the more learned and leading part of
Physicians, do as yet hold a Logomachie and anxiously dispute only about the
shapes and names of Herbs. As if when the Countenance were known, we should
think the Powers did not openly speak unto them; the powers I say, first
delivered by Dioscorides: so that the medicall power, seems to have arrived
at her perfection, in the first Author. In the mean time those things that were
of greatest moment have been neglected hitherto.

Neotericks and more modern Authors, have begun to distinguish Herb^ into
sexes, and thinking that thereby they have discovered many things, they have
yet complained that these things have been veiled: As if Nature did labor in
jest, and not in earnest, being solicitous of the sex, whereas she contenteth
her self with that which is androgynous and promiscuous. For the sex respects
nothing but generation, and not the operation and relation of pairs: Wherefore
to the end that she who wholly referred her self to certain ends, known to her
Creator, might not frame one jot or title in vain, wheresoever there was no
need of the marks of sexes for generation in the composure of things, she quite
omitted them. But if of two simples the one is stronger or rougher then the
other, that denotes not the sex, but the degree of rougher or gentler motion;
for by longsoft motion, and circulation that is moderate; heat, sharpness,
roughness, or what ever else is presented to the Pentarchy of senses, as
extreme and violent, is taken away; and becomes a subject wholly subdued to
the scepter of our Nature, and yields a sweet smelling favor: for a fragrant
smell is nothing else then a sharp smell, when it is moderate. Example of Pepper
and Euphorbium; of ^ough and violent motions, and therefore have no fragrant
smell. While therefore the same simple rotteth, and is changed into little
animals, these are not of one, but of both sexes; which truly would not come to
pass if those simples had already a sex or sexuall powers within them. For of
the same numericall herb, insects, as well of the male, as of the female sex,
are promiscuously bred.

There has also arisen other sects afterward, signatures, as it were a kind
of Palmistry in Herbs; and this conceit has been very much promoted by the
root of Satyrion: And by means of this chiefly have they introduced scientia
signata, or Anatomia essata; that is, new-fangl'd names, and swelling titles,
to gloze their fopperies. For me, I am assured by faith, that neither is man
the Image of Nature, nor Nature the Image of man. God out of the eternal
providence of his Goodness and wisdom, has enough and more then enough
provided for necessities to come. He made and endowed simples to the designed
uses of all necessities; that is, he composed and directed them to the end and
scope of necessities: And therefore we may very lawfully and deservedly be
excused, if we conceive the whole business of the Conquest of diseases, lies
upon the shoulders and single stock of simples in their right preparation for
Physic; nay, we are bound to believe that simples in their simplicities, are
sufficient for the Cure of all diseases: wherefore we ought, and more becoming
it is to us of this Nation, to employ more study in the enquiry of their
virtues, then in discussion of problems concerning them, since in simples, that
is, in their right knowledge and Philosophical preparation, is the perfect
cure and remedy of all diseases; and consequently Dispensatories, the monument
of the lazy Liturgy of Physicians, and other Ethnic Directories, endeavoring
to compound, confound and confect many medicines, make but a Hodge-potch though
sewed in with sweet broth, their syrups; and though they start, and hotly
pursue the Game of simples, yet they loose their sent, grow lazy, undo all,
and with a secret kind of blasphemy go about to supply the divine
insufficiency: And let us be excused to pause a little, and bethink us every
way round e're we lay such a flat Solecisme upon the gracious and most benign
bounty of God. Hence Paracelsus writes to the Chirurgians; to what purpose do
you superadde vinegar to the root of Comfrey, or bole, or such like balefull
additaments, while God has composed this simple sufficient to cure the
fracture of the bones? Whatsoever thou shall add to it, is done as it were to
make God subject to thy correction. Thou art foully mistaken. In like manner we
conceive that God has sufficiently and perfectly composed in simples the
complete remedies of whatsoever diseases.

Anatomicall kindred with the Archevs of vegetables, whether we respect the
whole or the parts: For the endowments of simples are from the Creation, and
not from the usurpation of possession. For the proprieties were in herbs,
before sin, death and necessity. Besides we believe that God does give the
knowledge of simples to whom he will, out of supernatural grace, and not by
the signs of Nature. For what Chiromantick kindred with the Pleuresy has a
boars-tusk, goats-bloud, bulls-pizle, horse-dung or the herb daisie? Or what
signature have those simples common to them? Indeed I praise my Lord, who
primarily created all things to his glory, before there were any diseases, nor
did he mark the simples by reason of the diseases that might afterward
happen, but for the beauty of the Universe, whence arises honor to the Lord.

There have not likewise been wanting, who Zodiac, as Bartholomaeus
Carichterus for one, whose number being too narrow, they enlarged every one of
the signs into a triple section; so that they divided all the powers of Herbs
into thirty six, and enclosed them in a narrow room. There are they also who
square the powers, virtues, aspects and applications in the Horizon of herbs to
diseases, from certain positions of Heaven, emitting some virtue which moves
everything in the kind, which yet is diverse from the circular motion it self;
or else they make them less efficacious, that is, in plain English
ineffectual: And so they have denominated some herbs solar and some lunar, and
such like toies put into great words, as that mechanic experimentator has it
in his Sylva Sylvarum. It is manifest, that there are some Flowers that have
respect to the sun, in two kinds; The one by opening and shutting; and the
other by bowing and inclining the head. For Mary-golds, Tulippa's, Pimpernell,
and indeed most Flowers, do open or spread their leaves abroad, when the sun
shines serene and fair. And again (in some part) close them, or gather them
inward, either toward night, or when the sky is overcast. Of this there
needs no such solemn Reason to be assigned; as to say, that they rejoice at
the presence of the sun; and mourn at the absence thereof: For it may be
nothing else, but a little loading of the leaves, and swelling of them at the
bottom, with the moisture of the air; whereas the dry air does extend them:
And they make it a piece of the wonder, that Garden-claver will hide the stalk
when the sun shows bright; which is nothing but a full expansion of the
leaves. For the bowing and inclining the head it is found in the great flower
of the sun, in Mary-golds, Wart-wort, Mallow-flowers, and others. The Cause
is somewhat more obscure then the former* but I take it to be no other, but
that the part against which the sun beats, waxes more faint and flaccid in
the stalk, and thereby less able to support the Flower.

The like trifling wonder make they of Rosa solis, or as others admit it Ros
solis, with which if Purselan or some other herb were observed to do the like,
it would scarce be of half nine days, unless they think that it is like
Gideons Fleece of Wool, that the Dew should fall upon that, and no where else.
It were well truly that this member of the Commonwealth of universal
knowledge was more studied, namely, this of Sympathies and Dyspathies, for in
this Angle (note Reader) lies all the abstruse knowledge of occult properties;
which thing the Schools have openly proclaimed by their dull hammering upon and
toiling about it, and which they have banished by their fetters and gins,
desisting where they should have begun. There is then in inanimate things
inhabitant as species of sense, fantasy, yea and election: yet in an
analogous consideration, according to the capacity and degree of every thing.
We speak not here of plant-animalls which things might seem ridiculous to
many: but this our paradox will offend no man, though but meanly knowing. In
the first place then without doubt, there are some flowers that are the Laquies
of the sun; as well in lucid days, in which the sun shines not, as in the
nights; witnessing that they have both motion, sense, and love of the sun; so
much, as without which, its impossible they should accompany the clouded Sun.
And also as in the evening they lose the Sun, in his setting (who until he
hastens to the East, does not operate among us dwelling in the darkness or
shadow of the earth) yet nevertheless whether the night be hot, or cold, or
serene, or rainy, the flowers do face about equally from the west, and bend
themselves and salute the rising Sun. Which chiefly does denote they have the
knowledge of the rising and solar circuit, and in what part he is about to be
orient or occident. Call it the instinct of nature, or what you will. Names
shall not change the thing. Its a matter of fact, and the thing done has his
cause in the flower, in his own propriety, and not from any analogy, concord or
positionall influx; do not borrow this solissequous perambulation extra^^, but
it is their domestic and innate virtue. These things happen in plants
vegetably animate. The less wonder. But that they have place in minerals also,
I thus prove. There is almost nothing made in Nature, without his proper
motion: and there is nothing moved of its own accord, or by himself, but by
reason of the propriety put into it by the Creator, which the Ancients call
self-love, and will have philautie to be nature, firstborn, innate and given
for the custody of its self. And where this is present, its necessary also
there be Sympathy and Antipathy, in respect of the diversity of objects. drum
made of a sheeps skin, or asses skin, and let another hard by be beaten, that is
made of a wolfes hide, and upon that motion and sound, the other shall wax
dumb, and not found at all. Such is the proprieties of natural things that
they must act and yield to the dominion and donation of the virtues implanted
in them from the Creation, and which they enjoy and put forth from their own
domicilium; and not from any imaginary house of heaven. We would have all sects
confine themselves to a mediocrity in opinioning, and not ramble over the whole
wild of Fancy: For a very little patience, e're you hear, that the Earth has
of her self a seminall virtue of producing herbs, which she therefore beggeth
not from heaven. For the whole propriety of herbs is from the seed, and the
seminative power is taken from the Earth, according to holy writ, and not from
the faces of the Lights of Heaven. For suppose that sixteen or twenty stars
make a Constellation, or one of the twelve Houses, and is extended thirty
degrees: in what manner can so few stars contein the essences, seeds, faces
and properties of five hundred plants, differing in kind and inward properties?
Besides a thousand other attributes of so many things as well humane as
political: Away with these trifles. Every Plant enjoyes the capacity of
vegetation according to the virtue of its peculiar and domestic ferment
originally inoculated into its principles. And the Scripture intimates to us,
that God created every plant of the field before it was in the ground, and
every herb in the field before it grew. It Is a base thing truly then in
Christians to follow him hitherto as patron in Physics, when of faith we
believe that plants germinated, before the stars were, with a seminal virtue.
For there is always found in nature an agent, matter, and product or effect,
instrument and disposition. And the operation of generation depends on Nature,
and proper organs.

The proprieties are in the seeds of herbs, not in the heaven or stars. Those
powers of the stars which have been fictitiously imposed on heats, colds and
complections by that Patron of chymaericall fictions, are now grown out of
date. For the stars, whatsoever way they be taken, do much more differ from
Plants, then herbs from Clouds and hoar-frosts, or fishes from precious stones.
Wherefore let it be a sophisme to attribute effects to causes, which possess
in them no causality at all: That is to dream whilst one is awake, if he
believe such a thing, or by his own thinking to rove into madness: But we shall
supersede this theme, least being too busy in it, we should seem to those who
have false or thick eyes, to demolish the fabric of Astrology, or be found
great with a sarcasme.

Mathiolus, Tabernamontanus, Brassavolus, Ruellius, Fuchsus, Tragus, d'
Allichamp^us and other Herbalists, have hitherto been busied only about the
features, and visuall knowledge of Plants, but all of them in like manner
describe the virtues out of Dioscorides. They also constrain them to the
predicaments of qualities, to degrees of heat and cold, as demonstrating
something from the foundation: Certainly it simples from heat, and not from the
fountains of the seeds. Dodonaeus, Friso, Tabernamontanus with some few others,
although they insisted in the same footsteps of degrees, have yet subjoined
certain additions from their own or others experiences: but without doubt as
yet they are confused, uncertain and rudely distinguished, as being noted not
from science, but either from the discovery of the vulgar, scientiously
described the properties of simples. as he who treated of all, from the hysop
to the Cedar of Libanus; which is a certain sign that true sciences are not to
be drawn from any other then the Father of Lights. To come

We believe there is no member in the vegetable Commonwealth, or province of
herbs, but may be easily admitted and enrolled in the journall-book or
Catalogue of fit subjects to be reduced to the wholesome advisoes of digestion,
and may be wholly subdued to the scepter of our stomach; unless those who are
out of the line of communication, and listed in the bills of mortality,
excepted against in the list of non-compounders with the State of our vital
Economy, who have a certain adhaesion of malignity to them, and are adjudg'd
by the Parliament of our Intellects (where Reason sits sole Epistates) and
openly declared by the tyranny of their own actions and powers, to be desperate
malignants and Traitors to the present government and Republique of our Body.
Small truly is the number of pot herbs, and things belonging to food in the
Crasis of herbs: which paucity surely does accuse some certain malignity, which
rightly sequestered, then, and not before, do they give forth their powers, as
the end and scope of their mission, whom poisonous keepers did hide under
themselves. Truly vegetables do work but a little in us; and the stomach is
busied about them. Nor do they go farther, before they compound and pay the
fine of their sequestration; before they first deposite their whole estate,
that is, almost all the strength of their remedy. For otherwise the whole
Fabric of our peaceable Commonwealth might be undermined, and it might go ill
with us, and we should feel and smart under their tyranny, if the stomach, not
being able to make a repulse and tame the vegetable taken in, cannot subdue and
bring it under the rules and governments of his own Archaeus. For otherwise, if
a vegetable should go on, as Cu^iasseer, strongly fortified, and with his whole
strength, he would also be made a companion of excrements, or trouble the whole
economy of sanguification. For else, that which would have withstood the
action of the stomach, now accustomed to crude simples; how could it transmute
and tame, in the second digestion, the unaccustomed, in crude meats. The effect
of such remedies likewise would be of greater difficulty, and more laborious
work, then thence to expect fruit. Lastly, this being granted, the
indistinction, confusion and perpetual turbulency of our Economy, should be
condescended to; for if any thing be not first rightly subdued in the stomach,
and thence the ex crement first sequestered, it would march on to our very
vitalls. It is necessary therefore, that vegetables suffer digestions and
formal transmutations: and the digestive faculties themselves also in working,
do ordinarily suffer from the foreign faculties of vegetables: a thing truly
perilous, and of difficult experiment and judgment. Then finally over and
above, all things being weighed exactly, every virtue of the vegetables is
restrained and limited to his own degree. It Is enough truly that most of them
have annexed their own cruelties infamy, immaturities, scabbinesse,
rottenness, exantlation of their powers, besides their manifold filth and
impurities; forasmuch as they should be taken away with the emunctories
dedicated to the evacuation of excrement, it is unavoidable but that their whole
aliment is full of excrement: It is exceeding cruel therefore in the Schools,
that there has not been considered and found out a remedy against these
defects, besides the simple and contemptible decoctions of the shops. At
length, saving the censure of these, the injuries of plants being sequestered
(the burnden of which our nature without great ruin cannot bear) so great is
the debility of them beside their unusual protervity, that scarce any thing
praiseworthy can be hoped for, out of the bosom of vegetables; when not only
they are compelled to lay aside their fierceness, if they be admitted further
within; but also formally to be denthduate from all the benignity of
themselves, before the Citizens of our Re-publick can entertain them.

An entire and live animal cannot be bruised without dung: It is therefore to
be lamented that it has not yet been so consulted with thought and experience
to consider, that herbs have much dung, who never yet made any egestion
thereof; and are therefore to be purged, not with the common depuration, but
with greater Caution. Finally, in man we by many marks distinguish blood from
goar; but in plants it is enough to have said, That plant in subject consists
of diverse and opposite properties: progress then by some common sapors, and
uncertain events. For from the stalk of Poppy being wounded, distilleth opium.
Celandin weepeth a golden juice, and spurge a milky one: From Butter-burre
flows Gum, from Chameleon bird-lime; which simples if they be bruised, they
yield another far inferior juice, namely, dung and gore mingled with blood,
although they be clarified: For Beginners must learn to distinguish the blood
of plants, from their gore and Parenchyma or garbage; and also to separate
them, if they think even to attempt any thing praiseworthy by means of
simples. For hence it comes to pass, that although you labor stoutly in
extracting after the manner introduced by Neotericks, yet one dram of crude
Rubarb given in powder, will effect more, then whatsoever you shall extract out
of a dram and a half: For the stomach by its ferment resolves more, then the
juice comes to, which is drawn out by the Extractors, who without distinction
resolve dreggs and vile liquor of the Parenchyma or garbage: For Quercetane,
when he had observed that by the Chiromancy and Anatomy usually called signata,
the inward powers of things were not sufficiently examined, he called Pyromancy
into his aid, but fails in the way. His device was, out of the ashes of a
Nettle, to draw a weak Lixivium, which being put into an earthen vessel, and
by chance, frozen a little (for if the lixivium had been stronger, it would not
have bin frozen) in the morning admiring at it, he cries out, Aha! I behold in
the ice the figure of the leaves of the Nettle; and rejoicing founded an Axiom;
namely, that in ashes, the seminall substance which figureth herbs, remains
unconquered by the fire. But this good man declares his ignorance of
principles; not knowing in the first place, that all ice beginning, makes
jagged pikes, after the fashion of a Nettle-lease. Next that the Archaeus is
the figurer of the thing to be generated, which is long since burnt with fire,
before the coal or ashes be made. Thirdly if the seminall substance of herbs
were wrung from the lixivium, it ought to resemble not the leaves, but the
root, stalk, flowers, and fruit. But the figurative power of seeds lies hid in
the Archaeus, the Vulcan of herbs and generable things, who being not subject
to fleshly eyes, it is to be impetrated of God alone, that he would vouchsafe
to open the eyes of the mind which to Adam and to Solomon, at first sight
demonstrated the proprieties of things; which power and optic virtue to some
few of late days has been bestowed, St. Theresa having once mentally seen a
Crucifix, perceived that there were eyes of her mind, which he afterward kept
open during his whole life, and that the flesh shuts them by the corruption
of Nature.

For neither do we otherwise know natures a priori, nor do we know the
alterities, and diversities of the Archaeus but by bare observation. Indeed
many of the simples are bequeathed to us, but for the most part false and
incongruous. Nor does the reading of books make us skillful in knowing the
properties, but by observation: no otherwise then a Child that sings a song,
yet does not compose it, as neither does he know the first grounds of Harmony,
for which the tones were so to be disposed. If this happen in sensible things
known by the sense, the reason whereof the hearing measures; what shall not be
done in matter of Physic, wherein the powers of simples can be traced by no
sense? Now the descriptions of all sorts of Medicines, may be read in shops,
with a defect of the knowledge of the properties and agreement. For we speak of
the optic notion, falling under the sight, such as the soul, separated from
the body, enjoys, and such as God bestows in this life on whomsoever he
pleases, and has hitherto removed it far away from the Conclave of those, who
give all veneration to Heathen books. Wherefore the Father of Lights is to be
prayed, that he would vouch-safe to give us knowledge, as he gave to Bezeliel
and Aholiab, and to that famous society, and community of R. C. unto the glory
of his name, and the mere love of our neighbors: For by this means the Art of
Physic would stand in us upright under every pressure. But it is to be feared,
lest he who suffered to perish the books of Solomon, reserve this knowledge of
simples till the Age of Elias the Restorer. For the schools by the stairs of
Tastes have promised an entrance into the throne of the knowledge of simples, by
sharp, bitter, salt, sweet, astringent, acid, and unsavory, they say, they
measure heats and colds, as the Artists of all properties: And they have bin so
rash of judgment, that they have taken upon them to judge of the nature and
faculty of simples by their taste and relish, and thereby discern and determine
their first, second, and thirdqualities, to the which afterward all the virtue
of the said simples was attributed. But because they found not this an
universal rule always and in all things, and that it did deceive; they fled
to that back door of evasion for their ignorance and laziness, to the secret
and hidden properties, arising from the form and totality of substance. But
these proud ostentations have by experience bin made a folly beyond ridiculous.
These and such like starting-holes and subtilties have made of Physic a
Meander, a Wilderness, and wild labirynth of incertainty and unstable
formalities. We desire the linguacious Chemistry of these heads to tell us, how
many bitter things there are in taste, which nevertheless (according to the
edict of that rule) are not hot at all? For Opium and cychory which hitherto
they have held to be hot, yet they teach to be very cold. But what virtue so
cold I pray you is there in Opium, which shall make me sleep though unwilling,
and hot enough? If the coldness of the vapors, why do wines after dinner
provoke to sleep? whether therefore is there one identity of heat and cold to
the procuring of sleep? why therefore is cold singularly attributed to Opium?
why are not hot things equally reckoned narcotick and dormitive? how does opium
amaricate? and amaritude in the schools predominating is accounted hot?
Therefore it is of unavoidable necessity, that the schools should choose one of
these; to wit, either that the coldness of opium is not exceeding, and by
consequence that Opium does not produce sleep by his cold: or that bitterness
in the schools is a fallacious indicative of heat. For why is not cold
purselane somniferous, by reason of his third degree? why is not a manipule of
Purselane equivalent to two grains of opium, when the cold is more plentiful,
and does more powerfully refrigerate in such a portion, then in so little of
Opium? wherefore does Nightshade make one mad, and not rather by his Cold
produce sleep? But we find in opium a sharp salt, and sudorifick, also a
bitter oil, far receding from the odor of opium, yet saporiferous. Again,
how many sour things are there which by their saporall rules should be most
cold, which notwithstanding are most hot: as spirit of Nitre etc. Thus sharp
Camphire, which by their rules ought to be hot, yet notwithstanding they
affirm without controversy to be cold. In like manner Chrysulca, oil of
vitriol, sulphur etc. being sour, according to the rules of sapors ought to be
very cold. Thus also many sweet things there are in outward taste, which in
their internal substance, are nothing at all contemper'd. How many things that
excentrically and at the threshold or first beginning of taste, are altogether
unsavory, and without relish, which in the parlour, intrinsecally and in
faculty, are most sharp and biting. Honey, Cassia and Sugar are in their
concentrick substance so hot and violent, that out of them may be prepared such
dissolvers, as are wont to be made of Aqua fortis and Regis, which can dissolve
gold and silver as speedily as the other. Thus lead in its ^elcony or
frontispice yields out no taste to the tongue: and yet in his chamber and
internal substance, dwells a certain sugared de^ightfull sweetness, as is
notoriously known and confessed by th^se but meanly instructed in the famous
art of Chymis^ry. Let not us then lean upon that broken reed of qualities and
temperament of things, but more inwardly and exactly perpend, then by that
superficiary and slight manner of tasting and experimenting; but let their
inward bowels, each sinew be dissected, by the acute knife of Pyrotechny, where
they shall be found far otherwise, and oftentimes different, not only in
taste, but also in odor, and in their whole substance. But we will at length
show in its due place, either in this our work, or in the next, when we come
to perpend, detect and sum up the dotages of our Physic squarers by the
impartial Arithmetic of Reason and mechanic experiments of Pyrotechny, that
the schools have not yet so much as looked into the bark of the faculties of
things, and have therefore passed over the fountains of seminal properties.

specificall sapor in each thing, which ought to teach the property, if at
least any of the outward things that are signed do so. For example, there is in
Cinnamon besides sharpness, a peculiar grace in the sapor, which you shall
hardly find in any other simple else. So Gentian, Enula-Campana etc. besides
common bitterness, have a specificall sapor, which by reason of the
singularity to every simple, cannot be brought under rules, and is the sole
distinguisher of every property. Now that simples are to be chosen when they
are in their state and chief vigor, this is common to rusticks, to the schools,
and to me. Namely the seeds when they are almost dry; but the stalks and leaves
while they are succulent and full of sap; but the roots while they swell with
virtue, and are not yet exantlate and exhausted with generating and concocting:
which after they have along time lain still, the Archeus being awakened they
begin to think of, sprouting. Some advise to take the Autumn; but we for the
most part love the spring, which we have learnt by experience in Polypody,
Bryony etc. For the juice of herbs is gore which being more and more ripened,
is either collected and thickn'd, or ends in the nature of fibers, or
discharges it self while the vital power thinks of propagating seed:
Wherefore in searching out and choosing simples, nothing has bin more
neglected, then that which was most repuisite, and wherein even from the
beginning down hitherto, there has bin no progress made. For the powers of
simples, and their immediate subjects have remained unknown.

For they, besides the clear, and as it were optic praeparation, and
appropriation; especially the knowledge of sciences, which presupposes not
traditions delivered at pleasure, and passed over from one to another: But
praeparation does require not only the boylings of the shops, or poundings, but
the whole business of Pyrotechny, or art of working by fire: At length
adaptation, application, or appropriation requires a Theory founded in the
light of Nature concerning man, his diseases and affections; and then the
dependences, mutations, and alterations: It is therefore no marvail that the
single-sold doctrine of simples has stood deserted, and forlorn.

Almighty has been pleased to stir up Chemists, who might deservedly take in
hand the consideration of the transmutation, maturity, tincture and promotion
of powers, and so progressing by degrees to the unisone of Physic, their
followers became partakers of what they wished for. For they went not to the
immeasurablenesse of the imaginary feigned humors; their strife, and Chimaera of
defluxions; nor to the products or fruits of diseases (by taking away of which
they know there followed nothing but palliations of diseases, which are
attended usually with apostate and direful recidivations) but they converted
their study to those things, that had the priority of the former; knowing that
the potestative basis of many defects was imprinted in the Archaeus of life.
Wherefore by the purity, simplicity and subtilty of remedies, that Symbolize,
they endeavored to enter into the middle life; that so if any of them do not
penetrate to those things whereof we are first constituted, yet at least in the
threshold of them they open and expose their endowment, by exciting our powers
by their grateful salutation.

agents as seem in a manner to be justly ranked in the number of Patients; (and
only a corporal action is of this sort, and the obedience of the nutritive
faculty:) but there is also an other authority of agents not to be slighted,
which is the exposal of the native endowment upon the very midst of the life of
the Archaeus, by reason of the sequestration mortality, seculency and
turbulency; by means of which superiority, such kind of agents do not suffer
from their patients, much less are altered by resistance or reaction. For some
remedies thus prepared by the embosoming and secret insinuation of themselves,
do so refresh our faculties, that they ascertain us that they came for this
purpose in the world. For some recreat us with their fragrancy: There are
others also which being enclosed are hindered from showing their good will
toward us; as Gold and Jewels. Others, their bands being loosed and
emancipated from the fetters of corporiety, the alone Remora and clog of their
activity, are brought into play, and having gained the liberty and authority of
their powers, to act in their own Horizon, diradiate their virtues, erect us
from falling, and solace us, with as strong and vigorous embracements, as rank
and lethiferous poisons are wont to trip up and prosternat our strength. For
they drive out the venom of the body wherewith it is as it were leavened; yea
truly, both the corporal and fermentall poison; yet not that any medicine can
refect or restore anew the extinct, abolished and exhausted powers implanted in
the parts. But it has been all along an error of the Schools not to ferment
the juices of herbs together with their Parenchyma, before the segregation of
the best parts can possibly be made.

Next they neglect to enquire how the juice of things being pressed out by the
mere odor of a sulphurous fire, continues afterward uncorrupted, without
that Barbarian Condiment, sugar, or any other Additament; by favor of which,
it acquires a balsamic quality, and transfers the aetherial virtue, which is
incorporated with it, to a high and perfect Entelechy.

We are now come within ken of our expected port, and now will we descend to
the weak and pigmie labors of the shops. In the first place, though Extracts
may seem to ease the weak stomach of labor, yet do we not much esteem them, or
salute them with that magnifying, as they do their Hector and Ajax, those two
Alexipharmicall Colossi, Mit hridate and Treacle.
hewed out of ethnic Dispensatories, and that for the above noted errors. But
we willingly put Magisteryes in the room of Extracts; in which the whole
substance of the thing is reduced into its primitive juice: Which manner of
preparation will for ever remain unknown to vulgar Physicians. In which
iteration or going back of solution, the heterogenerous juices are of their own
accord separated, for the most part with diverse sediments or bottomes, one
swimming over the other, and one master-juice settles, notable for its
diversity, containing a seminall entity or substance.

miscellaneous mixture, and confused jumblings together of so many simples,
betraying both succedaneums, does scrue the Schools to hope, that if one thing
do not help, another will; Oh the shame of men! And so they associate many
things together by the commendation of the common Council of Herbalists,
extolled, even to an enacting, for the same purpose. To which are added those
fripperies of vulgar heads, stewed in the Hypocaust of ignorance, boiling and
conditing, or seasoning, the twin-born sisters of Cookery.

To which purpose Dispensatories are commended, only for expedition and
readiness, but not for propriety and exigence; as having only general and
universal Intentions, with the substitution and dispensation of one instead of
another; whence they are called Dispensatories, or the Colleges poud'ring Tub,
wherein are barrel'd up many mixtures, neither of their own, and which is worse
without Salt. As though Men had not brick of their own to make, but they must
gather the straw and stubble of Galen and his Fodder-eaters; a servitude worse,
and baser then Egyptian: what do we else then make their's the light of
Goshen, and our own the thick darkness of Egypt. That there should be bread
enough in our Fathers house, in our own Land, which is not a wilderness, and yet
that we should have such trunck-hos'd appetites, be so parsimonious as to diet
our selves, and be tied up to the manger; and feed upon the husks, and chaff of
Ethnic and barbarian long-winded compositions, that have no footing in nature
or art; nor any analogy among themselves, or to our bodies. But suppose them
good, supppose them Manna it self; yet if an Omer shall be allotted us; if they
shall be barrel'd up from age to age, from the first gathering to this last
Century, while God and Nature every morning rains down new, instead of being
fit to use, they will be found like reserved Manna, rather to breed worms and
stink. Well may they be called Dispensatories; as of dys, and penso, things
hard of digestion, or hardly considered or weighed in the balance of clear
Reason or experience. In all and every of which, the concourse and mixture of
crude simples makes the issue conjecturall. For the patient cheated for his
money, both by the fraud of the Druggist, and oath of the Doctor; thinking that
he can neither err, deceive nor be deceived that swears he will admit none to
the degrees of Physic, but him that is skillful and able. We could wish and
and pray the Magistrate would prevent so great mistaking of the patients, and
fraud of the Physicians.

For our own part we chiefly admire in simples a sincere composition which is
made according to the composure of God. In Comfrey we find a full remedy bole,
vinegar, or other foreign things, as we before hinted out of Paracelsus, you
then corrupt the mixture ordained experiment. And indeed we have a most
pregnant instance hereof in Ink and Tinctures.

Oftentimes under the penance of studies we have considered that since there
was in Nature a certain proportion of matter to matter, and form to form, that
there was the same observed in properties to properties, and consequently in
effects to effects. But the composition of simples did by and by teach our
understandings, the defect of these; where alterations presently enter upon the
mixture of seed, and for the most part destroy one another; no otherwise then
the seeds of many things pounded together and blended, elude the expectation of
increase. Afterward we knew by much sweat and oil, that the matters of
remedies, exalted to a higher dignity by mere preparation, ascend to the top of
perfection, liberty, subtilty, and purity; and would far excel the decoctions,
syrups, and honyed pouders of the Shops. For whosoever is well skilled in the
mechanic Pyrotechny, does clearly perceive with me, that there is no medicine
found in Dispensatories, that contains not in it more hurt then good. For the
Schools, which profess Hippocrates, humor that is sharp, bitter, salt, or
acid, they yet palliate, and season all their remedies with honey, or sugar;
thereby abating the properties of them, though of themselves they be feeble
enough; as if the only cure and top of all diseases consisted in that which is
sweet. For their answer is, that laxatives work grateful to the Palate; and
thirdly that they are by this means kept from mouldinesse and putrefaction. As
to the first, we admit that poisons have equal force whether they be swallowed
with, or without sugar: For the power of laxatives shows it self wholly in
the melting of the body, and the putrefaction of that which is melted, and so
ought to be infamous for poison Wherefore the answer of the Schools is
impertinent, by poisons, to the question, touching the remedies of diseases, as
they are bitter, sharp, etc.

To the second we say, that the answer is frivolous as long as the first is not
satisfied. So that they are as yet ignorant, that the militia of remedies are
too contemptible to charge a disease, and that the force and fort-royall of
them are changed and abated by sugar.

That to many, the taste of Aloes is more pleasant then the drinking of honey.
Finally, though they desire to sooth the tongue, yet they cannot sooth the
stomach, which turns at the very sight of medicines covered with the
Leger-demain of sugar: of the same size of foppery is that bauble for babies,
gilded pills. Notorious it is, that a thing of ^ew drops is more easily taken
in some vehicle, or liquor, and is more willingly entertained within, then if
it were sweetened with much sugar. In a word, that being mixed with a convenient
liquor, they insinuate themselves more deeply, and more friendly combine, then
if they were daubed with much sugar. That sugar though pleasing to them that
are in health, does yet quickly grow distasteful to such as are sick, and is an
utter enemy in most diseases of the stomach and womb; but in others, it often
makes the help of the medicine added, to become ridiculous. For sugar is
diametrically opposite, is the antartick pole, and at enmity with the acid
ferment of the stomach, and therefore makes the digestions more difficult. For
sugar is clarified with a lixivium of unstalk'd lime and potters clay: And if
Physicians had known the sharpness of the spirit of honey, and the filthy
dregs of sugar, Charity being not quite graded, we have the freeness to think,
they would have been content, to have used it more sparingly about the sick.

To the third, we say, that the Schools do herein medicaments from corruption,
without saucing, and castration of their vigor; wherefore the fraud of beastly
syrups, Loches, Eclegm's, and other the Tribe of daubing medicines, has been
sufficiently detected; which are made only of simples decocted, with the
additament of honey or sugar: and it makes for this, that vegetables being
boiled in water, and frighted out of their wits, only lay down their juice and
mucilage; which being crude and impure, cause trouble to the stomach, until
being digested with honey, they make us heirs of their virtue; especially in
that the gummosity of herbs, which are fried with honey and sugar, is very
ungrateful and displeasing to the stomach, and in boiling, there is made a
great wast of the virtues. I Chemistry, out of the dregs of other Professions:
Since Chemistry has principles not drawn from fallacious reasonings, but such
as are known by nature, and conspicuous by fire; and she prepares the
Intellect to penetrate, not the upper deck or surface of things, but the deep
hold, the concentrick and hidden things of nature; and makes an investigation
into the America of nature, farther then the whole Heptarchy, yea, then the
whole Commonwealth of sciences, all put together, and peirceth unto the utmost
confines and profundities of real truth. For she admits an Artist to the
radical entities or primitive roots of those things, with the dearticulation
of the operations of nature, and the powers of art, and with the maturation of
seminall virtues. For besides the manifest entity and creation of things, there
is an anatomical lecture of the various creations and entities of them, to be
read of us, and understood by us: Besides the general and manifest creation of
things, the particular form of things, not the Peripateticks forms, is to be
examined, and much to be read and learned from the variousnesse, and that, not
only of the general form, but every single and particular form of the
Individual. And we must note, that the anaglyphe or exterior Cortex and
figure of things is the Hieroglyphick of an essential, true, real, powerful
spirit; beyond all the artificial, superficial, pyramidall Hieroglyphics of
the Egyptians: For in those dead leaves, is written in folio, in large
Characters, a living power or spirit of life; for besides its own spirit, it
has another, which is the wheell or primum mobile of it. Every ens beside its
own particular heaven or firmament has the heaven of sidereall and vital
light. Hence also the essence, property, and virtue of every particular
Individual is as well, if not rather, occult, then manifest; and the true
medicinal part in vegetables, as in all other things, which is the essence,
propriety, virtue, strength, efficacy, life and soul of the Compositum and
every specific part, is not contained in the external coat or form: For
Physic, to speak to be understood of them, who know not what they speak
themselves, or medicine, the essence of the thing, is not externe, to be seen
with Physiognomisticall corporal eyes, but interne, and to be sensibly
perceived by the eye of the Intellect. For the Sun of every ens, concentred
in its own firmament, does not so diradiate its beams of virtue, and strength,
to its Earth, the exterior Cortex, as to have her vestall virgin beauty
prostitute and ly open to the foul rape of an impure Tact, and embracement; or
contaminated by the cloudy emissions, of our basilisk corporal eyes; but is to
be gently handled, and drawn forth by Philosophic Pyrotechny. For the most
High is to be praised for his transcendent glory, who has given this art to
little ones gratis.

Neither are we of a cast with those praecisians in far fetched, and dear
bought Gew-gaws: For we seldom use remedies that are transmarine, that come
from beyond the seas, and are fetched from the furthest parts of the East;
knowing that it is not need, makes our old wife to trot; but that the Almighty
has made all Nations of the Earth easy to be cured: Nor would he have us such
Trugs to expect Barbarian Drugs from the Indian shore. What an absurd
consequence, and what a shame it is to think that God was less favorable to
mortals before the Indies were known. Such is the Trade, habit, and iterate
Custom and Practices of our Indian Drug-merchants and Physick-mongers; such is
the zealous and ignorant affectation, stupidity and perverse covetous nature of
some; the hammer of whose desires, beats on the anvill of completing and
filling up the measure of the vices and miseries of their native Country, by
the importation of foreign and heathenish drugs. What is this but to nose the
high and sagacious Genius of the English Nation, and to lay them open to the
scorn and derision of other Nations, and give them just cause to play and
descant upon the poverty and improvidence of Nature in our own Country, to
furnish us with remedies, for our maladies; as if we had no smith in England,
but must per mare, per terras, ultra Garamantes and Indos, run to supply her
deficiency. And the iniquity hereof familiar instance, though the luxury and
pride of those who sacrifice to the grapy God, open their mouths wide, and
gnash their teeth against me. What more foul and common sin among us then
drunkenness, and who can be ignorant, that if the importation of wine, and the
use of all strong drink were forbid, it would both clean rid the possibility
of committing that most odious vice, and men might afterward live happily and
healthfully, without the use of those intoxicating liquors. Yet who is there
the severest of them all, that ever propounded to loose his Sack, his Ale,
toward the certain abolishing of so great a sin, who is there of them the
holiest, that less loves his rich Canary at meals, though it be fetched from
places that hazard the Religion of them who fetch it, and though it make his
neighbor drunk out of the same Tun? While they forbid not therefore the use of
that liquid merchandise, which forbidd'n would utterly remove a most loathsome
sin, and not impair either the health, or the refreshment of mankind,
supplied many other ways: what can be expected in such a field of riot, but
the tares and thistles of mortifick distempers and maladies, and a course and
custom of easiness, and boldness to rush into all manner of debaucheries? He
to remove a national vice, will not pardon his Cups, nor think it concerns him
to forbear the quaffing of that outlandish grape, in his unnecessary fullness,
though other men abuse it never so much, nor is he so abstemious as to
intercede with the Magistrates, that all matter of drunkenness be banished the
Commonwealth; we have the less cause to hope, so long as a thing of as much,
if not greater Concernment, and of as little, if not less inconvenience, will
not be forbidden, as this of forbearing the fetching of all exotic, Indian and
Barbarian drugs, and heathenish Compositions for Physic, which would not
worse, but much better our condition, is a thing so little regarded, and has
hitherto lain so undiscerned, and undemanded. What is this, but to use the
mouth of our general Parent, the first time it opens, when he said or saw that
all things he had made were very good, to an arrogant opposition, and
correcting of Gods wisdom, freeness and bounty; as if he were more careless
and less regarding us, then other Nations, though sinners of the Gentiles; or
that Nature was more improvident, insufficient, and deficient toward us in her
good things; or that the things of our Country were not good, or not good
enough (lamentabile dictu) for the Cure of our homebread dlseases, but must be
beholding to others to supply the defects of God and nature, both as
supplement, and Correctives. No, no, we with serious tears speak it, that it is
Man's perverse cooking, who has turned this bounty of God into a scorpion,
either by weak and shallow commenting with their numerous, voluminous and
impertinent amplifications and modifications; or by proud arrogance,
covetousness, envy, and cruelty to them, who neither in their purposes, nor in
their actions have offended against the due honor of Physic, especially
Pyrotechnall: For to our common and underfoot Chemistry and jumblings of
Apothecaries, is the tendence of them, who have the leisure to be industriously
idle; and he who shall be tediously studious in it, argues a dullness little
less then fatal, and hardly on this side sorcery, or enchantment, not to be
undone by charms, or prayers: Insomuch that the fears which some men may have
of an invasion and innovation into the Eutopian Empire of Galenical heathenish
Physic, and constituting more clear, natural and experimental foundations and
principles, perhaps exceed the hopes that can be in others of ever introducing
it with any great success. And that such a thing ought to be done, and
cheerfully gone about, and settled, enough has been urged, and yet shall
further; since we are clearly of that opinion, that it will be a harder Alchimy
then Lully or Paracelsus ever knew, to extract or sublimate any sure real
foundations of Physic out of Galen, and his Taskmasters. So that we see,
without the help of further light, Salomons ships are more welcome that bring
apes and peacocks, and I know not what monsters both of principles and
practice; then the Gold of Ophir. Nothing now adays is more degenerately
forgotten then the true dignity of Man, almost in every respect, but especially
in this, and which is the aggravation, so nearly concerning himself. Indeed
man's disposition though prone to search after vain curiosities, yet when points
of difficulty and danger are to be discussed, appertaining to the removal of
some unreasonable wrong, burden, injury and abuse from the perplexed life of
our Brother, it is incredible how cold, how dull, and far from all
fellow-feeling we are: but when neither the spur of Philautie and
self-concernment, as this of our dear life and health, brought into unworthy
snares, without which we are useless and spiritlesse to our selves and the
Commonwealth, shall not stir us up to consider and bethink of an expedient to
get from under them, into a more generous, easy, safe and exquisite way, both
to preserve and obtain our healths; either not to plead for it, or nor to see
it, argues a coldness, dullness and dotage little less then incurable, or a
stark deadness, contracted by the Opium and Lethargy of epidemick ignorance:
Indignities that merit a Lucans spirit to lay open and explode them. And
seriously by this and other of the like bulk and size, if the Genius of English
men must thus go a fishing on the other side to have a draught, must be sent a
pilgrimage to the Worlds End, and fetch home the Apes and Peacocks of
Foreigners, and their Chimaericall humors, and all the way strike top-sail,
stand bare and vail with reverence, to the statue of Dispensatories of others
ignorance and unexperienced formalities, and suffer these spurious brats to
take the wall of all the free spirit of clear reasoning, and the sons of Art
and Ingenuity, we are no better then slaves and fools, and of desert to be
reckoned with the sons of Cham, and to work in the Laboratory of the
Gibeonites. Let us resolve then like Men humble in the sight of God, and with
no less faith and a serious judgment apply our selves to the freeness And
bounty of God in our own native Country: and know all the world, that the
Divine goodness has persuaded me that homebred diseases have their remedies
likewise at home. And Chymicall conclusions have taught me, that a little
liquor may be provided, which will keep the tempers of simples condiment. They
boil therefore herbs in water, Wine, or distilled liquor, (the absurdity,
vanity and iniquity of which shall further be shown anon) even till the third
part, or half be consumed, in a double vessel under a double Cover, and so
make a decoction, or anti-Chimicall porridge; wherein if the chiefest powers do
not perish, or are not evirate; yet is there nothing drawn from thence, but an
ill pleasing and distasteful slime of herbs, to be digested by the stomach;
although the decoctions and juices be clarified with whites of Fgges, and
palliated with sugar. For they are drunk without separation of that which is
pure, from that which is strengthlesse; without unlocking the hidden powers by
the Turn-key of Pyrotechny; without the root and participation of the life, or
emendation of the defects, crudities, excrements, and violent powers, whose
activities we have no Opium to dead, nor our nature cannot without great
prejudice endure.

Electuaries, Confections, or Pills, either to comfort, or to loosen; who
abound with greater miseries then the syrups; for without boiling, with mere
pounding or poud'ring they are ridiculously, ignorantly and unadvisedly framed
of many simples, which for the most part are in antipodaean position, and
diametrally opposite one to another; so that they cannot conjoin the mutual
help which they owe unto us. For it is not in Nature as it is in Numbers, one,
because they agree by unities. For in natute every thing is singular, and lives
of it self not delighting in conjunction. Thus far likewise the operations of
Physic proceed into the midst of the life of the Archeus; which by
confusions and blendings, if it do not altogether perish, yet is it at least
manifestly evirate. For the frustrated successes of many seeds compacted
together, and the autopticall unsuccesfulness of Physicians, by these weak and
contemptible engines ought to have given sufficient warning to the Schools,
that they should forbear from blending so many and different simples together.
How much more when in that multitude, many counterfeit, opposite, useless,
(but otherwise for the most part ponderous) impertinent, vain, improper, and
therefore faint, over-worn, evil, and dead things are added, or at least made:
For although the adulterating of drugs are more justly charged upon the
merchant then the druggist; yet not to garble them, is the part of a sluggish,
ignorant, or covetous Apothecary. In the mean time it is certain that almost
all the ingredients are taken crude, hard, unripe, shut, poisoned, impure,
bound, and unapt to the communication of their powers, and are more depraved by
mixture. And because the stomach of sick persons is hard-by, and in the
threshold, therefore it is first offended, because it is feeble and unfit to
extract the middle life, beset with so many difficulties: Wherefore we ought in
our labors and singular care, to be beforehand, that we may prepare all
things for the languishing stomach, if we hope with delight to attain unto the
conceived and wished ends. Wherefore the use of all Confections is harsh,
nauseous and tedious: Hence came the proverb, take that away, for it smells
like a medicine.

Likewise if you take from solutives, Scammony and Coloquintida, the whole
Edifice of the shops in Solutives, will fall to the ground, those two pillars
solutives besides Scammony, Coloquintida, euphorbium elaterium, esula and
manifest poisons, and those beside adulterated, sordid and horrid; the source
of the diminution of our forces and strength, contein nothing else, unless the
same poisons be supposed to be allayed with aloes, rubarb, seen, agarick, manna
and the like, and so the more liable to imposture.

purges down to Agarick, have need of correction, to the intent, that they may
bring in their very mouths strength unto Nature: But ah would to God such lame
Corrections were not idle and unprofitable, were not foolish; and that they
might serve rather to compare innocence of the medicine then his castration or
gelding his powers: Because castration of powers, concludes and carries deceit
in the very face; least, as who should say, the sick might understand the
poison, that is in it. The balefull remedies also of the shops, are like a
Crocodile, or domestic wolf; who seeing his occasion, whilst he is trusted
to, returns to his wonted fierceness and cruelty of Nature: Hence neither
dare they call their so corrected medicines by their proper Etymon: that is to
say, they hide Scammony, under the name of diagredium, as also Colocynthis,
they disguise under Alhandal. At length the compound laxatives in the
Dispensatories, do war under a feigned and counterfeit title of Dux. In the mean
while they cannot deny, but Scammony and Coloquintida, are the two pillars, on
whom, the whole Edifice of purging does rest and lean; in the collision of
which, all, whatsoever is built thereon, does fall to the ground. Their more
gentle solutives then, as Manna, Cassia, Seney, rubarb etc. have given up their
names to those two burley standard leaders.

The schools confess that a laxative medicine Physician; yea, and that more
is, they by this means defame the Laxatives, and therefore esteem them less
and set them behind phlebotomy. For if the laxative has committed any thing
too cruel, they are wont to accuse either the dose, or the correction, or the
sluid nature of the sick, or the Apothocary, or the servants, or the wife, or
some body, or something, least otherwise the name and fame of a solutive
medicine should perish: yet notwithstanding in the solutives contein in them a
corrupting, wasting poison, and only Aloes alone, they have made a proverb,
and call it innocuous. But the rest are administered with additament, correction
and circumspection, and not preposterously, nor overhastily. Of late, a certain
learned man to preserve his health, took the usual pill, ex aloe lota,
(castrata potius) and not finding the effect, he goes to round another
Physician in the ear, and tells him of it, who blames the sluggishnesse of
Aloes, and moreover turns Picron sive amarum, into pigrum: I Will prescribe you,
says he, gelded pills; which being taken, he miserably perishes, because he
had labored a whole week in vain, that he might reform the disordered effect
of the laxative medicine. He therefore that he might free himself from a future
disease, perishes by the deceit of the Physician, and leaves behind him eleven
children. Whence first it is manifest, that it is as free in a laxative to rage
fierce in one, that is well in health, as in one that is sick; for this thing
may go on raging against the life of Magistrates and chiefest Governors, and
that scotfree, without danger of punishment, under those two cheats, the name
of a Physician, and the deceit of a medicine; because the Earth covers the
cruel ignorance and unskilfulnesse of the Physicians.

purgation or depuration, but full of deceit God knows. Ah! would to God that
the Physicians purge could expiate diseases. Would to God as touching this, it
may not be, that the sick would expect purges from the Physician, or his
prescription. It Is worth our serious sorrow surely that they say, a loosning
medicine administered before the concoction of the disease, brings forth those
humors (for they will have laxatives have eyes, like that Epidaurean serpent,
to bring forth by selection one humor and not another) which otherwise, after
the aforesaid concoction of the disease, would be unusefull, yea, and hurtful.
Notwithstanding neither will they learn hitherto from hence, that the humors
brought out by laxatives, are not humors, nor things offending; (for
otherwise, in either station of a disease, and with one only laxative, they
should necessarily help equally, if they bring out the same peccant matter) but
mere putrefaction, and mere rotten consumed melted matter through the poison of
the laxatives. So much the more unhappily is the enemy received, in regard he
may exercise this cruel raging and ravening within, in the flesh and in the
blood.

To prosecute the deciphering of those cruelties and outrages which are
committed by laxatives, it will not be besides our purpose, to relate a story
of our friend in this business, which he mentions of himself; and it is that
acute Philosopher and ingenious Helmont, who when he was young, put on the
glove of a certain damsel infested with a dry itch or scab; where he had
contracted, first on that hand, then on the other, an unlucky scabbinesse, of a
Purulent constitution, and with pustules. The senior Physicians of the City
being called, they commanded, first a vein to be opened for the cooling of the
liver: then, with an apozeme for three days, they addressed themselves to
prepare for the deduction of yellow torrid Choler, and salt phlegm; and at
length they intend the Purgation of the aforesaid humors, by the pills of
fumitory, and they abundantly provoked many seiges. And he was therewith glad,
that he had excreted such a heap of stinking matter. They advise therefore the
same medicine to be taken the third day after, and again also after three days
with the like success: And says he, if all had been put together, it would
have easily filled two buckets of filthy rotten and stinking stuff; which he
did then think to be humors. He then who before was sound and lusty, in his
full strength, light and ^imble in leaping and running; was now made macilent,
his knees trembling, his cheeks were fallen, and his voice hoarse. I said
(relates he) and that too late. In what chamber of this my peaceable Inn, did
this crowd of s^i^king and unworthy guests lodge and take up quarters? For I
found not, neither in the Crown office, my head; nor in the White Hall of my
breast, or uncle Johns-House of my body the belly, any place for so great a
Farrago. For although all my bowels should be taken away, yet could not the
whole Iakes or cavity contein scarce half the quantity. I conclude therefore
with my self, that those humors were not preexisting* but made in me. And I
knew, that that rotten stinking melted stuff, was made by the medicine I had
taken; which same thing would have come to pass as often as I had taken it:
But it seems he was still troubled with his guest, the scrubadoe, and that the
same scab had possessed him as before. Whence may be known.

porous velame, that is obtended like a scarf over the whole frame of the body
is the topic habitaculum of that contagion the f^b, and is a disease of the
pellis, and scarce enters beyond the confines of the membrana carnosa, and not
an intemperature of the liver.

2. That the vicious temper of those humors in the scab, are false and feigned,
which were produced by the only tact of the glooe.

3. That laxative medicines do not at all purge or mundifie, but putirfie.

4. That they eliquate the vivid substance of the body, and resolve it into
corruption.

5. That they indifferently contaminate whatsoever by any means they can come
unto; whether it be the Blood, or the living flesh it self; and that they do
not, nor cannot selectively separate and draw forth one humor, from another.

6. That the contaminated does denote his contaminating to be mere poison, and
does effect only the liquefaction and putrefaction of the body.

7. That the contaminated matter, nature driving forth, will flow out until
the whole strength of the medicine be exantlate.

8. That this comes to pass as well in a sound man, as in a sick.

9. And therefore that a solutive medicine* is full of danger, before Nature is
victrix in diseases: For afterward, it does not so manifestly show its hurt.
Which things having so seriously weighed with my self unto satiety of
conviction and satisfaction, gave me ample cause to suspect the use of
laxatives, especially those of the shops now in common use.

A woman in Sepulchers parish near snow-hill, of a laudable constitution,
strong and lusty, took a potion of my own prescription, and it was only of
the common infusion of Senna and Rubarb; to whose streining was added only one
ounce of syrup of Cychory with Rubarb; and she confessed, with others, it gave
her above forty stools, and might have gone very near to have done violence
to her life, had not I with much industry applied my self to stay it; which was
done with good success. A certain man also took a Scammoniate medioine, and in
one day, it gave him above forty stools, which together with his piss that he
made that day, was weighed, and they weighed eighteen pounds and seven ounces
of stinking yellow stuff. Now in sooth, if that rotten melted stuff, be
Choler, and one of the four; then the residue of fleam in the body, (exceeding
choler by one third part, according to Galen) shall weigh twenty seven pounds
and ten ounces; and by the same compute, there shall exceed nine pounds, and
three ounces of pure black choler; that is, of fleam and melancholy not mingled
with yellow choler, thirty six pound and thirteen ounces. It Is clear purge
there is no purification of the body, but rather a distemperature of the
remaining humors if there be any such things. Then, that the aforesaid
solution, is not a selective mundation of the choler, or a freeing of the body
from superfluous choler: but a mere putrefactive eliquation of the blood.
Because while the blood is in the veins, it does not stink; but by and by, it
stinks in the guts, in the same instant, when it falls out of the veins: But I
pray you, what house of office or Close-stool is there in the body, that can
contain thirty seven pounds of fleam, and the remnants of black choler? chiefly
when from a purge, the veins which before were full, are now fallen, and appear
no more: for the following morning, the wretched man who trusted to the
Physicians judgment, and thought himself so well purged and cleans'd, speaks
now with a small, sharp and hoarse voice; his hands tremble, his knees shake,
his eyes hollow, his veins exhausted his look ghastly, and pressed with an
unreasonable thirst, and dejected appetite, thought he should never recover:
And certainly if the dose of the laxative had been greater, it would have had
his due, and might have made but an ill business of it. By this strong
purgation then, may be gess'd, nay does clearly appear the virulent propriety
of solutives.

The Physicians having their excuse ready, and Colluvies of the remaining
humors, and also the disproportion of the same. The which Scammoneats, does
not only draw forth choler out of propriety; but of the blood it self, or the
compound out of the four, there is made up that one liquamen, that heap of
stinking resolved matter: Whence we again conclude it an imposture and cheat,
which supposes to bring forth choler or fleam, or avouches, that purges, so
called, are the Gold-finders, or like the City Night-men, do cleanse and
mundify the body of its filth and impurities by the besome of laxation or
appropriate and selective deduction; or that they can single out one humor
from another, and fall foul upon it, and like a special Bailiff, arrest one
humor from all its fellows, without bail or mainprise, though they are all,
subsidy entities according to the Galenists) and of the grand Jury at the
Assizes of life and death held in the Guild Hall or Court of our body* which to
affirm is a madness and dotage beyond the power of Helebore; when themselves
confess that all are eliquated together: And according to Galen, when the
blood begins to putrefie there is made choler: and it is false that a
cholagogall medicine ( verbi gratia) will cure ^ilious diseases. And that it is
a deceit in them, who say, they bring out choler, when the other three being
first corrupted, are also cast forth. There is no man that is studious of Truth
who does not understand this thing presently, that the Basis of healing of the
Ancients is overthrown, as well in respect of the humors, as of the selection
of solutive medicines. To me seriously it is a wonder not much on this side an
astonishment, that the world has not yet considered the perniciousnesse of
laxatives, who otherwise can so quickly sent and perceive any vile arts
bordering upon their own purse or profit. It Is out of doubt truly, but that
laxatives may carry an occult poison, which has made so many thousands of poor
widows and orphans. Nor do they bring forth a singular humor after them,
which things never were in Nature, unless in the books of Physicians. For
truly, increase the dose of the laxative, and it betrays it self to be a
deadly poison.

celerity of the flux, takes away the occasion of putrefaction, and so also of
stink. For it is a Cadaver or dead body that stinks, and not the turd: Neither
could it so suddenly borrow, or be impregnated with such a savor of a strong
stinking turd from the gutts. Therefore stink smells of poison, and indicates
an efficient poison, and cadavorous matter taken from the living: which I do
thus experimentally prove. If any one have drunk a dram of white vitriol,
dissolved in wine, vomit. But if presently upon the drinking of it, he takes
down a draught of beer, water, etc. he shall truly have most stools, and yet
verily without stink. Scammony therefore and vitriol do equally liquate the
mesaraick blood: This truly, with the violent ponticity of it self; but that,
with the putrefactive and stinking strong poison of the laxatives. For which
consideration alone, a purgation, ought to be suspected as a cruel and stupid
invention. For if according to Galen, while the blood begins to putrefie there
is made choler, counterfeiting choler, is generated of putrefied blood: And by
consequence the laxatives themselves are resolvers and putreiyers of the blood:
which is easily gathered out of Galen, against the schools wills. For he
chiefly commends Triacle, forasmuch as it powerfully resists poisons: also he
asserts it, to be the most knowing sign of the best Triacle, that if Triacle
be taken, together with laxatives, undoubtedly there will not follow any
seiges. Do not these words of Galen convince, that laxatives are mere poisons?
To which suspicion, the effects also do agree. For a purging medicine being
taken, both the sick man sound do equally cast out resolved matter, of the same
color, smell and condition: wherefore it does not expel the peccant humor,
before the non-peccant, but does indifferently contaminate whatsoever it comes
to. Moreover the schools do impugn this selective liberty which they attribute
to laxatives. For if any humor of the four be putrid in fevers, it does
naturally betoken the ablation of it: But Laxatives may selectively draw out
the humor out of the blood; yea, in sound folks, as they list they liquefie
the sound flesh; that thence they may obtain their scope, which is to pour down
the stinking rotten resolved matter, into the common-shoar of the Economy, of
which the womb makes ejectment. Verily laxatives will not have the like liberty
in fevers, to the drawing forth of the peccant and putrid excrement. For the
putrid has no more its pristine essence and properties, which it had before
its putrefaction. For although the loadstone may draw iron; it will not
therefore draw rust. Therefore though a purging medicine may resolve the flesh
and blood, that thence it may draw forth choler, which by a specific
propriety, being overcome, does draw unto it self: it does not therefore in
like sort draw the putrid and putrefied matter included in the veins, which
would be the cause fevers. There is no man truly should ever die by fevers, if
those two axioms of the schools were true: To wit, if putrid humors be the
cause of fevers; and also, if they yield selectively to purges: It would over
and beside be mad caution, that purging medicines should not be given in the
beginning of fevers, before the matter grew turgid; that is to say, before a
maturity and concoction of the peccant matter, whence is sufficiently manifest,
that the black and dismal use of laxatives are hardly on this side the banks
of phlegetontal and direful evils. But if they should be given after that the
matter of the disease is rightly subdued, the aforesaid caution contains an
imposture too, forasmuch as the effect procured of its own accord and by the
benefit of solvent medicine: from which also truly the good and honest
Physician should more justly abstain; because else it may perturb the crisis,
and induce the danger of confusion and recidivation: verily a true and perfect
purge, which is to say, a cleanser of the body, ought to work only upon
impure, unsound bodies. Here it ought to be a Herculean actor in the Augaean
stables Dunghill of impurities, and not in the Seraglio or fresh and fair
garden of healthy and sound persons. And because of this it is most perfect,
which first of all insensibly lulls asleep and pacifies the Archeus, which
afterward (seeing Nature is sola medicatrix) mowes down the weeds, the thorns
and thistles of Diseases, and morbifick distempers, and the occasional causes
of them.

But they object for their purgers, that it is nothing, laxative medicine casts
forth the laudable juice out of the veins, chiefly because it drives out with a
stronger power and shorter cut the morbifick faeces. Nor is it greatly to be
regarded, though solutives do make a little diminution of the strength, with
the more crude blood. But it may be made appear unto ample satisfaction by the
consent of experience, that laxatives do not take away the noxious humors, or
any disease lodged in them. Then, that there are no such things in Nature; nor
was ever this meridian of humors ever touched or come nigh to, by those, who,
Drake-like, have compassed the whole Globe and round of Nature, and taken all
her dimensions by the Jacobs staff of perspective reason and experience; but
hangs only (like castles in the air) in the Eutopia of vulgar Physicians
brains, or in the narrow creek of their base-born books, and no where else:
neither do any diseases respond or go a pilgrimage to lodge in the
New Foundland of Americall or Prestor-John humors. Then also, that whatsoever
the Catharticks profligate, banish, and cast out from the Independency of our
vital Economy, is not one of the three humors which they say offends, is
become malignant, and endeavors to settle a commission of array, to plunder
not the petty suburbs but the Westminster Hall of our sanity and strength, and
has been found, not only pleading for the monarchy and tyranny of diseases
and distempers, but in actual arms against the Re-publique; for which he is
adjudg'd a Delinquent and Traitor, and to be sequestered and thrust out of the
lines of Communication, by the backdoor or port esquiline of our healthful
City: but is only the honest roundhead, a true and peaceable
Common-Wealth's-man; the blood who is chosen and ordained to be one of the
Keepers of the liberties, life and health of our bodies, now slain by the
laxative medicine, and sacrificed as a Holocaust on the Altar of its virulency
and poison. Therefore neither dare they give purges in acute fevers, unless
it be after the matter grow's ^urgid, which is as much as to say, after Nature
has returned Conqueresse* For when the diseased guest is overcome and now of
his own accord about to retreat, would fall out, with other filth brought to
pass by the Physic! unless the Archeus being pricked with indignation by an
hostile impression of the virulent medicine cast in, stirs up a fresh assault
or recidivation of the disease; which thing we have observed to happen
frequently. Every laxative therefore is absolutely noxious, and also
frustraneous, we should therefore be guilty before God, and uncharitable to
man, if we did not persuade to abstain altogether from purges. For let but a
virulent solutive be a little while detained in the stomach, and it does
putrefie, and contaminate whatsoever was deposited in the mesentery to better
uses: and draws in place of the putrefi'd treasury, the depurated blood from
the vena cava, and does leisurely contaminate it with a virulent contagion, and
eliquate it with the stinking ferment of the cadaver. Hence is that loss and
overthrowing of the strength by laxatives, and perturbation of the vital
monarchy, without hope of sanation from thence. And this rage of the laxatives
does endure, not only when they are present, but after they are gone, they
leave such a tincture behind them, as causes the body to work till it is wholly
spent, and has sufficiently sated it self on the living substances thereof;
for the poison has tainted with its contagion both the stomach and intestines.
For so in some persons an artificial Diarrhaea has arisen, which thence
forwards has continued until their dying day, and laughed at the promised
help, and inefficacious tried means of astringents. The use of laxatives
therefore are altogether to be disallowed and forbidden: Repetitions of
purgations are more wicked and hurtful; and indeed every purge is both
frustraneous and hurtful, in respect, they level their power only against
the productions or effects, and not against the Causes; chiefly when viscid
excrements are seated remotely from the stomach, they are too stubborn and
refractory to yield to the laxative operation of Purgers. If any please to
add, that although Laxatives may seem to have afforded ease and relief, for a
day or two after their use insomuch as the mass of crude and inconfected blood
in the mesaraick veins being voided by stool, there must of necessity succeed
the more sparing dispensation of blood through the body, and penury of
nourishment in the lungs, and by consequence a less quantity of excrement be
rejected: yet do they, by substracting from the necessary aliment of the whole,
and by leaving behind them an evil tincture in the instruments of common
digestion, every day more and more infringe the universal Economy of the
body, and impugn the conserving vigor of nature. Wherefore we conclude with
Hippocrates ad Democritum that every solutive works with the deprae'dation of
the strength, and very substance of our bodies.

Wherefore there is no Physician, that can faithfully or dares freely promise
health; by any laxatives of the shops. But true solutives, as they neither
putrefie, nor bring forth selectively any feigned humors; nor resolve the
vitalls, so do they discover themselves by a threefold character.

offends: and therefore do not aggravate but lighten the burden, and then by and
by the sick feels himself well. Then thirdly, that they draw not forth the
disease neither by sweat, vomit, or seige; but insensibly resolve, in
whatsoever part the disease is lodged, the rest nature being busied about.
Laxatives of this sort do not selectively bring out humors (which are feigned
in themselves) but (seeing that we are not nourished but with one only juice,
namely, blood, therefore we intend the propulsion, not of blood, but of
morbisick exerements) do resolve whatsoever exotic or alien guest is inserted
within the Inn of life, but not the vitalls: unless they be taken in an
indiscreet dose or too often: otherwise they only respect excrements, Nature
with in lending help to this purpose.

Thus then the compound laxatives of the shops have appeared in their colors,
that they are an imposture, mere poisons, resolvers of the flesh and blood,
diminishers of our strength and substance, and themselves diminished, and
enervated of their powers by their correctives. Wherefore we hate the
preparation simples, as often as lotion, boiling, rosting, association, or
calcination wastes the powers thereof. For Aloe^ by ablution loses the
juice, and there remains a mere rozen, which by its adhaesion to the
entrails, stirs up gripings and hemorroids.

In a word whereas the geniall and chief virtue of

Finally, what can be said more absurdly in the hartshorn into ashes, which
are altogether unsavory and without virtue, for great purposes? And instead of
preparation to substitute castration, or rather privation? For we have had the
leisure to learn that most remedies with their odor and sapour, as well
within, as without, do help our infirmities; and therefore we have detested the
mixtures of simples in that if you add another odor to a sanative one, that
may drown the other, palliate, or turn it into it self, or raise up a neuter
out of both together, we know that the sanative virtue will be abolished, and
the effect wished for by the patient, be made void. Therefore the association
of spices and sweet things is by us suspected.

Confections of the shops, because they are without virtue, wherein they
endeavor with certain ridiculous things to palliate and allay the excessive
and violent power of things, yea in the mean time they give out that the innate
benefit of such a medicine is as much promoted, as there is power taken away by
the addition of other strong things. For with the greatest part they mix some
grains of Cinnamon, or other vain things, that they may quell the fury of the
more violent ingredients; as if the madness of the laxatives were (...) with
some grains of spices. Besides who is there, though meanly instructed in
Chymicall matters, who knows not that in aromaticall confections, the
chiefest fault is committed by the plurality of the ingredients? Next that most
of them offend in crudity, hardness, chausure, choice and substitution. wind
up all in one example: what is there in the confection Lithon-tribon, or stone
break that is answerable to the promises of the etymon or derivation of the
word? For to what purpose is Cinnamon, Cloves, the 3 peppers, acorns, costus,
rhapentick, Cassia, ^delli^, mastick, amomum, peucedanum, spike, ginger, the
wood and juice of balsam, tragacanthum, germander, euphorbium, the oiles of
nard and moschelinum? Do every one of these conspire to the end proposed in the
denomination of the medicine? Or from them being blended, and marring the
intentions of each other, will a new virtue arise, to perform the promised
Cure? Can it powerfully break the stone in the kidney and bladder? And
presently loose all the defects of the urine? Or rather will not the juice of
balsam perish among the other grolleries and trifles? But in opiate confections
the same absurdity is observed as in the aromatic ones. Which we will also
dispatch in one example.

For to what purpose in the Aurea Alexandrina Nicolai is there a blending of
sixty five Ingredients? Of which simples there is none of kin with Opium, and
Mandrake, the pillars of the Confection. Of the like calculation are those
cardinal columns of Galeni^^ll Physic* Mithidate and Triacle, the beloved
Minerva's of our Physicians and Fools, at this day, deify'd as little Indian
Deiries, or he when superstitious Moors salute his li^ht; so do those heads,
who being ignorant of all things, foolishly admire all things so easily
entertain them, and with that infatuated reverence, worse then moorish: as if
they were Dame Natures second or her self, her chief friend, her true
Caelestiall balsam, her life, power and activity, the only refiner and
sequestrator General of all her impurities, when in sober truth, both to
themselves and nature, they are in direct antipathy, as the Zenith to the
Nadir; and little less then a stark and dead congealment of wood and hay and
stubble forced together; the totality of whose number, nature, essence and
property is but a mere olla podrida, not a whit convenient, nor effectually
prepared by any art, industry or dexterity; and they have caught pro Junone
Nubem. Medicines are like unto actors in the body of man, the soene: The
Epitasis or main end of them, ought to be homogeniety in themselves and to
nature, that so both may play their parts, before they make their exit, or
quietus est.

Truly the combining of simples, made according to the pleasure of some
ignorant fellow, is of as idle cordage, as his, who went about to twist a rope
of sand, which was a task, they say, that posed the Devil; that, that has
infatuated the schools, exanimated and tortured the sick; having put them in
hope, they have failed them, and by uncertain conjectures have set to sale the
opportunities of curing, which are ready to slip away every moment, and causes
them to pass over. Wherefore the compositions of the shops, if you examine
them with a single eye, and unprejuc'd mind, will every where in the syrups,
electuaries, pills, Loches, Troshiscks and other like, fill you with a
profitable admiration to observe how the world by the prattle of Physicians and
fooleries of the Schools, and their vain presumptions is deluded and bafl'd*
For we Christians believe with the Stoics that the World was created for the
use of man: which we having heretofore diligently pondered in the
concentrations of our mind, the result was, that the use of man might very
commodiously have been without so many poisons. For we found that these more
cold climates of ours, were herein more happy, that they had no creeping things
that were both monstrous and poisonous, wherewith the hotter Zone abounded.
Certainly we have not much need of poisons, or familiarity with, or abundance
of them, neither will their use any ways compensate so many calamities arising
from them: yea if the Earth bring forth thistles and thorns for the curse of
sin, certainly she bears far greater calamities on her back as well in the
tribe of living creatures, as vegetables, which are hurtful to the life of man.
Wherefore the text threatens the least part by thistles and thorns, of those
evils which by the subtilty of the Serpent, man has felt. Certainly if it be
well searched out, Nature has hardly any thing free which has not its poison
secretly mingled with it. For we have no Roses and Violets which do not cozen
us, and under so great fragrancy of smell do not hide the contagions of poison;
namely, the signs of Putrefaction, the colliquation of our body, and stealing
away our strength. Wherefore making a list simples, we shall find but few of
them hurtless; yea, if you behold the fields, the whole globe of the earth, is
but one contiguous spiders web. Moreover if we look narrowly into it, there
seems to be at this day the same face of things, as was before the first sin.
And consequently perhaps from the beginning, there were more hurtful and
noisome poisons then good things on the earth, yet was there no exterminating
medicine for man, because Paradise wanted such poisons, although Serpents were
there, or perhaps for immortalities sake, poisons would have been nothing to
man in Eden. But on the contrary, the Almighty saw, that whatsoever things he
had made even in the world without Paradise, were good in themselves, and to
their ends. wherefore we must confess a while ago we doted, thinking that
poisons were unworthy to be; both because the honor of God required not their
existence, as also that man would have more willingly been without many poisons
whereupon we thought that poisons were neither conducible to the glory of God,
nor to the use of man. For there are but few harmless ones, which one may use
without caution, but the greatest part contend against us with horrid Tyranny.
Others gnaw us while they burn with their sharpness. But the greatest part
under a friendly and fair show do beguile us, and hide within a destructive
enemy. In a word, every thing is full of filth, and is horrid with impurities,
and consisting of crudities, disproportionablenesse and invincible pertinacy of
perversitie. For though man were brought into Paradise, yet did the Creator
know from eternity that the world should be a dwelling for him; and as he gave
the earth to the Children of men, so he created the same with all the contents
thereof for man. At length taking a view of all things by Chemistry, and seeing
them more clearly, we repented of out rastinesse, and former foolish ignorance.
For in both we adored in suppliant wise with admiration the immense Clemency
and wisdom of the Architect. For he simples do otherwise deny. For the greater
and heroic uses of Physicians such horrid poisons are reserved. For brutes
scarce feed upon them, either that they intuitively know the poison, which
otherwise is not discovered by the smell or taste: or that some spirit governing
bruits, does keep those poisons for greater uses, as being heirs of the
greatest virtues. It is at least sufficient that the bruites leave to us the
chiefest remedies, as it were by the Command of the most High, who takes more
care of us then of beasts. For crude Asarum, with what anguish is it vomited
up, being a present poison, the stomach does sufficiently testify? as also how
it is mitigated with boiling, and the poison changed into an opening diuretic,
the remedy of slow fevers, which thing discovers the aroma that was hidden
therein.

Thus Aron boiled with vinegar becomes mild, and is the cure of great
Symptoms. Wherefore the Schools have set on foot Corrections and we could wish
they were not ridiculous ones, and such as gold and take away the force and
virtue of simples: for they think that the laxative part flies away from
Asarum, by boiling, no otherwise then in length of time, everything putrefieth
with its own mould. Asarum does not alike grow mild being sodden with wine, as
if it be boiled in water; yet in alike degree of fire the laxative part thereof
would in like manner expire. Others therefore think that the cruditie in Asarum
is the cause of Solution; but these neglect the herbs that are more crude then
Asarum, and consider not that Helebore would not be brought to maturity by
boiling, if vomiting arose from crudity. They boil Scammony in sour things,
that they may mitigate it, but ordinary Physicians know that Scammony is by
this means gelded, so that if it be exposed to the sour vapor of Sulphur, it
will be wholly deprived of its virtue; so that so much sournesse as it takes,
so much of its own property is lost.

But we desiring with a fatherly mind to correct the raging force of medicines,
well understand that the ancient powers of things ought to remain, and in their
root to be turned inward, or under their simplicity, to be transmuted into
other properties there privily lurking under the guard of the poison, or gotten
anew by reason of the perfection added: by which means Coloquintida turns
inward its laxative and noxious quality, and there arises from the bottom a
resolutive power, that excellency chronicall diseases. For Paracelsus in the
tincture of the Lily of Antimony, did with praise attempt that; yet he
concealed it, or was ignorant that the same comes to pass in all the venomes
of animalls and vegetables, by their circulated salt. For all their venom
perishes, if they return into their first entities. This high pitch, not the
schools, but Gods chosen Physicians, whom the Almighty has elected from their
mothers womb, shall know in the age to come, and it shall make a difference
between the sheep and the goats, between them who enter into the medicall
Temple by the door of the light of Nature, and the expert mechanic practices
of Philosophy; and those who climb up by the window of their own pride,
self-conceit and the darkness of Ethnic books. Wherefore the simples that
are of great powers are not to be castrated, nor to be mortified, but to be
meliorated by art, for the extraction of the things that lie hid, or by the
suspension of the virulency, or substitution of one for another, by adding
strong specificals.

Thus much let this serve for them, to whom it has not been given to taste the
power of the greater circulated salt. For some things laying down their
wildness, grow mild by the addition of other things, and become neuters,
partaking of the powers on both sides. Neither is it therefore lawful to
borrow such kind of additions from the received Dispensatories of the shops,
which do not teach the melioration, or corrections, but the destruction of
things, either altogether, or else afford but trifling Correctives. For
example, the Marquess Charles Spinelli General of the Tuscans; when he had
walked on foot about the City of Florence, and viewed all the walls, commanded
the Physicians to be called, and said unto them, that he had sometimes been
sick of an Epilepsie, and was cured by Helmont, but afterward was ever and
anon troubled with a dizzinesse: after that he passed over the sea from
Aquitane to Tuscany the College of Physicians, on the morning following
prescribe him a scruple of white Helebore, and for a corrective add as much
Anniseeds: Half an hour after he vomits, and in vain implores the help of his
Physician being absent, accusing his murderers and saying: Helmonte mio, voi
me lo dicesti gli medici tuccideranno: my Helmont, you told me the Physicians
would kill me. He held his peace, and after two hours, his stomach first
suffering a convulsion, and then his whole body, he dies in a swound. The
Physicians seek excuses, and the earth covered their fault. For thus the
Confections of the Schools by their foolish corrective Dispensatories, take up
many things to fill up the load. The Opiates have chiefly hot things added to
them; but laxatives for the most part ginger, mace, Annise; and whatsoever
things ease gripings, which follow from the laxatives. Oh with what license
does ignorance rage uncontrolled amongst men! How little do they understand
their Hippocrates: If those things be taken away which ought, (that is, such
things as are hurtful and burdensome) the patient mends, and easily bears
it. For since those things that hurt within, do oft-times not weigh a dram, all
the purgation that ends in health, must be an evacuation either imperceptible,
or at least very moderate, and with a restoration of the strength. For these
are the things which patients easily endure with content. Wherefore the
correctives of medicines are unprofitable loads, and without knowledge of
things described by the Schools, and so destructive to the medicines at least,
if not to the Patients. This part of Physic requires a skillful and exact
secretary of Nature; because therein, the ample riches of medicines, and the
golden houshould-stuffe of Glanra is found. The Schools had heretofore learned
of our Philosophers, that most excellent virtues dwell in simples, that were
guarded with destructive poisons. This made way for the rashness of the
Schools, who mingled the poisons drawn out by expression, and the corrosives
opened with their antidotes: hoping that by the goodness and quantity of the
adjuncts, the malignitie of the poison would be overcome; as if it were
agreeable to health, to have a pestilent glove brought to guests into a chamber
replenished with wholesome air. For we do not here accuse the viper in
Triacle, without which it would but be as it were a cadaverous heap of
simples. For the flesh of vipers is in it self unhurtfull and without poison,
yea an Antidote against it. But the Troshiscks made thereof, by being boiled,
leave all their virtue in the broth, which the raw flesh did conserve.
Concerning Arsenick in this place we complain, being Magisterially, as they
call it, put into Antidotes. For the Schools presume for the raritie of their
boldness to deserve belief, and to place the glory of studies in the
authority of possession. Neither is it perpetual that the most excellent
virtues attend about poisons in the same subject, so that they are covered by
the poisons. For Arsenick, Orpiment etc. though they be fixed and dulcorated,
ulcers, and tame them if they themselves be first tamed. Wherefore the
corrections of medicines, are without the knowledge of properties, parts and
Consonancies. For what does a spice weigh in respect of a poison? If the whole
body being lusty and full of life does presently fall down being smitten with
the tooth of a viper? will Napelles grow mild with the admixture of cloves?
Will Coloquintida cease to cause putrefaction with his torsions, if it be
joined with Tragacant? Therefore corrections in Dispensatories are grievances,
and dull additaments, which do not Chronicall and remote diseases. This only
thing remained in this business, that we infringe and subdue the violence of the
thing, with a fermental propagation. Wherefore as we in general pity the
Compositions and Corrections of the shops, so we yet more detest the
precipitations, vitrifications, and preparations of Mercury, Antimony, Tuty,
Sulphur etc. And also the adulterations of Spirits from Aromaticks: hot seeds,
of vitriol, of sulphur etc. For they are prepared for gain by our fugitive
servants, and furnish Apothecaries shops, rather in comtempt of Chemistry, then
the butter-flyes of leafe-gold, and pounded Jewels; selling their ignorance, if
not their fraud, at agreat rate. As if the stomach could thence expect the
least help. More subtle and therefore more to be condoled is the error of
those, who corrode gold, silver, Coral, pearls and the like with sour
liquors, and think they dissolve them, so that they will be easily admitted
into the veins, truly communicating their properties to us. For they are
ignorant, alas! ignorant that soreness is an enemy to the veins, and
therefore that the foreign soreness of the dissolvents being overcome and
transmitted, such metalls and stones are powder, as before. Which though it be
brought into a most fine flower, yet cannot the same be subdued by the stomach,
or impart its strength to us. Which that it may be apparent to the sight, pour
salt of Tartar on the things dissolved, in some pontick corrosive liquor, and
presently being dissolved, it will fall to the bottom in form of powder. For
if aqua fortis change not metalls in the substance, although those things
become transparent, that were before opacous: nothing hinders but that silver
may be thence again recovered. With what blindness therefore do they prescribe
stones and pearls, as though by corrosives they left their former essence of
stone or metal? For it was the invention of a subtle deceiver, that he might
before his patients set a high rate on his potions. Because ignorant deceivers
think, if the thing dissolving be not by the sight distinguished from the thing
dissolved, that the thing dissolved is truly and substantially transmuted. They
urge, that pearls, Coral acid liquors, but only as it were calcined by the
salts of the things dissolving. And this they prove by silver dissolved in Aq.
fortis or regis, which from thence is brought back again whole; therefore has
not lost its pristine essence: and this they wrest to the aforesaid stones, and
urge it, because by the salt of the alkali of Tartar, the same stone is again
precipitated to the bottom, which before was an invisible powder; forasmuch as
the alcaal salt does drink up the acetous salt, which did contain in it self
the powder of the stones. But they perceive not, first of all, that their own
principles do both teach and extol dissolutions of this sort: Then also, that
the stomach wants this salt of Tartar, that she may precipitate the dissolved
pouders, and separate them from the thing dissolving, and therefore they
propose a ridiculous thing. And by consequence, that the matter of Pearls,
Corrall, etc. once dissolved after this manner, remains dissolved, and is
admitted into the veins with the liquors of the Chyme, and moreover is
transmuted into urine or blood, and Tartar, to the separating of this powder,
from the thing dissolving: Because she is taught as well by means of the
aliment received, as of her own proper digestion, to sequester this powder. For
there are very many things amongst food, which do show forth this effect. Such
as are potherbs and Vulnerary-herbs etc. which for the most part have a
lixiviall volatile salt. Moreover the digestion it self of the stomach
ordinarily does transmute acid vegetable spirits substantially into a faline
volatile salt of urine: which when she may no longer enjoy her pristine power
of dissolving, which she at first had in acidity; by and by she relinquisheth
precipitates) the powder, which before she had dissolved under her own acidity:
and therefore before the mouths of the mesaraick veins does precipitate, and
cast off the aforesaid powder.

But the Galenists go on and urge saying, that Bezoar-stones, and Crabs-stones
(erroneously called Crab's-eyes) etc. as well taken in powder, as dissolved in
some acid dissolving thing, do notably help in the plague, fevers, stone,
wounded persons, and bruised from on high. Wherefore it savours of simplicity
to deny the same in pearls, Corrall, etc. To which we answer, That Gemmes,
stones, and things of a saxatile substance do differ much among themselves. For
first of all Gemmes, flints, marbles, per modum appensi and periapti; and that
but a little while, only until they pass from the mouth through the
excrements. Very languid therefore is the virtue of these, because it lies hid
and shut up in too dense a body. But pearls and Corrall, and whatsoever else
has a saxatile hardness of shellfish, must give place truly to gemmes for
hardness; and yet they are not therefore digested in the Athan^r of our
Economy, so well as in the stomach of some birds. But the stones of Bezoar and
of Crabs etc. not so hard as pearls, are not of a saxatile nature: but are
rather made of a lacteous semi-caseate and semi-petrified juice, and have a
neutrall nature of a tophe, between a Cartilage and a stone. To this that has
been said, for the better understanding of the truth we take leave to add,
That though Bezoar stones, and the stones of Crabs etc. as touching the solid
matter of their powder, are in no wise digested in the Balneum of our stomach;
although they carry in their breasts a lacteous and mucilaginou^ juice, of
great virtue, yet of an exiguous quantity; such as happens to be drawn sorth
also by the decoction of hartshorn rasped. If therefore you boil the powder of
the aforesaid stone in rain or distilled water, and streining the decoction by
a filter you separate it from the powder, and this also draw off by
distillation per Balneum, you shall then find somewhat of the aforesaid
muccilage. But the rest of the powder, as it is not overcome by elixation, so
it continues in a permanency of indigestion in the stomach, not to be subdued
by charms, or won to the scepter of subjection, neither by entreaties, nor by
the whole power of the Archeus. And moreover from the small quantity of the
aforesaid liquor the reason's manifest, why one dram of the aforesaid powder of
bezoar stone taken in some vehicle, effects more then one scruple of the same.

vulgar and pusillanimous Physicians, concerning the dose or quantity to be
taken at a time of Bezoar-stone. We intend not to make it our design to beat
down, or make apocryphal the praecipitous opinion of the common people, in
their obstinate creed and implicit confidence in the goodness of this stone,
from the incredible number of them in this Country, and in all Europe; whereby
it is impossible that that country of India (and but a spot of that neither)
can furnish so many Countries by a thousand parts of these stones, that is
every where so common: when it is eported by those of the Country, and by
Authors of good esteem and credit, That all the stones there must be brought to
the King of that Country: And Garcias ab Horto says, that it is very
difficult to get any there; whence seeing they are now so familiar and frequent
among us, and how it comes to pass, and that we have any good, is almost a
miracle, at least as rare as the white stone. Mathiolus also in Libro
epistolar. tertio ad Quacelbenum, says, That the stones the Emperor had, were
not good. Vallesius again, a learned and chief Physician to Philip the second,
King of Spain, in his fourth book, believes the King himself had not, nor in
all Spain was not a true stone. Moreover the Physicians themselves of that
Country confess that these stones are very rare, and besides are so dear,
that they are kept very precisely by the Indians themselves for their own
proper use. We dare believe, that above the hundred part of these Bezoar-stones
so called, are sorged and sophisticate: such a cunning cast of subtle and
deceiving merchants are there here in England, after the Italian mode, who can
so exactly counterfeit them, that themselves cannot know the one from the
other, the true from the false, but by a certain eminent sign of notifying
them. Josephus Acosta in lib. 4. cap. 42. confesses that the simple Indians
themselves know very well to adulterate them, and do it with a wonderful
accurate artifice, and very frequently; and no wonder, nor unlike to
verifimility, when this cousenage is wont to happen very often in medicines of
a lesser price. Lastly upon sure grounds we know, that there is not much to be
trusted to this stone; because they do not answer to those effects written of
by Authors. For they will have it to move sweat powerfully, and sometimes
vomit, sometimes as alexipharmacall; and again as Cardiacall; and therefore fly
to it as to the last refuge, as to the Anchora spei, and Sanctuary of life. But
alas poor ignorant deluded vulgar: who will rather snore in the lethargy of
their stupid ignorance, then awake to the disquisition of Truth. They err
first, in their too good opinion of this stone. Secondly, in their too great
ignorance of the quality of it. And thirdly, in their too little knowledge of
the quantity. Which last is greatly feared among the common people, and the
same is evident from the Physicians prescriptions. We will suppose now we have
the true genuine Bezoar stone, because the wild belief of the wilderness'd
vulgar runs a madding after this stone more, then seeking to be baptized with
the new name, or have the Evangelicall illegible stone. The most are wont to
fear the quantity of it, thinking it to be a most hot medicine, and powerfully
vigorous: and therefore dare not exceed above four or five grains at most;
Seeing it causes large sweat. Now sudorificks seem to be begotten under the
torrid Zone, to be hot, because they attenuate and cut the Line of humors* and
expel them out of the Center of the body, unto the confines bordering upon the
Territories of the Epidermis by the Nilus of profuse sweat that rills through
the creeks of the Pelt, the pores. But first it is to be noted that at this day
we seldom find Be^oar-stone to be the Midwife of evil humors, or
impregnated with a virtue to deliver and purge the body of vicious excrements,
by the menstruum of sweat, as daily experience testifies. Secondly, that
whosoever takes this stone in the maximity or greatest quantity of it, shall
not therefore perceive himself to be e're the hotter; which every sound man may
bring to the Test of experience in himself. Thirdly, they who have written
hitherto o^ this stone, and have sailed and coasted into the furthest parts of
the knowledge of it, have steered by the compass or Lant-skip only of others
petragraphy and description. Some calculate and will have it to dwell under the
temperate Zone. Others under the frigid. But no man who has traveled into the
Indies or America of its qualities and virtues, by the fixed North Pole of
experience will say, that it is an inhabitant under the su^mer solstice or more
hotter Zone; but is a naked substance living in the Autumn or wilderness of
insipidity, having no elevation of either of those two poles of odor or sapour
in it; which is a wonder that for all this, it should attain to the meridian of
that degree of heat, as is computed and ascribed to it; whereby it is feared as
a Harry-Cain, least the deluge of sweat it may procure by its hot sudorifick
quality, might drown and wash away our vital powers: Therefore they get into
the Arc of a small dose or quantity, and save themselves. But it is more nigh
unto the Israel of verisimility, that it acts by an occult, and not manifest
property, namely, Corroborating and fortifying the Canaan of the Heart, against
the Egyptian Garlic and onyons of malignant powers; whence we may infer by
the way. That the militia of this stone is useless and unprofitable to draw a
Line of fortification, about the breast-works of the heart, except there be an
hostile incursion and invasion of malignant distempers, to settle the barbarous
tyranny of evil and venomous humors, to subvert and overthrow the actions and
powers of the Commonwealth of our vitalls. And so although it may do no harm,
yet to be sure it does no good, and is administered in vain. Fourthly, They who
write of this stone, do not agree in the latitude, degree, or dose of it: For
as in their petragraphicall character of the qualities of it, they make many a
voyage wide of the Equator, and beyond the line of Truth; so in their
description of its dimensions or quantity, they come short of it; and at the
Landsend fall foul, and split upon the sands of a small and common dose, of
three or four grains. But Mathiolus prescribes at least seven grains. Garcius
ab Horto unto thirty grains, and confesses that more may be taken without hurt.
And we verily believe and from the premises we before hinted do affirm, that
one main reason why this stone is so little effectual, is because it is taken
in too small a quantity. And it is recorded, that to Edward the Confessor was
given a dram weight at one time of this stone in powder, which is sixty grains.
Fumanellus also commends a dram of it to be given in the plague. And certainly
if the stone be innoxious, a good quantity also will be innoxious. Thus
therefore the magnified virtue of this childish Rattle, like that precious
trifle of the Countess of Kents powder, with those seriovs fopperies of
Pearls, Corrall and Crabsstones, either in powder, or dissolved in some acid
liquor, crumbles away, and vanishes like a morning dew, before the sun of
Truth. Again, it is worth our noting that if wine or vinegar be drunk in the
same draught with the aforesaid pouders, they do not dissolve one sixth part of
the powder, and leave not the rest changed, but whole. The which will be
manifest from this experiment. That if any one drinks the stone of crabs, not
in powder, but broken in little bits, and after excretion it be washed, you
shall find the same weight of it as before, and truly nothing of it brought
under subjection to the stomach, nor it to partake any thing of those stones by
digestion. And here we advise the Galenists to consider how they are beaten
with their own stones or pearls being taken in powder, do melt in us; they in
vain attempt to dissolve them in the acid salnie vitriolated qualities of wine,
vinegar or juice of Limons. For there is nothing of the indigestible dissolved
thing conveyed into us, but that it contains its own digestible part, as we
before have said of the lacteous mucilage of animated stones. But if otherwise
the dissolved should make progress, and march into the Garrison of the veins
(which never happens) that he might offer and communicate his gifts unto us
(suppose it be pearls, or the aforesaid stones) sour enemy and alien, then
helps or profit. For in the first place, seeing they have refused to answer and
subscribe to the engagement of the Common Hall of our economy, the stomach,
(who is made Lord paramount and Surveyor-Generall over all things that is to be
received in) and have not submitted to the present power of digestion, (as was
proved even now) that is conferred on it by the Parliament of our Interiours, in
their totality and full session: it is therefore adjudged and voted that they
shall not be preferred any further, nor admitted to compound, or be concocted
in the second digestion: because they do not go to the ^lysium of the second,
but by the purgatory of the first. And therefore secondly, continue and are
looked upon as Delinquents, and never are converted into true Commonwealth's
men, blood, but into an other recrement of the veins.

Vain and fruitless are the blew promises of Physicians of their cordial,
exhilarating, fortifying and corroborating medicines, prepared of gold, gemmes,
etc. of like stupidity with the rest. For although they be reduced into most
fine po^der, yet they that suffer nothing from the fire, how much less can
they be transmuted by the digestive virtue. For first they are powdered in a
brass or iron mortar; and the gemmes s^rape off, and carry away part of the
brass with themselves, because they are pearls in Aq. fortis. For indeed by
and by the gre^^ color has betrayed it self, and the Apothecary confesses
that in stead of his cordial and fortifying medicines of pearls and gemmes
which should act powerfully, he has communicated to the sick the green rust of
br^sse or verdigrease. Then if afterward the gemmes be more curiously ground
upon a stone or marble, (far more soft then themselves) they increase in
weight, and the marbles and stones become confortative, beyond the original
gemmes.

That the powder of peals profit no more then flint-stones or glass-pouder
taken inwardly. And to this will subscribe all those, who apply themselves to
the serious disquisitions and scrutinies of Nature in examining of bodies by
Analysis, and who with me pity the deplorable ignorance and foolishness of
Physicians, and the unluckie tutelage of the sick. It is not denied, but worthy
of all due acknowledgement, that pearls, not of the same hardness with
cristalline gemmes, but members of the animal Commonwealth, do contain most
precious virtues and riches of good; yet cannot bestow any notable help; much
less in their powder or dissolved as before. For we have had the opportunity
and happiness to learn, and now divulge to the world, that they may take
notice in the first place, that whatsoever Physicians prate and babble, and
largely promise concerning them, it is but mere vain boasting. Then that a true
marga^ite or pearl, has not within a farinaceous powder, and dissimilar from
its Cortex; but the whole systeme or globe of the pearl, with all the whole
round of spheres, from the surface to the center, is homogeneall, has a
Syzygia, a conjunction or revolution of mere pellicles, lying on one another,
as the involved pills of onyons encompasse one another. The which thing they
can testify with me, who know how to reduce pearls of ovall figures, into
orbicular ones. But the aforesaid firmament or Region of pellicles or
conticities are in no wise resolved and fixed into a Caput mortuum or al^o^l
powder by the Crucible or reverberium of acidity as aforesaid. The which only
grinds the meal of falls pearls in the acid f^rment. And moreover, that although
the aforesaid circumvoltuion of corticities should be dissolved, (which is not)
yet were it but as a terra damnata or pulverata, and the whole batch, but the
same meal or dust of the pearl as before.

Does it not then on all hands appear very ridiculous, and worthy of hissing,
that they will comfort, fortify and corroborate with their Alkermes, gemmes,
leaf-gold, powder of pearls, etc. when an enemy in the bowels and heart of the
City of our vitalls rages and tyrannizeth within, by the prerogative of routing
our forces and remaining Conqueror, and precipitates the life it self into all
disorder and confusion of dissolution? For such an enemy who could lay seige to
our economy, and dares to attempt the scaling of our fort-rampant, beat all
the Commanders and Officers from their works, and cause Nature not only to
sound a Retreat, but quite quit the Garrison: how will he not grapple, within
push of pike, with all her Auxiliaries, blow up the sconces and bull-workes of
fortifications, the strongest of them all, despise their contemptible militia,
and hang out the flag of defiance to all the Recruits the Physician can make,
and let down the port-cullice, to stake out their Cordial cups. He that can
subdue and bring under subjection the health of the soundest man, and despises
the strength of the strongest; what cannot he do to him being overcome, though
he has the advantage of the sun, wind and hill of corroborating cordial
medicines? Chiefly when these Auxiliaries have no good cause, no good ground or
footing in Nature; seeing they are wholly exotic, not at all agreeing in union
of symbol with the spirits. Will such an enemy, such a Sampson care for these
cardiacall Phylistims? Or think they to lull him a sleep or bind him with these
cords? will he not rouse up, and shake his locks like a Giant, and break in
pieces their bands as thread. As he neither fears nor cares for any Committee
of sequestrations, their purges, so neither will he be bribed or laid asleep
with their cordialls. In vain therefore is the ease or lightning of Symptoms
intended, if a conquering power of healing be not present, which can compescate
and procure the consopition of the confusion of the vital Archeus: which truly
is an essential and principal efficient of healing.

And here we are fallen upon the detection of two other collateral errors of
Physicians, concerning the story of an old cock, and that pitiful poor
invention of Clysters. In the first place, Physicians, given to Physic, crack
much of the virtues of Cock-broth. But this will vanish away in fumo, like an
old-wifes-dream; Broth of an old cock joined with herbs, is a particular of the
Lady Ignorances hous-wifery. For first a young Cock, has more life, spirit and
virtue then the old decrepit ones. Concerning this, let judgment be committed
to the Hens. These Physic broths are very ungrateful to the stomach and
troublesome, and therefore are easily let fall into, and made the companion of
excrements. But we pass lightly over this mess.

And now it will be expedient and comes within Tripery, of washing the guts
with a Clyster; though I am led to believe, I shall be cried out on, by the
common Physicians and their besotted admirers the rabble of distracted vulgar,
who are unacquainted with the more rational ways of healing, who make it
their design to cry up any way or opinion that has the least plausibility in
it; and on the other hand to cry down what ever comes by the oblique line of
their dark crooked and common understandings: as if the womb of teeming truth
must be closed up, if she presume to bring forth ought that suits not with
their unchewed notions and suppositions. As for the last, it is not my task or
design, neither do I seek or care to supplant them from their paternoster or
All-gospel, being such as my soul abhors.

Quo semel imbuta recens servabit odorem.
Testa diu.
Yet seeing this sink-scourer, the use of Clysters is so generally and easily
believed to be such a safe and familiar practice, that he is accounted no
better then an Ass that speaks against it; I shall adventure to leave them a
hint, that Foolls are not constellated to a capacity of medicinal principles,
and that they stumble and err in nothing more then in this their so much
magnifying of Clysters. Which common unworthy and shameful help of Physicians,
is to be abhorred as a cruel and beastly remedy, taught us (as they say) from a
Bird. Hence upon rational deductions we conclude, That every Clyster is
naturally an enemy to the Intestines. Afterward it will easily appear, That
all things are received for the manner and respect of the Recipient. Which we
thus further explain. The tears of the eyes, although saltish, yet are
indolent, because familiar and natural to the eye. But simple water pains the
eye; and so does any other thing else. The urine also, though salt, does not
mordicate or fret the bladder. But any decoction or liquor whatsoever conveyed
within by Cathaeter or other pipe, although very sweet, does yet grieve and
pain the body. But if the pisso has drawn but the least acidity from new-beer,
or otherwise, by and by there follows a very great strangury and guttation of
urine. The ordure or turd therefore, seeing it is the natural and domestic
content of the gutts, does not prick or gnaw, nor is not felt, until it comes
to the fleshy parts of the Intestinum rectum, as executing the office of
doorkeeper, they do both feel and urge the protrusion of the excrement. Whence
we conclude, That every Clyster seeing it is an exotic guest and alien to the
guts, it cannot choose but be troublesome and ungrateful to them. Then, that a
Clyster never ascends to the Ileon. decoction, either the greatest part is left
in the pipe, or falls out in the delivery, and so it attains only to the
beginning of the Colon. And lastly, if there be laxatives in the Clyster (for
so for the most part the sick is deceived, fearing laxatives) as with the one
hand even now we exploded the poison of purgatives, so by the same rule we
throw down the use of a laxative Clyster also. we confess a Clyster is less
hurtful: forasmuch as the mouth of the stomach is always exercised in the
most noble business of life, and the life is hurt with the laxative poison. But
at least it cannot be denied by no man, specious, or by what name or title
soever dignified or distinguished, or under what administration soever or
manner of reception: because a purgative enema resolves the blood in mesentery.
No man ever yet brought out fevers by Clysters: because they attempt not, nor
come to the places encompassed with the feavorish matter; nor are they ever
eased or comforted by them. Moreover there is another Imposture called clyster,
the ultimate scope of a clyster: because they cast in broths of liquated flesh,
with the hope of nourishing, which truly is an argument of intolerable
stupidity. For the liquors being injected, first of all, they mingle themselves
with the turd found in the same place; then they are poured into those parts,
to whom it is proper to change all things into turd or excrement; and thirdly,
it is clear by experience, that such broths, if they be cast forth again, two
hours afterward, they smell not only of a turd, but in a manner of cadaverous
matter. For seeing there is nothing goes to the second or third, unless it be
by the first: it follows, that out of meats undigested in the stomach, and not
changed into true and laudable chyle, there cannot in no wise be made any
blood. Hence it is manifest also, that the injected broths are cadaverized, and
can never pass into aliment. Nor does it argue any thing, that such broths
carry the resolved flesh in the manner of chyle. For there is as good as
nothing done, unless they have first taken the fermentall proprieties of the
first digestion, preparatory to life, not to be found any where without the
stomach. For whatsoeves falls out of the stomach undigested, is very
troublesome, and stirs up diarrhaea's, tortures and also sour and unsavory
belchings, and breeds worms. But those things which are injected beneath,
because they partake not of the least benefit of the first digestion, they
unavoidably become cadaverous. Because they have tried the heat of the place,
but are deprived of the true ferment of vital digestion. An old woman's
invention then is a nourishing ^^yster, and a laxative, a cruel one.

Having now had a clear and uninterrupted prospect into the field of the vulgar
medicines of the shops. We now descend and take the chair on the stage of
Topics, the scene of oiles and suets, which are but mutes, and of no value for
ointments and plasters, Dramatis personae, unless perhaps to give consistence
(the Epitasis of their action) to the medicine, and bring the heterogeneall
parts into a chorus of mixture by their emplastick quality. For first a great
part of men suffer not ointments applied to the skin, because they excite
itchings and whelks with swelling. Next because the oiles aforesaid are for the
most part made of herbs whose virtue lies hid in a mucilaginous and gummy
juice, but that juice by boiling is drawn out into the porridge, or wrung out
by the press, which is not truly combined with the oiles, but at length being
fixed, grows hard. But we collect the balsomes of flowers more rightly in
honey. And we much more admit the simplicities of simple, then of compound
oiles. Wherefore we chiefly explode the unmeet and absurd compositions of
unguents and plasters sold in shops; in that nothing is more foolish then that
the powder, of vegetables under diverse suets and fats ignorantly mixed, should
by being fixed, harden, and so become good for nothing. Which if it be
mineral, will not mingle with the fat, but is rather so drowned therein, and
imprisoned, that it is worth nothing, and oneiy increases the weight. For
nothing is to be mingled with oiles, ointments, and plasters, which cannot in
them be wholly homogeneously sugar is commended, not because it is sweeter and
in its vigor more worthy; but because it is dearer, and oftentimes has been
boiled with a lixivium of unslaked lime. Where the very name of purity has
made the cheat. The contused flowers of herbs etc. being mingled with the
whitest sugar grow dull, which by means of sweeter sugar contract a ferment,
and by heating, draw out the powers of the simple. But afterward by the
enclosed digestion of the heat, the ferment is checked and they become more
powerful by far. But the diversity of the ferment depends on the lixivium
which one sugar has, and another wants. We are likewise wont outwardly to
apply ointment with choice. For in such maladies, whose cure proceeds from
the center outward, as in wounds, contusions, combustions, etc. We advise that
they be applied warm; but where the inward malady requires outward help, as the
dysentery, Colic or nephritick Convulsions, schirrhus, etc. ointments should
be cherished from without, with a stone heat, or with hot sand. And we have
learned by viewing Chafe in a kettle of warm water walking to and fro, as it
were from the heat kindled underneath; and therefore that by a powerful heat
ointments applied, are quickened, and join their spirit with our blood; We first
guessed and after found by experience, that the malady is by this means drawn
out, and the violence of the Symptoms staid. And whatsoever Baths do in the
whole, the same is done in part without prejudice of the whole, by ointments
being heat and cherished. For a fomenting tile, drives the smell of the
plaster inwards, and draws out those things which otherwise do stick more
closely. In like manner the spirit enforcing it self is drawn together with the
blood, and is dispersed with heat, another succeeding in its place, exhausts
the force of the medicine, and as it were boiling within, is reverberated.

Likewise about the gathering of simples it is not roots are to be gathered
about Autumn. But for the most part simples afford the more powerful roots at
spring. The Polypodium of the spring is chiefly green and fl^urishing. In the
Autumn it exhibits a hoary and black root, being worn out and useless. We
conceive that each is to be gathered immediately before the state of maturity:
for full maturity is the beginning of declination. Wherefore let each fruit
flower, root, leaf, bark, etc. have its determinate space of maturity: for
even the juice in plants first flows up, which in many afterward dries up,
or is consumed and spent into leafes, so that the variety of maturities
begets variety of gatherings. For thus some leafes, after the flowers are
more vegetous; but others are more juycie before them. There are also others,
which are stronger before the growth of the fruit; and there are others that
perpetually persist. Wherefore they more rightly determine, who gather simples
according to the exigency of their scope and design.

Hitherto has my employment been to make us men, and to bring us from under
the fraud, Errors, Ignorance and other rubbish of that, which the folly and
vanity of the Schools have falsely called a Science and Art. what art I pray
you? Except the art to cloak their defects and Ignorance with impostures, and
only palliate diseases, and that as beastly as can be wished? For as the case
stands, they have made of a lovely beautiful and bountiful virgin, an ill
favored penurious Harlot, dressed and tricked up with Gew-gaw's; with whom the
whole Europaean world has committed most abominable fornication. simple
distilled waters of the Apothecaries in the common leaden stills, and hope with
the Torrent of current truth, and rational deductions, to rince away this into
the common-shoare of errors; and with the Index expurgatorius of acute
demonstrations, to wipe it out of the journall-book of Physic.

How great and meridian light is come unto Physic only by true distillation,
as it is used of all men, so it is known but of a few; and daily experience
teaches, how great commodity has redounded thereby unto the sick; so that by
it has more glory and renown been reflected on Physic, and more additions
made, and perfections acquired, then by all the whole rabble of Galenicall and
heathenish traditions. We shall not stand to show whence the word distillation
is derived; let it be their tendance who have the Art to be industriously idle;
nor the manner of distillation or what instruments serving thereunto; nor how
many sorts of distillation, as per Ascensum, Descensum and latus; or how many
ways as per Balneum Mariae, per Cineres, per arenam, per campanam, per
patinam; it being besides my purpose, and requires a peculiar Tractate. But it
shall be here sought, whether that product, by the vulgar and rustic
distillation of Apothecaries in the common leaden stills, be any other, then an
insipid, aequeous humor, frighted out of the whole merely by the violence of
the fire, without the Counter-magick of the still or instrument for that
purpose, without any artifice, and without the elementall, true, genuine,
homogeneall entity of the compositum; without its spirit, life, or the
domestic balsome inhabiting in the whole. Destillatio tunc est operatio, qua
quod in Corpore est humoris totum illud vaporis specie ab eo separetur, qui
postea a frigido ambiente congelatus in liquorem ab excipulo recipitur. This is
but a short and cold definition and description of distillation; but such as
well will serve and suit with the common distillation. It Is confessed on all
sides, that in simple distilled waters out of herbs, there may be the strength
and virtue of the whole. I Will take the leave to add; That out of herbs plants
or any vegetable may be drawn forth a water by art, if they be distilled as
they ought to be, (not in the common leaden stills,) which shall equal, if no^
surpass the herb as it is whole. For there is a terra damnata in all
externalls, whether animal, vegetall, mineral or metalline, which must pass
the Chymicks Limbus or Purgatory, before it enjoyes its own Astrum or Sidereall
firmament.

This is the deciphering of our distillation. The topic or domestic astrum in
the horizon of its own ens or orb, is excited and awakened by the enormantick
power of an exotic motor from the Lethargy of gross inactivity, inoculated,
contracted, and fast luted by the crude and cadaverous opium of corporeity and
circumferentiall lumber, gets a habeas corpus from under the arrest of its own
domestic luggage, emancipated from the gabardine of corporeality, by the
sub-poena or turn-key of Pyrotechny, and subtiliated into a jubilee of
spiritual Aporhaea's or evaporations, sallies a broad hand in hand, emitting a
continual steame of most subtle effluviums, homogeneous and consimilar, that
is, of the same identicall nature with it self, wafted on the wings of its own
hydromantick vehicle, being sufficiently sublimated, condenses into a material
water by the Deliquium of the stills Cranium periwigg'd, and seeks the nose or
portal of the stillatories Cranium, at length is saluted by the cold
embracements of the Recipient.

What more foolish can distill from the cracked Retort of whymsical or obtuse
sculls, then the insipid and unsavory prescriptions of the Apothecaries common
stills cookery: since we are of opinion that no man who has but Philosophy,
ingenuity enough to examine the whole scheam of natural endowments of each
single ens, how upon the small stock of the smallest piece of the hexameron
fabric is inoculated several azimuths meeting in the Zenith of its own
Horizon; and has but so much understanding to know what true distillation is
in the nature, use and end; and how the several epicycles may be drawn forth
from the own individual meridian, by the Aequinoctiall line of Pyrotechny,
must of unavoidable necessity confess and acknowledge, That simple waters of
Apothecaries, as they are commonly distilled, are but the stagnant, aqueous
humor, and insipid snivell of the rheumatick vehicle or menstruum of the
Compositum, castrated and excis'd of its vitality and energy, and is no better
then that water which is the Cingulum macrocosmi, wherein the pulse of the
great world beats. For let it be considered in all its stages by our
Pharmacopropaeans, we mean, this vulgar operation of simple waters, by our
Chymick mimes and counterfeits, and we shall find: That the whole scene of
still pissing, all the journey, is nothing but the insipid, effeminate, cold
shivering and aguish exudations, the stewed steams of the Lady Ignorance's
hous-wifery, so that the Catastrophe or last exit of drop into the stills
chamber pot, when it comes to the atrophy of a caput mortuum, does epiloguise
and confess, that it is but the sceleton, a lean, starved anonymous thing,
scared out of its wits, not endew'd with any formal transmutation, nor nothing
differs from that thin-legg'd Gentleman Usher, the fleam, as they call it, that
comes forth in the prologue or first act. If the blind lead the blind, they
both fall into the ditch, into this standing pool, or puddle of simple waters.
What epidemick blindness and ignorance has possessed us of this age, in these
common leaden stills, that it is got into every corner of the Land, with those
who can go to the charges of keeping one at work, and think themselves not
well till they have one; then they cannot do a miss, when they shall have
ready at hand the waters out of all herbs growing amongst them. But they will
from hence learn, when they shall know, That nature loathes to pick strawes,
yet is never idle; and that this trifle so universally practiced is no issue or
product of her generous endeavors. It is neither the elementall, or semin^ll
water, or radical moisture of the compound, but a crude, raw, and phlegmatic
matter, partaking little or nothing of vitality, For first such waters are
destitute of savor and taste; for water of Wormwood neither smells like
Wormwood* nor is bitter; yea, the more wonder it is sometimes somewhat sweet.
Manarde in his Epistles lib. 15. Cap. 15. says, That the common waters
distilled out of herbs by fire, neither the smell no^ taste remain, but many
times the contrary; whereby is easily perceived, that the simple waters have
not the same virtues which the whole herb had. And why should one main
principle, the Earth, the faeces or ground after distillation ^e thrown away as
a terra damnata: like that of the College of Physicians bidding in their
Dispensatorie the Apothecary to fling away the faeces in their extract. Rudy,
(their best pill the most purgative and cordial part and so in other of their
extracts also) when there lies ambus^ado^d in it a main principle of vitality,
and if not ligamentum, yet Conservatum tatius, which cannot be destroyed; which
is wanting in the simple distilled waters, and therefore worth little, and ub^
sapiunt: as that great Master once said* who was the salt of sacrifices, and
the light of the world, and his Scholars the salt of the earth. This is clear
out of the ashes of vegetables; for although their weaker exterior elements may
expire by violence of the fire, yet their Earth cannot be destroyed, but
vitrified. If this be true, as without and beyond the doubt of any the most
pyrrhonian incredulity may be evinced, what a sympathy then, and harmony there
is between it, the humane earth, and his mother; in which are principles
homogeneall with his life, such as can restore his decaies, and reduce his
disorders harmony. But say they, if they do no good they do no harm. To which
we reply, as good never a whit, as never the better: what are we to jest in
Physic? Play the antic? play the Treuant? Shall not the compunction of this,
call blood into their faces, and imprint such a tincture, the character of
shame so deep, as shall stand for ever a statue of unworthy un-medical
baseness and ignominy, or be left, as only fit for the practice of Quacks.

To which we subjoin, that the vulgar simple waters distilled out of herbs by
the Seplastaries or Apothecaries out of the common leaden stills, are not only
nothing worth, nor retain not the force, strength and virtue of the whole
herb, but are noxious, evil, and pernicious, and destructive to the nature of
Man in general, nauseous to the stomach, and loathsome to the sick, wholly
different from the nature of the herb of which they are distilled, and
partaking of an exotic, heterogene quality and nature.

Distillation in the hands of such is as rats-bane in the hands of a Child, who
wanting judgment and discretion, not distinguishing it from sugar puts it to
his mouth, and kills himself. For besides their ignorance, a great error is
committed, not only in not knowing what distillation is, but their persuading
themselves, and making the people believe, they are the true essences, nature,
strength and virtue, of the herbs out of which they are draw'n; not perceiving
the strange, foreign nature and quality they partake by assimilating an other
nature contrary to their own, and the nature of Man. For not only they are
altogether devoid of all odor and sapour, both smell and taste, except in some
few whose sulphur lies in the utter and superficial part of the herb; but they
are wanting both of quality and virtue; for we may as well believe a fifth
Gospel, as that the quality or virtue of the herbs is draw'n forth in the
waters, except like savor, or smell, or both, be in the same. For without
doubt the quality is wanting, when out of herbs that are hot, a cold
phlegmatic moisture is draw'n, unworthy the name of distilled water, except to
those who have a tendence to christen things improperly, and barbarously, or
barbarously improper: But if we grant them this, it is a water; it is not the
elementall, seminall or radical water of the thing, as we hinted before; and
we may very lawfully be allowed to conclude, Such a water to partake nothing of
vitality, essence, or nature of the herb, and to be little or nothing
differenc'od from common well-water, and is as obnoxious to corruption and
putrefaction as others: yea also, by reason of their crudities to congelation
or conglatiation: witness the intent diligence of Aothecaries to stop their
glasses close, and care to preserve them from the cold in winter, from whose
arrest they cannot be bailed or secured, though by the subsidy of double glass
and stopple: Again that although there be a manifest difference between the
herb of mint and lettuce, that the one is hot, and the other cold, yet the
water of mints may very warrantably be said to be cold, when its calefactive,
and confortative part remains in his oil, and his balsamic part in his salt,
neither of which ne (...) quidem in the text, ascends not in the distillation
that is common and usual.

Waters distilled in glassen, or glazed vessels after the manner of our
distillation, and is known to some Apothecaries by our direction, which enjoies
its grand principiative fundamina, and the most radical and inmost nature and
balsom, do so far pass those that are made simply by the fire in leaden stills,
as gold passes Iron: such a distillation as shall give forth the natural
odor, savor and taste of the herbs and flowers whereout they be taken, absque
impyreumate, without any noisome smell or taste of smoke or burning, enjoing its
saline balsamic conservatory of vitality, and from, putrefaction and
corruption; which cannot be performed to a moity in the common leaden stills.
For the waters that are drawn off in them, are seldom, especially while they
be new, without notable loathsomenesse of smoke and burning. For they acquire
a sensible empyreumatick acidity, and inherit any foreign quality or tincture
devolved from the churlish saturnine vitiosity of the still; which unto sick
men that drink of them, either by themselves, or in their sauc'd Julaps, are
not only nauseous and very grievous, but also hurtful, and pernicious: For the
malign and evil quality of the lead, endamageth both the stomach, the breast,
and all the entrails; so likewise does the quality of brass, which Physicians
perceiving, left them, and only used decoctions; which things also, may easily
be made appear, with less ado then a volume, how frivolus and fruitless they
are; also how pernicious and evil. For in herbs, or any other matter of a
vitriolated ferment, that have an acid sapor or spirit, being decocted in
brazen vessels, yield a decoction very ungrateful, and partaking of a
canckerous and aeruginous quality: therefore have our London College of
Physicians wisely and advisedly forbidden the decocting of acid things in
brass: in the 54 fol. of their Pharmacopaeia or Dispensatory, where they
command that Berberries, of a tart vitriolate ferment, be boiled in vase
vitreato terreo, and they give the reason, quod acida ab aereo ingratum
sapiunt: And from whence they had this we need not be solicitous in searching
to know. If the vessel alter so much in the decocting, why not as well in
distillation? For if the decoctions may partake of a canckerous aeruginous
quality from the brazen vessel, why also may not the distilled waters in the
leaden stills with peuter-heads partake of a saturnine cerussal quality, not to
be digested by the most struthiocameline Athanor of the microcosmical aeconomy.
Such things then as are destill'd after the common manner of distillation, are
altogether to be disallowed, because of the Ceruse, and other malicious
qualities of the lead: for water also that is conveyed by pipes of lead Galen
condemns; for it breeds diseases in the entrails: and in this case it is
worth a man's tenth reading: for if he affirm, That mere water only conveyed in
leaden pipes does breed diseases of the bowels; how much more ought we to fear
our waters distilled in a leaden still; for no small Cerusse remains cleaving
to the inner side of a leaden head, as in distilling of vinegar is gathered: so
by the force of the heat, or burntnesse ascending up with a vapor, many times
also acid and tart, of a vitriolated nature and quality, does infect and tinct
the waters with a saturnine cerussall evil quality. For how comes it to pass
else that simple water devoid of all its salt, and so of all taste, should at
any time wax sour, and of evil taste, except it did partake of the evil
qualities of the spirits contained in the lead; which sournesse could never
happen in simple waters by reason of their coldness. But, well may they with
such devout confidence, even to superstition, administer such waters as partake
an evil quality of the lead in which they be distilled, when they shall plead
the tyranny of prescription and Custom, and with no less temerity, and as
much unsuccesfulnesse they shall not stick to administer those rattles and
scurffe of their brains, the scales of brass and Iron, inwardly.

But a hard task think they we have to contest sallads gathered out of the
Galenicall elysium; that cold herbs as Roses, Succory, plantain, burrage, etc.
must be stilled in a cold still, that is, a leaden still they mean. But what
hitherto has been spoke touching the invalidity and inefficacious remedy of
distilled waters, he who will deny to have been argued according to reason and
all equity of demonstration from the rules of Pyrotechny, we profess we cannot
edify how, or by what rule of proportion that Man's genius calculates, what his
elements are, nor what his analyticks: confidently to those who have read good
books, and to those whose reason is not an illiterate book, to themselves we
appeal, whether they would not confess all this to be true, were it not for
that afore-recited cold and dull objection of them, who like a lame dog must
be helped over the style, cannot get over this adamantine Alpe of frigidity.

activity, application, or accommodation of Cychory, (or any other cold
vegetable) to the Liver, be in his body, in his cold, unactive, elementary
quality, or in his spirit, (except we hold he has none in him) or some other
innate, peculiar disposition or balsome, which has power to work, and which
things Hippocrates calls (...).

That there is life, virtue, and strength in waters, (if the whole have any,
and they be draw'n off by an expert Artist in Pyrotechny) is confessed of all,
except those whose obstinacy in incredulity confesses their benightment to the
black paths of ignorance and error: for if as Christ says my Father works
hitherto and I work, and it is God that clothes the Lilly of the field, who
toil not, nor spin their own garments, but God in Natures Loom has wrought
both wa^p and woofe: what does he then cloth them with? with only the naked
fig leaves of their anaglyphe or exterior texture or vestment? yes certainly,
he clothes them with spirit, full of spirit and life, quick and living. Besides
the texture of them, the several, perpetual productions, their
multiplication, augmentation are manifest and infallible arguments of life.

There is then in all things lumen quoddam vitale, Tamque in pisce vitale est,
quam in leone; tamque in Cychoreo and papavere quam pipere, which is
extinguished, obstructed, or diminished in this clouted-shoe, hob-nayl'd
Chemistry of Apothecaries.

If this be true, as to satiety of satisfaction may be clearly evinced, that
every plant or herb enjoies vegetation according to the seminal virtue of its
domestic ferment, originally inoculated into its principles, by natural
consequence from hence we may understand, That all vegetation is from the
spirits. And that so all activity, capacity and power to work proceeds from
them: as also that all debility to perform their original inhaerent and
^mplantate vigor, power and virtue in the body, does depend upon the
obstruction, violation or diminution of the spirits and their peculiar
appropriate ferment. Cychory having a bitter taste, comes sal gemme, its
natural ferment according to the Chemists. So opium much more colder, has in
it a bitter and nitrous salt: yet in him besides his soporiferous quality,
there is connexed virus aliud. unde let halia papavera somno, decantantur a
Poetis. And anodynes although they stupifie, instar frigoris; yet they are
erroneously reckoned by the Schools, chiefly among cold things. For neither is
it soporiferous sulphur in opium that does cool; but greatly amaricate, and his
salt is sharp and sudorifick; and bitterness in the Schools is a notable
Indicative of heat. Out of opium we say separated from his narcotick sulphur,
may be made a notable purger. The like may be done of Cychory, Centaury,
Fumitory and Gentian: Salt of a cleansing succory made by fire, excellent in
the Ictericall tincture to expel it.

Certainly if we be not moles to our own understandings, and do not wilfully
shut the eyes of our reason, but do so much right to our own judgments as to
perpend what quality there is in the elementall Crasis of succory, we shall
find most manifestly a sharp bitter taste in it, which proceeds chiefly from his
salt gemme, which is not cold, but of an active quality, which is the true
hepatick medicine in it, and the chief specific part that aspects the Liver:
is the Ascendant and Almuten in its own Horizon, that radically applies to the
Liver: But the water of it, that is drawn off in a cold still so called, is
void of course, and peregrine, that is, stripped stark naked of its virtues, and
is not in reception with his original, and has lighted in the via combusta;
nor this balsamic hepatick salt, without which the whole is a nullity, is not
in exaltation, ascends not in the common distilling, nor can by no means be
translated thereto by the leaden stils. The Caput mortuum after every
distillation, in which is ambuscado'd the salt, is only in the combust way,
and is not aspected of the water, that is, partakes not one grain of the salt,
without which it is an unsavory medicine. For if the aqueous humor, the
chariot of the other inhaerent virtues, be drawn by these dull saturnine
leaden-heel'd horses, the common stills, and be driven naked into the world,
rifl'd of all its force and virtue, and carries not in its belly neither wind
nor fire; how can it be applied with honesty or conscience, as medicinal for
the Liver; when to the most gross and vulgar heads it confesses its
invalidity, as being pillaged and robbed of its efficacy, spirit and life. And
how all along it has been handed down to posterity, and reckoned among the
rapsodies of medicines, as a prime instrument to correct and condemn the
distempers of Man's body to a ne ultra, seems not so much a riddle as
ridiculous, except to the serious trifling gravity of such, who having as cold
and dull a pace, as pate, in the scrutinies of Nature and her excellencies,
have little else to do; whose tendence seems to verify the tenor of that
proverb, better play at small game then stand out.

Such herbs then as partake of a vitriolated quality, and an acid sharp spirit,
though cold, ought not to be distilled in a leaden still. Of a vitriolate
vegetables may draw mineral and metallic spirits unto them. And let not other
men think themselves free, and the thing equitable and rational, to call
choler aeruginous, vittelline and porraceous, for the likeness and affinity of
those things from whence the name is borrowed; and go about to debar me from
conceiving my self tied by the same duty. We have the same reason then, and as
lawful it is for us to say, that either the humors of the body so called, or
the topicall ferment of any part, may partake of a vitriolated nature and
quality: so also vegetables may assume a vitriolate energy, as Lujula, Limons,
succory, vinegar, (which does represent the tart qualities of vitriol) etc. who
have a sharp, piercing, powerful spirit, and therefore not fit to be distilled
in lead or peuter.

Hitherto the childish, ignorant and unadvised self-contradicting error of
Physicians has been exploded, and may much more be made manifest by their
rash, simple and common practice in bidding and prescribing distilled vinegar
in the common leaden stills. Unto so low a pitch of stupid ignorance has
vulgar Physicians fallen, that so easily and implicitly entertain the customs
and traditions of their predecessors, without any examination or due
disquisition of the things.

concentrals of it, and see if those stills be the true, natural and genuine
engines to draw forth the nature, essence and privy property resient in it.
Vinegar then, the circumferential round or cadaver of wine, whose acidity
proceeds not, nor is not caused by elemental frigidity, but is ambuscado'd in
those occult and acid spirits of salt, lurking in the conclave or shop of the
spirits of wine. This is perceived in the whole field of wines, though never so
generous, (before the spirits retire to their garrison, or concentrals, as in
the making of vinegar) when in the drinking is perceived a certain grateful
punction, striking most pleasantly upon the palate, from the singular temper of
the vitriolated acidity, being mixed with sweet and sulphurous spirits placed
in the wine by the Archeus of nature. Hence is it that some vinegers are made
sharper then others, as they contain in them more or less of the nature of
salt armoniack. For simple water devoid of all salt, by no frigidity can grow
acid. Tartar then is nothing acid vitriolate cristalline salt of the wine.
Moreover vinegar is both mineral and vegetable. But the vegetable excels the
others: seeing not only art produces it, but also nature in acid fruit, chiefly
in Citrons, limons, oranges: also in Goose-berries, barberries, etc. in herbs
sorrel, trifolium, acetosum, nasturtium Indicum, etc. Every acidum then is not
cold as the dull disquisitions of vulgar Physicians has left to us, and as to
ample satisfaction is elsewhere demonstrated. Nor is vinegar made by the total
separation of the sulphurous spirits from the wine; when of wine from which
the spirits are divorced, or which is corrupt, and has lost his spirit, no
vinegar can be made: But the more generous and rich the wines are, so much the
more strong is the vinegar made of them. Of wine also expressed from omphacine
grapes, and which is almost devoid of all spirit, is no vinegar made. And not
only out of wine is vinegar made, but also out of Beer, Ale, Hydromel, and the
juices of some fruits abounding with spirit; and out of which a spirit like
unto the spirit of wine may be drawn, but out of others which want such a
spirit, it cannot be. acidum by reason of its corroding energy, does operate in
a perpetual ebullition. The acid spirit in the round or verge of the mass of
wine is of a vitriolated energy, powerfully insinuating and piercing into a
proper subject. For an absolute impossibility it is that there can be any the
least acidity, which having once met with a proportionate object, does not
immediately begin to operate on it. This is sober verity, as by example may be
made Vinegar how weak soever, put into a peuter saucer, and suffering it to
stand a while, by and by begins to put forth its active, acid corroding spirit;
and in the vinegar you shall perceive clearly a certain white mother as it were
swimming in the vinegar; and the bottom of the saucer, shall be damask'd with
white streakes, yea, shall be white and rough all over the bottom, and a
certain substance like Cerusse shall be scraped off, and crumbled between the
fingers: This by practice may be observed, as by ocular experiment we have
tried, and it is so trivial and common a business, that it is known to all
Kitchen wenches, but is not regarded by the most Lady-like stomach. If it be
thus, I may be sooner destitute of leisure then proof sufficient to evince,
That such vinegar cannot be good for the stomach. Besides it makes it more flat
and dead, when it has sated it self on its proportionate subject, the peuter
saucer. It partakes then of a sordid saturnine evil quality, pernicious to the
tender tunicles of the stomach. If it please you then Ladies and Gentlewomen;
and all of all sorts, lay aside your peuter saucers, and no more eat vinegar
out of them, but instead thereof, you may use saucers made of fine Earth, or
silver plate.

As clear again, vinegar, how flat and cadaverous soever, having once touched
upon the stone concreted in the head or stomach of a Crea-fish, vulgarly (but
erroneously) called Crabs eye, can by no means contain it self, but must
immediately act in a phrensy of inquietude by oblique and circular motion to
the dissolution of it, and resolve it into a clear, diaphanous liquor. But what
I pray you of this acid spirit is drawn off in the distillation of vinegar, by
the common stills? Any thing but a bare fleam, as jejune as the crude and black
ignorance of such phlegmatic heads. When shall we awaken from the Lethargy of
this supine neglect?

Unsuccesseful and deplorable are the prescriptions of simple distilled waters
as the remedies and militia against the hostility of any disease or distemper,
either in the head, as by cephalic waters, of sage, betony, etc. In the lungs,
by pectoral and pulmoniack, as of hyssop, Coltsfoot, etc. In the Liver, by
hepatick waters of Agrimony, Endive or Succory, etc. And so of the whole
vegetable Monarchy. Vain are the drinks of cooling ptisans. Vain are the
liqorish sweet Julaps of distilled waters, in fevers. Vain are the decoctions
or Apozems, whose menstrue are distilled waters. The like is to be said of the
whole myr^ad of medicaments drawn from the poor and thin Commonwealth of cold
and crude sallads, without oil or salt. To which we may subjoin, that the same
altitude is taken by the Astrolabe of perspective reason of those ABCdarian
Nuntii, the forlorn hope of further sickness, their praeparatories, as they
have god-father'd them, except it be of as bad, if not worse remedy then the
disease. What can they lay the mountains low? Can they exalt the valleys? Can
they make the crooked path straight in the body of Man? Can they do any job of
journey-work for their Catharticks that are to succeed? Can they attenuate that
which is gross, viscid and thick, or thicken the fluid and thin? Can they fix
and nail that which is volatile? Can they humect the parts possessed with an
atrophy, or aridura membrorum? Unless it be with their waterish parts, and in
analogy to common well-water? Can they exsiccate or dry up the superfluous
humidities of the body? Yes, even as if dutch Wind-mills should drain the fens
upon New Market heath; so as little power and virtue have they to do any of
these: for nil dat, quod non habet. The propounders themselves seem to have
mills in their brains, that thus grind the grift of the dotages and dreams of
their predecessors turned about with the epidemick vertigo, the current of
distilled waters of vegetables. As if our bread would be dough, and the whole
batch of medicines spoiled, without the unsalted and unlea'vned prescriptions
of simple waters. Ah! alas can these, as well real, as nominal, simple waters
serve as a breast-work* or pallisadoes to stake out the hostile invasion of a
disease? Or barricadoe and dam up the receptory vessels, and all the passages
of the body from the least entrance or footing of any malignant distemper into
our Commonwealth? or drive out any Goliath, or Pigmey distemper with these
pebbles taken out of this shallow brook of waters? Once more, will the radical
indisposition of the Lungs, Liver, or any other more or less noble part be
hereby rectified, or defended from a second assault by this poor contemptible
Chambermaid militia? No sure, their forces are scattered, totally routed,
never more like to ralley again. March boldly on then the enemies and invaders
of our health; be not retrograde nor stationary, but with a full career charge
nature through and through, while your adversaries forces are weak, and routed.
For their General and Lord Nature cannot receive any recruit or assistance from
her auxiliaries, or make any safe retreat back to her primitive strength, but
must be enforced to resign to the tyranny of the Conqueror, and cry for
Quarter.

And to me seriously by this and such ammunition, if the whole train of
artillery be no better, nor those mortar-pieces and grenades of Physic,
Herculean actors so accounted, I make no doubt (the providence and power of
that grand Archiatros, the Almighty, not resisting) but such a devastation and
depopulation may be quickly made, as shall unhinge this huge fabric, and
calcine the world to ashes by the Chemistry of death. All these things, some
Physicians with whom I have talked, I have observed have both seen, known,
confessed and contended for, and yet in their practice, and among their
prescriptions, are so negligently forgetful, or desperately obstinate and
wilful as to commend and command in their Recipe's the Apothecary to mingle
some of these simple distilled waters in a leaden still, and that with such
serious gravity, as if they were to be saluted Doctor with four feet. Nay, what
Physician is there almost that by his practice does not confess his incogitant
infatuation, whose easy and incircumspect credulity can drink down, even to a
deluge, this torrent of simple distilled waters? Nor could I hitherto
sufficiently admire how possibly our Europaean world could be so grossly
circumvented by the grey-hair'd traditional dreams of their predecessors, in a
business so vain, simple and inefficacious; that men whose clear reason does
entitle them to plenipotentiaries, should thus prostitute their credulities to
the legends and Romances of ignorant paperstuffers and scriblers. See then with
what a full and swelling tide the insolent torrent of custom bears all before
it when even the best and understanding part of man, the crown and strength of
all his faculties floats like a dead drowned body on the stream of vulgar
apprehensions, drinking down even to gorging this puddle of simple waters, and
other ridiculous fictions: and how possibly they should inhabit thus long,
unless they be the lowest lees of an epidemick infection, liver-grown to their
sides, which perhaps will never uncling without the strong abstersive of some
heroic magistrate, whose high office dares lead him both to know and to do
without any frivolous case-putting.

We will now at length come to show the fallacy simples and medicines; in their
proposing such a tedious interval of time between the reception of the
medicine, and the working, or demonstration of his activity: by which means
they have cloaked their defects, and more lightly set off among the common
people their large time of curing diseases. The schools teach that the
cadaveriety, and dull lethargy of medicines, is contracted by the Opium of a
frigidal temper and constitution; and that they are altogether idle, fruitless
and dead, unless first by our heat, as by a Cook; they are prepared and being
excited are by it acuated: This they have concluded and ratified; in as much as
medicines taken or applied, do not by and by explode their faculties in us,
instar ignis: but they have need of a certain space of time, whereby to produce
their effects, by praevious disposititions. Nevertheless if a space may be
required, that an alteration may be made, which is an effect of the medicine;
that truly does not a whit argue the action of the medicine to be by our heat,
otherwise then necessary, that the medicine might acquire the donation of his
activity or liberty of working, which he has obtained and was granted him from
the creation whole and sound, full and free. Moreover the effects of medicines
are not produced, unless first there be a diligent and skilful preparation and
due application, and then with a more exquisite appropriation they imprint
their powers in us. Wherefore be it foolish, that pepper, vinegar, etc. ought
to borrow their activities and gifts, [ad agendum suscepta] from our heat: as
if the monarchy of one alone heat, should be the fountain and primary cause to
give life to so diverse and manifold effects. Wherefore in good sooth that
matter may act in us, as touching this, she has no need of any other
extrinsecal thing, extrase: but as primarily; so also without delay, she puts
forth her powers by the importance of dispositions, if it be duly applied. But
because the sensitive Anima (which the schools have basely confounded with
their Calor) does apply the received powers, and then does make a certain new
and proper action to Anima has received from the medicine, are only
occasional effective causes, and she can if she will pass them by, and
neglect them, which is manifest in robust bodies, who digest without trouble
violent laxatives tanquam Cibos. And in dying men; in whom there is an
application of medicines, but not an appropriation; by reason of the neglect or
defect of the sensitive faculty. For in strong bodies the exciting heat is not
wanting, and yet no effect.

Serpent, although sometimes it does not show its effect, by reason of some
impediment: so many have so accustomed themselves to purges and laxatives, that
at length they work not a whit, not because heat is wanting in the man; or that
the laxatives have lost their pristine strength: but the Anima has contracted
a certain familiarity by the frequent use of them, insomuch that at length it
does more slowly inflame by those poisons, then by the first Course.

Lastly it is true and perpetual that all sensation, consists rather in action
and vital judgment, then in a passion. Whether that sensation happens in the
exterior sense; or in some passion of the mind: or in the natural and
sympathetick sense of inanimate things. At least it is clear, that medicines do
not need the praegression of our heat, that they may act simply: but a
sensitive power, which is the principal actor, has need of agents, and
sensible objects, that she may perceive, and in perceiving may act. Therefore
the action of sensible things, does occupy her self on both sides by the mean
of an occasional cause, in respect of the sensitive Anima. For that cause
neither do medicines work in a dead body, by reason of the defect of the
principal and immediate agent, which is the life or soul. Whence also it is
sufficiently manifest heat, as such, it must come to pass, that every medicine
always, and everywhere, should equally work in every humane object, actually
hot. But a laxative exhibited in the same dose, loosens in one terribly, in
another not a jot; and yet on both sides sufficiently excited by our heat: yea,
the same which in stronger bodies is without effect; in weaker bodies for the
most part rages most violently. But we pass lightly over this scene, and
resign it to others.

Thus by this plain and evident demonstration we have good encouragement to
trust, where it shall meet with intelligible perusers, some stay at least of
men's thoughts will be obtained, to consider and promote this prudent and manly
expostulation; and not give away their birthrights for a mess of this cold
pottage of not daring or not willing to speak.

We now willingly come according to our promise, which is due, to arraigne and
examine the naturalities of the other universal main pillars of curing, namely
phlebotomy, fontanells or issues, and Diet, as three other props of healing,
which being shaken, the whole edifice falls down of its own accord as rubbish,
and being taken away, Physicians do desert their patients, having no remedies
but such as purging and bloodletting, the only publicans which by an
insupportable excise impoverish the whole body and make Nature bankrupt by
exhausting the stock of aliment from the vasa and viscera. All which we will
touch particularly.

These things are practiced and prescribed, as designed for the evacuation and
consuming the stock of morbisick distempers. We have done then with one manner
of evacuation of evil humors, purgation, and that by a twofold Instrument,
viz. Cathart^cks or purges, taken in at the mouth, the Arctick pole, and a
laxative Clyster, at the port Aesquiline follows, which is the going out of
the tide of blood, by the sluice of phlebotomy or bloodletting; which also
wears the Fools Coat or Livery of the Lady Ignorance, and well may be reputed
free of the Company of Physicians other, not more erroneous, then foul,
mischeivous practices.

As the Invention of Clysters was learned from a bloodletting from a Horse.
Good Teachers. Maids children and Horses scholars shall be Galen, In every
fever (the hectic excepted,) phlebotomy is requisite. To the schools
therefore and the destructive custom of this giddy-headed Age we do frame this
syllogism; and that from fevers, the most acute Index of all their

Phlebotomy is unuseful wheresoever it is demonstrated not to be necessary: or
where the indication, proper to it is wanting.

But in fevers, it is not demonstrated to be necessary.

Therefore phlebotomy in fevers is unuseful.

The major is proved: because the end is the first director of causes, and
disposer of the means unto it self. Therefore in what thing soever the end
does not point out a necessity of the means, they are in vain fitted and
related to it, not being requisite thereto; especially where it is clear by
reflection from the glass of Contra-indication, That blood is not drawn out of
the rivulets, the veins, without the fall or loss to the whole ocean of
strength. Such means therefore are badly instituted which the end shows to be
in vain, unusefull and to be done with the diminishing of the strength.

The minor is proved by Haratius Augenius de moute sancto, in his three books
Ex Professo. Teaching with the consent of the Academies That a plethora alone,
or too great a plenitude of the veins, that is, a nimiety of redundance of
blood, is the only Gn^mon in the table of directions for phlebotomy. And that
it does not run in a direct line to the sanation of favers, but to the oblique
angle of slackning the full blown sails of abundance of blood, and becalming
the puffs and gusts of too much plenitude, by the Trident of phlebotomy, the
Midwife to deliver only the ingravidate and bigge-bellyed veins from the
Tympany of a Plethora. But a Plethora has no subsistence under the torrid Zone
of Fevers: Therefore in the hot spur of Fevers the cooling card of phlebotomy
is never turned up, and consequently is not trump, is not requisite, but dealt
about as always unuseful.

The conclusion indeed may seem to come out of the Eutopia of novelty and the
Arabia of paradoxes, yet lives in the Eden of sober verity. Which shall
therefore be further proved, Galen himself proves the subsumption teaching,
That there is more choler sattered in every poroxysmo of a fever, then in two
days space is generated. In the mean time the rest of the members of our
public state adjourn not, nor supersede from receiving (according to the
Isonomy or pari-formall laws of Re-publiques) nouristment of the accustomed
blood. That is, besides the lavish expenses and exhaustion of the common stock
of aliment that is expended by this new Tenant and Inne-houlder, the Fever,
who has now taken livery and seisen, they consume their own patrimony, the fat
of the ordinary blood. Wherefore then from this advantage, it genuinely and
necessarily follows, that if in a healthy person there be an allowance of
eight ounces of blood for a daily portion, that then so many also should be
transmuted into nutriment, or otherwise the man should straight protuberate
into an excessive huge bulk, more deformedly corpulent then any Garagantua.
Therefore if in a sound person there is diminution made of eight ounces of
blood: Certainly the greedy fever will consume no less. Seeing then there is
little or no appetite of food, digestion or sanguification, of unavoidable
necessity, within two days, the full sea of a plethora (if there was any in
the new Moon or beginning of the fever) will shift its tides into a low ebb,
and in the wane of its fall and decrease, the false and dangerous shole or
quicksands of indication for springing a leak in the vein by phlebotomy, will
appear as a mare mortuum, and accordingly vanish into the Stygian Gulf of
errors. But that there is no plethora in Fevers, they see; who suffer ulcers
by an Is- or Cautery: which truly are presently dried up by the solstice of
Fevers, nor make no effluxion, according to the accustomed manner of their
purulent excretion. But it is chiefly and deservedly to be noted, that the
strength cannot offend, and deserves not to be blamed for its abundance, no,
not in Methusalem: neither also does good blood become peccant by nimiety,
because the vital powers and blood are Correlatives: seeing according to
Scripture, the soul or vital strength, rides in the Chariot plethora can never
be in good blood.

We shall show by and by, that bad and corrupt blood does never run in the
Canall of the veins.

If therefore the extreme of a Plethora of the veins, can ever be possible, it
ought to consist in a mediety, betwixt corrupt and very sound blood: Whether we
consider the same state of falling off and neutrality, or only, as mixed of
both, at least, the Galenists should remember, that good proceeds from its
Trunk, an entire cause; but evil from the racemation of several defects: and
so that this state should not be called plethoricall: but cacochymicall.
Neither to desire phlebotomy but rather purgation, which may selectively expel
the Theses being conceded, it will be a genuine illation, that the indication
of phlebotomy is not yet in no wise proved. For according to the truth of the
matter we before showed, the Anarchy of a cacochymia keeps not court in the
veins, the effect of whose Reign is only the perturbation of the blood. For
the appeasing of which mutiny, the grand design is not taken so much, from the
exhaustion and arraignment of the well-affected blood, before the Bar of
phlebotomy, as the prescribing a medicine, which shall be as a High Court of
Justice, with the power of Oyer and Terminer suddenly to take away and cut off
this grand Delinquent, the sole troubler and his Tyranny. passing by the center
of the heart, obtains its own depuration: therefore that which is drawn from
the divarications of the cubit, and first let out, shall be purer; but the more
impure shall be left within. Moreover seeing it is already so clear, as it can
escape the observation of no man, that there is no plethora in fevers, which
may require bloodletting; and this the Schools surrounded with shame, have
somewhat smelt, and have substituted in the place of Indication, some
C^oindications or Counter-Indications, in aequitality. and as aequiponderant or
aequipollent to Indication adaequate Nature, and praeponderant to
Contraindication; which otherwise truly, seeing it is desumed from the
conservation of strength, ought wholly to obtain the chiefest place, for this
cause seriously, That every fever is quickly, safely and For in good sooth
they use presently but one only remedy, multifarious and diverse putrefactions
of their Clients, the humors, and fevers flowing from thence, with one writ
of ejectment by the habeas Corpus or turn-key of Phlebotomy: Because it helps
abundantly (as they say) and is stopped at pleasure.

By which distinction truly they do in some laxatives. For they say, although
phlebotomy may seem requisite for a Plethora, by a natural and singular
indication of it self; yea, neither properly does it take away the putrefied
humors: yet it refrigerates, exonerates the burden of the veins, it recreates
the powers, takes away part of the evil humor together with the good; and
stops the current or catarrh of humors, at the damme or nest of putrefaction,
by derivation and revulsion, and also asswageth and removes them. Wherefore
nature feeling comfort, is busied about, and finishes the rest more
successefully and easily. These are good words (and we wish to be true) says
the sow, eating penitential psalms; but avail nothing to my hunger. These are
the Endixes or Co-indications, by which they persuade to continue men's
mischiefs; which we shall touch particularly.

phlebotomy cannot escape scot-free, seeing it has run upon the score of many
evils; nor go away uncondemned, forasmuch as fevers may more successefully be
^ured without it. For howsoever, phlebotomy at the first or reiterated courses,
oftentimes may seem to be as it were a pyromastix, and to usher in a power to
tame and assuage the intense heat and acuteness of fevers. Yet it falls out
no otherwise then that the Archeus being driven into an horrid ecstasy by this
unexpected unnatural extravenation, greatly fears the sudden depletion of the
powers, and undue and impertinent refrigeration, and so forgetting the duel or
conflict with the disease, neglects to expel the feavorish matter, and
exercise its function. But they who even now seemed to be lenifyed by
bloodletting, and thought the disease or'ecome, are now put to their shifts,
notwithstanding their weak engine of phlebotomy. For the enemy ralleys again,
and the Archeus is a new charged by the fresh Alarm of elusory recidivation,
and they now know it was but an Ambuscado retreat of the disease, and that the
mount Aetna of fevers is too hard to be removed by the infirm fingers of
pigmey phlebotomy; at least they are benighted to a later and weaker
valetudinary state. Which assertion the Turks and a phlebotomy, which was never
read, that God ever ordained it in Nature, nor to approve of it, nor yet to
have made any mention of it. Under the Ottoman Empire, the greatest part of the
Indies, phlebotomy is not used, nor so much as heard of; yet the strength of
these Nations, their agility, readiness, vigilance, and constancy of labor,
as well in action as sufferance, you may learn out of the Histories. Now
concerning the first scope of Co-indication, which is called refrigeration.

In earnest, blood-letting does no otherwise refrigerate, vital heat: but has
not the northern pole of frigefactive and positive power for its Horizon, by
which means truly such a refrigeration becomes nocivous. Why forsooth are they
so cautelous, that they do not; nor dare not open a vein in the Hectic? does
not the fever need refrigeration? Or does it cease to be a fever? But the
deficiency of blood is apparent in Hecticks, wherefore in the systeme of
Hecticks, and in the defect of blood and strength, there is an easy calculation
and illation of the hurt made by Phlebotomy; which otherwise is latitant under
stronger powers. In the consideration of which, we shall bring a remarkable
story of Prince Ferdinand, Brother to the King of Spain, who in Anno. 1641.
was opened: for being agitated with a tertian fever eighty nine days, dyed in
the two and thirtieth year of his age. His heart, Liver and Lungs being taken
away, and the veins and arteries dissected, such a paucity of blood was found,
that a conflux of scarce a spoonful of blood, issued in the cave of his
Thorax: for his liver appeared altogether exanguious, and the flaccid
crumenation of his heart, contracted an atrophy, and demonstrated a penury of
blood also. For two days before his death he had eaten more, if more had been
given him. For he was so exhausted by bloodlettings, purgations and hirudinall
blood-suckings, as we said, that his sceletantall fabric appeared as a pale
statu^ of exanguinality; yet for all this the cruel Tertian did not forget to
keep its paroxysmal course and return. Bloodletting.

Ah alas, is this the method of healing which makes a Physician, whom the most
High has created and commanded to be honored for the necessity of him? If it
know not to cure a Tertian in a young man, to what purpose is that method? Is
this the Art that the whole needs not but the sick? Let this therefore teach
Physicians to fear how they expose their febrile patients to the congresse of
cold things, in which they should be largely and presently experienced, and by
a manifest token know the virtue of their refrigeratives, because they may not
much confide in their Anomalies of heat and cold. For seeing it is clear that
the whole meridian, swindge and irradiation of heat in the province of fevers,
is of the latitude, and Empire of the very vital spirit it self: it follows
also, That the breath of refrigeration by the Boreas of phlebotomy, is a mere
exhausting and impoverishing of the Commonwealth of the vital spirits and
blood together. For if the fever be to be cured as an intemperature by
phlebotomy, as a refrigerating remedy, ( contrarium heu constat!) and by cold
alone, and others intend the cure even in a quotidian (which they have
subscribed to be an inflammation of putrid fleam) they would obtain at least
that refrigeration far more easy, by exposing their patients half naked to
the breath of the north wind, or hanging him in water, or in a deep well, until
he should confess himself sufficiently cooled, for so presently and largely
they should absolve the cure, if their conscious ignorance within, did not
condemn their febrilous essence of heat. We cannot therefore so readily submit
our belief, that the commotion reverberium of heat, an impetuous agitation, and
only a bare tempest of heat: but there is also the interposure of an occasional
vitiated matter of known hostility against the native economy of the parts,
the protrusion of which the Archeus is laboring and busied about, in which
concertation, their enterferes an adventitious accension, the symbol of its
indignation. Which Theory so long as it shall be neglected in the Schools, the
cure of fevers will be preposterous, pernicious and conjectural, and so all
not worth thanks to the Physician, seeing they may be cured by the spontaneous
and merciful goodness of nature: and we wish and with submission advise hat
Physicians would not tamper with them so much as they do.

cold* the Schools will respond, It is a dangerous it^^^ry to go from one
extreme to another. By which salve of their ignorance, they endeavor to stop
the mouths of people, as if they spoke some thing worth our cares and faith:
not being sensible of their rash inadvertency, how in the intertrigation of
their own hypotheses they contradict themselves, when they encomiate Phlebotomy
chiefly for that end, and dextralize and prefer it before their laxatives,
that it presently and abundantly helps by refrigeration; and therefore in
their nomenclature, have presumed to give it the appellation of an easy, quick
and universal help. For its own impotency grounded in ignorance, they distort
and strain to the arbitrament of an ill understood and worse applied that he
may cast forth the water out of his lungs. One may, I say, drag out some
certain body to the bankside: and may presently free a wound from that exotic
miasme and indisposition, that has possessed it, and bring it to a circatrice.
For very many such wounds are closed in one day: because the solution of
continuity wants nothing but its reunition; one may presently set a fractured
or dislocated bone. The sick may likewise be restored in the Epilepsie,
Syncope, Lipothymie and Cramp much sooner, the belly loosed presently and the
detention of excrements absolved and may presently stop the muliebrall flux.
For it is not to be supposed that nature rejoices in its own destruction, and
that weary of a sound and lovely state of health, is willing to open the gates
and let in grimfac'd repentinous Death, and should refuse a Remedy of that
noble entelechy, which should suddenly expel and drive out the malignant
disease, except she loves to be thought not to do that, which in possibilities
is best of all, nor to desire that every thing should have a being, and be
conserved. In demonstration indeed, it is accounted impossible to go on from
one extreme to another, without a mean, and that mean wholly deny all
interjacency: which if we have granted in naturalities with a certain latitude,
we shall deserve to be adjudged hitherto to have done very well, and whereof
not to repent. Verily we may not scrue and urge that of demonstration, unto
sanation. We confess indeed that the Dropsy may not be drawn forth by
Paraco^tesis all at a time: as also to eliciate all the purulent matter at once
out of an Aposteme, is not good; neither to carry one frozen with cold,
immediately to an Hypocaust, nor to feed one abundantly who is almost starved
with famine. But truly the slow and necessary incession of mediocrity, or the
progression from one extreme to another, does not constrain that, as such, as
if nature should make aversation from speedy opitulation.

peculiar, natural, medullary and entirely proper to it. But these things are
forbidden, because the exolution of the powers thence depending, would not bear
those swift motions. The schools therefore by sophistication of a cause not as
a cause, do drive the sick from a speedy remedy which they have not; that they
may veil their ignorance, and introduce their enthymemes among the common
people, under certain Axioms badly directed. For as often as nature effects,
and with a Trine, aspects the perfect sanation of disseases, which may be
genuinely accomplished in her own terms, without loss or detriment to the
powers, (for the constellation of powers has the Ascendand and first house,
the metrapolitane place in the systeme of indications,) whereby it is the sooner
obtained, and manumitted into a greater Jubilee of Nature, as we have often
observed in Fevers, with much pleasure, and profitable admiration.

Ascendant in the Horizon of Fevers, and every cure ought to be performed by
the monomachy or civil wars of debellative contraries: there is required
therefore a praeternaturall refrigeration, namely that contraries may stand sub
eodem genere. That is every Fever should necessarily be cured with the
conclamate cold of the ambient: and chiefly because the cold of the
circum-ambient air does collect, not dissipate the powers. But the consequent
is false; and therefore the Antecedent. The schools therefore do not intend to
persuade into a gentle calmnesse, their only impetum faciens, the heat in
fevers, by the ventilating Rhetoric of Phlebotomy: but they chiefly respect
the ablation of the blood and mittigation of accidents, which ushers in and
procures the debilitated powers, or the diminution of the blood and strength,
is the only beam in their eye, and which they primarily intend. Whereby with a
more colorable deceit they may call that a freer respiration of the arteries.
But we very much esteem diminution and prosternation of the powers and
strength, being outed of their vigor, and now exanimated into a dull and faint
mycropsychie, no disease can in the least degree, or largest latitud of
intention be profligated from the confines of vitality, nor does any thing
remain to be done by the Physician, but to stand for a cipher.

Hippocrates therefore concludes Nature to be the Aesculapius of diseases;
because the indication which is desumed from conserving the powers, should
moderate the whole scope of the cure. Therefore as the keeping of the powers, is
the prime indication perpendicular to health, and conducible to perfect
restoration, and this to be persuaded from the convincing arguments of reason;
so also its correlative the blood, because it contains them.

Hippocrates indeed it is confessed, commands to let blood presently and
abundantly in the strenuous plethora of Athletick bodies: and that the schools
every where thunder out for phlebotomy. But their allegations for that in the
cure of fevers and diseases, is extremely ridiculous and worthy the blushes of
learned men. For he commands not that for fear of the plethora, although their
veins might sufficiently abound with blood: but only least the full-stuffed
vessels should strein and burst in the exercise of their strength: otherewise,
what intercalation or advent is there that is common to sound Athletick
Enterprisers, with the cure of Fevers? For there is no fear of a plethora in
one afflicted with a Fever, nor that a vein should be broke by exercise. Yet
it is to be noted, that the depletions of blood, do so behave themselves, and
are Cyprian Dame, is irreparable, because it takes away from the innate spirit
of the heart. With semblable reason and in proximity to this, is the
destructive exhaustion made by phlebotomy, forasmuch as it readily and privily
steals away and that plentifully the influent Archeus. But although the
malignant tincture and influence of a disease does perpendicularly also oppugn
the sysygia of powers; yet because it does it not affatim, sed sensim,
therefore the cardinal effect, is rather a concussion and attrition of the
powers, then a real exhaustion.

the disease of attrition does more easily and readily bend and follow the
auxiliary hand of the Physician then from that of exhaustion, by phlebotomy.
For those who in any disease are debilitated by bloodletting, are oftentimes
disappointed of the Crisis, and if in the dilatory expergefaction from a
disease, and raising its seige, they begin to recruit, and nature is not put
upon such hard duty, but they now become a little better; yet they pass out at
the postern gate and narrow way of many anxieties, and a long flux of time it
is, e're these valetudinarists arrive at the broad and pleasant way of perfect
convalescence, and not without fear of the fresh alarm of elusory recidivation.
But they who take their decumbiture in a disease without phlebotomy, are easily
restored, and by and by attain to their pristine state of sanity. And if they
are destitute of remedies, and sometimes are driven to great extremitys; yet
Nature endeavors the Crisis and does refect them, because although their
strength suffer a conquassation by a disease, yet they perish not, because no
exhaustion by Blood-letting.

Wherefore a Physician is bound by the peculiar

For precisely the perpetual intention of Nature in curing fevers, is per
(...), per sudores.

periodicall exacerbations for the most part are checked and ended by the
profluvium of sweats. But phlebotomy is the antartick pole, is diametrically
opposite to this intention. For truly it vellicates the blood inwards, to
replete the vessels empty of blood: But seriously the motion of Nature
requisite to the sanation of fevers, proceeds from the center to the
circumference, from the Regalia of the noble parts and entrails, to the line of
this our garrison, the Region of the Pelt. But that bloodletting does hurt
unavoidably, by the dependent necessity of its debilitation, we need no strong
inducements to charm our belief, although stronger and plethorick bodies, may
seem to them, who to pass by the trouble of a judicial and serious
pensitation, are inclined to believe, that they find and witness the contrary:
if that holy writ which tells us, that the life dwells in blood, has not
weight sufficient to engage our credence; at least it may be made manifest by
the barbarous logic of Phlebotomy, please you to suffer the easy trouble and
experiment of opening a vein and bleeding largely. For presently the conclusion
and evidence given in will be, That the strength or powers and the sick are
faint and fall together. Therefore if in demonstration six things may notably
hurt: three then cannot but hurt, though not

Far therefore from the rules of sober verity and equity must his ano^mall
intentions and practice wander, who being delegated to cure and restore nature,
invents and tryes ways to hurt her, for which he has not the least
permission, if nature be her own Aesculape, and so much the more happy and
successeful, as she is stronger. For let it be but seriously weighed in the
balance, and by the weighty motive of the pressing necessities and mischiefs
that follow, and it will evidently appear that Physicians may deservedly suffer
the lash and feel compunction for their inhumane languifying practices. For is
it not enough to a Physician that the sick pines and begins to grow faint,
under the burden of an inexcusable weakness by a deplorable disease, hunger,
loss of appetite, inquietude, pains, anxieties, waichings, sweat, etc? Nor
ought a faithful Adjuvant or helper to lay load upon load, and add weakness to
weaknesses. Deceitful is that help which phlebotomy brings and his remedy so
uncertain, that no Physician hitherto durst promise from thence future sanation.

In earnest it is worthy our most serious consideration, when we take notice
how every Artificer performs what he promises, to wit, the Image-maker ad
unguem. But alas only a Physician, in a cold spasme of inconstancy, dares
promise nothing of his Art: because the infirm nerves of his ground work and
grand foundation leanes on the broken reed of uncertain principles; by accident
only, and most times deceitfully profitable: because however the matter is
handled, it is full of ignorance to intend cure by procuring weakness, that
is, by a sudden depletion of the blood, largely made; nature being driven into
the wild field of confusion, sounds a retreat, and neglects the expulsion of
her enemy. Which expulsion notwithstanding, needs no volume to confirm, that
being the Epitasis or heart of the business, or the Epilogue and winding up of
the matter, contains the whole scene of fevers and nature. Farther, it is an
indubitate and irrefragable truth, That the febrile matter does not take up its
lodging in the vein above the heart: and by consequent, seminall fomenting or
occasional matter, is in no wise exhausted or let out by the key of
phlebotomy, or effectuously cures, by the direct and perpendicular intention of
healing.

Finally, if bloodletting be concluded for the refection of the arteries
through the facility of perspiration, it is wholly frustraneous while the
fever Balneo, and in its ascension by the Climax of aggravation, before it
comes to the fire of sublimation, and has not yet mounted the Apogaeum of
conflagration. And seeing that not in its fixation or stationary position, nor
also in its retrogradation or declension, bloudletting is no whit necessary.
Therefore never. But not in the state, is proved: because the Crisis is
hindered, seeing nature (as they write) is most opposed and impedited in her
reluctation and conflict with the foreign invasion of the disease, and for the
most part returns conqueror, then would it be inconsiderate and invincible
dotage, to flank her files and fall foul upon her in the rear, by a rash
attempt of violating her force: then would she least of all be able to suffer
the loss of strength, and retreat from the duel. But if in the State Nature be
forced to resign to the tyranny of the Conqueror, what shall bloodletting be,
any other then mere homicide? If therefore in the state it is not convenient to
open a vein, while the heat is in its Zenith, the anxiety and powerfullest
respiration of the arteries is exagitated: Far less convenient surely will
it be, in the beginning and augmentation. Especially seeing that in the first
days, the fear of a plethora vanishes away, and so without doubt the
perspiration of the arteries is easy enough. But that diseases in Perigaeo or
declination, have not the least latitude or intention for bloodletting, and do
neither require it, nor suffer it, is confessed by the common consent of all,
and is so clear as needs no Apoixis, nor cannot escape the most blear-eyed and
regardlesse observation, that no man will ever essay phlebotomy in the
declination of a disease.

Moreover consider we that in the meridian of ecliptic, the veins, is either
good, or bad, or neuter. If good, that it will be good to keep good, there is
none so devoid of his reason to appear we believe so much a sceptick, to
dispute against it: because it adds to the strength. For (as elsewhere we have
showed) the fear of a plethora even straight at the beginning, if there was
any, ceased. But because in the Apotheosis of phlebo^omy they will have good
blood emitted, for ventilation and difflation of putrefaction, when both the
one and the other is taken away well enough; and that imaginary good, which
they suppose in the Chymaera of their own brains, has no other real Idea, or
footing, but in the distracted imaginations of the contrivers and abettors of
this fable, and brings nothing but loss of strength.

Moreover the schools teach, that phlebotomy in a fever, is not commanded
because of the goodness of blood, which negative Thesis supposes evil and
putrid. But they will otherwise learn when we come to show that there is no
corrupt thing in the Canals of the veins unto the last period of animation; and
consequently this drift of phlebotomy malignity of the blood, which is without
and before the corruption of the same. Next, how the bad blood is kept in the
vein, from the heart unto the Cubit, if they will have this their device of
phlebotomy ratified. Let them tell us, I say, how that the bad blood is not in
the first receptacles, and the blood being brought out by the vei^ of the
Cubit, a worse is not drawn to the heart, where the vena Cava makes the right
sinus of the heart. Let them inform us likewise that the superior veins being
depleted, there is not greater liberty and impunity for both noxia and ^ebrilia
to come to the heart, then before: yea, that in the place of difflating
corruption (which in severity of truth we have proved to be none at all) there
is not occasioned rather a freer passage of the putrid air to the heart,
toward which place seriously, the vacuity of the depleted veins does attract
the blood beneath. Let them show I say, how the effluvium of blood, and
diminution and excise of the strength by the Cubit, will be such a convenient
mother, to own such a production as will impede corruption, or import the
correction and redintegration of the putrid. Let them also explain themselves
what they mean, when they say, that phlebotomy should be made, that the
arteries may more freely respire, when that putrefaction (if there were any
possibility of it in the veins) would not affect the arterial blood, the
steward of whole Nature. Moreover let them prove that the good blood and
strength being diminished, proportionably, there is a greater power to the
remaining impure and inquinated by corruption, (as they suppose) of preserving
it self from the putrefaction that is imminent. Let them instruct us likewise
contrary to Scripture, that the life and soul are rather, and more delectably
in the remaining contaminated blood, then in the purer that is taken away by
phlebotomy. Otherwise we may have freedom enough to conclude, that the letting
forth of the good, does necessarily and regularly include the augmented stock
and proportion, and unbridled license of the remaining evil blood. What if then
in the fever and veins the blood be bad, and they say it is good (as a sign
and effect) which in phlebotomy flows forth bad: and should they esteem so
much at least of the taking away of bad blood; to which we find no grounds for
our belief to incline. For, first let them prove, whereby, that their
incrimination and arraignement of the blood to be noxious, may appear by the
verdict of apodicticall evidence and demonstration to be so indeed, as we
before have, and by and by shall fully acquit and find not guilty. And then let
them indoctrinate us how by such a sudden and large emission of the bad blood,
no prejudice is made to the powers and strength: and that the remaining
inquinated blood, the strength being now diminished, and a depletion made of
the blood, shall be the cause why the corruption of the rest of the blond is
less able to proceed? And whether they can hope, the blood being, after what
manner soever, once putrified in the veins, that from such a privation there
can be in nature any regression: And also let them show, not to contradict, how
it is proper to the fever to inquinate the blood it self, a posteriori, to
wit, with the removing of the putrefyed humor? For if at first the impurer
blood be drawn out of the vein, they iterate the opening of a vein, and in the
interim consternate and perturb the powers, and thereby take away all hope of
the Crisis, which if it come out redder then ordinary, they cry out with that
magnifying esteem, as if the whole heap of evil were taken away at once, and
as if the seat of fevers had been extended in a parallel line, only from the
continent of the heart, unto the Isthmus of the flexure of the Arm: but the
good had been residentiall about the parenchymatick Laboratorie of the Li^er.
But we have known fearful evacuations of the last excrements always in the
Dropsy, much more therefore in the bare taking away of blood, which in a direct
line takes away the vital spirits, from the center of the heart to the
circumference, by the orifice of the vein, whether the blood be good, or bad,
or neither.

And here seeing we are fallen upon it so directly, putrefaction of the blood
or corruption of the same, and now strictly to arraign and examine its
naturalities, and see if there be any possibility for it to outlive the faith
of them who seek to bear it down. And therefore not only simply heterodoxicall,
but a very rough-hewed paradoxicall asseveration it will seem unto inflexible
ears, if we say, That the blood putrefies not in the veins, and perhaps to
some as deeply heretical and of as high a Tincture, as comes not short of the
transubstantial migration of the grapy juice of the papal Sacramentarians.

The opinion of bad and corrupt humors, and worse blood, has been the
Cantharides to phlebotomy, and of bloody disadvantage in the method of healing.
Let the schools therefore know, That the blood never putrefies in the veins,
but (like Gemini Hippocrates twins,) its line or Ecliptic it runs in, the
vein it self putrefies also, as in the Tropic of Gangrenes and mortifications.
Moreover like precarious mendicants, they beg the question, who let out the
blood, least by the magn^t of its stagnancy it should attract and be
impregnated with the puddle of putrefaction. Also who assert, A synochus or
Ca^sus to be generated from the embryo of putrefyed blood in the womb of the
veins. Also who say, that when Mercury the blood putrefies in the Balneum of
the veins, it is transmuted into choler. If we suppose that some
excrementitious, foreign and alien humors and seminalities, may impresse a
seminall miasme in the parts, by a breath or blast of contagion or other
inquinating ferment, and thereby disorder and pervert the functions, yet will
it not therefore follow, that they are capable of corruption or putrefaction.
For putrefaction, according to the faith of that great Elementarist, Aristotle,
Is a corruption of the proper heat secundum naturam, in every humidum, by
another heat that is ambient. Here Aristotle requires three things necessary
unto corruption. First the subject or matter of putrefaction, which is,
unumquodque humidum. Secondly, the form and essence of putrefaction, namely,
the corruption of the proper heat from its own natural state, so that of a
natural state, it is made praeter naturam. And lastly, the efficient cause, to
wit, the heat of the ambient. The which if one of these be wanting, corruption
cannot then be made.

In conformity and analogy to this, Alexander lends us his suffrage, in lib.
12. cap. 2. where he proves, The humors do not putrefie in the veins, but that
they are rather congealed extra vasa, then putrefie. If they putrefy in the
veins, worms would be generated, because that there the heat is more vigorous,
then in the Intestines, where animals are begotten of corruption. Joubertus
also is not far from us, thinking, That all corruption is made cum faetore.
But in the veins there is no faetor; Therefore no corruption. Joubertus also
adds, That all things are conserved in there proper places: but the veins are
the proper Conservatories of the blood and humors, therefore putrefy not.
Capriolus responds to this, That although every thing is conserved in his
proper place, yet the same may putrefy from causes proceeding some other way. He
brings an example of wine, which although it should be conserved almost always
in its proper vessels, yet sometimes it is corrupted in them, and putrefies by
other causes. But because it is indecorum to the regularities of philosophy to
deny Theorems, we constantly assert, every thing to be conserved in his proper
receptacle or native conservatory. To the example of Capriolus which he brings
of wine, we shall only say, That wine is not in the Hogs-head or vessel, as in
his proper natural place, nor has it a proper place, when it is not contained
in his proper term or boundary; for the wine is detained in the vessel against
his nature. And those bodies which are taken away by external force and injury,
have not a proper and natural place. Man for this cause is mortal.

We remain also doubtful in the general Theory of putrefaction; for we find it
not an unusual (nor laudable) custom for fluctuating spirits, whose lenity of
belief inclines, or obstinacy of will constreins them, to dilate the notions of
things beyond the proprieties of their naturs. The schools they supponere
quodlibet, ut probetur quidlibet, In their Theorems of putrefaction, which we
thus prove: The blood is kept fluid even in a Cadaver or dead body, in its
Trunk, the veins, as appear, by the consent of all Anatomy, but once let out by
the key of phlebotomy does presently by the deliquium of the Ambient, condense
and coagulate into colchotar sanguinis, clods. Now the coagulation of the blood
is the prodromus and Alpha only of putrefaction. Therefore if the veins by
their proper balm, (not short of that of Memphis,) preserve the blood from
corruption in a dead body, much more will they in the living.

Its an argument a minori ad majus. It Is true some foreign excrements may
perturb the blood in the veins, as we before hinted, to wit, the surplusage, or
mean retinue as well of their own, as another digestion, but never the Lord
chief Treasurer of life, the blood. Because according to scripture, it is the
seat, the chamber and magazine of life. If therefore the grand seigniour
himself, the life, cannot preserve his own throne and Treasury in the
metropolis or Royalty of the veins, from the invasion or treacherous
undermining of that petty Rebel, corruption, from becoming competitor or
Tenant thereto, when then will he keep it? And how can it be ever free from the
same? And also if the life cannot save harmles and keep indempnified from the
charge of putrefaction, the blood, custos vitae, in which she sits enthroned
and grows and increases in glory

The veins therefore are ordained by the high court and Council of Heaven to be
Lord Commissioners deputed to keep the blood from corruption: because the life
is confermented to the blood of the veins, and therefore both are cast out by
the lease of ejectment of bloodletting; they both together have their current
through the sluice of phlebotomy, and make their exit at one door, the orifice
we declare under the penalty of being convicted of sound. Haemascopy or sight
of the extravenated blood, and have concluded, that the blood commanded by the
Physicians to be kept, was chiefly for this reason, that they might find out
one visitation in the sick.

Verily if putrefaction of blood has any place, and does demonstrate its
emission from that title, it takes place in the plague. But phlebotomy in the

Suppose also there be thirty men alike afflicted with Pleuresy, and ten of
them give forth blood apparently vitiated: (for the blood of pleuretick persons
is like to red wine mixed with curdled milk) the other twenty I Will undertake to
cure without bloodletting. Certain it is, that those twenty have their blood
no otherwise affected then those ten, who were let blood. And again that those
twenty that are cured, if a vein were opened, their blood shall be found
rectified, restored to its pristine perfection, and far differing from the
blood of pleureticks. Therefore the blood of pleuretick persons is not
corrupted, although it may seem so: because from the black paths of corrupted
blood, there is no return to the way of life and sanity. Black blood therefore
or livid, green, etc. do not signify the corruption of it: but are
symbolizations of only its effervescence, or fermentall turbulency. For in the
first place, if the more waterish and yellow blood does denote its vitiosity,
the arteriall blood should be far worse then the blood in the veins; which is
false. For the Tree of life, the blood, is no otherwise distinguished from the
aforesaid racemations, then as the wine is troubled, when the vine flowers, yet
is not therefore corrupted; for take away the trouble, and it returns again to
its pristine serenity and larvations vanish, the fever being taken away.
Verily these Haematognomists or diviners by the Phaenomena's in the blood, in
their Gnomologies may be compared to those who calculate and think to pass
judgment on the Radix or scheam of Spanish wine, by the ascendant of their
pisse-pot; who will judge of good putrefaction be not lodged in the blood, and
on the score of being a troublesome guest, why does it therefore the third
time, and not the first, or the first, and not the third time, spring forth
with a blush purely red out of the vein? But this argument does only
demonstrate one part of the blood to be more and sooner troubled then the
other, not the whole or altogether. And if it be putrefied, it availes to avert
the putrefaction, then in vain to mitigate the fever by refrigeration. But
surely those things whatsoever, that resist putrefaction, are hot. For myrrh
now two thousand years preserves the embalmed Egyptian Carcasses; which
otherwise with succory, plantain, and your cooling things had long ago
putrefied. The putrefaction therefore of the humors, of the blood also and the
spirits are fabulous stories, and a warring against them more ridiculous then a
fight in Quixot. We add one thing more, whatsoever has once apostatized
Diathesis of corruption in the body, nevr returns again into unity or favor:
But the blood of the veins howsoever it may seem corrupted returns agan into
favor. Therefore it has not bin once corrupted: The Major is proved, because
corruption Plague, pleuresy and fevers without bloudletting. haemorrhoidall:
but this is not corrupt, although it be almost as it were extravenated.
Therefore the blood is never to be judged putrid in the veins. The Major the
whole practice of Surgery, proves, by ulcers begotten of the haemorrhoides.
The Minor is proved, because we make a metal, haemorrhoides in a little
space, and in twenty four hours the haemorrhoides as well intern as extern
vanish away, although they be greatly swelled. Therefore that blood, is
received into pristine favor, and they feel themselves well.

What hinders now, if taken up and committed to the managery of a judicious and
deliberate perpension, but that this fabulous scene of putrid blood will appear
on all hands worthy the hiss off the stage of medical Theorems for phlebotomy;
and to account it but in the list of nothing. Wherefore in serious verity we
have always found that the help produced by the forcible taking away the
powers and strength, to be full of deceit; that for a little ease, the powers,
which are the Atlas of diseases, should be enervated. For even as a drink in
the infancy of a fever should be an adipson, and seem to refresh the thirst a
little by the dugs of humification: but who is so mad that would then drink, if
he knew that it would take away his necessary strength. False therefore,
deceitful, and but a momentary help is that, which advenes by phlebotomy.

Hercules, and main pillar of their faith in the premises of phlebotomy, to
justify it from the good successes usually attends and follows it. And the
schools themselves go about to work it upon our belief by the Rhetoric of its
good effects. Certainly it is an injurious method unto Philosophy and Physics,
and a perpetual promotion of ignorance, in points of obscurity to fall upon a
present refuge of that restless ill success and events. And to speak truly an
hazardable determination it is unto ^^uctuating and indifferent effects to
affixe a positive type. For in effects of far more regular causalities,
difficulties do often arise. And we can with a little pains make appear what
miserable, bloody, destructive and languifying effects has followed it, that
shall outvye and bear down all the mountains of good they can heap up. For what
though the cruel and barbarous practices of these pseudo-medici by diminishing
the requisite quantity of blood, life and strength, to the great and almost
irreparable detriment of the patient, do by exhausting the veins and emaciating
the body, bring a little ease, do they therefore strike at the root of the
disease, and destroy the cardinal efficient thereof? Nothing less. Now
concerning blood neither good nor bad, it is not worth speaking of in respect
of phlebotomy: seeing it is denied disjunctively, it may also be denied
copulatively. For whether it be natural, which consists in a commixture of good
with the depraved (supposing depraved which is not) or that, to which there is
a neutral alteration introduced, in each event the aforesaid do satisfy.

At length we come to cut off the Cable of that Anchora spei of revulsion, and
so to take away alike all the lesser tackling of Co-indications, that as in a
map may appear the dangerous rock of these their unleavened Heterodoxes, as
the miserable and tenacious subterfuges of Pertinacy. It is a mad help in
theoricall or practical phlebotomy (for they commonly draw out and exact a
plenty of it for this end) in shunning the Scilla of fevers to fall into the
Charybdis of menstrua's; and either in the first, or only in the last to let
blood for revulsion: because that the feavorish matter does not swim in the
blood, or fluctuate in the veins, as a fish in the water: but is fixed to the
vessel within. And in the menstrua's likewise: because that the separation of
it is made out of the whole, and not without the separating hand of the
Archeus. But phlebotomy verily separates nothing of things separable, because
it acts without any precognition of an end, and so without election. But the
innoxious blood, and in vicinity or proximity to the apertion of the vessel,
perpetually flows forth: the which, because afterward in a continued thread,
or undulation, other follows hard at the heels, for fear of vacuity. Therefore
the whole retinue of menstrua's, about that peculiar monarchy of the womb, that
have been collected by the study and labor of nature are then segregated by
the destructive knife of phlebotomy, and make their retroition into the whole.
But if phlebotomy sometimes in a plethorick and euchymous woman, may have the
plaudite and Elogie to happen successefully, yet really in many others, it
procures but a lamentable Catastrophe. For if by its only quantity the menstrue
(being now gathered and dispersed in the uterine veins) should offend, we will
grant the individual indication of phlebotomy, and in this only supposed
Accidentality willingly admit it. But if the menstrue flows in a womb of a
laudable constitution, it abundantly satisfies its own ends, and so forth
revulsion is in vain, although their Hypothesis supposes it impossible. For
phlebotomy is nothing else but a mere and indistinct depletion of blood. For
the veins being now unnaturally and unaccustomably emptied, they do attract to
selves forthwith, from every place, and any blood whatsoever. Because as they
are the greedy Capsulaes of blood; so they are impatient of vacuity. But
Derivation, because it is a parsimonious effusion of blood, (so that it be done
out of congruous veins,) it has profited in many topic diseases, but is
wholly impertinent in fevers.

But they urge with that confidence and instance pleuresy, that it is enjoined,
not under capital offense. For they say, That unless the confluent blood,
avelling pleura or thin membrane lining the chest, be revelled by a large
effusion of blood, there is danger, that the pleuresy would kill a man by
suffocation. But their Theory is wholly besides the mark, and they level only
at the productions and effects of diseases, and not the causes. For they are
ignorant of the Nature of a pleuresy in the material cause of its Generation,
place for its conception, Conduicts for its Traduction, Receptories for its
customary admission, and its penetrative corroding activity impregnated with
that immanity to avell the pleura or lining of the Thorax from the ribs, which
is firmly annexed and immediately adheres unto them, by the mediatory ligation
of numerous solid fibers. Wherefore we have no weighty engagement lies upon our
reason to conclude, that in the pleuresy, phlebotomy has no place, nor is of
no use for revulsion and derivation: but for the mere exhaustion and diminution
of the blood and strength: so that truly Nature greatly fearing that
evacuation, does supersede, and desists to send plenty of blood about the
pleura. It Is not nuworthy their notice taking, and substantial determination
whether this, with such a notable and sudden loss of strength (in a disease
wherein the whole burden lies upon the shoulders of the strength and powers) be
not to be cured, a posteriori, by precaution and prevention of the increase?
And whether that be a proceeding to the connexed and fomenting cause, while
they convert their whole work not ad faciens, sed ad factum esse? For mine own
part and in me its neither vanity nor pride to say, and let it not be a grief
or offense to any of their grave obstinacies and vulgarities, I let no man
blood in the pleuresy; nor have not since my peda^tisme and junior practice in
the medical profession, as many can witness, especially those who have had a
constant opportunity for some length of time to see into, and be inwardly
intimate in my practice and cures: and such a cure is both safe, sure,
profitable and solid. None of them have miscarried, whereas those that are let
blood, after a long Tabes, and lingering death perish most of them, and have a
quotannall recidivation. For according to Galen, whosoever within forty days
are not perfectly cured, grow tabid. But there are many alive in several parts
of this Nation, who can testify, That I cure perfectly within few days; nor do
they find relapses.

Revulsion in fevers. For in sooth, seeing primarily there is no other need of
revulsion, then phlebotomy, to which the succeeding blood that is about to
flow, is hoped for, by accident, and by the benefit of which, it will not flow
to the place affected. According to which Thesis it follows, That by such an
evacuation the peccant feavorish blood, dispersed in the veins will be drawn; (
conniventer loqui) which otherwise, latent in its own nest, far from the
heart, would not communicate the ferment of its hurt so hastily and fiercely to
the heart. Which is as much as to say, That by such a revulsion, the peccant
humor would be drawn from the ignoble part, to the more noble. For more crude
and feculent is the blood in the maze and Labirinth of the mesaraick veins; but
more defecate which comes to the palace of life, the heart. For otherwise the
first weapons of mischief had been placed by indiscret nature near the fountain
of life. Therefore seeing the stream of the feavorish matter flows not in the
veins, nor takes up quarters near the heart: Far be it from any sober head to
fall into that dotage to believe, That it can be drawn forth, or caused to
shift its quarters, by the rude hand of phlebotomy, however oftentimes a
multicolorate blood by the Court-ship of iterated bloud-lettings may be sent
forth. It Is a cruel remedy also, if unto the place of the emitted blood, some
other shall come from more remote places. For so the tincture of labefaction of
one place, should be communicated to the whole and to the more noble parts.

Finally if once the old Troops of errors of the Ethnicks were disbanded and
cashiered the Regiment of knowledge, the pretended Reformades, or part new
modeled Moderns would have more tender regard to the life of their neighbor;
and would likewise know, that the childish Theory of revulsions are but vain
and ridiculous comments; and that the loss of the Treasury of blood and
strength is pernicious; and that there is no hurt from the blood within the
veins; but only from hostile and alien Excrements: and also that God has
ordained sufficient Emunctories for any filth whatsoever; nor is there any need
of incising the veins for the cure of fevers. Thus having evidenced, at least
made dubious the litigious Theory and supinity of this practice of
bloodletting we think, and have some grounds to be confident, that the
ingenuity and rationality of it will prevail more then our slender
performances; whereby to fix as a very large discouragement, and disservice to
the activity of those spirits who are the patrons and Champions of this
practice. Herein we have been more elaborate, and the longer insisted, because
the error is material, and a wicked and bloody practice, and concerns oftimes
the life of man; an error to be taken notice of by State, if they will make
good that title and divine attribute to be merciful like Gods as they are
called. And thus we could not but think it our duty, (according to our
capacity,) wholly to subvert and disrobe this bloody mantle of the exsecrable,
and destructive Theorems and Epidemick practice of bloodletting; the second
manner of evacuation. We have assigned the precedence and priority to purges
from regular Idionomy and propriety of natures with their appellatives. The 3
manner of evacuation of evil humors follows.

manner of evacuation of the schools; which is Fontanels or Issues, another
universal main pillar of healing: and to examine it by the fire of truth, and
subdichotomise it by the severe incision knife of rational argumentations.
Which of all these general remedies has the principality of verity and
virtue, and the optimacy in sanation, is not worth the dispute. But this we
believe. That this Trichotomy or Ternary of Racemations or branches of the
medicall Root, is like the Taxus of India, which the first year bears fruit,
the second, leaves, and the third year, poison: and conclude, that but a mean
apprehension any thing well palated, will find no pleasant taste in this
practice neither; except he have it brawn'd and made ingustible, as being paved
with the freestone of Custom, and the blew Theory of the schools. We shall
therefore endeavor a full delivery hereof; declaring the grounds of doubt, and
reasons of denial; which rightly understood, may, if not overthrow, yet
shrewdly shake the security of this invention. Wherefore we will declare the
ends and the effects of Fontanells and Cauteries.

Cauteries in the first place are made by fire, and that either actual, as by
a red hot Iron: or potentiall, by escharoticall caustic: Fontanells also by a
razor, or incision knife cutting something away. Of late, they have a trick of
paring away, (palpably laniarious) and wounding the membrana Carnosa. But
others prefer a wound by fire, or Caustic fitted to it, which is laid open by
incision: because that by the actual heat and humors is better impeded and
stopped in their descent. As if in such a tantillation or moment of time, the
fire should burn something besides the Eschar; or exsiccate some other thing,
which they feign is about to flow to the wound. And on both sides, these
dreams are magnifyed by the schools. Vain therefore are the Canteries or
Fontanells, for the Revulsion and Exhaustion of humors, which have no real
existence Fontanell (for so they have christened their wounds made in the flesh,
that the poor deluded vulgar may believe, that thereby diseases are exhausted,
as by a fountain) helps nothing, before the crustous eschar be taken away; and
the vestigiaries of heat and dryness be first removed. Because the protoplast
or primitive ordainment of a Cautery, had excretion for its object; which takes
not the chair, nor flows not, till the ebb or decidency of the eschar: and in
its exsudation can less transpire through the obdurate obstructed eschar, then
through the integral porous pelt. Hence therefore the mod^r^ Pyhsitians have
determined that howsoever the Fontanell was made, at least they would make
solution of continuity, and keep it divided. integrality, to be kept untoucht,
and adjudged to be best, seems unto the controuling ignorance of the schools,
better to be vulnerated and divided, and so kept. To be wounded therefore, and
keep wounds open, avails much to the health of the schools. And seriously it is
worth our notice, but more our wonder, that they have not put wounding among
their Canons of conserving health: forasmuch as Cauteries or permanent wounds
are thought to be so nearly related to it. But the difference betwixt wounding
and burning is only this, that there happens an emission of blood: which one
would think, under that title, should excel with the schools, unless the
deceitfulness of phlebotomy had discovered it self. They presume Cautery or
new imposed Fontanell is a new Emunctory, by which Physicians may compel
Nature with a wet finger to exonerate her self. All which I say the schools
have drawn into practice, upon the design of evacuation and exsiccation of
superfluities, wildly imagining to comprehend the competent quantity of blood,
Generation of the exotic excrement, and easy expulsion of the same under the
single synonyma of Fontanells or Issues: whereby they can cite or summon the
Catarrhall s^minalities and radicities to make personal appearance before the
Bar of the wounds orifice, at the pleasure of the Physician. So that at this
sluice of Fontanells is expulsed the Nilus of defluxions, and particuliar
streams of gleeting humors, and it is now become a Cardinal point in the
medicall compass a main pillar of healing, and a Catarragogall Remedy cried up
even to pulpitising, and has so far prevailed, that now also they are applied
unto children who have not yet attained unto 3 solar revolutions* yea that
universality it has acquired, that it is the only remedy and refuge not only
of very many Internal, but also of most External and Cutany defects. But for
our own part in the first place, we look upon Fontanells to contain implicit
blasphemy, whereby they openly accuse the Creator of insufficiency in composing
Emunctories. And also we have suffered above two hundred Fontanells or Issues
to dry up, and have advised to incarnate them, and bring them to a Cicatrize,
which hitherto, so far as we know, none have had cause to repent. And lastly
we have considered the childish presumption of Physicians, in that they so
seriously persuade themselves, they can engage nature in her passive
auscultatory faculties to follow their commands, and expel the catarrh or
defluxion at the fictum impossible of catarrhs, has been a very convenient
mother indeed to bring forth the production of Fontanells: which Theory being
denied, the ground of Fontanells is a vain thing. For the schools teach, That
by Fontanells, evil, yea exitious humors are forced out of the body, which
otherwise would be either sent to another place, or by its declive tendency
would voluntarily flow downwards. It Is well truly, that Nature with a loose
rein, against her will must dance attendance and wait upon the pleasure of
Physicians, and the apertion of the skin; that by that way she may exon^rate
her self of that unprofitable burden, which otherwise would decline toward a
more noble member. As if Dame nature by her Mercuries or Emissaries should
denounce her open and just anger, and threaten thus. Woe be unto you, unless
you keep open for me the membrana carnosa with a wound, when it shall seem good
unto you, that ye may appease my fury by Revulsion, and avert me from the
opinion of dimission. For otherwise, that which by a subcutaneous expurgation,
should be sent out by the high way and sink of all sordid excrements, I will
now retract, in revenge, by the privy Garden of some noble member. But I pray
you, would it not amuse the activity of any sophistical head to tell us, from
what center, or ample source or head of the fountain, this corrupt stream of
evil humors is delapsed, and comes to make this progress? what is there in
the liver, the Shop and Forge of the four humors, as they are pleased to have
it? In earnest it is a Quaerie not below a solid determination, how the chanel
of this evil humor, having so hard, long and salebrous way, so many creeks
and intricate windings and turnings in its passage from the Metropolis of the
liver through the Strand of the vena cava, and so through the Westminster of the
Heart, wildly ranging, into the America and untravelled parts of the body can
be carried unto the utmost confines of the Epidermis or scarf skin of the
Arm, Leg, or neck, not in the least contaminating the blood, but the humor it
self keeping its primitive virginity, and all this while remaining purely
sincere? It Is a very cruel Emunctory truly which leads an evil humor through
the Fountain of life. And so a cruel Physician* and more cruel Schools which
commands a noxious humor to be carried through the heart.

The schools they teach, That the greatest part of mankind is in subjection to
the Tyranny of a Cold Distemper of the stomach, and an hot distemper of the
liver, and that from the stomach, during the whole act of Concoction, (as
absurd as the former) does sublime and ascend whole clouds of vapors (the
antecedent matter of Catarrhs) into the Basis or lowest part of the brain, and
there fix upon a plane: and that the Brain by its native Temperament, being
Cold, and set like a cover over a boiling pot, or the head of an Alembick, in
the highest Region of the Body; and so all those vapors that mount into it. by
the help of the local cold of the Brain, are again condensed into water, the
vehiculum or material cause of all erratick pains, the which, fontanels
adopted by the paedantick schools as their Minerva, is the only midwife to
deliver. Now what can smell more of stupidity and a dull phlegmatic opinion,
then this wild irregular Thesis of the schools? But we will descend to suppose,
that this current of evil humors at this day unknown, may challenge the Brain
(one of the most noble parts of the body) for its origination and Fountain: But
where I pray you? Whether or no, is it generated in any sink of the Brain?
either in the ventricles? Or in the Pelvis, or brain tunnell? Not truly in the
first: for the ventricles of the brain cannot be the magazine and nest of this
foul evil humor, without prseent danger of death; or the ineviteable
introduction of an Apoplexy, or universal Palsy: if the doctrine of the
schools, concerrning the origination of these diseases, stand firm: Or in the
pelvis of the brain, can this ill humor, which before was good, be created?
For in the basis of the brain is a narrow place called the Pelvis, or brain
tunnel, which sends two small tubes, or outlets, toward the nostrills, and as
many backward toward the neck. Which Cavities only could the Ascendant vapor
insinuate it self into; and those are ever repleted with a muccous or viscid
excrement, and perpetually by a kind of guttulous distillation, discharge it
down of their own accord into the pallat, and Nostrils, as the proper
Emunctories or dreignes of the brain, destined to the evacuation of the slimy
redundant humors: and therefore need no other vent or exit, as that
unnecessary one of a Fontanell or Cautery. But what a destructive man is he,
and what an unworthy depraved quality it is, to maleficiate a humor in any part
of the Head, which before was good, that he may from thence bring a malignant
one to some intercutaneous part, which the Physician commands to be wounded?
And how obedient is that, which being an evil humor (and doubtless over and
besides but a dead excrement) will suffer it self to be wracked and hurried to
another place, which at another time, and another place, not a whit sollicitous
of the economy of life, by its own single declivity conformes to the laws of
its situation! Lastly these things though conceded, yet it would want the
essence and Etymon of a humor, and by consequence of an evil humor, namely,
fleam, one of the four. For whatsoever does once steam up from the furnace of
the stomach in a vapor, and concretes into drops, is neither thick, nor
viscous or tenacious, nor one of the four imaginary humors made in the Eutopia
of the Liver: but should be a posthume guttulous liquor. Wherefore if the
depraved impression of the evil humor, the final cause of a Fontanell, be not
forged neither in the Liver, Brain, nor Stomach, what then shall be the mint of
these evil humors for Catarrhs? Or what part and how high is it that hurles it
forth, whereby it may be carried more readily, and downward, according to its
tendency, unto the hole of the Fontanel.

Thus the schools being on all sides compressed in Fontanell: but that the
blood turns Apostate in the wound it self, and sides ill disposed. For this is
geniall to all wounds which lack Dum pus ^it, major dolor, labor, and febris,
quam facto pure: they should know that the Pus is materially produced of blood,
by the labors of the faculties, and consequently, that for the same ends
purulent matter is coveted in a Fontanell. Which being so, the Thesis falls
down, which supposes bad humors are brought forth by a Cautery or Fontanell.

2. That the expulsion of the pus made in the wound, is not out of the center
of the body.

3. That it is not an excrement of the defluent Catarrhe.

4. That Fontanells do not purge bad humors, which transmutes the elixir of
good blood, into a Caput mortuum of an excrement, by the Athanor of the
digestive faculty.

5. Fontanells avail nothing to the precaution of a malignant humor, which is
topically made in the sides of the wound.

6. Pus and Sanies cannot retreat from the Turnpike, or orifice of the ulcer,
and fall into the Quarters of a noble part, much less good blood, of which the
Pus is made.

7. If the blood, of good, be made an evil humor, before it advenes to the
Fontanell; then Nature designs to send some evil from the mass of blood, unto
the wounded part only, that she may nourish it; or this is ordinary in every
part: Then Nature is delapsed into that dotage and folly, that shall outdo
Him, who to the end his Horse back might not bear too heavy a burden, took it
off and laid it on his own neck, and so rode upon him in that equipage.

8. It Is ridiculous, when that there is store of pus made, to say, the
Fontanell is well purged. Seeing that foul error, and aberration into pus,
demonstrates the Apostasy of the good blood into corruption. And moreover if
he who has a Fontanell, or Issue as it is called, be not well, in the stead of
pus of a laudable constitution, there does weep forth the lachrymations of an
ichorous substance.

9. If therefore at the port hole, or scupper of the Fontanell, there is a
pumping out or evacuation of ill humors, it unavoidably follows, that the man
should feel himself better, when the stream of ichorous matter flows out, then
when pus is made: which is false in the Thesis.

Hence therefore there is a genuine illation, That it is no select evil humor
or pernicious excrement, which in its irresistible decidency would violate
another part, that is expulsed by the Fontanell: but the totality of substance,
whether it be pus, or a thin virulent matter, is no other thing then mere
blood, deputed to the nourishing of the cauterized or wounded part, and there
corrupted by the distemper of the part: and so the corruption of it, to measure
the benignity and malignity of digestion, in the place of the Fontanell. And
therefore whilst the whole Archeus after what manner soever labors, there is
also the greater infirmity of digestion in the Fontanell, and the pus is nearer
to putrefaction. And hitherto the Fontanel by reason of the more powerful hurt
of digestion then is accustomed does weep forth an Ichor. Therefore its the
desire of the schools that of innocuous blood store of pus may be made, and of
a laudable color, white. And that they are pleased to say has purged well, if
any plenty of blood be corrupted in the last digestion. The which, if it were
strictly considered, then would it be made manifest, that a Cautery or
Fontanell is not set to the expurgation of a malignant humor, nor that there
is any existence of an ill humor: but only to the diminishing of the
redundancy of blood; and so in the beholding plethora alone. Whence we have a
fair opportunity to collect, that they are to be expunged out of the list of
remedies convenient to youth, or emaciated bodies, or oppressed with any
disease: so neither to moderate Livers and least of all to abstemious persons,
are they (without danger) pus in the Fontanel be generated of blood alone, or
of one of the four conceited humors; or of a commixture of the four. If the
evidence of truth go on the first's side, then the pus should not be of a bad,
but of the best of the four humors, and so the Fontanel shall be in vain, and
the best pus or effect of the Fontanel shall be worst, seeing it is nothing but
the corruption of the best. But if they are pleased so well to opinion, and had
rather comment, That the blood was not evil before, but may be made bad in its
range and straggling from his other three comrades. But the other three, in this
tripartatory secretion shall even then be worse naughty packs then the solitary
blood, and a fontanel that corrupts the good and innocent blood, may not be
made for every event without a bad end. But if they will have the pus to be
made out of a Tetra^yncrasy or commixture of the humors, then a Fontanel ers in
the end: seeing the Fontanel avails Institution, as the precaution of a
Catarrhe: for otherwise the matter of a Catarrh should not be a vapor, nor
fleam, but the blood it self, which the Fontanel corrupts in it self. For pus
is not made of pituitous matter; but of the blood only, as is sufficiently
taught in the schools. Therefore by the serious indagation of the essence of
pus in its matter and efficient, the ends of Cauteries and Fontanels, and
expurgation of Catarrhs and bad humors would vanish away. Yea truly, any
symptom of wounds being removed, in Caueries or Font^^^lls, and a valetudinary
state supposed, it is necessary, that the solution of continuity bring pus into
the Fontanel; and that may not flow from some other place; but be generated in
the part it self. The Archeus also does daily dispense proportionably so much
blood to the parts, as may serve for their nutrition. Therefore Pus is nothing
but the vitiated blood in that part which is wounded, and the effect of
vitiated digestion in the same place. The violation therefore of the integrity,
continuity and digestion of the parts, and the transmutation of blood into
matter, is reputed by the schools, as the only Achilles of Catarrhs, to
obstruct and impede their progress: whether from the head, which they have
farmed as the warehouse for the generation and transportation of this liquid
merchandise of Catarrhs, to extract an excrementitious humor (which otherwise
threatened to fall down to a noble part) by the hole of the Fontanell, or
whether or no, there be a Deuteropathy or consent of the head with the part
wounded? for it is all one, so be that the skin may be kept wounded, whether
that excrementitious humor be blood, or whether there be made pus or sanies,
it comes all to a pass, so that the easy credulous vulgar be gulled with the
fooleries and threadbare names of Catarrhe, precaution, derivation, Revulsion
and Fontanell. We will take the Line at length, and view the whole series of
distempers that afflicts an Infant of a year old, who is dentien^ and febrient,
with foaming at the mouth and indefinent salivation. Then follows pitiful
ejulations and yelling through the torments in his belly, with seiges green and
yellow. Certainly that tooth is a part of the head: wherefore a Diarrhea shall
be a Catarrh of the head. But what consent is there, or how comes to pass the
agreement of the budding or shooting tooth, and tumified gum, with the
Intestines? Or what power is there of generating and sending the Catarrhe out
of the stomach of the Infant, into its head? and then into the Ileon? By what
law shall the vapor that stills up from the Alembick of the stomach be
condensed and transmuted into aeruginous choler in the retort of the head?
peradventure the Shop of choler from the very thresh-hold of life, has
Pythagorized into the private warehouse of the head. Could the Fontanel (if
the tender Infant were capable of suffering it) like a sponge suck into it self
the diarrheall porraceous flux? And compensate and fobb off whole pounds of
porraceous choler with a few grains or minutulous drops of pus? Wherefore does
the ^ul^an of the Infants stomach forge the Catarrh for the odontalgie or pain
of the tooth? why is it sent into the intestine and not unto the aching tooth?
Does not the Reader yet perceive that a Diarrhea is not a Catarrh? But the
incensed Archeus is ready to transmute the alimentary cremor into excrements,
which by the schools are thought to be choler, fleam, etc. If therefore a
Diarrhea be not a Catarrh, and the enraged Archeus can transmute any thing into
a noxious liquor, if only the gum be afflicted; whether or no she could not
discharge her self on every side by the ordained Emunctories? nor need not to
wait for the port-hole or aperture of the skin by a Caustic? Nor do they
consider that in women, and membrana carnosa about the ordinary places of the
Fontanell is mere fat, at least two Inches thick, to which persons
notwithstanding Fontanels are more frequently, and more successefully applied:
wherefore the extreme or bottom of the Fontanell shall scarce reach half way
of the fat: Therefore there is no Caus-way by which the evil fictitious
excommunicated humor rushes out of the brain, or glides between the Cranium
and the skin, by the means of fat. But what then is that solitary humor which
profligated pus? If it be a steaming up of vapors from the boiling pot of the
stomach, why is it not more frequent in the younger fry, and hot stomachs, then
in weak persons, old men, and cold dyspeptick stomachs? By what means shall
this gross vestment of water, falling off from the Tiffany and thinner dress
of a vapor (if the exhalation of any such from the stomach be possible) who by
enquiring out and pitching upon the Chambermaid, the Brain, as most handy and
accomodate to fashion her into the tire and mode of a water, now wantonly put
off her lawn sleeves, that is like an old Almanac or wrinckled Bishop out of
date, and as if endowed with sense and arbitrary power of election, and by
synaerisis, put on the white Sarcenet bag of pus, and take up quarters in the
Cabin of the Cautery or Fontanel? How shall it in its eager Quest of strange
and unfrequented lodgings wildly range through the very body of the Brain, and
the seere^ Cells and Chambers thereof* its Membranes, Su^ures, f^ul, and
Periostion or Coat environing the scull, to find out and court this new Guest
the orifice of the Fontanel, that by that way only, as the alone Ro^d, it may
glide down and enjoy his embraces and be purged? Why does not the vapor a
hundred times sooner vanish into air by transpiration, before it arrive at the
place assigned to the Cautery or Fontanel? How shall the water mounting up from
the Trench of the stomach and scaling the Rampire of the Head, by and by appear
in the scarlet Robes of blood, and the mother to produce the white flag of pus?
How shall blood (the matter of pus, according to Galen) be the matter of
Catarrhe? Why is the blood reduced into the series of ill humors, which not as
yet contaminated, is dispensed by nature unto the wounded place? Wherefore will
nature (the wound being made) supersede from thrusting forth the noxious matter
by, and into the places accustomed to her? For what, the skin being unlocked by
a Cautery or incision knife at the pleasure of the Physician, shall she lose or
grow ignorant of the way? Or labors she only that she might find an exit in
any place? And that being done, will she afterward become the obsequious
Lacquey of the wounder? Unsufferable fallacies therefore and falsities are
couched under these four, namely, That pus is the matter of the Catarrh; that a
Catarrhe is materially from vapors out of the stomach; that a Fontanell is
Remedium Catarrhagogum, or an adaequate means to excrete the Catarrhous
matter; and that this matter would be diverted to a noble part unless it were
repelled out at another sluice or exit.

The schools now surrounded in a Phylactery and chronicall diseases, and also
in more obese and plethorick bodies have been known not seldom to profit.
Therefore it is necessary that, at least, the evil humor, the wound being
made, be purged, and the body exonerated. At which paper-wals and broken its
material Cause, Essence, Nativity, Place of conception, Efficient, manner of
Generation, receptory, progress, and collection, and also an evil Humor, and
ends of Fontanells are more ridiculous pedleries then the pageantries or
puppetries of Bartholmew Fair; and let all pass but for a Christmas Tale, or
old Beldames dream, and as the veil of their base unworthy laziness and
Ignorance. What, shall the unconstant tide of events overflow the banks of
Truth? To this shittle-cock, and example of restless ill, Success and Events,
we refer you to what we have said of the same in our examination of
Phlebotomy, and hope with ingenious heads, it shall not have power to destroy
or abate the prerogative and sovereignty of verity.

Fontanells, But what if on the other side the History whom Fontanels have had
but a bad Catastrophe: they presently cry out, we are not Empiricks, nor are we
moved by examples. For the schools are rational, and moreover do lean upon the
authority of the Ancients. And that, they thunder out so highly, as often as
they are destitute of reasons, and convicted by experience, they cease to be
most expert masters, nor will they be drawn by experiences contrary to their
own: but fly unto the reasons of their predecessors. For truly when the schools
had perceived that some by hap-hazard had help Seton or coard of twisted thread
or silk is run through on both sides the skin of the neck, which is believed
to be a remedy for an ophthalmie, Lippitudo* yea and for Catarrhs themselves,
and the vitiated digestion of the eyes. Manifest presumption and as ridiculous
is that lame opinion, That a Fontanell on the opposite Leg, is a help for the
sciatick pain. They have made a great deal of do about nothing, have stoutly
played the Vulcans, and have made a great deal of smithes work, and have
appointed Arabic ustions (to wit, not excepting goats dung fried in a
drying pan) for the sciatica, and Arthritick pains. Verily the schools have
misspent their sweat and oil every where in the medicall profession, in
fripperies, childish pageantries, and have set to sale for solid substantial
verity, as ridiculous toys as ever the Piazza Bordello, or loose stage player,
Balladier, or blind harper could expres, and such as deserve only the sponge,
and the contrivers or Abettors the hiss. But at last, it cannot Gout accounted
for Catarrhs, like a subtle fox has eluded and bafled out all the Theorems and
Fontanels of the schools: namely, has shown it to be false, that a defluent
Podagra should be by a Catarrb, and that a Fontanell, is a vain and fruitless
comment of derivation and revulsion for an humor flowing down, Philetas in
Athenaeus might be blown away by the least breath from the Eolus of truth. As
intolerable and whimsicall also are Fontanells in Tabes, or Consumptions,
distempers of the lungs, head, eyes, kidneys, yea in their idle catarrhall
defects, so that we more admire their cruel butchery, with their impostures,
then imitate and follow their vain essays and endeavors. So Patavie,
Hetruria, and Montpe^^en do drive a hot iron unto the very future of the
Cranium in the epilepsy, without hope of cure, and do promise that the
epileptick fumes shall come that way out of the brain; not that they may break
the fit, but that they may suspend the rest. But these things the sick hold by
a poor Tenure, that have no more assurance then what comes in thus by their
tortures, and suffer them with an insensible hope of health; at least wise
without example. Nor do they once consider, that those fained vapors do not
afflict the brain for want of an exit: but on the contrary, they stir up the
tempest of the diseases causation, before they can come to the hairy scalp.
Wherefore it is a blew business, and vain is the work and help a Fontanell,
which begins a posteriori in curing diseases.

Fontanells are convenient, because they do but seldom help, and that by
accident only: so that it is impossible their Hypotheses being conceded, that
Fontanells should be profitable, and therefore impossible also to find their
manner, means and ends. But laying aside these positions of the schools
concerning Catarrhs and Fontanells, we come now to prove, that it is easy to
find out the case wherein Fontanells are said to help, and that if all the
demands of the schools hitherto mentioned, be freely granted them, yet could
they be of no advantage, as to the manifestation of the Cardinal point in
controversy, viz. the manner, reasons, and ways of the Fontanell and the
transmutation and progress of the pus, that has its egresse out at the hole
of the said Fontanell. For in sooth, by reason of the necessary innovations of
blood in every station of the moon, namely, whatsoever of the old blood shall
be left beyond the period of the foregoing moon, in a plethorick body, that
ought to be converted either into fat, or into an excrement of the Fontanell,
therefore fat and gross bodies, high feeding, plethorick and sedentary, do now
and then feel a little help by a Fontanell, and none other. Because that the
swelling mass of blood is reduced toward its just weight and requisite
proportion: for otherwise there would be an oppression and burden to the
Archeus, and the parts, and the digestions and distributions of these, by its
nimiety and redundancy. For thus far the fear of an instant evil may be
shunned. Therefore all the extorted or hoped for benefit of a Fontanell is
placed in a contemperation of abundance of blood, by a daily and minutulous
diminution of it. Otherwise a Fontanell is a cruel and beastly remedy, because
by exercise, just parsimony, and due moderation and temperance may easily be
prevented whatsoever the Fontanel can divert or expel. For let none be so
absurd as to think, That whatsoever the sober rules of moderate and spare diet
cannot cure, any help is to be expected to be brought by a Fontanell. For those
same things which have regard to a long and sound life, do excuse Fontanels.

palliative cure, and but in some neither, and hitherto far below and very
unworthy the venerable medicall schools. I know it is usually said, That if a
Fontanel be once made, unless it be continued, there is the fear of a greater
evil incumbent. But we have known no such thing as we before have declared.
Therefore be it the mere ignorance of the schools, who apply a Fontanell not
unto the original, or to the cause or root of the disease, but unto the effects
or products, which never were worthy of such a serious application of cure, as
they pretend, and make the world believe. Its unknown therefore as yet to the
schools in what disease this palliative cure of Fontanells avails. Because by
chance, and the Lady Ignorance the mother of fools being Leader, they have, and
still do try all things. So that their prescriptions are alternatim, and they
command one thing after another, that if this thing nor that, nor here nor
there, or repeated Fontanell do not help, nor much pus, nor sames ex^reted. Let
the Fontanells be advisedly closed up. Thus therefore the general Theory of
Fontanells, being suspected; since they dilate the notions of it beyond the
propriety of its nature or ends; since it is not verifiable by observation;
since the grounds are feeble that should establish it; and lastly since if all
were true, yet are the reasons alleged for it of no sufficient satisfactory
inducement to maintain it.

Now it becomes our method of exploring verity, and the course we at first
propounded to our selves to look into the Physicians Pantry or cubboard, to see
what good house they keep, and if we can find viz. purgers, phlebotomy and
Fontanells, we shall now sift and examine their anonary or Kitchen Physic,
their grave rules of Diet, which they prescribe with so much seeming
seriousness, as they would be looked upon as nursing or feeding fathers. For
let those ears that have the patience to hear, and the openesse to receive
truth, know, That when Physicians see they have afforded no benefit to their
patients, by the lavish expenses of the laudable juices of the body, and the
diminution of natural vigor, when bloodletting, purging, cupping, rubbing,
(ostler-like) and other grievous and ineffective remedies have done no good;
they at length remit them to the sober rules of Diet, and think to turn out the
disease at the back door and childish evasion of their Kitchen Aphorisms, as
the only hopeful means and Cardinal point of their recovery, and so leave
them by the painful use of fontanells, and reiterated moderate purges, to spin
out the weak thread of their remaining life, Diaetetice, by a medicall, that is,
a miserable course of diet. This is but the thin-chopt Skeleton, the Anatomy of
the other burley bundle of Physicians not more erroneous then torturous
remedies, but the dead corpse of Physic, without any life or soul of truth, the
Limbus or Physicians purgatory, to which the venial, as well as rebellious and
strong-headed disease must be turned over to be crushed and crumbled away by
this raw-boned fury, famine or strict Diet. So that by this Rear-Guard of
diet, you may judge and give the word for the forlorn hope of a lingering
continuing disease to draw up, and appear in its colors. Whence we may deduce,
That if any thing has happened to succeed by the auxiliary phlebotomy and
purgations) they turn over and enrol the other half of the cure to serve
another master, namely a precise rule of Diet and life; which for the most part
they estimate by heats, colds, and the temperance of these, for the regard to
laudable juice. Well may they in much seriousness prescribe this reverend
nothing of diet* to an end wholly unknown to themselves, when they wallow in
the threadbare heats and colds of the Elements. For to speak soberly, besides
their gross errors, threadbare Theorems, languid and invalid remedies, they
blush not to veil over their bloody ignorance by their specious Kitchen Canons,
which may be made in dubious to the most prejudicate, of Physicians, and
grievous servitude of the patients, prescribed not much on this side the
penalty of capital punishment, and wrought into the heads of the sick, whose
lenity of belief inclines them further then they have force from rational
deductions to persuade, so that now it puts on the habit to exact their faith
and confidence.

For in the first place, whatsoever is far fetched frenchifyed Apes, (the
Protaean monkies of the world) we praise and commend as best. And in medicines,
leaf gold, powdered pearls, scarlet grain, cuchineel, crude silk, etc. (and
perhaps spiders also, if they were brought from far out of a strange
country, would be dear and greatly esteemed, as crocodiles turd) in meats
also; for whatsoever is pleasant to the tongue, nor very harsh to the stomach,
that generally and presently is cried up as euchymous, sound and wholesome:
forasmuch as those things which pleasantly court the palate, ought to be most
grateful and healthful. Therefore they vary these things according to the
palate of the Physician. For (according to the vulgar proverb, we have cibus
anceps, one man's meat is another man's poison,) that which is praised by one and
cried up as good, by another, to whom it is less pleasing, it is decried and
nauseated. For by this means Pheasants, Partridges, Stares, Black-birds, and
fat Capons, are preferred before Quadrupedes: although that these together with
us are viviparous, and hitherto more familiar to us, then birds, fishes, and
animals oviparous. So also fishes of stony or gravelly places are set before
marine piscations; and manchet or white bread, before brown. For these
Capon-eaters being very dainty, and many a sweet tooth in their heads, advance
their endeavors and studies in the Kitchen trade, or art of cookery, that they
may please the sick, (like children and fools with rattles,) who being
destitute of knowledge and remedies, have subjected themselves to a barren
profession, who forsooth, do become master-cooks in time. How they traverse out
of one hole into another, and how diligently and narrowly do they look into all
things in Kitchins, butteries and dining chambers, that they may exercise their
imperious jurisdiction, that they may seem to all, to have made a very sedulous
provision, and thereby the more ready and fitted to exercise their cruelty on
the sick. Even as though meats and drinks were Apollo, and the Aesculapius of
great sicknesses. Certainly they may leave off their journeys to wait at the
temple of Aesculapo, when culinary prescriptions, and Kitchen Aphorisms shall
lay seige, and be the militia to encounter the hostility of a disease. Truly
this is the shame of Physiti^ns, and they tacitly confess? that wholesome and
moderate diet is to be preferred to most of those unfaithful medicaments of the
shops: and, upon the testimony of their own unhappy unsuccessefulnesse,
conclude, that the patient ought to abstein from them, as hurtful, and at best
but rarely to be used. Senation verily is the lovely effects of a Laboratory,
and medicine, not of the Kitchen. Wherefore as we have had just cause to
suspect the languid and contemptible weak engine of meats: so also not to
guess^, but conclude, that a precise conformity to the dietetical rules, as
well in the commander, as observer, do insinuate an implicit ignorance of a
true and adaequate remedy; or a smooth imposture.

But on the other side, he which carries fire, can Accidentalities and
irregularities of diet, kick at their rules, and in this business slight and
pass by the idle and needless industry and adulations of the schools. For
those tares, enormities, and other racemations of irregularities, that may grow
up by the course manurement of diet, are with ease eruncated, and anticipated
by the Energy and prepotent seigniorie and goodness of the remedy qualified
thereto. For if Hippocrate^ prefers meats in their afluefaction, though less
commodious for esculency and sanity, yet not simply bad, before unaccustomed;
and that diet is not to be altered easily, safely nor quickly from our
accustomed cibations: what then may be judged as the aberrations of particular
distinctions, customary elections, ^optations and desiderations of meats and
drinks? Considering that Nature following her own peculiar inward dictates,
has been observed oftentimes to excel a medicine, to the deserved shame of
Physicians, when they had precisely forbidden it before.

First of all diet does not treat clearly of things hurtful: For it is not
disputed whether it is wholesome to eat Poison or potshards, etc. nor whether it
be healthful for the sick to stuff himself with much meat and drink, although
of laudable juice; or whether crapulency, ebriety and an inordinate life be the
actions of a sound state, or fit helps to the conservation or recuperation of
health: but diet is wholly busied about the particular distinctoins and
selections of meats and drinks, which notwithstanding, as indifferent
nutriments, do consist within the bounds of goodness, and are differenced
only in the latitude of neutrality. And therefore we have always looked upon
the medicall Diet, as the discloser of the ignorance of causes, of true
medicine, and powerful remedy.

non-Conformists are there to the Kitchen Canons, who do repudiate the rules
that is prescribed them, will be no obsequious dietetical slaves, will observe
no bounds, and yet often recover and are well? The Physician is his own
encomiaste chaunts forth the praise of the cure, and rings out a panegyric to
his rules; and the refractory disobedient patient laughes in his sleeve, to see
his Doctor so transported with the honor of his diet, as having the capital
energy, which yet had no finger in it. Hence has this Art of Physic been
brought upon the stage and fallen under the facete reprehension of Comaedians,
because the Kitchen or diaeteticall Aphorisms and rules do manifestly declare
the slenderness, of judgment as well in the Physician, as sick. Whence the
Physicians oftentimes hope to get an occasion of the disobedience of the sick,
about the rules of diet not strictly observed. Ah alas how many and great
absurdities are committed by this deceit, which in the world are not yet
sufficiently brought to light! What, while they know nothing, nor have
wherewith to assault, propell, and rout the conturmations of the disease, or
constrain into a precisianisme of conformity, yet shall be adjudged that they
would take away with much care and industry the bag and baggage of a further
increase by the blandishments of Culinary prescriptions?

To proceed, if a conformity to the observance of diet convalescency. But in
sickness how importune, irksome and impertinent is it, is testified from
their own unwilling subscriptions and acknowledgements? When commonly the edge
of the appetite is dulled, and its vigor consternated, and which then is
induced to its own complacency, least it wholly perish? Whose conservation is
of as great a moment as is the indication of life. For in the state of an
unconstant appetite, nature does oftentimes minister convenient food to her
self; and that not so often, as then chiefly, when she stands most in need of
help. Then do Physicians in their concertations with this good pleasure of
nature most afflict her by their irksome dietetical rules: from which let the
sick abstain, if he would not have all the cause of his destruction imputed to
a faithless and treacherous helper. For then does the Archeus symptomatically
rage, and then follows a perversion of its functions, because she perceivs a
denegation of that, to which she has had a strong optation, and it may be,
some familiar longed for meat, or other accustomed food, and so they stir up
and accumulate strife upon strife. Even as if a horse passing through water, and
not being suffered to drink that which is sufficient for him, retains
afterward a difficulty of breathing, troublous to life. convalescency, is also
wonderful troublesome, if not in vain: seeing nature now is willingly very
diligent, and greatly busied about other matters. For in severity of truth a
medicall course of diet, and Kitchen operations, cannot but accuse the defect
of a sufficient remedy, and so an implicit confession of a false and
treacherous sanation. Let Physicians no more attempt by these fruitless
means, to dreigne the hopes, bodies, veins, strength, and purses of the sick;
but let them cure as they ought, and becomes them, worthy their name and
profession, and as nature moves and enclines, and if not go along with, yet to
follow her, for the security and assurance of restoration.

the costly and sweet-lipped rules of diet: but to the rich he had been more
bountiful, and with their wealth he had also bestowed health upon him;
considering that he enjoyed the means, whereby to balance the charges of diet.

For in earnest the chiefest part of the diet of exorbitancies of life.

First of all, bread is accounted the primary food; but other things as only
Concibi or obsonia. But on the contrary we call other aliments veros cibos; but
bread only obsonium. For many are found to have lived a long while with milk
only. Irish people shamroch or three-leaved grass, instead of bread. And some
Northern people do attain to a very old age, who do live upon fish only without
bread, and stand stiff and firm against piercing colds and insinuating
diseases. The stuffing with bread is bad in the Adage: not only, because it is
a token of poverty; but because truly it is very burdensome in a weak stomach.
Seeing bread by reason of the ferment (for else it is nothing but a barepaste)
dissolving into a cream, to colliquate, (which we daily experiment in the
digestion of dung) and for this consideration only we have given it the name of
obsonium rather then Cibus. But least we should dwell too long upon notions and
nominalities, it shall be sufficient to us, whatsoever it be called, so that
the use and necessity of bread be known to be conducible and most powerful in
the liquefaction of meats.

medicall, but ethicall or moral, and the symbol of a well informed
judgment: yea further, if the Appetite He, who knows not to prefer one meat
or dainty bit before another, which may be more convenient for my patient: but
it is no great matter which of the two the sick should take, so that he has
gotten but some good and sure remedy.

For in strict reason, if a remedy be invalid and not disease, or oppose the
forcible assault of a disease, and hinder it in its progress by less
convenient food, far less able will it be to discomfit, overcome and expel
diseases. It Is further discovered therefore, that the benefits which are with
so much confidence hoped for, and with as much vanity answered from a medicall
course of diet, is but a wild, languid, invalid, treacherous, and indeed
desperate kind of remedy; and culinary cookeries too contemptible a militia to
encounter so formidable an Adversary, already entered upon the borders of life.
For as it is in the proverb, It is easier to hold out, then get out, a guest.
So in the correlative. Whosoever presumes to overcome a disease by the virtue
of a powerful remedy, let him be sure, that by that remedy, he shall far more
easily overcome all things arising from the incongruities of aliments. It Is not
therefore an inference in our opiniotry only, nor undeserving to be ranked much
on this side a positive conclusion, if we express, that it is an eminent sign
of weakness and diffidency in a Physician as often as his needless and
fruitless prescriptions are to be cooked in the kitchen, before they ascend
the stairs, and pass through the long Gallery of the OEsophagus, into the great
Hal of the patients stomach; for he wanting a worthy and powerful medicine,
that in the mean time he may seem to do something, and not to take his fees in
vain, he makes the critical day the Atlas of his hopes, and by his pe^uinary
defraudations gulls his patient by his culinary prescriptions, and choice of
Diet. Whence from semblable reason may be deduced,

1. That Nature in us is wiser then any Physician whatsoever, and is more
knowing of her own profit and damage then the whole Conclave of Aesculapes, or
all the wits of the schools.

2. That Nature therefore chooses and desires those things, that are most
convenient and fit for her.

3. That a beast never dyed, because he satisfied his thirst, unless perhaps
he had swallowed down poison, or had fallen and miscarried by excessive eating,
because drink in fevers does subvert many inconveniences of drought.

4. That to drink in thirst, would not be less natural, then for a man to
pisle that has need to piss.

5. And therefore seeing this does not postulate or require the Physicians
consent: it needs not his counsel.

6. That when I give together with drink a few drops of a thing, which facilly
penetrating, specially in thirst, I have oftentimes strangled and killed many
fevers together with their thirst, to the pleasant and profitable admiration
of the sick.

7. That a great appetite to a thing, in the rules of diet apparently noxious,
for the most part is created and acuated from the dictates of Nature, who has
marked and observed her own remedy, but not in the vain paper-works of the
schools books.

8. That therefore we ought not to be much troubled about things desired and
longed for, little hurtful, and less accustomed.

9. That if a remedy ought to be Lord paramount, and like a Cedar to o'retop
the disease, the lesser shrubs, or meaner retinue of meat and drink, in their
latitude, cannot contain the strength of a Pharmaceutick entity.

10. That if aliments contain not an energetick remedy, so neither scarce any
hurt in them, speaking of nutriments, as such, that is, indifferent. Thus we
persuade our self from the direction of our own knowlede, and thus we prescribe
these things to others. Namely that the wholesome rules of abstinence and
temperance, has the optimacy above the dieteticall ones: and chiefly when any
thing is eaten with a vigourous appetite according to the will of the sick: as
that Adage hits it, Quod sapit, nutrit. That which savours, nourishes. For the
appetite is satisfied by quality, not quantity. And if fullness loads and
burdens the stomach of sound persons, much more the sick and weak.

2. Moreover let them eat, not truly to gorging, or stuffing the cavity of the
stomach, nor to the sensual humor and dictate of their Gust: but as much as
easily suffices to sustain a sound life. And this, although at first it may
seem a hard task to fresh men, and but beginners to accustom themselves to it;
yet it will not be so to those who are beaten to it. For how ridiculous is it
for one lamenting himself by his disease, to wish that he had not made such a
Hogs-head of his belly, by his ingurgitations, or that he had not gorged and
crammed the stowage of his body so much, whereby to surfeit.

Yet we would not have any man so far please himself with the opinion, that
this sobriety of life incidencies do contemn the economy of digestion, and
distributions, because they exuperate them.

3. Seeing that all aliment ought to pass into a liquid reduction or tendance
to chilification, and that mastication is that which facilitates chilifactive
mutation, or alimental conversion, therefore through mastication is to be highly
commended. For truly one morsel being not thoroughly subjected to the laws of
the Dentimolary operations, not well and duly masticated or chewed, brings more
work and difficulty to the Vulcan of the stomach, then three soundly chewed.
Therefore rostrous animals, as birds, because they want teeth, have need of a
double stomach, though otherwise they are most powerful in digesting. Also
every ruminating animal, as it was greatly esteemed in the Law; so also in
favorable reason, it implies seriously to us the necessity of mastication, not
to be extenuated. Yea, for that cause the ruminating brute in Scripture is
chosen for clean.

stomachicall ferment, do wax hot truly within: and do putrefy, but are not
until then digested: as is most evident in fevers: But how much of more
tenellous meats is swallowed in a surfeit, is digested ^ruly, but being delapsed
out of the stomach, draw^s down with it a great quantity of ^de and indigested
matter, as well by reason of the extension of the vessel, as the carelessness
of Nature being oppressed. But if that which is very tender has been digested,
and should tarry in the stomach longer then is necessary, it would unavoidably
wax deid beyond its due bounds and temper, or plainly putrefy: and migrates
into a bitter excrement, which in its virgin matutine courtship salutes the
nose with an acid (...), and is oftimes cast forth by vomit: (...) which the
schools rudely and falsely impose the name of ^holer.

5. Whatsoever accusto^ed thing is taken in, that is (...) ^y desired, nor of
any malignant seminality or impression; that also absente sa^iet a^^) is
facilly digested, and in the disease safely admitted if it be taken soberly and
moderately: because that the whole batch of accustomed things, especially, as I
said, if desired, is leavened, transmuted and subdued by the mediation of the
Local and appropriate Ferments. For Hippocrates also persuades to use a
slender diet in acute diseases, until an edge shall be set on the appetite, and
it rise from the opium of its dull inactivity. We do not Magisterially obtrude
it as a definite position, but in the due freedom of opinion, and as
experimentally enlarged, we commend small drink, as far as we discommend sweet
drinks, and ptisans, having a reflection on the words of Galen: Barley (says
he) a little boiled, does cause ventosities: but better boiled, obstructions.
Wherefore our Ancestors firmly believing, that boiled barley can by no means
be innoxious, by procuring its germination, have meliorated its qualification,
which then they call Malt; by which means both ventosities and crudities are
hindered. Cook-brothes, Gelly of meats well decocted and stamped, or to stuff
the sick with eggs, etc. if he be infested with an acute fever, being mindful
of that precept: Corpora impura quo plus nutris, eo magis laedis. For although
in acute fevers the patient should live by only drink, without mear, yet would
there be no danger of life imminent: yea, they the sooner mend, and by far
less difficulty the strength and appetite return again. Doublesse as often as
any putrefactible or cadaverizable thing is ingested into the stomach, wanting
its digestive ferment: the digestible putrefyes, and is not digested. And this
we conceive is the genuine and true explication of that Aphorism. For we never
desired, that the sick should come out of fevers fat and crammed, but we
chiefly intended this one thing: namely that they might quickly recover, and
not suffer much detruncation or diminution of their strength.

We cannot omit to declare what would not pass undiscovered, that the chiefest
part of Diet in diseases of the stomach we have drawn out of that Aphorism:
Quod ructus acidus superveniens nidor^sis, sit bonum. That an acid ructation,
of a reparable ferment, superinduced upon a nidorous one, is good. For nidorous
ructations, the aversion of spontaneous nauseousnesse, flesh, fish, and eggs,
yea the loadings and oppressions of the stomach it self, do call for and
command, that the sick be nourished with only potables: for otherwise by things
cadaverable you may expect strange accidents, defects of the mind, and other
incommodities of that kind. Because potations then do humect, and in the
refection of thirst, do refrigerate, and dispel the fuliginous aridities and
debilities flowing from thence. But under the notionality of Potables is not to
be understood here, jusculous sorbitions, abundantly nourishing, to wit, of
those things, which in a hot stomach are of their own accord cadaverized,
without the digestive ferment: but altogether of those, which do not putrefy:
such as Panada's, and also Beer damaskd with wine, to which a crum of bread may
also be mixed, that may be both meat and drink. We might here not impertinently
ampliate what we hinted before in our Tractick of simple waters, of the
digestion, or chilifactive transmutation of the stomach, whether it be pepsis
or sepsis, digestion by heat or other quality: but cannot laudably bring it in
as a member of this practical, rather then speculative or Theorical
argumentative therapeutick Tractate, Yet we shall not I hope dull the edge of
the stomachs vigor, though perhaps we may invigorate the testie mood of the
Aristotelicans if we say, That digestion or alimentary conversion into a
Chilifactive liquid reduction, is made by a specific appropriate ferment, and
not by that fictuminane of heat. This though Peripatetical Problems approve
not, yet Philosophical disquisitions and experimental observations will evince.
Therefore as often as there is an aversation or opposition to flesh, and
nidorous ructations Ascendant in the arched part of the highest orb in the
systeme of our bodies, the mouth, it is the significator of the presentiality of
heat, and the acid ferment in its detriment. Consider also this, how easily
recent flesh if bound to the foot or hot head, would putrefie and presently
stink. In a feavorish stomach therefore being very hot, wise Nature fears to
make a Cadaver within her vital incommunicable world, and therefore presently
there follows an aversation from flesh.

Whether then is the ferment of the stomach vital; and whatsoever that is truly
vital has once degenerated from the concordant rules and harmony of that vital
spark, which at first entitled it to Animation, and now is blown into a
luculent flame, never remigrates again from the winter of its privation. But
the ferment is redintegral and redivivous. Thus therefore it happens. For
either the discharging of the ferment out of the spleen, sometimes does not
extend to the stomach, by reason of some defect of either of the presidents or
Archeus of the stomach, or spleen; or the ferment being entertained in the
stomach is obvolved with an alien and feavorish odor. Which understand thus
exemplified. A hungry man, and well in health, tarrying long in the
inconvenient smoke of coals, presently perceives a nauseousnesse to arise
within him, and aversation from meats, then also a pain of his head, and at
length he vomits. The ferment of the stomach therefore as it is covered with
the noxious odor of the coals: so likewise with the virulent breath and
nidorous contagion of the exagitated fever, so that there presently happens an
aversation from meat, forasmuch as the indigenary ferment in the stomach is
covered with that favor.

alimentary conversion in the stomach, in the form of a liquid diaphanous
reduction, by the virtue of its ferment, that has entered the thresh-hold, and
is admitted into the entry of a vital juice, although not yet into the essence
of life: and for that cause does not so naturally and freely putrefy. But
whatsoever is not dissolved, or if in it self it be dissolved, and yet does not
admit the ferment, as the serum of the blood so called, and brine, etc. it is
either an excrement, or is facilly made so, and is obvious to corruption:
Therefore in dieteticall prescriptions the chief regard is to be had to the
diseases and food, which in respect of the disease the sick nause^^s, or
desires. For nature is to be served, not forced, and it is her office to serve
also, not command. That is to say, let the ferment, which ought to be the
Caterer, prescribe them, and not the Physician according to his appetite and
pleasure, nor let him not make one last fit all sizes.

Lastly exercise, labor, rest, sleep and air do depend on the rules which the
importance of other digestions do dictate to us. Thus to conclude this is the
true diet which Nature of her own accord and naturally does show and teach unto
us. And let this one thing remain as a firm truth that shall outlive and bear
away its unhappy pressures, that whosoever by the sweat and dust of his sober
endeavors, and rifling the rich Treasury of Nature has lighted on such choice
remedies that are grand and powerful Arcana's, enriched with that sublime
energy, that can presently restore the sick, and free him from any disease
whatsoever: he need not prescribe any other diet to the sick, then what the
sound are familiarly acquainted with. For to the sound all things are adjudged
sound and wholesome; because that the digestive ferment does powerfully draw
and constrain every thing into its own power and dominion. And so let
digestions indigitate and prescribe the rules of diet.

Thus then we have seen the main Axes or poles of the whole systeme of the
general and particular remedies of the schools, and present practice of
Physicians shaken: it remains then, that that health or cure holds but by a
poor Tenure that has no more assurance then what is wafted in by the frigid
north pole and narrow door of bloodletting, purges, Fontanells and Diet, etc.
With these, such toys and rattles as that of their Aurea Alexandrina, pill
aureae, vng. aurcum, Confectio ^e Hyacintho, Requies Nicolai may pass for
substantial and peculiar means: gold-Titles to set to sale their fopperies;
and no wonder when we all know that brass farthings bear the stamp of the
royal Arms and Crown. But and if their Shoot Anchors fail, then the stream of
their Advice is such, that frights one more, then Lord have mercy upon a door.
For if the former answer not their doubtful hopes, Quid tum nisi vota super
sunt: and so the Doctor bids his patient goodnight, and He the world. And which
is most remarkable, and none can plead Ignorance in though the sick are
emaciated to living Skeletons or walking Ghosts by their torturous and
murderous means and remedies the Physicians have used to them, yet the disease
remits not, nor discontinues the execution of its fury, but comes on with a
rampant vigor, more heated and heightened by their seeming oppositions. Truly
the acousations of the sick when they thunder it out against the supinities,
falsities, impostures, temerities, and the false merchandise of Physicians,
whereby their lives and healths are spoiled, or brought into unworthy misery
and languishment, has caused us to cry out for an active endeavor of a through
reformation in the medicinal part, that there may be a better preparation and
conjunction of medicines, if that be good and needful, that so sanation. If
any man can match in all the world, in any Art or Science the like trifles and
fopperies in decimo sexto, or the like mischiefs in folio, we profess we dare
venture to have our judgment burned in the Ear for a Fellon, or bored for a
slave to their principles and practices, yea, morgaged, and benighted to
eternal dullness. We are ashamed seriously not for own individual singularity
and egoity so much, as for the sake of our Neighbor and Brother, that
Physicians are so careless, and seem to study only for lucre of gain; and what
it should mean we profess not to know, unless it be of divine ordering that
the schools shall so long grope in the dark, and stumble, till they are got
clear and have quitted themselves like men from the errors of the Ancients, and
come to sharpen their own Axes and Coulters at the forge of Nature. These
things have been sooner, and rather found out by our eyes, then thoughts and
meditations: yet at this bone Cape we would willingly touch and unlade our mind
to the notice of the sons of wisdom, that the errors and ignorances which
have been here discovered by familiar and pregnant demonstrations, have not bin
sucked and elaborated (like the Be) so much out of, either the poison of somes
dotages and uncertain principles, or others Florilege and Analect, as from an
inward teaching of the minds heightning and enlightening by an invisible and
yet sensible glorious emanation of light, truth, God, Intellect and
Intelligible objects. For they have not come in at a crevise or hole of the
door, or opened themselves by little and little, and entered gradually into our
mind, so as that we have conceived, meditated, and found them out one after
another. For if in this Discovery one thing after another had come to our
knowledge, we should have esteemed the whole progress to be the enfeebled and
wier-drawn inductions of Reason, and fantasy obtruded in the species of
Intelligibilities.

schools and most practicioners in Physic in the whole world, namely, by
contrariety and s^mility. Some attempt to scale the Fort royal of diseases, and
rout them in their strong holds per contraria, and so by Contentions, strifes,
jarrings and clashings endeavor a mutiny; then comes the Crisis, as they call
it, in diseases, whereby judgment is given of the victor, either the disease
or Nature to overcome. This plausible and stupid Doctrine, which will persuade
no further then the lenity of belief in people inclines them, easily pleases
all, who are prone to run into the way of sloth, and facilly induced to
subscribe by an implicit credulity to what first has chopped into their
understandings, and possessed their too flexile natures. All the schools of the
Christian world have taught and subscribed to this, that Contraries have their
remedy from Contraries. By which truly every excess (marked with the
nomenclation of a disease) should be reduced into perfect symmetry. As if a
medicine should not work Physically, but mechanically, mathematically or
demonstratively only.

irascible entities, that is, in the irascible faculty of sensitives, and no
where else. Whence perhaps by a Metaphor or improper Hyperbole, contrariety is
wrested to all Individuals in the world. When I take meat, I never find a
contrariety in my self, nor in the meats: but if quantity or quality offends
me; I find truly a deficiency in me: but not a contrariety. If any one nauseats
cheese, it does contrariety or Antipathy; but a seminal disposition, a certain
noxious thing operating. For, because of the necessary vicissitude in things,
it hardly can be admittible to call every or any noxious qualities in us,
hostilities, and enmities of things. Because in Philosophy we must confine to
proper speaking: where words change the sense, and alter the essences of
things; and chiefly when the whole Crasis of healing is distorted to the
destruction of Mankind. For the schools reduce all sanation to the means of
Contrariation in their vain and ridiculous Comments of heat and Cold. And yet
when they are dashed upon rocks in these their lecturers, they will stoop to
concede, that heat and Cold may dwell under one Roof, and yet not as contrary
Guests or Inmates: seeing that in the least drop or smallest Atome of simples,
heat and cold may be connexed: as in Opium a deep cold, and high heat also they
discover in his amaritude. But we have in our Lecture of sapours, and
examination of the medicines of the shops, when we discoursed of Opium,
discovered, that the knowledge of the schools from sapours, was ridiculous and
fruitless: because seminall and specific faculties by the schools is basely
confounded and traduced into Elementall qualities. For cold in Opium, though it
be declared by no judgment of our senses, but supposed from its effects,
because they have strained a dormitive seminality in a ridiculous dream to
cold. As if God when he cast Adam into a sleep, had stirred up cold in him: And
as if after dinner a notable cold in us should steal up into our heads.

To what has been said of Contraries, that there is no intentions in Nature of
contrariety in those things, in whom there is no pretention of hatred,
variance, victory, or superiority, we add; that unity is not Duality. Nor
upwards to downwards, nor high to low, nor East to West are not contrary. Nor
is the right car contrary to the left, although opposite. Nor is a volatile
contrary to a Reptile. For the same silkworm is both. Nor is Generation
contrary to corruption. So likewise neither great is contrary to little, nor
straight to crooked. When one and the same may be now small now great, straight
and crooked. The same is to be said of sweet and bitter; hard and soft: heavy
and light: sharp and blunt: Coagulate and resolved: or white and black. The
like is to be said of water and fire: Heat and cold, which are not contrary.
This the schools own Theorems do despise: the which so often as they list they
will not follow. For in the plague and malignant Fevers, they administer
Treacle, and other things not obscurely hot; as also sudorificks, the
indication of heat being neglected. An Erysipilas also, of all Apostems most
fiery (as they say) they will heal by putting on it some of the best Aqua
vitae. So that it appears these things are limitable, alterable, and by
themselves not regarded, and so not fit for principles; and therefore no
contrariety, hatred, discord, war, strife of victory or superiority in
natural things, but that they act without intention or precognition of an end:
and so although there be Phila^tie, Sympathy, Antipathy, Election, yea, and a
kind of sense attributed to inanimate things: yet let it be a certain Analogy
shining rather in effects and causes, then in the direction of the creator, or
distinction of ends: because that they are deprived of proper sense, election,
intention of acting, and precognition of ends: The schools therefore and
Physicians are exceedingly out of the way who will admit only those as remedies
of diseases, which by a hostile contrary property, encounter and war against
them, as if there were a power of sense and an arbitrary power of Election in
them.

Others go more amicably to work, and cure diseases simility. Paracelsus
himself has too effeminately stooped to this opinion, and says, that all
Sanation must be shut up and finished by assimilation, admitting sometime
otherwhiles the velitations and tempests of Contraries. And although simility
does proximely include familiarity, and facility of reception and entertaining
the remedy, union, ingresse, and penetration by reason of the conformity of the
Symbol: yet the abetto^s hereof know not that these are not Agents
sufficiently endowed, nor capable or requisite to Sanation: but occasional
means, externe, or medicines procuring favor or help: such as is the purity
and subtilty of a medicine. Wherefore we conceive that a medicine properly,
immediately, and efficiently consists in its competent or appropriate
^abilities: By which Nature stands upon her own legs again, and rises from her
fall. There are truly natural endowments, specifica and dotata, which differ
from their simility. And they are those things in which our Archeus finds
delight. As for example. Bulimia or Famine, is as it were morbus peracutus,
which by the sufferance of a few days, cruelly kills. Now it is not healed by
its contrary, meat, nor by simility. Neither does famine accuse or declare a
defect of blood being taken away. For then Dysenteries and Phlebotomy or
bloodletting should necessarily make us hungry: But in famine there is a
devastation of the nutriment, and that of the stomach it self, not by the
intense peptick quality, but by the vigor of the digestible, esurine and
depascent ferment. For as often as the ferment of the stomach is well disposed,
not having an object whereon to work and sat its appetite, it consumes the
proper aliment of the stomach. Famine therefore supersedes from raging and has
his quietus est, by meat; not as it is contrary to the ferment, nor that it is
like to the same: but because it is an appropriate remedy. The like is in the
healing of all diseases whatsoever, namely, there is required an adaequation of
the remedy to the indisposition of the Archeus, and taking away the occasional
cause. Which appropriate convenience of the remedy or the dose, presupposes a
proportion as well in the degree, as quantity, as also adaptation and
application, with a specific adaequation of conformity. Thus far also it
includes an indication and cognition of the end: the habitude and exigency of
our faculties and the accord of them with the remedy, in which again the dose
is supposed. For so remedies would not only respond to the parity of objects,
but also to the determinations of the ferments.

Others there are again who think to make medicine Chemists Ternary of new
principles, Sal, Sulphur and Mercury; and thereby think themselves Natures
Zanies and imitators. To this do many of this Age subscribe: but it is to be
wished that they did know otherwise, and might come to learn that digestion of
Nature never tends to those three principles, and that we never are nourished
by them: but with one only and the same congenerous or consimilar liquor,
whereby we consist and have our Individuum entirely preserved. Many things by
their first bullition depone their pristine virtues. For so Asarum of a
vomitive evades into a diuretic: And for the most part the unisone and
specific propriety of a thing is destroyed, by running division into those
three principles. For although they will keep some of the Crasis of the
Concrete: yet notwitstanding they are new created things, brought to pass by
fire. For to speak severely and truly, the common Chemistry of this day, is not
productio rei nova, but an alteration or transmutation by an exotic motor.

Happy sure was he constellated, who knew how crude simples. For it is the
primitive method of healing noted in scripture. That the Highest had created
medicine out of the Earth. Truly, as the Spagyrick art draws forth and
invigorates many things with a degree of a greater and higher energy, inasmuch
as it excites a new ens: so on the other side again it does debilitate many
things by a privy and insensible suffuration. It Is a bold attempt to accuse
nature of sluggishnesse, dullness and imperfection, whosoever supposes she can
perfect nothing without Pyrergy. Let the semination of things bear
testification to this. For in vegetable productions there are somethings which
spring up of themselves. Such is the propriety of plants, which multiply within
themselves and have no sexuall distinguishments, but the power of the species
contained in their individual seminalities and productions: according to the
Law of the Creation, Genesis 1. Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb
yielding seed, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed is in it self. Which is
indeed the natural way of plants: but some there are, which want sation and
occatory operations. But yet their potestative inhaerencies which proximely and
immediately dwell in the bosom of Nature, do emit their virtues by an
emanative and influential manner, nor will they willingly conform and submit
to the Tyranny of fire. But those which are not immediately in the forms of
the simple in its Individuum, but of the heterogene parts: are very often more
dilucidate in their abstracted part. For so Mace, Turpentine and Asparagus, do
delineate and describe their symbol in the piss excreted. But the powers
which do rise out of things by fire, although they may owe something to their
concrete, as pledges and tokens of that Family: but yet truly they are new and
transplanted germinations, and commonly the vassals of another Monarchy. We
have always greatly esteemed the destination of God in the virtues and gifts
of simples: forasmuch as he has endowed them with excellent qualifications,
natural, specific and gifted to an end, without contrariety or simility. Yet
in this Panegyric of simples, we do not vilify, or detract from the due
praises of Pyrotechny: but well serves only for a lecture to those, who admit
nothing but those three principles, as they are pleased to opinion.

But when a disease has all ready entered the borders meridian of life, and is
marched up to the walls of the palace of vitality, and has almost fatally
foiled Nature, then there is required higher medicines, of a more noble
Entelechie then those which Nature produces of her own accord; and then the
Physician will know that he needs a greater light then what Galen and the
schools have beaconed up unto him. And to speak freely what cannot be
concealed, and will daily break out more and more, all this is to be
accomplished by the exact benefit and exquisite operations of pyrotechny.
Concerning which we cannot but ingeniously confess that it now begins to be
looked into; great capacities that are constellated to be something more then
ordinary, being wearied out of the old fruitless unsuccessefull way. Yet two
sorts of people we find are culpable of Hyperbolicall deviations. One in their
Encomiums of Chymicall preparations attributing too much we fear, more then
they possess: the other; we know, less then they deserve. A degree beyond the
latter goes a sort, who rail, revile and speak evil of those things they know
not. For in that thing, wherein they deny the verity of the science, they
manifest that they are ignorant of it. others again in a pannick fear, but more
friendly, yet empyre^ma: that they are hot, virulent, and but little used, and
less safe. Secondly, that they are basely sophisticated, and adulterated by
Chemists faithless selves, and careless servants. Thirdly, That they are
virulent medicines, powerfully poisonous, and very dangerous. That they must
either cure or kill, and therefore desperate remedies: and with this face
obtrude their pusillanimous and untrue notions and Mola's or false conceptions
on the vulgar.

Spagyrick remedies, is a sore temptation upon them to make many a voyage
beyond the Aequinoctial^ line of Truth, to fetch Apes and Peacocks; which makes
them so content to gather the stubble of falsities, to make their brick
withal. It is not therefore true, that all Chymicall medicines are prepared by
the strongest degree of fire. For oftentimes but a gentle breath is felt, and
sometimes scarce distinguishable. But to this Galen himself will answer, who
teaches that by a strong fire most medicines do depone all their acrimony and
mordacity. And beyond all doubt, and by common experience it appears, that by
this Spagyrick art the fiercest medicines are tamed, and by it medicines that
are otherwise poisonous, their deletory parts being taken away, are transmuted
into Cardiacall. Moreover though the essences of vegetables and aromaticks
volatile salts (which few have seen) are temperate, so that if thou know to
transmute oil of Cynnamon, Cloves, Lavender, etc. into a volatile salt, you
have then attained a temperate medicine, effecting as much as can be hoped for
from those simples, in an old vertigo, palpitation, Apoplexy, and the like. As
for example. If oil of Cynnamon, etc. be mingled with his alkaal salt, and
progressing by a most artificial and occult circulation for three months
without any water, till the whole be changed into a volatile salt, you have
then a real temperate medicine of a great value; and then it will truly
translate the essence of its simple into us, and bear it into our first
constitutive principles. Verily the admirable powers of most excellent things
cry aloud to heaven, as if they had come in vain; when there is scarce any man
can emancipate them from their fetters, and loosen their bonds, and free them
into a Jubilee of liberty to act, and pay that benevolence which they owe unto
mortals. And to conclude this objection the Contrivers may be compared to the
Fox, that despised the grapes for their soreness, when in Truth they hung too
high for him, and so were out of his reach.

To the second, that they are sophisticated and adulterated, we reply, That we
have to do with things and not words: we have to do with medicines, and not
with things nothing related to an expert Artist; with their right preparations,
not sophisticated or careless preparation. Shall the abuse of a thing take
away the use? And to come nearer to themselves, what greater cosenage and
sophistication is there in their magnified Cardiacall stone of Bezoar? Will
they therefore not use it at all? We confess we cannot but acknowledge that
there is much baseness and fraud used in the common Chemistry of the shops.
For it is certain that fraud is the adjunct, and is always connected to gain,
and so to the adulteration of medicines. But how this does square to the
opprobrie of Chemists and their remedies, we leave to the decision of impartial
and ingenious heads.

It is no great thing to deceive the ignorant in things which themselves
profess to be unskilful in. essential oils, which are sold for a deer price,
are all and every one of them adulterated: if nine parts of oil of Almonds be
mixed to one part of the essential oil, the experiment is easily made. For
cast it into a spoonful or more of Aqua-vitae, and whatsoever swims a top, is
of the essential oil; but the rest Amygdaline. And this more safely and
clearly may be made manifest, if you experiment it in Balneo. Oil of Sulphur
is half rain water: But the acid water of vitriol, wholly a cheat. Which with
a simple examination in Balneo will presently appear, that scarce the sixth
part is pure. And thus many more medicines which are gotten into familiar
acquaintance now with Galenical Physicians, and are commonly used and
prescribed, may in time when the Spagyrick art shall come to be refined and
sublimed, appear very ridiculous and worthy their blushes, being such as they
will be ashamed to own. This then may serve to wipe away that dirt which they
have endeavored to cast on the lovely face of Chemistry, and conclude this
objection, desiring them to take notice that dogs bark not at the spots, but
light of the moon.

To the 3d. That they are virulent medicines, powerfully poisonous, as appears
by the small dose or quantity given: That they either kill or cure, therefore
desperate remedies, we reply, that these things proceed from their ignorance in
this art, and the presumption and audaciousnesse of some knaves, who use only
most vehement things, and prepared with a preposterous operation. But this does
verify that Adage, that knowledge has no other enemy but the Ignorant; which
is manifest by this, that these Corrosives and manifest poisons, by Art may
become sweeter then sugar. Moreover their own septicall and escharoticall
medicines, their ^lammula, Crowfoot, smallage, etc. do lay down their
vesicatory quality by distillation, as any vitriol vegetable as juice of
Citrons its acidity, and water pepper its acrimony. Nor does it avail any thing
to say that chymick medicines are administered in a small dose. For that does
not accuse its virulency, but declares its high entelechie of acting; and that
they are more familiar and friendly to Nature. Besides it is more familiar to
those Physicians that are called Galenical, who follow the old doctrine and way
to use those strong medicines, which the chemists bring seldom into use, at
least they better prepare them.

And which is a thing very observeable, in the Physic at this day, the sink
and scumme of the world, the very draff of men and women; all of all sorts,
humors, professions and Sect; any knave, whore, Baud, old woman; or any that
have the impudence dares boldly rush into the Galenecall way of Physic,
without control: dare play with and dandle the lives of men and women in their
hands: and unto so high a pitch of impudence have they flown, that they dare
build their nests in the Colleges Turrets, and use their highest medicines*
and plead prescription, Custom and present practice of the most eminent
Physicians: which yet they dare not sore, nor so much as hover about the Air
where chymick preparations breath: it being too high a region and the tenth
sphere above their wild Astronomy. And in a word we verily believe, and have
some reasons for it, that some rash unadvised ignorant pretender has been too
busy in tampering with chymick medicines, and like the fly about the flame of
the candle, have burnt their fingers, and so like the Beggar, that because the
sieve deceived him, would not trust his dish with his drink any more, they
inveigh against the powerfullest and surest remedies of Nature.

Thus have we at last digested our thoughts, and drawn our hints, and the
impetus of our inolinations to a period; wherein if our weak performances
afford no satisfaction unto others, I hope our well meaning, attempts and
essaies will be adjudged laudable, and shall not bring any condemnation upon
our selves: si non laudatur, tamen excusatur. Swarms there are of many other
things, in which we could enlarge, if we were willing, and thought it worthy
our pens taking notice and run over the whole Rabble; errors so obvious as
needs no Candle, that cannot deceive a mean capacity, nor needs not the
Collyrium of Albertus, nor no Argus to descry them: some of the chief of which
our industry may collect, and in the futurities of our performances ampliate
and dilucidate: but other again, and especially now, we shall not disparage our
Reader so much as to mention them; much more we shall forbear the inquiry
into, and dispute of them, least we should have no defense lest us from seeming
to challenge him of most impossible ignorance, and our self of as palpable
pride and presumption.

It has somewhat whet our thoughts to consider what fabric others have
already reared: for some that have gone before us, have been diligent in the
exploration not only of vulgar errors (as our own Country man Doctor Brown:)
but medical ones; as the Teutonick Jacobus Primrosius, and the Belgic Helmont;
but the most of other writers have dealt with us either like part of Gideons
men, or as a Dog touches Nilus. But least this our impresse should be suspected
of novelty by those who smell rank of Antiquity, and as for such who list
themselves under, and follow Authority, which to stronger heads Testimony is
but a weak kind of proof, and only accommodate to junior indoctrinations, it
being but a topicall probation, and an argument in Logic rightly termed
inartificiall, and does not solidly fetch the truth by multiplicity of Authors,
nor argue a thing false by the paucity that hold so; yet we will say thus much,
if they be such who list not to be malicious, but will be so ingenious as to do
so much right to their own understandings to take notice, may find, or hear
related to them, that the thoughts of wisest heads, and hearts no less
reverend for devotion, have tended this way, and contributed their lot in some
good measure toward this which has been urged for: who have loudly sighed and
groaned (and we do but now make them articulate) for the errors, abuses,
supinities, and deplorable cruelties, nor couched, but embodyed in the
stupendous bulk of the medicall Art; with the desires and Pressures for a
speedy and through reformation; and also that these Advisoes which we here bring
have bin favored, and by some of those affirmed, who in their time were able
to carry what they delivered, had they urged it, through all Christendom, or
to have left it such a credit with all good men, as they who could not boldly
use it, would have feared to censure it. But the ocular testimonies of our
present times, in the unsuccessefullnesse in this medicall profession will
clearly evince against all the clamours, though of the general part of the
whole Nation: and seeing it savours of p^dan^ery; and withal we have
scattering here and there in our progress nominated some; and knowing that if
all the Testimonies in the world were brought, yet these things would not be
redressed, and this would be no way capable of reducing the precipitancy and
obstinacy of the vulgar, we omit to declare them. Henceforth then let them who
condemn the assertion of this book for new and preposterous, be sorry, lest
while they think to be of the graver sort, and take on them to be Doctors, they
prove but Cymballs, and expose themselves rather to be pledged up and down by
men who intimately know them, to the discovery and contempt of their ignorance
and presumption.

Having now attended that which was comprised strength we have into one main
body, with that organick force, that the premises considered proffers us.
Henceforth therefore let it be considered nay rather let it no longer be
considered (for in re t^m justa non est deliberandum:) seeing the longer we
travel from the first point or beginning of error, we shall in futuritie I fear
come to the largest latitude or distance from the Equator of truth, and be so
totally orewhelmed and lost in its dissemination, unto discomposure into error
it self. What shall we do then? the schools in a cold spasme of scruple,
continue ignorant of the causes, ignorant of the remedies, and wavering twixt
negligence and uncertainty suspend all farther enquiry, snoring in the Lethargy
of their idleness like drones in the hive of their pedantick Brother-hoods;
contracted by the opium of a warm fellowship and their present Revenues
whereupon they now surfeit, whereby they are at Hercules Pillars, and thereby
have choked abundance of active Industries, and souls more towardly and
capable are kept out. Shall we therefore sit still, and expect that those in
whose hands the keys of the Temple of knowledge is should quietly resign them
up, or new mould it themselves, or some fine chance should do it to our hands?
no, but let us wait early and late at the door of Authority, and move them
again and again for an assistance to this undertaking, to scatter those mists
and clouds of vapors that have infested, eclipsed and orewhelmed the Horizon
of learning; that its old hoarie and despised head may be raised up again by
that Arm that has upheld and stoutly maintained our liberties, worthy of
praises that shall outlive time.

Its our sober utinam therefore and we would obtain, that there may be a
thorough and early plowing up the fallow ground of the universities, that she
may be laboriously rummig'd in her stupendous bulk of blind learning, and her
rubbish cast out, and no longer be a Quagmire of pitiful learned idleness, to
serve for no nobler end then to nurture a few raw striplings, come out of some
miserable country school, with a few shreds of Latin, and to maintain the
frothy lectures and mutterings over a few stolen impertinencies and wrackt
disputations of industrious scoldings and bawlings of a few yongster
Pedanticks, whose teeth are as long as their beards, and understandings as
wier-drawn as their strutting bodies, who understand that which they profess
as little as any thing else, and know as much of what they coldly deliver and
mumble over, as their pupills, or as Coriats horse his masters greek and
perhaps no more, though in harder words, then the postulated principles of
Nature, born with us, and what they had heard their mothers talk by the
fireside at home in a Chimney-Corner Lecture, in a language no finer spun then
their Russet-grey. That a fair prospect may be taken of the whole Landscap of
Physic, both in the dry ground of it, the vain speculative part or Theory,
overgrown with thorns and brambles; and as large in the moorish and fennish
part of it, the practick; that those parts of it which have not been justly
measured, nor indeed scarce yet discovered, as the Terra incognita of
Chymistric, which in the known small spot and portion of it, and habitable part,
lies uncultivated and unmanured, may be all taken in, not into particular
enclosures, but levelled into the open common of experience and real truth,
may be adjoined to the large field and continent of knowledge, and have Nature
in her largest latitude for its m^ridian.

That they may make of this ill-favored Medusa with her Tresses full of
Adders, in a barren wilderness, a fair Damosel. That we may be acquainted with
more rational ways of healing: and that it may be brought to those few rules
and sure as before.

That there may be a luxuriant farming of experiments, a review of the old
experiments and traditions, which have gul'd so many junior beliefs, and serve
for nothing but to make and fill the world with impudent and detestable quacks.
Also that the Body of Physic may be studded and embossed (not as jewels and
pendants to hang in her ear) with new acquests and experiences. That they may
take care and be intent to find out medicine that shall be grand and universal
Arcana's magnalia Dei, that shall be so homogene, essential and specific to
the Center of diseases, where they first take up quarters, where the immediate
cause lodges, where the nest is, the fountain and original of all vital
faculties and actions whatsoever, that shall conserve, preserve, plant and
build up the life, in that fountain of life, no less the Author of death and
diseases, as of health. Surely medicine is not a naked word, the very word is
not idle here: a mere word without a sense, much less a fallacious word,
signifying contrary to what it pretends; but faithfully signifies healing, not
by the chance-medly of fortune, accident and Natures work; nor by contrariety
or simility. Therefore that such medicines may be found out and prepared as are
specific, and such sure cards, that they may never leave them, ^ut play their
parts so surely, as they may bring glory to God, honor to themselves, and good
to their patients. For it is not enough, nor is there any such thing, as to
chalk out the way, and say to a medicine, go thou to such a vein, or to this or
that place: but a Physician should be so ably and generally qualified, that his
medicine may be sure to eradicate the dise^se, and respect the proper Archeus
of Nature, and the intricate semanalities or roots of the diseases and not the
racemations or products. And it should be the whole study of the Physician to
find out remedies, with which all diseases secundum loca and secundum genera
(that is of that which he has to deal with) may be of one value, and the same
price: and not to direct his study and intentions to things that come
afterward, or the alterations in the Archeus, or Symptoms concomitant. For in
diseases all things depend upon an occasional cause inoculated in the field of
life because diseases have not in themselves an essential radicity of
permanencie and stability, as other entities have, which abide and subsist in
their seminalities.

And finally to conclude, that our Reason like Solomon^ virtuous woman may set
all her maidens at work, about this laudable attempt and design, and not to
make some step^ but go thorough stitch to the journeys end, that our knowledge
may thrive by exercise, as well as our limbs and complexions, that so although
we cannot attain unto perfection, yet that we may come to those things most
probable. We fear to be more elaborate in such a perspicuity as this lest we
should seem not to inform, but to upbraid the dullness of an age; this only,
and not the want of more to say, is the limit of our discourse.

FINIS.

