THE NON-PAREIL, OR, THE VIRTUOUS DAVGHTER SVRMOVNTING ALL HER SISTERS:
Described, In a Funeral Sermon upon tbe Death of that virtuous Lady, ELIZABETH
HOYLE, late wife of the Worshipful Thomas Hoyle, Alderman of the City of York.

By that godly and Reverend Divine Mr John Birchall, late Pastor of the Church
of St. Martins in Micklegate.

The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, but the memorial of
the wicked shall rot. YORK: Printed by Tho: Bro^^, welling in Stone-gate over
against the Sta^re. ^6^4.

To the Honorable Thomas Hoyle, Lord Majo^ of the City of York, and one of
the Burgesses of the High Court of Parliament for that City, increase of Honor
and Virtue.
HONORABLE,
I Hope whiles I revive your virtuous Ladies memory, I need not fear to renew
your so^row, which is not so much worn away with Time, as born with Christian
Fortitude, and allayed with discretion. Again, you have happily repaired your
losses, (and in the same kind) by a second Rebecca; so you are comforted after
her death, who (living) was Mother in Israel, as Isreal's Father was after the
death of his Mother. Add to this, that all private Crosses are to be
forgotten, yea and present Blessings scarce to be enjoyed, when we remember
our public calamities. So Pbineas his wife was more affected wiih the taking
of the Ark, then with the death of either Husband or Father; neither would she
forget her sorrow, though a Man-child was born into the world. Such was (not
the wilful humor, but) the gracious temper of that good Hittite, who would
neither eat nor drink, nor go down to his house or wife, whiles the Ark and
Judah abode in the Tents, and his Lord Joab and his servants lay in the open
fields, counting that unlawful, which was only unseasonable. Pardon I pray
you, this digression, which yet is not altogether impertinent to this ensuing
Funeral Subject, seeing the whole Kingdom is almost turned into one Funeral.
The righteous perish, and none lays it to heart; where, though the departure
of the Righteous is much to be lamented, yet much more the apathy and
se^slesnesse of the miserable Surviver.

But to return and resume our former Subject. As she wa^ a^ e^cellent Pattern
of many divine graces, so especially she excel^d in this tenderness and
compassion, which, with the rest of her holy virtues, I need not pourtray and
represent unto your view, seeing you fully know them by a long and sweet
experience* and have their Idea still before your eyes: and this also is done
to my hand in this just Panegyric by a better Orator, who was your vigilant
Pastor, and my reverend acquaintance, in whom those rich endowments, which he
describes in your worthy Consort, did also shine in an eminent manner, so that
changing only the Psrson, it may serve for his own Funeral Sermon; for as in
water face answers to face, so their hear is both washed with water and the
same holy Spirit, were alike spiritual and holy. He being dead, yet speaks
in his Sermon, and she being dead, yet lives in our affections and memory. and
remains a lively pattern of heavenly conversation. Her excelling virtues he
sets forth, not in excellency of words, but with the Apostle in the
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Neither could his meditations and
composure be very exact and perfect, seeing this his pregnant issue was to be
delivered the day after the conception: and though he had more time for
preparation, yet he was not like those who prick their words, (as birds set
their feathers, or nice women their curles,) in a quaint and curious order; for
this savours more of affectation then of affection, and of ostentation, then
truth and sincerity. There are many whosand Sermons are half a year in
contriving, then vented in one hour, and forgotten in another; (like painted
Pageants erected against the Kings Coronation, which after much pains and time
spent in decoring, are taken down when the day of Solemnity is over,) and these
are they who like those Jews, John. 5. 44. seek honor one of another, and seek
not the honor which comes from God only, especially the chief Rulers among
them did love the praise of men more then the praise of God, Joh. 12. 43.
whereas not he that commends himself (as such plaunble, but unprofitable men
would do) is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2 C^r. 10. ult. But the
sole aim of our Orator is, to glorify God, to do your Consort right and us
all good, by setting forth in plain, yet patheticall language, her holy life,
for our happy imitation: and though his time of preparation was very short, yet
his Se^mons very full; for he being a present man always furnished, had his
quiver full of divine meditationss which he c^uld readily open upon every
opportunity, and it becomes every one of us to expose the tender parts of our
hearts to such wounding, yet healing arrows, which receive this sovereign
quality from the Sun of righteousness which has healing in his wings. Now for
this particular Sermon, certainly it is much eclipsed, from that primitive
luster which it had when it was presented viva voce before you: for his tongue
was ^he pen of a ready writer, but not the pen of any writer could match his
ready tongue; for he was very quick both in his tongue and in his mind, full of
holy affections to sanctify his learning, and full of choice lea^ning to
beautify his holiness. Thus much I thought good ^o write in his honor, who
so much honored you and yours. But I fea^e me I have wea^ied you, so now remit
y^u to the refrefreshm^^^ of his comfortable Sermon, which I make bold to
commend to your Patr^nage, you and yours to the Almighties protection, and any
poor endeav^rs to your Lordships acceptance. So rest,

Your Lordships true Honourer, J. F.

The Commendation.
PROVE. 31. 29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.
WHen I looked first into this Text, thinking to consult (as I did) with some,
yea, diverse Commentators, then I did begin to think of saving that labor; for
truly this blessed Saint of God was the best Commentary of this my Text in her
life: What an happy thing was it that she should hear her Funeral Sermon (as
it were) before her death; the last Sermon that ever she heard was on that
^ubject, and it was observed concerning her, that she came from the place of
Gods Worship with such joy, as though she had come from Heaven. The text was
that which we spoke of last Monday on the 116. Psalm 13. Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints. She both in her life and at her death
did express the truth of that last text which she heard discourse of on a
Funeral occasion, and she also in her life and conversation is an exact
Commentary on this my text. That which I purpose to speak of concerning her,
shall be nothing but what I conceive in Gods sight to be truth: and what shall
be now said in her commendation, (for seeing she honored the Lord in her
life, it is my poor desire, and it shall be my best endeavor to honor her at
her death,) what (I say) now first shall be said in her commendation, shall at
last be repeated again with application unto you all, for your imitation.

Truly this in general, first I may say, that when I look into those examples
in the Scripture of rare persons, even of godly women, as Sarah and Deborah a
Mother in Israel, and the like, may not we say, that the name indeed differs,
but the practice does not; a Sarah is dead, a Deborah a Mother in Israel is
gone: Nay, beside these examples, when I read those expressions and
discriptions of godly women, in the 1 Timothy 2. in the 2 Titus, as also in the 1
Peter 3. me thinks, there is a lively description of this godly Saint.

But leaving generals, we will come to speak of some particulars, and we will
reduce them briefly into these two heads. First, to her conversation before
God, as in the sight of God, as also amongst Her conversation toward God.
and before men here on earth. Secondly, to her affection and Heavenly
mindedness toward that glorious place, and the enjoying of that blessed
person there, even the Lord Jesus. ^or the first of these, (and by the way,
that you may not conceive, that what she did even in regard of Moral things,
was nothing but what a Civil and Moral man might have done) this Man-ward, the
will of God was her rule, the Spirit of God was her guide, and the glory of God
was her end. Three such qualifications of an action, as never yet were found in
the best action of the highest Formalist.

But now particularly concerning that first work of God upon her, even her
conversation unto God (as I am given to understand.) It is since the Lord begun
to set her face toward Heaven some thirty years, or thereabouts, all which
time until now, she kept her face and her heart toward that blessed place.

Look a little into the Gospel (for there are the best and the surest
evidences of a blessed estate) concerning the great work of Faith in H^^ Faith
the blood of the Lord Jesus: oh, how precious was the Lord Christ unto her
soul, as her discourses many a time did manifest, and as the text speaks, 1
Pet 2. It is a clear evidence that she believed on the Lord Jesus, because (as
the Apostle there speaks) to such as do believe he is precious, and so he was
unto her; and you may conceive from that, which some persons do think, is not
such an evidence, she her self would often confess, that she found shaking
sometimes concerning her Faith: for I do assent unto his judgment that affirm
it, That he that always believes alike, and he that always prays alike, he
never believed, nor prayed truly. But all her shaking were for her further
settling and rooting in the Faith; as ye take a tender Plant and shake it that
so the root of it may be more settled in the ground, and spread abroad further
in the earth.

And for her repentance in respect of sin, oh her sorrowful and Her
repentance.
penitent soul for that! after her days of humiliation in secret, she coming
out into the family several times these years have heard her speaking of her
sins, with eyes as full of tears as may be; and when she came unto the Lords
table, she came with such brokennesse and with such tenderness of spirit, as
it was a clear evidence unto me, that as with joy she looked on Christ the
Maker and Matter of that blessed Feast, so with sorrow she looked on her sin
by which she had pierced so sweet a Savior.

What shall I say further, I might go through all those marks and evidences
of life and of salvation revealed in the Gospel, expressed by our Savior, in
5. Mat. O I might tell you that she was poor in spirit, and she was pure in
heart, and she was a mourning soul, and she was an hungry soul, she was a
meek soul, and she was a merciful soul, of all which our blessed Savior
pronounces this in that place, that they are certain and infallible marks of a
blessed estate. Look into those evidences that are expressed in the rules and
commands of the Gospel, as concerning the mortifying of sin, so as not
suffering it to reign, growing in grace, walking, not after the flesh, but
after the spirit, self-denial and humility of spirit, Her self-denial and
^umilitie.
especially that in the will, not only that reverentiall humility whereby she
had high thoughts of her God, and low and mean thoughts of her self, but also
that obedientiall humility in sto^ping, and subjecting her will unto the will
of her God; this was enough for her that God had said it, and therefore she
for ber par would endeavor to do it; these are such evidences as are
Evangelicall.

Look now a little into the Law as modifyed by the Gospel; in all the commands
of the first Table. For the first command I have Her obedience to the first
Command
often thought of her speech; oh! says she, I am greatly in love with the
first command, and truly it was a sound evidence of life in her, for this is
the sum of the first Table, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, etc. nay, she was heartily glad that the Lord had bin pleased to
express himself in that manner. Oh beloved, could any man hear her speak
this, how she loved the first Command, which indeed is the root and substance
of all the rest, and how glad she was, that God had given out such a Command;
could any man (I say) hear this, and not thus conclude from it, and say, Oh,
the strength of grace in the heart of this Saint! T^ the 2. C^mmand Her
^rdinary duties. In he^^ing the Word. In receiving the Sacrament.


And for the second Command, that is, of Gods worship, whether ordinary or
extraordinary. For the ordinary, whether public, private, or secret; For
those in public, as the hearing of Gods Word and joining in Prayer, oh what
meltings, and oh what breakings have these eyes seen, in that seat, she used to
hear, and made use of what she heard! Many of us do use to hear Sermons, but
there is an end, we make but little good use of the Sermons that we hear. And
for her receiving of the Sacrament, oh what care did she take in a special
manner by her self, by humbling of her soul to prepare her self for the
participation of that ordinance! and oh what melting affection in a sweet
mixture of joy and sorrow (for at that time there is both) have these eyes
seen in her, when as these hands have given her the outward elements? and oh
the joy and gladness of her soul after she returned home, having been
feasted with the Lord Jesus at his own Table? And as In ^^^ding of (...)
S^ri^tu^es. (...) me^it^^ion.
for private performances what shall I say for reading the Scriptures from the
first, unto the last, she was a constant daily reader of Gods Word; And for
that same duty of Meditation, (oh, that too much neglected duty) it was her
constant course one or twice a day to run over what she had heard on the
Lord's Day, even on the week day, and I my self have seen her many a time
retire her self to walk in a place commonly called the Garth, or in some other
place in a special manner (I am persuaded) for this very end, to press upon
her soul in secret, what she had heard in public. And for that of prayer,
her constant course was to pray by her self three or four I^ prayer.
times constantly every day, beside her constant joining in the family duties.
And here now (if you please) let me bring in her death because when she was
closing with God in that duty, then the Lord concerning her present Death.
was pleased in a special manner to draw near unto her, and this you must know
that it is one thing to die suddently, another thing to die presently or
quickly.

Suddenness is this, when a man never thought on the matter before, nor
prepared for the matter before; but presentnesse or speediness may come on a
person that is fitted and prepared; therefore let me say two things concerning
this. First, for her preparation for Her preparation for Death.
death, and her thoughts and speeches of death, it was very much, and they were
very many and frequent; nay, the very last day that ever she lived here on
earth, even at Noone in discoursing with others, to this purpose she said unto
her husband; Husband you are not like to enjoy me long; some replies being made
unto her, she returned this answer, But no man knows so much by me, as I do by
my self; and this was about eight hou^s before her death; thus her thoughts
were running upon it, and no doubt still she was preparing for it; and she has
said unto me and others, that she was verily persuaded she should die this
kind of death, because it seems both her Father and her sister before her dyed
so. Yet you must remember the distinction that even now we gave you. There is a
twofold A twofold suddennes^ in dying.
suddenness; one in respect of preparation, and another in regard of time: the
former was not to her, the latter was: to make this distinction plain to you:
It may be you are indebted to a man an 100. pounds, and there is no day set for
the payment of it; he may come when he pleases; well (say you) Sir come when
you will, your money shall be ready for you; you lay the 100. pounds by you in
a readiness, because you do not know certainly when he will come; it may be
such a day he comes, and he knocks at your doors, and calls for the hundred
pounds: you may say now, his coming is sudden, and not sudden, in respect of
preparation it is not sudden, for you have the money by you; but in respect of
time it is sudden, for he came in a time you looked not for; oh, how many
thousand, thousand, have warning enough for Time, but as for Preparing for
Death, alas what preparation is made! oh, let me labor for the former that
Death may never find me unprepared, and for the latter the will of the Lord
be done. Shall I tell you, one of the rarest Saints that ever breathed here on
earth, dyed quickly, Moses by name; why, says God to Moses, Moses go up into
the Mount and dye; nothing but this, Go up, depart and dye: thus Moses dyed. So
Aaron (as a man may say) he is only stripped of his clothes, and so he dies;
this is the first thing that I would have you consider, concerning her death.

And secondly, this I add, (seeing that the Lord was pleased that this death
should be) how seasonable was it that at this time Her death was seasonable.
she should be taken out of this world unto God? how it is with other men I
know not, this I am sure of, that a child of God, as generally at all times, so
especially toward the evening will go unto God, and make even his reckonings
with him, that so if death should come to him in the night, and his Bed should
be his Grave, yet then his soul might go to Heaven; Now though she had been
again and again with her God that day, both in private and in public, yet
she is not weary, but as Moses goes up into the Mount, so she still goes into
her Parlour unto her God in Prayer, and at that time she closes with her God
so, that He was pleased to seize upon her body, and so presently after, her
soul departs unto the Lord Jesus. Here I bring in her death in her Prayer, to
wit, as when the River is going toward the Sea, the Sea at the Tide comes out,
as it were to salute it, and to bring it in; so this blessed Saint, oh! she was
running fast toward heaven, and she was almost in heaven all that day after
the Sermon; well now, the Lord seeing her make such speed toward him he comes
down to meet her, and now he has taken her unto himself, this for ordinary
duties both in public, private, and secret, respecting the second
Commandment.

Now for extraordinary duties, this on my own knowledge also Her duties
extradinary.
I speak, that she constantly every week did keep a private Day of
Humiliation, retiring her self alone, and spending some part of the day with
her husband, and that in examining of her heart, and humbling of her soul, in
reading and in meditating, and yet such was her wisdom, that she cast things
so, as she might not be interrupted by those occasions which she might meet
withal, either in the world, or in the family. This for the second
Commandment.

For the third, for her reverencing of Gods Name, it is no great To the 3.
Commandment.
matter for me to say, I never heard her swear (as I never did) during all that
seven years that I lived with her, and I am persuaded had I lived 70. yea 100.
years with her, I should never have heard her swear; no, no, more then that,
she feared an oath; and this evidenceth that she had respect unto the thitd
Commandment.

And for the fourth, what shall I say for that, a whole day might To the 4.
Commandment.
I spend concerning that day: she spent it wholly for God: I will tell you
nothing but the truth: she did rise constantly at 6. of the clock in the
morning, and being up, she first went apart secretly and commended her own case
unto God in Prayer, and she did read Gods Word; then she came forth, and she
(to prepare her self further for the public duties) went to pray with her
husband in private, or with the Minister that was there present in the family;
after this she went about seven or eight of the clock unto the public place
of Gods Worship, where she spent all the forenoone, until dinner: presently
after dinner, so soon as the servants had dined, she occasioned their calling
in; then was an account given by them of what they had heard that forenoon, and
usually this continued until the time that the Bell ceased ringing, then she
went to the House of God again, and there she spent all that time which was
allotted for the public Worship: then she returned back again^, and presently
after, before supper, the servants were called in again an account was given
concerning the Word that they had heard, and oftentimes, oh! with affection
would she speak unto her servants, (especially now of late) Oh! remember this;
when a seasonable Truth was delivered. What did she yet before supper? why, she
retires her self in secret, she goes to God in prayer, and what then? why,
presently after supper, the servants were a third time called in, an account
was still given of the Word that they had heard, what this or that servant
could say, so as they were able to answer in some method, for method helps
both judgment and memory: then the whole Family, the Church, the Word of God,
and all was commended unto the Lords blessing, and we were fitted and prepared
for to take our rest; Lo here a Saint of God spending the Lords day
graciously. And this was her constant course: had she done it once or twice
only, it had bin less, but it was her constant course; thus I have led you
along in speaking something of her concerning her carriage toward God both in
the Gospel, and in the Law, these are main things, believe it, these are
special things, and in all these the authority of God overawed her, and the
love of God constrained her to do what she did.

Now we come to speak something of her in relation unto man, Her convers^tion
toward man.
and there you may see, that though she has gained, yet we have lost; I have
heard it reported of her by a man that was not apt to flatter, he said plainly,
That of all the persons in the world, with whom he did converse, he never knew
her equal in all things, and I confess ingeniously and sincerely, that I have
been acquainted with diverse in the Southern, in the Western, and in the
Northern parts, but for all things both toward God and man, I never knew her
equal.

But more particularly in respect of the Church, and People of Toward the
Church and people of God.
God, (to begin with the best first) oh the Church of God has a great loss:
She was but a woman, but she was a most valianr Soldier, one that could fight
with the enemies of the Church of God, yea wrestle with God himself by her
praye^s, and tears, these are the weapons of the Church, without which let a
man's spirit be never so courageous, yet if he go not out with God, all his
courage and strength will but little avail: thus the Church of God for a
friend, has lost one.

Look now unto the Ministers of the Church of God, and to the members of the
Church of God, this is the truth; For the Ministers Toward Ministers of Gods
Word.
of Christ, I have wondered at her carriage toward them, and what if I should
say also of her bounty toward them; Concerning the members of Christ, T^wards
the Members of Christ.
the Saints of God, yea all the Saints of God, yea the poorest Saint of God,
with whom she was acquainted, every one of them was her dearly beloved. I do
not know a Child of God that was acquainted with her, but he will seal unto
this truth, that she loved the Saints, all the Saints, and that therefore, even
because they were Saints. This I know, that in her eyes a vile person was
contemned, but (as the Psalmist speaks) she made much of them that feared the
Lord. Well then, Church of God thou have a loss; Ministers and Members of the
Lord Jesus ye also have a lo^se.

In relation now unto the family, to the City, to friends, to foes, to Parish,
to Poor, to all. In relation to the family, to the head of the family, oh, she
was a dear, obedient, and faithful wife: oh, a T^w^rds her family
loss unto him: what! for the outward man? yes, a loss that way: but
especially for the inward man; oh, her presence, her counsel, her company, her
prayers for the soul of her husband above thousand thousands yearly. A loss
thus unto the inward man of her husband, she was every way unto him a meet help
indeed, and this now in the want of her is both known and felt; and for her
Children, she had many taken away from her by death, very young and tender, but
for that which remains, oh her care over her! oh her prayers for her and with
her! she it seems for other times (this excepred) used to take her daughters
along with her, to pray with her: Oh a loss thus in respect of her husband! oh
a loss thus in respect of her daughter! this is known and felt. For her
servants in the Family, before I knew her 20. years, it was her constant
course to Catechize her servants, and now lately more especially, she was
putting on to that duty: oh her love u^t^ the souls of her servants!
Concerning her kind^ed on his side, on her side, they may come in and say, Not
only husband and daughter, and servants, but we also have lost a great loss
Concerning the City now, and those that she conversed withal in it, truly,
when I remembered what was once said concerning A^h^n^sius, in his p^aise and
commendation, I could not keep my thoughts from running upon her, she was (as
it is said of him) both Magnes and Ad^mas, both ^ Lodestone and an Adamant; as
a Lodestone she did draw others sweetly by her carriage; and a woman so grave,
and yet a woman so cheerful seldom have I seen; yet she was as firm for God
as an Adamant, not yielding unto any thing, whereby Gods glory might be any way
impe^ched, or his will might be disobeyed. For those moral virtues, which we
touched upon before, as her Justi^e, her Temper^^^e, her C^ur^^e, yea and that
raised higher, her coura^e f^r G^d, her pa^^^n (...) in her calling, her
mee^en^s^e, her m^d^st^, (...) in ^ll (...) she was admirable: Thus b^th Family
and City, the persons therein with whom she conversed, in respect ^f both there
is a loss

Look to friends now, and to foes also* to have a friend that is a Saint, and
to love an enemy; both these are marks of grace. For the former, I have already
told you of it; and for the latter, this I have been told, that I having had
some occasion to speak something of that subject, she could freely speak, what
a large heart the Lord had given her for her enemies, to pray for them, and to
do them good both in word and deed, and this but about some 8. hours before
he^ death. And for the Parish, they themselves well know that they have lost a
Matron, and lost a Motber indeed. And for the poor, this was her constant
course every week, to lay up something for them, to see how the Lord would have
it. In the morning of that day on which she dyed, about the poor neighbor for
whom we prayed, she was employed in making something ready for him, yea sending
money to him, yea a third time sending; and that it might not be done for
ostentation, she would sometimes charge the servant that carried the alms, to
give the alms so as to conceal the name; thus both Parish, and Poor, all have
a loss.

Now for her twofold outward state, as thus she carried toward all persons,
so thus also she carried in all estates; still she was constant with her God,
in the time of prosperity, so humble, so thankful, so bountiful, and liberal
she was: In the times of any cross, or loss, or adversity, oh, then the
strength of the patience, and long-suffering of this godly soul! oh, what
wisdom did she show! what subjection unto Gods will, nay, what fruitfulness
also after the affliction was past; thus did she go through sufferings. She
told me not long since, that the Lord had answered every prayer that she had
put up, as if he should have said to her, why, child, I will both direct thee
what to ask, and I will also answer thee in what thou ask; as the Lord said
to Moses concerning the people of Israel, Let me alone: so concerning her last
dear child, I shall never forget her words, Ah (says she) I could never yet
get my heart enlarged in praying for his life, because (to wit) the Lord had a
purpose to take him unto himself; therefore he restrained the spirit of his
servant, from being so instant with him in praying for his life. Thus you have
seen some things in relation to God, to man, to persons, to things, to states.
Now for the second thing that we propounded, that is, concerning her heavenly
mindedness; eertainly her conversation was in heaven, for all her endeavors
did tend thitherwards; nay, she had a heart set for heaven, and she had set her
affections on things above long before. And for the world, oh how often would
she speak of that, as having her heart taken off from the world; and finding
that the things of the world did steal away her hear^, she cuts of the
affection by taking away the occasion; What says she, you things of this life
do you begin to steal away my heart from heaven and heavenly things? away with
you, let not me be troubled with you; that therefore which the men of the world
do look after so carefully, as loving it dearly, even their gold and silver,
she finding it somewhat to incroach upon her affections, her husband must have
it, she will not keep it; and in respect of her expressions many and many a
time concerning her desires to be absent from the body, that she might be
present with the Lord, oh, how Saint-like did she express her self? Now
seeing in this manner (as you have heard) toward God, and toward Man, in the
use of all good means she was walking and stepping on still toward heaven;
and seeing that she, (setting heaven and the Lord Jesus before her) thus
pressed hard forward toward the Mark for the price of her high calling, we may
say two things for conclusion: First, we may say this, That though we have
lost, yet she has gained to eternity: And secondly, this also we may say (and
so I come unto my Text) that though many have done virtuously, yet may I not
speak of he^ as Solomon does ther^ have not thou excelled them all? And so from
her unto our text we pass with what brevity may be.

THE SERMON.
PROVE: 31. 29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.
IN the latter end of this last Chapter there is a commendation of a virtuous
and godly woman, positively from the tenth verse unto my text, and here in my
text comparatively. The words divide themselves into two parts: the former part
is this, Many Daughters have done virtuously: the latter part this, But thou
excellest them al^. Seeing then what is said here, is for the Praise,
Commendation, and Honor of a virtuous and godly woman, we will therefore from
the words at this time handle this one truth.

Doct. That though many do ^er^uousl^, yet sone of Gods people do excel in
gra^e, and this is their praise and glory.

We say sometimes of the lives of women, as Origin once spoke concerning them,
that if they be good they are very good; though therefore we might bring to the
examples of men in the Scripture that did excel in grace, yet notwithstanding
for the confirmation of this truth, we will only in^^ance in those of the same
Sex with this godly soul now departed: And the fir^^ shall be in ^ne of her
own name, ^l^za^et^, Lu^e 1 6. there you s^all find ^ha^ Z^ch^ry and Elizabe^h
were two rare and excellent persons in grace, for there it is said concerning
them both, that they were ri^hteous before God, and blameless among^^ men*
there is one excellent woman. The second that we shall name is T^bi^h^, she is
de^cribed in Act. 9. 36, 37. she was a Disciple, a Professor of the Gospel,
and a woman full of good works, the^e is a second exce^len^ woman* The third
that we shall name, for a woman that was excellent in gra^^, is Mary, John 1.
11, 20. she was first at the grave, and she was last at the grave; she stays
at the grave, weeping, and mourning, and crying, when Peter, that rare Apostle,
was gone; here was a woman rare for her affection unto Christ, her heart did
appear to be more tend being a woman, then the heart of Peter, a person of
another Sex: To name yet another, Romans 16. 12. there Paul salu^es two godly
Matrons, that labored in the Lord; but says he salute our beloved P^^si^,
that labored much in the Lord; that is more; Others they labored in the Lord,
and ^his was their commendation, but this beloved Pe^si^ she labored and
labored much in the Lord, therefore she is especially commended for it.

Reas. The reasons of this truth are the^e; The first is taken from the inward
working causes, and they a^e these two, Christ his spiritual providence, and
his peoples special diligence. First, Christ's spiritual providence in
dispensing the gift, for according to his gift so is not the truth of grace
only, but the measu^e of grace also, Ephesians. 4 every one has grace given him
according to the measure of the gift of Christ; and (as the Apostle speaks
unto the Corinthians,) The spirit of Christ distribute unto every one even as
he will: This blessed Head, though he gives unto all, yet notwithstanding he
gives unto all differently, to some more, and to some less, even as he
pleases; this for the inward means. So for the outward means, by his
spiritual providence he affords unto some, more and greater means, and a
longer time, to others less: He also does bless the means more unto some then
unto others.

Again, another inward working cause is the special diligence of Gods people
themselves, exciting and stirring up, and also exe^cising that grace which is
given them, applying the means unto their hearts, and bringing all home in
private, that was done in public, this is the reason why, though some do
virtuously, yet others do excel in grace, even their practice of Piety, and
their Christian diligence. And as thus ye have heard the working causes per se,
by themselves, so also per accidens, by accident, the Lord sometimes makes the
sense of sin a means to break the heart, and that sinner that has bin
exceeding ^^nful, that sinner afterward sometimes becomes a notable Saint; this
is the first general ground from the inward working causes.

The second general ground is from the final cause, and that is double, for
his owre g^ory, and his peoples good; for this double reason, though others do
virtuously, yet the Lord will have some to excel in grace: First, for his own
glory; thus in dangerous times, Elijah he must stop up, the three children they
must be willing to step into the Furnance, and D^nie into the Den, rather
then the Religion and Wo^ship of God shall ^e demolished and beaten down:
though therefore he have many Worthies, yet the Lord will have some special
Worthies, that not only shall have grace, but also much grace, for his honor.
Thus for his own glory th^ugh others do vertu^usly, yet the Lord will have some
to excel in grace. So also for the good of his people, to draw them on when
they are backward, to strengthen them when they are weak, and to encourage
them when they a^e faint-hearted. Why had Caleb and Joshu^ an excellent spirit
given them? why? to strengthen and incou^age others that were weak and
f^int-hearted: therefore when the people were discou^aged Up (say they) f^^r
not the people of the Land, ^^r their strength is de^arted f^o^ them, u^d they
shall be but as bread ^or us. This from the working (...), and also from the
final cause, you see reasons why though others do virtuously, yet the Lord
will have some to excel in grace.

But why is this their praise and glory? why, the reason of that is taken from
the definition of true honor; that is truly honorable, which the wisest and
the best do speak in the praise of; That is not honorable which every man
speaks well of, (though I am persuaded in respect of this Saint of God, who
ever he or she was that did speak against her, while the tongue was against
her, the conscience was for her,) but that is truly honorable which is
commended by the wisest, and by the best, by the wisest Prophets, and the wise
Apostles; For the wise Prophets when they come to commend persons, whom do they
speak well of? why, holy persons, holy souls, the Saints that do express the
power of grace in their lives: And for a wise Apostle, tell me, where Paul is
commending any but a Saint especially: nay, if an Angel must come from heaven
to speak in the praise and commendation of any man here on earth, it shall be
only in praise and commendation of a Saint; this is plain in the 9. of Daniel,
there Daniel is humbling of his soul, and breaking of his spirit for his own
sins, and the sins of the people; well, now an Angel is dispatced from
Heaven with a message to him, and he brings him this news, Oh Daniel thou art
a man greatly beloved; thus an Angel will rejoice to bring good tidings from
Heaven, for the praise and commendation of a Saint upon Earth. But what do I
speak either of Saints or Angels, even God himself does account their death to
be precious, he has a high opinion of them, he has high prizing thoughts of
them, as you have heard Here you see the reasons of this truth, why though many
do virtuously, yet some of Gods people do excel in grace, and this is their
glory and honor. We have a question before we come to Application, it is this;
Wherein appears this excellency in grace? I answer in short, It appears in
the matter that is done or suffered, and in the manner of doing it: First, in
the matter that is to be done, both in avoiding evil, and in doing good; For
the avoiding of evil (and all this you shall see in this godly soul that we
have discoursed of) She is a woman of an excellent spirit, that endeavors so
to avoid all sin, her special sin (which David calls his own iniquity, and
the special sins of the time; here is an admirable spirit indeed; and
certainly herein did this blessed child of God shine out most chearly, in that
she labored to avoid all finne, and her own sin, and the sins of these
days and times.

Again, for the doing of good, she that endeavors to perform all duties, and
especially her duties, and those duties that the world hates, and scorns, and
speaks ill off, certainly such a woman as this, is of an admirable spirit; yet
this also was the spirit of this Saint of God, in that she endeavored to do
all duties enjoined: and for those that concerned her in her place, she shined
out admirably in them; yea, she was constant and diligent in performing those
duties, which a wicked heart most hates, as redeeming of the time, walking
precisely, growing in grace, standing for God with zeal of heart, and the
like; this argues an excellency: And as thus in doing the will of God in his
command, so also for a patient subjecting unto the will of God in his
providence. Though the Saint of God had much experience in matter of
prosperity, yet she had had also great experience in matter of adversity, yet
notwithstanding was not that an admirable speech of her: I^ is the Lord, let
do what seems him good? had any d^ne this but the Lord, I should never have
borne it, but seeing the Lord has done it, why should I be impatient under it.
Nay, when her Child, her dear and only Son was dead, this was that which
stayed her spirit, that the Lord had done it.

And as thus for the matter, so also for the manner too, when this is done
sincerely, with constancy and continuance, truly that was a pretty time of
trial which she had for 30. years together, and for the measure thus, with
zeal, when this manner and measure is added to that matter, there must needs be
an excellency; together with this effect growth in grace, and this end, the
glory of God, when for for the matter it is thus universally, against all
sin, our sin, and the sins of the Time; unto all duties, our duties, and
the contemned duties of the Time. And thus in respect of suffering, patiently
submitting unto the will of God, and when for the manner, it is thus, sincerely
for truth, constantly for continuance, zealously for measure, having this
effect, growth in grace, and this end, the glory of God, this must needs be
excellent indeed. Thus you see wherein this excelleney appears.

Now the application will be threefold, unto the wicked, unto the godly, and
unto all. Is this a truth then first for wicked men, concerning themselves, and
concerning others? See sometimes this way, First, concerning themselves, what
do they think to be the glory and excellency of a man or woman? truly to have
those titles, places, riches, and means in the world, to have that esteem and
repute in the world, oh this is a rare thing indeed; this is the judgment of a
man of the world. But now concerning grace, and goodness, ask them whether
that be an excellent thing, yea or no, and they must must needs tell you (if
they will but confess the truth) that they think not so; if they should say
so, they must needs lie, because their whole practice is against it: certain^y,
if this be a truth which we have confirmed, these persons do err in their
judgments, in judging thus of the honor and glory of any person; nay, another
error is this, that although in their life time they show very little, nay,
indeed nothing at all in a godly way for which they should be commended, yet
notwithstanding when they come to dye, if a Minister be to preach for them, and
in preaching will not speak in their praise and commendation, they think him a
strange Preacher: why, you hear that we must only speak in the praise of such
as do excel in grace, these only we must commend; would thou be commended
when thou dyest? oh man live godly while thou live. Art thou a Drunkard? art
thou a Swearer? art thou a Sabbath-breaker? art thou an oppose^ of goodness
whilst thou live? and yet notwithstanding when thou come to dye, a
Minister of Christ must stand up in the place of God to praise and to commend
thee?

And as thus for an error in judgment, so also for an evil in heart, What is
that which wicked men do love? What is that which they affect? is it grace? is
it an excellency in graces though certainly a righteous man (as the text has
it) is more excellent then his neighbor, yet notwithstanding a wicked wretch
that is neighbor to a godly man, he thinks not so of him, nor answerably is
he affected toward him. What? do thou not think a godly man better then thy
self, (I speak to a wicked Wretch) nor art thou answerably affected toward
him? and the Lord says so directly, There righteou^ (...) is more excellent
then his neighbor. What? are persons more willing to be bad and vile, then to
be so accounted, and so called? yet how many are there that cannot endure to be
evil spoken of, who yet will do most vildly, most unworthily.

And concerning an excellency in grace, many a one is afraid to be too hot and
zealous for God, least that he shoul'd be scorned and derided by the wicked of
the world. I wish it might not be found true of many a one, that the praise,
account, and opinion of men has not too much byaced the matter, so that they
dare not strictly conform in all things to the will of God in their lives,
least they should hear ill of those of whom they would be commended. Thus men
do err in their judgments; they should prefer the testimony of their
consciences in pleasing the God of Heaven, before the praise and commendation
of all the men and women in the world. Where find we amongst these men that I
am speaking of, such a man as that Heathen was, of whom it was said, That
so^ner a man might pluck the Su^ne ou^ of his S^hear, then draw him asid^ out
of the course of Justice; Oh this great Idol in the world! this esteem and
repute! it draws persons aside wonderfully, an^ they think it ^ disgraceful
thing ^ometimes to do that which God commands: yea, add one thing more, when
men are ashamed and afraid to be too good, and yet they are neither ashamed nor
afraid to be too bad, It is an old saying, and it is a true one, Qui timet ^sse
bonus, non timet esse ma^us. If you see a man afraid to be good, that man
surely is not afraid to be evil.

And as for that singularity in goodness (which indeed is the excellency that
I am speaking of) how is that evil spoken of? many a man is afraid to be
thought such a one. It is the Observation of a learned godly Divine, Persons,
says he, would be singular in every thing, but in one thing, that is, in
gr^^e, in goodness, and in god^iness^, for wealth a man would be the richest
man in the Parish, nay for Pride, persons would be above any in the City; what?
do men affect ungularity this way in riches, and in pride, and yet when they
should come to be singular for goodness, they will be as their neighbors
then, they are afraid to be too good, yet they are no^ af^aid to be too proud;
this for the first use.

Use 2. This looks d^^ectly on Gods people, is this a truth, that though many
do virtuously, yet some do excel in grace? then for the people of God thus:
Are they stronger, or be they weaker, in respect of themselves, or in regard of
others, they may learn something from hence; for those that are stronger in the
highest form, let them first walk humbly: amongst the graces that make
persons to shine and to be rare; Humility is one: You know what the Apostle
speaks, Who made thee to differ? and the same Apostle writes a whole Chapter,
and all for this end, to take off those in the higher form from Pride, and
those in the lower form from Envy, in respect of those gifts of edification,
especially in 1 Cor. 12. And Paul himself a man excellent in grace, and full
of it, yet says he, in 1 Cor. 16. 10. By the grace of God I am that I am, for
my spiritual being I give it only unto Gods grace; and, I labored, says he
more abundantly then they all; How now Paul? do thou take any thing to thy
self? mark how he corrects himself immediately, Yet not I, but the gra^e o^ God
in me, says he; thus still he gives all to God, this is the first thing, That
they who are in the higher form should do, they should walk humbly.

Secondly, And as thus walk humbly, so also let them walk thankfully, oh give
thanks unto that God who has called you out of the world, and made you rare
and excellent in grace and goodness, had the Lord made another world, and
given you it all, it had bin nothing to this to give you grace, and that grace
wherein you do excel: be thankful therefore according to the sight and sense
of grace.

Let them walk also with comfort and cheerfulness; what is that that makes a
child of God go sadly and heavily? why this, a^^s he is afraid that all is not
well at home, but if the Lord come in, and show himself powerfully and sweetly
unto his soul, then as he should give the glory of it unto God, so he should
take the comfort of it unto himself.

Thirdly, let them walk wisely, yet let them also walk resolutely; I have
wondered at the wisdom and resolution of Daniel, he was a man so resolute for
God, that though he was a man of great employments, being ^et over 120.
Princes, who had rule over 127. Provinces, and though it is likely that his
enemies did vvatch him, to see it in any sort he had neglected the Kings
bu^^nesse, yet notwithstanding they could find no fault a^ all in him that way,
such was his vvisdome. And for his resolution, nay, says he, rather then I
will not pray to the God of Heaven, the Lions shall devour me; and before I
will defile my self with that meat, I will venture life and all.

But may some say, was not this resolution of Daniel an impeachment of his
vvisdome? no, I will show you three rare men, who though they were resolute
for God, yet you shall see also that they were very wise;

1. The first was this of Daniel, so wise a man was he, that the Proverb runs
of him, What? as wise as Daniel? He had the matter revealed unto him, which
was not revealed unto any other man in the World, yet notwithstanding, his
discretion and wisdom will not keep him in a moderate frame, but he is
resolute for his God. The second example is that of David, of whom the 200. men
spoke, that he was as wise as an Angel of God; yet notvvithstanding, his
vvisdome did not hinder his resolution for God; therefore when she had that
laid in his bosom, even Michol his wife checked him for his zeal, What, says
he to her, is this to be vile? I will be more vile yet. The third is Moses, he
must be as God to Aaron, there is his vvisdome, yet notvvithstanding make this
resolution, Heb. 11. 24. great things are offered unto him, great honors in
Egypt, great treasures in Egypt, and great pleasures in Egypt, threescore
temptations, and it is likely that they might cry secretly unto Moses, and say,
Stay Moses, stay a while Moses, be not such a fool Moses: what? vvilt thou
join with the people of God, and so lose all thy honor, all thy wealth, and
all thy pleasures? What now does this wise man Moses? farevvell all, says
Moset, farevvell all, I will rather suffer affl^ction with the people of God,
then I will enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Oh then what a
discretion is that which keeps men in such a moderate and luke-vvarm temper,
that it will not suffer them to be so resolute for God, as for his sake to be
vvilling to part even with all the things in the World, whereas you see here
the persons so resolute for God that they will venture life and all for him,
and yet they were very wise.

And thus also be resolute, so as neither being allured by the dearest friend,
nor affrighted by the bitterest foe: not being allured by the dearest friend
thus in the Acts of the Ap^stles you shall find, that when they h^a^d there
what Aga^us had prophesied, namely how Paul should be bound at Jerusalem, the
friends of Pau^ (and it is likely they were godly friends) they come unto him
weeping and crying, Oh Paul, go not unto Jerus^lem, what, will thou be bound
Paul? mark now how Paul answers them, Why stand ye weeping thus, and breaking
my heart? bound? says he, I am willing not only to be bound, bu^ to dye als^
at Jerus^^em, for the name of the Lord Jesus. A courteous word from a dear
friend draws much, yet notwithstanding, Paul there, when his friends sought by
weeping to draw him off from being so resolute for Christ, Oh says he, in so
doing you break my heart; yea, mark also the speech of that rare Marquess
Galeaceus by name, when great proffers ^ere made unto him, if he would do so
and so, Let him be a^cursed, says he, that thinks all the wealth in the world
worthy in any sort to be compared with one days fellowship with Jesus Christ.
Thus though we be allured by the dearest friends, yet we must be resolute for
God: nay, though also we be affrighted and scorned by the bitterest foe as
David, you heard, when his wife scoffed him for dancing before the Ark (where
she played the part of a bitter foe) What? ^aith he, am I vile for this, and I
will ^e more vile yet. So Lu^he^, great offers were made unto him, and great
thunderings were sent against hi^, yet he was ^esolute for God still. And says
Nehemi^h that great Reformer, Shall such a man as I fl^e? he would resolutely
stand for God. Thus you see what advice may be given unto those that do excel
in grace, they should walk humbly, walk thankfully, and cheerfully, walk
vvisely, yet also resolutely for God.

The second branch of the Use concerns those that are in the lower form, and
they are either such as have bin stronger, and now are weake^, having weakened
themselves; or else they are such as are weak. For the former; Let such be
deeply humbled, and that speedily, in calling to mind the mercies, the merits,
the time, and the corrections which have bin afforded unto them, and which
they have bin tried withal; let them look on all these things to humble their
souls before God. And 2. let such also double their diligence now. And for
those that are vveak, let them pray that what is promised by the Lord, Isaiah
40. two last verses, it may be accomplished in them; there the Lord speaking of
his people, says thus, They shall mount up with wings as Eag^es, they shall
walk and not faint, yea run and not be weary; thus then do thou, run to the
Lord and say, Ah Lord, I am ca^t behind in thy way, others do outstrip me,
others get before me, and thou have said Lord, that I shall walk, yea run, yea
fly, in running the vvays of thy Commandments, make good thy word unto thy
poor servant Lord; Thus fly to the throne of grace when thou art hindered and
cast behind in traveling toward heaven. Thus for those that have bin strong,
and have weakened themselves, and are vveak still. And as thus concerning
themselves, so also concerning others their fellow Saints and brethren, let
them thus do, comfo^t the sorrowful, support the feeble, and if any man be
disjoynted, joint him again, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. If any man be
overtaken in an infirmity, ye that are spiritual restore such a^ one in the
spirit of meekness. And as thus for their endeavor, so also for their
affection, let it be with them as it was with David, Psalm. 16. All my de^ights,
says he, are in the Saints upon earth, and such as do excel in virtue. So let
your special love and delight be to the excellent ones upon earth, even unto
those that do excel in virtue, and excel in grace. Should a man come unto
every man and unto every woman in this place, and ask them this question, what
kind of persons have the highest room in your souls? whom d^e you most highly
prize and most dearly love; this is a most sensible thing, and b^ing applied,
will come close unto the quick; is it a gracious man yea or no? is it an
excellent man in praise? yea or no? if it be not from God, I tell thee this day
that the Lord marks thee out this day for a bad man; what can be more plain
then that in 1 J^h. 3. 10. by this is manifested a chi^^ of God, and a child of
the Devil: a child of God is one that loves God, an^ ^^rk^s righteousness,
and he loves his brother, especially his brother in ^race, above hi^ b^^ther in
n^tu^e why ye must live with those whom ye love. Oh* this child of God that is
now dea^, she loved the Saints of God while she lived, and the^e^ore now she
lives with the Saints of God being dead; This loving of the br^th^e^ is not as
the cause why we are in a blessed state, for so Christ is; but as an evidence;
so indeed it is. This for the second Use.

Use 3. The third Use is to persuade good men, bad men, all men to come unto
God, and to get much from God, even to excel in grace, that so at death they
may be able to say in truth what our Savior said for pe^fection, Oh says he
in John 17. 1. Father I have finished the work which thou gav^st me to d^, now
therefore F^ther gl^rifie me; There was a work given him to do, and a work
given him by God, this work must be done, it was so; then he prays, Now
therefore Father glorify me. So the Lord has given thee and given me a work to
do, a work in general, a work in special, a work to do, a work to finish, and
it is the work which the Lord has given us; now then let it be thy endeavor
to finish it, and then when death comes thou may pray in truth, as thy
Savior did for perfection, Father, the work which thou gave me to do I
have done it, yea Father I have finished the work that thou gave me to do,
now therefore Father glorify me. And here now take both the means for this,
and also the Argument* to it. 1. For the means whereby we may come excel in
grace (for this is thy glory and this is thy commendation) they are these
three; 1. The Lord Christ the Fountain of grace. 2. The spirit of Christ, the
Author and Work^^ of grace, some special and particular graces of Gods spirit.
And 3. the right making use of the means of grace. For the first of these, to
wit, Christ the fountain of grace. Would a man have grace? yea would a man be
full of grace? why, the Text tells us, that there is a fullness of grace in
Christ, and of his fullness we must all receive grace, for grace: And would a
man indeed be excellent? let him labor in a special manner to be filled with
Gods Spirit; oh that evil jearing spirit that is in persons against Gods
Spirit! at any time at their best leisure, let them read what I would commend
unto them, and they shall find in the book of God, that when it is said, that
such a man did something that was excellent, then the text tells us, that the
Spirit of God was upon him, and the Spirit of God filled him. Sampson was a
strong man, yet when he did any admirable act of strength, you shall find that
the Spirit of God stirred him up. Elijah did great great things, but then the
Spirit of God came upon him; Elisha also did great things, but then the Spirit
of God came upon him. So in Luke 1. there it is said, that the Mother of John
was filled with the Holy Ghost, and the Father there was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and then he spoke unto admiration, ver. 37. and 34. So in the Acts of
the Apostles. in the 1. of the Acts, there the promise is made, that the
Apostles shall be filled with the Hol^ Ghost; and in Acts 2. what wonders do
they? but first they are filled with the Holy Ghost. So you shall find in Acts
3, 4, 5. Then the Apostles filled with the Holy Ghost, and, Then the Apostles
filled with the Holy Gh^st, did so and so. So in Acts 6. and in Acts 7 there is
Stephen full of the Holy Ghost, an admirable man, and Paul in Acts 11. being
full of the Holy Ghost set his eyes there on a wicked Wretch; who is that? why
a man that hindered the passage of the Gospel, that Bariesus that sought to
turn the Deputy from the Faith* Pau^ looking on him, he said, Oh full of all
subtilty and malice, thou child of the Devil, and enemy of all righteousness,
will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord? Thus you see
that when any, either admirable speech has bin spoken, or any admirable thing
has bin done, still persons have bin filled with the Holy Ghost. Thus labor
to partake of the fullness of Christ, and labor to be filled with the Holy
Ghost. And for the special grace of Gods Spirit as in the body of a man that
is strong and lusty, active, and able, some parts are to supply with spirits
for nourishments, and for growth, as the stomach, liver, and heart; so in the
soul of a child of God, there are certain graces, that are useful, for all
practices, such as are these (...) Faith, Hope, Love, and Fear, these are all
Mother graces h^ but above all, the first, ^o, the grace of Faith! this will
direct a man what he should d^, this will persuade a man why he should do, and
this will enable a man h^w he should d^, yea to work wonders: all the wonders
that have bin in the world, have bin w^nderfull by their Faith. And for Hope,
that is an admirable grace to make a man rare in grace, d^e not you remember
what is said in J^h. 1. 3. he that has this hope, what h^pe is that? why this
hope to see Christ, and t^ be like him; he that has this hope, what does he?
why he does purify himself even as Christ is pure, and that other Text also in
2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. Seeing these things m^st be dissolved, ^h what m^nner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation, and godliness: why what is
the matter? why, because the time shall come when the Heaven shall pass away
with a noise, the Element shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth with the
things that are therein shall be burnt up, and then we look for ^ew Heavens,
and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; we look for a new Heaven* and a
new earth, that is, we look for another place of habitation, even in heaven;
for properly there is no earth in heaven, but as these heavens, and this earth
is now the place of our habitation, so after death we look for another place
of habitation then this, even in heaven. Seeing then our hope is in heaven to
have another and a better, a more happy and blessed place of habitation, then
we have here below, now therefore what manner of persons ought we to be. For
Love, now Faith is an intaking grace, but when it would put it self out, for
the doing of any good, then it takes hold on Love Faith works by love, says
the Apostle, it works love, and it works by love, and this love of God (as the
Apostle speaks) will constrain a man to live unto God, yea to the utmost of his
desires and ind^avours; the love of grace will not make a man stint himself in
his de^^res after grace; no, as those persons that do love money would not only
have this hundred or that 1000. but many hundreds and many thousands,
especially, if they love it, for it self, then there is no end of their
desires after money: So let a man turn the st^eam of his desires, toward
grace, and then he will long after it unmeasurably, he will never stint his
desires after it, and say, Thus much grace will serve me, and so much grace
will content me. And as love thus will put a man on unto that is good, so
lastly, for Fear, it will pluck a man back from the doing of what is evil;
therefore that man there in the book of Nehem^ah was faithful above many,
because he feared God above many Lastly, the means of grace in the use and the
right use of them, when men hea^ Sermons, and then afterward preach them over
and over again to themselves, that they may have grace in their hearts, and
express grace in their lives. Oh this duty of meditation in bringi^g things
home unto the heart, is one of the ^peciall means to make the soul rich, in
expressing the power of godliness in life and conversation: this for the means
of it.

Now for the Arguments to it, and they are four, From God, the thing, our
selves, and others* Why should thou and I labor thus to be rare and excellent
in grace? why first because God bids us; if there were no more but this, it is
enough for thee and me that God bids us labor to be so: thus in 1 Pe^. 5 the
Lord is calling upon us to grow in grace, and in Mat. 5. last verse, Be ye
pe^f^ct as your (...) F^ther is perfect: what, can we be as perfect as God is?
fa^ be we from that conceit, but we should labor to be like unto God, for
there he is speaking, how God does good to the bad: nay God does good to his
enemies now let us b^ing our selves unto this rule of perfecti^n: Certainly if
a man does excel in virtue, and be rare in grace, in the world he shall have
enemies ^ost thou love them? can thou pray heartily for them? this is now to
be perfect, as thy heavenly ^^ther is perfect. Secondly, look on the thing it
self, it is in it self a most c^mmendable thing: you shall find that the Lord
does study to find out terms to to put upon his people that are rare in
grace, for their praise and comm^ndation, as Abraham, Moses, David, and Daniel;
oh for Daniel the Lord comes again and again to him to tell him, Oh Daniel a
man of desires, a man greatly beloved? the heart of God is so taken with him,
that herepeats it again. O^ Daniel, a man greatly beloved; that is a rare
expression of the Holy Ghost, for the praise and commendation of such a man as
does excel in grace. Thirdly, look on ou^ selves, in regard of our own persons
in heart, and in regard of life. 1. For our hearts, to have the love of God
toward a man, and the blessing of God in a special manner upon the spirit of
a man, oh this is an admirable thing indeed; to be enriched in the world, oh
we say, this is an excellent thing, and how will men ^i^e early, and go to bed
late, and all for what? why for this, that the Lord may b^e^se them with a rich
state in the world. But, oh the blessing of God on the s^ule of a man, in
making a man ^ich in grace, this is an excellent thing indeed, one d^am of
grace is worth all the world; now the Lord will enrich those in grace that do
use well the means of grace. Take heed how you he^^, says Christ, for loo^ in
what manner of he^ring you hear, and with what me^sure of diligen^e after
hearing you use, s^ God will measure out again to you. Thus in regard of a man's
heart within 2. In regard of a man's life without, truly our life is but sho^t,
we have a great de^l of work to do, and but little time, therefore says the
wisem^n, Eccles. 9. What soever thou find to do, do it with all thy might,
says he; why so? why, for as the time is short, so after death there is no
working then; the time of this life is a working time, after death is the
receiving of wages, though a wicked man should do never so much in hell, yet
that could not any way comfort him* but what he has done in the body, look to
that mainly. And as thus for ou^ selves, so lastly for others, and that both for
them, and also from them; For them, do^t ^hou wish well to thy Country? do
thou wish well to Eng^and? do thou wish well to this City of Yor^e, to the
Parish and the Family where thou live^t? oh then labor for this excel^ent
state, if thou d^e excel in grace, thou art the person that must prevail with
God, for wife, for child, for Church, for state, for County, for ^ingdom, and
all, if there be any hope to prevail with God in mercy, his excellent ones must
do it* but when there is no hope, then says the Lord, Though Noah, Daniel and
Jo^, should all join together in prayer, I would not hear them implying thus
much, That then the case is desperate, when such excellent ones cannot prevail.
And as thus for others, so also from others; Would thou receive strength and
encouragement from persons in the worst times? why then it must be from the
Saints that d^ excel in grace In evil and dangerous times, C^le^ and J^shu^h
who were rare Saints, Elyah a rare Saint, and D^niel a rare Saint, they must
step up, that so from them, Gods people being discouraged, and distressed,
might receive comfort and encouragement. And here now, Her whom in the
beginning I set out unto you by way of Commendation, I now again set before you
as a pattern for the imitati^n.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY UPON The much lamented Death, of that virtuous Lady, and
unparalled Matron, ELIZABETH HOYLE, LATE Wife to the Worshipful Thomas Hoyle
Alderman of the City of York, who (surprised with an Ap^plexie at her private
Devotion^) departed this lif^, December. 9. 1639.

Come my people enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee,
hide thy self for a moment, until the indignation be overpast.

For behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the
Earth for their iniquity. Esaias 26. 20, 21.

woodcut of two pots of flowers

YORK: Prrinted by Tho: Broad, dwelling in Stone-gate over against the Sta^re.

To the Worshipful his honored Friend, M. Tho: Di^kinson, Alderman of the
City of York, and one of the Standing-Committee there, and Treasuret-Generall
of the Army for the City and County, Health and Happiness.
SIR,
IN regard of your near alliance to the Subject, and dear acquaintance with the
Author of this Sermon, you may challenge of right the Dedication of these
Lines: And indeed they were long since yours, being immediately upon her death
presented to your self, and your virtuous Consort her Daughter; so you are in
every respect worthy of them, only my fear is they are unworthy of you. Yet let
them not now in your ascensions be unwelcome to you, seeing when the distance
was not so great I thought you right welcome to them.

Now both that Elogie in the foregoing Funeral Sermon, and those due
expressions in this ensuing Funeral Elegy, want not the best example for
their warrant. The Royal Prophet David wept and mourned over A^mer, and by his
pathetike Oration melted all the people into tears; nay they wept a second
time; as how could they contain, when they heard the moving words of a
lamenting Prophet, and saw the swollen eyes of a tenderhearted King? Part of
his Oration was, Know you not that there is a Prince and a great man this day
fallen in Israe^? so the day of this Ladies Fu^erall there fell a Matron, and
though not so great, yet (which is much better) a good woman and Mother in
Israel. So for my Elegi^, that sweet singer of Israel is also my Pattern, for
he lamented with the like, yet far surpassing Lamentation over Saul and
Jonathan, part whereof I ^ere insert, as I long ago translated it,

Weep, ye Isacian Daughters, weep
Over Saul, who did so bravely ^eepe,
And cloth you all in Skarlet trim,
And in all pleasures made you swim.
'Twas he about your Robes did f^uld
Those m^ss^e Cbains of beaten Gold,
Yet all these were but glistring trifles, or if treasures, yet only Treasure
on earth, subject to Moaths, Rust, and Theeve*s, but the adorning of this
Matron was not in the plaiting of the hair, or of wearing of gold, or putting
on of Apparel, but in the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of 1 Pet. 4. 5.
a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price: and in
this she surmounted all the Daughters of your City, as also in many golden
rules, and in a shining example. Nor was she only the wife of that Merchant,
who is known in the Gates when he sits among the Elde^s of the People, Prove.
ult. 23. but she her self also was that Merchant who considered a field and
bought it, even that field with hidden Treasure, M^t. 13. 44. for which (as the
Merchant man for the Pearl, ver. 36) she sold al^ that she had to purchase.
Indeed, the Kingdom of Heaven was her Treasure and her Pearl, which he^ body
has ^ill in hope, her soul in possession, and both shortly shall enjoy in
perfect frui^ion. If we love her, and would be with her, let our care be to go
to her, seeing she shall not return to us. In the mean time our tears for her
may be wiped from our eyes, since all tears are wiped from hers: that which is
required of us, is, our repenting for sin, not lamenting for her, not our
mou^nfull exgressions, but our cheerful imita^ion. The Epigrammatist did thus
revive his old friend Pris^us, upon the death of Saloninus;

Sed defi^re, nef^s: number qui te Pris^e, reliquit,
Vivit, qua veluit vivere p^rte m^^is.
'Twere sin to weep: since he for whom you grieve, Mart. Epig.

Lives in that part wherein he wished to ^ive.
She is now where she long longed to be; her desire was to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ; with whom we leave her.

Thus it becomes us to set forth the virtue and praises of her, who set forth
the praises and virtues of him, who has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light. I^ is observeable in that Text, that the word t^anslated
Praises, s^gnifieth also Virtues (as in the margin) which s^ewes, that only
Virtue is Pr^ise-wo^thy; so the royal Preacher, The woman that fears the
Lord she shall be praised, not her favor for that is deceitful, not her
beauty, for that is vanity, but her fear is commended, and her ve^tue highly
prized, ver. 10. Especially, if she excel in virtue, Psalm. 16. 3. as the
righteous do, The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12. 36.
and a man of understanding is of an excellent Spirit, 17. 27. by which we
understand, the Fear of God, for this is called that good Understanding, Psalm.
3. ult. the praise whereof endures for ever. And this grave and understanding
Matron is that Righteous one, that Mulier strennua, that wise and virtuous
woman, which the wise man so much enquireth after, and having found advances
her above all her fellows. Many Daughters have done ve tuously but thou
surmountest them all: thus it pleases him who has called the Poor of this
world to be rich in Faith, to make the weaker vessels strong in Faith; and
Daughters of Abrah^m, whose Daughters they are as long as they do well, do
virtuously, especially, if they excel in thus doing: and indeed this doing
virtuously is that Practical, not Speculative beauty on which we should bestow
all our amorous and imbellishing phrases, in the highest strains and
expressions of commendation and glory. Excelling virtues shall have extolling
praise. Now for her, such were her perfections that I know not whether she more
illuster her Sex, by communicating her immanent graces unto others, or obscure
it, (as the greater light the less) by her eminent brightness out-shining
others; so that I hope it were no disparagement to Greatness though I should
apply that verse. which was sung of the Lady El^ct^esse, to this Elect Lady of
the same name,

Tell me if she was not d^sign'd,
The Eclipse and Glory of Her Kind.
Thus we ought, in the best manner we ^an, to honor them that fear the Lord,
but above all to honor him who has put this fear into our hearts, that we
may not depart from him: so ceasing further to praise her, let us never cease
to praise God for her, and pray unto him for our selves, that we may be
foll^wers of her, even as she was of Christ. Now if there be any of her
sisters that do virtuously, yet not so virtuously, think much that we have bin
so liberal in her commendations, let them know, that first we only do her
right; and secondly, that we have done them no wrong; for the commendations of
one is not the disparagement, but rather should be the in^ouragement of
another; and to them we only say, Go and do likewi^e. Thus having commended
her, I now commend you and yours to the protection of the Almighty, desi^ing
you to patronize, and kindly to accept of the weak endeavors of

Jan. 20: 1644 Your truly affectionate Friend to serve yo^ in Christ. J. F.

A Prosopopeia to Her.
MAdam, you strangely left your widowed Friends;
F^r so the ignorant stranger apprehends,
Who knew you not: else 'twere no wonder, why
She should dye once, that did so daily dye,
You daily mortified your very bre^th,
Which Dying-life, prevents that ^iving Death.
When to your wonted room you did repair
You truly powered out your S^ule in prayer.
It Is strange that in your passing was no noise
When the remotest Heavens did he^r your voice.
I^ seems that winged prayer your spirit did hear
Amongst the Cherubins, and they staid it there,
L^ft us your ashes. Blessed that servant, whom
The Lord so doing finds when he sh^^l come.
How sweetly did she steal eternity!
It Is credible, you thus desired to dye.
Blessed soul! what haste the impatient Angels made
To fetch thee hence away! they seemed t'invade
Thy crazy Tent, thee to immortalize
Envying Mortality so rich a prize.
The prize was great; nor the surprizall strange,
For still you long*d after this happy ch^nge,
Were sick of love, and Swan-like did divine
Your death; and fainting sung, Stay me with Wine
And comfort me with Apples: far^e above
The love of Wine, or Jonathan, was thy Love.
Or your expiring C^nticle might be this,
My Welbeloved's Mine, as I am His.
Or this, Thou chears me with thy staff and rod.
Or this, Make no long tarrying O my God.
Or with the Heavenly Bride might dying pray,
So come Lord Jesu, quickly come away.
Madame, w^t^ which of these did you expire
When you went up in Chariots of fi^e,
And flaming Raptures, which Psyram*d-wise
S^il^ tower and wind ^hem^elve within the s^ies.
Thus having prai*d, straightway about you sprung
A flight of Cherub^, in whose arms you sung
A triumph Psalm, went up, and now are set
With your sweet Savior in Mount Olivet.
If from that Christ all Mount you can behold
This darkesome Vale of tears, and duskie mould,
And see from thence your mourners swolle^ eyes,
Wringing of hands, ^^d he^r their bitter cries,
Pity and wonder too, Pity our fears;
W^nder to see your C^ffi^ float in tears.
But greater wonder twere to imitate
Your gracious ife: And our own piteous state
Calls for a stre^ming and un ess^nt tear
Tom the our bed to swim, and not your B^ere.
Your S^viour bids, and you, Weep not for me,
Weep for your selves, and your own misery.
Sure y^u f^res^w some dismal gloomy day
H^stning, which made you make such have away.
I deed; and did you see the Flying Roll
Sent with black execrations, against that soul
That enters league with death, applaudeth Hell,
And sets Heaven at d^st^nce, and d^^^s sw^ll
With word* against the A^m^^h^y: (f^r there a^e
Such Gian^-Atheists who the Sun^e outst^re)
Did these ^ffrigh^ you hence? make you retire,
Astrea-li^e, from us, and so desire
W^^h ^^eed to be d^ss^lv'd? so s^one be gone,
And hide your self in Heavens Pavi^ion?
It seems that w^^g^d B^o^ was large, and spread
S^ far, that it w^u^d h^ve i^^e ^ped
In one just d^^m^, and comm^n judgment b^th
Clean and unc^ean, that swears, or fears an oath.
Sure you perceived by some thick pitchy cloud
A storm a coming, so your self did shroud
Under the wings of prayer; yet none can say
You (coward-like) affrighted run away.
But staid and waited in your private room
Till you were taken from the ill to come,
And snatch*d with lingering Lot. When such ^ name
Is 'ent away, fear in app^o^chin^ fl^^e.
How many anxious mind, which now survive
Your ch^ste unspotted soul^, are scorcht alive
With fiery Serpents, Worms that never dye,
Which knawing in their ^o^scious bosoms, lie!
Whose ak^ng hearts are pined with discontent,
Fear^ng death, Doom-day, or P^r^iame^t.
Whil^^ you with th'He^ven^y Courtiers Feast, and pass
Your time in aneternall Ch^^stenm^sse.
L^^d we your Ho^y Life, that so we may
With you, keep ev^r^^sting Holy Day.
Mirror of Virtue! still my thinks you live;
Your h^nd I see it open still to give:
Your lips I see them with an orient smile
Enchear the good, your tongue rebuke the vile:
I see you frowning brow, untaught to soo^h
The obstinate, ^t his relenting smooth.
Your awful mi^dnesse both your friends did move,
And enemies, with reverence and with love.
At pride how like an Empress would you storm!
But the humble found you humbler then a Worm.
Your feet have made two path-wayes from your door,
The One to the Temple, the other to the Poor.
But now both ways, and Poor, and Temple mourn,
Th'^hurch wants Her frequen^ Guest, thought has your urn.
The rich m^ss^ their de^r friends, friends bid adieu
To riches and such comforts missing you.
The painful Prophets want their Patroness
Whom your abounding table often did bless,
And they your table; scarce could I d^^ine
Whether your gu^sts or you were more ^ivine.
H^w ^^p^uous was your board! yet how discreet!
The ^^reet misses a f^mily, York a street:
Old Age wants his companion; younger years
Their Counselor, and Infants drink their tears
For lack of your refreshings. Every one
Old, Young, Poor, VV^althy, all their loss bemoan.
Th'hungry want their Purveyor, and the Feast,
Missing its moderator, seems unblest.
And's even at Christmas like a Funeral;
Whiles you (Angel-like) in the Starry Hall
Keep a perpetual Banquet in those rooms
Of Cristall, where no tear or sorrow comes.
We feed on both, unpleasing to the sense,
O! had we your victorious patience,
Stayed Wisdom, Faith, and Hope, then we might b^^^e*
Mountains of trouble with undanted cheer.
You bore twelve children (if I do not err)
And soon eleven of them you did interre.
Nay when your Isaac (struck with that disease
Which plowes up flesh and blood, and there sowes Pease)
And your sweet Granchild by your only Daughter
Were rent from you, this multiplied slaughter
You bore with constancy unmovable,
Not the least murmurcheard, but all was well,
God's only wise, and his correction mild,
My Fathers Will is dearer than my Child,
And w^^ not all your patience well bestowed? 2 Cor. 4.

When for your short afflictions e^sie load,
You challenge now a weight of glorious Joys
Great as Eternity, and yet never cloyes.
Happy exchange! to compass Heaven for earth,
Solid and lasting j^yes, for fainting mirth;
Kingdoms for Cities, Ever for a Breath.
And th'great Jerusalem for N^z^reth.
Only your widowed Husband's left bebind,
Thinks on your absen^e with a bleeding mind;
May your unwearied spirit of patienee b^
Doubled on him, to bear his misery;
For d^uble cause of grief does him pursue,
He missetb both bis children de^^, and you*
More then ten children to him. Heavy cross!
No Merchant ere sustained so great a loss.
Next your sweet Daughter, and her Husband dear,
True mourners, wait upon your Sable Biere,
With thousands more. How soon did you bereave
Our Joys! you left your friends, yet took no leave.
So The Holy Child of Nazareth slunck away. Luke 2.

From his perplexed Parents: every day
They seek and sigh, and wonder where he is gone,
The third day (like his Resurrection)
Restores him found. But they amazed begin
To check his absence: Son, where have you bin?
Our heart aches for you. Sharply then their Son,
What? must my Fathers business be undone?
That Fathers children nothtng mis-befalls,
He still has business for them when he calls.
And for what business were you summoned hence?
To Adore the Throne with prostr^te Reverence: Rev. 5.

To hear the Lamb with his own mouth reveal
The mystic Oracles of the ^eaven-fold Seal.
To l^arn at once and in perf^ction know, 1 Cor. 13.

The truth of All men argue of below.
To read your name writ in the White-stone gemme, Re. 2. 17. Psa. 8. 5. Rev. 8.
3.

And to receive the Royal Diadem.
To pray at th*golden Altar, and to sing
New songs of triumph to the immortal King.
The hidden Manna* and the Fruit to eat Rev. 2. 7.

Of life, in the midst of Gods own Eden set.
Embroidered stoles of Ophir-gold to wear, Psa. 45. Rev. 7. 9.

And in your hands victorious Palms to bear:
To parlie, and to be familiar
With Saints and Seraphins, and the morning star. Re. 2. 28.

Here you did bear and sing, discourse and pray,
(Much more'^ not done above,) and in this way
You walk'^ to Heaven; where glorious now you see
Fullness of j^y in Christ's sweet Majesty.
Many there be, who careless live, and spend.
Their days in ignorance, and still depend
On longer time for mercy, then decay,
And in some lingering sickness melt away.
Like the foul candle in the socket spent,
Damping the room with an unwholesome sent.
After some blazes does at last consume,
And dye, and vanish in a noisome fume.
So these vain Flashes do: still judging wrong,
Themselves dye suddenly though they languish long
To dye well, yet live ill, is a vain strife:
Sweet Death ^ere followed an unsavory Life.
But you, after your conversation bright
Had shined long time amongst us, had your light
At once put out with an Extinguisher,
The blasting Apopl^xie did interre
Your brain in earthen mists, which over-cast,
And through obstructions, bind the senses fast.
Here Art is senseless too: yet are we sure
The resurrection this Disease can cure.
This you foresaw in your last morning fligh^
Before the evening of your fatall^ Night,
For rising from your Bed, these words you gave,
How sweet will be our rising from the grave.
Then from your closet to the Church you hyed
Where your own happiness you heard prophesied,
The Funeral text was this, When a Saint dies.
How precious is his death in the Lords eyes. Psa. 116.

Whence you, as Christ from Jordan, straight return,
Or like that mournful Pair, whose heart did burn
In Emaus way: thus fired wi^h Heav^nly flame
You fully were possessed with your own Elizabeth, i. e fullness of God.
Name,
And (thus inlivened) with your friends at table
Your heart so cheerful was, so comfortable,
So pleasant was your vein, that you correct
Your self, and smiling, s^id to this effect.
Well, Husband, here I have not long to bide
Why Love? says he, I hope a longer Tide
We may. Nay, you reply, that may not be
It Is little known to you, wha^s know^ to me.
Then straight the sacred Temple did you call,
Invited to a second Funeral:
Where (present) I observed your sparkling eye^
Through th'incense of your evening Sacrifice;
That done, to your last Supper you retire,
Thence to your Agony. This was the gire
And circuit of your last and well spent day,
The Model of your life and Heavenly Way.
Then Israel-like, you strive to your last breath:
He took his Maime in Prayer, and you that death
By which you live. Such blessed victories
Are soonest got by wreast^ing on our knees.
You conquered death, and your sweet end begins
More happy years, then all the world has s^nn^s.
Religious Soul, could you devise a way,
Your last sweet Raptures hither to convey,
The Pattern of your dying Prayer would be
Thrice recompense for my course Elegy.
Yet my blessed memory shall your Acts enshrine,
And Virtues, and to virtue me incline.
Let them whom fears of sudden Death beset,
Still wear about them this tried Amulet.
Agracious heart, and life's the surest guard,
He never dyed suddenly that dyed prepared.
C^ll't not a sudden or untimely Doom,
Which did both welcome and expected come.
Happy, thrice happy, who departs hence,
With your sweet Name, and spotless Conscience.
Cum mihi supremos Lachesis perneverit annos, Non aliter cineres mando jacere
meos.
FINIS.

