THE COPY Of a certain Large Act [Obligatory] OF YONKER LOVIS de Bills, Lord of
Koppensdamme, Bonen, etc. Touching the Skill of a better way of ANATOMY of MAN'S
BODY. Printed [in low Dutch] at Rotterdam, in the Printing House of John
Naeranus a Bookseller, at the sign of the Book-binder in the street called Het
Steiger.

LONDON, 1659.

To my much esteemed Friend Samuel Hartlib the Elder, Esquire
SIR,
YOur desires were wont to tend so much to the Public good, that your Virtuosi
would think I wanted Philanthropy as well as Civility, if I should refuse to
comply with such as your Letter brings me. I send you therefore the
Propositions of Monsieur de Bills Englished out of low Dutch, at my request, by
such a Person as you will readily think can translate very well, though he can
better write things worthy to be translated; when I shall have told you that
his name is Mr. Pell. The design avowed to be aimed at in the Propositions, and
much more the matter of Fact, without which they might appear extravagant,
made the Print (I confess) very welcome to me. For though in some Papers I
formerly told you of, I had mentioned diverse things I had intended to try, and
some that I had already observed, in order to the preservation of Animal
substances, and the making some of them more durable Subjects for the Anatomist
to deal with: yet besides that most of the ways I proposed to my self were as
yet little more then bare Designs, I never aimed at, (and scarce so much as
hoped for,) such strange things as in this Paper the ingenuous Publisher of it
tells us he has already actually performed. And therefore I suppose that it
will not be unwelcome to you, if not having had the opportunity to see the
effect of this Gentleman's skill my self, and being sufficiently indisposed to
believe or affirm any strange thing that I have not seen; I annex the other
Paper you lately desired of me. I mean that wherein the Proposers Dutch print
came inclos*d to me from the Hague. For besides that it contains something of
Particular; it comes from a French Gentleman whose Testimony may well be
considerable in matters of this nature; for he is one of that select Society of
Parisian Philosophers of which You and I have sometimes discoursed, and you
will find a celebrating mention made of him in the life of Gassendus, (whose
Friend and Disciple he was.) And his curiosity leading him to imitate diverse of
the old Greek Philosophers, who travailed through many Countries only to enrich
themselves with what knowledge they could meet with in them, he went purposely
to visit Monsieur de Bills, soon after he had left England; which he lately
traversed, and in his passage honored me with several of his visits. I am so
willing that You should be as wary as I in admitting unlikely things into your
belief, that in putting the French I received into English, I have been
(purposely to avoid straining his expressions) more careful to do right to his
Words then to his Style. And as for those things that appear to have been left
out by me, they are some of them such matters as concern not our Proposer and
others but such Complements as require rather my Blushes then my Translating.
The consent you desire of me to publish the Proposalls in our Language I must
not refuse you. For it is the least we owe to a Person that has endeavored to
oblige mankind, and to those that are willing to encourage such endeavors, by
acquainting the ingenuous here with his Propositions, to strive to procure him
Subscribers, and to afford them the opportunity of encouraging and assisting so
useful a Work as This (supposing the truth of the Historical part of the Paper)
is like to prove. It may also be hoped that the noise of such Discoveries
abroad will rouse up our ingenuous Men at home, and excite them to endeavor to
emulate if not surpass them: and to keep up that reputation for Anatomical
discoveries and skill that this Nation has of late deservedly enjoyed. Nor
will it be amiss by the same means to give as many of those in Authority as may
happen to read what the States of Holland have done in favor of a Stranger,
occasion to take notice what countenance neighboring Magistrates, that are not
thought unpolitick neither, are forward to give to those designs that aim at
the advancement of Real Learning. Which may perhaps invite those that can do
it, to give encouragement to the English Wits; which I am groundedly confident
want nothing but encouragement, to perform things in this kind that would
really advantage the public, as well as highly gratify such persons as Mr.
Hartlib and his

Affectionate humble Servant R. B.
October. the 13. 1659.
The Copy of a certain large Act of Yonker L. de Bills, Lord of Koppensdam,
Bonen, etc. Touching the skill of a better way of Anatomy of man's Body.
THis day being the 26. day of May, 1659. before the Witnesses here-under
named; and me Leonard Van Zyl, a Public Notary admitted by the Court of
Holland, and residing in Rotterdam, there appeared Yonker Louiis de Bills, Lord
of Koppensdamme, Bonen, etc. Bailliu of the City and Territory of Aardenburg.
And he declared, as he also does further declare uprightly by this Writing,
that, although he, the said Gentleman, having given, to the famous University
of Leiden, diverse Anatomical pieces of his own work, had resolved to trouble
himself no more with Anatomy, and accordingly had done nothing in it for,
fourteen years together; Yet he has now taken up the contrary resolution,
because of the earnest entreaties of diverse famous, learned and judicious men
both of this Country and of foreign parts; as also because of that
favorable permission and Granut, whereby the High-Mighty Lords, the States
General of the United Netherlands have given him power to take all the Bodies
of those that shall be executed by the hand of justice, whether Military or
Civil, as also of those strangers that shall die in the Hospitals, in ill parts
belonging to the said States General; and to dissect the said Carkases in such
manner as himself shall think good for the satisfying his own Curiosity, and
the promoting of Knowledge for the Common good. Being also further encouraged
by the convenient place for an Anatomical Theater in that house which was
lately the Court of the English Merchants in this City; which house the
Honorable Lords the Governors of Rotterdam have favorably granted him to
that end, He, the said Gentleman, has now at last resolved and begun to set up
a merely new Anatomy of the body of Man, by many dead Bodies dissected and
embalmed in an extraordinary manner, in which bodies shall be shown all the
Veins, Arteries, Sinews and Fibers severed from one another, but remaining
fast, both where they first arise, and where they end. Also the Heart, Liver,
Lungs, and Entrals, Eyes and Brains shall remain manifest in the said Bodies;
and shall be so ordered that Lectures may be made upon them, as well in Summer
as VVinter, with discovery and demonstration of mistakes both of Ancient and
Modern Anatomists, who in their dissections are hindered, by the spilling of
blood, from seeing to the bottom of their work: But these new Anatomies shall
be completed without spilling any blood at all. In these the Anatomy-Reader
shall be able to show the true ground of the Circulation of the blood, first
found out by Doctor Hervey; as also to give further demonstration to that
doctrine, by causing the Veins to swell, so that they shall stand full of
blood, which can hardly be seen otherwise. By which means men may see all the
valvas venarum and the manner of the opening and and shutting of all those
trap-doors within the Veins; some of which doors are Semilunular, some of
other shapes; as may be seen described in a little Book published [in Dutch] by
the aforesaid Undertaker, bearing this title The true use of the Gallbladder,
etc. Whereby may be understood the office of that Passage commonly called
Ductus Chyliferus with its branches and adjoined little Pipes: As also how the
Chylils comes to the Heart and its little bag; how the tears come into the
Eyes; how the spittle comes into the mouth, how the Watercourses come to the
Liver, and how the whole Body is moistened.

But because the foresaid Undertaker plainly sees it impossible to complete so
great and costly a work as this, at his own charge, it having cost him already
some thousands of Pounds Flemish; and he having always refused all offers of
those that would oblige him to serve any other Sovereign, Therefore, By these
presents he makes known this his intention to all those who regard the good of
Mankind, and this useful knowledge: And he invites them to be helpful to his
design, whereto diverse famous learned men have persuaded him; namely, To
provide almost fifty Bodies differently dissected and embalmed; according to
which, pictures may be drawn and engraven in Copper, and Books may be written.
More-over, this his new manner of dissecting and embalming he promises to
reveal to every one of those who shall contribute a small sum, which by many
hands may quickly arise to the desired sum of twenty thousand pounds Cursiv.
for so much will be necessary, considering that so many Bodies, before they be
Anatomized and Embalmed as is desired, will stand him in some thousands of
Guldens, besides other expenses, which he has already been at, and more he
must yet be at.

Whosoever, therefore, desires the aforesaid skill or the furtherance of it,
let him bring or send his name with the sum of five and twenty Carolus
Guldens at one payment (He that desires to hasten this design, may send in as
much more as he pleases) to the foresaid Undertaker, who will bind himself to
every one of those Contributors by a Solemn Obligation under his Hand and Seal,
to satisfy every one of them, by a complete revealing of his skill in a
Writing subscribed by the said Undertaker, and delivered to each of them within
a year and an half after the first of July 1659. And if any of the
Contributors, dwelling in foreign Countries, shall conceive the said Writing
not clear enough to give them full Knowledge of the said skill, they may then
either come themselves to him or send some Countryman of theirs to Rotterdam
to be present at his dissections, where the said Undertaker will show them the
true manner of working; as also to all those Contributors that dwell in these
Countries, if they desire to see the way of handling, that they may so much the
better perceive and understand the way, which he by long Experience and much
practice has found out for the dissecting of a whole Body without spilling any
blood, and for the Embalming it for whole Ages in such manner as aforesaid: So
that the said Contributors from that time ^^rward shall be able to do all those
things as well as he, the said Undertaker, can do them, namely to dissect and
embalme a whole Body with its blood, bowels, brains, and whatsoever is in it,
without being subject to any putrefaction in the least.

And if any man be curious to see beforehand some Effects of these Promises, he
may come to the Undertaker at Rotterdam; and giving one Reiks Daler, he shall
see four pieces of his Work, which shall be there showed unto him before he
lays down the foresaid twenty five Guldens. Those Pieces are four Anatomized
humane Bodies thus prepared and Embalmed, but dissected each of them in a
different manner, wherein any man according to his desire, may view the Veins,
Arteries, Sinews, Membranes and Fibers in their order.

But, if at the end of the eighteen months abovesaid, the abovesaid sum
should not be made up, and so his foresaid design be hindered; He then
promises, to all and every one of those that brought or sent him money, upon
condition that he should teach them his skill, that upon their returns of his
Obligations, He will readily repay their five and twenty Guldens, (or more, to
those that contributed more) detaining no part of their money, save the
Reiks-Daler which they gave for the sight of the aforesaid four Anatomized
Bodies, toward the charges which he has already been at, or must yet lay out,
to satisfy the Curiosity of those that shall come to view his foresaid pieces.
And that all may be done without fraud or deceit, the said Gentleman, the
Undertaker, shall by his delivered Obligation bind his Person and goods both
movable and unmovable, to each of the Contributors, either to teach them his
skill, or to restore their money.

If this Undertaker come to dye before the said term be expired, then shall
his Wife be bound, by the same Obligation, either to deliver every man his five
and twenty Guldens (or more, to those that contributed more) or else to give
every such Contributor a Copy of the Description of the said skill; in which
Description he the said Undertaker protests seriously that he has expressed
his uttermost Knowledge of his skill, so as may content any Learner. A fair
Copy of this Description showed to me the Notary, and put up in a Latton Box,
and sealed with the Seal of my Notaries Office, shall be kept by the Wife of
the said Undertaker.

Of all which above-written Declarations, the aforesaid Gentleman, the
Undertaker, required me the Notary to make an Act in due form.

Thus done in Rotterdam, in the presence of Justus Riikwaart and Laurence
Jordaan, both Doctors of Physic, entreated to come on purpose to be Witnesses
of this Writing.

Underneath stood Quod Attestor and was signed below L. van Ziil, Notar. Publ.
Under the printed Copy was written thus, It agrees with the Original Act,
dated and subscribed as above L. van. Ziil, Notar. Publ.
The Dutch coin abovementioned, reduced to English money. 20. thousand pounds
Flemish 12. thousand pounds sterling. 25. Carolus Guldens 50 shillings English.
1. Reiks-Daler 4. shillings, 6. pence.



The forementioned Translation of the French Gentleman's LETTER
I Went into Zealand, partly to see there Monsieur de Bills; but being informed
at Middelburg that the Lords States had invited him to Roterdam, to erect there
his Anatomicall Theater; I presently resorted thi^ther, and made a weeks stay
there, to visit him. I shall not tell Y^^ Sir that I entertained him concerning
You, and that, etc. -- I shall content my self to acqua^^^ You, that I desired
him to give me the enclosed Print to send You that You might know what he is
upon -- His Two secrets are that of Embalming, and the Opening of dead Body's
without spilling of Blood, which he pretends to teach those only that shall
have contributed to What this amounts to in English money the Print will inform
you.
the sum of sixscore thousand pound, when it shall have been made up. If his
Experiments be true he revives the Title of the Liver to Sanguification, and
believes himself to have discovered the original of Tears, and Spittle, of the
Serosity's contained in the Pericardium, and the passage of those which serve
for the making of Urine, without traversing (...) Heart. He holds forth also
many other Propositions, very ingenious, if the things be such as he delivers.
I have seen his four Embalmed Bodies, which are extremely fine; and diverse
smaller parts of the body by themselves. One of those is embalmed with all the
Excrements in the Guts, and a little Faetus (that he has) is embalmed whole.
--

Postscript.
An abortive Faetus so preserved together with an intimation of the way by
which it is preserved I have seen and mentioned in the Papers I lately told
you off.



A Extract of a LETTER written by the Learned Dr. Horn Public Professor of
History in the University of Leyden to S. H.
BIllii Anatomia sane admiratione dignissima est: eam vobis dudum innotuisse
non dubitabam. Tria Corpora jam olim spectaculo praeparaverat, quae etiamnum
visuntur. Corpora quasi in Lapideam durittem congelat: ita sine sanguinis aut
partium perturbatione singula naturalibus locis spectantur. Ex Anatomico
nostro, data occasion, inquiram quae toius rei sit ratio.

In English.
DE Bills his Anatomy is indeed Admirable, I made no question but you had heard
of it long since. He had formerly prepared three Bodies after his new fashion,
and they are yet to be seen. They are become almost as hard as stone, so that
every part may be seen in its proper place without any removal either of the
blood or other parts. The next time I meet with our Professor of Anatomy, I
will get a particular Account of the whole business from him.

FINIS.

