Purgatory Survey* OR, A Particular account of the happy, and yet thrice
unhappy state, of the Souls there.

ALSO Of the singular Charity, and ways we have to relieve them.

And of the Devotion of all Ages for the Souls departed*

WITH Twelve excellent means to prevent PURGATORY.

AND The Resolution of many Curious and Important Points.

Printed at Paris, 166^*

To the truly Noble and Virtuous Lady. Mris. D. C.
Madam,
THough this Survey of Purgatory address it self to all Roman Catholics in
general, yet is there not the person to whom it is more peculiarly devoted, nor
indeed any, from whom it may with more confidence look for shelter and
entertainment then your self.

For were it a mere stranger to you, yet am I so well acquainted with your
noble humor, and civility to all your guests, as not to despair of a friendly
welcome. But since it was so lucky as to receive its first birth, or at least
to begin to breath our English Air under your roof, it is certainly there it
may best challenge countenance and protection, now it comes to appear abroad
and expose it self to public view. And if I mistake you not, you are neither
so wedded to the pleasures of this transitory life, as not to be more concerned
for what passes in the other world, nor so taken up with Plays and Romances
(the usual employment of your sex) but that you can lend an eye or an ear now
and then (and with delight too) to spiritual discourses, though running in a
lower strain, not so agreeable to the quaint Palats of our times. Howsoever I
dare promise you here no unpleasant entertainments; I am sure at least you are
read a very pleasing lecture in the last Survey. For while you see the way for
you to escape Purgatory chalked out, you will clearly find your self already in
it, as practicing most of the twelve means there prescribed. To say nothing of
the rest (in which no doubt you have a large share) I cannot but take notice of
two of the most important, I mean your singular charity to the poor and your
patient suffering for a good cause. Your loyalty (and your noble Consorts) to
God and your King, even when you saw others to renounce both, was very
remarkable, and I think I may safely say (with proportion to your Estate) you
were as great sufferers upon this score, as the worst of times could produce.
And yet you were never so great loosers your selves, but you could still have
the heart to spare a very liberal proportion to relieve others. I could bring
instances, and enlarge my self upon each particular, did not your modesty give
me a silent check. I will only then conclude with leaving you this comfortable
satisfaction to know you are in the ready way to redeem a good part of your
Purgatory in this life, if not all, as he most heartily wishes you may, who
must ever subscribe himself,

Madam Your most obliged humble Servant. R. T.

A Prefatory address to the Catholic Reader.
Dear Reader,
THe drift of this Treatise is not to prove Purgatory but taking it for granted
as a prime maxim of Catholicism, that God has a suffering Church in the other
world, besides that which triumphs in heaven and is militant here upon earth,
the design is to set it forth in such lively colors, as may not only express
its nature (as far as we are able to judge of it at so great a distance) but
raise your thoughts, first to a compassionate care for the present, of
procuring all possible relief for such distressed souls, as are already fallen
under the lash of those merciless torments, and secondly to a provident
prevention for the future, that the like mischief may not involve your selves
hereafter. Now this being the chief aim of these my labors, I am put upon a
kind of necessity of giving you the trouble of this Prefatory address. For
should this Survay of Purgatory fall into any other hands but yours, it could
look for no better entertainment, then to be laid aside for wast paper, such as
would be some strange Map, or Survay of another world which had no other
subsistence but in the brains of the Painter. For why should the enemies of
truth, whose belief reaches only to heaven and hell, amuse themselves with the
consideration of a third place, for which they can find no place in their
Creed. And yet, though I presume, this will be its common fate, when it meets
with such persons, yet I am very confident the judicious Protestant, if he can
but find in his heart to peruse these Papers, (especially the fifth Survay)
will find more then enough to convince him of this middle state of Souls, which
we call Purgatory.

Now to say the truth of this Treatise, I know not well how to profess my self
the Author, nor yet the Translator of it. Not Author, for I must acknowledge
the maine bulk and substance of what I offer to be borrowed of the Reverend
Father Steven Binet of the Society of Jesus Not a bare Translatour, because I
am to do my self so much right, as to tell you, that I have not tied my self so
wholly, to that worthy persons method, or matter, as not to yield a little now
and then to my own genius, but have so made use of his learned pen, as to
dispose, abridge or enlarge, where I took it to be more for your satisfaction,
in this conjuncture of time and place wherein I was to puhlish it.

As for the language, I have taken care, neither to have it so bald, as not to
suit a little with this eloquent age we live in, nor yet so flourishing and
luxuriant, as to dry up the fountains of devotion, which I seek to open. And if
all my endeavors prove but so lucky, as to occasion the releasing of any one
soul, out of Purgatory, or the conveying of any other into heaven, without
passing that way, I have my end, which is only the greater glory of God, and
the good of souls There was a Roman Emperor, would never dine, but he would be
feeding his eyes, and his thoughts with the contemplation of the torments of
hell, and the pleasures of the Elizian fields, which he had caused to be
curiously painted, and exposed, for that purpose, in his dining room I do not
press you to use any such devotion or pictures, I only offer you this Survay of
Purgatory, which I beseech you to look often upon, and withal to have an eye
still upon heaven, and the best meant how to send souls thither, and to follow
them your selves, without stepping a side into Purgatory, for believe it, if
you come once there, you will find it a very restless and uncomfortable lodging
which I pray God you may all timely prevent, and I earnestly beg your good
prayers that the like mercy may not be deuied.

Your most devoted Servant R. T.

The Contents.
The First Survey.
PVrgatory is laid open, with all the hellish pains, wherewith the souls are
there tormented. Page 1. Sect. 1. Of the fire of Purgatory, and pain of sense.
p. 5. Sect. 2. Of the worm and pain of loss. p. 21. Sect. 3. Other
considerations much aggravating these pains. p. 44. Sect. 4. How long the
souls are detained in Purgatory? p. 57. Sect. 5. Whether their pains grow less
and less p. 72. Sect. 6. A notable Example in confirmation of all the preced ut
doctrine. p. 76.
The Second Survey.
A glimpse of the Paradise of Purgatory, or of the ineffable joys and heavenly
consolations of the souls there. p. 81. Sect. 1. How these excessive joys, can
stand with their unspeakeable torments? p. 83. Sect. 2. Two main grounds of
their comfort, the double assurance they have of their salvation and
impeccability. p. 90. Sect. 3. More grounds of comfort, arising from their
voluntarily suffering, their disinteressed love of God, and exact conformity
with his holy will. p. 100. Sect. 4. Another comfortable consideration, drawn
from the desire they have to make themselves worthy of the sight of God p. 119.
Sect. 5. Their suffering without merit and the free exercise of their virtues
without impediment are to them special motives of comfort. p. 124. Sect. 6.
They joy in the continual decrease of their pains, and influence of pure
heavenly consolations. p. 133
The third Survey.
That there is not in this world a more eminent, or prudent act of fraternal
charity, then to help the souls in Purgatory. p. 142. Sect. 1. The greatness of
the charity, to the souls in Purgatory, is argued from the greatness of their
pains, and their helpless condition p. 148. Sect. 2. Our charity for the souls
departed is preferred before all other works of mercy. p 155. Sect. 3. Of the
great advantages we receive by this devotion for the souls in Purgatory. p.
168.
The fourth Survey.
Of the powerful means to quench the flames of Purgatory p. 186. Sect. 1. What
succor they receive from the Angels and Saints in heaven? p. 188. Sect. 2.
Whether they are capable of being relieved by one another prayers? p. 196.
Sect. 3. That the dead may receive help from us that are living, and how we
must be qualified to do them good? p. 206. Sect. 4. Of the particular ways we
have to help them. p. 216. Sect. 5. Certain questions resolved about the
application and distribution of our suffrages. p. 233. Sect. 6. How dangerous
it is to trust others with what concerns the sweet rest of our souls in the
next world. p. 243 Sect. 7. Some motives fetched even as far as the other world,
to stir us up to be mindful of the dead. p. 253.
The fifth Survey.
How all Antiquity was ever devoted to pray for the dead. p. 269. Sect. 1. Of
the natural iustinct of all Nations to honor and comfort the dead. p. 273.
Sect. 2. The constant practice of the Church in all Ages to pray for the dead.
p. 284. Sect. 3. A continuation of the same subject from the sixth age after
Christ unto our days. p. 295.
The sixth Survey.
Of twelve excellent means to prevent Purgatory, or to provide so for our
selves as not to make any long stay there. p. 308. Sect. 1. The first. Perfect
contrition. p. 309. Sect. 2. The second. To die in Religion. p. 313. Sect. 3.
The third. To be an Apostolical Preacher. p. 320. Sect. 4. The fourth. To serve
the infected. p. 318. Sect. 5. The fifth. A tender devotion to the Blessed
Virgin. p. 333. Sect. 6. The sixth. An humble Patience. p. 341. Sect. 7. The
seventh. Devotion for the souls in Purgatory. p. 347. Sect. 8. The eighth. To
be a great almesgiver. p. 350. Sect. 9: Tbe ninth. Angelical purity. p. 360.
Sect. 10. The tenth. A profound humility. p. 368. Sect. 11. The eleaventh. To
communicate well and often p* 373. Sect. 12. The twelfth. A faithful and exact
obedience. p. 382.
The Conclusion.

Many curious and important Questions are incidently resolved under the
foregoing heads.

Errata.
PAge 29. l. 19. r. nobly, p. 41. l. 20. r. lovely, p, 45. l. 9. r. this p. 57.
l. 21. r. last p. 61. l. 24. r. intension p. 63. l. 5. r. overflowing p. 85. l.
17. r. borne down p. 104. l. 24. r. not p. 113. l. 16. r. Agrippina p. 115. l.
11. r. deiformity p. 132. l. 22. r. Salvianus p. 133. l. 4. r. works l. 8. dele
so, p. 134. l. 20. dele, his l. ult. r. rescue p. 135. l. 13. r. take p. 137.
l. 17 r. say l. 19. r. possess p. 139. l. 17. and 18. r. greatest of your p.
141. l. 7. r. and pious endeavors p. 143. l. 10. r. where p. 144. l. ult r.
fraternal p. 148. l. 2. r. and to p. 162. l. 4. r. little pains p. 165. margin
r. pitied p. 174. l. 16. r. Angel-gardians p. 17^. l. 14. r. then p. 203. l.
20. and 21. r. near p. 210. l. 6. r. of p. 227. l. 12. r. vigorous p. 250. l.
ult r. loath to be p. 266 l. 18. r. the truth p. 323. l. 6. r. to see l. 8.
dele, he p. 330. l. 1. dele, poor p. 343 l. 20. r. good people p. 346. l. ult
r. of dross p. 347. l. 21. r. in the same p. 359. l. 11. r. this p. 394. l. 12.
r. swift.

Be pleased to Correct these, and pardon some other literal faults.

PURGATORY Surveyd, etc.
The First Survay.
Purgatory is laid open, with all the hellish pains, with which the Souls are
there tormented.

FOR fear, least my discourses (Dear Reader) should not prove so lucky, as to
raise up thy compassion, nor my words so prevalent, as to make a breach, or
deep impression in thy heart, (which is the main thing I aim at, in this whole
Treatise) I am resolved, to have recourse to that pious Stratagem, which the
first Jesuits so happily made use of, in the conversion of the Indies. Those
good Fathers were not at first well skilled in the language of the new world;
and yet their zeal, would be still carrying them on to preach, whilst the
Indians stood listening and staring at them, but could understand little or
nothing. This would not have done their work, had they not withal used this
device, to take with them into the Pulpit certain devout pictures, which they
had carried out of Europe, in which the Passion of our Blessed Savior, was
very lively represented; here they first showed the most bitter torments, which
the Son of God endured for their sakes; and then they labored to express, in
their best Indian phrase, the name of God, Savior of the World, most holy
Prophet, and the like, pointing still at the picture, to tell them, that he
whom they saw so cruelly misused, was the very man they spoke of. And this they
followed with showers of tears, preaching Christ's Passion, more with their
eyes then their tongues; and figuring their discourses with sighs and sobs, and
a mournful voice, in liew of other tropes, and Metaphors. Who would believe
it? The Barbarians, at the sight of so lamentable a spectacle, out of a
natural compassion, seconded by an interior impulse of divine grace, burst
forth into fountains of tears, and became strangely concerned, for that poor
patient, whom they beheld only in Effigy. The heart has this property to
understand the language of hearts, let the expressions of the tongue be never
so imperfect; and the eyes are of that sympatheticall nature, that when eyes
speak to them, in floods of tears, in liew of full periods, they instantly
melt also into tears; and so mingle their griefs, with a strange kind of
Sympathy, and near alliance. What the tongue cannot utter, the eye speaks
aloud, and the heart, and the very air of the whole countenance of a man, who
seems to carry his very heart on his brow. Seeing therefore my discourses may
fall short of what I pretend, I am now going about to lay Purgatory open, to
represent I say, unto your view, as in a Mapp or Picture, that bloody tragedy
which is acted there, not in sport and merriment, alas! but with horror and
amazement. And if you dare not with the eye of faith, contemplate this sad and
horrid spectacle in it self, at least refuse not to look upon this picture,
which I am going to delineate, to give you a rude draught of the just rigor of
Almighty God, in purging holy souls, and as it were distilling them by drops
in a fiery limbeck.

1. Of the fire of Purgatory, and pain of sense.
IT was a strange piece of niceness, that of the Grecians in the Council of
Florence, to boggle at the smoke and fire of Purgatory, and yet withal to
confess it, to be a dark and dreadful dungeon, an abyss of mere gri^f and
torments; as if they would have been content, all other engines of cruelty
should have place there, to play the executioners, so they might but have leave
to banish fire, from having any thing to do, in the purgation of souls. The
Latin Fathers labored to Real fire in Purgatory.
undeceive them in this point of folly, and sore gravelled them, with that text
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. He shall be saved, yet so as by fire, which cannot be
meant of hell fire, as the Grecians understood it, because there is no
salvation or redemption to be expected, but well of the fire of Purgatory,
which is designed only, for the purifying of saved souls. And though they
thought fit afterward to wave that controversy for peace sake, and not to
press on to a definition; yet is it a doctrine very generally received, and
taught by the holy Fathers, and Doctors of the Catholic Church, and very
consonant to the dictates of the holy Ghost, in divine Scriptures, that there
is a real and corporeal fire in Purgatory, and that the souls which depart
this life, without first cancelling their many failings and imperfections, by
satisfactory works, are necessarily plunged into merciless flames, which by
little and little, eat away all that dross and impurity, which till expiated,
obstructs their entrance into heaven. Nor is it possible to my thinking to
raise any argument of substance, to discredit these purging flames, which will
not also be levelled at the extinguishing of hell fire, which notwithstanding
holy Writ assures u^, to be prepared for the divill and his Angels. Matthew. 25.
St. Augustine de civit. 21. 10.
I am sure St. Austin finds the same difficulty, how the devils and men's souls
can be tormented with fire; and gives the same solution to both, with a Why
should we not say, that incorporeal spirits may Veris sed miris modis.
be truly tormented with corporeal fire, though after a strange and wonderful
manner? Must we presently renounce the Oracles of Gods Church, because we
cannot fathom them with our narrow capacity? the very fundamentals of our Faith
would be shrewdly shaken, should we measure them by this preposterous rule, of
a seeming demonstration to the contrary. Believe it, it is one of the first
rudiments, but main principles of a Christian, to captivate his understanding,
and so re^ulate all his dictamens, that they be sure to run parallel with the
sentiments of the Church. And this I take to be the case, when the question is
started, about Purgatory fire, which I shall ever reckon, in the class of
those truths, which cannot be contradicted, without manifest temerity, as being
the doctrine generally preached and taught all over Christendom.

You must then conceive Purgatory Purgatory described.
to be a vast, darksome, and hideous Chaos, full of fire and flames, in which
the souls are kept close prisoners, until they have fully satisfied for all
their misdemeanors, according to the estimate of divine justice. For God has
made choice of this Element of fire, wherewith to punish souls, because it is
the most active, piercing, sensible, and insupportable of all others. But that
which quickens it indeed, and gives it more life is this; that it acts as the
instrument of Gods justice, who by his omnipotent power, elevates and
reinforces its activity as he pleases; and so makes it capable to act upon pure
spirits. Do not then look only upon this fire, though in good earnest it be
dreadful enough of it self, but consider the arm that is reached out, and the
hand that strikes, and the rigor of Gods infinite justice, who through this
element of fire, vents his wrath, and powers out whole tempests of his most
severe, and yet most just vengeance: So that the fire works as much mischief
(as I may say) to the souls, as God commands, and he commands as much as is
due, and as much is due, as the sentence bears; a sentence irrevocably
pronounced at the high Tribunal of the severe and rigorous justice, of an angry
God, and whose anger is so prevalent, that the holy Scripture styles it, a day
of fury: Now you will easily believe, that Job, 20. 28. Esa. 13. 13. Thr. 1. 12.
this fire is a most horrible punishment, in its own nature, but you may do
well, to reflect also on that which I have now suggested, that the fury of
Almighty God is as it were the fire of this fire, and the heat of its heat; and
that he serves himself of it as he pleases, by doubling and redoubling its
sharp pointed forces; for this is that which makes it the more grievous and
insupportable to the souls, that are thus miserably confined and imprisoned.

They were not much out of It is a kind of hell.
the way, that styled Purgatory a transitory kind of hell, for that the
principal pains of the damned are to be found there, with this only
difference, that in hell they are eternal, and in Purgatory they are only
transitory and fleeting, for otherwise it is probably Suar. d. 45. Sect. 2. n:
14. S. Th. in 4. d. 21. q. 1.
the very same fire, which burns both the holy souls and the damned spirits,
and the pain of loss is in both places, the chief torment, as I shall declare
hereafter. Now does not your hair stand an end? does not your heart tremble,
when you hear that the poor souls, in Purgatory are tormented with the same,
or the like flames to those of the damned? Can you hold from crying out, with
the Prophet Isay, who c. 33. 14.
can dwell with such devouring fire, and unquenchable ardours? Heavens! what a
lamentable case is this? Those miserable souls, who of late when they were
wedded to their bodies, were so nice and dainty forsooth, that they durst
scarce venture to enjoy the comfortable heat of a fire, but under the
protection of their skreens and their fans, for fear of sullying their
complexions, and if by chance, a spark had been so rude, as to light upon
them, or a little smoke, it was not to be endured: Those, for whom down it self
was too hard, and even ready to break their bones, one single grain of
misfortune, a stone but as big as a nutt, a rotten tooth, a sullen and
malignant humor, stolen into the marrow of a bone, a cross word, an affront, an
idle fancy, a mere dream, was enough to bury their whole felicity in a kind of
hell. Alas! how will it fare with them when they shall see themselves tied to
unmercifull firebrands, or imbodied as it were with flames of fire, surrounded
with frightful darkness, broyled and consumed without intermission, and perhaps
condemned to the same fire, with which the devils are unspeakably tormented?
When Saul found himself beset on all sides, and in the midst of his enemies,
and saw, that he must either dye instantly, or fall into the hands of that base
and accursed crew. Oh let me rather die (cried he) he will do me a favor that
will cut my throat, 1. reg. 31.
that so I may not see my self butchered by such wicked hands; and trail'd away
by them: death alas! is not the thing I apprehend, but that a King as I am,
should die like a slave, ah, is it that which gives me the fatal blow, and even
breaks my very heart. O God! what a confusion, what a sensible heartbreaking
will it be to these noble and generous souls, designed to eternal glory in
the Kingdom of Heaven, when they shall see themselves condemned to the same
punishment, and devoured by the same implacable flames with those of the
damned; and lodged in the very suburbs of hell. A Prince had rather die a
thousand deaths, then be condemned to live amongst base slaves in a gally, or
be hanged amongst fellons, for it is not the death so much, as the dishonor,
that makes them to die indeed. And can you doubt whether the souls of the just
have the same feelings, when they see themselves involved in the same
misfortune, in the same place, and in the same flames of fire, with which the
accursed rabble of damned spirits is eternally tormented? ah! they take it for
so high a dishonor, that it may with reason be questioned, whether this
unhappy place and condition grieves them not more then the fire it self. Plut.
Sen.
There was a time when they would have forced a young Roman Cavallier into the
bottom of a dark and stinking pit; but his heart was so filled with
indignation at it, that he chose rather to dash out his brains against a door
threshold, and so to let out his blood, and his life together, then to enter
into so noisome a place. What a tearing grief must it be to those virtuous
souls, when they shall see themselves border upon the very confines of hell;
and in that accursed frontire, and more then this, to be shut up close
prisoners in that unfortunate gulf; and to be condemned to suffer the same
fire as the damned, though their punishment be neither so terrible, nor so
lasting?

Good God! how the great Saints and Doctors astonish me, when they treat of
this fire, and of the pain of sense as they tall it. For they peremptorily
pronounce, that the fire that purges those both happy and unhappy Souls
surpasses all the torments, which are to be found in this miserable life of
man, or are possible to be invented, for so far they go. Out of which assertion
it clearly follows, that the furious fits of the stone, feavour or raging gout,
the tormenting chollick, with all the horrible convulsions of the worst of
diseases nay though you join racks, grid-Irons, boiling oils, wild beasts, and
a hundred horses drawing several ways, and tearing one limb from another, with
all the other hellish devices of the most barbarous and cruel Tyrants, all
this does not reach to the least part of the mildest pains in Purgatory. For
thus they discourse: the fire, and the pains of the other world are of another
nature from those of this life, because God elevates them above their nature to
be instruments of his severity. Now, say they, things of an inferior degree can
never reach to the power of such things as are of a higher rank; for example,
the air let it be never so inflamed, unless it be converted into fire, can
never be so hot as fire. Besides God bridles his rigor, in this world, but in
the next he lets the reins loose, and punishes almost equally to the desert.
And since those souls have preferred creatures before their Creator, he seems
to be put upon a necessity of punishing them beyond the ordinary strength of
creatures, and hence it is, that the fire of Purgatory burns more, torments
and afflicts more, then all the creatures of this life are able to do. But is
it Aug. in Ps. 37. S. Th. supp. q. 100. a 3. and in 4. d. 21. S. Greg. in 3.
Ps. Penitent: S. Anselm. in Elucydario.
really true; that the least pain in Purgatory exceeds the greatest here upon
earth? O God! the very proposal makes me tremble for fear, and my very heart
freeses into ice with astonishment. And yet who dare oppose * St. Aug. St.
Thomas, St. Anselme, St. Gregory the great, etc. Is there any hope of carrying
the negative assertion against such a stream of Doctors, who all maintain the
affirmative, and bring so strong reasons for it? Have patience to hear them
yet once more; sin, say they, exceeds all creatures in malice, and therefore
let it be never so little, it must deserve a punishment exceeding all the pain
that can proceed from creatures. Again, creatures here below do nothing above
their natural reach and capacity, they act only within the sphere of their
limited forces, whereas the fire that is designed to purify guilty souls,
derives its vigor and force from God, Who being Almighty, and besides provoked
to displeasure, makes it so active and so prevalent, that there is nothing can
be compared with it. And they add unto all this a world of visions, and
revelations, which seem to countenance the rigor of their position. What then
will become of thee, poor idle soul, if the least pains in Purgatory surpass
the greatest in this world, what I say, will become of thee that art so tender,
that a little smoke is able to draw tears from thy eyes?

But for thy comfort, there are Doctors in the Catholic church, that cannot
away with so much severity, and namely St. Bonaventure, who is very peremptory
S. Bonavent. in 4 d. 20.
in denying it. For what way is there (says this holy Doctor) to verify so
great a paradox, without wounding reason, and destroying the infinite mercy of
the living God. I am easily persuaded there are torments in Purgatory far
exceeding any in this mortal life, this is most certain, and it is but
reasonable it should be so, but that the least there, should be more terrible
then the most terrible in the world, cannot enter into my belief. May it not
often fall out, that a man comes to dye, in a most eminent state of perfection,
save only, that in his last agony, out of mere frailty, he commits a venial
sin, or carries along with him some relic of his former failings, which might
have been easily blotted out with a Pater noster, or washed away with a little
holy water: for I suppose, it is some very small matter, now, what likelihood
is there, I will not say, that the infinite mercy of God, but that the very
rigor of his justice, though you conceive it to be never so severe, should
inflict so horrible a punishment upon this holy soul, as not to be equalled by
the greatest torments in this life, and all this for some petty fault, scarce
worth the speaking of? How! would you have God for a kind of trifle, to punish
a soul full of grace and virtue, and so severely to punish her, as to exceed
all the racks, cauldrons, furnaces, and other hellish inventions, which are
scarce inflicted upon the most execrable criminals in the world? What do you
make God to be! is he not a God of mercy in the other world as well as in this?
He, says Tertullian, that is so sweet Tertul. Apol.
and so good, that he darts the rays of his mercies into the darkest abyss of
hell, shall he be so extremely rigorous in Purgatory which is so full of
Saints? That which a sigh would have blown away here, or a tear have drowned,
it was so small a matter, will you have God to power out his whole wrath for it,
and to punish it with such a proportion of sufferings, as cannot be paralleld
by all the torments in this world? Have a care least by making God too severe,
you say not that which clashes with his infinite mercy. That nothing should
remain unpunished, is no more then fitting, but that for a mere Peccadilio, or
for some small remnant of a little penance, God should employ such tortures, is
a most incredible paradox, and S. Bonaventure will not believe it, and are we
not beholding to him for it? He confesses that the fire, the worm, and all the
purging pain is of its nature far greater then the pains of this world, but
that the least there should surpass the greatest here, he flatly denies; and I
cannot think thou will need much entreaty to side with him. And thus much
learned Suarez has prudently observed for thy Su. d. 40. 3, 4.
purpose, that in truth the pains of Purgatory, and those of this life, are of
quite different species's and can no more be compared together, then a flint
with a Diamond, but that there may be so many flints put together as to exceed
the worth of a Diamond, and so may the pains of this life be so multiplied, as
to surmount the least of those in Purgatory.

2. Of the Worm and pain of loss.
BUt why do I entertain you so long, with the consideration of the fire and
flames of Purgatory, as if it were the only or the greatest torment of the
afflicted souls. Alas! there is a worm which knawes them yet more to the
quick, then those murdering flames, which make but an outward assault. It is
this worm alas! it is this worm, that plays the tyrant over those captive
souls. The worm of hell shall never dye, Esai. 66. 24. Mar. 9. 44.
but that of Purgatory shall dye indeed, but so long as it lives, it is not to
be imagined how cruelly it bites. I know there are those among the learned,
that believe, God has in store certain ravenous and devouring worms, that
shall incessantly prey upon the carcasses of the damned souls, and cause an
endless martyrdom, by consuming them without ever yet consuming them. But as
for Purgatory, where there are only naked souls, stripped of their bodies, there
are no corporeal worms, but the worm, that knaws them, is a metaphorical
worm, or a sharp and sensible grief, and deep resentment, which utterly
undoes those miserable souls, by piercing and transpiercing them, with the
sharp lances of a thousand and a thousand remorses.

But to give you in fine a more particular description of this unsatiable, Love
and gri^f are knawing Worms.
and devouring Worm, which causes them so much mischief and vexation; Divines
teach us, that it is either an Heroical Act of Charity, or a vigorous Act of
Contrition, or finally a Holy kind of Impatience, and supernatural Act of Hope,
but such a one, as does so importunely and powerfully check them, that it is
not to be expressed. You may fancy Charity to be a golden File, which goes
filing, and still filing away the dross of their imperfections, and as it were
consuming them without intermission: Contrition to be a pair of hot biting
Pincers, which does so desperately pinch those poor Souls, that it is a kind
of pity to God and his Angels to behold it: Hope retarded to be a kind of Rack,
upon which those miserable Souls are so far extended, and stretched out with a
desire that carries them to God, and so withheld by the impediment that lies in
themselves, that it must needs be an unmercifull Torment. They seem as it were
to be drawn in pieces by Wilde-horses. Love draws, but pain withdraws,
contrition spurs them on, but their misfortune pulls them back; Hope gives them
wings, but Justice clips them off, and through the violence of these contrary
Motions, these unfortunate Souls are in a most lamentable condition, and as the
Holy Scripture expresses it, are knawn and torn in pieces, with Hungry,
Devouring and tormenting Worms. It is not the fire, nor all the Brimstone and
Tortures they endure, which murders them alive, no, no, it is the domestical
cause of all these mischiefs, that racks their consciences and is their
cruelest Executioner. This, this is the greatest of their evils, for a Soul
that has shook off the fetters of flesh and blood, and is full of the love of
God, no more disordered with unruly passions, nor blinded with the night of
ignorance, sees clearly, the vast injury she has done her self, to have
offended so good a God, and to have deserved to be thus banished out of his
sight, and deprived of that Divine fruition. She sees how easily she might have
flowne up straight to Heaven, at her first parting with her body, and what a
trifle it was that impeded her. A moment lost of those inebriating joys, seems
to her now worthy to be redeemed with an eternity of pains. Then reflecting
with her self, that she was created only for God, and can not be truly
satisfied, but by enjoying God, and that out of him all this goodly machine of
the world, is no better then a direct Hell, and an abisse of evils, alas! what
Worms? what Martyrdomes, and what nipping Pincers, are such pinching thoughts
as these? The fire is to her but as smoke, in comparison of this vexing
remembrance of her own follies, which betrayed her to this disgraceful and
unavoidable misfortune. There was a King in an humor gave away his Crown and
his whole Estate, for the present refreshment of a cup of cold water, but
returning a little to himself, and soberly reflecting what he had done, had
like to have run stark mad, to see the strange irreparable folly he had
committed. To loose a year or two years, (to say no more) the beatificall
vision, for a glass of Water, for a handful of Earth, for the love of a
fading Beauty, for a little Air of worldly praise, a mere puff of Honor, ah!
it is the Hell of Purgatory to a Soul that truly loves God, and frames a right
conceit of things. Jephte Judic. c. 11 etc. 18.
could have died for grief when he saw that by his own rashness he was to
loose his only daughter, the light of his Eyes, the life of his Soul, and Soul
of his life. And that poor youth, from whom they had stolen his gods, although
they were mere Idols, yet did he take on most bitterly, and was become so
disconsolate, there was no chiding him out of that humor. What! said he have
you robbed me of my gods, and do you now question me, why I lament, as if he had
not cause enough to grieve, who has lost his gods? And you may observe, it was
not his fault that they were lost, and besides they were but gods of wood and
stone, such as a skillful Artist would have made far better. The case here is
different, for the Souls clearly see, they have lost God, through their own
carelessness, and lost him for ten, twenty or perhaps thirty years, and this
puts them out of the reach of all comfort. It Is true, here below we are not able
to taste the bitterness of this wormwood, but those pure Souls who are in the
grace of God, and full of light, and well grounded discourses, see so clearly
the grossness and foulness of this error, and taste so sensibly the gall
and bitterness thereof, that it is a more vexing pain to them, then that of
the fire.

But you will say, it is but for a short time, that they are to be kept out of
paradise. O God! this is enough to break their hearts, for in that short time
you speak of, they could have exercised a Million of most refined, heroical,
and divine acts in Heaven and all this is lost. And if one act of virtue here
on Earth, give so much glory to God, and so much joy to the whole Court of
Heaven, what a loss is it, to have carelessly let slip the occasion of
excercising a million of such acts in Heaven, which can never be recalled? I
speak not for the merit, nor for the content there is in doing well, nor for
the degrees of glory which are lost, no, I touch not yet what concerns their
interest, but I only treat of the glory which they might have given to God, by
their signal services of Love and Adoration; all which precious treasure is
negligently cast away. When that Marc. 12. 42. Luc. 21. 2.
good poor widow, cast her two brass mites into the Treasury; Christ Jesus
was as well pleased, as if she had cast in both her eyes, or as many Worlds;
and when St. Martin cut his Cloak in two, to give one half of it to a needy
beggar, our Blessed Savior vouchsafed to cloth himself with that half
garment, and turning to the Angels, who were about him in great numbers, and
withal showing them that livery of his servant, behold said he, how noble this
young Catechumen has attired me. If the Almighty Monark of the world, makes so
great a reckoning of one act of virtue, one small charity, what vexation will
it breed in a Soul of the other World, to consider that other glorious souls,
and perhaps some of her alliance, or acquaintance, are already daily spending
themselves in acts of highest perfection, and that she has wilfully thrown away
all this glory, which she might have given to Almighty God, and in place of
acting so gloriously in the empireall Heaven, all resplendent with divine Fire,
she is constrained to lie parching and frying in the flames of Purgatory, and
undergoing a thousand inconsolable punishments.

Now if you lay on the back of Their incredible loss.
this, the consideration of interest, good God! what a terrible grief will it
be to holy Souls, to reflect on the loss of so many degrees of Grace and
Glory, which they have foolishly and negligently cast away, for mere trifles,
and without hope of recovery. One grain of Grace is certainly more worth then
all the world, what a misery then? what a grief, and what a confusion will it
be, to have prodigally sold for nothing, so many grains, so many graces, and so
many worlds of true happiness? Since I have lost my Empire cried Nero, there is
no living for me. Could I but one day arrive to be King of Athens, ^^d a
Grecian, I could be content to walk barefoot to the bottomless pit of hell, so
great a value do I set upon swaying the Scepter but one day; and so precious is
the least grain of glory in my estimation. Now if these ambitious souls, have
such feelings for a little transitory and worldly glory, what will they have,
who breath nothing but the pure love of God, and know how to set a true value
upon glory, and celestial glory in those heavenly mansions? This in the opinion
of learned Suarez: is a worm, the most sensible, and the most vexatious of all
others, in that Church of patient sufferers.

But since these two Worms, Whether Love or grief torments most.
Love and Grief combine together, to martyrise those poor Souls, which of
the two is the most grievous charity, or contrition? They have neither of them
teeth to bite with, but they conjure up such tempests of biting thoughts, in
these unfortunate souls, as g^^e them a world of afflictions. Me thinks I hear
them discourse in their turns much after this fashion. Love. O ungrateful and
disloyal Soul, have thou so easily lost the sight of thy merciful Redeemer?
Grief. Dye for shame, unlucky Soul, and dye for Grief, for having so easily
merited, that God should thus banish thee, and punish thee in these base
flames? Love? What have thou got, by loosing so good a God, whom thou were
already to have possessed and enjoyed? Grief, What have thou got, but deadly
heart-breakings, for having preferred sin, before his infinite favors? Love,
In lieu of riding upon the wings of a Seraphin, and burning with Love, as they
do in Heaven, miserable creature, thou art now to be locked up under ground, in
a furnace of Hellish Flames. Grief. In lieu of calling to mind, the benefits
of this great God, thou art to be knawn to the very heart, with the sharp
teeth of an infamous Grief, and to pass so many whole days in sighs and sobs,
and unprofitable lamentations. Love. So many lesser Souls, have taken their
flight straight up into Heaven, and what do thou stick there below, in those
loathsome pits of Fire? Grief. So many simple Idiots by leading innocent
lives, are now in Glory, whilst thou idle wretch, lie there melting in
unquenchable flames Love. What a Madness was it for thee, to cast away so many
precious hours of seeing God, when one glimpse of that divine object is worth
a million of worlds? Grief. Could there be a greater folly, then for a slight
pastime to offend so loving a Father, and put him upon a necessity of punishing
thee here like a criminal, to wear of thy felonious and rebellious offenses.
Love What is become of so many degrees of Glory, so many exstatical acts, so
many divine Canticles, which thou should have sung in Heaven, since thou art
buried under ground, in a Sulphurous Laxe. Grief. What is become of all thy
cursed possessions, which now persecute thy Soul, with a fresh remembrance of
thy sottish disloyalty? Love. Thou were created for God, can thou live
without him, and without glassing thy self in that eternal Mirror, and
sparkling rays of his divine Countenance. Grief. Thou were placed in the
sublunary world to serve him, c^nst thou without bursting for spite, call to
mind the life which thou have lead, and is not the remembrance of thy
debauches more frightful to thee, then the very sight of Hell it self. Love.
Who loves God, had rather sink down into a thousand Hells, then loose him for
a moment. Grief. Who loves God, had rather eternally suffer all the torments
of Hell, then lie one instant in the Hell of Hells, that is in the bosom of a
mortal sin Thus violently do these two virtues of Love and Grief, make their
several on sets, on this poor Soul, thus terribly do they bate her, one after
another, thus cruelly do they lay her under the heavy press of unavoidable
reproaches.

This is not all, for divines The greater Saints the mo^e tormented with this
worm.
teach, and are very peremptory upon the matter, that the more a Soul loves
God, and the greater Saint she is, the more sensible is she of the biting, of
these un merciful worms. And by the way, you are to note, that these holy
Souls, do not suffer these afflictions only to purge themselves, No, though
there were no other motive, but that of the Love of God, and a certain honesty
well becoming their noble nature, though there were nothing to be got by it,
yet would they not desist from exercising these generous and heroical acts, and
from giving God a signal testimony of the dear affection of their Souls. In the
mean time, this their honesty costs them dear, and these acts of charity and
contrition are extreme painful. And since the sting of honor wounds deeper,
pains sorer and goes more to the quick, then pain it self, hence it follows,
that these holy Souls, whether for Love, or for justice sake, are upon a most
cruel rack, and so become an object of great commiseration, and it cannot be
expressed, how beholding they take themselves to those, that endeavor to
comfort them, and are mindful of their calamity. Now the reason, why divines
believe, that the most perfect Souls are the most afflicted, with these
voluntary kind of punishments, as I may term them, is, because they all
actuate according to the uttermost Sphere and extent of their virtue, so that a
Soul that has a greater proportion of Love, acts with more vigor, and plunges
her self deeper in the profound abisse of Love, and in the Gall and bitterness
of contrision, and as this proceeds out of mere love, notwithstanding their so
sensible misfortune, they would not loose an ounce of it, so tender is their
love to God, and so great the horror they have of all that is displeasing in
his sight. But of this more at large hereaft^r.

Now I must tell you plainly, all The greatness of the pain of loss.
that I have yet said, is in a manner nothing to what I am going to say. The
Saints and Doctors of Gods Church, as I have already insinuated, unanimously
agree, that the most grievous pain in Purgatory, is to be deprived for a time
of the beatifical vision, and to be laid aside, and banished as unworthy to
contemplate the bright Sun of the divinity. This pain of loss, as they call it,
is the pain of pains, it is the deepest pit of Purgatory, and the very bellows
that blows the coals there. This evil of the privation of the sight of God,
is according to St. Thomas, of its own St. Th. in 4. d. 21. a. 1.
nature far exceeding all the temporal punishments of this world, and thus he
proves it. Will you know the full latitude of grief, and take an exact survey
of all its dimensions, reflect with your self what the good is, it deprives us
of, what the present evil we endure, what powerful instinct we have, to
repossess that good which we have lost, what obligation we have thereunto both
by Grace and Nature; and lastly what a violent application and vigor of Spirit
we feel in our Souls, in the pursuit of it. Now all this is extreme, in the
evil we now treat of. For it is Gods precious sight which is lost, who is the
consummation of all bliss, it is the very dregs of bitterness, those poor
Souls drink down at large draughts, it is the only beautiful object, for which
they were Created, and Redeemed, with the most precious blood of Christ, for
which they breathed out so many sighs in this mortal life, and which they do so
passionately pursue, when once delivered out of their bodies, that there is
nothing to be compared to that holy ardour. No, I do not think, that an arrow
shot from a bow, or an Eagle upon the wing, or the wind, or lightning, or the
Sun in his full careere or flight it self flies away faster, I cannot believe
that fire mounts up, or a stone sinks down to its center with more vehemence,
nor that the Heavens can be swifter in their motions, then these vigorous Souls
are in running, flying, and precipitating themselves into God, when alas! they
find their wings clipped, and their whole flight so unluckily stopped, that no
tongue is able to express the resentment they feel at it.

I know St. Bonaventure strives to St. Bonav. in 4. d. 20. a. 1.
sweeten this Martyrdom and will not have this privation, or pain of loss, to
be so cruel as others make it, and in particular he maintains that it does not
always exceed the greatest torments of this life. I will not take upon me the
boldness, to make my self judge and umpire between St. Thomas and Saint
Bonaventure, that is to say; between an Angel and a Seraphin, an angelical
doctor and a Seraphical Doctor; in a word, between two famous oracles of
Divinity, two glorious Suns placed in the several Spheres of their religious
orders. But what remedy! whether of the two shall we believe? The one assures
us, that the privation of the sight of God, is a martyrdomes beyond all the
Martyrdom, of this world, the other tells us for a truth that it were certainly
a most grievous torment but that it is sometimes so tempered and alleniated by
other considerations, that it equals not the severest rigor of the Torments of
this world. What? is there no means to reconcile these two heavenly Doctors?
May we not say, they have both reason on their sides, they have both won, and
both lost the field, and whilst the one looks as it were to the North, and the
other to the South, they both meet in the Meridian line of charity, and rest
securely in the bosom of the same truth. St Thomas would say, that if you look
upon this privation, as it relates to God, the loss is incomparable, and he
speaks the very truth; that the Soul has not a more violent instinct, then that
which carries her to God, this is also an undoubted truth; that there cannot be
a heavier loss, then that of God, and is not this also clear? That unless this
grief be otherwise moderated, it is the most intolerable of all others; this
is as evident as the rest: that you cannot deprive a Soul of a more lively
object, and consequently that there is not the thing in this world whose
absence is of its Nature so sensible, who can doubt of all this? certainly, if
you state the case thus, and go no further, St. Thomas has clearly got the
victory. Now let us hear St. Bonaventure. Who tells us that this evil of
privation, being joined with a most certain hope of seeing God ere long, may
be much lessened, that even in this world, we want the sight of God, and yet by
reason of other diversions, are not so much concerned for it, that the holy
Souls most contentedly submit themselves, to this piece of severity, and the
more willingly they do it, the less are they burdened with sorrow: that many
Saints out of pure charity, and for the glory of God, have offered themselves
to be thus eternally deprived of the sight of God, and have taken great
pleasure in it, with a world of other reasons, of which I shall treat in the
next Survey, where I must (...) up the comforts, of the Souls in Purgatory. Has
he not reason for all this, I pray you? Nay, have they not both reason for what
they teach? Me thinks they do like those that look upon your pictures, which
are drawn after the Italian fashion, by Mathematical projection, one looks upon
them this way, and sees a fair Picture of St Michael, another that way, and
sees St Laurence upon a Gridiron, represented to life, the one vows, he sees
an Angel, and he says true, the other is ready to swear he sees a Martyr, and
he is not mistaken; mean while they contest about it, and neither of them will
forsake his Opinion, whilst both are in the right, though they seem to wrong
one another. Let us therefore conclude, that in truth there is something in this
pain of loss, which surpasses all that can be imagined in this world, but that
God is pleased in some cases to mingle certain Comfortable sweets with it,
which take off much of the bitterness which the Souls would otherwise find in
it.

. 3. Other Considerations much aggrevating these Pains.
BUt that which adds new Life To loose God wilfully.
and strength to these quick and piercing pains, is to see that they have not
only wilfully lost for ever so many degrees of glory, whereof the least is an
inestimable treasure, but are also estranged from the sight of God, by their
own carelessness and tepidity. To want the sight of God out of charity, is to
find a kind of Paradise in Hell, but to loose the sight of God by his own
fault, though it be but for a moment, is a Hell indeed to a Soul that loves.
Naturalists tell us of a little bird, th^^ is so far in love with the sun, that
she lives no longer then she can behold it, and so lives but a few hours, for
no sooner does the sun set, but the poor bird seeing no longer the living rays
of the sun, believing it to be really dead, dies also, as not being able to
survive the sole object of his love. God is the Sun of our Souls, and therefore
these worthy Souls, seeing this Sun quite ecli^sed from their eyes, and
overcast with the sable night of a suffering people, would doubtless die if
they could, for God being the life of their life, having lost his life, how
should they live? When the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph had lost the sight of
the little Infant Jesus, what Tongue can express the affliction of their Souls?
He only knows who has tried it by experience, and whose eyes God has opened,
what it is to loose the sight of God and to loose it through his own fault, and
to be as it were poin^^d at, for a wretch that has lost (...) God.

I wept says holy David, and I Ps. 41. 4.
wept night and day, when they would be still thus obrayding me, why David,
where is thy God? the God for whom thou had so much love? Oh it is a dagger
at my very Heart, and they kill me, when they ask me the question. Now this
dagger is never from the hearts of those desolate, and languishing Souls. I
will either die this day cried Caesar, or I will be the chief in Rome, for what
likelihood is there that Caesar should live, and not be Caesar! live, and not
live in the quality, which is due to his birth and courage? Oh how often does
this thought assault and persecute these holy Souls, alas! how easily could I
have purchased a million of degrees of essential Glory, and got Laurels upon
Laurels, Crowns upon Crowns, and Trophies without number, and unfortunate
wretch as I am, I have lost all this eternally, for mere sloth, for want of a
little striving for it, am I not worthy to undergo the pains I suffer, though
they were a thousand times more rigourous and intolerable. I do not wonder
that Divines affirm this Heartbreaking to be far worse, then the privation of
the sight of God, for to this they can find some ease and comfort, but the
other is altogether inconsolable, since it is purely through their own faults.

You may imagine all the virtues All the virtues charge them with reproaches.
to come in upon this, and either voluntarily, or by a sweet kind of violence,
to set upon these captive souls, with a new and fierce storm of reproaches.
Faith. If you believed there was a Purgatory indeed, miserable creature, why
did you not live so as to avoid its cruel torments. Hope. If you aimed to gain
Paradise, why did you play the fool so as to amuse your self with such
trifles, and to loose so much precious time in them. Charity. Oh how well have
you deserved to burn in these flames, since you often scorned to burn with
mine, and to serve God with a heart all inflamed with divine fire; burn then
at leisure, and die here for shame, since there was a time, thou would neither
live, nor die with sacred and holy love. Penance. Is it you that were so
frighted with my rigours, so terrified with my sweet austerities, with which I
would have preserved you from these cruel torments? Tell me now, where are your
damask beds, your soft quilts, your down pillowes, your fine sheets, that were
smoother and whiter then milk and cream, your sweet bags and perfumes, all
your dainties, all your vanities, all that modish attire and braverie, which
did so besot and inchant you. One sigh, one tear, one act of self denial,
would have kept you out of this place of torments; answer me now, and let me
hear, what you have to say for your self. Prudence Foolish and senseless
soul, how came you so to loose your wits, and even common sense too, as
knowing the rigor of these flames, to use no caution to prevent them Oh? How
well are these horrid punishments bestowed? This vile creature was so simple,
as to believe, that continually offending God, without making him amends for
it, in an honorable way, she should pass scotfree, and supply for all with a
slight peccavi, and so enter into heaven. What an idle folly was this? As if it
were a sufficient pretense to be wicked and rebellious, because God is full of
mercy. Sit still then at the daily task of thy sufferings, and rather think of
doubling them, for it is meet that God should show himself to be God, as well
by justice as by mercy, and that both these divine attributes, should play
their parts in their turns. Fortitude. How often have I offered my service to
strengthen you, O you careless and lazy soul, how often have I offered to lend
you my Arm, my Heart, and all my invincible power, to support and bolster up
your pusillanimity and weakness, and you have disdained to employ it, now you
are forced to bear the heavy burden of Gods just vengeance, have I not just
reason to withdraw my assistance? Temperance. I told you as much long since,
that for want of bridling your unruly passions, the time would come, when you
would curse the hours of all your excesses and disorders, without having power
to redeem them, but by excessive torments. Do you look now, inconsiderate soul,
that I should pour out water upon your flames, you that have ever slighted me?
Thus all the holy Quire of Gods darlings, the innocent virtues, come one after
another, and beat upon this Anvil, laying whole loads of most heavy strokes,
upon this miserable soul, that you cannot well imagine what more grievous
fortune can befall her, in so much, that the soul so oppressed with evils, and
so furiously battered on all sides, with a fresh supply of torments, is forced
to cry out, miserable that I am, and a thousand times miserable? am I not
wretched enough, but must the virtues themselves join their forces with my
frailties, to persecute me, and complete my misery. How long alas! how long
will you thus cruelly combine to undo me, you love, and you grief, you by a
thousand sweets, and you by a thousand severities: You by flattering my pains,
and you by redoubling them, you by showing me life, and you by showing me
death, you by estranging me from Paradise, and you by conducting me to the very
gates of hell; you by sweet expostulations, and you by bitter reproaches, which
go to my very heart. How long I say once more will you be so cruelly kind, as
to join your forces to imbitter the martyrdom of a poor creature, now grown to
^e the most miserable wretch under Heaven. Forbear at length, forbear, it is
not fit the severity of Gods Justice, should eclipse all the rays of his
infinite mercy. Whether the Devils torment them.


All were lost, if the opinion of some were true, who will needs have the
Devils play the executioners in Purgatory. Lord, what a terrible war would
these wicked Aposta^a's raise, against the holy Souls, who are ere long to
take possession of the places which they have lost in Heaven. With what a rage
would they assault them, and wreak their barbarous fury upon them, were they to
be treated at their mercy. But I had rather S. Tho. in 4. d. 20. and 21. Suar.
d. 46. Sect. 3.
follow the opinion of others, who with far more reason, me thinks, believe,
that the Devils have no power to do them the least mischief. Tell me, what good
would they get by it, since the souls can neither offend God, nor loose
Paradise, which is the only Butt against which the Devils level their whole
malice. Origin fancied the Devil, to be so sullenly proud, that having been
once foiled by a soul, he will never after come near her, nor have any thing
more to do with her. If this be so, the Devils will beware how they come near
Purgatory where there are so many Victorious Souls. Besides God will not permit
it, nor can we see what good can arise thence to Gods glory. Possibly also,
these p^nishments which the Devils would inflict, might shorten the term of
the souls durance, and this may be the cause, why they are loath to meddle with
them, least they send them so much the sooner into heaven. However, some of the
learned think, that these souls bordring so near upon hell, may very probably
see the Devils, and Su. cit. n. 10.
the damned souls, and hear their most execrable blasphemies, and that this is
no small addition to their pains, to hear their good God, whom they entirely
love, to be incessantly cursed, blasphemed, and renounced by those devilish
and sacrilegious spirits. St. Catharine of Siena was heard to say, she had
rather suffer all the torments of Hell, then hear one blasphemy against God,
for whom she had so much cordial love, and who is of himself so lovely. I
confess this is a sweet kind of torment, as proceeding from supernatural and
divine love, but I maintain withal, that it is a torment and a most grievous
one, because though the Arrows of Love are gilded over, or made of pure gold,
yet are they as sharp pointed, and as piercing to the quick, as those of Grief,
though they be but of steel. Confusion is one of Their confusion.
the most intolerable evils which can befall a soul, and therefore St. Paul
speaking of our blessed Savior, Ad Heb^. 12. 2.
insists much upon this, that he had the courage and the love for us all to
overcome the pain of a horrible confusion, which doubtless is an unsupportable
evil, to a man of wit and courage. Tell me then if you can, what a burning
shame, and what a terrible confusion it must needs be, to those noble and
generous souls to behold themselves overwhelmed with a confused chaos of fire,
and such a base fire, which affords no other light but a sullen glimmering,
choakt up with a sulphurous and stinking smoke, and in the interim to know,
that the souls of many country clowns, mere idiots, poor women and simple
religious persons, go straight up to Heaven, whilst they lie there burning,
they, that were so knowing, so rich, and so wise, they that were Counselors to
Kings, eminent Preachers of Gods Word, and renowned Oracles in the world, they
that were so great Divines, so great Statesmen, so capable of high employments.
This confusion is much heightened by their further knowing, how easily they
might have avoided all this, and would not. Sometimes they would have given
whole mountains of Gold, to be rid of a stone in the Kidneys, or a fit of the
Gout, Colic or burning Feavour. And for a handful of Silver, they might have
redeemed many years torments in that fiery Furnace; and alas, they chose rather
to give it to their dogs and their horses, and sometimes to men more beasts
then they, and much more unworthy. Me thinks this thought should be more vexing
then the fire it self, though never so grievous.

And yet there remains one The remembrance of their ungrateful Children.
thought more, which certainly has a great share in completing their
martyrdom, and that is the remembrance of their children, or heirs; which
they left behind them, who swim in Nectar, and live jollily, on the goods
which they purchased with the sweat of their brows, and yet are so ungrateful,
so brutish, and so barbarous, that they will scarce vouchsafe to say a Pater
noster in a whole month for their souls who brought them into the world, and
who to place them in a terrestial Paradise of all worldly delights, made a hard
venture of their souls, and had like to have exchanged a temporal punishment
for an eternal. The remnants and superfluities of their Lacquies, a cast at
Dice, and yet less then that might have set them free from these hellish
torments; and these wicked ungrateful wretches, would not so much as think on
it.

4. How long the Souls are detained in Purgatory?
IF all these punishments passed away like a tempest, if the time of their
continuance were but short, their case were not so deplorable. But how long
think you does a soul dwell in Purgatory? First, it is most certain, that these
pains are not eternal, otherwise it were not Purgatory, but hell it self; for
in this chiefly lies the difference between hell and Purgatory, that the pains
of Purgatory, lasts but for a time; those of hell for an eternity. Again, it is
most certain, that they survive not the day of Judgment, and St. Augustine
proves it evidently, because then all souls are to S. Aug. de. civit. c. 16.
receive their last doom, and be immoveably fixed, in an eternity of good or
evil. Thirdly, it is most certain, that all the Souls shall not be there
punished equally, neither for extent of time, nor proportion of torment, for as
their crimes were not equal, so the punishment cannot be equal, where Justice
bears the sway. Fourthly, It is also certain, says the Learned and Judicious
Suarez, after others, Su^d. 46. Sect. 4. n. 6.
that we must not apply the revelations of certain devout persons, to all the
souls in Purgatory, All Visions and Apparitions of Souls, not to be credited.
but rather ought to be very reserved in this kind, and not easily to give
credit to all such stories, which pass for revelations, for though God in his
secret judgments, may be pleased to punish some disloyal souls, after a
particular manner, yet must we take heed, how we draw general conclusions, from
particular cases. For since private revelations, are not Articles of Faith, we
must be very cautious, and proceed warily in this matter, especially where we
see such kind of revelations seemingly to clash one against another. We must
therefore wave such extraordinary cases, and honor them with due respect, but
not build so much upon them, as to draw thence universal maxims. Wherefore in
this place I mean not to speak, but of the common and ordinary style of Gods
providence, laying aside all particular visions, and personal exemplar
punishments, which God has reserved to himself. Now there have been some so
bold, as to maintain, that all the souls lie in Purgatory but a few hours, and
are then quit and released of their pains. Their The Souls not so soon released
as some imagine.
grounds are, first, because the pains may be so doubled, and scrued up to such
a height, as to equal any extension of pain what soever. Secondly, because the
souls there do exercise such acts of love, and other sublime virtues, all which
conspire to purify these poor creatures, so that the business is soon
dispatched. Were this true, it were very good news, but the mischief is, that
most divines censure this assertion as too bold and temerarious, and in truth
it has very little or no probability, and were a way in effect to destroy
Purgatory, since we may cut off half of those few hours they speak of, by
redoubleing the pains, and another half of these by redoubling them again, and
so go still halving the time, by doubling the pains till we reduce them to a
quarter of an hour, or half a quarter, or possibly to an instant, or so little
durance, as to be scarce begun but ended. Which kind of Purgatory, though it
may have place in those souls which depart immediately before the day of
judgment, when the intention of the pain must supply for the extent of time,
which will be then wanting, in regard that there is to be no more Purgatory,
after that general accompting day, yet to apply it commonly to other souls,
where there is no need of such subtilties, were to confound all things. It is
the ordinary strain of Gods Justice, to proceed by degrees, and therefore there
must be a competent time allotted for those punishments. And this is the
general belief of the Church, that the souls are kept there for a time, some
more, some less, each one according to his desert, and though happily some
choice souls, do but as it were kiss the gates of Purgatory, and rather feel
the smoke then the fire, yet the greater part of them, lie there for some
considerable time, to satisfy the sweet rigor of divine justice. I am not
ignorant, that some great Divines have believed, that if a soul stay there for
a year or two it is all. For say they, how can you require more of them, then
to be two years miserably tormented in a burning furnace? That which here might
have been redeemed with a tear of true contrition, or with a sigh of ardent
charity, can it not be purged with flames of fire, in two whole years in the
other world? The most barbarous cruelty in this life, is scarce ever seen to
reach beyond a few hours, and what shall we then say, of two years in
Purgatory, which are as it were two ages, or two little eternities, (so great
are the torments) shall it not be enough, to purify the most unclean soul in
the world, so she be in the state of Grace. But yet this opinion is not
received in the Church, and it is a great madness, to attempt any thing,
contrary to the common judgment of the Church; and her Learned Doctors.

Sotus held a singular opinion of his own; that no soul Sect. in 4. d. 17. q.
3.
remains in Purgatory above ten years. For, said he, we must set some bounds to
the rigor of Gods justice, who does all things in number, weight, and measure,
and is said to dispose all things sweetly. And is not ten years of most bitter
pains, a great number, a grievous weight and an everflowing measure, to say
nothing of so many prayers, so many masses, so many tears, so many privileged
altars, and Plenary indulgences, so many alms, and other good deeds of the
living, and then the most powerful intercession of the whole court of Heaven,
but especially of our blessed Lady, and her beloved son, who is the Attorney
general of the whole Church, and who pleads for her with a most persuasive and
divine Rhetorique. Yet for all this, I must tell you, many divines lay heavy
censures upon this opinion, sticking not to call it, not only temerarious, but
also erroneous; and the common sense of the church is quite contrary, as
appears by the immemorial custom, of perpetual foundations of set Masses, to
be yearly said, for such particular persons, and to continue to the worlds end,
all which would be needless, if almighty God put a period to their punishments,
after ten years; for to what purpose are those Masses after the ten years, are
expired? And though the most learned of this age, will not take upon them to
condemn this opinion of error, yet they all accuse it of much temerity, No
certain time beyond which a soul may not be tormented.
because in truth this whole business is very uncertain, as being a secret
locked up in the cabinet of God himself, and letters sealed up, which our
Savior would not hitherto open to his Spouse the church, so that whilst it
remains in the nature of a secret, we must not presume to define any thing
precisely. Only this we know, that many souls, do but touch Purgatory as it
were with their finger and away, others lie there whole hours, days, months,
and years, and as we are not easily to credit those visions, which threaten the
souls in Purgatory, with a continuance of their torments until the last day,
so are we to believe, that God can well punish some of them, so long that the
space of ten years, in comparison should seem little or nothing to it. Hence it
is a very laudable and pious custom, to found Masses to perpetuity, because
alas! who knows whether he may not be, of the number of those unfortunate
souls, who are to be kept there so long. How few know truly the state of their
own souls, and the debts they are to pay to the severity of our most just
judge, who is indeed full of clemency, but such as is ever accompanied, with an
impartial justice worthy of God. I may add here, that the piety of the
founders, looks not only upon the releasing of their own souls out of
torments, which they are assured will have an end sooner or later, but they
open their hearts and bowels of charity, and extend it to others, who from time
to time shall be in Purgatory, and very possibly, have no body to remember them
in their devotions. This certainly is a work of charity, well becoming a good
Catholic, and a well disposed soul, to provide so, as to cooperate even
after his death to the help, and salvation of other souls, and to be ever and
anon sending some into Heaven, by antedating the time of their deliverance, and
increasing the number of the glorious Saints. Mean time, what an inconsolable
grief is it to the poor souls, to see themselves plunged over head and eare^,
in flames of fire, and condemned to remain there, ten, twenty, a hundred years,
and perhaps to the worlds end, if their friends upon earth do not afford them
their best assistance? middle State of Souls, lately censured by his Holiness.


There are some few of late, are fallen so far into the contrary extreme, that
they cannot afford a soul once in Purgatory, should ever get out, before the
day of judgment. But as this strange Paradox, took its rise chiefly, from a
false conceit, of the nature of a spiritual substance, and other wild
principles of a new minted Philosophy, so is it generally cried down, and not
only contradicted, by many known apparitions, and revelations, which the Reader
will meet with in this Treatise, attested by such grave Authors, and Fathers
of the Church, that he has little reason to suspect them for old wives tales,
or melancholy dreams, as these men would have them: but seems to have been
blasted long In Bullar. Romans Conc. Flor. in lit. vnionis. act. 4.
ago, and condemned, in a particular Bull of Pope Benedict the eleaventh, and
in the holy Council of Florence, where it was expressly defined, that those
souls which after they have contracted the blemish of sin, are Purged either
in their bodies, or being uncloathed of their bodies, are presently received
into heaven. And since the Author of this extravagance, will have Tradition to
be the sole rule of our Faith, (of which Tradition, we can have no clearer
proof, then from the testimony of the Church) let him but look into the general
doctrine, and practice of the church, both now at this present, and time out of
mind, and he shall discover as clear a Tradition, for this common persuasion
of the souls being released out of Purgatory, some sooner, some later,
according to their own deserts, and the relief of our suffrages, as for any
other thing in the world. Do not good people generally ground themselves upon
this, when they offer up their prayers, give alms, procure Masses and Diriges,
apply Indulgences, for the present relief of their deceased friends? Is not the
whole practice of Christians (for as much as concerns their piety to the
faithful departed) built so wholly upon this, that (were it not true) we must
conclude, that the whole Catholic church has been all along fooled, by her
Pastors and Doctors? Who has ever hitherto so much as fancied it in a dream,
that his suffrages for the dead, were to be of no greater advantage to them,
then as far forth as they had power, to advance the time appointed for the day
of judgment? which for my part I apprehend so coldly, that, did I not rely
upon better motives, I should soon lay a side all devotion for the souls
departed.

But I mean not here to dispute the question, since this Treatise is not
intended so much, in a polemical, as in an affectuous and moving way, And
therefore I leave it for others, who have already entered the lists, and are
engaged in the quarrel. And so I take no notice, how it can stand with Gods
impartial justice, that, whereas many souls may leave this world, in the same
condition, as to Purgatory, that is (in this Authors opinion) with the same
bur^hen of depraved affections, some of them shall lie 1000 years in Purgatory,
to wit, those that die 1000 years before the day of judgment, an^ others but a
day, or an hour, or a moment, to wit, those that die immediately before that
general accompting day. For since he owns no other pain in Purgatory, but that
which flows from the said crooked inclinations and affections bent against
reason (which I suppose to be the same in all) why should some of them (as it
must necessarily follow in these principles) shake them off so soon, and others
groan so long under them? Again, I say nothing how harshly it sounds in a
christians ear, that a holy soul in the other world, should not only still
pursue the same wicke^ inclinations, for example, to drunkenness, gluttony, and
carnality, which she had in this life, but that this should be her only
punishment. I say as little, how in this opinion, great sinners, that die
immediately Trid. sess. 14. c. 2. Flor. act. 4. cit.
after baptism (who certainly go directly into heaven) must needs carry their
Purgatory with them into heaven. For since it is evident that baptism does not
blot out their perverse inclinations, they cannot be dispossessed of them, but
must of necessity carry them into the other world, as well as others, and
consequently must have their Purgatory in Heaven, Purgatory being nothing else
with him, but the inhering strife and fury of such irrational affections. I let
slip a world of other absurdities, because my aim, as I told you, in
publishing this Treatise, is not to canvase curious and impertinent questions
of Purgatory, but to move the Reader, to a solid devotion for the poor souls,
which I fear is not a little cooled, since these fond opinions came to light.

But now me thinks, I hear my Reader very inquisitive to know.

. 5. Whether their pains-grow less and less?
IT is pity to see sometimes how your greatest divines are entangled, and lost
in their over subtle speculations. As for the pain of loss, which the souls
endure by being deprived of the sight of God, they agree; that, it is daily
much lessened, for seeing the time draw nearer, in which they are to be made
happy with the sight of God, whom they love so ardently, it exceedingly
rejoices them, and certainly they cannot choose but much sweeten, and
consequently lessen their pains, by the frequent repetitions of that devout
aspiration, which St. Teresia was wont to use, when she heard the clock strike.
O lovely hour, how do thou rejoice me, by bringing me the welcome news,
that I am now a whole hour nearer to the sight of God. For a heart that loves,
cannot but be overjoyed, to know, that, he approaches to the fair object of
his love, though it be but a moment. But as for the pain of sense, your
Doctors are divided, some hold, that as for the continuance, that is certainly
shortened every day, by the day that is past, which is evident, and in
particular, that the prayers of the faithful, obtain of God, an abridgement of
the length of the time, which he taxed for their punishment, so that the more
one prays for the souls, the more is cut off, of the time of their suffering,
which by that means becomes the more tolerable. But as for the sharpeness, and
intenseness of the pain, and the action or activity of the fire, as they speak
in schools, that is as grievous in the last moment, as at the first, and as
painful in the end, as at the beginning of their Purgatory. And they flatter
the souls, as if this were best for them, because the greater the pains are,
which they endure, the sooner are they purged, and made worthy to enjoy the
presence of God. Others teach, that as well the pain, as the time, are
continually lessened, according to the proportion of the relief, which they
receive from the suffrages of the Church. And why not? since Gods goodness is
so great, such is the desire of the Church that begs it, the tears of the
faithful pretend to no less, and we must not consider the fire as an Element
working naturally, and equally at all times, but rather as an instrument of
Gods justice, who gives it more or less force and power, to work upon the
souls, as he pleases. Why should Almighty God, who is so loving a Father,
refuse to give this relief, at the earnest suite of children, in behalf of
their Parents, Brothers, Sisters, and dearest friends, I say at their instance,
who are so sensible of their torments, and so much concerned for their ease and
relief. I willingly embrace this opinion, as more worthy of the bowels of
mercy, more sympathizing with the heart of Christ Jesus, and better suiting
with the prayers of the Church, and the sighs of Christians. And certainly none
can better clear this difficulty, then the souls themselves, who feel the
pains we speak of, and these have often by Gods permission appeared to their
friends and devout persons, and born witness for this truth; that their pains
were still lessened, as they received new succor, from the pious endeavors of
their friends upon earth, until they came at length to cease and determine.
And we must not here be too nice, and hard of belief, for, as it is an argument
of too much rashness and folly, to give credit to all pretended visions, of
what nature soever, so it argues too much brutishness, and profaness, to
believe none; especially, when they are authorized by the Church, and by
persons of authority and credit beyond exception, that we must either believe
them, or believe nothing in this World.

6. A notable example in confirmation of all the precedent Doctrine.
BEfore I leave off finishing this Picture, or put a period to the
representation of the pains of Purgatory, I cannot but relate a very remarkable
History, which will be as a living Picture before your eyes. But be sure you
take it not to be of the number of those idle stories, which pass for old
wives tales, or mere imaginations of cracked brains and simple souls. No, I
will tell you nothing but what venerable Bede, so grave Beda hist. Angl. lib.
5. cap. 13.
an Author, witnesses to have happened in his time, and to have been generally
believed, all over England, without contradiction, and to have been the cause
of wonderful effects, and which is so authentical, Bellarmin. de gemicu
columbae, l. 2. c. 9.
that Cardinal Bellarmine, a man of that judgment as the world knows, having
related it himself, concludes thus. For my part I firmly believe this History,
as very conformable to the holy Scripture, and whereof I can have no doubt
without wronging truth, and wounding my own conscience, which ought readily to
yield assent, unto that which is attested by so many, and so credible
witnesses, and confirmed by such holy and admirable events.

About the year of our Lord 690 a certain English man, in the County of
Northumberland, by name ^rithelmus, being dead for a time, was conducted to the
place of Purgatory by a guide, whose countenance and apparel was full of
light; you may imagine it was his good Angel, Here he was showed two broad
Valleys, of a vast and infinite length, one full of glowing firebrands and
terrible flames, the other as full of Hail, Ice, and Snow, and in both these
innumerable souls, who as with a whirlwinde, were tossed up and down, out of
the intolerable scortching flames, into the insufferable rigours of cold, and
out of these into those again, without a moment of repose or respit. This he
took to be hell, so frightfull were those torments, but his good Angel told him
no, it was Purgatory, where the souls did penance for their sins; and
especially such as had differred their conversion, until the hour of death;
and that many of them were set free, before the day of Judgment, for the good
Prayers, Alms, and Fasts of the living, and chiefly by the holy sacrifice of
the Mass. Now this holy man being raised again from death to life by the power
of God, first made a faithful relation of all that he had seen, to the great
amazement of the hearers, then retired himself into the Church, and spent the
whole night in prayer, and soon after, gave away his whole estate, partly to
his wife, and children, and partly to the poor, and taking upon him the habit,
and profession of a Monk, lead so austere a life, that though his tongue had
been silent, yet his life and conversation spoke a loud, what wonders he had
seen in the other world. Sometimes they should have seen him, (as old as he
was) in freezing water up to the ears, praying and singing with much
sweetness, and incredible fervor, and if they had asked him, brother, alas!
how can you suffer so much sharp and bitting cold? O my friends, would he say,
I have seen other manner of colds then these. Thus when he even groaned under
the voluntary burden of a world of most cruel mortifications; and was
questioned, how it was possible, for a weak and broken bod^, like his, to
undergo such austerities, Alas! my dear brethren would he still say, I have
seen far greater austerities then these, they are but roses and perfumes in
comparison of what I have seen in the subterraneous lakes of Purgatory. And in
these kind of austerities, he spent the remainder of his life and made a holy
end, and purchased an eternal Paradise, for having had but a sight of the pains
of Purgatory. And we dear Christians if we believed in good earnest, or could
but once procure to have a true sight or apprehension of them, should certainly
have other thoughts, and live in another fashion then we do.

The second Survey.
A Glimpse of the Paradise of Purgatory, or of the ineffable Joys, and
Heavenly consolations of the Souls there.

I Do not style that the Paradise No terrestrial Paradise in the way to heaven.
of Purgatory, which some have fancied, as if the souls, having almost clean
cancelled out all those impurities, which they here contracted, were to be
conveyed into a terrestrial Paradise, or a most delicious garden of pleasure,
smiling with a divine amenity, there to dispose themselves the better to see
God, without suffering any pain of sense. For although this fancy may appear to
have something of piety, yet has it little or nothing of solidity, and I am
resolved to couch nothing here that is not very Massive, Solid and
substantially well grounded. Now the Council of Florence, Flor. sess. ult.
seems to take away all credit from this opinion of a terrestrial Paradise,
and so down goes all that goodly fabric, built in the air. For, (says the
Council) either the souls are quite purged, and if so, they are immediately
received into heaven, and made worthy to behold God, or they want still more
purging, and refining, and then they are still like to lie by it in Purgatory.
From whence it clearly follows, that the souls departed* can have no time left
them, to entertain themselves in those pleasant gardens, and sweet breathings,
they so much magnify.

Wherefore under the notion of the Paradise of Purgatory, I understand, the
excessive joys of these captive souls, the incomparable acts of their will and
understanding, and the continual favors shour'd down upon them from Heaven,
even amidst their most cruel torments.

. 1. How these excessive joys can stand with their unspeakable torments?
TO make this good, we must A separate soul acts without control.
first suppose, that the actions of a soul disengaged from the body, are quite
of a different nature, from those which she exercises, while she is chained to
a lump of flesh, drowned in blood and other humors, kept in thraldom by her
tyrannical passions, and brutish affections, overburthened with deadly frights,
and fears, and leading a kind of slavish, and miserable life. Tertullian came
near the mark, when he compared a soul in this world, to a Coachman, that is
to guide four unruly Horses, without Rains, a Soldier that has his Sword in
his hand, but his Arms tied, a swift courser, that would run, but is tethered,
a bird that would fly, but has his wings clammed up with Bird-lime. Now when
the soul is once set free from this bondage, and lives at liberty, this
Coachman drives, this Soldier strikes, this Courser runs, this Bird flies,
and this Soul does what she pleases without control. Besides, that which
makes the actions of a Soul in this life, to be so weak and unperfect, is the
necessary dependence, which she has of the body, into which she is so
ingrafted, that she seems, to be but one, and the self same thing with it. If
the body be oppressed with pain, the soul is so deeply plunged in it, she can
think of nothing else; you must work a miracle, to make her have so much as a
good thought, or g^ve you a good word, she is grown so lumpish, you would
think, her whole spirit were resolved into flesh. And this may be the reason,
why the holy Scripture, so often compares men to beasts, as to Lions, Foxes,
and the like, because their souls become brutish, by following the dictaments,
and motions of their sensual, and beastly appetites.

But you must observe that all The power of grace above nature
this happens, while a soul is left to her self, and her own natural forces,
for when the divine goodness is pleased, to furnish her with plenty of his
grace, even in this world, as wicked as it is, this grace has such an ascendant
over nature, and breathes such spirit, and vigor into a soul, that she can
wrestle with all difficulties, and remove all obstacle^, nay though the body be
borne, and sunk into the very center of misery, yet can she still hold up her
head, and steer her course toward heaven.

Now will you clearly see, how the souls can at the same instant, swim in a
paradise of delights, and ^et be overwhelmed with the hellish torments of
Purgatory? cast your eyes upon the holy Martyrs of Gods Church, and observe
their behavior. They were torn, mangled, dismembered, flead alive, rackt,
broyled, burnt, and tell me, was not this to live in a kind of Hell, and yet in
the very height of their torments, their hearts and souls, were ready to leap
for joy; you would have taken them, to be already transported into heaven. Hear
them but speak for themselves. O lovely Cross, made St. Andrew.
beautiful by the precious body of Christ, how long have I desired thee, and
with what care have I sought thee, and now I have found thee, receive me into
thy arms, and lift me up to my dear Redeemer. O death, how amiable art thou in
my Eyes, and how sweet is thy cruelty? Your coals, your flaming firebands, and
all St. Cec^ly.
the terrors of death, are to me but as so many fragrant Roses, and Lillies,
sent from Heaven. Shower down upon me whole deluges St. Stephen
of stones, whilst I see the Heavens open, and Jesus Christ standing at the
right hand of his eternal father, to behold the fidelity of his Champion.
Turn, O St. Laurence.
turn the other side thou cruel Tyrant, this is already broild, and cookt fit
for thy Palate: O how well am I pleased to suffer this little Purgatory, for
the love of my Savior. Make have, O my Soul, St. Agnes.
to cast thy self, upon the nuptial bed of flames, which thy dear Spouse has
prepared for thee. O St. Felicitus and the Mother of the Machabees.
that I had a thousand Children, or a thousand lives, to sacrifice them all to
my God. What a pleasure it is, to suffer for so good a cause? Welcome tyrants,
tygres, St. Ignatius
Lions, let all the torments, that the Devils can invent, come upon me, so I
may enjoy my Savior; I am the wheat of Christ, O let me be ground with the
Lions teeth. Now I begin indeed to be the disciple of Christ, O the luckie
stroke St. Paul.
of a Sword, that no sooner cuts of my head, but makes a breach for my Soul, to
enter into Heaven. Let it be far from me, to glory in any thing, but in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let all evils band against me, and let my body
be never so overloaded with afflictions, the joy of my heart, will be sure to
have the mastry, and my soul will be still replenished with such heavenly
consolations, that no words, nor even thoughts are able to express it.

You may imagine then, that the Souls once unfettered from the body, may
together with their torments, be capable of great comforts, and divine favors,
and break forth into re^olute, heroical and supercelestial acts* The holy Ghost
tells us, that the body that Sap. 9. 15.
is corrupted, burdens the Soul, and the earthly habitation, presses down the
understanding. So that a Soul, by the infirmities of the body, is violently
kept, from the free exercise of her functions, whereas if the body were
supple, pliable, and willing, to follow the perswations of a resolute, and
generous Soul, or the inspirations, with which she is plentifully supplied from
above, what might we not be able to do, even in this life? Now, that which is
not done here, but by very few, who are looked upon, as so many miracles, and
prodigies of men, is easily performed, by those separate holy souls, who are in
the very porch of Heaven, assured of their eternal salvation. In fine, will you
have, a most perfect exemplar, and idea of this wonderful combination, of ^oys,
and griefs, in one simple person; you may clearly see it, in the most sacred
person, of our blessed Savior, who in the midst of his bitter passion, and in
the very height of his agony, and extreme dereliction, when he not only seemed,
to have been abandoned, by his eternal Father, but had even abandoned, and
forsaken himself, by miraculously withholding, the superior part of his
blessed Soul, from relieving, and assisting the inferior, yet even then, had
all the comforts of Heaven, and saw God face to face, and consequently, was at
the self same time most happy; by the fruition of the beatifi^al vision, and
yet so oppressed with griefs, that he cried out himself, my soul is sorrowful
unto death; and again, O my God, alas! why have thou thus forsaken me!
Conceive something like unto this, of the Souls in Purgatory, who are most
miserably tormented, and yet replenished with heavenly comforts.

. 2. Two maine grounds of their comfort, the double assurance they have of
their salvation, and impeccability.
THe better to unfold you this They are certain of their salvation.
riddle, I must tell you, that possibly the most solid, and powerful ground of
their comfort, is the assurance of their eternal salvation, and that one day
when it shall please God, they shall have their part in the joys of Paradise.
That which is the sorest affliction in this life, unto the most refined Souls,
in the greatest torments, is the fear of offending God, and making an unhappy
end, for want of the gift of perseverance (of which none can be assured without
a particular revelation) and so becoming the Devils martirs, by purchasing one
Hell, with another. For if an Angel should come down from Heaven, and give this
infallible assurance, unto an aff^^cted person, that undoubtedly he shall be
saved, as being one of the choice number of the elect, certainly his very heart
would leap for joy, nor would the severest usage, with death it self, and
death represented in her most frightful, and ghastly attire, seem cruel or
irksome unto him, but exceeding welcome, and pleasant. When almighty God was
pleased once, to reveal unto St. Francis, his eternal predestination, and to
seal him, as it were, a deed of gift of Paradise, this Seraphin incarnate, was
so transported, with an ecstasy of joy, and so ravished out of himself, that
for eight days together, he did nothing but go up and down, crying out,
Paradise, Paradise, O my soul, thou shall have Paradise, and had so quite lost,
all memory of eating, drinking, sleeping, suffering, living, dying, and all
things else, as being inebriated, with the sweet remembrance of that
comfortable news, of eternal bliss, that he was not at all sensible, of any
oppression of nature, nor seemed to be the least concerned for it. For, said
he, what can any thing else avail me, since I am one day to have Paradise,
with all the delights of Heaven. Now, if we Suar. d. 47. S. 3.
credit, the holy doctors of the Church, and best divines of the Christian
world, the Souls in Purgatory, are most certain of their salvation: For no
sooner is the Soul departed this life, but she is brought to a particular
judgment where she receives an award of her eternal state of glory, or
confusion, and from the mouth of God, hears the irrevokable sentence, from
which there is no appeal, no civil request, no review of process, no writ of
error, for this decree of Gods justice, must immediately be put in execution.
They say further, that in the same moment, that a Soul sees her self condemned
to Purgatory, she sees also, the precise time, prescribed her, to continue
there, according to the ordinary strain of Gods justice. But whether she know
also by divine revelation, who will pray for her, and what assistance in
particular they will give her, or how much will be cut of, of the time
determined for her punishment, is a nicer question, which I purposely leave
untouched for others to exercise their wits in, as they please, and make have
to take up the thread of my discourse, I was letting fall, in which I am to lay
before your eyes, the ineffable joys of the souls in purgatory, when they
seriously reflect, upon the certainty of their salvation, and how soon they
shall be drowned in the Divinity, and yet swim in an Ocean of all heavenly
comforts. When Jacob knew for certain, that he was to have the fair Rachel, he
was content to be espoused first to Lia, though she were blear-eyed, and ill
favored, and besides, a world of heats and colds, frights and fears, and
fourteen years toylesome service, seemd scarce an hour to him, so much was his
heart enchanted, with a holy love, of his dearly beloved Rachel, and so true it
is, that for the enjoyment of that, which a soul loves in good earnest, she
makes no reckoning of fire, and flames, and a thousand Purgatories. So that a
Soul, that is confident, of espousing one day Rachel, that is, the Church
triumphant, sticks not to be first espoused to Lia, that is the Church
suffering, with all the pains in Purgatory, so long as it shall please God, and
fourteen years, are unto her but as an hour, such is the excess of her love to
heaven. O with what a good heart, do I drink up my tears said the royal
Prophet, Ps. 41.
when I remember I shall pass into the heavenly Tabernacle! were I to make my
passage thither, through Hell it self, how willingly would I runn that way?
And to the same tune, cried out St. Chrysostom with a masculine voice, and a
heart which was all heart. If I were to pass through a thousand Hells, so I
might in the end of all meet with Paradise, and my God, how pleasing would
these Hells seem unto me? And certainly there are infinite souls, would be
ready to sign it with their heart blood, that they would be willing to dwell
in the flames of Purgatory, till the day of judgment, upon condition, to be
sure of eternal Glory; at the last; for believe it, they that know well the
meaning of these four words, God Eternity, Glory, and Security, can not but
have a moderate apprehension of Purgatory fire, be it never so hot and furious.

Another heavenly comfort, They are impeccable.
which rejoices these happy souls, in the midst of their torments, is an
infallible and certain assurance, which they have, that, although their pains
be never so insupportable, yet shall they never offend God, neither mortally,
nor venially; nor show the least sign of impatience, or indignation. A true
lover of God, understands this language, and if he do not, shall in a moment
learn it in Purgatory, and find by experience, that a soul there, had rather be
plunged in the deepest pit of Hell, then be guilty of the least voluntary
misdemeanour. So that seeing her self to be grown impeccable, and that no
evils, can have the power, to make her offend God, and that all impatience dies
at the gates of Purgatory, from whence all sins, and humane failings are quite
banished, O God, what a solid comfort must this needs be unto her. The greatest
affliction that good people can have, in the sufferings of this life, is the
fear of ^ffending God, or to think that the violence of their torments, may
make them subject, to break out into a thousand foolish expressions, and to
toss in their heads, as many foolish thoughts, filling their imaginations,
with a world of Chimeras, and idle fancies, of frightful objects, or in a word,
because they appre^end, either death, or sin, or the loss of their merit, and
labor, or that God is angry with them. For grief with the Devils help,
strives to snatch out of our hands, the victorious palm of our sufferings, or
at least to make us stoop to some frailties and imperfections, which imbitter
our hearts. And were it not for this just fear, Saints would not stick at the
greatest evils they can endure in this world. What a joy then must it be to
these holy innocent Souls, to see themselves become altogether impeccable. The
reason of this is clear, because the particular judgment* being once over, the
final sente^^e is also pronounced, and the Soul is no longer in a capacity, to
merit, or demerit, not so much as to satisfy, by any voluntary sufferings of
her own, but only to submit, to the sweet rigor of Gods justice, who has taxed
such a proportion of pains, answerable to her demerits, and so to clear her
conscience, and blot out the remainder of her frailties, and impurities. Make
have to do well before Eccl. 9. 10.
death, is the counsel of Almighty God, for the appointed time wherein to heap
up treasures of justice and merits is before you appear in judgment, for after
that, it will be too late. The very instant that a soul leaves the body,
according to Gods law, there is no more time for merit or demerit, and
therefore the souls, that are sent into Purgatory, are most certain, they shall
never more commit the least sin, that can be imagined. When St. Anthony was so
furiously assaulted, with a whole rabble regim^nt of Devils, he was not greatly
daunted, at all their hideous shapes, terrible howlings, and rude blows, all
his fear was of offending God, he apprehended more the strokes of impatience,
then all the wounds of hell, he called upon Christ for help, and having
obtained the favor of a personal visit, he made him this amourous complaint,
and sweet expostulation.

O good Jesu, where were you, alas where were you even now my dear Savior,
when your enemies and mine, conspired so cruelly against me? why came you no
sooner to relieve me? I was here replied Christ, beholding thee, and preserving
thy heart from sin. If it be so, said the invincible Hermit, do but assure me
this, that I shall not sin, and let Lucifer, with all his accursed crew, and
hellish power, nay let all the world besides band against me, since my God
stands by me, and will secure me from offending him, I make nothing of all the
rest. Pain is no more pain; Hell is no more a hell, but a mere Paradise, since
it helps me to gain Paradise, which is worthy to be purchased with a Million of
Hells.

. 3. More grounds of Comfort arising from their voluntary suffering, their
disinteressed Love of God, and exact conformity with his holy Will.
IN the next place, take this most Voluntary suffering.
sweet and weighty Consideration. An evil that is forced and against ones
will, is a true evil indeed, the constraint and violence it carries along with
it, imbitters it above measure, and renders it insupportable; whereas if the
evil be voluntary, it is a good evil, a lovely evil, an evil to be purchased
at any rate: Witness the ho^y Martyrs of Gods Church, who when they
voluntarily shed their blood, and with a good will poured ou^ their lives, for
Gods cause, though at the cost of the most inhumane torments imaginable, seemed
to make but little reckoning, of the smart of them, as you may observe by their
carriage: For some of them would throw back the worms, that were crept out of
their Ulcerous so^res, others kiss the burning coals, and by way of Honor,
place them on their heads. This holy Martyr, embraces the Gibbet, as if he took
it to be an easy ladder, whereby to mount up straight into Heaven; another
provokes Tigers, and Lions to dismember him. This tender Virgin, leaps into the
fire prepared for her, without staying for the Executioners help; another casts
her self into the Sea, to preserve her Virginity. See the force of Christian
Resolution, which is steered by divine Maxims: They dye and smile at it, they
seem to court Death it self, they choose rather to be under the hands of a
bloody executioner, who can at most bereave them of their lives, then in the
power of the Son of an Emperor, who may rob them of the Lillies of their
Virginal integrity. Nothing can be grievous to him that acts vigorously, and
suffers voluntarily whatsoever falls in his way. This then is one of the Souls
chief Comforts, in those fiery Dungeons: They accept their pains, as from the
hands of their loving Father, who out of his paternal care makes choice of
those rough instruments, to polish and refine them, and so fit them for his
presence. They look upon them as love tokens, sent from their beloved, and
esteem them rather as precious gifts, of their loving lord, then as cruel
punishments inflicted by a severe enemy: They kiss the rod, and the Fatherly
hand, which makes use of it, for their Sovereign good: When a Chyrurgion makes
a deep incifion, to let out the water of a dropsy, when he strikes his lancet
into the arm, when he cuts of a Gangreend-member; the diseased person kisse^
the hand that has made the wound, embraces the Suregon, though sprinkled with
his blood, opens his mouth to give thanks, his purse to reward, his eyes to
bath in tears, and his very heart to love cordially this kind Murderer, who
has so cruelly mishandled him, to do him good, and to save his life. What think
you is the language of these holy Souls, these children of God, in the midst
of their severest torments? Sweet rigours of heaven, amorous cruelties, alas,
why do you vouchsafe so to humble your greatness, to take the pains to purify
us poor Creatures, worthy of a thousand Hells. O the profuse goodness of the
Almighty, who is pleased with the tenderness of a loving Father, to chastise
his wicked Servants, and so to ado^^ them for his dear children. W^^ it
necessary, that himself should take the trouble upon him, to stretch out the
hand of his infinite Justice, to purify such disloyal Souls, far unworthy of
a love so cordial? Oh, let him burn, let him strike, let him thunder, it is but
reason he should do so; for since he is our Father, our Creator, our redeemer,
our dear All, the sole Object of all our lives; howsoever he handles us, we
shall still take it for a great favor, and esteem our selves over happy, to be
treated, though never so rudely, by so good a hand. Have they not reason?
Believe it, they experience it to be so sweet, and so reasonable; nay, they
judge it so necessary, for them to suffer in these flames, that though they
should discover a thousand gates open, and a free passage for them, to fly out
of Purgatory into Paradise, nor so much as one soul would stir out, before she
had fully satisfied the divine Justice, Paradise would be to them a Purgatory,
should they carry thither, but the least blemish in the world. When Isaac saw
the sword in Abraham's hand, ready to strike off his head, and reflected that he
was to receive the deadly wound from the hands of his dear Father, that good
and virtuous young man, could neither find tongue to plead for his life, nor
feet to run away, and decline the stroke, nor hands to defend himself, nor so
much as eyes to deplore his sad misfortune; but yet was content to have a heart
to love his good Father and a head to loose, and a life to sacrifice upon the
altar of Obedience, and believed the fire, which was prepared to destroy him,
was to be as the odoriferous flaming Pile of the Phoenix, wherein she is
consumed, to rise again to a new and happy life. The holy souls, that burn in
the flames of Purgatory, are much better disposed, to embrace whatsoever God
shall ordain, then Isaac was in regard of his Father.

But there is yet something of a To be where God has placed them
higher nature to be said upon this point. We have all the reason in the world,
to believe that God of his infinite Goodness, inspires these holy souls with
a thousand heavenly lights, and such ravishing thoughts, that they cannot but
take themselves to be extreme happy; so happy, that St. Catherine of Genua
professed, she had learnt of Almighty God, that, excepting only the blessed
Saints in heaven, there were no joys comparable to those of the Souls in
Purgatory. For (said she) when they consider, that they are in the hands of
God, in a place, deputed for them by his holy Providence, and just where God
would have them, it is not to be expressed, what a sweetness they find in so
amorous a thought, and certainly, they had infinitely rather be in Purgatory to
comply with his Divine pleasure, then be in Paradise, with violence to his
Justice, and a manifest breach of the ordinary laws of the house of God. I will
say yet more (continued she) it cannot so much as steal into their thoughts,
to desire, to be any where, else then where they are, supposing God has so
placed them, they are not at all troubled, that others get out before them, and
they are so absorpt in this profound Meditation, that they are at Gods
disposal, in the bosom of his sweet Providence; that they cannot so much as
dream of being any where else. So that me thinks, those kind expressions of
Almighty God by his Prophets, to his chosen people, may be fitly applied to the
unhappy, and yet happy condition, of these holy Souls. Rejoice you my people,
says the living God, for I swear unto you by my self, that when you shall
pass through flames of Fire, they shall not hurt you, I shall be there with
you, I shall take of the Edge, and blunt the points of those peircing flames. I
will raise the bright Aurora in your darkness, and the darkness of your nights
shall outshine the midday. I will power out my peace into the m^dst of your
hearts, and replenish your souls with the bright shining lights of Heaven. You
shall be as a paradise of delights bedewed with a living fountain of heavenly
waters You shall rejoice in your Creator, and I will raise you above the hi^ht
of Mountains, and no^rish you with Manna and the sweet inheritance of Jacob,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoke it, and it cannot fail, but shall be sure
to fall out so, because he has spoken it.

Did we truly know what is the Love without intesest.
pure love of God, a love without interest, and a heart that neither has, nor
will have any other ends, feelings or designs, but those of Almighty God,
happily we might be able to conceive, a good part of the paradise of the souls
in Purgatory. Those good souls, see so clearly, how much it imports them, to
have no other concern, or interest, but for Gods cause, that without the least
regard to their own sufferings, they had infinitely rather dwell in Purgatory,
(since God will have it so) then be surrounded with the sweets of Paradise,
without Gods pleasure; nay more though they had not the least blemish, to wipe
out, and the only question were, to comply with Gods blessed will, who for some
reason best known to himself, were pleased to treat them in this rude fashion.
This pure love without all self interest, is more forcible, then any other
consideration. For if St. Paul could wish himself in hell, if Moses could have
been content, to be blotted out of the book of life, if others have offered
themselves to remain in Purgatory til doomesday, to have the assurance of
their own salvation, or to suffer for the good of others, and all this, either
out of a kind of self love, or an excess of fraternall charity, and while they
were yet entangled with the apprehensions of this wicked world, what may not a
soul do, which is full of divine love, without any mixture of self interest, so
purely refined, as not to desire any thing but God, and the execution of his
inscrutable designs. And since all holy souls are of this temper, in the other
world, I am confident, there is not any one soul, would quit Purgatory, where
God has placed her, nor any that would not most willingly exchange Heaven for
purgatory, should she discover the least inclination of Gods will, that it
should be so. The Saints are much perfecter then mortal men, who
notwithstanding all the weakness of frail nature, could have the heart to cast
themselves into burning flames, when they saw it made for Gods greater glory,
and could there sing out his praises. So happy did they take themselves to have
the power of serving God, without any other interest, then that of his glory,
nay with the ruin of their very lives, and all other worldly concerns. And
when they had done all this, they would break out into tears, as the most
eloquent, though silent expression of a favor, they never took themselves to
deserve. Wherefore since all the souls in Purgatory, have not only a perfect,
but also an experimental knowledge; of this pure love, and withal see such a
world of devout souls, who are still pouring themselves out into such heroical
acts, of pure love, how much think you does this encourage them to do their
best in this kind. And can you think after all this; that God will suffer
himself to be overcome in curtesy, or charity, and not be still furnishing
them, with a fresh supply of new lights, and celestial comforts? And
certainly, the Heavenly raptures.
attractions of Almighty God, are not to be numbered amongst his least favors,
they do so transport a soul, and so absolutely master her, that she neither
feels nor cares for all the torments in the world which the body suffers,
^hile she is thus absorpt, and even lost in Almighty God. They applied
causticks to St. Thomas of Aquin, while he was rapt in his profound
speculations of Divinity, and he seemed not to feel the least smart, or at
least took no notice of it, he was so ravished, and drowned in Almighty God.
They tell the same of the seraphical St Francis, how when he was once gone out
of himself, with an ardent affection of the love of Jesus Christ, they applied
the button cautere, and the good Saint felt it no more, then if it had been a
button of glass or crystal. Many other servants of God, in their extaticall
raptures, and lofty meditations, of the joys of Heaven, have been pricked wi^h
needles, wounded with lances, and persecuted with rude blows, cold water, hot
irons, and the like, and yet for all this, could not be drawn out of their
sweet quiet, and repose, to give the least attention, to these rough
entertainments. What shall we say now, of those fair souls, lately flown out
of their bodies, who are so forcibly carried away with the pure love of God,
and his eternal glory; who see themselves so near it, and so certain to enjoy
it, and to be swallowed up in the immense Ocean of the Divinity. So my son may
be one day Emperor of Rome, (said the ambitious Agrippian) I shall most readily
yield, to be soon after thrown headlong into the bottomless sea. And do you
think those souls, who are most certain to reign for ever, in the Empireall
heaven, can complain of the fire, wherewith they are tormented for a few hours,
or years, which are but so many moments compared with eternity. St. Catherine
of Genua assures us* that God does so violently, and withal so sweetly attract
and draw after him, these happy souls, that it is impossible to find out words
to express it, or any parallel to this, sweet and amorous violence.

This pure love, which the souls Conformity with Gods will.
have for Almighty God, goes not without a perfect conformity to his divine
will: And this is the thing, which of all others metamorphoses Purgatory into
Paradise. To have the same will with Almighty God, says holy St. Bernard is to
be like God, but S. Bern. ep. ad fratres de monte die.
not to have the power to have any other will, but Gods, is to be what God is,
that is content, and happy, in whatsoever condition. If God, for some special
reason, would have a soul to be a million of years in Purgatory, without fault,
and without hope of any further merit, she would not much concern her self,
neither for the extremity of the pains, nor for the length of the delay, but
would rest satisfied, with a perfect resignation, to Gods holy will.

Can there be any doubt of this, when we find souls even in this miserable
life, so courageous, and so conformable to the divine pleasure, as to offer
themselves, to be buried in Hell fire, so it might but add one single grain of
increase to Gods glory. No, this diformity or uniformity to the designs of
Gods providence, is so excessive great, in these devout souls, so vigorous, and
so puissant, that it cannot be expressed, or conceived in this our gross
ignorant world. The Ecclesiastical Eusebius. Niceph. Baron.
History assures us, that many of the holy Marty^s, whilst they were in flames
of fire melting of their lives, by drops (as I may so say) were heard to
profess, with a smiling countenance, and an invincible heart, that they took
themselves to be at a nuptial feast, and to tread upon Roses. So well were
they pleased, that God was so pleased, and that his blessed will was performed
in them; nay more, that nothing grieved them, but the shortness of their
torments, and the fleeting condition of their petty martyrdoms, as they would
call them. Alas, would they say, were this to last to the worlds end how happy
were we, and how welcome were our flames, by the light whereof, one might
clearly read the fidelity of our hearts, and their conformity to the heart of
the great God of Heaven.

This excessive conformity, and To cooperate with Gods justice.
sidelity of these holy souls, makes them willing, to cooperate with the sweet
rigours of Gods justice against their crimes. Who loves God purely for himself,
loves all that belongs to make up his glory, and since God shows himself as
much God, in the exercise of his justice, as in the sweet influences of his
boundles mercy, a happy soul cannot choose but take pleasure, to cooperate with
Gods justice, in procuring his satisfaction, even at the charge of her own
sufferings, and would most readily annihilate her self, for the honor of her
God. If our hour be come; said the valourous Judas Machabeas, and if God have
so disposed of us, let us die my brethren, and let us die bravely; it must be
as the Heavens have decreed, and I will have it so, though at the cost of a
hundred thousand lives. And holy Job, Is it not reason (said he) that we should
as well receive what we call evils, at the hand of his justice, as favors, at
the hand of his mercy? That noble Roman, that buried his Poniard in his own
Sisters breast, whom he met foolishly bewailing, the good fortune of the City
of Rome, had nothing to alledg for his justification, but this; What (said he)
shall not Rome be Rome, as well in the exercise of rigourous justice, as in
the maintenance of her greatness, and demonstration of her absolute power. Can
I offer a more pleasing holocaust, unto the Gods, then to sacrifice my Sister,
when Romes justice requires it? This Roman severity carries with it. I know not
what masculine generosity, and this cruelty to a foolish Sister, argues much
piety to his dear Country. In effect all the world cried up the fact, which at
first sight, seemed too brutish, barbarous and inhumane. The holy souls that
burn with ardent charity, seeing it necessary, that the divine justice should
receive plenary satisfaction, and that Gods interest is extraordinarlly
concerned, that his justice should rule by course, as well as his mercy,
goodness and charity, these holy souls, I say, seeing all this, have such a
pleasure in their torments, as cannot be comprehended in this miserable life,
which is so full of self-love, but by some few noble and generous souls; that
love God only for himself; and that so purely, as not to make any reckoning of
their own concerns or sufferings.

. 4. Another comfortable consideration, drawn from the desire they have to make
themselves worthy of the sight of God.
TAke another consideration, Their desire to remove all obstacles ^f seeing God.
which will much illustrate that which has been already said, and reinforce the
joy of the souls, in spite of their tormenting pains. You may believe, that a
soul, having once taken leave of the body, has such a passionate inclination,
to enjoy her end, that is to see God and be united with God; and finally to
arrive unto that happiness, for which she clearly sees, she was created, that
it can hardly be expressed. A bird newly stolen out of the Cage wherein she was
detained captive, flies not away swifter, the furious Course of a torrent, that
precipitates it self from the top of a mountain, roules not along with a
greater impetuosity; the enraged winds, broke loose ou^ of their close cavernes
underground blow not with more violence, then the desire of seeing God, thrusts
on a soul once freed from the thraldom of the body.

Now as they see in Purgatory, that there is no other obstacle, but the rust
and filth of sin, and the remainder of their former misdemeanors, and that
Purgatory fire, is deputed by almighty God, to purify and refine them, and so
to make them worthy of his presence, they are so far from grumbling or repining
at this sweet rigor of Gods justice, that on the contrary, they take it for a
great favor and an extraordinary piece of mercy, of almighty God, their most
loving Father. When they sawed off the Leg of that great Philosopher, he held
it out with both his hands, he encouraged the operatour, and perhaps also took
hold of the Saw himself, to do the Surgeon that piece of service, saying
withal, let u^ thrust my friend let us thrust, and let us not fear to cut off
this rotten and useless bone, the pain you give me, will procure me a great
deal of good, and the sooner we have done, the better. Be not afraid then, my
dear enemy, but strike in thy Saw boldly, the crueller thou art for the time,
the sooner thou will put me out of pain. And thus the Surgeon cut off his Leg,
with as little sense or feeling, as if it had been the Leg of a statue, or of a
person, that had no relation to him, or was his mortal enemy. And that Japonian
Virgin, who was to dye by fire, could not hold from kissing the burning
coals, and crying out joyfully, O lovely Hist. Jap^n.
coals, O delicious flames, how much am I obliged to your sweet cruelty, since
you put me in a condition of enjoying, within a few moments, the only spouse of
my Soul, Oh, the souls in Purgatory say the same, with a far greater ardour
of love. And I dare say more yet, that they have such a longing desire, to
cooporate with God in their own purification, and to render themselves capable
of the beatifical vision, that, if it were in their power, to heighten the
rigor of their torments, it would be the first thing they would do, to advance
their eternal felicity. And with reason, for if we were, says St. Austin, to
take the pains of hell, in our way Sermon. 2. in festo omnium sanct.
to see God, in his glory, we ought to suffer them, with a good heart, for a
good so great, that whatsoever it costs, it can never be too dear. Think well
on these words, good Reader, Let God cost never so much, he cannot be too dear.

St. Catherine of Genua was heard to say, she believed, that the greatest pain
which the souls have in Purgatory, is to see, they have an obstacle within
themselves, and some few blemishes, which hinder them for the time, from
enjoying (...) ^ight of their creator; in so much that their spite and anger,
is not so much against the flames, though never so biting, as against these
unlucky blemishes, and loathsome remainder of their sins. Nay they are in a
manner in love with the fire, which by little and little helps to free them
from this cruel pain, and do like the Patient, who kisses the razour, that is
to cut out whole slices of putrified flesh, from a Gangrene, or mortal Ulcer,
which would otherwise insensibly bereave him of his life, if that fierce remedy
were not applied.

. 5. Their suffering without merit, and the free exercise of their virtues
without impediment, are to them special motives of comfort.
What a pleasure, think To exercise virtue without merit and to suffer
without recompense.
you, is it to suffer, or indeed to exercise any virtuous act, merely for the
virtue it self, without casting about for any further recompense, then barely
the doing, what is pleasing to him we love, and who loves us out of his pure
bounty, without any desert of ours. A Roman Lady understanding that Caesar had
condemned her dear Husband Petus, to stab himself, snatched up the dagger first
her self, and struck it deep into her breast, and then with a smiling, but
dying look, spoke thus to him; My dearest, this stab has done me no harm at
all, upon my honor it has not, but alas! the stab that you are going to give
your self, it is that which bereaves me of my life, and with that she gave up
the ghost. Those holy and enamored souls, calling to mind, how Christ died for
them, to pay the ransom of their sins, without looking for any return, by way
of recompense, out of his pure charity, and obedience to his father, they would
most willingly sacrifice themselves, for his glory, in satifaction of justice,
and imitation of his charity, and scarce feel their pains, when they compare
them, with those of their dear redeemer. And though we can scarce apprehend
this joy, we that are so selfish, as to relish nothing but earthly things,
whose hearts are so wedded to our own interests, and so apprehensive of pain,
yet have the patience, to listen to the patheticall expressions, of a man of
this world, who certainly was not without his havenly gusts, but could make a
shift, to find out a Paradise even, in the Purgatory of the sufferings of a
miserable life. You will soon discover by his golden eloquence, who it is that
speaks. Had I the S. Ch^ys. ho. 8. in c. ^^ Ephesians.
choice, to be an Apostle, Prophet, Doctor, nay more, an Angel, and Poten^ate
of heaven, were it in my power to be metamorphosed into a Cherubin, or
Seraphim, and to be raised above their thrones, in a word, to be seated at the
right hand of God, or rather to be thrown down into a dark, loathsome, and
subterraneous jail, there to be manicled, fettered, and greivously tormented
for the sole love of my savior Jesus Christ in company of the glorious Apostle
St. Paul, with out all hesitation, or doubt; I should choose to be there, with
St. Paul, and should prefer it before the joys of heaven. How do you feel your
hearts, when you hear this kind of language? and what, think you, may not the
souls in Purgatory have the like affections, and more heroical, if there can
be any thing thought of more heroical, then to quit heaven for Purgatory, and
to leave God for God, sacrificing themselves entirely to his glory, as a
perfect holocaust, to please his divine will, and appease the sweet rigours of
his justice.

Blessed Father Francis Borgia, was wont to say, he would willingly go to
Purgatory, and lie frying there, to the end of the world, to heap up a new
treasure of grace, and glory, and to become a greater Saint in heaven, and a
more acceptable servant to his divine Majesty. In earnest this was an act of a
noble heart, and purified soul, aspiring to the highest pitch of perfection.
The holy man took it for a most incomparable satisfaction to see himself every
moment, to go on increasing in virtue, and heaping up graces upon graces, and
at the last, to purchase so high a place in the Kingdom of heaven, as not to
have cause to envy the highest Seraphin. And yet me thinks, if I may have
leave to vent my own thoughts, there is something of a holy kind of self
interest, in this point of perfection, holy I say, but withal interest. But
why may we not believe, that those holy captive souls fly higher and offer
themselves to God, to suffer there for one another, out of a divine kind of
civility, and generous act of fraternal charity? For in this world, there have
been Mothers have chosen rather to die themselves then see their dear children
die before them. There have been also souls, as I have touched elsewhere, have
wished to be damned (always understanding that it were without sin) to save
others, and this without hope of grace, or glory, merely in obedience to
perfect Charity. And why should we make such a wonder of it, since the very
Tygress who has no heart, but what is made up of cruelty, has nevertheless love
enough, to cast her self into flames, if she find no other expedient to save
her young ones. Can we believe, that bruits have more love, and mortal men more
charity, and courage, then the holy Souls of Purgatory have for the love of
God, and of those Souls they passionately love. O sweet Purgatory, O amourous
flames of charity, and pure trancendent charity, worthy of the souls, which are
so pure? Sure this is that, which the holy servant of God meant, when she said,
that the souls there are wholly despoyled of all selfinterest, and do wholly
devote themselves to Gods interest, and that of pure charity.

We should soon see wonders in The power ^^ grace and virtue when they act
freely and without impediment.
our selves, would we but give way to our virtues, and those divine graces,
which are hourly showred down upon our souls from heaven, to work according to
the full extent of their energy, and power. But alas, an infirm body, much
passion, a faint heart, with a thousand other obstacles in this life; make us
to do scarce half wha^ we are able. And divines are of opinion, that, besides
the mother of God, there has hardly been one, amongst all other pure
creatures, who has acted according to the full latitude of his power, and those
gracious helps sent him from heaven. Others indeed, have sometimes made valiant
attempts, but it was, as it were, but in a bravado, and by spurts, and they
often came off but poorly, and failed of their designs. But the souls in
Purgatory, who are as it were new minted, and cast into a pure sp^ritual
substance, free from the body, and all corporeal and humane infirmities, nor
are at all impeded by their torments, from the free exercise of all the powers
of their souls, they I say, give full scope and liberty to all the quires of
virtues to play their parts, and suffer grace to have her entire effect, and
this doubtless affords them such unspeakable comforts, and advantages, as
cannot well be expressed in this mortal life. O what ejaculations of their pure
love? what submissions of their profound humility! what conformities of their
wills? what submissive obedience, to the holy decrees of Gods justice? what
fidelity and justice, to satisfy the rigor of Gods justice for all they owe
him? what passionate desire of purity, to see themselves without blemish, or
hinderance from enjoying God? what incredible tenderness toward God, who
treats them so sweetly in comparison of their ingratitude, and infidelity? what
excess of joy, to see themselves, within two fingers breadth as it were of
Paradise? In fine, what a Paradise of virtues, what divine endeavors of these
happy souls? what attractions of almighty God, and heavenly allurements? who
can worthily comprehend, such a medley, of so sweet a Paradise in Purgatory, so
cruelly sweet, and so amorously bitter. And now I understand why St. Catherine
said, that in case the souls did not meet with Purgatory, it would be a kind of
Hell to them, to want the help of those purging flames, to cancel out the
blemishes of their sins, and make them worthy to see God. I have not told you,
what jaculatory prayers they make, what sweet aspiratious they breath out, and
what flaming darts of love, they shoot up into the heart of God. For if the
Martyrs, in the greatest extremity of their torments, could cast out such
gentle sighs, and break into such divine, and amourous speeches, as to draw
tears, from the eyes of a hangman, or tyrant, what will not these holy souls
do, since they have scarce any sweeter entertainment, then to converse with
God, and implore his mercy. The afflictions Lib. de Provid.
and sufferings of the body, says Solucanns, cannot hinder the Paradise of the
soul, and her interior sweetness, much less, when the Soul is in the other
world.

. 6. They joy in the continual decrease of their pains, and influence of pure
heavenly consolations.
THe fire of love, makes more sensibly with them, then their tormenting flames.
The natural instinct, they have to be with God, and their longing thirst, so to
take their fill of those inebriating joys when they see themselves forcibly
detained, and bound fast to so base an Element as Fire, is a torment beyond
expression. St. Ambrose St. Ambr. Ser. 1.
maintains, that the fire of love, which had seized on St. Laurence his heart,
was more active, then that which consumed his flesh, and melted the very marrow
of his bones. Wherefore it must needs be great comfort, unto these sweet souls,
to see that their sufferings, Their pains go still dec^easi^g.
are every moment diminished, if not otherwise, at least, for as much as
concerns the prefixed time of their durance, which goes lessening it self
more and more, as it draws nearer to an end. And, according to the probable
opinion of holy men, the intensenes of the pain it self, is perpetually
remitted, according to the proportion of the fresh supplies of succor, which
the Church militant never fails, to administer unto them, by her prayers, and
sacrifices, since there is not an hour neither by day, nor by night, where
there is not Mass said, or some devout prayers offered up, in some part of the
Christian world. Besides St. Catherine tells us, that God also grows still more
and more liberal, in showring down his heavenly sweet favors, and gracious
influences upon these his wretched, and yet happy souls. There was a young
woman, Heavenly comforts increase upon them. Val. Max.
had lived with her husband, with so much chaste love, that she was not more
tender of her own life, and see^ng him, one day, laid dead upon a burning pile
and having a long time in vain cast about, how she might come to receive him,
at length threw her self just upon his heart, and so chose willingly to die
with him, and mingle her ashes with his. And who doubts but the Angel Gardians,
those Eagles of Paradise, seeing the souls of their pupils, for whom they had
so much tenderness, and care in this life, to lie burning in scorching flames,
often casts himself in, to comfort them, and if not release them, at least
entertain them, with such pleasing discourses as takes of much of the sense of
their bitter torments. When the King asked Daniel, whether the Lyond had not
devoured him, and whether his God had power to preserve him, from that
inevitable death, he answered, yes sir, my God has sent his Angel, who is come
down from Heaven, to protect me, and has tied up the mouths of the hungry
Lions, who have not offered to touch me, nor had I ever so much comfort, in my
whole life, as in this place of death, and despair, for Paradise is every
where, where God and his Angels are. The same happened to those three innocent
young men, who had leisure to sing in the middle of a burning furnace, which of
a kind of Purgatory was become a terrestrial Paradise, or an empereal heaven.
This being so, and the goodness of God comforting the Souls, with a world of
good thoughts, you must know that Purgatory seems a great mercy to them, and so
much the greater by how much they see clearly, the vast difference, between
this condition of theirs, and that of the damned Souls, and what an unspeakable
favor God has done them, to dispose things so sweetly, that they might be
convayed into Purgatory, they that so often deserved to be thrust into Hell
fire, and possibly more then many of the damned souls, since there are
certainly many damned but for one, or two mortal sins, whereas they may know
themselves to have committed thousands: And who knows then, whether in their
ecstasies of love, they may not cry out, with holy S. Gregory. O my God,
increase my griefs, alas! I have deserved far more, but with all be pleased I
beseech thee to remember in thy mercy, to increase also my courage, and to
fortify my patience.

There Is nothing sure that is Nothing to pure heav^nly consolations.
comparable to pure heavenly consolations. When all creatures are wanting, and
all other worldly satisfactions, eclipsed from our hearts, so that we remain in
pure suffrance, and savor nothing but God alone, then it is, says the mistical
divines, that we prosess the joy of all joys, and the quintessence of all true
and solid comfort. God has done us the honor (says St. Paul) to ad Ephesians. 2. 6
make us sit by his divine Majesty, and as it were side by side, to his son
Jesus Christ, a favor, that has so ravished my soul, that I cannot think on it,
without incredible St. Christ. Homil. de laud Pauli.
joy. Where do you imagine was S. Paul (says S. Chrysostom) when he spoke
this? For my part, I believe, he was lying in a dungeon, in irons, neck and
heels together, forsaken of all the world, and that it was in this general
dereliction, when he was surprised with those ravishing joys of heaven, and had
such a feeling of Gods greatness, that he seemed to be already seated at his
right hand. When think you, says S. Thomas, was he rapt up into the In ep. ad
Cor.
third heaven, I am apt to believe, it was at his conversion, when despoiled of
all worldly comforts, and all things failing him at once, all mighty God,
snatched up his soul into heaven, and gave him a sweet relish of the delights of
Paradise. What shall I say then of the souls, who seeing themselves besieged
with fire and torments, and a thousand Martyrdoms, and having no humane
consolation, are put upon a sweet necessity, to have their recourse unto God,
and to seek their contentment in him alone. O what fervent aspirations, what
holy exstasies? what cordial oblations! what divine acts of uniformity! How
amorously does God and his Angels inspire them! what pure lights and affections
do they instill: Hear the Prophet David, Ps 93. 19.
according to the multitude of my bitter griefs, your consolations, O my God,
have rejoiced my heart. And S. Paul, when I 2 Cor. 1. 5.
am oppressed with evils, then it is that my soul swims in celestial joys, and
that I am as it were all can died with sweetness. And the Prophet Esaias, in the
greatness of our furies, in the severest rigor of your anger. O my Lord, you
have cast out some rays of your sweet mercies, and have ravished me with
admiration. Now though all this be said of this mortal life, yet may we in some
proportion give a guess by it, how it fares with the holy souls in Purgatory,
and the rather, because a soul once severed from the body, has much more
liberty, to actuate her self, and to couple an excess of torments with an
excess of joys since the same in some sort has been seen to have happened in
this life. Have you ever read in St Austin, that if a drop of the Heavenly
torrent should fall into Hell, Hell would no longer seem to be Hell, but a kind
of Heaven. Now certainly the divine goodness, lets fall some of those drops
into Purgatory, nor are the Angels sparing, but rather prodigal, in showring
them down upon the souls there, who within a few moments are to be exalted into
Heaven, as high and gracious as themselves, and possibly more.

I begin to fear, this discourse may debauch your devotions, and cool your
charity, and that, seeing the souls enjoy so much comfort in Purgatory, your
compassion for them may grow slack, and so not continue equal to their desert.
Remember then, that notwithstanding all these comforts here rehearsed, the poor
creatures cease not to be grievously tormented, and consequently have extreme
need of all your favorable assistance, pain and endeavors. When Christ Jesus
was in his bitter Agony, sweating blood and water, the superior part of his
soul enjoyed God and his glory, and yet his body was so oppressed with sorrow,
that he was ready to dye, and was content to be comforted by an Angel. In like
manner these holy souls, have indeed great joys, but feel with all such bitter
torments that they stand in great need of our help. So that you will much wrong
them and me too, to stand musing so long upon their joys, as not to apply your
best endeavors to afford them succor. Let us then here break off this
discourse, and pass on to consider, what assistance we owe, and they expect of
our charity, and first let us see what a charity it is to help them.

The third Survey.
That there is not in this world a more eminent or Prudent Act of faternal
Charity, then to help the Souls in Purgatory.

THe Divine Apostle, the Desciple of Paradise, and 1 Cor. 13.
Doctor of the universe, reads us this lesson; that the highest point of
Christian perfection consists in Charity. The abridgment of the Decalogue, the
epitome of the whole Bible, the quintecense of all virtues, is finally reduced
to this sole point of divine Love. Now fraternal charity, or the love of our
neighbor, is cozen German to the love of God, and upon these two holy loves, as
upon the two Poles of the World, moves the Heaven of all perfections. They are
the two Angels that keep sentinel at the Genesis 3. 24.
gates of Paradise, the two Cherubins that cover the Ark, when 3 reg. 8. 7.
the Manna of the felicity of this life is contained. They are the two eyes of
the spouse of the soul, which wound the heart of God, and pierce it so deep,
with their divine glances, that he cries out in the Canticles, that they have
Ca^^. (...).
stolen away his heart, alas says he, my beloved, thou have wounded my heart,
and have robbed me of it, so powerful are thy innocent charms, and chaste
allurements

The more power the love of God has in us, the greater is the heat of fraternal
charity, which burns the very heart of our souls, and like the Phoenix, takes
delight to live and dye in so noble a fire, and to consume in such harmless
and yet murdering flames.

My design here is, not to treat of the love of God, but only to suppose, that
the more one loves God, the more he loves, and desires to help his neighbor,
and to believe that a man loves God, without doing his uttermost to assist his
neighbor, in way of charity, is to fool him self directly. Would you know how
much you love God, look with what courage you use to serve your neighbor, for
otherwise your charity is not fire, but smoke, and your affections are not
divine love, but wind, or a mere natural love, or in a word self love, or
rather an empty shadow, or Fantastical appearance of divine love. He that
loves not his neighbor, whom he daily sees with both his eyes, says St. John,
how can he make us believe 1 Jo. 4. 20.
that he loves God, whom he never saw.

That which I am to maintain, is that amongst all the acts of faternal
charity, or works of mercy, the most sublime, the most pure, and the most
advantageous of all others, is the service we perform for the souls in
Purgatory.

In the History of the incomparable A remarkable passage.
order of the great St Dominick it is authentically related, that one of the
first of those holy religious men, was wont to say, that he found himself not
so much concerned, to pray for the Souls in Purgatory, because they are certain
of their salvation, and that upon this account, we ought not in his judgment
to be very sollicitous for them, but ought rather to bend our whole care to
help sinners, to convert the wicked, and to secure such souls as are uncertain
of their salvation, and probably certain of their damnation, as leading very
lewd lives. Here it is (said he) it is here that I willingly employ my whole
ende^vours. It is upon these, that I b^stow my Masses and Prayers, and all that
little that is at my disposal, and thus I take it to be well bestowed. But upon
souls that have an assurance of eternal happiness, and can never more loose
God, or offend him, I believe not, said he, that one ought to be so
sollicitous. This certainly was but a poor and weak discourse, to give it no
severer a censure, and the consequence of it was this, that the good man, did
not only himself forbear to help these poor souls, but which was worse,
dissuaded others from doing it, and under color of a greater charity, withdrew
that succor, which otherwise good people would have liberally afforded them.
But God took their cause in hand, for permitting the souls to appear, and show
themselves in frightful shapes and to haunt the good man, both by night and by
day, without respit, still filling his fancy with dreadful imaginations, and
his eyes with terrible spectacles, and withal letting him know who they were,
and why with Gods permission, they so importuned him with their troublesome
visits, you may believe, the good Father became so affectionately kind to the
souls in Purgatory, bestowed so many Masses and Prayers upon them, preached so
fervently in their behalf, stirred up so many to the same devotion, that it is
a thing incredible to believe, and not to be expressed with Eloquence. Never
did you see so many, and so clear, and convincing reasons, as he alleged, to
demonstrate, that it is the most eminent piece of fraternal charity in this
life, to pray for the souls departed. Love and fear are the two most excellent
Orators in the world, they can teach all Rhetoric in a moment, and infuse a
most miraculous eloquence. This good Father, who thought he should have been
frighted to death, was grown so fearful of a second assault, that he bent his
whole wit, to invent the most pressing, and convincing arguments, to stir up
the world, both to pity and piety, and so persuade souls, to help souls, and
it is incredible what good ensued thereupon. The History does not set down the
motives which he either invented, or had by inspiration, to evidence this
truth, and therefore I will borrow them of St. Thomas, that angel for divinity
of the same order, and of other Saints and doctors of the Catholic Church.

1. The greatness of the charity to the Souls in Purgatory, is argued from the
greatness of their pains, and their helpless condition.
SInce there is no torment under Most charity to help tbc greater sufferers.
Heaven, comparable to the pains of Purgatory, as you have already seen, those
unhappy souls, must needs be the most afflicted creatures in the world, and
consequently, there cannot be a greater charity then to relieve them. The
loving mother runs always to her sickest child, not but that she is tender of
them all, and has her heart divided into as many parcels, as she has children,
and sick children, but where there is most need, there she makes a greater
demonstration of her love, thither her heart is carried, with a greater
violence, and tenderness of affection, where the greatest evil, or danger
appears. As for the rest, their condition is not so pressing, she speaks to
them at leisure, and by giving one of them a few comsits, a good word to
another, a smile to a third, they are all well contented, but he that burns in
the Purgatory of a violent feavour it is he that has most need of his mother,
and so you see her as it were nailed to his pillow, her heart her eyes, her
hands, her mouth, and her very bosom lie open to this child, and she can think
of nothing but him: so that where there is a greater share of misery, reason
requires there should be more compassion, and more charity expressed. Cast but
a morsel of bread to a needy beggar, send a good alms to a poor Hospital,
visit a prisoner, give a word of comfort to a sick person, and they are very
well satisfied, but he that lies burning in unmerciful flames alas, it is he
that ought to move all the bowels of your compassion. When the image of
Cleopatra, with the stinging Aspes at her breasts, was carried in triumph
before the Romans, though otherwise fierce and cruel enough by nature, yet
could they not hold from shedding a few tears of compassion, (and truly such a
Queen in so sad a condition, was not to be looked upon with dry eyes) the other
captives yet living, did not move them at all, in comparison of that
unfortunate Princess, for all she was only represented in colors, upon a
painted cloth. You Angel-keepers of Purgatory, I conjure you to unlock your
gates and lay your prison open, that I may discover those Kings and Queens, I
mean those holy Souls of both sexes, who are shortly to have their share in the
celestial empire, that I may lay before the Eyes of the whole Catholic Church,
those Asps of grief, that lie so close at their hearts, those cruel flames, I
say, that incessantly devour them, and withal the infinite modesty, and
patience, with which they endure all, in so much that not one of them lets fall
the least froward, or inconsiderate word, or makes the least complaint against
the sweet rigor of God. Is there a heart, if it be the heart of a man indeed,
and has but a drop of true Christian blood in it, that does not feel it self to
be either broken or mollified, at so pitiful and lamentable a spectacle, to see
I say, such noble and generous spirits in so deplorable a condition. Is there
any thing within the whole circumference of the universe, so worthy of
compassion, and that may so deservedly claim, the great'st share in all your
devotions and charities, as to see our Fathers, our Mothers, our nearest and
dearest relations, to lie broyling in cruel flames, and to cry to us for help,
with tears, that are able to move cruelty it self? Whence I conclude, there is
not upon the earth, any object deserves more commiseration then this, nor where
fraternal charity can better employ all her forces?

Next to the grievousness of their More charity to help those that cannot help
th^mselves.
pains, there is not any thing can so magnify your charity to deceased souls,
as the nature of their condition, wherein they can neither help themselves, nor
one another. For there is no more time for merit, alas no, nor any way left
them to solace themselves, in the least degree, but merely to suffer patiently,
the sweet rigours of the divine justice. Here upon earth there is not so
wretched a creature, that cannot both help himself, and receive help of others.
At least he has his comfort, that he merits heaven by his sufferings and that
his patience will prepare him a crown of glory, He may exercise a thousand
acts of virtue, which are as many d^grees of grace and glory, if he do them as
he ought. In fine he makes a virtue of necessity, by embracing that
voluntarily, which he cannot avoid, and glories in this, that he can imitate
his Savior Jesus Christ, whereas the souls can receive no comfort by meriting,
which is the comfort of comforts in this life, whence I conclude, that our
charity to them cannot be better employed.

When our blessed Savior, saw that poor creature, and heard him say, that he
had lane there perishing at the Pond side, for the space of thirty eight years,
for want of a man to help him in, it went to the very heart of sweet Jesus and
presently forsaking all others he cured this poor impotent creature, and
wrought that famous miracle in favor of this helpless wretch, forsaken of the
whole world besides, and certainly, this was a case of great commiseration, but
nothing comparable to the case we treat of, for those that are yet living
(though never so miserable) have a thousand tricks and devices to shift and
help themselves in their miseries, but the poor souls alas, have no way left
them, to decline or sweeten their martyrdom. Pliny reports that an Eagle
seeing one day, the young maid his dear Mistress, who had cherished him in her
bosom, to be laid flat on a burning wood pile was so struck at the sight, what
with love, and what with compassion, that she immediately took wing, and
launching into the burning flames to deliver her, was there consumed with her.
Good God! shall Savage beasts, and that Tyrant of the Air, have more pity of a
dead carcass, that feels nothing, then we have of immortal souls, who have so
great a feeling of insupportable torments. Your Indian women use to hold it for
a great honor, to throw themselves into the flames to their dead husbands, and
so to join souls and ashes together, and shall it be said, that a natural love,
is more daring then a supernatural and that women have more love for the dead
carcasses of their husbands, then we for the preciou^ souls of our Fathers,
Mothers, Brothers, Sisters and others who are most worthy of incomparable love.

. 2. Our Charity for the souls departed is prefered before all other works of
mercy.
YOu shall be judge your self, you that read this. If God at the same instant,
should put you both in Purgatory, and in a common Jail (as it is most easy for
him to do) I conjure you to tell me, in which of the two places would you
desire to be first relieved? and ought you not to do that for others which you
would have them to do for you?

Besides the spiritual works of mercy, are of a higher rank then (...) Ch^^^ty
in spir^tual then in corporeal works of mercy.
those that are corporal as St. Thomas proves excellently well. Is it not then
a more noble piece of Charity, to relieve souls then bodies, to stretch out
your hand, I say to help a poor soul out of scorching flames, then to comfort
a sick person, that feels but a little heat of a Feavour, and may have a
thousand sweets, and refreshments.

Again, when you bestow an Alms on a poor body, it is true, Nothing lost that
i^ given to the Souls.
you can never do amiss, if you look only upon God, but you may often fail of
your aim, and loose both your money, and your labor, if you consider the men
themselves who for the most part are Ungrateful, Deceitful, Wicked, and so
far unsatisfied, that you have never done with them. Do them a thousand good
turns, if you fail but once, all is lost, they do nothing but grumble and
repine, they quite forget all the good, they have so plentifully received from
your accustomed liberality, they take notice of nothing but what you have
omitted, they believe all is no more then their due, they are as insolent a^ if
you were always bound to do for them* To say nothing, th^^ they often abuse
your charity, and serve themselves of your gracious benevolences, to offend
both God and man, as being notorious gluttons, Drunkards, Blasphemers, and
abominable villans, both for body and soul.

But the good you do for souls, so be^utiful, so noble, and so holy, besides
the rew^rd you shall be sure to receive from God, it is not to be imagined, how
well it is bestowed, and how grateful they are for it. There is nothing lost,
though you give never so little, they take themselves to be infinitely obliged
for your charity they never forget it, they never complain, they never turn
ungrateful. Certainly it must needs be an unspeakable advantage to you, to be
assured, that the good you do, is for a happy soul (though unhappy for the
time) for a Saint, that is ready to be canonized in heaven, and happily after a
few more moments of pain, shall be a greater Saint there, then many whose
feasts we keep with great solemnity? Besides, it cannot but be an excessive
comfort, to oblidge a soul, which God loves with all his heart, and which will
soon lodge in his very heart. Lastly, what an honor must it be, thus to
contribute to the glory of so happy a soul, who within ^ ^hile shall be
brighter then the sun, and a companion to the Angels, and shall exercise a
world of most sublime acts of virtue, of thanksgiving to God, fraternal
charity, and the like. And if you chance to go your self into Purgatory, before
they are released, you will be exceedingly joy'd, to see what a grateful
remembrance they have of your charity, and would not for all the treasures in
the world, but have done that little you have done for them and will scarce
have a more sensible feeling for any thing, then for having lost so many fair
occasions, of relieving (...) many poor souls in their grievous torments.

Our Blessed Savior tells us, whosoever bestows a charity on a disciple, or
on a Prophet, shall be sure to have the reward of a disciple or of a Prophet.
Now as long as your charity exten^s it self only to the living, let your motive
be never so pure, and for the love of God, alas, you are often deceived, and
think you do a good turn for an Apostle, and he is an Apostate, or another
Judas, you take him for a great servant of God, and he often proves to be a
most wicked fellow, ^ r^venous wolf in a lambs skin, and this is seen daily,
and every where, not but that you ought to do it, and shall never want your
reward. But it falls out clear otherwise, when you place your charity upon the
souls in Purgatory, for they are undoubtedly the disciples of Christ, they are
Prophets and great Saints, and therefore ^hosoever shall do any ch^ritable
office for them, may well hope to have, the reward of Saint^. For so it is not
only those that are thus relieved, shall be translated into heaven, but those
also t^^t relieve them, shall be carried ^^^^her in ^ue time, to take
possession of the glory of the Saints.

St. Thomas tells us, there is an It is the ^^st ordered ^harity to help the
Souls. St. Th. 2. 2. ^e^ord. ch^.
order to be observed in our works of charity to our neighbor, that is, we are
to see, where there is a greater obligation, a greater necessity, a greater
merit, and the like circumstances. Now where is there more necessity, or more
obligation, then to run to the ^^re, and to help those that lie there, and
(...) not able to get out? Where can you have more merit, then to have a hand
in raising up so great Saints, and Servants of God? where have you more
assurance, then where you are sure to loose nothing? where can you find an
object of more compassion, then where there is the greatest misery in the
world? where is there seen more of Gods glory, then to send new Saints into
heaven to praise God eternally? Lastly, where can you show more charity, and
more of the love of God, then to employ your tea^s, your sighs, your goods,
your hands, your heart, your life, and all your devotions, to procure a good,
that surpasses all other goods; I mean, to make souls happy for all eternity,
by translating them into heavenly joys, out of insupportable torments. That
glorious Apostle of the Indies, St. Francis Xaverius, could run from one end of
the world to the other, to convert a soul, and think it no long journey, the
dangers by Sea and Land seemed Sweet, the Tempests pleasing, the Labor easy
and his whole time well employed. Good God! What an advantage have we, that
with so little and few prayers, may send a thousand beautiful souls into
heaven, without the least hazard of loosing any thing? St. Xaverius could not
be certain, that the Japonians for example, whom he baptized, ^^uld persever in
their faith, and though they should persever in it, he could have as little
certainty of their salvation. Now it is an Article of our faith, that the holy
souls in Purgatory, are in grace, and shall assuredly one day enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

But since I am entered upon the Nothing can more advance Gods glory.
point of seeking Gods greater glory, and procuring that his Sacred Majesty be
worthily Adored by his creatures, where can you find any thing among all the
other works of mercy, more eminent in this kind, then to concur toward the
peopling of Paradise, and increasing the number of those thrice happy souls?
Let it be never so little that you advance, the term appointed for the eternal
happiness of a soul, by recovering it out of Purgatory and placing it above
the Firmament, O into what acts of Love will she break forth? what glory will
she give to God? what excess of Love, what Transports, Visions, Unions, and
miracles of heaven will ensue? And what a happiness is it, for you to have
concurred to make up all these wonders, which would have been quite lost all
this time, and by your occasion are now added as a superabundant increase of
Gods greatness.

St. Ignatius, that glorious founder of the society of Jesus, stuck not to say,
he should think his whole life well bestowed, should he but hinder an
ungracious soul, from offending God one only night. Such an esteem he had of
increasing Gods glory, and such an apprehension of diminishing the least grain
thereof. What a mercy is it then, that by helping a Soul out of her purging
flames, you are the cause of a million of most divine acts, which would never
have been, had not the time of her delivery, been antidated by your charitable
and devout prayers. Tell me, dear reader, what can you do here below
comparable to this? How many thousand Beggars, Prisoners and sick persons may
you relieve, without procuring the thousanth part of this ^nspeakable good?
That which one does by another means, he is accounted to do himself. So that
all the new Saints, I mean, all the souls, who have been delivered by your
assistance, shall be as it were your Lievtenants, and your Vicar-generalls, or
your Ambassadors, to do incomparable wonders in Heaven, whereof you are the
cause, in whole, or in part. And what comparison is there now, between the
good* we do for men upon earth, and what we do to relieve souls in the other
world.

There is but one only Case One (...) more to be ^pied then that (...)
Pur(...)*
can be imagined, in which your Charity might seem clear better employed, then
in comforting the poor* languishing souls in Purgatory. And it is this;
Suppose you had but one instant of life at your disposal, and could either
employ it, in the conversion of a desperate sinner, who must otherwise be
infallibly damned, without redemption, or in releaving a Soul in Purgatory,
whether you ought not in this case, to prefer the eternal salvation of a
sinner, before the present ease of a soul in Purgatory? To this I answer, that
in the first place, you put a very metaphysicall case, far remote from all
common practice, for it is not a thing that will probably ever happen, but
should it really fall out, in Gods name, do the one or the other, as God shall
inspire you, and God will sooner multiply the bread in your hands, then you
should want an occasion, of relieving the poor, whether living or dead. But to
give you better satisfaction, put the case as you please, and I will make the
Souls in Purgatory themselves, judges of the cause, that they may have no
reason to complain, or appeal from my sentence.

They will certainly tell you, that where there is question of a mortal sin,
or of the eternal loss of a soul, that has been ransomed with the blood of
Christ, they had rather lie still groaning under their torments, then purchase
a little ease at so dear a rate.

No, they are not so selfish, their love is more pure then so, their fidelity
to God, will never suffer them, to seek their own glory, with the least
diminution or, lessening of Gods glory. St. Catherine of Siena, be^^^d two
years together, with tears in her Eyes, that she might be damned for all
mankind, and that she alone might suffer all the pains of Hell; rather then any
one soul should be damned, or her dearest spouse grievously offended. And do
you believe that a tender Virgin, made of flesh and blood, and as yet a sinner,
at least so far as to be guilty of certain venial transgressions, can have less
Self-love, more courage, and more of the love of God, then the souls of the
other world, who are totally disengaged from all self-respects, and love God
only with a most perfect love. No, they had rather double, and redouble their
cruel Martyrdomes, with a million of fresh torments, then willingly give
consent, that for their sakes, one should forbear to hinder the commission of a
mortal sin, or the damnation of a soul. And therefore, should the case fall in
your way, stick not t^ bestow your time, for the benefit of the living, do not
so much as think on the Souls in Purgatory, who would most willingly, melt
themselves away in tormenting fire, rather then permit such a horrible mischief.

. 3. Of the great advantages we receive, by this devotion for the Souls
departed.
BUt to come nearer to you, It makes most for our interest to pray for them.
seeing that interest rules the world most, and is the spirit that moves the
whole Universe, if you are at all sensible of your own interest, I mean, a holy
interest allowed of by God himself, to wit an interest which we all have in the
increase of our Grace, Glory, and eternal happiness: in Gods name, do all the
good you can for your neighbor (I except only the case I lately spoke of) I
defy you to do the thing, that can bring you so much true and solid good, or
be of so much advantage to you, as is the striving to relieve the Souls in
Purgatory with your pious endeavors.

And first, though it were true Their (...) angels (...) strive to ^^quite us.
(as many will have it) that the Souls in Purgatory, are not able to obtain the
least mercy of almighty God, for themselves, or us, in respect of their present
confinement, in which they lie, as it were, at pawn, and under a most severe
restraint, and strict seizure, yet have we reason to believe, their good
angels, will supply their defect, and not fail to requite you, for seconding
them so well, in delivering the Souls under their charge, for whom they are in
a kind of pain, to see them endure so much pain, and yet to be held back, as it
were, only by a small thread, from enjoying their full liberty, and becoming
their companious, and as glorious as themselves. One sigh, or sob, one tear of
yours, shed for these captive Souls, is enough, to cut the thread, and then they
will cry out, with holy David. Our souls are got loose like the innocent
Sparrow, and are flown up to Heaven, having luckily broken the Iron nets that
h^ld them bound to hellish fire. The holy name of God be ever blessed, and they
also, who have been so kind as to call upon him in our behalfs. It is you, dear
Reader, to whom these holy souls address their speech, whom you have comforted
with a good wish, or with a Tear, or with a Mass, or with a Communion.

But suppose the Angels, should God will be sure to reward us.
neglect to perform this good office, which notwithstanding we have reason to
expect of their charity, God himself would not fayl to do it. For beholding the
zeal, with which you burn, and the charity which impels you, to succor those
tormented souls, whom he loves, and for whom he has prepared eternal Laurels,
and rich Crowns of immortal glory, can you doubt, whether he takes it well,
that you love these his dear friends, that you have a tender heart toward
them, he so tenderly loves, that you do this good work, believing (as it is
most true) that this is faternal charity in the highest point of its
perfection* and that making choice of it, to ^erve God in the best manner by
your self, and by those holy souls, his infinite goodness is highly pleased
with your charity so well bestowed, and on so good a subject.

Mark well the reason I am now going about to lay down before you. Christ Jesus
has vouchsafed, to honor his Church so far, as to style her his body, of which
he is the divine head; Now it is most certain, that of all the members of this
most sacred, and mistical body, that which is the most oppressed with evils,
and the most lamentably afflicted, are these dear souls, who are alas, most
severely treated in the bosom of the Church-suffering, since there is not any
torment in the world, that is comparable to theirs, as you have seen elsewhere.

If then our Blessed Savior, see your heart melt with compassion, for that
part of his body, which is the most comfortless, and the most afflicted of all
others, sure he must needs love you, with a paternal affection, and give you a
thousand benedictions, for the ease and pleasure you give him, in that part of
his body, which suffers most. Historians tell us, how a man having one day
plucked out a thorn out of a lions foot, the generous beast feeling himself
eased, in that part which was most grieved, soon forgot his fierce nature, and
by force of love and gratitude, metamorphosed himself into a Lamb, to wait
upon this Savior of his, who had ^^ us preserved his life, and by way of
requital, in a like occasion of danger, saved the (...) life also, to the
astonishme^^ (...) all the beholders. God plays the Lion of Juda below in
Purgatory, permitting his justice to sway the Scepter of rigor, now if you but
pull out the thorn out of his foot, that is, (...) you ease him in that part of
(...) mystical body which suffers the pains of Purgatory, this Lion will soon
become a Lamb, he will not only save these poor souls, but when you your self
are in most need, as when you are struggling for life, he will show himself, he
will fight for you, and will give you the true life; In a word, he will make
you clearly see, how well he takes it, that you have plucked out the thorn out
of his foot.

Now let us suppose the worst. The souls themselves will pray for us.
Put case that neither God, nor his Angels, do requite you. Yet I maintain you
cannot do an act of faternal charity, wherein your gain is so great, and so
certain as this I do not say it, because the men of this world are commonly in
an ill sta^^ (...) which their prayers can do you no service. I do not say it,
because though you suppose them to be in the state of grace, yet is their
devotion for you soon at an end, and while it lasts, is but a slender* cold,
and untoward piece of service.

I do not say, that these souls, who are truly miserable, and yet holy, under a
cruel restraint, and yet happy, not able to merit any thing, and yet gracious
in the sight of his divine Majesty, no, I do not say, that when they are once
got into Paradise, they will be so many Angels, Guardians of yours, so many
Advocates, to plead your cause at the grand Tribunal of the most holy Trinity,
so many patrons and sureties for you and yours. But I say, that even while they
remain prisoners, they will do miracles for you. I said miracles. Now hear how
they will do, that which cannot be done. They will effect that for you, which
they cannot do for themselves, and were it necessary, to work a miracle in good
earnest, they would sooner do it, then forsake you in your nec^ssities. I am
not igno^ant, that the Angelical S. Thomas* 2. 2 9 ^3. a. (...). ad. 3.
Doctor teaches, that those unhappy souls a^e in such a wretched state, that
they have more need to beg our prayers, then to pray for us; that they are
wholly taken up with paying their debts to Gods justice, who exacts an account
of them, to the last farthing: that this suffering Church, is rather in a
condition, to suffer them to act any thing: that it is not now a time to merit,
but to burn; not to succor those that are living, but to expect succor from
them. A man that is drowning, has not leisure to think of others; a notorious
malefactor, that swims in boiling Oil, is not in a place, where he ought, or
can plead for another, his whole mind is so plunged in the Oil, and all his
thoughts so overwhelmed with the boiling liquour, that torments him. Alas,
those racked souls have more reason, to cry out with holy Job* Ah, you my Job.
19. 21.
friends, you a^ ^east take pity of me, for the hand of Gods justice so
lovingly severe, hangs continually over me, and strikes me without
intermission* cease not to pour out your prayers for me, to abate the rigor
of his justice, with your charitable sighs, for a most miserable soul. They
have I say more need, to beg our prayers, then to pray for us. I know well,
that many Learned Doctors, are of opinion, that the souls in Purgatory do not
pray for us, but it is no point of our faith, and therefore they must give me
leave to side with other great Divines, who very probably maintain, that Bell.
l. 2. de Purgatorio c. 17. Suac. d 47. Sect. 2. and l. ^. de oratione c. 11.
those grateful souls, pray most ardently for those that pray for them. The
rich glutton (though he were certainly damned) could after his fashion pray for
his brothers, and shall not a holy soul have the power to do it? Abraham argued
the case with him, called him lovingly son, and seemd to be upon the ^oint of
doing Luke 16.
something for him* at least gave him the comfort, to tell him, that his
brothers had Moses and the Prophets ^o instruct them, as if he would have
said, that if his brothers, had not been sufficiently provided of other means,
he would peradventure have granted him his request, and sent Lazarus to preach
to them. But to Math. ^. 31.
give you yet a stranger instance. The devils themselves have put up their
requests to God, and have been heard, and obtaind that sorry comfort they
desired, as when they begged not to be thrust down into Hell, and got leave to
enter into the heard of Swine, and then to throw themselves into the Sea. What!
shall the damned souls pray, and shall the devils be able to obtain their
request, and shall not the Souls in Purgatory have the like privileges? St.
Thomas does not deny, that they pray for us, but only affirms, that they have
more need of our prayers, which is most true, but may well stand with their
praying for us. A wicked Fellon, that is going to be turned off the Ladder, has
yet a care to pray for his whole family, for the King and the whole Bench, that
condemned him, and many times for the very Hangman too, who is ready to
strangle him. And shall this wretch have more power, or more zeal, or more
grace, then those souls, who are so holy, and who in spite of their torments,
are very present to themselves, and have their wits about them, free from all
trouble and disquiet, which might rob them of the sentiment and feeling, which
they ought to have, of the obligation they owe, to their charity that pray for
them! O no, they do the one and yet neglect not the other. They pray for
themselves in suffering, they pray for us in sighing, and the one hinders not
the other in Purgatory, since that even here upon Earth, the soul that is
immersed in flesh and blood^* can perform both parts; that ^^ s^tisfy for her
self, and yet have a sollicitous care of others. Did not Onias and Hieremius
pray affectionately for the people of God, whilst they were in the dark prison
of Abraham's bosom! And do not the Saints assure us, that God wrought a
miracle, for the merits of St. S. Gre^^^dial.
Paschasius, who yet nevertheless was not out of Purgatory. The same is
reported of St Severin, and though there be some dispute who this St. Severin
was, yet the Authors doubt not, but that a Saint in Purgatory, may work a
miracle by Gods permission Some that are damned have wrought miracles, and is
it such a wonder that we should grant this to the Saints of Gods suffering
Church?

We read in the life of St Catherine They are powerful advocates.
of Bolognia, whose Body, Flesh and Bone, is yet entire, and sits to this hour
(...) chair, exposed to the view of the world, though it be above sixty years
since her death* we read I say, in her life (which has the approbation of the
sea Apostolic,) that she had not only a strange tenderness for the souls,
but a singular devotion to them, and was wont to recommend her self to them in
all her necessities. The reason she alleged for it, was this: that she had
learnt of Almighty God, how she had frequently obtained far greater favors by
their intercession, then by other means. And the story adds this, that it often
happened, that what she begged of God, at the intercession of the Saints in
Heaven, she could never obtain of him, and yet as soon as she addressed her
self to the souls in Purgatory, she had her suit instantly granted. Can there
be any question, but there are souls in that purging fire, who are of a higher
pitch of sanctity, and of a far greater merit in the sight of God, ^hen a
thousand and a thousan^ Saints, who are already glorious in the Court of
Heaven. Tell (...) was not our Dread Soveraign^ during his late Banishment,
more puissant, and more mighty, then His Subjects, who lived still in their own
Country, at their liberty, and at their ease, and perhaps in greater plenty,
for we see Him, no sooner restored to His undoubted Right, but he is every way
as great ^ King, as His Predecessors, as richly Attired, as much Courted by
Foreign Princes, and as gloriously attended at White Hall, whereas the rest of
his Nobility and Gentry, are but his creatures and most humble Servants. There
are great souls, that for some slight misdemenours, are banished out of the
Kingdom of Heaven (to which they are heirs apparent, as being the adopted Sons
of God by Grace) nay more, are locked up in that burning furnace, which we call
Purgatory, but they are scarse^^^ ^^ose, when you may see them (...) out in
triumph, and go soaring up above the Heavens so high, as to loose all sight of
them. And when they are once there, what will they not do for you? And what did
not our gracious King to his power, to honor and gratify, those that stuck
close to Him in his misfortune; or were so lucky, as to have a great hand in
restoring Him. King David at his death, recommending his good servants to his
Son Solomon, spoke thus withal, My Son, there is such a one, and such a one,
have well deserved death, for the crimes they have committed, but when I was
generally deserted, and when they took the boldness upon them to throw stones
at me, these men, took pity on me, and gave me succor. in my greatest
affliction, and therefore I charge thee, O my dear son, to be mindful of them,
and to favor them as thou love me. Have not holy souls as much charity as
David? Is not the misfortune into which they are fallen, of a more sensible
nature then His? In what a lofty strain, will they ^hen represent unto God, the
good service you have done for them, in their extreme necessity, when they find
themselves on^e securely seated in those heavenly mansions! And what will not
that boundless mercy, be moved to grant, at the instance of so dear friends.

Shall I tell you, there are many worthy persons, think these words of Jesus
Christ, may be very properly applied to the souls in Purgatory. Do good (says
he) and make your selves friends at the charge of your purses, and be good
stewards of Mammon, the false god of Riches, that those whom you relieve, may
assist you at the hour of your death; and lead you into eternal tabernacles.
Among the poor, none so secure, of enjoying the delights of Paradise, as the
souls in Purgatory, who are all predestinate, and all holy, for the present
they are poor indeed, and helpless creatures, but if you contribute never so
little to their ease, they will be sure to requite you in your necessities, if
not before, at least when they are once possessed of the joys of Heaven.

Cardinal Baronius, a man of credit, beyond exception, relates In annal. Eccles.
how a person of rare virtue, found himself dangerously assaulted, at the hour
of his death, and that in this Agony, he saw the heavens open, and about eight
thousand Champions, all covered with white Armor, to descend, who fe^l
instantly to encourage him, by giving him this assurance, that they were come
to fight for him, and to disengage him, from that doubtful combat. And when
with infinite comfort, and tears in his eyes, he besought them, to do him the
favor, to let him know, who they were, that had so highly obliged him. We are
(said they) the ^^uls whom you have saved and delivered out of Purgatory, and
now to requite the favor, we (...) come down, to convey you instantly into
Heaven. And with that he died.

We read such another story of (...). ^erthus. ap^^ P. Roam de Purg. c. 20.
St Gertrude, how she was troub^ed at her death, to think what must become of
her, since she had given away all the rich treasure of her satisfactions, to
redeem other poor souls, without reserving any thing to her self; but that our
Blessed Savior gave her the comfort to know, that she was not only to have the
like favor, of being immediately conducted into Heaven, out of this world by
those innumerable souls, whom she had sent thither before her by her fervent
prayers, but was there also to receive a hunderfold of eternal glory in reward
of her charity. By which examples we may learn, that we cannot make better use
of our devotion, and charity, then this way. But he that will (...) satisfy
himself, that he can loose nothing, but gain excessively though he should offer
up all his satisfactory works, for the souls in Purgatory, let him read over
what F Eusebius Nerem^ergicus, and F. James Monford, have excellently well
written upon this subject

The Fourth Survey.
Of the powerful means to quench the flames of Purgatory.

COuld the poor souls, but They cannot help themselves.
help themselves, or abate the cruelty of their torments, with all their devont
aspirations, so pure, and so holy, they would soon free themselves. But alas,
they cannot, and this is one of their greatest miseries, to see themselves in
so desperate a condition, as to be overwhelmed with raging fire, and not to
have the power, to get out, or to allay the fury of the flames, or to merit the
least favor in this kind, not so much as de Congruo, as they speak in Schools,
or by way of a certain congruity, convenience, or decency. The time of meriting
expired with their lives, what now remains, is wholly deputed for suffering,
and it is not the least of their vexations, to see how easily they might have
prevented all these mischiefs in their life time, and that now there is no
remedy, but by suffering to supply for that negligence though they would never
so fane. Howsoever, I love those divines, Su. in 3. p. d. 19. post. St. Tho.
who are something more civil in this point, then their fellows, and am easily
persuaded by them, that although the souls, cannot immediately contribute the
least to their own ransom, or any way merit their own deliverance, yet may
they be so happy, as to work upon the goodness of their Angels, and by their
means, obtain some sweet refreshments, at the merciful hand of God, wherewith
to allay the bitterness of their torments. And following their opinion, who
teach, that they pray for us, and procure us heavenly favors, what
inconsequence were it, to say further, that they move our good Angels, to
inspire us efficaciously, to intercede for them, and to assist them with all
the duties of Christian charity, it being a thing, to which they are otherwise
of themselves so much inclined, without the solicitation, or importunity of
others.

. 1. What succor they receive, from the Angels, and Saints in Heaven?
IN the first place, you would be The Saints pray for them:
resolved, whether the Angels, and Saints in Heaven, and above all the Mother
of mercy, Pray really for them. If so, how comes it to pass, that they do not
every hour, or indeed every instant, make a general Jail delivery, and quite
empty Purgatory? For what power has the Mother o^ God? what cannot so many
millions of Angels and Saints do? what can they be denied, in so favorable a
request, for persons of so high merit. I answer, that they pray for them, and
pray i^ good earnest, and I say further, that they are not content, with a
quarant hour, now and then (as our custom is, in occasions of pressing
necessity) but they keep a perpetual and constant course of prayer in heaven,
in favor of these holy Souls.

This I take to be the pious belief Vid. Su. d. 48. Sect. 9
of the Catholic Church, as delivered by the whole sacred Torrent of Doctors.
Nor is there the least reason, why they should not do it, being not only
powerful, but full of charity, especially, when they remember, that the like
charity was bestowed on many of them, that their necessity is extreme urgent,
that they are all Members of one body, that they do not only concur to the
glorification of their dear brethren, but are themselves to receive an
additional increase of accidental glory, for having advanced the delivery of
those precious souls, who perhaps may be holier then some of their own blessed
company: Besides, this is a charitable office, suits well with their happy
state, and there appears not the least inconvenience in it in this World. And
yet, if this be so, one would think, they might soon turn all the souls loose,
and empty Purgatory, so that it were impossible, for any soul to make any long
stay there. Hold, you must pardon me, and not flatter your selves too much,
with this vain credulity. You are to know, that the Saints, are not such
strangers to the decrees of divine justice, as to beg the souls release without
punishment, for that were the way to destroy all justice, no, they accommodate
themselves to the Laws of heaven, and willingly submit to the most equitable
resolves of Gods justice amongst which, it stands irrevocably decreed, that
this life should be the place for mercy, but that justice should bear the sway
in Purgatory. Do not then wonder, that the Saints, do not obtain so extra
vagant a favor, the souls themselves, who are the most nearly concerned in
their own sufferings, would be ashamed to demand it. Is it not reason, that God
should be God in all his attributes, and exercise his justice as well as his
mercy? We must take heed, how we employ, or rather abuse his clemency so, as to
break down the Laws of his justice. Will you then know what the Saints do?

First, They pray God, to inspire The saints have many ways to help them.
the living, to offer up their satisfactory works for the dead and to find out
a thousand inventious to help them. Secondly, They labor to shorten their time
by procuring, that the intension, or sharpness of their pains, may supply for
the length and extension thereof, wherein there is no wrong done to justice,
but only an exchange made of a long pain into a shorter one, but more violent
and yet this is an extraordinary favor, for you cannot imagine, what an
incomparable treasure, is one day in heaven advanced before the ordinary
prefixed time.

Thirdly, Many Saints have left behind them, a great treasure of satisfactions,
above what was due for their sins, so many holy innocent hermits, so many chaste
Virgins, so many great Saints of all orders in Gods Church, who lead such
austere lives. Now is it not very likely, that these good Saints, may pray God,
to apply the superbundance of these their merits and satisfactions, to the poor
souls in Purgatory, and who knows, whether the infinite goodness of God, may
not accept it for good payment. Fourthly, Why may we not piously imagine, that
even those Saints, who have no such remainder of merits, pray those that have
it, to bestow it as an alms to relieve the poor souls. Sure they are so
courteous as not to deny any thing to one another, especially in a case of so
great commiseration, and why should they hoard up these precious treasures,
which cannot avail them? or how can they bestow them more charitably.

Fifthly, What harm were it to say, that the Saints beseech our blessed Lady,
and even Christ himself, who has an infinite treasure of satisfactions in
store, to apply some of their precious merits this way. I know the severer
divines, will not have it, that the Siants have recourse in this, to our
blessed Savior, who has determined, what, and how he will have this applied,
according to the ordinary strain, and set Laws of his divine justice, but
there be other Doctors, of a milder temper, believe, he may be drawn sometimes,
to wave the extremity of rigor, and to dispense with his own Laws, so that by
extraordinary privilege, we may hope for this favor of sweet Jesus, and his
Saints. And if other Saints, have so much charity for the poor Souls, you will
think it but reasonable, that the Fathers and Mothers (the same is to be said
of other near relations) who are in Heaven, and know, that the Souls of their
dear children, are locked up in that fiery furnace, will use all their possible
endeavor, as far as God will give them leave, to fetch them out. But what
shall I say, of those saints who were lifted up into Heaven, before their time,
by the extraordinary assistance of the living, whose turn now it is to be in
Purgatory, is it not very credible, they will now requite their courtesy, and
with usury too. For example, there may be a soul in Purgatory, has helped above
a thousand other Sou^^; out of that place of torments, can it be imagined, but
that that regiment of Saints, will do all they can, and more if it were
possible, to deliver this their deliverer, and to place him in the court of
Heaven, who had so great a hand, in their timely preferment. But because we are
mere strangers, to the style of that court, and nothing acquainted with the
constitutions of that divine Monarchy, let us conclude only thus. That
whatsoever the Saints can do, for the comfort of these languishing souls we may
be sure they do it, and do it punctually, without neglecting the least moment,
and where they cannot prevail, without breaking the just decrees of their
Sovereign, there they willingly acquiesce, and with due submission, adore the
divine justice. So much for the Saints. Let us now speak of the Souls
themselves, and see.

. 2. Whether they are capable, of being relieved by one another Prayers?
IT may be justly questioned, They help one another.
whether the Souls, though altogether incapable of helping themselves, in their
extreme misery, may not at least be permitted, to help one another, by their
devout prayers. For if they have the privilege, to pray for the Saints in
Heaven, that God will be pleased to increase their glory; if they can pray for
the living, as I endeavored to evince in the last. Nay, if a damned soul, may
have liberty to pray for his friends as it seems to be clear, in the case of
the rich glutton, why may they not be so kind, as to pray for one another? If
the flames of Hell (said the Devout Sales, that worthy Prelate of Geneva) were
not sullied with the smoke of sin, were they but pure flames of holy love, O
what a pleasure were it to be swallowed up by such flames, or to be thus damned
eternally to love God. What should hinder then, but that the Souls in
Purgatory, where the fire of love, triumphs over their tormenting flames, may
display their ardent charity, and vigorously apply themselves, to assist, and
comfort one another, as far as Gods providence will give them leave. May we not
presume to fancy, that out of an excess of charity, they are willing, to
dispoil themselves of all those helps, and advantages, which they receive of
their friends, to throw the^ upon others, offering themselves freely, to suffer
for one another. Tertul. Apolog.
Tertullian admires, how prodigal the first Christians were, in this kind of
charity, of suffering, and even dying for one another, how ready they were, to
leap into the very flames, and expose themselves to the most cruel tortures
that could be devised and all to save others, for whom they were prepared.
What? shall frail mortals, who are made up of flesh and blood, thus willingly
suffer for one another, and shall not the souls, who have cast of with their
bodies, all humane weakness and imperfection, have as much charity, for other
souls, especially, being certain of their salvation, of which men in this life,
can have no assurance, without a particular revelation. St. Ambros. de Virgin.


Didymas offered to dye, for St. Theodora, and in conclusion both died for her,
and with her. Elizeas being dead himself, raised another from death to life,
which was more then he did for himself. St. Paul seems to have been content, to
be damned, to save the Jews, always reserved, that it might be without sin.
David would willingly have met with death, in her uggliest attire so he might
have saved his son Absalon, and yet he knew him to be but a graceless and
unnatural parricide. Shall not holy souls, have as much kindness for other
souls, whom they see, upon the point of being metamorphosed into Seraphins, as
David had for a mere reprobate and lost creature? Many Saints in this world,
have begged it as a favor of Almighty God, that they might suffer for the souls
in Purgatory, and have done it in good earnest, freely renouncing their own
conveniences, for the souls comfort, by a most heroical act of supernatural
charity. Do not you believe, that the souls in Purgatory, have a more refined
love, and that they actuate themselves in more heroical, transcendent acts of
charity, since they are not only grown to be inpeccable, but have withal a far
clearer insight, into the nature of this divine virtue. I but they can merit
nothing. True, but do you take them, to be so selfish, as to do nothing purely
for Gods sake, without seeking their own interest? what say you to our Angel
Guardians? is it for any private lucre or merit, or purely to please God, and
to do us a work of singular charity, that they have so sollicitous a care of
us? And when God himself loves us, is it I pray you, for any interest of his
own, or out of an excess of his overflowing bounty, and charity, which Math. 5.
48.
well becomes him. ^e perfect (says he) as I am perfect, now the means to do
this, is to be well versed, in these acts of heroical love, as, to love God for
God, because he deserves it, as being the only charming object of our love. I
love, said St. Augustine, because I love, I am resolved to love, because I am
beloved of him, that loves me only because he will needs love me. To love for
mere love, is the quintessence of divine love. What? shall we be so niggardly,
so mercinary or so mechanical, as not to exercise an act of pure love, without
hope of reward? Is not our love well requited, if we please God, and those whom
God loves? They say Appelles, would give away his Pictures for nothing, he had
so great a value for them, he thought no set price could be equal to their
worth, and that gold it self was too mean a thing, to purchase such precious
labors, which he therefore chose rather, to give away gratis, then to expose
to an unworthy sale, so that, the bare pleasure he took, in bestowing them upon
his friends, was all the recompense he looked for, for those incomparable
pieces. And certainly, it is a most noble, and truly royal thing, to give, and
to give without hope of requital.

Seneca spoke a word, which showed a magnanimous, and true Sen. l. de benef.
generous heart. To give, and to loose all benefit by his gift, is no wonder,
but to loose all benefit and yet to be still giving, is a divine Masterpiece,
and an act worthy of God indeed. Now when these charitable souls, can gratify
others, by giving away the charities, which are bestowed on them, why should
they not do it? To do a pleasure for another, without incommodating himself, is
no more, then what you may expect of an Arabian, or Barbarian, but to
incommodate himself, to lie burning in fire, groaning under excessive torments,
and all this, to make others happy, is certainly an act worthy of those noble,
and generous souls, who are all inflamed with pure divine love. When they had a
mind to flatter their Caesar's, the people would cry out, O Jupiter, take away
some of our years, shorten our lives, decimate our days, and give it all to
prolong the life of our good Prince, let him live, at the charge of our lives
we are all ready to lay them down at his feet, that he alone may live, and
reign happily, in the flourishing greatness of his Empire. Shall Infidels have
more kindness for a mortal man, perhaps a wicked Tyrant, or a profane Atheist,
then holy souls have, for those that are about to be Canonized for Saints in
the Church Triumphant? I have heard of great servants of God, who when they saw
some famous Preacher, or Apostolical Person, draw near to his end, would
express themselves to this purpose, O that I were permitted to dye in his
Room, for I alas am but an unprofitable member of the Church, all my services
avail but little to advance Gods cause, whereas this worthy person may do a
world of good, and be a comfort to infinite souls. What should hinder a soul in
Purgatory, from having the like feelings, may she not, and with truth cry out,
I am well acquainted with my own abilities, and can have a nearer guess, what
I am able to do in Paradise, where I am like to be one of the meanest servants
in the whole house of God, and therefore may be well spared, but there is such
a soul, had she but once cleard the petty debts, she stands yet engaged for,
she would instantly mount above all the Quires of Angels, and possibly soar up
to the highest Seraphims. O that I might but have leave, to suffer here a while
in her place, how willingly would I do it, that so my God might be the sooner,
and better glorified in heaven, by this happy soul, and a million of other
souls upon earth, receive comfort, and protection, from her powerful
intercessions. I willingly resign up unto her all the right I have, of being
set free my self, and if God permit, I am ready to make her a deed of gift, of
all the suffrages, which my dear friends have sent me, for sure all the pains
which shall fall upon me by this bargain, can not but be amourously sweet,
since they are the cause of so great a good, in the empirial Court of Heaven.
St. Christina, was already lodged in Heaven, says Cardinal Bellarmine, l. de
gemitu, col. c. de Purg.
when she quit the glory of Paradise, to exchange it for the flames of a
thousand and a thousand most cruel Martyrdomes, and why may we not believe,
that so charitable souls, would willingly yet remain in their flames, that
others more worthy then themselves may be sent out in their rooms to glorify
God in Heaven. Whether God accept of these holy desires or no, may be a
question, but at least, it seems very credible, that the souls who are so
replenisht with perfect charity, make such tenders of their service, as far as
God gives them leave, and as far as it may stand with the laws of the Church
patient. But enough of what passes in the other world, of which we have no
certain revelation, nor other clear light to guide us by. Let us now turn our
speech to the living, and see what they are able to perform, for the benefit of
the dead.

. 3. That the dead may receive help from us that are living, and how we must be
qualified to do them good.
BE pleased to take notice, what several meanings these (...) eans impetration,
satisfaction, etc.
three words import, Satisfaction, Impetration and Suffrage. Satisfaction
implies a good work, accompanied with some grief, or pain, answerable to the
pleasure, we unadvisedly took in sinning, whereby we make an honorable amends,
and satisfy the Laws of Justice, by repairing the injury we have done.
Impetration is a kind of letter of request, which we present to the mercy of
God, beseeching him to pardon those, for whom we offer up the sacrifice of our
devotions, and the incense of our sighs and prayers, so that our prayers,
address themselves to the sole mercy of God, and crave an obsolute pardon, or
abolishment of the crime, as a pure gift, without offering any proportionable
satisfaction, save only that of our blessed Savior, or in general, of the
Church militant. Suffrage is a term which comprehends both, whether it be a
penal work, or a prayer only, or both luckily united together. The Church
triumphant, to speak properly, cannot satisfy, because there is no place, for
penal works in the court of Heaven, whence all grief, and pain are eternally
banished.

Wherefore the Saints, may well proceed by way of impetation and prayers, or at
most, represent their former satisfactions, which are carefully laid up in the
treasury of the Church, in lieu of those which are due from others, but as for
any new satisfaction, or payment, derived from any penal act of their own, it
is not to be looked for, in those happy mansions of eternal glory.

The Church militant may do either, as having this advantage above the Church
triumphant, that she can help the souls in Purgatory, by her prayers and
satisfactory works and by offering up her charitable suffrages, wherewith to
pay the debts of those poor souls, who are run in arreare in point of
satisfaction due for their sins. Had they but fasted, prayed, labored, or
suffered a little more in this life, they had gone directly into Heaven; what
they unhappily neglected, we may supply for them, and it will be accepted for
good payment, as from their bayles and sureties. You know, he that stands
surety for another, takes the whole debt upon himself, this is our case, for
the living as it were entering bond for the dead, become responsable for their
debts, and offer up fast for fast, tears for tears, in the same measure and
proportion, as they were liable to them, and so defray the debt of their
friends, at their own charge, and make all clear.

This then is the general sense The living may help the dead (...) how (...)*
of the Church, that the living may help the afflicted souls, all these several
ways, either by satisfying for them, or by their prayers, or by interposing the
satisfactions of Christ Jesus, who has left them at the disposition of the holy
Church his beloved spouse. And what rational person can deny this, since they
are all members of the same mistical body; and consequently are tied in
charity, to yield mutual assistance, and comfort to one another, and the
rather, for that every one in his turn, may stand in need of the same
friendship, and look to be requited. I am pertaker, said Ps. 118. 63
holy David, with all those that fear God, and holy Church, to this purpose
repeates that doleful ditty, so full of tenderness, out of Job, take pity on
me, at least you that are my friends, for the Job, 19. 21.
hand of God has fallen heavily upon me. And otherwise we must discredit a
world of good Authors, a world of authentical records, a world of most pregnan^
proofs, and blast the reputation or venerable Antiquity, which has ever held
it as one of the maine points of Christian charity, to pray fervently for the
faithful departed, to pay their debts, and to strive by all means possible, to
help them out of their flames. To which purpose, by special favor almighty God
has sometimes permitted souls, to show themselves visibly to their friends, and
kindred, and to beg relief by Masses, Prayers, and other good works, whereby to
shorten and diminish the sharpness of their torments. So did Pope Innocent the
third, and a thousand others, as appears by unquestionable relations of grave
Authors. What they cannot of themselves, they beg of us, and beg it as an alms
for charities sake and it were both sin and shame to deny them. That which
often costs us but little, they esteem at a high rate, and could they but give
us a clear sight, of the wonderful effects of our small endeavors, we should
questionless take their cause more to heart then we do. Howsoever St. Thomas,
and other divines assure us, that even in rigor of justice, our satisfactions
are accepted in lieu of theirs, since God has so ordained, and past his word
for it to his dear spouse the Church, who really believes it to be so, and
proceeds accordingly. So that we may rest confident, that whosoever undertakes
to provide for those distressed souls, so he be qualified with the conditions
which are requisite on his part, shall infallibly relieve them. Well, but you
long now to know, what these conditions are, with which we may be morally
certain, that our suffrages are effectual toward the purifying, and releasing
of the poor souls in Purgatory.

He that will have his works acceptable We must be in the state of grace to do
them any good*
in the sight of God, for the obtaining of any mercy for himself, or others,
must in the first place be sure to be in the state of Grace, that is, Go^^
friend, for how can God be pleased at the doings of his mortal enemies? how can
he relish, or approve actions which proceed from a heart envenomed with the
deadly poison of mortal sin? Could I work miracles and wanted but a grain of
true charity, all this, says St. Paul were but wind, it 1 Cor. 13.
were all unprofitable. Next unto this, he must not fail, to have an intention
of doing such a good work, to relieve the soul, he either names himself, or
leaves to Gods determination and choice. Besides the work must be good and
virtuous of it self, that is, accompanied with all due circumstances. The more
love, humility, contrition, and devotion you bring, and the more penal your
work is, the more precious will it be in the sight of God, and the greater
miracles will it do in Purgatory, rejoicing the afflicted souls* quenching
their flames and converting Purgatory into Paradise.

But let us now look a little into Whether the Mass of a wicked. (...) Priest
(...) avail (...)*
the consequence of this Doctrine. Does it not hence follow, that all lewd and
ungodly Priests, are unprofitably employed for the good of the souls, for since
they are supposed to be in a damnable condition all they do, seems to be as
good as nothing, and then, what a world of Masses shall we have quite cast
away, what a world of foundations utterly lost, since they may often fall into
such wicked hands. Away with these discourses, which are not only false, but
very prejudicial to Purgatory. Good divinity teaches, that a Mass is always a
Mass, always Su. d. 48. Sect. 8.
good and of an infinite value, that the Priest that says it, or sings it, as
a Minister of Gods church (let him be never so unworthy) is always acceptable
for her sake, in whose name he acts, that if you take him as a private, and
particular person, it is true, all his prayers and devotions, can avail nothing,
but as he represents the Church, he cannot fail, to do the maine deed we
pretend, and we need not scruple it. You would be amazed, should I further tell
you, that it may very well fall out sometimes, that you may gain more, by
hearing the Mass of a loose, or deboach'd Priest, then of another, for that
which is common to both is, that they both offer up the propitiatory sacrifice
of the Mass, which is always pleasing in the sight of God, they are both
Ministers of the Church, and under this qualification, they are both acceptable
persons, both have the intention you require, of relieving the soul you
recommend unto them, both perform all the holy rites and ceremonies, which the
Church prescribes in this case: In this they differ, that the one adds
particular devotions of his own, which are grateful to God, because he is in
the state of grace, and one of his adopted children, whereas the others
personal actions, are of no worth, because we suppose him to be in an ill
state. Well, but this is the cause why you that know it and are fearful to
loose by the bargain, bring so many Theological acts of Faith, Hope, and
Charity of your own, so many holy affections, springing from a zealous
devotion, all inflamed with the love of God, that the loss you were afraid of,
is abundantly recompensed, and with no little advantage to your cause. Be not
then of the number of those fond persons, who profess, they are afraid to sound
obits, for their deceased kindred, least the Masses should come to be said by
ungodly, and irreligious Priests. It were mere simplicity, to be afraid of
clear cristal water, because forsooth, it issues out of the snoute of a black
marble serpent, or passes through the Jaws of a Lion of Brass. Would you
refuse a million of Gold, if it were sent you out of Turkey, from some wicked
renegado? or should the Pope send you a Cardinals Cap, would you be so nice as
not to accept it, because the messenger that brought it, were an ill
conditioned fellow? Elias was not so dainty, as to forbear his meat, because it
was brought by a Raven. Do a Gods name what is fitting, and leave the rest to
God, who out of his infinite goodness, knows how to supply all these defects,
especially such as happen against your will, and such as you know not how to
prevent, unless you were a Prophet.

. 4. Of the particular ways we have to help them.
THe holy Canons, and Doctors of the Church, comprehend all the means, and
advantages we have, to relieve, the dead, under these four general heads. 1.
The Priests oblations and sacrifices. 2 The Prayers of devout people. 3. Alms
deeds. 4. Fasting, unto which, you must reduce all kind of austerities, all
penal works, that afflict the body, what way soever, and in a word, all that
goes under the common notion of suffrages.

For the enjoying of all which helps, St. Augustine observes, how greatly it may
import to bury the dead, in Churches where the bodies of Saints and holy
Martyrs lie enterred, not that the bare lying th^^e can so much avail them,
but for this, that devout people resorting more thither, then to other places,
to perform their devotions, to God, and his Saints, and seeing the Tombs of
their deceased friends, cannot but remember to apply their charitable
suffrages, for the help of such needy persons.

I am in love with that Religious Masses.
practice of Bolognia, where upon funeral days, they cause hundreds, and
thousands of Masses to be said, for the soul departed, in lieu of other
superfluous and vain ostentations. They stay not for the Anniversary, nor for
any other set day, but instantly do their best, to release the poor soul from
her torments, who must needs think the year long, if she must stay for help,
till her anniversary day appears. They do not for all this, despise the
laudable customs of the Church, they bury their friends with honor, they
cloth great numbers of poor people, they give liberal Alms, but as there is
nothing so certain, nothing so efficacious, nothing so divine, as the holy
sacrifie of the Mass, they fix their whole affection there, and strive all they
can to relieve the souls this way, and are nothing so lavish as the fashion is,
in other idle expenses, in importune Feastings, which are often more
troublesome to the living then comfortable to the dead.

But you may not only comfort the All kind of afflictions.
afflicted souls by procureing Masses for them, nor yet only by offering up
your Prayers, Fasts, Alms-deeds, and other such works of Piety, but you may
bestow upon them, all the good you do, and all the evil you suffer in this
world. If you offer up unto God, all the cruel frettings, and gripings you
endure in a fit of the Stone, which tears up your very entralls, if all the
bitter sting and gnawings of the raging gout when it buries you alive in a kind
of Purg^^ory, if all the sensible tearings of a desperare Megrim, when it
cleaves your head in pieces, if the sullen humor of a Quartan Ague, which
steeps your very heart in the Gaul of a deep melancholy, if all the other
evils, which murder you alive, and do not kill you out right, to be still
killing you, with a lingering death. If I say, you offer up unto God, all that
causes you any grief, or affliction, for the present relief of the poor
languishing souls, you cannot believe, what ease and comfort they will find by
it, and as in the buckets of a Well, while the one sinks down to the bottom,
the other mounts up to the top, so the lower you humble your self in your
sufferings, the higher you will raise the souls in their flight toward heaven.
Nor will you have cause to fear, forgetting your self while you satisfy for
them, for it will infallibly come to pass, as St. John Chrysostom assures us,
that God, who is always prodigal of his mercies, will be sure to remember you,
and the holy Souls, soaring up to Heaven with the wings of your Charity, will
there plead for you with so much eloquence, as to gain your cause, or at least
obtain so much patience for you, as to defy the worst of your evils, which do
so insult, and tyranize over you, with so much insolence, Pliny would make us
believe, there are certain fishes, that entertain so fair an amity, and
faithful correspondence with one another, that if one of them chance to be
hung in the net, the other strives al he can possibly to set him free, and
having no other means to compass his design, presents his tail, or one of his
sins, which the other lays fast hold on with his teeth, so that, while the one
thrusts with all his might, and the other draws with all his force, they break
the mash, make way for the prisoner to get out, and so swim away both
triumphing in their liberty. Mean while the kind fish that was sorely bitten,
bleeds fresh of his wounds, and yet is so well pleased to have purchased his
friends liberty, though at the cost of his blood, that he thinks not of his own
mischief, for the joy he takes in his friends safety. Do you the same for your
friends, who are detained captives in Purgatory, lend them your Arms, your
Head, your Blood, all your griefs, and pains, and they will be the sooner
released out of their miserable thraldom, and you by their favor, shall in
your turn pass through it with so much ^wiftnesse, that you shall scarce feel
the scorching flames, with which they are so grievously tormented.

You have another easy, but ^^^^lgences.
most powerful means to help these unfortunate souls, and that is to dispense
out liberally amongst them the inexha^stible treasure of indulgences, to cause
Masses to be often sa^^ (...) privileged Altars, to gain Jubilies and other
plenary Indulgences, which are appliable to the benefit of deceased souls. For
though some extravagant writers, have been so bold, in their unwary
speculations upon this subject, as to question, whether the Popes power in
granting Jubilies and other pardons, reach to Purgatory or be only confined to
this world, yet the current of sober Doctors, must bear the sway, who all
conclude, that as to the living, his Holiness proceeds by way of absolution,
and as to the dead, by way of suffrages and satisfactions, but has full power
over both, to loose or bind, open or lock up Heaven gates, and to distribute
the treasure of the Church, and that he has his commission for all this, from
the sacred mouth of Jesus Christ himself, Math. 16. Certainly there be
thousands, deserve to lie in Purgatory, were it only for this strange neglect,
that ha^^^g so rich a treasure in their han^s, wherewith to ransom poor
captive souls, they were so careless, as to make little or no use of it, but
let a thousand occasions slip in which they might have released them, and all
for want of a little pains to gain Indulgences.

And they are the less to be excused, because it is very probable, Prepos. de
Indulg. q. 14 dub. 10. and Alii. passim:
that they may gain Indulgences, which are appliable to the dead, whether they
be in the state of grace or no, so they do but the work prescribed.

What will they do (says the Apostle) ^ Cor. 15. ^9
that are Baptized for the dead? What means this Baptism for the dead! I leave
a dozen of Interpretations, to tell you, there were some fervent Christians in
those days, that took a world of pains, and suffered a world of austerities for
the faithful departed, and so were Baptized in the tears of contrition, and in
the blood of a most rigourou^ and penitential life. I requi^^ not so much of
you, only a little care of applying such indulgences as you have in your power,
to do them good, who by a little of your favorable assistance, would be soon
set at liberty. Cruel heart! can thou refuse so slight a courtesy to souls so
holy, and yet in so lamentable a condition. And if thou have the honor to get
in thither thy self hereafter (I say the honor) do thou not deserve to be
let alone, to feel at leisure the smart of thy idleness and disloyalty. Who
will take the pains to help a wretch, who would scarce stir a finger to help
out souls, whose eternal happiness she might as easily have procured, as cut a
small thread in two, or quench a little spark of fire?

I have not the confidence, to Holy (...)ses (...) all (...) low.
propose things of greater hardship, and therefore I will not exhort you to
imitate the example of St. Catherine of Siena, who offered to s^ffer the pains
of Purgatory it self, in place of her dear Mother, nor that of St. Catherine of
Genua, who really suffered two years together, what flesh and blood is not able
to endure in this mortal life, not that of St. Christina the wonderful, whose
excesses Bellarm. Surius. Vitri^co.
in this kind were incredible, if not attested by very credible persons. I know
there is no persuading you, to devote your self to such holy excesses, least
you should chance to be taken at your word, as some others have been. I hope at
least I may without offense, mind you not to stick to apply this way all your
fasts, hair girdles, disciplins and other corporal afflictions, and in a word
all the evils you suffer in body or soul, whether they be voluntary or
unavoidable. This I beg as a most w^lcome alms, to the poor souls in
Purgatory, and a charity, which will be of no little comfort to your self. Do
but as Magdalen and Martha did, when they saw their brother Lazarus locked up
under ground, and overwhelmed with Earth, they wept and took on so bitterly,
that they drew tears from our blessed Savior, and rescued their brother out of
the Jaws of death. They are your brothers I entreat for, they are prisoners
under ground, Christ Jesus has as tender a heart as ever, give your selves then
to acts of contrition, let a tear steal now and then from your eyes, and
happily sweet Jesus will be so well pleased to see them, that they may suffice
to quench the flames of Purgatory and possibly work a miracle there in raising
souls to life everlasting, and placing them above the firmament, that lie now
as it were buried in that subterraneous lake of fire. But if you be so aride
and barren or so niggardly, as not to afford them a tear, at least send them
the sweet refreshment of a devout aspiration, or some short but rigourous
jaculatory prayer, which as a fiery dart, you may be still levelling at the
heart of Almighty God, give them a good thought, or a cordial expression of
sorrow, that you are not able to afford them the relief you could wish. Do
never so little, so you do it with a good heart, and you will assuredly give
them much ease in their implacable torments. The people of God was condemned to
be cruelly massacred, or destroyed by fire, when Queen Esther, fetching but a
deep sigh or two, and whispering but a few words into the ear of King
Assuerus, did so charm him as to work the redemption of above a million of
souls, who must otherwise have been delivered over to the fury of fire and
sword. Are you so void of charity, or is the blood that runs in your veins,
and feeds your heart, so frozen up, as not to yield one drop of compassion, for
Gods people, who are most miserably handled, by a most cruel inundation of
Purgatory fire. If so let us conclude that nature was deceived, for thinking to
make you a man, she missed of her aim, and made you a very Tiger, void of all
humanity, and common civility.

It was a pious invention, that Baron. An. 987. A sodality to help the (...).
of certain Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons of Rome, An. 984. to
erect a sodality, of those that should particularly devote themselves to pray
for the dead, which custom continued a long time at Rome, and is yet extant in
some part of the Christian world. When one of their number dies, they all
contribute their pious labors, to help him out of Purgatory, I say all, not
only those who remain yet alive, but those also, who are already got into
heaven; so that it is impossible for him to make any long stay there. What a
pleasure is it, to see that a soul of this happy confraternity does no sooner
enter into Purgatory, but a good part of Heaven and Earth, conspires to procure
her enlargement. This is to be wise indeed, these are matters of state, which
all the world would be well versed in, as importing them far more, then the
government of whole Kingdoms. Methinks, you that read this, should now long to
spread abroad this most excellent devotion, by erecting one of these
sodalities, which would be of so great advantage to your self and others. Most
part of mankind is so taken up, with building rich houses, or providing stately
Tombs for their Rotten Carcasses, they have no leisure to think, what will
become of their souls, or in what a fiery mansion they are like to be lodged,
at their first appearance in the other world. Do they not in truth deserve, to
lie there frying whole years Without mercy they that had so little wit, as not
to endeavor the avoiding of an evil, which only deserves the name, if compared
with the petty evils of this world, which are such bugbears in our weak sighted
apprehensions. A man that is undone, by some cheat or surprise, may be pitied,
but he that sees his own ruin, and will not stir a foot to prevent it, no
creature can pity such a man, and certainly, he deserves not the least
compassion.

The world has generally a great esteem of Monsieur d' Argenton, Phillip
Commines, and many worthily admire him for the great Wisdom, and sinceraty he
has labored to express in his whole History, but for my part, I commend him
for nothing more, then for the prudent care he took here, for the welfare of
his own soul in the other world. For having built a goodly Chapel, at the
Augustins in Paris, and left them a good foundation, he tied them to this
perpetual obligation, that they should no sooner rise from table, but they
should be sure to pray for the rest of his precious soul, and he ordered it
thus, by his express will, that one of the Religious should first say aloude,
let us pray for the soul of Monsieur d' Argenton and then all should instantly
say the Psalm de Profundis. Gerson lost not his labor, when he took such
pains, to teach little children, to repeat often these words, my God, my
Creator, have pity on your poor servant John Gerson. For these innocent
Souls, all the while the good man was a ^^ying, and after he was dead, went up
and down the Town, with a mournful voice, singing the short lesson he had
taught them, and comforting his dear soul with their innocent prayers.

Now as I must commend their prudence, who thus wisely cast about, how to
provide for their own souls, against they come into Purgatory, so I cannot but
more highly magnify their charity, who less sollicitous for themselves, employ
their whole care to save others out of that dreadful fire. And sure I am, they
can loose nothing by the bargain, who dare thus trust God with their own
souls, while they do their uttermost to help others; Nay though they should
follow that unpparallel'd example of F. Hemando de Rbo. Hist. l. 1 c. 4.. 3.
Monsoy of the society of Jesus, who not content to give away all he could from
himself to the poor souls, while he lived, made them his heirs after death, and
by express will bequeathed them all the Masses, Rosuries, and whatsoever else
should be offered for him, by his friends upon Earth.

. 5. Certain questions resolved, about the application, and distribution of,
our suffrages.
IT will not be amiss here to resolve you certain pertinent questions. Whether
the suffrages we offer up unto God shall really avail them for whom we offer
them, and whether they alone, or others also may receive benefit by them.
Whether it be better, to pray for a few at once or for many, or for all the
souls together. And for what souls in particular?

To the first I answer, if your How our suffer ages are applied to them.
intention be to help any one in particular, who is really in Purgatory, so
your work be good, it is infallibly applied, to the party upon whom you bestow
it. For as Divines teach, it is the intention of the offerer, which governs
all, and God of his infinite goodness accommodates himself to the petitioners
reque^^, applying unto each one, what has been offered for his relief. If you
have no body in your thoughts, for whom you offer up your prayers, they are
only beneficial to your self, and what would be thus lost, for want of
application, God lays up in the Treasury of the Church, as being a kind of
spiritual waife, or stray, to which no body can lay any just claim. And since
it is the intention, which entitles one to what is offered, before all others,
what right can others pretend to it, or with what justice can it be parted, or
divided amongst others, who were never thought of.

And hence I take my rise, to Better to pray for few then many.
resolve your other question, that if you regard their best advantage, whom you
have a mind to favor, you had better pray for a few, then for many together,
for since the merit of your devotions, is always limited, and often in a very
small proportion, the more you divide it, and subdivide it, amongst many, the
lesser share comes to every one in particular, as if you should distribute a
crown or an angel, amongst a thous^^^ poor people, you easily see yo^^ Alms
would be so inconsiderable, they would be little better for it, whereas if it
were all bestowed upon one or two, it were enough to make them rich in their
conceits.

Now to define precisely, whether it be always better done, to help one or two
souls efficaciously, then to yeald a little comfort to a great many, is a
question I leave for you to exercise your wits in.

I could fancy it to be your best course, to do both, that is, sometimes to
single out some particular soul, and to use all your power, to lift her up to
heaven, sometimes again, to parcel out your favors upon many, and now and then
also to deal out a general Alms upon all Purgatory. And you need not fear
exceeding in this way of charity, whatsoever you bestow, for you may be sure,
nothing will be lost by it. And St. Thomas will tell you, for your comfort,
that since all the souls in Purgatory, are perfectly united in charity, they
rejoice exceedingly, when they see any of their whole number, to receive such
powerful helps, as to dispose her for heaven, they every one take it as done
to themselves, whatsoever is bestowed upon any of their fellows, whom they love
as themselves, and out of a heavenly kind of curtesy, and singular love they
joy in her happiness, as if it were their own. So that it may be truly said,
that you never pray for one or more of them, but they are all partakers, and
receive a particular comfort, and satisfaction by it.

Me thinks this very consideration, should inkindle in your hearts a fresh
desire, to be often ^olafing those happy souls, and to entitle your selves
their special benefactours, who will never suffer the remembrance of your
tender mercies, to be blotted out of their grateful memories.

But let us now state the case How if we employ other^ to help the^*
thus: suppose you should employ another, to do those good works for the souls,
whether or no, will they have the same effect, as if you had done them your
self? again, should this other, whom you thus employ, be an ungratious fellow,
whether would all his endeavors be able to give any ease to the souls, for
whose sakes you procure them! I am so taken with the Angelical Doctrine of St.
Thomas, I Will go no further for an answer. He tells us then, that if you be good,
and he stark naught, by whom you procure for example the Dirge to be said, or
any other good work to be performed, that can be done by a third person, (for
there be some that be personal) it does not at all blast the fruit of your
devotion, nor obstruct the souls benefit, for whom you procured it; That if he
chance to be good, so much the better, the benefit will be the greater, though
God look more upon the chief Agent, and principal cause, then upon the
accessory, or instrument, he thinks fit to make use of. That if you be wicked
your self, and the other good, the good work will have its effect, and the soul
will be assisted by it. That if you should be both so unlucky, as to be neither
of you in the state of grace, (excepting Mass only, which can never fail of
its effect) all other means you use, will be utterly void, and of no effect,
because they proceed from so ungrateful hands, and worse hearts. Would you
have God to accept of his enemies presents, and while you refuse to give him
your heart, to seal with his divine grace, would you have him to deliver you up
his, to dispose of his mercies, for the benefit of others. No wicked wretch,
no, till you alter your condition, do not look, that God will appear in his
mercy, to bestow a Jubily, on those holy souls you entreat for, nay, it falls
out sometimes, even in this world, th^^ the pleading of an infamous advocate, or
a sworn enemy of the Prince or State, makes the criminals case more odious and
desperate, and in lieu of a Gibet, procurcs him a wheel, or a worse punishment.
Yet I must tell you, and I must conjure you, by all the obligations of
humanity, that, be you never so lost a creature, never so covered with
enormious crimes, you never fail at least to procure Masses, and to distribute
liberal Alms, for the relief of the poor souls, and this for many reasons.

First, Because the Mass is always to good purpose, as having its effect, ex
opere operato, as they speak in schoools, or of it self, without any relation
had to him that says it, or causes it to be said.

Secondly, Because they use to say, that the last wholesome advice, we ought to
give to a desperate soul, plunged over head and ears in sin, is to be sure
always, to be good to the poor, for sooner or later, good will come of it

Thirdly, It is truly said of almsdeeds, that they are good sollicitours, and
have a most charming Rhetoric, to obtain of God, and to extort as it were out
of his hands, what they please. In so much, that if the sentence of
condemnation, were already signed in the hands of God (it is the expression of
St. Chrysologus) God Sermon. 8.
himself would tear it in pieces, and revoke the sentence, rather then refuse
any favor to the merciful. Give Alms, says the Eccl. 29.
holy Ghost, and hide it in the bosom of the poor, and your Alms will
intercede for you. So that, although you wicked wretch, cannot say a good
prayer for the souls, yet your charity will supply your place, and plead for
you and the poor that partake of it, will also pray for you, and all this may
possibly be to good purpose* What your tongue cannot, your hand will perform,
with greater advantage, and what cannot proceed from your heart, which is
poisoned with deadly sin, will out at your purse, which is full of mercy, and
help to purchase some comfortable refreshment, to take of the fury of those
hungry flames which are incessantly preying upon the poor souls.

And here again, taking upon me, to be Proctour for this sufferring
Commonwealth, I conjure you, to be liberal in distributing your alms, and
procuring M^sses, for the souls departed. I can expect no less from their
goodness, but that their Angel gardians, or yours, or those of the poor, will
inspire them with good thoughts, and move them, to pour ou^ their ardent, and
innocent prayers, for you in recompense of so great a charity. Mean while you
shall be like the Crow, that brought bread to St. Paul the Hermit, without so
much as tasting it, or like the Whale that convay'd Jonas safe to the shore
without feeding on him, or to use St. Gregory's comparison, you shall be like
the water in the Sacrament of Baptism, which falling upon the head of a child,
washes away the foul stain of original sin, and entitles him heir to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and mean while glides away into some noisome sink, and
there turns to filth and corruption.

Now to the last Query, for what What souls we ought most to pray for.
souls in particular, we ought most to concern our selves? I answer briefly
thus. 1. Without question, all obligations of kindred promise, gratitude, rule,
command, etc. are to be served in the first place. 2. You cannot do better,
then to offer up your devotions, for those souls, which are dearest to God, or
his blessed Mother. 3. It is a singular charity, to remember those, that are in
most need, or most neglected. 4. It is a pious and laudable piece of spiritual
craft, to do for thos^ that will be soonest released; for by this means, you
shall send into heaven, good store of powerful advocates, who will incessantly
plead for you, before the throne of mercy.

. 6. How dangerous it is to trust others, with what concerns the sweet rest of
our souls in the next world.
AS I cannot but highly magnify, It is a folly to trust others.
and extol their charity, that have a sollicitous care, to rescue out of
Purgatory the Souls of their dear parents, friends, and acquaintance, so I
cannot forbear deploring, and even laughing at their folly, and mere madness,
as I may rightly term it, that leave all to the discretion of their heirs and
friends, they leave behind them. They must pardon me, if I wrong them, it is
the zeal of their good transports me, it is a just indignation sets my heart
all on fire, to see, how the wisest often prove the veriest fools, in this
occasion, which is the most important of all others. How many wills never see
any other light, but that of the fire, which consumes them to ashes? How many
false ones are daily forged, to fill up the others room? How few do we see at
this day punctually performed, or rather, how many do we see not performed at
all? Having procured a Mass or two of Requiem, and the Dirige to be said, for
decency sake, and for the honor of their house, who is there almost, that will
give himself any further trouble to pray even for his parents. The good man, is
scarce cold in his Grave, but his Children fall together by the Ears, run into
endless suits, seize upon what they can next lay their hands on, right or
wrong, and will not be persuaded to forego it, but by main force of Law, or by
the terror of dreadful excomm^nications. One lays injustice ^^ his Fathers
charge, for doing so much to advance his eldest Sons fortune, another cries out
upon him, for being so unnatural, as to undo his own Child. The Daughters think
much their portions are no greater, the whole house is up in arms, and in
continual alarums, and in a word, there is nothing but a mere confusion, and
hurly burly amongst them. Mean while, the good man has leisure enough, to fit
at his task of suffering, and to lie frying in Purgatory, not so much as one
of his Children, thinks on him, unless it be to brand him with some injurious
reproach The unfortunate soul, almost killed himself with care, and had like
also to have damned himself, to make his Children happy in this world, and
these barbarous harpies are so insatiable, as to be raking at the bones, and
gnawing the very heart of their deceased father, who must needs be very
sensible (if he know it) to see himself so undutifully regarded, by his own
Children. I will bring him in anon to speak for himself, as best able, to hold
forth his own lamentable condition, and sure it will break your very heart to
hear him. And yet tell me seriously, does he not deserve all this, who might so
easily, when time was, have provided better for himself, and prevented all this
mischief, by obliging the Chuch to offer up good store of Masses for him, and
was so indiscreet, as to leave it wholly to the discretion of his Heirs and
Executours, who are little better then direct Barbarians. For is there any
likelihood, they will stir, to help him out of Purgatory, they that cannot so
much as afford him a stone upon his Grave, worth a crown, with a little
inscription to put good people in mind, who lies there, that they may cast a
good thought after him. But I shall have occasion yet, to enlarge my self more
upon this subject, and to make it appear, what an irreparable folly is
committed, by the wisest in the world, in neglecting one of the most important
affairs in their whole life.

It would go h^rd with many, Whether a soul must stay in Purg. till restitution
be made.
were it true, that a person, who neglected to make restitution in his life
time, and only charged his heirs to do it for him, in his last Will and
Testament, shall not stir out of Purgatory, till restitution be really made,
let there be never so many Masses said, and never so many satisfactory works
offered up for him. And yet St. Brigit, whose revelations are for the most part
approved by the Church, sticks not to set this down for a truth, which God had
revealed unto her. Nor are there wanting grave Divines, that countenance this
rigourous position, and bring for it many strong reasons, and examples, which
they take to be authentical, and the Law it self, which says, that if a man do
not restore another goods, there will always stick upon his soul a kind of
blemish, or obligation of justice, and since the fault lies wholly at his door
he cannot (say they) have the least reason to complain, of the severity of
Gods justice, but must accuse his own coldness, and extreme neglect of his own
welfare. Nay, even those, that are of the contrary persuasion, yet maintain,
that it is not only much more secure, but far more meritorious, to satisfy
such obligations while we live, then to trust others with it, let them be never
so near, and dear unto us, let it be your Child, or your Wife, or the very half
of your self, yet you ought not to trust your other half in this case, where we
see men are so daily cozened in their expectations. And you that read this, and
think to take so good order, that the like inconveniences cannot befall you,
let me tell you, you are like to be one of the first, that will be thus
miserably cheated, and perhaps, far worse then your neighbors, if you do not
seek to discharge all these obligations, while you are yet alive, and rather to
day, then to morrow. And I beseech you, take the p^ins once more to read over
this. For it is unto you I direct my speech, or rather it is God that speaks
to you by my mouth, if ^ou fail in it, you will have cause to repent, for my
part, I hold my self discharged. But now to return from whence I have a little
digressed, I told you, that these last Authors, though they do not believe,
that a soul shall be necessarily tied, to dwell in Purgatory fire, till
restitution be made, yet they hold, that it may accidentally fall out, that she
may be kept there far longer, then she would have been otherwise. For the
Creditors, who have received their due, the poor, yo^ have made amends for
what was wrongfully taken from them, and others, well satisfied, with your just
proceedings, will make it their bu^iness, to pray for your soul, for want of
whose prayers, you may lie, God knows how long, neglected, and forgotten, in
that fiery dungeon. And believe it, let the first opinion, be never so
improbable in your judgment, it will not be very safe for you, to lie in
Purgatory, till the case be decided, nor will it be your wisest course, to
learn there, how egregiously you have played the fool, in not clearing your
debts sooner, and providing better for the ease of your soul. I am clearly of
the second opinion, but would advise you, to make use of the first, that the
one serving you as a bridle, the other may be as a spurr to incite you to that
which does more import you then the dominion of the whole world. You would be
loath to Emperor of the universe, upon condition to be perpetually tormented
with the Stone, or the Gout, or to lie broyling upon a Gridiron, and are you so
wilfully unwary, as to cast your self into the flames of Purgatory, upon a
vain confidence, that your friends, or your children, will fetch you out, who
perhaps have scarce a thought of you once in a twelvemonth.

You have no reason in the world, to expect others should love you better, then
you love your self, so that if you can find in your heart to neglect your
self, it is a folly to expect others will have more care of you. Sure it is not
good going to heaven by proxy, nor standing to another courtesy, in what
concerns the necessary refreshment and ease of our souls. You that are so rich
in worldly wealth, but bare enough of solid virtue give but a tolerable excuse,
why you do not build a Chapel, or an Hospital, that good people, remembering
their founder, may be daily pouring out their prayers for you, both living and
dead. That which you often cast away, at an unlucky throw at Dice, would
suffice, that which you bury in a caprichious piece of building, or devour at
an idle entertainment were more then enough. Why do not you get a privileged
Alter in your own Parish, or at least cause frequent Masses to be said at such
Altars, to release poor souls, that others may be as kind to you hereafter?
Why do not you send good store of Alms to poor prisoners, that your charity
may help to redeem souls out of Purgatory. You do nothing of all this, and yet
would be thought to be in your right senses, which I look upon for my part as a
mere paradox.

. 7. Some motives fetched even as far as the other World, to stir us up to be
mindful of the dead.
CArdinal Cajetan has a singular tenet, which will not a little help, to
promote piety and deserves highly to be recorded, as a Doctrine, which suits
well with the infinite goodness of our most just and merciful God. The
question is, what becomes of all the merit, of those Masses, and other
suffrages, which are offered for souls, which are not in Purgatory? some hold,
it is applied to their Parents, Alliance, or Friends, others to those that are
so frendless, as to have no body to remember them, others to them that stand in
most need of help, others will have it horded up with the rest of the Churches
treasure. A pious opinion of Cajetan.
But this learned Cardinal maintains, that it goes all to relieve their souls,
who in this world were particularly addicted to pray for the dead. And what can
be more reasonable? According Math. 7. 2.
to the measure, we deal out to others, it shall be measured to Luc. 6. 38.
us again, give, and there shall be given to you, says Almighty God.

Who can lay a better claim to it then they? For first, the founders
themselves, were they but half acquainted, with what passes in the other world,
cannot but be well pleased at it. Then, it is a powerful incentive, to
increase devotion in the hearts of all good Christians, who may hope in their
turns to reap the like fruit of their charitable labors, for the good of
souls. And who can find fault, that such straggling suffrages, which of right
belong to no body, should be so profitably employed? This opinion is no Article
of faith, but is a very pious conjecture, worthy of that most eminent Cardinal.
And me thinks I see the blessed souls themselves, for whom these holy suffrages
were offered, to lie prostrate before the throne of God, beseechi^g him to
apply them to those needy souls, who while they lived were so full of charity,
as to forget themselves to be sure to remember them.

Me thinks I see the other Saints in heaven, who were handed out of Purgatory
by the arms of charity, to be joynt-petitioners, and their good Angels also,
and all of them together, to become earnest suitors, to obtain this favor of
Almighty God, who is easily overcome in a suit of this nature, which is so
rational, that the granting it must needs cry up his ineffable wisdom and
mercy. And I cannot but think, that if the case were to be decided by the souls
in Purgatory, they would all unanimously agree, that such suffrages as these,
which out of mere ignorance, were misapplied to those that could make no
benefit of them, cannot be better disposed of, then to their companions, who in
their life time were so charitable to other souls. This I take to be a very
moving consideration, and yet I have just cause to fear, all I can say to you
will hardly s^ffice to mollify that hard heart of yours, and therefore my last
refuge shall be to set others on, though I call them out of the other world.

And first, let a damned soul read you a Lecture, and teach you the compassion
you ought to bear to your afflicted brethren. Remember Luke 16.
how the rich glutton in the Gospel, for all he was buried in hell fire, took
care for his brothers, who survived him, and besought Abraham to send Lazarus
back into the world, to preach, and convert them, least they should be so
miserable, as to come into that place of torments. A strange request for a
damned soul and which may shame you, that are so little concerned for the souls
of your brethren, who are in so restless a condition.

In the next place, I will bring in the soul of your dear father, or mother, to
make her own just complaints against you. Lend her then a dutiful, and
attentive ear, and let none of her words be lost, for she deserves to be heard
o^^* while she lays forth the state o^ her most lamentable condition. Peace,
It is a holy soul, (though clothed in flames) directs her speech to you after
this manner.

Am not I the most unfortunate The Complaint of Soul in Purgat^^y.
and wretched parent that ever breathed! I that was so silly, as to presume,
that having ventured my life, and my very soul also, to leave my children at
their ease, they would at least have had some pity on me, and endeavored to
procure me some ease, and comfort in my torments. Alas, I burn unsufferably, I
suffer infinitely, and have done so I know not how long, and yet this is not
the only thing that grieves me, alas no, it is a greater vexation to see my
self so soon forgotten, by my own children, and so slighted by them, for whom I
have in vain taken so much care and pains. Ay, do thou grudge thy poor
Mother a Mass, a slight Alms, a sigh, or a tear; thy Mother, I say, who would
most willingly have stolen bread out of her own mouth, to make thee swim in an
Ocean of delights, and to abound with plenty of all worldly goods. See how
proudly this unnatural Child struts up and down, as fine as hands can make
him, as glorious as the sun, while I his poor Mother have no other robes left
me but scortching flames of fire: See how he empties my Coffers, to cast it
upon his Horses and his Dogs, or upon men worse then either, and cannot find
the heart to lay out a penny in charitable uses for his poor Mother; his Gold
flies about the table, as nimbly as the Dice, he plays with, and in mere sport
and merriment, he throws away that, which cost me a world of pains, and perhaps
was the occasion of my death, and my cruel confinement to this place of
torments. He cannot afford me so much as a Cup of cold water, wherewith to
quench my flames, while he gl^ts himself with all superfluous and choice
dainties. Am I not well served, for having had so little wit, and so little of
common sense in me, as to trust this wretch, who has not a spark of good nature
in him, to have the least feeling of my deplorable condition. Who will not
refuse me comfort, when my own Children, my very bowels, do their best to
forget me. What a vexation is it to me, when my companions in misery, ask me
whether I left no children behind me, and why they are so haggard natured as to
neglect me, what can I say, or what answer can I make but this, that I thought
I had brought forth Children, but find them to be mere Vipers and Tigers. When
I was upon my death bed, struggling for life, these hypocritical villans,
feigned themselves in despair, their pale looks, their counterfeit tear^,
their sighs, their sobs, their kind expressions, delivered in soft and smooth
language, made me verily believe, they loved me, and won me to play the fool
thus, to rely upon them, when God knows, they longed for nothing more, then to
close up my eyes, and were almost ready to burst for mere grief, that I died no
sooner, that they might have sooner enjoyed the goods I had scraped together,
with the hazard of my life, and poor soul too. I was willing to forget my own
concerns, to be careful of theirs, and the ungrateful wretches have now buried
me in an eternal oblivion, and clear left me to shift for my self, in these
horred tortures, without giving me the least ease, or comfort. O what a fool
was I? had I given to the poor but the thousandth part of those goods, which I
left this unlucky Child, I had long before this been joyfully singing the
praises of my creator, in the Quire of Angels, whereas now I lie panting, and
groaning under excessive torments, and am lik^ still to lie by it, for any
relief is to be looked for, from this undutifu^, and ungracious Child, I made my
sole heir Go you mortals, go hereafter, and trust your children, your kindred,
and your heirs, that you may be treated by them, as I am by my son who was
dearer to me, then the very apple of my eye. O it is the greate^^ piece of
indiscretion in the whole world, to rely upon the discretion, of indiscrete,
and undutiful children, who had rather be scuffling, and tugging one another,
for a part of our inheritance, then striving to help us out of our pains: Sure
parents are either bewitched; or grown senseless, to hazard their souls for such
untoward, and ill natured ch^^dren, who have not a drop of good blood in their
hearts, nor a grain of true filial love. But am I not all this while strangely
transported, miserable that I am, thus to amuse my self with unprofitable
complaints against my son where as indeed I have small reason, to blame any but
my self, since it is I, and only I, that am the cause of all this mischief. For
did not I know; that in the grand business of saving my soul, I was to have
trusted none but my self? did I not know, that with the sight of their friends,
at their departure, men use to loose all the memory, and friendship they had
for them? Did I not know, that God himself had foretold us, that the only ready
way, to build our selves eternal tabernacles, in the next world, is not to give
all to our Children, but to be liberal to the poor? Did I not often hear it
preached to me, that a cup of cold water, sometimes luckily bestowed, was
sufficient to put out Purgatory fire? Did they not as often ring it in my
ears, that a wise man sends his good works before him, and leaves them not
for others to finish, as fools do, who by that means, come to carry nothing
with them but a shameful remorse, which lies like an aspe, at their breast,
continually knawing, and devouring them. I cannot deny then, but the sault lies
at my door, and that I am deservedly thus neglected by my children. And were I
disposed to wish harm to any body, I would wish them no greater mischief, then
that their children should serve them, just as they have served me; I say, that
the ungodly wretches may come hither, and be as much neglected, and forgotten
as I am, and see when it is too late, what it is to trust to the kindness of
children, which is commonly buried in the same grave with their parents. It is
one of my greatest miseries, that I have not the face, to beg any comfort of
God in my sufferings, for whereas he clearly promised me all favor, so I would
but be good to the poor, I have done the clean contrary, putting more
confidence, in the uncertain performance of unworthy children, then in the
infallible truth of Gods word. The only comfort I have left me in all my
afflictions, is that others will learn at my cost this clear maxim, not to
leave to others a matter of so near concern, as the ease, and repose of their
own souls, but to provide for them carefully themselves. O God! how dear have I
bought this experience, to see my fault irreparable, and my misery without
redress.

One must have a heart of Steel, or no heart at all, to hear these sad regrets
and not feel. some tenderness for the poor souls, and as great an indignation
against those who are so little concerned for the souls of their parents, and
other near relations. I wish with all my soul, that all those, who shall light
upon this passage, and hear the soul so bitterly to deplore her misfortune,
may but benefit themselves half as much by it, as a good Prelate did, when the
soul of Pope Benedict the eighth, by Gods permission, revealed unto him her
lamentable state in Purgatory. For so the story goes Baron. an. 1024.
(which is not to be questioned) This Pope Benedict appears to the Bishop of
Caprea, and conjures him to go to his brother Pope John, who succeeded him in
the chair of S. Peter, and to beseech him, for Gods sake, to give great store
of alms to poor people, to allay the fury of the fire of Purgatory, with which
he found himself sorely tormented. He furthen charge^ him, to let the Pope know
withal, that he did, acknowledge, liberal alms had already been distributed
for that purpose, but had found no ease at all by it, because all the money,
that was then bestowed; had been acquired unjustly, and so had no power to
pravaile, before the just tribunal of God, for the obtaining of the least
mercy. The good Bishop upon this, makes have to the Pope, and faithfully
relates the whole conference, that had passed between him and the soul of his
predecessor, and with a grave voice, and lively accent, exaggetates the
necessity and importance of the business, that in truth, when a soul lies a
burning, it is in vain to dispute idle questions, the best course then, is to
run instantly for water, and to throw it on with both hands, calling for all
the help, and assistance we can to relieve her, that his Holiness should soon
see truth of the vision by the wonderful effects which were like to follow. All
this he delivers so gravely, and so to the purpose, that the Pope resolves out
of hand, to give in charity vast sums, out of his own certain, and
unquestionable revenue, whereby the soul of Pope Benedict was not only
wonderfully comforted, but questionless soon released of her torments. In
conclusion, the good Bishop, having well reflected with himself, in what a
miserable condition he had seen the soul of a Pope, who had the repute of a
Saint, and was really so, it workt so powerfully with him, that quitting his
Mitre, Crosier, Bishopric, and all worldly greatness, he shut himself up in a
Monastery, and there made a holy end, choosing rather to have his Purgatory, in
the austerity of a Cloister, then in the flames of Pith. Baron. an. 874
the Church Patient. I wish again, they would in this but follow the example of
King Lewis of France, who was son to Lewis the Emperor, surnamed the Pious.
For they tell us, that this Emperor, after he had been 33. years in Purgatory,
not so much for any personal crimes, or misdemeanors of his own, as for
permitting certain disorders in his Empire, which he ought to have prevented,
was at length permitted, to show himself to King Lewis his son, and to beg
his favorable assistance, and that the King, did not only most readily grant
him his req^est procuring Masses to be said in all the Monasteries of his
Realm, for the soul of his deceased Father, but drew thence many good
reflections, and profitable instructions, which served him all his life time
after. Do you the same and believe it, though Purgatory fire is a kind of
Baptism, and is so styled by some of the holy Fathers, because it cleanses a
soul from all the dross of sin, and makes it worthy to see God, yet is it
your sweetest course, here to baptize your self frequently, in the tears of
contrition, which have a mighty power to wash away all the blemishes of sin,
and so prevent in your own person, and extinguish in others, those baptismal
flames of Purgatory fire, which are so dreadful.

The Fifth Survey.
How all Antiquity was ever devoted to pray for the Dead.

THis charitable devotion for the dead, is a thing so inbred and natural unto
us all, that we seem, as it were, to suck it in with the very milk of our
Nurses: Nor was there ever any people, I do not say Christian, but even Jewish,
or Heat henish, which did not profess some Piety in this kind.

As for the Jews, it is well known The Jews pray for the dead.
to be their constant practice this day, to pray for Souls departed, and is
confessed to be so by Purcas himself, and other Modern Protestants. And what
their custom was, when they had the privilege of being the only chosen
people of Almighty God, the Scripture it self bears witness; especially, where
it relates the incomparable zeal, which that valiant invincible Champion of
Heaven, Judas Machabeus, had for the good of 2. Match. 12.
their Souls, who had unfortunately been slain by their enemies. Take his story
in brief, thus: Having in several feirce encounters, made such a slaughter of
his enemies, as to strew the fields over with dead Carcasses, and to stain the
Rivers with blood, he caused a diligent search to be made, for all those that
had fallen on his side, to have them honorably enterred in the Sepulchers of
their Fathers. But the mischief was, that in stripping them of their Clothes,
they discovered under their coats some unlawful spoils, which they ought to
have destroyed, according to their law, but had secretly reserved to
themselves, a crime, for which they all instantly concluded, those unfortunate
souls, had deservedly been cast away, and cut off by the hand of God. And some
there were doubtless, that fell a cursing this their fordid avarice and high
transgression, but the good Captain, takes this occasion, to exhort them to
adore the just judgments of heaven, and to learn at the others cost to have the
fear of God before their eyes, and to be more religious in their ways, and yet
withal to be more reserved in their censures, and rather to have pity on the
souls of their fellow soldiers, who probably might not die in so desperate a
condition, as not to be relieved by their help. This done, he makes a
collection, he raises a sum of 12000. drachms, he sends it to Jerusalem, to
procure Sacrifices to be offered, for their sins that were slain, who for ought
he knew, might dye in a fair way to a hopeful resurrection. Now, whether
shall we first admire, the tender heart of this noble Cavalier, or his
religious piety, or his charitab^^ liberality. He knew well, those miserable
wretches had committed a most foul crime, and yet he would not despair of
their salvation, but was willing to believe, they repented themselves of their
frailty, and that God had sent them their deaths, only as a temporal
punishment, for the terror of others: Nor had he the least doubt, but that our
Lord would be well pleased with his charity, and accept of the Sacrifices which
he thus offered, for the repose of their souls. And certainly, the fact is most
highly commended by the sacred Text, which concludes the story, in these words.
It is therefore a holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the Dead, that
they may be loosed from their sins. O that so fair an example would teach all
Christians, to be good and liberal to the Dead; for alas, the greatest part of
mankind content themselves, with drawing two or three sighs, at a funeral, or
saying a^^^^rt prayer or two at most, wher^^^ this generous Captain (even
before the clear light of the Gospel) did all this, and consirmed it with a
noble Gift of 12000. drachms.

. 1. Of the natural instinct of all Nations to honor, and comfort the dead.
IT may well put most Catholics to the blush, to consider what an incredible
care, all nations have ever had of the dead, by the mere impulse of nature.

Caesar takes notice, how superstitiously De bello Gall.
pious, the ancient French were in this kind, who together with the dead corpse,
which they burnt upon a great pile of wood, were wont to consume all that had
been precious, and dear to him when he lived, as all his rich movables, his
Dogs, his Horses, nay sometimes his very Servants also, who took it for a great
honor, that they might be suffered, so to mingle their ashes, with those of
their dear Lord and Master. And does not the Roman Tacit. Hist.
History tell us, that, when Otho the Emperous, had (...) himself with a
Dagger, many ^^ his Soldiers were seen to do the like, to show the affection
they had for their Prince, and how-ready they were to sacrifice their lives for
his honor, and service. I know these customs were not only very extravagant,
but extreme rude, and barbarous, and yet they may serve to shame Christians,
who are so far from expressing any such love for the souls of their friends,
though they believe them to lie broyling in Purgatory. For what would not these
others have done, or what would they not have given, to redeem the souls of
their friends out of cruel torments (had they believed as much) since they were
so prodigal, as to sacrifice their goods, and their very lives to their bare
memories.

What shall I say of those other Nations, whose natural piety lead them, to set
burning Lamps at the sepulchers of the dead, and strew them over with sweet
flowers, and Odoriferous perfumes? Herod. l. 2.
do they not mind Christians, to remember the dead, and to cast after them, the
sweet incense of their devout sighs, and prayers, and the perfumes of their
alms deeds, and other good works.

It was very usual with the old Romans, to shed whole floods of tears, to
reserve them in viol glasses, and to bury them with the ^^^nes, in which the
ashes of their de^d friends were carefully laid up, and by them to set Lamps,
so artificially composed, as to burn without end By which Symbols, they would
give us to understand that neither their love, nor their grief, should ever
dye, but that they would always be sure, to have tears in their eyes, love in
their hearts, and a constant memory in their souls for their deceased friends
Good God! shall charity be overcome by vanity, shall Religion yield to
Idolatry, and shall ^he Catholic Roman stoop to the Pagan Roman? shall a
little vain glory, or a me^^ ^atural affection have the power to draw whole
Glass fuls of tears, from the eyes of idolatours, and shall not a Religious
compassion prevail so far ^s to draw a single tear or a figh, or a good word
from the mouth of a Christian? shall they take on so bitterly for dead
carcasses, that are not sensible of the flames, that consume them? and shall
not we be more concerned for souls, that really feel the smart of a most cruel
fire? sure they will one day rise up in judgment against us, and reproach us
for believing as we do, and carrying our felves clear contrary to the belief we
profess.

They had another custom, not only in Rome, but elsewhere, to walk about the
burning pile, where the dead Corpse lay, and with their mournful lamentations,
to keep time with the doleful sound of their Trumpets, and still every turn, to
cast into the fire some precious pledge of their friendship. The Women
themselves, would not stick to throw in their Rings, Bracelets and other costly
attires, nay their very hair also, the chief ornament of their Sex, and they
would have been sometimes willing, to have thrown in both their eyes, and their
hearts too. Nor were there some wanting, that in earnest Suet. in Aug. Dion.
Alex.
threw themselves into the fire, to be consumed with their dear spouses, so
that it was found necessary, to make a severe law against it, such was the
tenderness they had for their deceased friends, such was the excess of a mere
natural affection. Now our love ^^ infused from heaven, it is supernatural, and
consequently ought to be more active, and powerful to stir up our compassion,
for the souls departed, and yet we see the coldness of Christians in this kind,
how few there are, that make it their business to help poor souls out of their
tormenting flames. It is not necessary to make Laws to hinder any excess in
this kind, it were rather to be wished, that a Law were provided, to punish all
such ungrateful persons, as forget the duty they owe to their dead parents, and
all the obligations they have to the rest of their friends.

It will help something to increase Diod. Sic. l. 17. c. 16.
our confusion, to reflect how Alexander the great behaved himself at the
Funerals of his dear Hephestion. They tell us, he spent at least twelve
thousand Talents that is, above seven Millions, and two hundred thousand
Crowns, upon his funeral pile. It was beautified with a world of rich, and
goodly statues, made of Ivory, Ebony, or some precious Metal, amongst others,
you might have seen curious Mermaides, with exquisite music, locked up within
them Eagles, Dragons and other beasts represented to life, stately galleries
hung with Scarlet richly embroydered, triumphant crowns of p^^e Gold, torches,
fifteen cubits high, perfumes without end. O what an excess of love, and
superfluity was this? what a st^r to make a handful of ashes, of the carcass of
a miserable damned wretch? And yet all this was nothing, Justin. l. 1. Diod.
Sic. l. 3. Bud.
to the mad profuseness of that other infamous and desperate King, who yet
living built his own funeral pile, and made himself and a world of treasure to
the value of fifty millions of Gold to be all consumed to ashes. What
reflections shall we make upon all this, we that are scarce willing to spare a
shilling, to ease a soul that lies consuming in the flames of Purgatory.

Tell me, dear Reader, what would they not have done for souls, they that bore
so Religious a respect to the bones, ashes, and small remainder of dead
carcasses? They first clothed themselves with black cypres, washed their hands
clean, quenched the fire with milk and wine, then they made a diligent search
for the bones, carefully raking them up out of the ashes, they placed them in
their bosoms, washed them with their tears, and their choysest wines, dried
them again, and lapped them up in their finest linen, covered them over with
roses, and other costly perfumes, and so reserved them in urns of glass,
Ivory, or porphyry, and could never think they had done enough for them* And
can we Christians, with the eye of our faith, pierce the Earth, and see poor
souls burning in Purgatory fire, and see them with dry eyes, and with a frozen
heart? Can we be so niggardly, as to grudge them a little comfort, or refuse to
cast on our Wine, our Milk, and our flowers, the wine of our charity, the Milk
of our innocence, and the flowers of our devout sighs, and prayers to help to
quench their flames. Christ Jesus told the Jews, that the Queen of Saba would
condemn them at the latter day, and I fear Queen Artemifia Strabo. l. 14.
Diod. l. 16.
will condemn u^, for having built one of the seven miracles of the world, in
honor of her dear Lord and Husband, not content with this exterior
de^onstration, of the dutiful affection she had for him, she took a strange
resolution, to drink up his ashes, and to lodge them in her heart, and so to
make it good to the very letter, that man and wife are indeed but one flesh,
one body and and soul, have but one life, and can die but one death. What would
she not have done, to have lodged his soul in Heaven, she that took such care
to lodge his ashes in her breast? What have you to say for your selves, you
unkind wives, or what answer can you make you unnatural Children, when she
shall question you, what care you took, to provide a better mansion for the
Souls of your Husbands, or your Parents, when they were lodged in the merciless
flames of Purgatory fire? Sure you are not sprung, from that wicked race of
barbarou^ people, who were wont to feast themselves with the flesh of their
dead Parents, and to justify the fact, by saying, that it was Strabo. Val. Max.
better their bodies should be their meat, then the meat of worms, and that
they could not do better, then to lodge them in their own bodies, and so to
return the courtesy they received, when they were heretofore lodged in theirs.
I know this brutishness does not reign amongst us, at this present, but alas?
there is another not unlike to it, which is much in fashion: for how many
Childen, gourmandize themselves with the riches of their parents, drink up the
sweat of their brows, and devour their goods, without so much as dreaming,
what becomes of their Souls, whether they broyl in glowing fire or starve in
freezing cold? Cruel wretches! Is this the gratitude with which they honor
their Parents? Are they indeed children, or rather are they not direct vultures
and Tigers?

I should never make an end, should I go about here, to reckon up all the
religious expressions of charity, which the Pagans are known to have made to
their dead friends, and therefore I say nothing of the ten valiant captains,
Xenoph. l. 1 Pausan. l. 2.
that were slain, for not fishing for the bodies of their soldiers, and
causing them to be buried, which was a crime they held unpardonable I say as
little, of that pions custom of the Athenians, who would confer no honor, or
dignity, but upon those, who were well known to have been all ways very
religious in burying their ancestors, and honoring their tombs. I take no
notice of a world of sacrifices, prayers, and ceremonies, which were constantly
performed by the vestall virgins, Priests, and whole pagan Clergy, nor of the
stately mausoleums, pyramisses, colossusses, and other stately monuments, which
were built in honor of the dead. It grieves me to the very heart, to consider,
that there are scarce any to be found in the whole world, that make less
reckoning of the dead, then some loose and idle Christians* and I know not how
to be better revenged of them, then to wish that in punnishment of their
coldness, and want of charity, they may be just so served by their successors,
as they dealt with their predecessors. It is the least they deserve, for
neglecting a piety, which they might have learnt of the Pagans, and of the very
beasts themselves, for some have been so curious, as to observe in the Ants,
that in their little cells, they have not only a hall, and agranary, but a kind
of churchyard also, or a place deputed for burying of their dead.

. 2. The constant practice of the Church in all ages, to pray for the dead.
IT is a pleasure to observe, the 1. Age.
constant devotion of the church of Christ in all ages, to pray for the dead.
And first to take my rise from the Apostles time, there are many learned
Interpreters, will have that baptism for the dead, of which the Apostle
speaks. 1 Cor. 15. 29. to be meant only of the much fast^ng, prayer,
almesdeeds, and other voluntary afflictions, which the first Christians
undertook for the relief of their deceased friends. But I need not fetch in
obscure places, to prove so clear an apostolical, and early custom in Gods
Church.

You may see a set form of Liturgia utrinsque. St. Jacobi. St. Math. St.
Marci. St. Clem. ep. 1. St. Dion. Eccles. hier. c. 7.
prayer for the dead prescribed in all the ancient liturgies of the Apostles,
Besi^es St. Clement tells us, it was one of the chief heads of St. Peter's
sermons, to be daily inculcating to the people, this devotion of praying for
the dead, and St. Denis sets down at large, all the solemn ceremonies, and
prayers, which were then used at funerals, and receaves them no otherwise then
as apostolical traditions, grounded upon the word of God, and certainly it
would have done you good to have seen with what gravity, and devotion that
venerable Prelate performed the divine office, and prayer for the dead, and
what an ocean of tears, he drew from the eyes of all that were present.

Let Tertullian speak for the next 2. Age.
age. He tells us, how carefully devout people in his time, kept Tertul. de
cor. mil. c. 3.
the Aniversaries of the dead, and made their constant oblations for de
monogam. c. 10.
the sweet rest of their souls. Here it is, says this grave Author, that the
widow makes it appear, whether or no she had any true love for her husband, if
she continue yearly to do her best for the comfort of his soul, to neglect so
necessary a piece of service, were to tell the world, how she joys in his
death, and was certainly long since divorced from him in affection. Believe it,
all love is not expressed in setting out the solemnities of a noble f^^eral,
hanging rooms in black, and shutting out the sun at noonday, to lie buried in
darkness, or appearing abroad with Coach and Lackies all in complete Mourning,
Howling and crying, and the like; there is often more ^eremony or vanity in all
this then love. It is all rather to amuse the world, then to benefit the poor
Soul, who God knows has more need of other helps, then these vain shows of
Pride and Ostentation. All the day long you do nothing but whine and cry, your
dear Husband is gone, and has left you such a debt, and so great a charge of
children to provide for, that you know not which way to turn your self, and all
this while it is not in your thoughts, what is become of this dear Husband of
yours, or what he suffers in the other world, and what need he has of better
comfort then can spring from your unnecessary lamentations. Let your first care
be to ransom him out of Purgatory, and when you have once placed him in the
Empireall heaven, he will be sure to take care for you and yours. I know your
excuse is, that having procured for him the accustomed Services of the Church,
you need do no more for him, for you verily believe he is already in a blessed
state. But this is rather a poor shift to excuse your own sloth and
laziness, then that you believe it to be so in good earnest. For there is no
man, say Origin, l. 8. in Romans c. 11. 3 d. age.
^ut the Son of ^od can guess how long, or how many ages, a soul may stand
in need of the Purgation of fire Mark the word ages, he seems to believe, that
a soul may for whole ages, that is, for so many hundred years, be confined to
this fiery lake, if she be wholly left to her self, and her own sufferings.

It was not without confidence 4th. ^ge. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 60. and 71
(says Eusebius) of reaping more fruit from the Prayers of the faithful, that
the honor of our Nation, and the first Christian Emperor, Constantine the
great, took such care to be buried in the Church of the Apostles, whether all
sorts of devout people resorting, to perform their Devotions to God and his
Saints, would be sure to remember so good an Emperor: Nor did he fail of his
expectation, for it is incredible as the same Author observes, what a world of
sighs and prayers, were offered up for him upon this occasion.

Saint Athanasius brings an eligant q. 34. ad Antiochum
comparison, to express the incomparable benefit, which accrews to the Souls
in Purgatory by our Prayers. As the Wine (says he) which is locked up in the
Cellar, yet is so recreated with the sweet Odor of the flourishing Vines,
which are growing in the fields, as to flower a fresh, and to leap, as it were
for joy; so the souls that are shut up in the center of the Earth, feel the
sweet incense of our Prayers, and are exceedingly comforted and refreshed by it.

We do not busy our selves (says Saint Cyrill) with plating crowns, Cyril.
Hieros. in Catechesi 5. mystag.
or strowing flowers, at the Sepulchers of the dead; but we lay hold on Christ,
the very son of God, who was sacrificed upon the Cross for our sins, and we
offer him up again, to his eternal Father, in the dreadful Sacrifice of the
Mass, as the most efficacious means, to reconcile him not only to our selves,
but to them also.

Saint Epiphanius stuok not to Heresi 7 5.
blast Aerius, for this damnable Heresy amongst others, that he held it in
vain to pray for the dead, as if our prayers could not avail them.

Saint Ambrose prayed heartily S. Ambr. in Orat. in Fun. Theodosii.
for the good Emperor Theodosius as soon as he was dead, and made open
profession, that he would never give over praying for him, till he had by his
Tears and Prayers, conveyed him safe, to the holy Mountain of our Lord, whether
he was called by his merits, and where there is true life everlasting.

He had the same kindness for Oratione in Fun. Valent. in fun. Satyr.
the souls of the Emperor Valentinian, the same for Gratian, the same for his
Brother Satyrus and others; he promised them Masses, Tears, Prayers, and that
he would never forget them, never give over doing charitable Offices for Conc.
Carth 3. can.. 29.
them. And much about this time it was, that some out of too much care that the
dead should as soon as might be, have all the comfort they could afford them,
were grown into an abuse of making no scruple of saying Mass for them after
Dinner, so that it was sound necessary that the Church should make a severe
decree against it.

Will you honor the Dead 5. Age.
(says Saint Chrysostom) do not spend your selves in unprofitable
lamentations, choose rather to sing Psalms, to give Alms, and to lead holy
lives. Do for them that which they would willingly do for themselves, were
they to return again into the world, and God will accept it at your hands, as
if it came from them.

Saint Augustine is every where very full of this subject, but it may
abundantly suffice here, to set down a part of the ardent prayer, which he made
for his good Mother after her death. Hearken to me I beseech thee (O my God)
for Lib. 9. Confess c. 13.
his sake who is the true medicine of our wounds, who hung upon the Cross, and
sitting now at thy right hand makes Intercession for us. I know she has
willingly, and from her heart, forgiven such as offended her, forgive thou also
her sins, O Lord forgive her I beseech thee, and enter not with her into
judgment. Let thy Mercy overtop thy Justice, etc. And I verily persuade my self
that thou have already done what I desire; but yet accept, O Lord, this prayer,
which I willingly make. For she, when the day of her death drew near upon her,
did not crave that her body might be sumptuously adorned, or embalmed with
Spices and Odours, nor desired she any curious or choice monument, or cared she
to be conveyed into her own Country. They were not these things she recomme^ded
to us, but only she desired to be remembered at the Altar, whereat she used to
assist, without pretermission of any one day, etc. Let her therefore rest in
peace with her husband, etc. And inspire O Lord my God, inspire thy servants,
my brethren, that whosoever reads these my confessions, may at thy Altar,
remember thy servant Monaca, with Patricius her husband, etc.

St. Paulinus, that charitable Prelate, who sold himself to redeem others,
cold not but have a great proportion of charity, for captive souls in the other
world. No, he was not only ready to have turned slave himself, to purchase their
freedom, but he became an earnest solicitour to others in their behalf, for in
a letter to Delphinus, alluding to the story of Lazarus, he beseeches him to
have at least so much compassion, as to convey now and then a drop of water,
wherewith to cool the tongues of poor souls, that lie burning in the church
which is all a fire.

I am astonished, when I call to mind the sad regrets of the people of Africa,
when they saw some of their Priests dragged away to Martyrdom. The Author says,
they Victor utic. l. 2. de persec. Wandal
flocked about them in great numbers, and cried out alas! if you leave us so,
what will become of us, who must give us absolution for our sins? who must bury
us, with the wonted ceremonies of of the church when we are dead? and who will
take care to pray for our souls? such a general belief they had in those days,
that nothing is more to be desired in this world, then to leave those behind us
who will do their best, to help us out of our torments.

. 3. A continuation of the same subject from the sixth Age, after Christ unto
our days.
ALmighty God has often 6. Age.
miraculously made it appear, how well he is pleased to be importuned by us, in
the souls behalf, and what comfort they receive by our prayers. S. John
Climacus In 4. gradu scalae.
writes, that while the Monks were at service, praying for their good Father
Mennas, the third day after his departure, they felt a mavelous sweet smell,
to rise out of his grave, which they took for a good omen, that his sweet soul
after three days Purgation, had taken her flight into heaven. For what else
could be meant by that sweet perfume, but the odor of his holy and innocent
conversation, or the incense of their sacrifices, and prayers, or the
primitiall fruits of his happy soul, which was now flown up to the holy
mountain of eternal glory, there enjoying the odoriferous, and never fading
delights of paradise. Not unlike unto this, is that story which the great. St.
Gregory relates, of one Justus a l. 4. dial. c. 55.
Monk. He had given him at first for a lost creature, but upon second
thoughts, having ordered Mass to be said for him, for thirty days together,
the last day he appears to his brother, and assures him of the happy exchange
he was now going to make, of his torments for the joys of heaven.

Pope Symmachus and his Council 6. Synod. Romans
had reason to thunder out anathema's against those sacrilegious persons, who
were so frontless as to turn pious legacies, into profane uses, to the great
prejudice of the souls, for whose repose, they were particularly deputed by the
founders. And certainly, it is a much fouler crime, to defrande souls of their
due relief, then to disturb dead men's ashes, and to plunder their graves. And
yet we read of dead carcasses, that have risen up in their graves, to struggle
for their sheets, with the wicked wretches, who would have stolen them away.
And it were to be wished, that more were permitted to do the like, and that
souls might have leave, to appear sometimes, to those that abuse them so
unconsieonably, happily they might fright them into reason, who will not be
otherwise persuaded to do them right.

St. Isidor delivers it as an apostolical tradition, and general 7. Age. l. 1.
de offic. c. 18. and l. 2. c. penu^t.
practice of the Catholic Church in his time, to offer up sacrifices and
prayers, and to distribute alms for the dead, and this not for any increase of
their merit, but either to mitigate their pains or to shorten the time of their
durance.

Venerable Bede is a sure witness 8. Age.
for the following Century, whose learned works, are full of wonderful stories,
which he brings in confirmation of this Catholic doctrine and practice.

St. John Damascene made an eligant Orat. quod ij qui. etc.
ora^ion, on purpose to stir up this devotion, where amongst other things, he
says, it is impossible to number up all the stories in this kind, which bear
witness, that the souls departed are relieved by our prayers, and that
otherwise, God would not have appointed, a commemoration of the dead to be
daily made in the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, nor would the Church have so
religiously observed anniversaries and other days, set a part for the service
of the dead.

Were it but a dog (says Simeon 9. Age. In vita St. Pachom. St. Eusebius. etc.
Metaphrastes) that by chance were fallen into the fire, we should have so much
compassion for him as to help him out, and what shall we do for souls, who are
fallen into Purgatory fire? I say souls of our Parent^, and dearest friends,
souls who are predestinate to eternal glory, and extreme precious in the sight
of God? And what did not the Saints of Gods Church for them in those days? some
armed themselves from head to foot in course hair cloth, others tore of their
flesh with chains and rude disciplines; some again pined themselves with
rigourous fasts, others dissolved themselves into tears, some passed whole
nights in contemplation, others gave liberal alms or procured great store of
Masses: In fine, they did what they were able, and were not well pleased that
they were able to do no more, to relieve the poor souls in Purgatory. Amongst
10. Age. Luitprand. l. 4. c. 7.
others, Queen Melchtild is reported to have purchased immortal fame for her
discreet behavior, at the death of the King her Husband, for whose soul she
caused a world of Masses to be said, and a world of alms to be distributed, in
lieu of other idle expenses, and fruitless lamentations.

There is one in the world, to 11. Age.
whom I bear an immortal envy, and such an envy, as I never mean to repent. It
is the holy Abbot Odilo, who was the Author of an invention, which I would
willingly have found out, though with the loss of my very heart blood.

Take the story as it passed thus. Sigeb. in Chron. an. 998.
A devout religious man, in his return from Jerusalem meets with a holy
hermit in Sicily, he assures him, that he often heard the Devils complain,
that souls were so soon discharged of their torments, by the suffrages of the
faithful, and particularly by the devout prayers, of the Monks of Cluny, who
never ceased to power out their prayers for them. This the good man carries to
Odilo, then Abbot of Cluny, he praises God for his great mercy, in vouchsafing
to hear the innocent prayers of his monks, and presently takes occasion, to
command all the Monasteries of his order, to keep yearly the Commemoration of
all souls next after the feast of all Saints. A custom which by degrees grew
into such credit, that the Ca^^olick Church thought sit to establish it all
over the Christian world, to the incredible benefit of poor souls, and singular
increase of Gods glory. For who can sum up the infinite number of souls, who
have been freed out of Purgatory by this holy invention, or who can express the
glory, which accrued to this good Abbot, who thus fortunately made himself
Procuratour general of the suffering Church, and furnished her people, with
such a considerable supply of necessary relief, to alleviate the insupportable
burden of their sufferings.

St. Bernard would triumph, 12. Age. Ser. 66. in Cant.
when he had to deal with Heretics, that denied this piviledg, of
communicating our suffrages, and prayers to the souls in Purgatory. And with
what fervor he would apply himself to this charitable employment, of relieving
poor souls, may appear, by the care he took, for good Humbertur, Ser. de obitu
Humberti.
though he knew him to have lived, and died in his Monaste^^, so like a Saint,
that he could scarce find out the fault in him, which might deserve the least
punishment in the other world, unless it were, to have been too rigourous to
himself, and too careless of his health, which in a less spiritual eye, then
that of St. Pernard, might have passed for a great virtue. But it is worth your
hearing, that In vita Malach.
which he relates of blessed St. Malachy, who died in his very bosom. This
holy Bishop, as he lay a sleep, hears a sister of his, lately dead, making
lamentable moan, that for thirty days together she had not eaten so much as a
bit of bread. He starts up out of his sleep, and taking it to be more then a
dream, he concludes the meaning of the vision was to tell him, that just thirty
days were now past, since he had said Mass for her, as probably believing she
was already where she had no need of his prayers. For this indeed is the
ordinary excuse, wherewith many use to ^^^^ke their idleness, God be with him,
he was a good soul, he is certainly in Heaven ere this, there is no more need
to pray for him, etc. whereas God knows heaven is not so easily purchased, as
fools imagine: Howsoever, this worthy Prelate so plied his Prayers after this,
that he soon sent his Sister out of Purgatory, and it pleased God to let him
see, by the daily change of her habit, how his Prayers had purged her by
degrees, and made her fit company for the Angels and Saints in Heaven. For the
first day she was covered all over with black Cypress, the next she appeared
in a Mantle something whitish, but of a dusky color, but the third day she was
seen all clad in white, which is the proper Livery of the Saints. What think
you now says Saint Bernard, is not the Kingdom of Heaven got by violence? Did
not Saint Malachy force it by storming? were not his Prayers like strokes of a
(...)like engine, to make a breach in heaven, for his sister to enter at? Sweet
Jesus, you that suffer this violence; are your self the cause of it; the good
Prelate breaths nothing but what you have inspired him; so sweet are you in
your Mercies, so faithful in your Promises, and so powerful in your divine
wonders. Thus far Saint Bernard But I cannot let pass in silence, one very
remarkable passage, which happened to these two great servants of God. Saint
Malachy had passionately desired to dye at Claravallis, in the hands of devout
Saint Bernard, and this on the day immediately going before All Souls day, and
it pleased God to grant him his request. It fell out then that while Saint
Bernard was saying Mass for him, in the middle of Mass, it was revealed to
him, that Saint Malachy was already glorious in Heaven, whether he had gone
straight thither out of this world, or whether that part of Saint Bernards
Mass had freed him out of Purgatory, is uncertain, but Saint Bernard hereupon
changed his note, for having begun Mass of Requiem, he went on with a Mass of
a Bishop and Confessor, to the great astonishment of all the standers by. O
it is good to have such devout Masses said presently after ones death, it is good
to dye in so good hands, as will not quit you till they have conducted you safe
to the Quire of Angels.

Saint Thomas of Aquin, that 13. Age.
great Champion of Purgatory, gave God particular thanks at his death, for not
only delivering a soul out of Purgatory, at the instance of his Prayers, but
also permitting the same soul to be the messenger of so good news.

Durand argues the case thus: Sure Christian charity, has more 14. Age. In 4.
d. 45.
power with Almighty God, then a mere natural friendship can have, with the
civil Magistrate; now it has been often seen, that a condemned person, has
been quit at the earnest entreaty, or voluntary satisfaction of their friends:
Stories are full of such courteous Civilities. How can we then make any
question, but that God will as easily be moved, to release holy souls out of
Purgatory, at the sweet importunity of their friends tears, prayers, and
sufferings here upon earth. It was a laudable custom in some Countries, that if
a chaste Virgin should present her self at the place of Execution, to beg a
Fellon for her husband, her request was granted, and the poor criminal was with
great joy instantly conveyed from the gallows to a nuptial feast. This
custom, though now out of date, may yet serve to tell us, that Almighty God
will not deny to set a soul free, from the punishment of all her
misdemeanors, if we beg it earnestly at the hands of his infinite mercy.

And now we are come down to the fifteenth Age, where the 15. Age. Conc. Flor.
in decreto.
Fathers of the Council of Florence, both Greeks and Latins, with one consent,
declare the same faith, and constant practice of the Church, thus handed down
to them, from Age to Age, since Christ's and his Apostles time, as we have seen,
viz. that the souls in Purgatory, are not only relieved, but translated into
heaven, by the Prayers, Sacrifices, Alms, and other charitable works which
are offered up for them, according to the custom of the Catholic Church. Nor
did their posterity degenerate, or vary the least, from this received doctrine,
until Luthers time, when the holy 16. Age. Trid. sess. 25
Council of Trent, thought fit again, to lay down the sound doctrine of the
Church, in opposition to all our late Sectaries. And I wish all Catholics,
were but as forward to lend their helping hands, to lift souls out of
Purgatory, as they are to believe they have the power to do it, and that we had
not oftener, more reason, then the Roman Emperor to pronounce the day lost,
since we let so many days pass over our heads, and so many fair occasions
slip out of our hands, without easing, or releasing any souls out of Purgatory,
when we might do it with so much ease.

The Sixth Survey.
Of twelve excellent means to prevent Purgatory, or to provide so for our
selves, as not to make any long stay there.

BEhold the most important point of all others, the secret of secrets, and the
true knack of all state affair^s in this world. They talk of certain water^,
which have so strange a power, to dull the edge of fire, that if one wash his
hands, with them, he can receive no prejudice, though he should thrust them
afterward into the fire, or into boiling lead. The preservatives I am here to
treat of, are of a higher nature, they do not curb the restless activity of
this our sublunary fire, which is bent only against dull bodies, but they arm
us against the raging fire of Purgatory, which God has prepared, to torment our
very souls in the other world.

. 1. The first perfect contrition.
ONe of the surest means, to avoid Purgatory, is to dye with tears in our
eyes, and St. Th. supp* q. 5. a. 3.
true contrition in our he^rts. For Divines teach, that our contrition may be
so great, ^s to wash away all those spots of sin, which Purgatory ^^re was
otherwise to have words off. And therefore as I take it to be a gr^^t piece of
folly, to defer the exercise of so prec^ous ^n a^^, unto the hour of our
death, so I esteem it, one of the most solid devotions of all others, to
accustom our selves to it all our life time, that by daily frequenting such
acts, we may at length get such a habit, and facility in them, as with Gods
grace, to have them at our call, when we come to dye. All must not look for the
same privilege, which the good thief had at the last gasp. It was but little
that he said, but he spoke it with so cordial an accent, that he deserved to
hear those comfortable words, of our blessed Savior, This day thou shall be
with me in Paradise, and soon found them verified, by a present fruition of the
beatifical vision. Almighty God is pleased sometimes, to make so forceable an
entry into the heart of man, and to set it so desperately on fire, with his
divine love, that there is no remedy, but to dye between the arms of love, and
grief, and thrice happy are those souls that loose their lives in this divine
encounter, and dye in the amourous flames of ardent charity, they are sure
never to feel the murdering flames of Purgatory. Such was the death of our
blessed Lady, St. John Evangelist, and infinite others, who have been straight
carried into heaven out of this world, upon the wings of love, or contrition,
so that a heart, that is well seasoned with contrition, or steeped in a bath of
salt tears, is like the heart of Prince Germanicus, which Tacit. Ann.
being washed over with a certain precious liqour, could not be consumed by the
fire, which turned all the rest of his body to ashes.

This is that they call a good Peccavi, but it must be a good one indeed, for
it is not every ordinary, and trivial kind of sorrow, which can work such
wonders. Those that have been long used, to actuate themselves in those
generous acts of contrition, may be full of confidence, that the mercy of God,
will not fail them at the hour of their death, and that their good Angels
will be then ready, when it most imports, to inspire them with all the best
motives of true contrition since they have gone all along with them, still
furnishing them with such good thoughts, and with so much good success, that
their hearts have been a thousand times broken with a lively, amorous, and
cordial contrition, and repentance for their sins. And certainly, they that
dye, either in the fire of so ardent a love, or in the water of so piercing a
grief, need not fear the fire of Purgatory, for that fire (says St.
Bonaventure) was not made for them. So that methinks, this charity may be fitly
compared, to the Seraphin at the gates of Paradise, brandishing his flaming
sword, which Tertulian calls the por^er Romphae^ janitrix Faradisi.
of Paradise, grief is the edge, love the fire, wherewith it is inflamed, and
he that has this flaming sword, has heaven gates at command, and goes strait
thither when he leaves the world.

2. The Second, to dye in Religion.
ANother safe way to escape Purgatory, is to live, and die in a good Religious
order, and at his death, to renew, and Ad fratres de monte dei a coella in
coelum, etc.
ratify his Religious vows. To prove this, I first call St. Bernard to
witness, who doubts not to assure us, that there is a ready, if not an
uninterrupted passage into Heaven, out of a Religious cell. Next I appeal, to
those learned and holy Doctors, who give it for a certain sign of
Predestination, to die in Religion, because Christ has in a manner sworn, in
his holy Gospel, to give a hundred fold, and life everlasting, Plat. de bon^
stat. Relig.
to all those, that shall leave Father, Mother, and other worldly concernments,
for his sake. From whence it is, that holy Church permits, the superiors of
diverse Religious orders, to make this solemn promise, at the profession of
their novicies, for they have no sooner made their Vows, of Poverty, etc. But
the superior answers, And I Child do promise thee Paradise, and eternal life.

3. Many Popes have granted a Sixth Greg. 13. Greg. 14.
Plenary Indulgence, in form of a Jubily, to all Religious persons, that
either by word of mouth, or in their hearts, call upon the sacred names of
Jesus Maria, at the hour of their death. And what Religious person is there,
that does it not, either when he dies, or not long before, not only once, but a
thousand times.

To say nothing, that many are of opinion, that they gain this Jul. 2. bull.
Indulgence at the hour of their death, whether they pronounce the words or no.
For as other Indulgences are gained, by visiting certain Churches, saying
certain prayers, giving alm^^, or exercising such other acts of virtue, the
supreme Pastor of the Church, thought no act more worthy of a Jubily, then to
die in a Religious order, in the actual profession of voluntary poverty,
chastity, and obedience, with final perseverance in the austerity of a
Religious life, and a patient acceptance of death, as from the holy hand of
God. ^et us then suppose, a good Religious man to come to die, and besides the
common benefit of the Sacraments, and other holy rites of the Catholic Church,
let him gain this Plenary Indulgence, which the Popes grant as freely, and with
as much assurance, as any other, have we not all the reason in the world to
hope, that he goes immediately into Heaven, or at most does but make a swift
passage through Purgatory, or rather, as we read of many in the Ecclesiastical
History, takes it in his way, to have the company of some of his friends there,
whom he has the privilege, to lead away with him in triumph into Heaven.

4. Who can better deserve, to go directly into heaven then they, whose lives
are a continual Purgatory? They go in rough hair shirts, pine themselves with
rigourous fasts, tear of their flesh with cruel disciplines, drink up their own
tears, live of nothing but mortifications, and perpetual hardships, and thus
abundantly satisfy, for all the sins they have committed, and for those they
never dreamt of, but had rather dya thousand times then commit. They that have
no will but that of their superior, they that breath nothing but holy sighs,
and burn with ardent charity, how can they burn in Purgatory fire?

5. Divines furnish me with another pregnant proof, and it is this. It is
certain, (say they) that a solemn Profession in Religon, brings with it a
plenary Indulgence; or remission of all their sin^, not only because it is a
second Baptism, or a lingering kind of martyrdom, which is not completed in a
few moments, as other Martydomes are, but also, because in the opinion of the
angelical 2. 2. 4. ult. a. 3.
Doctor, it is so sublime and eminent an act, as surpasses all other acts in
this life, so that if Daniel, (says he) could say, that by giving a little
alms, we may blot out our sins, what may we not say, of this supereminent act
of liberality, by which, a man gives unto God, all his goods, and present
possessions, with all his fair hopes of improving them, his body, his life, his
honor, his will, his soul; with a million of worlds if h^ had them in his
power. The same holy Doctor says elsewhere that a man, who sacrifices his
will unto God, the most noble portion of his soul, and makes it to become his
eternal slave, gives God full satisfaction for all his misdem^^uours, since a
pure creature, cannot present him with a more noble gift, then to make him an
entire Holocaust, of that which is dearest unto him in this world, which is his
will, and the absolute sovereignty over himself, and all his concerns. Others
go yet Su. verb. Religio n. 27 etc.
further, and assure us, that as often, as a good Religious man, renews this
his profession, he makes a new purchase of the same favor, and obtaines an
entire pardon, of all the pain due to his sins, and that these, and the like
privileges, are not tied only to solemn vows, but are common to all vows,
that make up the substance of a Religious man, of what order soever in Gods
Church. And they say withal, that these favors are not in the nature of
indulgences, granted by his Holiness, but are inseparably annexed unto the
vows themselves, which are so generous, and so precious acts, in the sight of
God, that they move his goodness, to blot out the remembrance of their sins,
and to cancel out a great part, if not all the pain, which was due for them.

Now put all this together; and it will necessarily follow, that since the Pope
on the one side, grants a Jubily, unto all religious, at the hour of their
death, and since they have it in their power, on the other side, to renew their
vows, before they dye, by which act they may fully satisfy, for all their
sins, there cannot be a greater assurance of going directly into heaven then
theirs, who have as I told you this double security of a general pardon, that
one way or other, they can scarce sail to obtain it.

What shall I say now of their perfect resignation, unto the will of God, their
invincible patience, their love of God, their Virginal purity, their exact, and
punctual obedience, with a million of other divine acts of virtue, which are so
incident and connatural to a religious vocation, all which no doubt stand ready
to assist them at the last hour, and to show them heaven gates open, and ready
to receive them, and howsoever to assure them, that their stay cannot be long
in Purgatory, since they leave behind them so many of their own order, who will
be sure to ply them with Masses. Indulgencies, and other charitable works for
their speedy deliverance,

. 3. The third. To b^ an Apostolical Preacher.
A Third means to redeem Purgatory, is to be a zealous, and apostolical
Preacher, for as this is a life of eminent perfection, and incredible merit, so
is it extreme painful, and may well pass for a Purgatory in this life. But
observe, that I speak of an Apostolical Preacher, or of one that is full of
divine fire, or a holy zeal for the good of souls. I mean not those that preach
themselves, those that desire to be admired, and adored for Oracles, those that
profane the word of God with their vain glosses, idle applications and affected
eloquence, seeking nothing more then worldly applause, and really destroying by
their life and conversation, all they build up in the pulpit. St. Paul compares
such vain Preachers, to cracked trumpets, and broken bells, which make a noise
indeed, but are altogether useless. They send others to heaven (said St.
Xaverius) and go Gods knows whether themselves. St. Gregory likens them to the
water of baptism which entitles children to the kingdom of heaven, and is it
self conveyed into some noisome sink: and there turns to corruption. I speak
then of a Preacher, who is a man of God, one that does what he says, and says
what he does; one that ayms at nothing, but the salvation of souls, preaches to
a few, or to many, in Cities or Villages, Princes Courts, or poor Hospitals,
with the same fervor of spirit. One that rents their hearts in sunder, and
draws floods of tears from their eyes, one that preaches like another St. Paul,
and draws his sermons out of the Pentatuke, of the five wounds of his redeemer;
one that after he has done all he can, believes he is an unprofitable servant,
unworthy to open his mouth, or to tread upon the earth. Such a one in my
opinion, if he die in the exercise of his holy function, either goes not at all
to Purgatory, or stays not there. This was the case of one Cherubin, a famous
Hist. St. Fran. 3. p. l. 7. c. 2.
Preacher of the Order of St. Francis, who before he died, had the comfort to
see St. Hierome, whom he had chosen for his peculiar Pation, and with him three
thousand souls, all saved by his means, who assured him, that they were sent
expressly by Almighty God, to carry him into heaven, and so to requite him, for
showing him the way thither, in his zealous sermons. Not unlike unto this, is
that story which I touched elsewhere out of Cardinal Baronius. He tells us that
Annal. Eccl. an. 716.
St. Boniface, saw a holy Abbot at his death; surrounded with devils, and much
terrified see them so insolent, as to cry out; his soul was theirs, when he
behold his good Angel appears at the head of a white troop of blessed souls,
who after a solemn profession, that they had been all saved by him, gave him
the comfort to understand, that they had brought an express commission, to
convey him instantly into heaven. But you long now, to have me paint you out
such a Preacher, for though there may be many, that sooth themselves up, with a
vain persuasion, that they are the men, yet if we sift a little narrowly into
them, we shall possibly find so much vanity, so much care of esteem, so many by
ends, and so many other imperfections to steal into their sermons, that we may
safely say there are but very few Apostolical preachers indeed, and such as
seek only Gods cause, and the good of souls.

Take an exact Idea from one The Idea of an Apostolical Preacher
that lived but in the last Age. Father Gonzales Silveria, of the Society of
Jesus, scarce ever went up into the pulpit without a hairshirt, and would say,
a man must be well armed who goes to fight against vice. It was also very
usual with him, to encounter Goliath with David's sling, to make a bloody
discipline, and so to mount up into the Pulpit, and there like thunder, to
carry all before him. He had for the most part, but five books for his Library,
to wit, his breviary the Bible, the lives of Saints, a crucifix, and the
picture of our Blessed Lady. In these five books, he studied for all his
sermons, and certainly, the thunder bolt^ of his admirable eloquence, were
framed in the heart of his crucified Lord, the best furnace of divine love, the
sweet flowers of his Rhetoric, were steeped in the milk of the Virgin, his
trops and figures, and the whole variety of his sermons, were borrowed out of
the word of God, and the admirable lives of his Saints; and lastly the
religious, and devout performance of his daily task of divine office, and holy
Mass, gave fire to his discourses, wherewith he did not only heat, but inflame
the hearts of his auditors. He would preach you twice or thrice a day, and
would do it the more willingly, in the meanest places, and to the poorest
people. His common lodging was the Hospital, where he contented himself with a
spare diet, and gross fare, he was never observed, to be over nice, and coy of
his sermons, nor required he much time, to make them with applause. The only
thing he had before his eyes, was the glory of God, and help of souls, and his
life preached more then his tongue, for he really acted more in his own person
then he taught others: As for his manner of preaching, it was rather powerful
then charming, and fitter to break their hearts then please their ears. Such
was his fervor, that he poured his whole heart, and his whole zeal out of his
mouth, and he would be so transported with this zeal, as not to take notice of
any thing else. Once as he was Preaching, he struck his hand upon a sharp
nail, which stuck out in the Pulpit, and made it bleed so extremely, that the
whole Auditory took notice of it, and some of the devout women courteously
offered their handkerchiefs, to bind up the wound, and stop the bleeding and
all this while, the good man neither saw handkerchief, nor nail, nor blood,
nor took the least notice of any thing till after his sermon, when the wound
being grown cold, he was heard to wonder, how the blood came there, and to
complain, that his hand put him to some pain. Another time, preaching in the
Queen of Portugals chapel, he had put himself into such a heat, that his mouth
being clammed up, he could scarce get out his words, when the Queen perceiving
it, called for an Ewer of water, which was instantly brought, and presented him
by the young Princess, but the man of God, was so rapt in his devout thoughts,
that he saw neither the Ewer, nor the Princess, nor the Queen; so that they
were forced to pull him by the sleeve, that the Princess Royal might not stand
thus waiting on him, with the Ewer in her hand; and then the Queen her self
prayed him to make use of the water, to cool and refresh his dry mouth. With
much a do, the good Father came to himself, and rising up, made a low obeisance
to the Queen, and to the Princess, thanked them for their care, excused
himself for being so uncivil, as not to mind them, but for all th^s, would
not take a drop of water, but went on with his Sermon, to the great wonder and
edification of all the standers by. This, this is to preach like a man full of
Gods Spirit, like one that has his heart so transported with zeal, and his
Eyes so bent upon moving his auditors, that he can see nothing else. And would
you have such a fiery man as this be condemned to Purgatory, one that has so
much charity for others, that he forgets himself, and distills out his life
into blood, sweat and tears and is consumed in the fire of Charity, which is
the sweet Purgatory of the servants of God.

. 4. The fourth. To serve the infected.
THose that charitably expose themselves, to serve the infected, and so come to
get the Plague, and to die in the service, freely giving away their lives to
save others, may have a great confidence, that they have served out, if not
all, at least the greatest part of their Purgatory. For since an act of
Contrition, or of perfect Charity, has power, to make a soul instantly fit for
heaven, as it falls out in Martyrdom; why may we not hope, that the same
privilege, follows these charitable souls we speak of, who though they dye
not, by the hands of a bloody Executioner, yet are cut off by a Martyrdom of
incomparable Charity. Christ our Savior said, that the greatest Charity that a
man could have in this life was to give his life for his friends, where by the
way, Saint Bernard notes, that his charity must needs be greater, then the
greatest, since he gave his divine life, not only for his friends, but even for
his enemies. What shall we then think of their charity, who voluntarily
sacrifice their lives, for infected persons, whether friends or enemies,
acquaintance, or no acquaintance rich or poor and do it generously, dying a
thousand deaths for fear, danger and pain, before they come to dye in good
earnest? Does not the Church list them amongst other Saints, in the Roman
Martyrologe? Does she not keep their feast, and make an honorable
commemoration, of their glorious death, on the 28 day of February? does she not
withal tell us, that the faithful devout people, were accustomed to honor
them as Martyrs? would you then have these kind of Martyrs, who dye in the fire
of charity, go to Purgatory? To what purpose? to Metamorphose it into heaven?
For if a Virgin, who is violently dragd away to the stews, which is a kind of
hell, where they make a Massacre of chastity, in the opinion of St. Ambrose,
changes it into a kind of heaven, what can we think of those charitable souls,
but that, if they were conveyed into the suffering church, they would suddenly
change it into a Church Tryumphant. Hear a comfortable story to this purpose.
One Damian; of the holy order of Annal. St. Fran.
St. Francis had devoted himself, to serve those that lay sick of the Plague
with a burning desire to give them all the comfort he could, by his charitable
visits. St. Francis met him one day, and said my Son, did thou but know what
a crown in heaven is prepared for thee, in reward of this charity of thine,
thou would be out of thy self, for mere joy, go on, in Gods name, for it
will not be long, before thou art translated into heaven to eternal glory. The
good Friar, continued the employment, till one day being in fervent prayer, he
rendered up his happy soul into the hands of his creator. Can you now believe,
that a man, that sacrifices a good part of his life, on the Altar of the
highest charity, which is in the world, next unto Martyrdom it self, one that
looses his own life, to make others live, and dies in the flames of a devout
prayer, that this man I say, goes to Purgatory, or rather do you not believe
that heaven stoops to take him up, and to crown him with immortal glory.

Eusebius takes a pleasure, to relate the high esteem they had of b. 1. c, 20.
those good Priests, Deacons, and Secular persons, who thus exposed themselves
to the Plague, and sometimes were seen to tumble into the same graves, where
they had newly laid others. The fiery furnace (says St. Chrysostom) was so
Hom. de tribus pueris.
astonished, to see those three innocent creatures there, that it durst not
touch them, but vented all its fury, against the cords, and fetters which bound
them. Let us then suppose, these holy souls, to be cast into the furnace of
Purgatory, who chose rather to forsake their lives, then to forsake poor
infected, and forlorn creatures, can we imagine any thing less, then that
those subterraneous flames, should yield, and with reverence submit unto the
flames of heaven, which have already seized on those holy souls, and that they
should say with Ecclesiasticus, Thou have delivered me according Eccl. 51. 6.
to the multitude of thy mercies, from the oppression of the flame, which has
compassed me, and in the midest of fire I was not burnt. What! shall purity
have the power to resist fire so that many chaste Virgins have received no harm
by it, and shall not charity in its perfection, be as good a preservative
against the fire of Purgatory?

. 5. The fifth. A tender devotion to the Virgin.
I Cannot be persuaded, that a soul truly devoted to the honor, and service of
the mother of God, can be long detained in Purgatory, if she go thither at all.
For how should this be? does our blessed Lady want power, she that can do all
things (says St. Anselme) or charity, she that has no bowels but of charity,
she that has a heart so tender, that though you suppose a heart, to be made up
of all the mothers hearts in the world, it could not be more tender then hers,
which is all sweetness, and tenderness. St Brigit had a son, lived not so good
a life, Osor. in cone. St. Brigit. revel.
as to look for Heaven, without passing through Purgatory. This great servant
of God, who was not without the passion of a loving mother, casts about, how to
save the poor youth, who was grown careless enough of himself. She resolves
therefore, to offer him up to the Blessed Virgin, and to trust her entirely
with his salvation. She undertakes the trust, and carries it on so luckily,
that in fine, she saves him, and at the hour of death, takes up his soul into
Heaven. This she did, by first working him to a perfect act of contrition,
which impt his wings for Heaven, and then cutting of the thread of his life,
which should have held out one day longer. So that the Devil finding himself
thus cozened, made his complaint to God, the just judge of the world, who
returned this answer. Know, that my mother is Lady and Queen of Heaven, and
therefore has liberty, to place there, whom she pleases, and what she does in
this kind, is well done, and pleasing in my sight. There is a world of
examples, of the like favors, graciously showred down from the mother of
mercy, who has often taken the pains, to conduct her good Children, and
faithful Servants into Heaven. And when it stands not with Gods justice, but
that a soul must into Purgatory, what does she not to help her out, as well by
her own powerful intercession, which she will be sure to interpose, as far as
it may stand with the just decrees of heaven, as by the prayers of her devout
servants, into whose hearts she inspires a thousand good thoughts, of
tenderness for their souls; who were particularly devoted to her. How many
divine consolations, and refreshments does she send them, by their good Angels?
And since it is certain, that she goes sometimes, to visit them on their death
beds, why may we not piously imagine, that she gives them the like comfortable
visits, when they lie tied to their beds of fire in cruel torments? The
Lionness, and the Tigress, though never so fierce by nature, will leap into the
fire, to save their young ones, or perish there; God forbid, we should make any
comparison between the Blessed Virgin, mother of the Lion of Juda, and these
wild beasts, and yet, since we must allow so much tenderness to such cruel and
savage Mothers, we may not doubt, but that the Mother of mercy, seeing her
beloved Children in the fire of Purgatory, will fly thither to fetch them out.

The devout and learned Richardus de Sancto victore, commenting Ps. 126. Rich
c. 39. in Cant.
upon these words of the Psalmist, ^e shall not be confounded, when he shall
speak to his enemies in the gate: tells us, that this gate, is the blessed
Virgin; to appear at the gate, is to dye, and to be cited to Particular
judgment, where no body (says he) is ever confounded that finds this gate,
but favorably open, and to whom should the mother of God be favorable, but
unto those, that were constant in her Service, and from what confusion does she
deliver them, but from the dreadful fire of Hell and Purgatory. O God! what
assurance have we, when the Queen of Heaven is pleased to plead for us, and to
procure us a favorable sentence; and since it is her well beloved Son, that is
to be our judge, who denies her nothing, what may we not hope for? When St.
John Damascene had lost his hand, he begged it again of the Queen of Heaven;
and his Sur. in ej^s vita Metaphrast.
suite was instantly granted, so sure it is, that she denies nothing to her
dear Children; what favou^s then may not a devout soul look for, at her hands,
when she departs out of this world. If Bern. he. 1. sup. mistes est.
Mary hold thee by the hand, fear not falling, cries St. Bernard, Mariae
tenente non corruis etc.
for if she be propitious, thou art sure to have thy share in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Now to whom will she ^e propitious, if not to those, that while they
lived, breathed nothing but her love and service, and when should she show her
self more our friend, then when we are threatened with Purgatory fire which
burns so dreadfully?

The holy Abbot Guericus had Ser. 1. de assump.
reason, to wish rather to be lodged in the bosom of the blessed Virgin, then
in Abraham's bosom, O, it is no small security, to be under her protection,
though it were but under her feet, for who should fetch a soul thenc^ to throw
her into Purgatory? God the Father? how? out of the hands of his beloved
daughter? who then? God the Son? how, from his beloved mother? who then? God
the holy Ghost? what, from his dearest Spouse? who then? St. Michael with his
Sword and Buckler? that were pretty, that a creature should attempt, what the
blessed Trinity forbears, out of love to the Mother of God. Who then? The
Devil? what, the serpent, whose head she crushed under her feet, or any of his
fellows, who tremble at the very found of her name? No, there is not the
creature, dare meddle with a soul, that is once sheltred, under the royal
mantle of her protection. So true it is, that one of the best preservatives
against Purgatory, is to be very devout to the blessed Virgin, Mother of God.

But it must be more then an ordinary devotion, as to make a vow of chastity in
her honor, to devoce ones self entierly to her, to do her some signal piece of
service, to call often upon her, and with a filial confidence, to bullil a
goodly Chapel, or some house, where she may be served to the worlds end, to
give liberal, and frequent alms for her sake to compose some excellent work in
her praise, and so to draw many others to her service. To maintain poor
Scholars, in a way to be Preachers, or Religious men, with this obligation,
that they shall make it their study, all their lives, to preach her greatness,
to promote her service, and to draw all the world after her. To make her a
present of Masses, communions, fasts, disciplines, and other mortifications,
but above all, to imitate her glorious virtues, and to regulate our lives
accordingly. If you do these, and the like things, and do them with a good
heart, you need not fear, Purgatory will do you any great harm. She will
obtain for you, such a measure of true contrition, such a proportion of love,
and conformity to Gods will, so much patience in your last sickness, such holy
and ardent desires to serve God, suc^ profound humility, in a word, such
Heroical acts of virtue, as blot out of your soul, what Purgatory was to have
done and put you in a present capacity, to go directly into Heaven: And if an
extraordinary pass should be necessary who can better procure it for you, then
the Lady of the House, the mother of the Judge, the Empress of Paradise, and
Princess of the Universe?

. 6. The sixth, an humble patience.
YOu that suffer great miseries in this world, may comfort your selves with
such precious sufferings, for so you be faithful to God, so you voluntarily
embrace what God sends, in spite of impatience, so you submit to the Laws of
his sweet rigor, which chastices you, so you freely offer all your little All,
to this great Lord, of all the great All of the whole universe, so from time to
time you be still letting fall some good word, to testify that your soul, and
your body play not at the same game, move not upon the same center, but that
while the one is oppressed, and cries out, the other secretly praises the
paternal goodness of Almighty God, so you do all this, you may be confident,
there will be little, or no Purgatory ^or you, for since you have a Purgatory
in this world, there is no reason you should have another hereafter.

I learn this secret, of St. Gregory, who admires a poor paralytique, that lay
rotting on a straw Hom. 15. in Evang.
bed, where he had lived so all his life, or rather, where he had died so all
his life, his life being nothing else, but a mere concatenation of hourly
deaths. Seruulus was the name of this poor wretch, who at his death, was
comforted with angelical music, and carried away by Angels, to sing his own
part in heaven for all eternity. One of those that were present, told St.
Gregory that at the hour of his happy departure out of this life, so sweet a
smell was spread all over the little Room, where he lay, that he never felt the
like, and that this continued, and was perceived by all the standers by, until
his holy body was laid in his grave, and the service ended. But you will say,
every body cannot be so holy as this good man, certainly they may, by the grace
of God; for St. Gregory observes but four things in him, which you may command
as well as he. First he read often the holy Scriptures, to comfort his heart in
his sufferings. Secondly, he gave a part of the Alms he received of Gods
people, unto other needy persons and lodged poor pilgrims in his poor Cottage.
Thirdly, holy aspirations and devout breathings, were often heard to proceed
from him which were like so many fiery darts shot into the heart of God, and
bringing thence the sweet air of Paradise, to refresh his soul, which by such
amourous entertainments, found less trouble in her afflictions.

Fourthly, He was sensible enough of his pain, and would complain of it
sometimes, I say complain, do you think Saints have bodies of Steel! but
betweeen one complaint and anoother, he would be often thus sweetly
interposing. O my God, I desire thy will may be fulfilled in all things, and
nothing else but thy will. I am willing that thou handle this my body, and all
that belongs to me, according to thy divine pleasure, both in time and
eternity. Now tell me, dear reader, can thou not do all this, as well as this
poor paralytick, who lived for no other end, but to be dying a lingering death,
all the days of his miserable and yet thrice happy life. Will you have a soul
so holy, and so pliable ^o Gods will, be thrown into Purgatory fire* Sure (said
St. Austine) if he meant to damn us in the other world, he would not damn us in
this, to a Hell of most loathsome and intolerable diseases, and I may say the
like here, that if God meant to punish his servants in Purgatory after this
life, he would not punish them here in a Purgatory of miseries. His goodness
is not wont to punish the same fault twice. Go into Hell and purgatory while
you live (cried In illud descendant in infernam.
St Bernard) and you will be sure not to go thither after your death; for it is
not reasonable, that you should have two Purgatories, or two Hels: Alas! no,
And this is the cause, why God, to save his friends from those horrible
torments of Purgatory fire, sends them good store of crosses and afflictions in
this world, which are nothing so painful, and yet are highly meritorious in
his sight, Hom. 8. in c. 3. ad Colon.
whereas the other are but pure sufferings. Hear Saint Chrysostom. The tongue
that praises God in the midest of afflictions, is not inferior to the tongues
of Martyrs, and likely they may have both the same reward. If a man praise God,
and give him thanks in his sufferings, it is reputed as a kind of Martyrdom,
and would you have a Martyr go to Purgatory; he that finds heaven open, and
ready to receive him. For as Emissenus says very well, the Heavens are not
only open to Saint Steven, but unto all Martyrs, and unto all that suffer, and
die with the name of Jesus in their mouths, constancy in their hearts, and
fidelity in theirs souls. The works of patience according to St. James are
perfect, and that which is perfect, Jac. 1.
ows nothing to Purgatory, nor can Purgatory refine that, which is already
perfect, no more then our fire can refine gold of twenty four carrats, that is
so pure, as not to have the least mixture or dross or impurity.

7. The seventh Devotion for the Souls in Purgatory.
SHall I deal heartily with you; one of my chief mo^ives of publishing this
Treatise, was to persuade you this truth, that one of the best means to prevent
Purgatory, is to have a great tenderness, and a particular care to comfort the
souls there, to spare nothing that can further their deliverance; in a word, to
make your self a general Agent for this suffering Church, to solicit for
their eternal rest. Take now the proofs of this Assertion, and the whole
strength of my discourse.

1. Christ said in plain terms, In what measure you mete, it shall be measured
to you again; that is, you shall be dealt withal, in some manner, as you deal
with others. Mat. 7.
So that if you have beat your brains, and employed all your endeavors to help
the souls in Purgatory, and have really delivered some before their time; it is
but reason that this your charity should be requited with a like return, and
with a hundred fold besides, and heaven at the end of it. Methinks ^our case is
not unlike to that of the prudent Abigail. King David was so highly incensed 1
Reg. 25.
against the ungrateful Nabal, that he swore to pursue him, and his whole
Family with Fire and and Sword, and to turn all into ashes. For all this,
Abigail ventured to meet him with a Present, and did it with so good a grace,
that she soon made up the breach, and saved all. For David after some little
dispute with his anger, grew calmer, forgave all, and so sent her away joyfully
in peace. The application is easy. It Is true, you have played the ungrateful
Nabal, you have offended God, so far as to provoke his high displeasure, so
that he may seem to deal favorably with you, if he sends you into Purgatory:
But you have with all played Abigails part, in sending him as many grateful
Presen^s, as you have breathed out fervent Prayers, for the souls in Purgatory,
and with these you have made your peace, so as you may look to be dismissed in
peace, into the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Take a second reason of St. Peter, who exhorts us above all things to have
charity for one another, because charity covers the multitude of sins. For
since it is the greatest Charity in the world to 1 Pet. 4.
help poor souls out of Purgatory, as I proved at large in the third Survey;
those that devote themselves wholly to this Service, may be confident so to
cover their sins as to put them out of the reach of Purgatory fire. When
Gibellin had straightly besieged Guelph Duke of Bavary, and forced him to
surrender his Town, upon such hard Parud. l. 2. c. 70.
terms, as that the women only were permitted to secure themselves, and to
take away with them what they could carry upon their backs; but as for the men,
they were to remain at mercy, exposed to the fury of the fire and sword: The
good women laying their heads together; found out this strange expedient, to
save their husbands, as well as themselves, for every one taking her husband
upon her back, and what else she was able to carry about her, they marched out
of the town. Never was man so struck with astonishment, as Gibellin was at this
fight, and though he might have disputed their passage, as not consisting with
the true meaning of the Articles, yet was he so taken with so rare astratageme,
and strange example of a true conjugal love, that ^he suffered them all to pass
freely to the admiration of the whole world. And surely we may hence conclude,
that all those who have so much love for the poor souls in Purgatory, as to
carry them, as it were, upon their backs out of their miserable thraldom will
find heaven gates open, and all the blessed spirits ready to receive them with
acclamations of joy, for so sweet an excess of charity.

3 It is not possible, that they who have been thus ransomed out of Purgatory,
by the ardent zeal of their friends here, should not hold themselves obliged to
restitution, to return I say the like charity to the souls of their
benefactours, when they leave the world. How can those happy souls, that swim
in the ocean of overflowing charity, choose but employ all their power, and
interest, to make them so. But sure I need not go about to multiply reasons, in
a case so clear of it self so full of piety, and heavenly decency. I will only
mind you of what I told you elsewhere out of Cajetan, how reasonable a thing
it is, that all those holy strayes, or wandering suffrages, which are offered up
for such souls as are not in Purgatory, should be applied unto them; that had a
particular affection and devotion to help souls out of that fiery dungeon, and
this certainly will be a means to fetch them out quickly, if they ever come
there.

. 8, The Eighth, To be a great Alms-giver.
THe Eighth means to prevent Purgatory, is to be very liberal, and tender
hearted to the poor. The holy Ghost teaches us as much in most emphatical and
comfortable words, some whereof I have chosen to lay down before you, with a
desire to imprint them in your hearts. Blessed is the man, that understands
concerning Ps. 40.
the needy, and the poor, in the evil day our Lord will deliver him, our Lord
preserve him, and give him life, and make him blessed in the land, and deliver
him not to the will of his enemies. Our Lord help him in the bed of his
sorrow. These words need no gloss. For what is this evil day, but the day of
particular judgment, at the hour of death, since it is the great critical day,
and the most considerable moment, upon which eternity depends. Now he ^^^ls us,
that God will deliver him this day, from what I pray you, if not from eternal
fire, and from the dreadful fire of Purgatory, according to the measure of his
charity, and liberality to the poor. He tells us again, that he will make him
happy in this day, out of which I conclude, that he shall not go into
Purgatory, for how can he be happy that day, if he lie in flames of fire? Call
you this to deliver a man from evil, to plunge him over head and ears in a
fiery gulf. St. Chrysologus spoke with a Sermon. 8.
grace, when he said, that charity will not suffer a great almes-giver to be
laid in fire, but will appeal from the sentence, and more God to cancel his own
Decree, and in a word, will have him to be saved, and all this, with so sweet a
violence, (says the same Saint) that God had rather alter his decree, then
contristate mercy, and charity when they plead with such power for a great
alms-giv^^. Let us hear the holy Ghost once more, I pray you. Water quenches
burning fire, and alms resists sins, God is the Eccl. 3. and 4
beholder of him that renders grace, he remembers him afterward, and in the
time of his fall he shall find a sure stay. Son bow down thy ear to to the
poor without sadness, be merciful to pupills as a Father, and as a Husband to
their Mother, and thou shall be as the obedient son of the highest, and he
will have mercy on thee more then a mother. O God, what sweet words are these!
when he is about to fall; he shall find a sure stay, when he is ready to sink
into Purgatory he shall be held up, he shall be strengthened, he shall be raised
above the firmament, he shall be carried into Paradise. What would a loveing
Mother do less, if it were in her power? And since God has given us his word,
that he will be more then a Mother to such charitable souls, that is, have a
greater tenderness, and love for them, is it credible that he will suffer them
to fall into Purgatory, or if justice require some satisfaction there, is it
not likely, that all means will be used to remove them out of hand. The Cesars
crowned themselves with laurel, as fancying it to be a sure protection against
fire from heaven, but I may safely say, that a merciful soul all covered over
with laurels, olive branches, and refined gold of charity, cannot be struck
with fire from heaven, and has as little reason to fear the fire of Purgatory.

It is better (said St. Chrysostom) Hom. 39. ad pop.
to give an alms to the poor, then to work a miracle, or to raise a dead man,
for in this you are beholding to God, but in that God is beholding to you. And
therefore, since God is indebted to you, tell him plainly you will be paid with
no other coin, but tha^ of Paradise, if he think of sending you to Purgatory,
tell him, you will be first paid, what he is pleased to owe you, for he has
promised y^^ life everlasting, and therefore let him first place you in
Paradise, and you will have leisure there to talk of Purgatory. It was an
answer worthy of eternal memory, that of the good Count Thiband of Champagne.
A. poor Gentleman fell at his feet, with tears in his eyes, saying my Lord,
you are the Father of the poor, I have two daughters to marry, and have no way
to compass it, having nothing in the world to give them, those poor creatures
are utterly lost, if you take not pity on them and me, your most humble
servant, and therefore I beseech your honor, to have mercy on us. The two poor
young women, were all this while on their knees, as beautiful as the sun, their
eyes humbly cast down upon the ground, and their faces covered with a modest
and virginal blush when out steps a ruffi^n like courtier. his name was Arrant,
and rudely tells the poor Gentleman, it was a pretty fight indeed, to see him
beg an alms with his sword by his side. Besides he was to know that the Count
was not for nothing surnamed the bountiful, for he had given away so much, that
he had no more left to bestow. How! replied the Count, that is not so, I have
yet something left, God be thanked, and enough too to bestow upon the good
Gentleman, for I am willing to part with thee, and to yield up unto him all the
interest I have in thee. Take him friend, continued he, and be sure you do not
part with him, till he has bestowed both your daughters This he said, and it
fell out so in good earnest; for the Courtier was glad at his own charge, to
provide competent portions for the two poor young women, and all France
admired, and highly extolled the Count, for his purdent carriage of the whole
business. Can you find in your heart to condemn such a brave Prince to
Purgatory, after he has left many such charitable examples behind him, one I
say, that has given so much away in pious uses, that he has no more to give,
one that would willingly have sold himself after all, to make an alms of the
price, to our blessed Savior, in the person of those poor innocent doves.

The Angel Raphael deserves credit, when he tells us in express terms, that it
is better to give alms, then to lay up treasures of T^^. 12.
gold, because that is it which purges sin, and makes us find mercy and life
everlasting. How does your heart feel at this comfortable lesson, since
charity has the power to purge sin, what need of another Purgatory, and since
she is so happy as to procure life everlasting, have you not reason to hope she
will at your death set heaven gates open, and lead you in thither as it were
by the hand. When those dutiful children, Val. max.
took their parents on their backs, to deliver them out of the flames, which
were furiously vomited out of Aetna, to the terror of all Sicily, which seemed
to be all on a light fire, they say, the flames out of respect to the natural
affection, parted themselves, and made a lane for the youths to pass through,
without harm, that had so much love for their parents, whose age and
feebleness would have otherways betrayed them to utter destruction, and so all
for company were luckily saved out of that furious Purgatory. And certainly if
your charity take you up, if your mercy do but hide you in her bosom, when you
shall pass through Purgatory, the fire will be so courteous, as to retire, and
give way to your passage: they will set all the gates open, for you to get out
when you please, and bring you the Keys of Paradise.

. 9. The ninth, Angelical purity.
THe ninth, and a very efficacious preservative against Purgatory, is a
singular chastity, or virginal purity I cannot think that a pure and humble
heart, a Soul that is newly divorced from a virginal body, can ever be tied to
purging flames. This Diamond of chastity, has I know not what, that makes it
victorious over flames; this mount Libanus as white as Snow, is never visited
with fire from heaven; this virginal Laurel, which triumphs over the pleasures
of this world, fears not the fury of any subterraneous flames; this St. John
may be plunged into boiling Oil without feeling the least smart; this Royal
Salamander can live untouched in the midst of fire; this pure Gold suffers no
detriment in the crucible; this Eagle cuts her way through the element of fire,
and soars up to Heaven without singing her wings; these innocents ^ing merrily
in the furnace of Babylon, as if they were in a terrestrial Paradise. In
earnest there is no reason, that persons as chaste as Angels, who were
invincible, and untouched in the midst of the flames of concupiscence, which
devour almost all the world, there is no reason, I say, that those who were
proof against these subtle alluring flames, should not appear as good proof
against those other cruel devouring flames, or that they should ever feel the
smart of the one, that had so valiantly overcome the false flatteries of the
other. St. John says, that Virgins follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, they
are the ordinary courciers of Jesus Christ that have washed their Robes in the
blood of the Lamb. And shall such clean innocent souls, need the help of
Purgatory fire, to wash away the^r stains? St. Teresia once seeing a Cannon in
the Church, ready to be laid in his grave, and another time one of the society,
who was also laid upon the Beer, ran instantly to kiss their dead corpse, and
when all were astonished to see her, she told those whom it concerned, that
she was very certain, that those two reverend persons were Virgins, and that
their happy souls, had for that cause taken their flight into heaven, just as
they parted with their bodies.

The Greek History tells us, that, Cedren. Annal.
when in the heat of the Tyrants persecution, Nicomendia fell to the plunder of
the rude Soldiers, amongst others, they took a beautiful young Virgin, and
having in vain labored to make her sacrifice unto Idols, they put her into the
hands of a wanton fellow, to use her as he pleased. She laughed at them, only
begged leave to speak a word or two to A^ithim^^ the Bishop. To him she
proposed this ca^e of conscience, whether she might not rather choose to die, or
to be accessory to her own death, then loose the precious Pearl of her
Virginity. The good Bishop made her so doubtful an answer, that not well
understanding what he meant, she consented to go along with the Soldier. He
hurries her away instantly into his own house, where the poor Virgin, seeing
her self in his power speaks thus to him. Friend, do not touch me, and I
promise to teach thee a receipt, that will make thee immortal, whereby thou
shall become the most valiant and famous man living, the secret is as dear to
me, as my honor, and my very life. As one Devil will sometimes overpower
another, so here the love of honor overcame lust. He tells her therefore he was
content to let her alone, so she could but make her words good. Sir, I have,
says she, a precious Ointment, which is of so great virtue, that whosoever is
anointed with it can receive no harm, a thousand rude blows, or desperate
thrusts of a Sword, cannot do him the least hurt against his will How shall I
believe this Paradox, replies the Soldier, which you speak possibly only to
amuse me* or rather to abuse me. Sure you will believe it says she, when you
see it tried before your eyes. A way she goes, borrows a little Oil of the next
Lamp she meets with, returns instantly, shuts the door, bares her neck as
white as Snow, rubs it well over with this miraculous Oil, that makes people
immortal; then casts herself down on her Knees, and bids the Soldier be sure to
take good aim, and strike boldly and spare not, for he should soon see a fair
trial of this wonderful experiment. With this she smiles and stealing an
amourous look toward heaven, begs of sweet Jesus her beloved spouse, that the
Oil might have the effect she so much longed for, to preserve her Virginity.
Mean time the Soldier lifts up his Sword, and with all his might levels it at
the neck of the innocent Virgin, and in a trice strikes of her head, which lay
reeking in blood, a good distance from the rest of her body. Never was man so
amazed and confounded as the Captain, to see himself thus fooled. But let us
leave him to vent his sury by himself, and fall to considering this prodigious
courage, this excessive love of purity, this ingenious st^a^agenie of the
Virgin, this innocent murder, or harmless contrivance of her own death, in
obedience to a particular instinct of the holy Ghost, as we may piously
imagine; and having taken a full view of all these circumstances, let us see
whether we have the conscience, to condemn the young Lady to Purgatory fire, who
was so chaste, as ^n choose rather to die then part with her Virginal integrity.

Which of you, said the Prophet Isa. 33. 14.
Isay, can dwell in devouring fire without burning? Answer, It is chastity.
Which of you can carry fire in his Bosom, or lie in the bosom of fire without
hurt, cried Solomon? Answer, It is chastity: Again; which of you can walk Prove.
6. 27. 28.
upon firebrands or tread upon glowing coals as upon a bed of flowers? Answer,
It is a Virginal chastity. Witness St. Agnes, who lay smiling in the midst of a
most cruel fire. Witness St. Thecla, who could walk as confidently upon hot
burning coals, as if they had been Roses. Witness St. Apollonia, who made
nothing of leaping into a dreadful fire which was prepared for her. Witness a
thousand other Virgins, who were seen to triumph in flames of fire, as if they
had been in the empireal Heaven. You may remember the Mart. Romans 17. May.
most chaste and incomparable virgin Restituta, who being condemned to be burnt
alive, was for that purpose put into an old ship, full ^f Pitch, Brimstone and
Fire, and thus exposed to the mercy of those merciless Elements. She apeared in
the midst of the Sea, as in a floating fire, upon her knees and there breathed
out her sweet soul into the hands of her heavenly spouse, leaving her Virginal
bo^^ still entier, and without suffering the least detriment, by the smoke or
by the fire. Now it was the fire of love that gave her the mortal wound, no
other fire durst touch, or consume that Virginal flesh, which was consecrated
to her dear Savior, by the fair hands of chastity. Go cast me such a soul into
Purgatory fire, and let it do its worst and burn her if it can. No, Fire will
sooner melt a Diamond, and all things that are the most impossible will sooner
come to pass, then a pure and angelical Virgin shall feel the smart of
tormenting fire; which has the discretion (says St. Chrysostom) to Hom. de
tribus innocent
distinguish innocence from guilt, and to fly furiously upon the one, while
with veneration and reverence it fawnes upon the other.

. 10. The tenth. A profound humility.
IT cannot enter into my ^^^d, that a soul which is truly humble, shall ever
enter into this place of torments, much less be long detained there. They say
there is a bird, that will be sure to save her self in all occasions of danger,
by sinking down so low into the water as to be out of all reach. The soul of a
man that is truly humble, sinks down so deep into the center of her own
nothing; that there is not the thing under heaven that can come near her, to
annoy her, and if by chance a little Purgatory fire should be let down upon
her, it would do by her, as, they say, the fire which falls from heaven does by
a pe^ce of well disposed moulde, which is so far from burning and destroying
it, that it converts it into some precious stone. The great God of heaven, who
loves to crush the heads of ambitious persons, to lay them level with the
ground, and to grind them to powder, takes pleasure to raise humble souls out
of the dirt, to make them prime potentates of Paradise, and to fit among the
Princes of his heavenly kingdom. He that will be sure to find the glory of the
Saints, (said St. Ser. 1.
Dorotheus) must seek it in the bosom of humility, for there, and only there
all true joy, content, and happiness are to be found: Paradise will sooner
stoop down to Purgatory, then suffer an humble soul to lie burning in those
merciless flames. Will you (says St Chrysostom) pass quickly thorough the
raging, and ^emp^stuous ho. 38. ad pop.
ocean, be sure that humility be your pilot. When St. Paul took himself for no
better then the dust of the common streets, then it was that he was rapt up to
the third heaven. True, And I may be bold to tell you, that if you be but
humble, they will not easily make you stoop so low as Purgatory, but will
rather lift you up above the wings of Seraphims. The royal Prophet made it his
prayer to God, to look down upon his humility, to consider his labors, and to
blot out all his sins and make him as innocent as an Angel, or a child of a
year old. What has an Angel or an Infant to do in Purgatory? Some hold a man
that is St. Doroth. ser. 2. de humil.
very humble to be a kind of Martyr. Must Martyrs be sent like criminals to
broyle in Purgatory? No, no, (says Climachus) rejoice Grad. 25.
not that you have the gift of miracles like an Apostle, or that you tread all
the devils in hell under your feet, it is a gre^ter advantage to be humble;
and to have your names written in the golden book of humility, Shall such as
stand in competition with Apostles be sent into Purgatory? There are stones of
so happy a temper, that though they should lie a thousand years, in a hot
furnace, they would not be the worse for it, but become still more fair and
beautiful. Behold the true emblem of humility, Purgatory will be sooner turned
into Paradise then do an humble soul the least prejudice. Ester (whose very
name carries humility) was ready to dye, when she saw the Majesty of King
Assu^rus; she humbled her self, and lay prostrate at his feet, and what
followed? They were so far from putting her to death, according to the laws of
the kingdom, that they placed her in the Queens throne, and made her on^ of
the greatest Princesses of her time; when God sees a soul that is humble in
good earnest, to lie prostrate at his feet, he has not the heart to condemn ^er
to death, or to torments, my friend, will he say, mount up higher, it is not
your place to lie there melting in Purgatory, mount up higher, and do it
boldly, for I love to raise those high that humble themselves low, and of the
Children of Abraham who esteem themselves no better then a little dust, I make
the stars of my firmament, and the Angels of my Paradise. It is a strange thing
to see, that poor Lazarus as humble and contemptible as he was, comes no sooner
to dye, but the Angels do him the honor to conduct him into Abraham's bosom.
And the good thief, who had scarce any other virtue to plead for him, but a
little humility, to confess himself a vile wretch as he was, did scarce find
himself in the other world, but he found himself in Paradise. So true it is,
that God loves humility and that all the heavens stand open, to entertain those
that are truly humble.

. 11. The Eleventh. To communicate well and often.
I Should never make an end, should I go about to bring in all the heroical
virtues, which are strong antido^s, and powerful preservatives, against the
fire of Purgatory, and yet I cannot choose but vent a thought or two more, which
with the rest, I submit to your discreet judgment.

And First, I take those that communicate often, and do it well and worthily,
to be pretty secure from feeling any great smart in Purgatory, St Ignatius Ep.
ad. Ephesians.
had reason to style the holy Eucharist the Antido^e of immortality.

The Romans used to put a peec^ of silver in the dead man's mouth, and verily
believed, that by giving this for his passage, he should be conveyed safe to
the Elizian fields. This was a vain superstition, but you must give me leave to
fancy, that when a good Christian di^s, with his savior in his mouth, or in
his heart, all Paradise lies open to receive him. Open your gates, you Princes
of heaven, open your gates, for Ps. 23.
behold the King of glory is ready to make his entrance, in the triumphant
chariot of virtues, sitting in a heart as white as Ivory, which serves him for
his royal throne. Roger King of Sicily, having long labored in vain, to Hist.
Neup. p. 2. l. 1.
make himself master of the Island Corfu, at length tired out with so long a
siege, fell upon this noble stratageme. He makes as if a certain Nobleman of
the town, were dead in his camp, who desired to be buried within their walls,
with the rest of his ancestors. He was accordingly laid upon the bear, and
covered like a dead corpse, a noble conv^y was prepared to ^^t^nd the Hearse,
with torches in their hands, nothing was wanting to make up a complete Funeral.
The Town mistrusting nothing, set open their gates to let them in, but my
counterfeit dead man, was scarce got upon the draw bridge, ready to enter the
Town, when behold he suddenly changes the whole scen, reviues and starts up
with his sword in his hand, which was a sign for all his attendants to throw
away their torches, and to betake themselves to their weapons, and they managed
them so well, that they first took the Gate and then the Town, and the whole
Island, to the great terror and astonishment of their enemies, who found
themselves guld, and surprised with so unexpected, and unusual a ceremony. A
grave Prelate terms the H. Paris lib. de Enchat.
Eucharist the incordiation of God, as if he would have said, that God in this
holy Sacrament is as it were incorporated into our hearts, and our hearts into
God, so that God lying thus hidden within us, he that is lord of the celestial
Jerusalem, to which our hearts have laid so close, and so loving a seige, if
we present him to the blessed inhabitants, as dead for the love of us, they
dare not but admit him, and them also that carry him after this manner, in the
very center of their hearts and souls.

Upon occasion of a hot contest at Florence, about Savanorola, when some would
have him an Heretic, others not, there were two amongst others took a strange
resolution, to put it to the trial of the fire, and he that could endure the
flames better, was to be thought to have the better cause. The day agreed on
being come, the fire prapared for the purpose, and all the world longing to see
the success of this strange challenge, it was discovered, that one of the
parties, had hid the blessed Sacrament in his bosom, believing that the fire
would not hurt him, while he carried so precious a treasure about him. What
came of it, and what was the conclusion of the whole business* you may read at
leisure in the History it self, I only bring this, to show the man's confidence
in this powerful preservative, and then you may please to remember, how the
sacred host has been sometimes seen, to hang in the air, surrounded about with
flames, and thus to have been miraculously preserved. I know we are not always
to look for miracles of this nature, and yet me thinks, we may be confident,
that Purgatory fire will have nothing to do with a soul, where Christ has been
pleased to take up his constant lodging. Where the King is, there is the Court,
where Christ is (says Sinesius) there Syn, Ep. 111. Ang. de genesis ad litt.
must needs be good fortune and victory, where God is (says St. Austin) there
is Paradise, ay though you were in the deepest pit of Purgatory, God would not
deny you entrance into Heaven, who never refused to entertain him in your
heart; he never knocked at your door but you were still ready to receive him,
can you think he will be less courteous to you in the other world?

Besides all this, he that receives often and devoutly, receives withal such
store of heavenly lights, such a tenderness of heart, such inflamed desires, so
much innocence in his conversation, and so much purity of intention in all his
actions, he is withal so transformed into God, upon whom he feeds, and feasts
himself continually, he is so identified with him, and to use the phraise of
St. Dennis, and St. Bonaventure, he is so straightly united with God, that as
St. Paul speaks of them that cleave to God, he becomes one spirit, and as it
were one thing with God. This being so, will you have this heart, which is but
one thing with Christ, to be swallowed up in Purgatory, and so to carry Christ
thither? They say, Albertus Magnus held, and whether he held it or no I know
many other worthy persons maintain, that one single thought of the most bitter
passion Granad. de^rut. du Pont. 4. p. Medit.
of our Blessed Savior, is so powerful, and so effectual, that a man may gain
sometimes more by it, then if he had fasted with bread and water, or
disciplined himself every day til blood comes or read over daily the whole
Psalter. I mean not to examine now the truth of this assertion, according to
the rigor of divinity, I only say that in some sense it may be true, and this
makes very much for my present purpose. For there is not the thing in the
world, that is a more lively representation of the Passion of Christ, then the
blessed Sacrament, which he left expressly, as an eternal memorial of his
Passion, commanding us to remember his death and bitter passion, when we
receive him, and still acting in our hearts that sad tragedy, though without
the effusion of his blood, and imprinting in our souls, the several passages of
his most precious death. Good God? of what merit then must a holy Communion
be, and a Communion, which is often frequented, and continued to the hour of
death. If such as these go to Purgatory, sure, there will be none free. St.
Thomas tells us, the blessed Sacrament is called a pledge of eternal life, now
(says he) we never use to deliver up our pledge, until we are possessed of the
thing for which it was engaged; see then (says he) that you part not with the
body of Christ, unto his eternal father, til he has received you into Paradise,
for which it was given you, as a most precious, and secure pledge. Hence it is
that St. Ambrose styles it, a parcel of eternal life, an Ambros. Opux. de
sanct. sacram.
essay or taste, a certain infallible assurance of enjoying it, and St. Cyprian
calls it an infusion of the Cyp. de cen^ dom.
divine essence, and St. Bonaventure a wonderful deification, or Metamorphosing
of the heart, by which a man that communicates often, is so deified, that he
seems to be a little god upon Earth. And to such as he it is said, You Ps. 81.
6.
are Gods and the Sons of the highest. Go now and bury these little gods in
Purgatory, you will sooner work a miracle, and turn Purgatory into Paradise,
for certainly Purgatory cannot be a fit place, for those that are gods by
participation, or consorts of divine nature, as St. Peter terms them. If the
sheeps teeth, that feed upon a certain herb in Candia, seem to be made of
pure Gold, what must we think of those, that are daily nourished with this
divine Plant of Paradise, Lilium convallium* but that they have hearts of Gold,
consciences of Gold, and so pure and refined Gold, that the fire of Purgatory
can find nothing more to purify and refine in them.

. 12. The twelfth, A faithful, and exact obedience.
THe twelfth, and last means, to prevent Purgatory, which I intend here to
propose, is an exact, and faithful obedience, for I cannot persuade my self, a
true obedient person, will have much cause to fear Purgatory.

Elias flew up to heaven in a fiery chariot, how could he do it without
burning? very well, for he did it to obey God. The three Children went into the
Babilonian furnace, alas? they are lost creatures. No, for they went in to obey
God. This being so, be of good comfort, the fire knows not how, to arm it self
against obedience. Jonas lies three days floating in a Whales belly, sure he is
undone, the poor man will never appear more. He will, he will, and quickly too,
for though it was his disobedience, which made him a prey to that devouring
monster of the Sea, yet he now willingly submits to the decrees of heaven, and
were it to do again would as willingly cast himself in, to obey the will of
God, and since it is so, he will infallibly recover his liberty, and not loose
the least hair of his Head.

Moses walks in the bottom of the read sea, while the waters stand like
mountains on both sides, threatening death and destruction, alas, it were great
pity so worthy a person should be thus lost in waves. Fear not, there is no
danger, no, since he entered to obey God, neither the sea, nor death dare
attempt any thing against him, all the elements, have two much respect to his
obedience, to do him the least injury. Daniel* is in the Lions jaws, who put
him there? obedience, Fear nothing, he will not perish, the cruel lions, will
be his lifeguard to protect him. Behold Susana under a cloud of stones ready to
hail down upon her, who put her there! obedience to the law of God. And
therefore do not fear, she will come off untouched. All creatures do so highly
honor the commands of their Creator, that they will sooner forget their own
nature, then forget to obey him, and honor all those, who had rather die then
disobey. It is a kind of Martyrdom (says St. Thomas) to dye for obedience, and
without question Purgatory was not made for Martyrs. It is a perfect holocaust,
to sacrifice his life upon the Altar of obedience, and why should a heart, thus
burnt and consumed in obeying, be any more exposed to fire? St. Bernard, in his
funeral sermon of Humbertus says, that if that holy Monk had any thing to
suffer in Purgatory, it was for want of a little obedience, in that which
concerned the care of his health and that otherwise, he could not but think,
that he went immediately into heaven. Let us hear the great St. Ambrose.
Whosoever In Ps. 39.
(says he) does the will of God, who lived and died in obedience shall not die
eternally, but at the hour of his death shall hear those comfortable words,
which were spoken to the good thief, this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. Why so? Is it not sufficient, that St. Ambrose speaks it so roundly?
But if you will have a pertinent reason for it, take this. 2 2. q. 186. a. 5.
The Angelical doctor, having first laid this ground, that all eminent and
Heroical virtues, put a soul into a most pure and perfect state; says further,
a man can give God nothing, that is of more value in this miserable life, then
to consecrate his will, and submit it not only to him, but for love of him to
frail creatures perhaps ignorant, hasty and collerick, perhaps younger, and less
witty then himself, perhaps his own Scholar, his own son, and if you will
perhaps, his own servant. Is not this a sublime kind of Matryrdom which ends
not in a moment, or with one dint of a sword, but must endure a thousand
strokes of an indiscrete tongue, which go more to the quick, and this all the
days of his life. Now is there any reason, that a man that has courageously
suffered all these Martyrdoms, should be martyred again in Purgatory fire?

When Abraham, out of pure obedience, would have sacrificed his dear Isaac, God
seemed so well pleased, (I had almost said obliged to him for it) that by way
of requital, he made a solemn Oath, to give him his only son, and the land of
promise, flowing with all manner of delights. Tell me, is not every obedient
person another Abraham? nay, is he not greater then Abraham, since it is a far
harder task, for a man to sacrifice himself, then to sacrifice his son; to
sacrifice, I say, his will, the noblest part of man, which is born to be sole
empress of the universe, and has no other life, but to rule and command as well
in the great, as the lesser world. Now let him be but another Abraham, and sure
you will not think it fit to send him to Purgatory, who carries in his bosom
the delights of Paradise. The Abbot Mutius, when he turned Monk, brought his
only son with him to the Monastery, about eight years old, that he might begin
betimes to learn the fear of God. The Abbot of the Monastery, to make trial of
his obedience, peremptorily commands him, to take the Child, and throw him into
the River, for he did nothing but disquiet the Monks. The holy man, without
disputing the case, animated with an angelical obedience, and a heart like that
of Abraham, takes up the Child, runs away with him to the River throws him in,
and returns again with dry eyes, and without any sign of trouble, as if he were
not at all concerned, for the loss of his own Child. And certainly, the Child
had been drowned, had not certain Monks, who could swim well lain secretly
there, by the Abots appointment, who took up this little Moses, saved this
Isaac, and brought him back to the Monastery, where they all stood in
admiration, of so perfect an example of blind obedience, and self denial, in so
natural and lawful an affection, as is the love of a parent to his dear Child.
The same day, it was revealed to the Cass. l. 4. c. 27.
Abbot, that this fact of Matius, was as pleasing to God, as that of Abraham,
and that he should be eternally blessed for it. Go now and cast this soul into
Purgatory, who stuck not to cast his only Son into the River, at the command of
his superior, and when you have done, will they not sooner think you cast in
the whole River, which was thus blessed by a perfect act of obedience, and so
quench the flames, then suffer her to lie burning there. Mutius did but once
cast his son into the River, and how many Religious souls, out of the same
spirit of obedience, expose themselves a thousand times, to all dangers both by
Sea and Land, and after all this, must they needs visit Purgatory in their way
to heaven?

It seems boldly said of St, Austin, Tract. 10. in Joan.
that the blessed Virgin was happier in obeying God, then in being the Mother
of God, and yet Christ himself, said as much in express terms.

For when by way of applauding him, they were crying up her Luc. 11. 27. and 28.
happy, that had the honor to be his Mother, and to nourish him with the milk
of her breasts, he sudainly replied, that he took them to be happy indeed, that
heard his word, and put it in Practice; Luc. 8. 21.
and another time, when they had told him, that his good Mother, and his
brothers, stood without waiting for him, who (say he) are my brothers, and whom
do you call my Mother, whosoever does the will of my Father, he is my Mother,
my brothers, and my whole parentage. Now to our purpose, if an obedient person
have the honor, to bear this honorable title, of being the brother, and even
the Mother of God, can God so far neglect this brother, and mother of his, as
to leave them in Purgatore fire. The Abbess one day commanded S. Catherine of
Bolognia, that for the love of God, and the exercise of l. 1. vite ejus.
obedience, she would enter into a burning furnace. The Saint runs away
instantly, and doubtless would have thrown herself in, had not the Religious
stood in the way to hinder her. It is not a crime 1 de civ. c. 1
(says St. Austin) to be thus prodigal of our lives; and even like Samson, to
make our selves away, when God requires it; No, this is no crime, but a pious
holocaust, offered upon the Altar of obedience, and will you then kill a man
that is already dead, will you burn him in Purgatory, that is already consumed
in the holy flames of obedience, God does not use to punish, or purge the same
fault twice; and therefore a soul that has been once purged in the fire of
obedience, has no need of being purged again in the fire of Purgatory.

O what a thing it is to be obedient, cried Gerard, as he lay a dying, in St.
Bernards arms, I have been carried before Gods high tribunal, and have seen
the power of obedience, no body shall ever perish that is truly obedient; but
when he comes to die, shall mount above the quires of Angels Archangels, and
Apostles, according to the merit of his obedience, and with this he died. Must
Angels, Archangels, Apostles, and those that are in the same degree of
perfection, be thrust into Purgatory fire? Is it reasonable, that they should
be confined to so loathsome a prison, that made themselves voluntary prisoners,
under the severe government of obedience. I am resolved (said H. David) to fear
no evils, of what ragged nature soever they be, Ps. 22.
so long as thou my God do lead me by the hand, though I should walk in the
midst of the shadow of death, in the very suburbs of hell (which is Purgatory)
I will fear nothing, for thy rod, and thy staff, wherewith thou do govern,
and direct me to do thy holy will, in all occasions, will be my sure comfort
and protection.

An obedient man speaks nothing but victories, says the holy Ghost in the
Proverbs. What victories? Such as St. Dorotheus Pro. c. 21. 28 Doct. 1.
describes, when he tells us, that a soul being scated in her triumphant
chariot, drawn by humility and obedience, treads all underfoot, and with a
swift motion steeres her course up to heaven. If humility and obedience be her
horses, they will not easily convey her into Purgatory, for they know not the
way thither, but only into heaven, their own native country, where they will be
sur^ to leave this triumphant, and victorious soul; in the joyful fruition of
eternal happiness. Take away self-will and there will be no hell, cries St.
Bernard: If obedience can put out hell fire, Ser. 1. de. resur.
she most needs have power to put out the fire of Purgatory. What a solid
comfort must this be to religious souls, who have given themselves over to the
practice of this virtue, and to all those, that living in the world, yet do
nothing of their own heads, but are constantly ruled by the will of God.

It is a strange, but very true observation Bonau. c. 13* reg. novi^* to. 7.
of St. Gregory, and of St. Bonaventure, that God who is invincible, will yet
suffer himself to be overcome, by the obedience of his servants, so far as even
to obey them; I say obey, for it is the very expression, he uses himself, in
the case of Josua, who is said to have stopped the sun in his full carreere,
because God was pleased to obey the voice of his obedient servant. If this be
so, that God will refuse nothing to an obedient soul; let her ask him to be
freed from Purgatory, and she will not be denied it, who never denied him any
thing. And without all doubt, it is as easy for her to curb the fire of
Purgatory, as to stop the sweet motion of the heavens. You then that are
obedient, know your power, you may appeal from God to God, in case he should
sentence you to Purgatory, you may boldly claim his promise, of denying you
nothing, and then you will be sure to make it in your bargain, to have nothing
to do with Purgatory, but to go straight into heaven, there to enjoy him for
ever.

The Conclusion.
IT is now high time to conclude this. and with it the whole Treatise. And I
cannot leave you better then in heaven, whether I have brought you, if you will
your self, for you see; it is in your power to make your way thither, without
passing through Purgatory. Believe me, it is no trifling matter, but the most
important business we have to do in this world, to purchase heaven, and to
purchase it so, as to have right to take possession of it immediately after we
have left this world. Christ our Savior tells us, that the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and that they must be both violent and valliant, that run
away with it, where St. Ambrose observes well, S. Amb. in Luc.
that God loves to be forced, and that they which importune him most, and use
the greatest violence, are the men he makes most of. Take courage then dear
Reader, take courage, imitate the good thief, snatch heaven out of his hands,
steal away his Paradise, do something worthy of him, worthy of your self, and
worthy of Paradise* If no better means occur to you, at least strive to to be
hugely concerned for the poor souls in Purgatory, pray often, devoutly for
them, and procure that good store of Masses may be said for their relief. You
have the ell in your hands, by which you may measure out your (...) happiness,
(says the devout Salvianus) be charitable to others: and they will be no less
to you. The time is not long that is allowed you to sojourn in this world: in
this little time, be sure you make the Saints in heaven, and the souls in
Purgatory, your friends, that they be obliged to help you in your greatest
need. Learn at least by these discourses, to have a tender heart for the poor
souls, and to use your uttermost endeavors, to go your self directly into
heaven out of this wi^ked world. It is the thing I earnestly beg of Gods
infinite mercy for you, and for my self at the instance of your good prayers.
For though I must acknowledge, I have de(...) (...) ^easo^ ^^ take (...) ^our,
to be sent^^^^ (...), to lie there as ^any months and years, a^ ^^ shall please
God, yet I confess ingenuously, I have no great mind to either place, ^ut only
to heaven, which I beseech God by the merits of my dear Savior, and by the
plenary indulgence of his most infinite mercy, to grant us all, Amen.

Et Fidelium animae per misericordiam Dei requiescant in pace. Amen.

FINIS.

