A CORDIAL For a HEART-QUALME.

Or, Several Heavenly Comforts for all those who suffer any Worldly cross or
calamity.

By Simon Birckb^k, Bachelour of Divinity, sometime Fellow of Queens College
in Oxford: And now Minister of Gods Word at gilling, in Richmundshire.

London, Printed for Richard Best, and are to be sold at his shop at Grayes
Inn Gate. 1647.

To the Right Worshipful, Colonel Richard sbuttleworth of Galthrop, in the
County of Lancaster, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, in this
present Parliament. 1646.
Sir
IT is too apparently visible, how it has pleased our only wise good God, to
suffer this poisonously infected Cup of heart-dividing distractions, to be
generally and strongly handed to most of this Kingdom, yea and the dreggs
thereof to seize upon the vitals of many; which has produced, even very
dangerous and unexpressible epidemicall Anxieties and Sinco^s. Upon serious and
frequent meditation thereof, raised through my own sad experiences, even in the
midst of our greatest continuing miseries, I here have endeavored to fit and
prepare this discourse, as a Co^fectionary of spiritual Relief and Cordial
Comfort for all such as may fa^le and faint under the heavy pressures of any of
this worlds Afflictions; and now make bold to present them unto you, not as if^
any necessity in you called upon any such advertisements: But that I very well
know with what christian resolution and patience you have out passed the loss
of (...) hopeful and valorous son, slain in the public cause of Religion and
Kingdoms, besides the danger of your own, hazard and wounds of diverse other
your sons, banishment from your own house and family, plundering of your goods,
and the continued want (even until this time) of a part of your estate. These,
I say, may sufficiently testify your proficiency in this more then Aesculapian
Art: Yet howsoever in tender of my due observance to your self, hoping their
shortness may no way impedite your more serious employments, now of public
concernment and present agitation: I dedicate this Cordial, and offer the
perusal thereof unto you: Desiring from my heart, as they are by me intended,
they may strengthen the weak and feeble, be oil of joy for mourning, and the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and so safely to usher us along
in uprightness and holiness here, that we all may receive eternal bliss
and happinese hereafter; through Christ Jesus our Lord, which is the constant
and fervent prayer of

Yours ever bounden, S.B.

The Contents.
The Preface, or Preparative to the Cordial Page 1. Sect. Sickness the
ordinary Harbinger of Death p. 1.
SECT. I. Comforts for the sickbed. 3
Sect. 1. Comfort from the Author of sickness, that God has a special hand
in it 1 Sec. 2. How, and in what sense Affliction is good 7 Sect. 3. It Is some
comfort that Health and Sickness come by courses 8 Sect. 4. How to serve God
in^ Sickness and Health 11 Sect. 5. The sweet fruit and effect of Affliction
12 Sect. 6. The benefit of Affliction, Affliction is medicinal 15 Sec. 7.
Affliction is a Trier 18 Sect. 8. Affliction weaneth us from the World 21 Sect.
9. Whether Affliction be desirable. Of a three sold Affliction, Punishments,
Chastisements, Trials 23 Sect. 10. We shall meet with Crosses, we need no
self created Crosses 28 Sect. 11. God Corrects, but we put the rod into his
hand 30
SECT. II.
Cordials and Comforts against the loss^ of our goods 34 Sect. We want, whose
fault^ is it 36 Sect. 1. Consider how little suffices Nature 37 Sect. 2. The
Godly destitute, not forsaken 39 Sect. 3. Consider the worst Condition of
others 47 Sect. 4. Consider the benefit of a slender Condition 55 Sect. 5. The
Cares that attend on wealth 57 Sect. 6. The Security of a small state 64 Sect.
7. The fickle nature of carthly goods 67 Sect. 1. Uncertainty of Riches, their
staying with us 70 Sect. 2. Uncertainty of our staying with them 72 Sect. 3.
Uncertain, to whom we shall leave them 74
Sect. 8. Riches, they are not ours, but lent us 76 Sect. 9. Labor to be
Content with a simple Condition, not depending upon many things 79 Sect. 1. The
Benefit of an Independent Condition 83

SECT. III.
Comforts against Imprisonment 87 Sect. 1. We are free Prisoners, the mind is
at liberty 87 Sect. 1. The Saints Imprisoned 88 Sect. 2. Imprisonment not
strange; we are Imprisoned in the womb, the world, the Body, and the Grave
ibid. Sect. 3. Hell a fearful prison, the^ no light,^ no favor there, no
deliverie thence 89 Sect. 4. Pray, we never be delivered to that Prison 92

SECT. IV.
Comforts against Banishment 93 Sect. 1. We are all pilgrims, Heaven is our
Home 93 Sect. 1. The benefit of Remooveall 95 Sect. 2. Abraham enjoined to
leave his own Country 97 Sect. 3. We have Right in any Country, by the
Lord's Title 98 Sect. 4. The Saints Banished ibid. Sect. 5. God accompanies
His, even in Banishment 99

SECT. V.
Comforts against public Calamities 100 Sect. 1. Of the ^series of a Civil
war 100 Sect. 2. Comfort from the sense and sympathic of common evils 104
Sect. 3. Comfort from the justice of Gods proceedings 110 Sect. 1. Personal
Corruptions 111 Sect. 2. National sins common and peculiar ibid. Sect. 3. War
the Malady, Repentance the Remed^e 118
Sect. 4. Comfort from Gods overruling Providence 122 Sect. 1. Gods providence
instanced in Joseph 124 Sect. 2. To depend upon^ Gods Providence 128
Sect. 5. The Remedy, our Particular and General Repentance 131
SECT. VI.
Of means to work us to Patience under the Cross 143 Sect. 1. Comforts from
the greater sufferings of Holier men 144 Sect. 2. Our Sufferings short of our
deserts 151 Sect. 3. Our Sufferings infevior to our Glory 152 Sect. 4. Look on
our Comfort, as well as our Corrafive 156 Sect. 5. Compare our selves
afflicted, with our selves at ease 158 Sect. 6. Our good days more than our
evil days 160 Sect. 7. Of patience in suffering 162 Sect. 8. God exchanges his
blessings; denies us wealth peace and deliverance; and gives us Conte^ment,
Patience, and Supportation 164 Sect. 9. We must be sitted for mercy, and then
(...) 166 Sect. 10. The use of patience, and the need of it 169
SECT. VII.
Directions for the recovered Patient. 174 Sect. 1. Be thankful after Recovery
174 Sect. 2. See whether Affliction have bettered thee 176 Sect. 3. Take heed
of Relapses they are dangerous 178 Sect. 4. Strive for a Blessing, Prayer will
procure it 181
A Cordial for a Heartqualme.
The Preface or Preparative to the Cordial.
DEath (as Job. 18. 14.
Job Sect. (...). Sickness the ordinary Harbinger of Death.
calls him) is the King of terrors, who, (like some great Commander) has
large quarters, and sends forth his Harbingers before him: Affliction is the
ordinary forerunner of Death, taking up his billet and lodging almost in every
house. One cries out, 2. Kin. 14. 18.
My head, My head,^ with the Shunamites son; another, 2. Mac 9. 5.
my bowels, my bowels, as Antiochus; another, my feet, 1 Kin. 15. 2^.
my feet, as Asa; being troubled (as it is probable) with the gout. One
complayneth of a Palsy, another of a burning Fever, another of the Stone, or
Strangury: and they that are not troubled with any of these, yet they are still
under this King of Fear, lest he should enlarge his quarters, and take in
them too. But is there no Balm in Gilead? Yes, there be (God be blessed for
it) Cordials, and Scripture-Comforts, appliable to such as are cast on their
Sickbed, their Deathbed, their Grave-bed; for so Isai. 57. 2.
Isaiah calls it: they shall^ rest in their beds: that is, their graves;
every one walking in his uprightnes, where they shall securely sleep in a bed
of ease, till the morning of the Resurrrection.

SECT. I. Comforts for the Sickebed.
COnsider with thy self Sect. I. Comfort from the Author of Sickness, that God
has a special hand in it^
dear Patient, and fellow laborer, under the Cross of Christ; that God has a
special hand in thy visitation, even thy God the Father of Mercy, which
chastises thee for thy good, and then thou will kiss both^ the Rod, and hand
that corrects thee. For, as Job says, Job. 5. 6.
Affliction comes not out of the duft. Sickness and Affliction, that alights
upon men, comes not either by casualty, or of it self, or merely from the
second causes, whether of men, or other creatures, or by distem pers of body
only, but it comes from above, and is inflicted by the divine hand of supreme
and infinite Justice, so as thou may say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119 75.
I know o Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that of very faithfulness
thou have afflicted me. It were not well with us, if these maladies came by
chance, or were let loose to alight where they^ list: it is our comfort they
are swayed by the provident hand of a loving Father, who like a skillful
Physician tempers the Dose and Receipt according to the need and strength of
his Patient. 1. Cor 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able,
but will with the temptation also, make a way to escape, that we may be able to
bear it: He will give a happy issue out of it, and enable us to go through
with it. He corrects his children, not out of measure, ^r. 46. 28.
but in discretion; with the Rod of men, 2 Samuel 7. 15.
that is, moderately, and with compassion, in a fatherly tenderness and love,
for their good and amendment. He^ knows their strength is not the strength of
stones, Job 6. 12.
nor their flesh as brass; his anger endures but for a moment. Psalm. 30.5.
Look the^ upon the Author of thy sickness, and how it is stinted, and under
Commission; and this will work thee an unmooved patience and humble
submission. And thus Ely when God foretold by Samuel the ruin of his house,
quiets himself, 1. Sa. 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And thus the people of God,
when Paul was resolved to go to Jerusalem, submitted, saying, Act. 21, 14.
the will of the Lord be done; a speech fit to proceed out of the heart, and
mouth of a Christian.

It is true indeed, sickness Sect. II. How, and in what sense Af^ction is good.
and affliction simply considered, and in their own nature, are not good; but
consequents of sin; their use and fruit is a blessing of God, giving us thereby
a sight and sense of our sins; but that good, it is not wrought out of the
nature of misery, but comes from them by accident only. No chastning for the
present seems to be joyous, but grievous: Heb. 12. 11.
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. As it is in these humane corrections, those
chastisements, which were grievous unto us in our childhood, are afterward
allowed of us, as^ profitable unto us: So is it in these afflictions from the
hand of God; none of them are for the time pleasing, but grievous and irksome;
yet afterward we find them to be exceeding beneficial, by taming,
disciplining, and fitting us to an holy life, which brings peace of
conscience after all the unquiet broiles and ^mults of trial and temptation:
Now blessed is that sickness, that prooves the cure of the soul: Oh welcome
Fevers, that may quit our soul from everlasting burnings.

Thou complainest that Sect. III. It Is some comfort that health and sickness come
by courses
now thou art sick, now thou art grievously pained; I apprehend it as such, and
pity thee with all my soul: But^ tell me, were thou not before a long time
healthful? Can thou not be content to take thy turns, and let God have his
intercourse of favors and crosses, health and sickness? Can we look for
fair weather every day? As well may the day be without succession of night, as
a mortal body, of so frail and britle consistence, without fits of distemper.
It was the answer Job 2. 10.
where with that pattern of patience, Job, stopped the clamorous mouth of his
tempting wife; shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not
receive evil? It was a memorable example B. Hall of Contentation. Sect. 15.
of a worthy Christian, who had lived to his middle age in^ much health and
prosperity, and was now for his last two years, miserably afflicted with the
S^gury; who in the midst of his torments could say; Oh my Lord God! how
gracious have thou been unto me? Thou have given me eight and forty years of
health, and now but two years of pain thou mig^st have caused me to ^e in this
torture all the days of my life; and now thou have carried me comfortably
through the rest, and have merci^lly taken up with this last parcel of my
^ment; bl^d by thy name for thy mercy in fo^ng me, and for thy justice in
afflicting me.

Yea, but thou complainest Sect. IIII. How to serve God in Sickness and health
of these fits and changes, that they interrupt thee, and break off the works
of thy calling; it is that erstwhile thou had so much respite and breathing,
as to follow thy vocation. This cessation and intermission, will upon thy
recovery, make thee fall more freshly to thy task. If the Lord be pleased to
send thee a Writ of ease, a (...) est, to take thee off thy business by
sickness, yet even then thou have time to serve God another way, to wit, by a
selfe-resignation, and patient submitting to his will. If he mean to use thy
service any further, he will restore thee to thy health and strength, to do
the work he^ sets thee about. For health is at his command, and sickness
stays at his rebuke. In the interim, and mean, this time of sickness, is a
purging from that desilement, we gathered in time of health, till we come
purer out; which should move us the rather willingly to abide Gods good ley
sure.

The Lord sees, that if Sect. V. ^.
the body be not sick, the soul would. Blessed is that sickness of the
body, which procures the health of the (...). We are best for the most part,
when we are weakest: when we are Gods p^iioners, and cast on our sickbed, then
it appears w^ good proficients we have been in the time of health.^ If there
we learned any good lesson, this is the time to practice it. This will put us
to it, and make us, (if ever,) turn Confessants, Supplicants, Comprecants: do
we then, under Gods visitation, confess our saults more fu^ly, then formerly?
do we sue for pardon more earnestly, and pray more fervently? This is a good
symptom and token of our spiri^ali state, if we can pra^ that in time of
sickness, we learned in time of our health: Affliction indeed gives
understanding, and we may thank affliction for it: gramercy affliction, that
now we are promising men, that now we promise amendment of life, that now we
are^ peaceable men, as bring tied (as it were) to good behavior, that now we
are not catch^ with those baytes of the world, 1 John 2.16.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, that is,
with carnal lusts and concupiscences, covetous desires, proud and ambitious
thoughts and affectations, but that we can say, (...). 12.2.
I have now no pleasure in them. I was sometimes alive to those sinful courses,
I relisht them: I was then in mine element, even there where I would have
been: now, I find no more taste in them, then in the Job. 66.
white of an egg: now I am dead to them, as 1 Samuel 25.
Abigail to dead Nabal. Gramercy affliction. And yet affliction,^ as of it
self, could not work us to any good, were it not that the Lord gave us a
sanctified use of Crosses, and sweetened these bitter waters of Marah to the
Israel of God.

The Benefit of Affliction. Sect. VI. The benefit of Affliction. Affliction is
Medicinal.
Affliction is of a medicinal quality: it is a preparative to (...) for further
trialls, and namely, for our last duel, our combat with Death. It is of a
purgative nature also: when the Physician finds the body distempered, the
blood foul and ^amed, he orders the opening of a v^inc, and the drawing out
of so many ounces, as may leave the rest meet for correction: Our spiritual
Physician finds we have distempered^ our selves by riot and surfets, and now
he diets us with the bread and water of affliction, and ministers some bitter
potion to take down our foul body of sin, to I sai. 1. 25. Dan. 11 35.
refine and purify his Patients; wherein they lose nothing but dross.

Affliction has its alterative property; where it works kindly, it changes
and reformes the Patient. David drank of it, and found himself better after
it, Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted, says he, I went astray; but now I keep thy word.
Manasse was far gone in a Lethargy of sinfullnesse, but this Antimonian cup
of Affliction recovered him, When he was in Affliction, says the story,^ he 2
Chr. 33. 12.
besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly before him. The Goal was a
happier lodging to him than his Palace; Babylon schooled him better than
Jerusalem. It changed him from an Idolatrous and murderous Manasse, to a
Convert, and penitent Manasseh.

Affliction is a correctory for sins past; and thus the Lord awakened Jonah
out of the sleep of security, by casting him into the Sea: he cured Zachary of
his Infidelity of not believing the Angels message, by striking him with
dumbness. It Is a Defensative, a Preservative to prevent our future falling
into sin: Thus was Paul 2 Cor. 127.
buffeted by the messenger^ of Satan, and why? lest he should be exalted above
measure: The Lord suffered Satan to lay hard both at his faith and his
sincerity, lest he should be puffed up with multitude of Visions,
Revelations, and Angelical Apparitions.

Affliction is a Trier. The Sect. VII. Affliction is a tryer.
Lord afflicts us to prove us, whether we can endure the hammer and the test:
What dross of corruption, and what sound mettle of Faith, Love and Obedience
is in us: he proves us, even as silver is tried in the fire Psalm. 66.10.
, when the Sea is calm, it looks even and level, let the wind rise, it
rages and swells, and casts up wrack: Stir the liquor in the^ glass, and the
lees and dregs will appear: in time of peace and prosperity many carry
themselves moderately toward God and Man; but if God lay, I say not his hand,
but his little finger upon them, then they begin to murmur and grudge, and
discover their hidden corruptions: Yea the godly man would hardly think there
were so much distrust, impatience, frowardness, faintheartednesse and love of
the World, as he shall find in himself in the day of his affliction. D^. 82.
Exodus 16. 4.
Moses told the Israclices, that God therefore humbled them with want, to prove
them, and to know what was in their heart; that is, to try them,^ or make them
known, no to himself, who knew them well enough before (without any
experimental trial of them) but to make it known^ to themselves, and others,
whether afflictions or favors would work them to obedience. And thus the Lord
prooved Abraham's obedience in offering up his son, and Job's patience, upon
the loss of his children and substance, albeit he knew what was in them, what
was in man. Action quickens Gracelanguishing, it manifests hidden and secret
graces, and justifies a man's sincerity; and so it cleared David, Job and
Ezechiah (...) it cleared them from hypocri^sy, and justified their sincerity.
Affliction reviveth Grace,^ which otherwise would faint and languish for want
of exercise and employment: were it not for assliction, there were not
altogether that use of patience, nor of temperance, but for the many incentives
and provocations there are to riot and excess: nor of christian valor, but
that we have spiritual enemies to encounter.

A^iction ferves to weane Sect. VIII A^iction weanes us from the World.
our affections from the world: thus the Lord visits his children with crosses:
as love of friends, loss of goods, weakness of body, meannesse of estate,
and the like; that in case they will delight in some sinful course, and doat
on things vain and transitory: then^ these corrasives and corrections may vex
and disquiet them as the Canaanites did the Israelites: as the Nurse weanes the
child, by laying some bitter herb on her breast; so the Lord imbittereth the
pleasures of this life, to make us long after that better life to come: for
those whom he afflicts more feelingly, can part with the pleasures of sin more
freely, and say with him in the Preacher Eccle. 12.1.
, I have no pleasure in thee, nor thee, nor thee. My Soul (says David Psalm.
131.2.
is even as a weaned child. A child that cannot want the teat for an hour or
two, yet if it be disused and weaned a while, seeks not after it: do thus^
with thy bosom sin, thy Dalilah, thy Herodias, the sin that hangs on thee
more then the rest, be it chambering and wantonness, surfeiting and
drunkenness, or the like, single it out, do to it as David did to his: I kept
my self (says he) from mine iniquity: I kept my self from following my
corrupt affections to the sin I was most inclined unto.

Object.
If Affliction be (as is pretended) Sect. IX. Whether Affliction be de^cable.
Of a three fold Affliction. Punishments. Chastisements. Trials.
such a benefit, why do we not give thanks for it? why do we seek by all
means how to avoid it, how to come out of it?

Sol.
Here the old distinction must be remembered. Of Afflictions,^ some are
punishments (...) Punishments.
properly so called, they be such as proceed from God's vindictive Justice,
and are not matter or occasion of (...), but rather of deep humiliation and
trembling, unless the offender repent: others (...) (...). are chastisements,
or fatherly Corrections; they differ from the former, not so much in the
matter, as in their (...) and (...), and end: their Rise is from God's love
(for whom he loves, Prove. 3. 12.
them he corrects) and from his Fatherly care, willing thereby to reclaim
us: they have their temper, measure, Esaias 27. 8.
and mitigation, according to the ability of the Patient: they tend to^ make us
partakers of the Hebr. 12. 11.
quiet fruit of righteousness. Sickness and other scourges of God, which are
punishments to the wicked, inflicted upon them for their (...) Nocumen ta.
Documenta.
sins, are Fatherly chastisements of God's children for their instruction and
amendment. In afflictions of this nature, in respect of their use and fruit,
we have (...). Triall^.
cause of thankfulness: Corrections are instructions. Lastly, some are Trials,
and trials of faith: whether by Satan, as those of Job were, or by men that
persecute others for righteousness sake: In this sort we find great cause of
thankefullnesse and rejoicing. Peter and his fellows Act. 5^ 41.
rejoyced^ therein, as in a great dignity; that they were counted worthy to
suffer for his name: Paul in his Epistle to the Philipians calls his cross his
Grace. phil^. 17.
It seems say the lea^ned Annotators on the B^ble; that some of the
Philippians were partakers with the Apostle in his bonds, which the Apostle was
so far from esteeming any disgrace or disparagement to him, that he accounted
them a grace and an ornament to him. As also did the noble Martyr Babylas, who
gave charge at his death, that his bolts should not be knocked off his feet, but
be buried with him. Now, how far forth we may desire affliction, I conceive^
it thus: Some things are desirable for themselves, as happiness and holiness;
some things are desirable not for themselves, but as they make way to better
things, being ^ower and bitter to nature themselves; as Physic is desired not
for it self, but for health; we desire health for it self and physic for
health: and so is it in the case of affliction; we should hardly take down the
bitter pills of Affliction, were it not for the good use, and quiet fruit of
righteousness that it yields.

Quest.
Belike then if Crosses be so penal and afflictive, it is not fair^ for us to
call in Crosses.

Answ.
We shall meet with crosses, Sect. X. We shall meet with Crosses, we need no
felfecreated Crosses.
we need not create crosses. There be some self created crosses, which we
have reason to bear, and bewail, as having pulled them upon our own heads,
for want of forecast, unthriftynesse and rash suretyshippe, We fall into want;
upon wilful distempers of drink riot and surfets, into fevers, upon
intemperances, and licentiousness into consumptions: There be other Crosfes
which are immediately God's hand-wo^ke: Shall there be evil in a City, to
wit, evil of pain and adversity, and the Lord has not done Amos 3. 6.
it? says the Prophet Amos. There can be^ no evil of punishment wherein God
has not an hand; but some evils are more immediate from a divine stroke. We
must set our thoughts on work or else like mil-stones wanting grist, they will
grate and wast one another. Yet take heed lest we spend our spirits with
carking care of fore thought and future evils, which (happily) either fall not
out at all, or not in our time; so as they need not trouble our heads. Some man
is haunted with thoughtfullnesse, what shall become of his child when he is
gone; or least his wife marry after his departure; whereas they dye in the me^
time, and he out-lives^ his own grief: Another frettingly fears he shall be
undone in a dear year, or in case there be some change in Religion; whereas
he dies in the interim, and ends his days in the same professaon, in peace and
plenty. A moderate care and forecast does well, either for provision of things
necessary, or prevention of damages and dangers; but not to antidate our
misery by such fore-conceits of imaginary evils: We have our hands full
already; Mat. 6.24.
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. We complain Sect. 11. God
corrects, but we put the Rod into his hand.
of crosses; and yet we put the Rod into Gods hand, so as he is glad to deal
with us, as we do with frisking horses^ in a large pasture, which will not be
taken, till they come to a strait gate: The Jer. 2. 24.
wild Ass, that snuffes up the wind, to cool her heat, will not be taken,
till she be in her months, till she be with foale, and laden with her burden.
We have grown wanton with ease and long peace and plenty; and if the Lord
should not tame us with affliction, we should run wild after the excess of
riot with the world; there would be no rule with us. We are like unto Ephraim;
Jer. 31 18. 19.
the Prophet says of Ephraim, that, before he was chastised, he was like a
bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, but after he was instructed, then he smote
his thigh;^ he was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because he did bear the
reproach of his youth: As if he should say; Thou have a^cted me O Lord, and I
am humbled, I do now bow my neck, and stoop under thy yoke; I was like an
untamed Colt, but now the hand and rod of affliction has broken me, now I
smote upon my thigh, in token of remorse, sname and detestation of my former
wicked ways; I did bear the reproach of my youth, of mine excesses committed
in my younger days. Surely after that I was turned, I repented; after that
thou had wrought upon me, and showed me my sin, I repented. When he smote
them, saith^ the Psalm. 78.34.
Psalmist, then they sought him, yea, they sought him early; Hos. 5. 15.
yea, then (says the Lord) they will se^ke me diligently; early, and
diligently. God that can draw light out of darkness, can give a good issue
and success of our a^ction; albeit they be harsh to flesh and blood; yet he
can turn them to our good, to our profit. Metals are never so bright, as when
they are scoured; Perfumes and spices never so redolent and savoury, as when
they have felt the fire, and the p^. Affliction serves to scour our earthen
vessels of that soil and rust of corruption, that we formerly contracted.
We may think it were well if we escaped this scouring^ and burnishing, but
it is good for us to be thus afflicted; Psalm. ^1971.
that now the Lord pricks the swelling of our pride, extracts the malignity of
our humor; so as now we give up the sweet morsels of sin that overcharged us,
and pay dear for the stolen pleasures of sin.

SECT. II. Cordials and Comforts against the loss of our goods.
HE^, me thinks, I hear the tender Patient reply; It is not this present
malady and infirmity^ afflicts me so much: this comes by the wise and orderly
guidance of the good hand of God, and is laid upon me for my correction and
amendment, or for trial of my faith and patience, and will (I trust) work for
my good, if I make a sanctified use of Gods visitation there, in my sickness,
I fell into the hands of God, Sam^ 24 14.
whose mercies are great: here I have lost my goods by Plunderers, and am
fallen into the hands of men, into mine enemies hand, whose mercies oftimes are
cruelties. I was but a little displeased with my people (says the Lord) Za^,
1.15.
but they, to wit, the Chaldeans, their enemies, they helped forward^ the
affliction; and so have these sons of violence done. Indeed these be heavy
pressures, and such as require more sovereigne Cordialls.

You complain of want Sect. We want, whose fault is it?
and poverty; but who ha^ caused it? H^d it come through your own negligence
and lasinesse, your unprovidence and unthristinesses, your rash suretiship and
engagements; then you had reason to have borne that burden you had drawn on
your own back; as women that marry husbands of their own choosing against
their friends consent, if they be never so ill used, yet you shall seldom see
them complain, but set a good face on it. Now that others have^ spoiled you,
you may bear your cross more comfortably, as not being accessory thereto; And
yet therein you may diserne, the rod of the Lords anger (as the Assirian is
termed) Isai^ 10 4.
chastising you by their hands, as his instruments; wherein yet you may rather
be grieved at their wrong doing, and ill dealing, then at your own innocent
smart, and suffering.

Thou complainest thou Sect. I. Consider, how little suffices nature.
have lost thy goods; why, but have thou not necessaries left? if so, then it is
the Apostles Charge; having food and raiment, 1. Tim 6. 8.
let us therewith be content: Other things serve for Ornaments, and Trappings
of state; but that is most useful, that nourisheth^ us within, and covers us
without. Nature is content with a small pittance, and Grace with less; they
that have taken the measure of our throat, and other instruments, say, that it
is less then in other Creatures of answerable proportion; Qu^ sunt multa quae
^se non d^! Said Socrates.
to teach us temperance, and to beware of sup^ considering how little suffiseth
Nature. The Countryman expressed his contentment, who coming into a Merchants
Shop furnished with great choice of commodities; Oh, said he, how many things
be here, which I stand no need off? It was Agu^s wish, Prove. 30. 8.
feed me with food convenient for me; and so we have a competent^ livelihood
for our estate and charge; why should we Martha-like, trouble our selves about
many things? As our Savior said in an other case, one thing is needful: Luke
10.41.42.
And if (...) be not so competently ministered to us; it may (happily) be good for
us to be kept short for a time; and that God will make provision for us in the
Mount, Genesis 22. 14.
that is in extremity, when all other means fail us.

David says, Psalm. 37. 25.
he never Sect. II. The godly destitute, not forsaken.
see the righteous forsaken, nor their feed begging bread: Godly men in all
Ages have been put to want; but this poverty of theirs, came not through their
own lewd and wastfull course of Job. 30 1. 3. Psalm. 59.15.
life,^ as it is with diverse lasie and idle beggars, but from Gods visitation:
Christ says, Man 26. 11.
we shall have the poor always with us, that so their poverty might exercise
the rich man^ charity: They have been straightened with penury for the time, but
it was not derived along from the needy Parents to their Children, but it was
ere long supplied either to themselves, or theirs: He might see them destitute,
but not forsaken, not so forsaken, but there were ever some that releived them,
or took compassion on them: And thus the Israelits found favor in the eyes of
the Egyptians, and borrowed Jewels of them; so did Joseph wi^^ the Keeper of
the Prison; Ruth was suffered for her relief to gleane in B^z his field. J^mic
being imprisoned was highly respected by the S^ward of the Kings household,
Ebedmelech the Ae hyopian, as also by Nebuzaredan the Captain of the Guard;
Paul and his Company were kindly entreated by the Barbarians.

The Lord is my Shepherd (says David) Psalm. 23. 1. and 34. 10.
I shall not want: and yet David was an hungered, and wanted bread; when
Abiathar was glad to relieve him with the hollowed bread, (...). Sam 21. 3 4.
which none but the Priest might (...) off, unless (as this was) in case of
necessity and charity, which dispense with Ceremonies: He was thirsty, and
wanted drink when he wished, that one would help him with drink of the water
of the Well of Bethlem; 2 Samuel 23.15.16. 17.
and when he saw it was purchased with the hazard of the lives of three of his
Worthies or Colonels, he would not drink of it, but poured it out as an
Oblation, to testify his thankfulness to God for preserving these men in this
extreme danger. The Lord is our Shepherd, we shall not want, he takes care
of us, and ministers things necessary to u^, albeit we may be pinched for the
present: The Lord has his appointed time of relief; it is seasonable with him
to reach forth his hand, when^ we are brought (as Master Calvin speaks) (h) in
^mas Calvin. (...) Psa. 54. (...)
angustias, to the last cast, then to help at a dead lif^. And if we be stri^
of all, we be b^ as we were, and as we shall be. For, we brought nothing
into the world, 1. (...). 6. 7.
neither shall we carry any thing out: We are but as others have been. Was
not the victorious Osiand. Epi^. Cen. Eccles.
Emperor, Henry the Fourth, who had fought fifty two pitch Fields (at last)
compelled to make suite in his old age, for a poor Prebend, in the Church of
Spyra? And was not Bellisarius Carion-Chron.
(sometime the only man for prowess and honor) driven to that hard exigent,
that having his eyes put out, and being^ led in a string to beg by the high way
side, he cried out to the passengers, Date obulum Be^isario, for God's sake
bestow one half penny on Bellisarius?

Thou art stripped of all, and yet thou live; the Prophet Jeremie Jer.
45.5.(...)
comforts Baruch the Scribe against the public calamities of the time, that
his life should be Save my life and take my goods.
given unto him for a prey; as if he should say: it is not a time for thee now,
in this common danger of all things, to be casting about for any great matters
for thy self; thou may think thy self well dealt with, if (what ever become
of thy outward state) thou escap'st with thy life. If ones house^ be fired, or
plundered, he thinks it well, if he can save a brand, a desk, a trunk, a
Cabinet or his Box of writings: he that is in danger of sh^p-wrack, cast's his
goods away, and is glad if himself come safe to the harbor. History of the
(...) Roman Emperors.
The Emperor Conrade, third of that name, having beseiged Guelphe Duke of
Bavaria, would yield to no milder conditions, but only to suffer such
Gentlewomen as were with the Duke in the City, (their honor's safe) to issue
the town a foot, with such things as they could carry about them: they resolved
(neglecting all other riches, or Jewels) to carry their husbands, children, and
the Duke^ himself on their backs. The Emperor perceiving the queintnesse of
their device, took so great pleasure at it, that he wept for joy, and after
entreated the Duke and his with all favor. Is not the life more excellent than
meat, and the Body more than raiment? Mat. 6 25.


It will not be amiss Sect. III. Consider the worse condition of others.
sometimes to step aside into the homely cottages of our poor neighbors, and
there take an Inventory ('it is soon done) of their mean utensils, course fare,
and hard lodgings, thereby to make us relish our own condition the better: We
are apt to complain of our courser di^t, and thinner meals; and yet the
Prophet Elijah was^ fed by 1 King 17 4.
Ravens, and one bit from their mouth, more pleasing to him than a whole
table-full of Ahab's delicate dishes. Obadiah hid the Prophets of the Lord, by
fifty in a Cave 1 King 18. 4.
, and fed them with bread and water: this was but poor feeding; yet in such a
famine and drought as that was, bread and water was good fare, brown-bread and
the Gospel are good cheer. When the Prophet Elijah was boorded with the widow
of Sar^pta 1 King 17. 12.
, she had not so much as a little Cake baked on the hearth, no bread at all
baked in the Oven, nothing but a little meal in a barrel, and a little oil
in a cruse to entertayne him withal. Daniel Dan. 1. 12. 15.
and^ the captive children were fed with pulse and water, and yet were fatter
and fayrer than those that were di^ted at the Court. We find John Baptist
feeding on Locusts and wild honey, Mat. 3. 4.
such as Bees made ordinarily in woods and clefts of the Rocks; he fed on such
home ly and voluntary diet as that wild place of his abode would afford; a
few barley loaves, Math. 14. 17.
and some little fishes was all the provision was ready for our Saviors train.

Do we complain, that our Lodgings are homely, and unfurnish't? When the good
Shunamite prepared a chamber for the Prophet Elisha; 2 King. 4. 10.
what other furniture^ had it, save a Bed, a Table, a Stool, and a
Candlestick? these were such things as were fit for Study and Rest: the Prophet
is not curious, so things be convenient. When the Sons of the Prophets were
straightened for room, they went to the banks of Jordan, 2 King 6.1. etc.
and took thence every man a beam to build withal: now one of them lets fall
the head of his axe into the River, and makes his moan to Elisha, Alas Master,
for it was borrowed: Elisha causes the Iron to swim like Cork, and move
toward the hand that lost it. Here was a building toward, none of the
curiousest; here is no hyring of any curious^ A^tificers, no procuring of some
costly marble or cedal: every man is to hew, and square and frame his own
b^ame; they are their own Carpenters, and their tools are borrowed M^h. 8. 20.
. The Foxes have holes, the Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not
whereon to lay his head. He does not say, Kings have Palaces, but I have none;
or, rich men have house and land, but I have none. He lays down his Condition
to be below the very (...) of the air, and the meanest beasts upon earth: In
this humbled condition of his, he did not so much as provide a set houseroome
for himself and his family: the stable was his^ Inn, the crach was his bed.
The Disciple is not above his Master. St. Paul says, 1. Cor. 4. 11.
to this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and have no
certain dwelling place.

Do we complain that our attire is mean, our clothing homespun? Elijah 2.
Kin. 1. 8.
was clad with a rough hairy coat (such as the Prophets used to wear) and girt
about with a plain girdle. John Baptist, as he came in the spirit of Elias, so
he resembled him in his Habit: He wore a rough garment of Camels hair, and a
leathern girdle, Matthew. 3. 4.
not as was usual with those of the better sort in those parts, of finer
stuff. If some say his garment was^ Chamblet, they speaken to Dr. Fulks Answer
to the Rh^mists, in Matt. 3.
of fine Chamblet, but of a rough and course cloth, made of the great, and hard
hairs of Camels; not of the fine and soft hairs, called Camels wool, whereof
our Chamblet and Grograines are made. But what ever John's garments were made
off, or how course soever ours be, Freese or Russet, or as it comes off the
sheep back, without further ^ncture or dye; we find that others, perhaps
better deserving then our selves, have wandered in sheeps-skins, goat skins,
being destitute, afflicted and tormented. Hebr. 11. 37.


In a word: If I lie in a poor Cabin: Those ancient Worthies, we read of,^
in the Church-story, they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens,
and Caves Hebr. 11. 38.
of the earth. If I live in a low-thatcht Cottage, the Prophet Jonah. 4. 5.
Jonah had but a Lodge, or a Booth made of boughs, that he sat in. If I have
a hard lodging; Jacobs. was harder, when the earth was his bed, and a stone
Genesis 28. 11.
his pillow. If I want money; so did Peter; silver and gold (says he, Act. 3.
6.
to him that asked him an A^me.) have I none. If I be but a day-labourer, and
put to earne my living with my hands; so was that great Doctor of the Gentiles,
Paul; he was a Tent-maker, Act. 18. 1.
and stitcht up skins for his Tentworke; a Trade which then^ was much in use in
those hot Countries, and by this means he maintained himself. And to speak
of later times, so did that learned writer, Musculus, ^.
who after his worthy service in the Ministry, was feign to get into a Weavers
house, and learn to weave, to get bread for himself and his Family; and after
thrust out of the house by his Master the Weaver, was forced to the common dich
of the Town, and work with his spade to get his living. Why should I look
for Joseph's party-colored coat, or Benjamin's five Messes? When as others of
my brethren, deeper (happily) in Gods books, then my self, have^ been so
homely entertained. What am I that I should speed better then the meanest of
these Patients? What had they done that they should fare worse then I? If I
have little, others have less.

Consider the benefit, that Sect. IIII. Consider the benefit of a flender
condition.
accreweth (by accident, at least) out of a mean state and condition of life;
and it will help to work out our present coffeehouse. It is true, we want
some former conveniences, and accommodation for our dier, lodging, attendance,
and entertainment: But if our allowance be shortened, our retinue must be
reduced. We shall have courser fare, thinner meals, meaner utensils, homelier
attire,^ fewer attendants; but withal we shall have as quiet rest, as found
Sleeps, as safe security, a better appetite, freer merriment, fewer cares and
fears, less danger of distemper by surfeits; we shall not be so deep
charged in the Excise Office, but quietly enjoy such provision as nature, and
honest earnings shall furnish our Table withal. We cry up rich places, and
great purchases; but are not those places attended with cares and emulation,
and those purchases charged with secret encombrances? How often are their
Masters ^eep broken, and their beds disquieted with cares? What toil took we
in getting a little wealth, what care to^ keep it, what fear to lose it, what
grief ^is to part with it? And now we are eased of our burden, full sore
indeed against our will, and yet we complain.

What pains took we Sect. V. The cares that attend on wealth.
to dig into the bowels of the earth? Not as others do, who search there for
minerals, and hidden treasures, to enrich themselves withal; but to hide some
poor utensils, lest others should find them, and spoil us. What fear had we
then, lest somecurious eye should watch, and observe us, lest our own trustee
should betray us, or some casually fall upon our close Reserve? How ready were
we then to sequester our own state, to be^ strangers at our own home, and to
go into a kind of voluntary exile? Me thinks I hear what thoughtfull
consultations we had in those p'undering times. Shall we fly with David 1. Sam
23. 19.
into the Wilderness of Ziph? Why, the Ziphites (of whom David afterward
complains, strangers are risen up against me) Psalm. (...). 3.
they will discover me to Saul, to mine enemy. Shall I ^e beholden to the
futtlety of a woman for my shelter? For, even that weak Sex has of entimes
saved the lives of Gods servants. Shall I go to Rahab, J. (...). 2.6 Hebr. 11.
31.
who hid the Spies, and covered them with the stalks of fl^xe, and is
commended for it? Shall I hide my self on^ her flat-roofed house? I fear the
Terrase and Leads are too open; and exposed to the view of the enemy; the
lumber there, were soon rifled, and remooved, and my self discovered. Shall I
go to the Well of Bahurim, 2. (...). 17. 18. 19.
where that good woman hid the messengers, that carried secret intelligence to
David, of Absolons plot, and Achitophel's counsel? she covered the Well's
mouth, and spread ground corn thereon. The sudden wit of a woman has choked
the mouth of her Well with dried corn, that it might not bewray the Priests
Sons, the messengers. Is not this Well (being in an open Court) too well kowne
to the neighbours^ that repair thither, so as some one false brother or other
may give the searchers some notice of it? May not the corn thereon, and the
covering thereof, serve for provender and provision for themselves and their
horses? The well is uncovered, and I am discovered. I fear this Well is too
shallow to hide me.

Shall I betake me to Michals wile? When David's house was beset with murderers,
Michal 1 Samuel (...).
, to gain time for David's escape, feigned that David was sick, and laid a
statue in his bed, with a pillow of goats hair for his bolster, as if it had
been David's hair, thereby deluding Saules men with hope^ of taking him, till
by this their stay David had time to escape out at a window: this was a queint
device, but who but Michal, Readiness daughter, would have adventured to delude
Readiness Messengers? This wile of hers, would in another have been held a mere
mockage and affront, and have enraged the pursuers: our searchers are not so
tame as to be couzned with a picture or a pillow, Michals wile is not for my
safety. Well yet I remember Rachels device; she was one could hide as close,
and carry the matter as covertly as any of her sex. When Rachel perceived that
Laban made search for his Idols in the Tents, she took the Images^ and put
them in the Camels litter Genesis 31 33. etc
, or furniture, and she sat upon the Idols, and covered them with her coats
pretending for her not rising to her Father, the necessity of her present
condition, (Levit. 15. 19.) according to her sex, that the accustomed
infirmity of women was upon her, and therefore she desired to be excused, so
Laban searched all the tent, but found them not. This of Rachel's was subtle,
but not warrantable. For, first she stole her Fathers Idols, and then she
cloked her thest with a lie; yet this excuse of hers passed; it passed with a
Father, but it would not now be admited; the childbed, the sickbed, the^
grave-bed, all are rifled and ransacked.

I will not balke any means that may make for the preservation of my life and
my state; but I will not rely on any but that of David's, Psalm. 119. 114.
Lord, thou art my hiding place, my refuge and my shield. The Lord has his
close Reserves; he provided a little Zoar for Lots entertainment, the land of
Goshen for his Israelits, an Egypt for Mary and the babe; the town of Pella,
for the Christians that quitted Jerusalem: he has Caves and Rocks for David,
and for Obadiah's hundred Prophets, and a basket for Paul, to let him down the
wall. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence, Psalm. 31.20.
from the pride of man: thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion, from the
strife of tongues: It may be (says the Prophet Zeph. 2.3.
We shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger.

We have heard the complaint Sect. VI. The Security of a small estate.
and troubles of a full estate, look now upon a mean condition, and observe
the better temper thereof; what an advantage is it to be freed of those cares
that fret the owners heart, as a moth does a garment? Arise (says the Prophet)
get ye up into (s) Jerem 49.31.
the wealthy nation, or to a nation without either fear or care, a secure
nation, as it is explaned by the words following, which have neyther^ gates nor
bars, which dwell alone. He means the Kedarens of Arabia, that dwelt without
care in their Tents; without gates or bars. It you came to a man's house that
has neither lock nor key, neither door nor bar, you may well resolve that
he dwells securely and in safety: And if you come to a City that has neither
gates nor bars, you may well say, either this City has no enemies, or else
it fears none: A City without gates or bars, is the emblem of security; and
such is the plundered man's character. He sleeps with his doors open, no
dangers threaten him, no fears break his rest: he starts not^ out of his bed
at midnight, and cries Thieves Thieves; there is none needs give him the
warn-word, the watchword. The Philistims be upon thee Sampson; Sampson the
Philistims be upon thee: He looks the taker in the face, and siniles to think
how he is disappointed of his prey: He is not troubled with hiding his
treasure, nor tortured for discovering of it. He is not served with a writ of
Latitat, but makes his appearance upon any law full summons and occasions: He
fears no rifling or pillaging, for he can carry the choice of his wardrobe on
his back, if any casualty befall his cottage he takes it not to heart, as
knowing that^ a little labor and charges will make him another H^t He is like
the Pine Tree, which (they say) if his bark be pulled off lasts long, else it
rot^: He lives the longer and better for his losses. (...) August. (...). 45.
in (...).
necessit as quae in mel^ra compellit; well fare that want and necessity, which
bettereth a man in the course of piety.

Thou complainest of the Sect. VI. The fickle nature of these carthly goods
sudden and unexpected loss of thy goods; why do but consider the fickle
nature of these earthly commodities, and it will help to allay thy grief.
Riches (as Prove. 23. 5.
Solomon says) have wings, and what use is there of wings but to fly?
Sometimes they fly of themselves, and sometimes they must be set flying^ to
bring in more; and yet cven then, by trusting of ill customers, by the
unfaithfulness of facto, or the unexpected falls of Markets, they may
(happily) come home with their feathers, and train shorter, till they be imped
again. Some have erected a winged Statue in honor of the Lady Victoria,
hoping thereby to have her more favorable and propitious to them; yet fearing
lest she should desert them, and fly into the enemies Camp, they clipped her
wings, to make her reside with them: If we could pini^n the wings of our
riches, and nail them fast down to us, it were something; but We can have no
steadenesse, no^ certainty of them. The Apostle charges us not to trust in
uncertain riches, 1. Tun. 6. 17
in the uncertainety of riches; the very form of money (it is Austin's conceit)
Aug. in Psa. 83.
agrees well with the condition thereof; for it is stamped round, as being
very apt to run from us; we call it current, and our goods, movables. If
riches were certain, how is it that they that trade most for them, are driven
to hazard, and put their goods continually in a venture, Merchant Adventurers?
If riches were certain, what need such Bills and Bonds, and Assurances so
strong as our learned Council, and the wit of man can devise, and all to
secure them? They^ pretend it is because of man's mortality, but they mean many
times, the mortality of his wealth, as well as of himself, and yet if the man
live, there be some will break these bands asunder, as easily as Sampson did
the seven withs, or cords, wherewith he was tied; even in security there is
uncertainty.

There Is a double uncertainety Sect. I. Uncertain ty of riches, their staying
with us.
in riches; their staying with us, and our staying with them; our parting
certain, their stay uncertain. How many men have been driven to an untimely
want, by casualty of fire, inundation of waters, violence of tempests, by
robbery of thieves, negligence of servants, or suretiship for^ friends? By
Pirates and R^vers by Sea, by Robers and Pillagers by Land? By perils from
strangers, and those of their own household? Besides, if there fall an
invasion, or some garboil in the State by foreign, or (as now) by Civil Wane,
then if ever is Job's Simile verified, that Riches are like a Cob-web, Job. 8.
14.
which is to day, and to morrow is swept away; that which a man shall be
weaving all his life long, with great a do and much travel, there comes me a
soldier, a barbarous soldier, a Plunderer, with his broom, and in the
turning of a hand sweeps it clean away. How many good men during these
dangerous times have^ tasted of this incertainty? As it is in a wheel, the
spoke that is now upward, is by and by downward; so comes it to pass, he
that is now rich, shortly becomes poor. Job was yesterday the richest man in
the East, to day he is so needy that he is grown into a Proverb, As poor as
Job: Bellisarius the great and famous commander, to whom Rome owed her life
twice at least, came to Date ^buluns Belisario, one half penny to Belisarius.
How many have gone to bed rich, and risen poor men in the morning?

But be it that they were Sect. II. Uncertain ty of our staying with riches.
certain to tarry with us, yet except we our selves were sure to tarry with
them also, it is as good as nothing. Now^ we are not certain of our selves,
we may have Leases of them for three lives, or one and thirty years, but they
have no Leases of us for three hours. For when the grounds are stocked and
stored, and the barnes full; Hac nocte, Luke 12.20.
if God say but this night, it dasheth all. This night thy Soul shall be
required of thee; and then whose shall those things be which thou have
provided? here is another uncertainty; we may be outed of possession: many (as
the Prophet Habbak. 2.6.
speaks) lade themselves with thick clay, that is, with earthly riches, the
desire whereof is like a burden that overcommeth and smothereth the bearer
alive: but^ as the question is there, How long? this ^ading must be laid down
again, and if the times prove dangerous, we have but a poor fruition and
enjoying of that whereof we Sect. III. It Is uncertain to whom we shall leave
them.
are possessed: Besides there is an uncertainty in the conveighing them, and our
leaving them, by reason of the danger of our childrens scattring of them. Whose
shall those things be which thou have provided? perhaps a strangers, perhaps
some falls Executors, perhaps an Enemies. We may indeed with Zacharias call for
writing tables, and write his name John, but do we not often ^ee that men make
heritages, but God makes Heirs; that many sons roste not that^ their fathers
got in hunting? He heaps up riches, says the Psalm. 39. v. 6. and 49. (...).
Psalmist, and knows not who shall gather them, whether his children or
strangers: I must leave them (says the Preacher Eccl. (...). 18.19.
to the man that shall be after me, to my successor, to the generation
following, I cannot be sure to leave it to one that will use it well: Who
knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool, a good husband or not? The
snow in the Sun never melted faster than some men's riches as soon as
themselves be gone. A moderate portion and provision does well: A great estate
left to an Heir, is as a lure to all the byrds of prey, round about, to seize^
on him, if he be not all the better educated and stablished in years and
judgment.

Besides, these riches, they Sect. VIII Riches, they are not ours, but lent us.
are not ours, but lent us: we may say of them, as the poor man of the
hatchet, Alas Master, it is but borrowed King. 6. 5.
: we have jus adrem not dominium in rem: right to these earthly things, not any
Lordship over them, and but a right of favor, as Tenants at the will of the
Lord, the Proprietarie; and we must be accountable for them, and the greater
our Receipt, the greater will our reckoning be. Bernard says, Sermon. 4. de
advent.
these earthly riches, nec verae, nec vestrae sunt; they are neither true
riches, nor^ yet your own. If they be yours, says Gregory; why do you not
take them with you, when you go? By leaving them behind you to the world, you
confess they are not yours, but the worlds. Indeed they are the riches of this
world, for here you get them, and here you may lose them; here you get them,
and here you must leave them. The very certainty is, losing or leaving, that
is, forgoing them; so the very certainty, is an Uncertainty. ^ 17. 18. 19.
Leave them, or lose them we must: leave them when we dye, or lose them while
we live. You must either leave them when you die, or they will leave you while
you^ live, this is certain: but whether you them, or they you, this is
uncertain. Job tarried himself, his riches went. The rich man's riches (...),
but he himself went, Luke 12. 20. One of these shall be, we know, but which of
them shall be, or when, or how, or how soon it shall be, that we know not,
says that sweet singer of Israel. We have an usual phrase among us, and it is
a very proper one; When a rich man dies, (we say) he left a great estate, he
leaves it indeed, for he cannot carry it with him: he must go out naked, how
well clothed soever he was while he was here. Well then, since these earthly
goods are of so frail and brittle^ consistence, let us according to our
Saviors charge, Much. 6. 20.
lay up for our selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth, (which builds
in another man's possession) and ^ust does corrupt, and where thieves do not
break through and steal.

If we seek for contentment Sect. IX. Labor to be content with a simple
condition, not depending on many things.
(as who does not?) We must not like Martha trouble our heads with many things,
but some few necessaties; and reduce our affections to some short dependances.
It is true we have a body consisting of diverse members, which have need of
several helps and supplies, as air, diet, houses, exercises, recreations; and
we are subject to much weakness, hurts,^ losses, and hindrances: The Sea B.
Hal of Contentation.
best way for our convenience and accommodation, will be to draw out mind into
as narrow a boundary and compass as may be, like thrifty husbands that
cash^ere unprofitable retainers; and not to depend upon many things: But taking
the Lord for the portion of our Inheritance; Psa. 16 5.
Content our selves with a simplicity of condition, not hankering upon this,
and that, and the other changeable object, as if (forsooth) we could not live,
nor subsist without it. As for example; some cannot live without sports and
pleasure, and great means; another is all for a convenient house, and sociable
company; taken any of these from him, you touch him in his freehold, and he is
(as it were) dead in the nest.

Quest.
Why, you will say, may we not use such things?

Answ.
Yes, but with weaned affections, so using them as if we used them not, 1.
Cor. 7. 21.
not abusing them by an inordinate use of them, or by too much doting on them,
and cleaving unto them; not so, as if we were wedded to them. You shall have
some their hearts so glued to them, as they are like to break, if their
friends, estates, or credit fail them, or they be hindered of their pleasures,
and profits. Now he that enjoyes^ these things so, as to set up his rest
thereon, so as he terminates his comfort and contentment therein; such an one
Idolizeth them, and commits a kind of Idolatry with the Creature; in such
sort as St. Paul calls a covetous man an Idolater. Ephesians. (...) (...).
The Idols of the Heathen (says the Psalmist) are gold and silver, so are they
of the covetous man: The one worshippeth the Image of gold and silver in the
Church, the other of the Prince stamped upon his Coin in his chest. And as the
Idolater puts his trust and confidence in his gods; so does the covetous man
in his goods, saying to the wedge of gold, ^.
thou art my hope, and confidence.

Give me now the man Sect. I. The benefit of an Independent condition.
that can sit down with a slenderness of condition, that depends not on many
things, and see how he has taken out St. Paul's Lesson, and can say; I have
learned in whatsoever estate I am, Phil. 4. (...)
therewith to be content, that is, riches or not riches, honor or not honor,
I can be happy with them, and without them: I can live by them, and without
them, I can live without liberty, I can live without friends, I can live
without sports and pleasures, without worldly credit and esteem, without wife
and children, without riches, without convenience of air, Gardens and
Orchyards: Yea, were he put into^ a Country Town far from all suitable
acqu^intance; yea were he shut up in close prison, yet even there he could
walk with God, and do as Paul and Silas, have his heart filled with joy and
peace through believing. And how so? because he fetches comfort from God's
All Sufficiency, so as come what will come, whatsoever condition he is put
into, let him be up and down (like the Spring-weather) sometimes fair,
sometimes foul, he has a bottom of his own to stand upon, he has somewhat
to comfort his heart.

Let our conver^ion (as the Apost. says) Hebr. 23 (...)
be without covetousness, and be^ we content with such things as we have. If
we have teg^menta, covering only for our nakedness, and alimenta, food for
our emptiness, let us therewith be content, albeit we have not ornamenta,
rich attire also for comeliness, and oblectamenta, delicious fare for
daintiness. If we have an easy saddle, what though we want trappings? Rest is
good, though it be between two panyers. Let us neither grudge at the leanness
of our own portion, nor envy at the fatness of another lot. Far be it from
us to deal with God herein, as Hiram did with Solomon. Solomon gave him twenty
Gities in the Land of Galilee, 1. King 9. 11. 13.
but because the^ Country was low and deep (and so in all likelihood more
fruitful for that, we say deep riding, good abiding) they pleased him not:
So as he said to Solomon, what Cities are these thou have given me? And he
called them Cabul, that is to say, displeasing or dirty; or therefore
displeasing, because dirty: Say rather with David, Psalm. 16. 5. 6.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, the lines are fallen unto me in
a pleasant place; yea I have a goodly heritage.

SECT. III. Comforts against Imprisonment.
THou complainest of Sect. I. We are free Prisoners, the mind is at liberty.
want, but it is want of liberty, that troubles thee more. Indeed liberty is a
blessing we prize next to our life; so dear, as many have lost their life, to
purchase their liberty. But be not disheartened with this confinement: The outer
man is restrained; the inner man, See Bp. Hall of the free Prisoner.
the mind, is at liberty: Thou are thine enemies prisoner, and Gods freeman;
thou art barred from the Country^ thou were borne in, not from the Country
thou art borne for, borne to.

Thou art imprisoned, (see Sect. I. The Saints imprisoned.
thou suffer not for thine own fault, but for a good cause) thou art clapped up
within four walls; why thou have worthy Precedents; so was Joseph, Michaiah,
Jeremie, John Baptist, Peter, Paul and Silas, who sang like Nightingales in
their Cages.

What though I be coup^ Sect. II. Imprisonment not strange: we are imprisoned
in the womb, the world, the body, and the grave.
up in prison? Why should that be so strange to me? I was kept close prisoner
nine months together in my mothers womb, when I came into the world, I was
put into a liber a custod a, a wider prison; my soul is now imprisoned in my
body, and^ ere long I look for an habeas corpus to remoove me out of this
place, to the Grave, the Land of darkness, as Job Job. 10 21.
calls it. But God, who has all times in his hand, will in his good time
send me my writ of ease, and give me my liberate, and thereby free both this
body of mine, from these outward prison-walls, my soul from the prison of this
body, and both body and soul from the Romans 8 21.
bondage of corruption, and restore me to the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God. Sect III. Hell a fear full prison, thet's no light, no favor there, no
delivery thence.


There is yet a terrible and fearful prison, whence there is no redemption, no
goaledelivery, without bail or mainprise, but this is our^ comfort, the Lord
has the keys of H^ll, Revel. 1. 18.
so as he has an absolute power over it, to deliver and discharge the penitent
from the fear and danger thereof: He has the keys of death to unlock the
graves, and the keys of Hell, Revel. 20 3.
to lock up the old Dragon, and his crew, into the bottomless pit,

When I was an Embryo in the da^ke Cell of the womb, I was pen't up there as a
close Reserve, and yet there I had a kind and loving keeper, my mother my
midwife, and afterward my nurse: But in that other p^ison, the keeper there is
our 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Adversary the Devil, who walks about, as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he^
may devour. In other prisons men have found some favor and mitigation; Joseph
was put in fetters, Genesis 39.21.
but the Lord was with him, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of
the prison, but never any in that prison. Jeremie was in the dungeon, Jer. 38.7.
yet he had Ebedmelech a Courtier to interceede for him to the King: But there is
none to solicit for the prisoners there, as being extr a statum merendi,
without all capacity of favors, and acts of grace. Acts 12.7.
Peter was put into a dark prison, but the light shoone round about him, his
fetters fell off from him, and the Angel led him forth, and set him free. But
in that other^ prison, there is nothing but utter d^knes, no Angels there, but
such as kept not their first estates, Jude 6.
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the Judgoment of the
great day.

Now then as Jeremie Sect IIII. Pray, we never be delivered (...) that prison.
prayed unto the King Z-dechias, J^r. 37. 20.
that he would not canse him to retu^ne to the house of Jonathan the Scribe
(which was the prison) lest he dyed there. So let us put up our supplications
to the Lord, that he would not send us into that eternal prison to die for
ever.

SECT. IIII. Comforts against Banishment.
THou complainest Sect. I. We are all Pilgr^ns, Heaven is our true home.
that thou art banish'c out of thy Country; why, who is not? We are all of us
Pilgrims and Strangers; 1 Per. 2.11.
our conversation is in Heaven; Philip. 3.20.
Zanchius translates it, our Burges-ship, our society is in Heaven, we look
higher then the earth, we set our affections upon the things that are above;
we carry our selves like fe^low-Citizens of Saints, there we live according
to the^ Laws of Heaven, and here on earth in part enjoyes the privileges of
that heavenly Corporation, the new Jerusalem that is above. It was a gracious
speech of a worthy Divine (d) upon his Dr. Pre^on.
Deathbed that he should change his place, not his company: His conversation
was now beforehand with his God, and his holy Angels, and now he was going to
a more free and full fruition of the Lord of life, in that Region of glory
above. Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, as
St. Paul says: 2 Cor. 5.6.
This is not our true home, we seek for a better country, Hebr. 11.16.
that is, an Heavenly. There is our true^ home, and were we (as it is thought
S^. John was) banish'c into the Isle Patmos, Revel. 1.9.
or the Archipelago, for the word of God, and the Test^mony of Jesus Christ;
even there we should find as ready a passage to Heaven in our addresses to
God, as in our native soil. This Center of earth is equidistant, alike distant
from the glorious circumference of Heaven; as Hierom said of old to his
Paulinus, De Hierosolymis and de Britannia aequaliter patet aul a caelestis,
Heaven is as open in Britain as in Jerusalem.

It is Cyril's observation, Sect. I. The benefit of remooveall.
that Abraham whilst he was in his own Country, had never God appearing to^
him save only to bid him go forth of his Country, Genesis 12. 1.
his Kindred, and his Fathers house; but afterward, when he was gone forth, he
had frequent visions of his Maker. Had Joseph been ever so great, or had such
trust in Potiphar's House, or Pharaoh's Kingdom, if he had not been sold into
Egypt? Had Daniel and his three companions of the captivity ever attained to
that honor in their native Land? Themistocles Plutar. in Themist.
being banished from Athens, grew into great favor with the King of Persia, so
as he was wont to say, my sons, we should have been undone, if we had not
been undone.

Art thou banish'c out of Sect. II. Abraham enjoined to leave his own Country.
thy Country? Why, what other thing has befallen thee then it pleased God to
enjoyne Abraham the father of the faithful? Saying to him, Genesis 12. 1.
get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers
house, to a Land that I will show thee. He must go from the place of his
birth, and wonted abode, but he knows not whether, Hebr. 11.8.9.
to a place he knew not, and to men that knew not him. He must sojourne Genesis
14.13.
in a strange Country, where he is constrained either to buy, or hire, or
borrow both a place for his dwelling, as also a plot of ground, for the bi^iall
of his dead. (...). 23.4. etc.


What though we be Sect. III. We have right in any Country, by Gods title
strangers at home? The Lord can provide us an home amongst strangers. Egypt
the slaughterhouse of Gods people, the furnace of Israel's affliction; has
nevertheless three several times been the Sanctuary and Harbor to preserve
Gods Church, as namely; in Abraham, in Joseph, and in Christ. God oftentimes
makes use of the world for the behoof of his own. The earth is the Lords, and
all places are alike to the wise and ^hfull. God that is every where, the same,
makes all places alike to his.

In a word; am I banished Sect. IV. The ^
from home I meet with many of whom the world^ was not worthy, H^. 11.38.
wand^ing about in sheeps-skins, in goats-skins, in Dasarts, and in mountaios,
and in Dens, and in Caves of the earth. Why am I then discouraged or
disheartened? There has no temptation taken me, 1. Cor 10.13.
but such as is common to man: There Is nothing has befallen me herein, but
what is incident to other men holier then my self; such as usually has been
incident to Gods dearest children; such as may be borne by man in this life,
specially affisted by Gods grace, which is always suffici^nt for his children.
Sect. V. God accompanies his, even in Banishment.


Besides, if I be east upon a foreign Coast, I shall have good company, For he^
has said, Hebr. 13.5. Jos. 1.5.
who cannot fail, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; which though it
were spoken to Joshua, yet it belongs to us: For even particular promises may
be generally applied, specially when the thing promised appertains unto all.

SECT. V. Comforts against public Calamities.
HE^e me thinks I Sect. I. Of the mi series of a Civil war.
hear the tender hearted Patient reply; It is not the want of health, or loss
of goods, restraint^ at home, or exile abroads, or the like personal
grievances, that affect me so much, as the public calamities; to see the
Sword, the Famine, and Pestilence like the three bands, 1. Sam 13.17.
or Companies of the Philistines, ready to wast the land of Israel. My heart
bleeds to see the fearful effects of this Civil War waged in the hands of
our homebred enemies. Many of our dear brethren are stain and fallen by the
sword, their blood has been spilt like water, and their bones have been
seattered, as when one cleaves and cutteth wood upon the earth: what tumbling
of garments, and weltring of the horse and his Rider in^ their mingled blood?
The spoiled cry to us for bread, the sick and wounded for help and healing.
Many Towns have been plundered, many Matrons and Virgins have been ravished,
many Families have been plundered, many Wives and Children deprived of their
Husbands and Parents, left Widows, and fatherless Children Many Parishes
berese of faithful Pastors, and some of our dwellings turned to ashes. What an
unspeakeable misery is it, to heat the sh^ieks and horror of some dying, to
see the gashly rage of others killing To see the streets and fields strewed
with carkases, and the channels running^ with streamos of blood?

Indeed it is just with God, and our sins (personal and national^) did well
deserve it; that our plenty should be turned into want, and famine; our health
into sickness; and our long peace (^he Crown of all these blessings, and the
Envy of the Nations round about us) into the worst and most miserable of all
wars, (for, it is ever a dangerous-fire thar begins in the bedstaw) a Civil
War, a War of Christian against C^ristian, Neighbors against Neighbors,
Brethren against Brethren, a war of Ephraim against Manassch, of Manasseh
against Eph^aim, so as the Lords Judah is endangered. O thou^ of the Lord, how
long will ((...)) Jer. 47 6.
it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self into the scabberd, rest and be still.

The Prophet complains Sect. II. Comfort from the sense and sympathy of
common evils. ((...)) Amos 6. 6.
of Israel's wantonness, that they drank wine in bowls, but were not grieved
for the afflictions of Joseph: They let themselves loose to all intemperance
and carnal pleasures, drinking in measures without measure; and in the mean
time were not sensible of the miserable condition of Gods wrongfully oppressed
servants. It is a dead member that is not sensible of the state of the body:
You do well to be touched with the sense of the common calamities of these
woeful times;^ by this your sympathy, and follow-feeling, you show your self
to be a member of the Church and State wherein you live; we are not whole, and
entire pieces, but as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 12. 26.27.
members in part, members in particular, each one for his part, and in his
place, so as we share, and have community both in commodities and
discommodities. If one member suffer, all the rest suffer with it: If there be
a thorn in the foot, which is the lowest member, the head stoopes, the back
boweth, the eye discovers, the hand searches, and all are set a work to
relieve the engaged part: How much more if the whole body suffer?

It is a rule in Law, Reg. Juris. 29. ab omnibus appro. b^ri debet
Quod on^nes tangit, abomnibus ^ each one must take care of that, wherein all
are alike concerned. We have each of us some (...) of commodities ^ that
common vessel set forth by the Church and State, so as we had need pray for a
(...) gale to bring it (...) to harbor; for if that miscarry, what will become
of our stock, of us passengers? God is pityfull, Jam. 5. 11.
of many bowels, and of tender mercy: now as his bowels are tender, and yea^
toward us, so should his people have rolling and tender bowels toward Him,
his cause, his people, and his Church. A Christian, as he^ must not be proud
flesh, so neither must he be dead flesh, but feeling and sensible, as of his
own sinsulnes, so also of the common malady. Now the fruit of this
sensiblenesse, is earnest prayer to God. Melanchton said well; Si nil curarem,
nilorarem: If I cared for nothing, I would pray for nothing. There be some
that have hard bowels, hide-bound, such as take little care what becoms of
Church or State, sink or swim, so themselves may sleep in a safe skin: but if
the Public suffer either in Church or State, no man's private pleasure, or
profit, can stand firm unto him. And Cicero Lib. (...). ep. 15. ad Attic. Qui
amisia Re publica Piscinas suas fore Salvas Sperare videntur.
had reason enough to laugh at the folly^ of those men, which in his time
seemed to conceive such a windy hope, that their fish ponds, and places of plea
ure, should be safe, when the Commonwealth was lost.

When David would have gone to the field in person, his Worthies dissuaded him
from so doing, saying; the enemy, 2. Sam (...).3.
they care not for us, but thou art worth ten thousand of us, their principal
aim is at thee; they had rather surprise thee our General, then thousands of
us: so may we say; we are all interessed in the public, and should be more
deeply affected, what befalls it, then our own private, as being of more value
and concernment,^ then our particular. He is too wary, that has more care of
himself, then the cause of Christ, the Churches, and his own Country. Old
Eli was sorry to hear the news of Isreal's discomfiture, and his sons death;
but when he heard the report, that the Arc (the Testimony of Gods presence)
was taken by the enemy, this struck 1. Sam 4.17.18.
him dead. His Daughter in law, 1. Sam 4.20. etc.
no sooner heard of that heavy news, but she sell to her travel; and when the
women that stood by her, bid her, fear not, for she had borne a son, she
regarding more the loss of the Arc; the common loss, then rejoicing at her
new^ son, she cal's her child Ichabod, that is, where is the glory? And with
her last breath answers her self: The glory is departed from Israel, the Arc
is taken.

Thou mournest for the Sect. III. Comfort from the justice of Gods proceedings.
common sufferings; Indeed these be woeful and distracted times, and much to be
bemoaned; but as the Prophet says, Lam. 3.39.
wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin?
Why does he complain of Gods hand? He suffers nothing but what he has
brought upon himself by his sin. Man sins, and God proceeds to
punishment; this is an Act of divine Justice; of corrective Justice; and shall
not the^ Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18. 25.
It cannot be denied, that our sins have reached up to Heaven, and called
down these judgments.

For, besides those secret Sect. I. Personal corruptions.
personal corruptions, which are in every one of us, and whereunto every man's
heart is privy; there be many public and national finnes, whereof the people
of this Land are generally guilty; such as are abundantly sufficient ((...)
Gods actions were to be ^^^nned) to justify his dealing toward us, to acquit
and clear him when he is judged. Psalm. 514. ect. II. National fins, common
and peculiar.


(...) For besides the sins, common to us with other Nations, there be some
peculiar^ to us alone, as namely: our wretched unthankfullnesse unto God, for
the long continuance of his Gospel, and our Peace: our long peace bred us to
security, and we grew wanton with plenty: we ran into Riot and excess (the
noted proper sin, of our Nation) and much intemperate abuse of the good
creatures of God in our meats and drinks and disports, and other provisions and
comforts of this life. The people of Israel required meat for their lust, and
the people of England nourish't their lust and appetite for their meat; so as
we became a byword to the neighbor nations for gluttony and belly-cheare.^
And for Novelties, in fashion, in opinion; Athens Acts. 17. 21.
it self was nothing so mad thereon, as our English Nation; witness, our
guises in apparel so many times disguised; the people so Cameleon-like
transfashioned into the Italian, Spanish, French, any foreign form they had
but seen in Countries where they traffiqued or travailed, so as one might
thence conclude, Levity to be, after a sort, our National sin: and for
novelty in opinion it is too palpable, our wantonness and toyishnesse of
understanding, has almost corrupted the simplicity of our Christian Faith; we
have troubled the peace of the Church with a^ thousand nic^ties and novelties,
and unnecessary w^lings in matters of Religion: we pity the former Ages
contending about leavened and unleavened bread, keeping of Easter, fasting on
Sundays, and the like. The future ages will do the like for us, and our
bickerings, about gestures and postures, habits and attyres, rites and
Ceremonies, and the like.

Now to these peculiars, may be added, our carnal confidence and security, in
our wooden and watery walls, our shipping. We were a wealthy and a careless
Nation; our deliverances were great, we dwelt alone without fear of evil,
and were become the envy^ of those that were round about us. Look into the
Church, and there might be (...) many, rather professing the form, then
practicing the power of piety; our cheap and irreverent regard unto God's holy
Ordinances of his Wo^d and Sacram^ and Sabbaths and Ministers, our hearing of
the Word, our partaking of the Sacraments, our praying and invocating God's
sacred name, were become both in Pastor and People, for want of true devotion,
and the inward guidance of the holy-Spirit, but as it were so many outward
fashions, forms, and complements, Walk into the courts of Judicature and
there behold corruption^ by sale of offices and enhancing of fees; by making
the petty penal Statutes like trappes to catch the weaker sort, and the more
weighty and material Laws, like Cobwebs, for the abler and mightier to
break; and pass through at their pleasure. Step aside into our shops and
warehouses, and see (though I confess it is hard to discover that mystery,
and handy-crast) how our trades and traffic were become the practice of
deceit; while we made our gain by lying, and forswearing, by false lights,
false weights, false measures, which are abomination to the Lord. And (to
reckon no more) our Incompassion to our brethren miserably^ wasted with war^e
and famine in other parts of the World, and our heavy oppressions of our
brethren at home, in racking the Rents, and grinding the faces of the poor
Esaias. 3 15
. We were (as the Prophet speaks Jer. 49 31.
a wealthy nation, which dwelt alone; a secure people, as either having no
Enemies, or fearing none: Peace was within our walls, and plenteousnesse within
our Palaces. But when we had caten and were full, and had waxen fat, we rose
up aagainst the Lord our maker, who had done so great things for us; our heart
was lifted up, and we forgot our God, and lightly esteemed the Rock of our
Salvation,^ we loathed the Manna that rained down upon us.

Therefore the Lord has Sect. III. W^tre the malad^e, (...) ^ance the remedy.
recompensed our ways upon our heads, and suffered our destruction to proceed
from our selves; our wickedness does correct us; our backsliding does reprove
us, and our iniquity is become our ruin. The Lord has broken us with a
grievous breach, his anger has divided us, and his fury has dashed us one
against another. The sword is drunk with our blood, and we are numbered to the
slaughter: the high ways are unoccupied, Judge. 5.6.7.
there is not that commerce and intercourse of trading, because men dare not
travel in the high ways for^ fear of enemies and robbers; they forsake the
beaten roads to escape the enemy; the travelers walked through by-ways, or
crooked ways; the inhabiters of the villages ceased, the unwalled Towns lay
wast, because the country people durst not dwell in them, our goods are for a
spoil, and our substance to the robbers. Now in all this, Ezekiel. 18.25.
the way of the Lord, is it not equal? Is there any can tax his actions with
unjustice? nay, are not our ways unequal? Shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord? Jer. 5. 9.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation? Lord, thou have visited us, and
that sharply: say to the destroying sword, It is now euough.^ Let our (m) sword
blades be turned into plow-shares, and our speare-heads into Scithes, and our
helmets into bee-hives. Peace is a Compendium of all prosperity, even the
prosperity of war is called peace. David demands of Uriah, how Joab the
Captain did? In the original it is, 2. Sam (...). 7.
how Joab's (o) Ps. 90. 13.14.15.
peace did? and how the people did, and how the war prospered: As on the
contrary, war is the Master of all misery: the Hebrews they call war Milchama,
from eating, because it devoureth all things. Return, (O Lord) how long? And
let it repent thee concerning thy servants. O satisfy us early with thy mercy;
that we may^ rejoice and be glad all our days. Make us glad according to the
days wherein thou have afflicted us; and the years wherein we have seen
evil. But how shall we either remoove present, or prevent future judgments?
There is no way under Heaven but this, to break off our sins by a seasonable
and serious repentance.

When the body is distempered, and the blood inflamed, the Physician orders
the opening of a vein, and the drawing out some ounces of blood, for the
preservation of the whole: The great Physician of the State has taken the like
course with us; we ran into riot and excess, sin was our^ surseit, and war
is our disease and now here is a deep incisi on made in the maine body and it
lies a bleeding: Ther'^ no way to stanch and stop this issue, but by bewailing
and abandoning our forme^ wickedness, and to diet our selves hereafter by
abstinence from sin, lest otherwise our disease grow desperate.

Thou complainest of these Sect. IIII. Comfort from Gods overruling Providence.
confused and tumultuar^ courses; indeed they ar^ lamentable and distracte^
times: But he that sits i^ Heaven orders these earthly affairs, according to
the eternal counsel of his will: He sits at the stern, and steeres this
tossed vessel of Church and State; and how^ ever the proud billows arise, and
threaten to overturne it, yet he can tack a^out, and serve himself even of
contrary winds, to b^ing it safe to Harbor. God does not put things into a
frame, and then leave them to their own motion, as we do clocks, after we
have once set them right, and ships after we have once built them, commit them
to wind and waves; but as he made all things, and knows all things, so (by a
continued kind of Creation) he preserves all things in their being and working,
and governes them to their ends. There is nothing so high, that is above his
providence, nothing so low that is beneath^ it, nothing so large but is bounded
by it, nothing so consused, but God can order it, nothing so bad, but he can
draw good out of it; nothing so wisely plotted, but God can disappoint it, as
he did Achitophel's counsel, nothing so simply and unpolitiquely carried, but
he can give a prevailing issue unto it.

A notable precedent Sect. I. Gods pro^ence instanced in Joseph, Genesis 37.1. etc.
hereof we have in Joseph. Jacob sends Joseph to Dothan to visit his Brethren,
his Brethren cast him into the Pit, Reuben relieves him, the Ishmaelitish
Merchants buy him, and sell him to Potiphar, his Mistress accuses him, his
Master condemns him, the Butler (after long^ forgetfulness) recommends him,
and Pharaoh exalts him. O what instruments were here! how many hands about
this one poor man of God? How was he passed over from hand to hand, from his
Brethren to the Ishmaelits, and from them to Potiphar? Never a one of them
looking to that end which God had purposed unto him; yet the Lord contrary to
their intention, makes them all wo^ke together for Joseph's advancement in
Egypt. It was not you that ^ent me hither, says Joseph ^eu 45. 8.
to his brethren, but God; ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto
good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people, to^ wit, the
Egyptians, and other people, who in the famine were furnished with corn, by
the store which Joseph's providence had laid up in the years of plenty. Joseph
meant not to clear his brethren from all fault, but to cheer them up in
contemplation of Gods providence, who turned their malice and his misery, into
a means of great mercy. And indeed God is so good, that out of the worst
conspiracies and deeds of the wicked, he can work the greatest welfare; as
from the bloody counsels of Herod, Acts 4. 27.
and Pilate, and many others against our Savior, the salvation of the Elect.
Ephe. (...). 7.
This may minister comfort, and^ confidence against the plots, and attempts of
the wicked; wherein though they mean nothing but mischief, God can by his
omnipotent providence, bring forth quite contrary effects to that they intend;
and as he brings light out of da^knesse, 2. Cor 4. 6.
so he can bring peace out of war, quiet and orderly government out of
confused commotions. Gods goodness overmasters the malignity of men, turning
their evil into good, ex viper a theriacum, triacle out of the viper, and make
a medicine of a poison. He that is so infinitely wife to know the designs of
his enemies before they are, could as well prevent them, that they might^ not
be; but he lets them run on their own courses, that he may fetch glory to
himself out of their wickedness. This cannot but bring strong security to the
soul, to know that in all conditions, and in all variety of changes, and
intercourse of good and bad events, whatsoever befalls us: God and our good
God, has such a disposing hand.

If thou see (says the Sect. II. To depend on Gods Providence.
Preacher) Eccles. 5. 8.
the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment and Justice
in a Province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher than the
highest, regards, and there be higher than they. Stand not as it were at a
bay, in a careful and combersome thoughtfulness,^ as if God did not see and
regard these things below: be not amazed and dismayed, as if all things were
let loose: as if these earthly things were not orderly swayed by a wise and
most provident God, who in his good time will redress these things, and
therefore we must depend upon him: for we are under a providence that is above
our own. That wise Moderatour of all things, that works his will in us, loves
so to do it, as may be least with our foresight and acquaintance, and would
have us fall under his decrees unawares, that we may so much the more adore
the depths of his providence, which we cannot^ Every creature walks blindfold,
only he that dwells in light, sees whither they go.

God is like to a skillful Artisan, who out of a crooked and untoward piece,
can frame an excellent work: he can dispose of things confused and out of
order, and even contrary to their nature turn them to good ends and uses.
Where we cannot t^ace him in the course of his providence, there we ought
with Saint Paul Romans (...). 33.
, to admire and adore him, when we are in heaven, it will be one part of our
happiness, to see the harmony of those things that seem now consused unto us.
All God's dealings will appear beautiful in their due seasons,^ though we
for the present see not the contiguity and linking together of one thing Sect.
V. The Remedy our particular, and general Repen tance.
with another. Thou complaynest of these woeful times, thy Soul (thou say)
mournes in secret, for the common maladies of this distempered State; thou do
well to mourn over such sins as the Land is generally guilty of, but let me
tell thee, have thou not reason so to do? Have thou not put thine hand to the
wickedness of the times? Have thou not carried in some fuel to this common
fire, and cast in thy mite to the common shot? Though others be principal, yet
thou art accessory to the evil thereof. Have thou not either commanded^ it, as
Jezebel did to the Elders of Israel? Advised it, as Jonadab did to Amnon?
Consented to it, as Bathsheba did to David? Soothed it, as Zedekiah did to
Ahab; Furthered it, as Joab did to David? Forborne to dissuade it, as Hirah the
Adullamite to Judah? Not resisted it, as partial Magistrates? Not revealed it,
as treaeherous Confessaries? Thou have not mourned for the corruptions of the
time so feelingly, nor endeavored the refor mation of them to thy power so
faithfully as thour ought, and might have done. Thou shall do well to
begin at home, and to make thine own composition^ and peace with God, for
thy particular offenses, and then to move for an Act of Oblivion, for a
general, a National Pardon; so shall thou put out the brand which thy self
cast in, and help to abate and quench the common slame. Indeed public
humiliations have ever been thought, and so they are, proper remedies against
public Judgments: yet if every man would cleanse his own Front-stead, the
whole City would soon be cleared. Let every one then return to his own heart,
to know there (as Solomon says (...) 8. 38.
his own plague, even the sins wherewith he has grieved God, to be sorry for
them, and^ henceforth with the duty of repentance, and real reformation, with
more precise caution against spiritual Relapses; to betake himself more
frequently to private supplication, and to perform both that and the public
with more sincerity and servency of affection: that so the God of Peace might
be pleased to put an end to these wars.

Quest.
How shall we know when a man is cast down and disquieted, otherwise then is
befitting?

Answ.
There is a threefold miscarriage of inward trouble.

1. When the Soul is troubled for that it should^ not be vexed for, as Ahab, 1
Kin. 21.
when he was crossed in his will for Naboths Vineyard.

II. In the measure and extent, when we trouble our selves (though not without
cause) yet without bounds. Put the case a man be disquicted for sin (for
which not to be disquieted is a sin) yet we may look too much and too long
upon it: for the Soul has a double eye, one to look to sin, another to
look up to God's mercy in Christ. Having two objects to look on, we may
sin in looking too much on the one, with neglect of the other: We should so
mind our grief, as not to forget God's mercy. Saint Paul would have the
Corinthian^ Delinquent, upon his unfayned tokens of Repentance, released of the
censure and received again into the Church, and comforted, lest he be
swallowed 2 Cor. 2.7.
up in the gulf of despair.

III. Thirdly (And this to our present case) there may be a miscarriage in the
ground of our trouble, as when we greive for that which is good, and for that
which we should grieve for; but it is with too much reflecting upon our own
particular.

For instance sake; in these unhappy times, and dismal days, there is great
troubles both in Church and State; three Kingdoms involved in a blody
unnaturall^ war, betwixt those who are brethren by nature, nation, and
profession of Religion; wherein what party soever gains, the Kingdom loses
many loyal subjects, and the Church many Christian professors; which causes
our enemies to insult; our selves and all good Christians to lament, and be
deeply affected herewith. But now if we would deal truly with our own hearts;
what is it indeed that makes us take on so? Is it not because these troubles
hinder the liberties of the flesh, and restrain the pride of life? Is it not
because our liberty is abridged, our ease disquieted, our wealth pared with the
razor of war,^ our attendants reduced, our recreations stopped, and our
visits discontinued? Other things, (the common sufferings) may be pretended,
but it seems it is our private sore that touches us, and if it be so, our
respects are but private, and personal, selferespects. Men are usually grieved
for public miseries from a spirit of self-love only, or specially, because
their own private is imbarqued in the public. There is a depth of deceit of
the heart in this matter.

If our trouble have no higher rise, it is but private and personal, but if we
take to heart the woeful breaches that are made amongst us, for that by these
troubles God^ is dish^noured, the public exercises of Religion hindled, and
the gathering of souls thereby stopped; that heerby, the S^ates and
Commonweal^hs, which should have been harbors of the Church are disturbed,
lawless courses and persons prevail, Religion and Justice is triu^phed over,
and trodden under, this shows that we are men of public spirit.

To discover this selfe-deceit, we may make this home ly trial. If we can be
as hot as tostes in our own private cause and quarrel, and yet as cold as
ice, when most dishonorable indignities and affronts are offered to the Lord,
without our own impeachment: then it is evident,^ that in those cases, where
Gods and the common cause are joined together, our zeal was only for our own
interest, and not for Gods, and the public good. Here was the trial of
Moses his meekness, and his passion. When the people murmured, and when
Korah, Number. 16.
Dathan and Abiram rebelled against him, here was just cause of anger: but here
Gods cause and his own were coupled. Let us therefore mark Moses behavior,
when they were singled. When Miriam and Number. 12. 1. 3.
Aaron spoke against Moses, because of the Ethiopian Woman, whom he had
married; and when they offered him this private injury, it is^ said Moses his
meckenesse was such, that he gave them not a word: inasmuch as he is commended
for the meekest man that was upon the face of the earth. Look now upon him in
another posture When the people had fallen to Idolatry, Ex. 32
and had made a Calfe, and Aaron had his hand therein. Here Gods quarrel was
severed from his own, and how carries he himself here? He spares neither
Aaron, nor the people, but in a godly fit of zeal takes on, and breaks the two
Tables in pieces, being transported with zeal (though for Gods glory) as he
some times spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106. 33.
so he might now do unadvisedly with his^ hands, and so may be a^ example of
man's imperfect sanctity, which has a mixture of divine grace, and humane
weakness even i^ the b^st of Gods children however, he was a meek^ Lamb,
and patient in his own quarrel, and as fierce as a Lion in Gods cause, and
the common cause of salvation. In the Lords service we should be common men as
well as private.

In a word, we complain of these woeful times, that we are the worse for
them: but may not the times complain of us? Let us take heed we be not a part
of the misery of the times, that they be not the worse for us.

SECT. VI. Of means to work us to Patience under the Cross.
WE have seen what fruit the Cross bears; our next care must be with Simon
of Cyrene to bear it patiently, when we are put to it: For if we be impatient
in word, or behavior, we shall afflict our selves the more, like the bird
caught in the net, the more she struggles, the more she is entangled.

Thou complainest that S^ct.I. Comforts from the greater suff^rings of holier
men.
thy malady increases; I bemoane thy case, and wish I could give health and
ease, as well as advice. We cry out, my body is troubled, my state is broken,
my friends fail me; but all this while, there is not that care for the poor
soul to settle that in peace. See that all be well within, and then all
troubles from without, cannot much annoy us. Besides, holier men have suffered
more. The Lord measures out affliction according to the ability 1. Cor 10. 13.
of his children. Now our strength when it is at the best, is far inferior
to the strength of Job, David, or Abraham; and the efore we must ^ trialls^ and
troubles are far shore of theirs. The Lord, lest any should be discouraged, or
faint under the weight of the Cross, has sampled out the sufferings of his
Saints, men of our own mould, and subject to the like infirmities that we
are, that have gone before us in the hardest duties of affliction. What duty so
harsh to flesh and blood, as to take up the Cross, and follow Christ? What
Cross can be named, which they have not borne, and comfortably endured to the
end? It is hard, you will say, to part with our goods; yet there have been
they that have taken joyfully, the spoiling of their goods; Hebr. 10. 34.
not that the loss of their goods,^ was of it self, and its own nature
joyful to them; but they were so far from being dejected, and disheartened
with the afflictions they suffered for Christ, as they accounted them matter,
or occasion of joy; and why? Both because they were counted worthy to suffer
for the name of Christ; Act. 5. 41.
as also because of the blessed fruit Heb. 12. 11.
and issue of their affliction. Tribulation (as the Apostle says) Romans 5. 3.
works patience. Tribulation accustometh us to patience, and patience assures
us by experience of Gods merciful sustentation and aid; and this experience
of Gods goodness, puts us in hope of his further mercy, and seasonable^
deliverance: besides this experience under the Cross, it confirms and fastens
this our Anchor-hope, and this hope deceives us not, it disappointeth us not,
it being grounded on the love of Christ, shed abroad in our hearts. Tribulation
then works patience, not, that of it self, and its own nature it works
so; for it often produces contrary Job 3. 1. etc. Ps. 73. 12. Jer. 12. 1.
effects both in the wicked, and the godly, as in Job, David, and Jeremie; but
it does so, when God gives us a sanctified use of Crosses, conforming Romans
(...) 8. 28.
us thereby to our Head Christ Jesus.

It goes had to exchange hoped of advancement for rebukes, Heb^. 11. 16.
and reproaches;^ and yet Moses chused it willingly, and counted it an honor to
him: Moses was jeered for marrying the Ethiopian woman, Joseph was nicknamed
a Dreamer in scorn: This is the manner of ill minded men to set terms of
reproach upon the religious; so Christ was called a Galilean by Julian; the
Apostle Paul a babbler Acts 17. 18.
by profane Philosophers. This Age abounds with such abusive appellations cast
upon the best Christians, by such as are of an Heretical Religion, or of no
Religion at all, the practice of this kind of contumely is ancient, and the
patience under it as ancient; which may make us both to look for it,^ and make
light of it.

It Is too much to leave Country and kindred and Fathers house, and yet Abraham
did so. It Is hardest of all to leave our sweet life, especially by violent
torments: what death can we think so full of shame and torture, but it has
been endured H^er. 11. 37.
by the Saints of God? by the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs: some of them
have been put on gridirons, others in boiling Cauldrons, some on the spits,
others under the sawes, some in the flames, others crushed with the teeth of
wild Beasts, some on the racks, others in fiery furnaces, most of them in such
torments, as in comparison whereof, our^ pains are but flea-bitings. We do
but taste and sip of that cup of affliction which Christ and his Saints dra^ke
sheere off, as appears by the Churches story, the Martyrologies, the Acts and
Monuments of the Saints. Why then do we grudge to wet our fee^e, where they
waded over the foord, even a red Sea of blood? We should look to others as
good as our selves (as well as to our selves) and then we shall see it is not
our own case only: who are we that we should look for an exempted condition
from those troubles which God's dearest children are addicted unto?

Comparison to this end is^ very availeable. Compare Sect. I^ O^r Sus^ings
shorc of our deserts.
we our sufferings for Christ, with his sufferings Hebr. 12. 2.
^or us: Compare we our momentany afflictions of this life, with the endless
torments of hell endured by others, and deserved by our sins, from which by
those, as means, we are freed (for we are chastened of the Lord 1 Cor. 11. 32.
, that we should not be condemned with the world.) We are mercifully
chastened by the Lord, on purpose that we may escape that eternal condemnation
which befalls the wicked of the world, and we shall find that there is no
proportion betwixt our sufferings and our deserts. Alas the wages of every
sin is Death, a double death; of the^ body, and of the soul; both temporal
and eternal: Any thing the Lord sends below this, is mercy. We must not ^ke
so much at what we ^ele, (...) what we have deserved to seele. What ever our
crosses are, or may be, justly we are in them, our sins have deserved that,
and more, so that we are to beaer Gods chastisement willingly, si^h we have so
sinned against him. I will bear the indignation of the Lord with patience and
humility, because I have sinned against him, says the Prophet Micah Mich. 7. 9.
.

Compare we our sufferings Sect. III. Our sufferings inferior to our glory.
with our glory that shall be revealed: our suffering is but for a moment, our
reward shall be great and glorious^ far above the proportion of all our
service, or suffering for our light affliction, 2 ^or. 4. 17.
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. The afflictions of the godly are not light in themselves, but
Comparatively, to the infinite and eternal weight of heavenly glory, which our
affliction works for us, not by any merit of ours, but out of Gods mere
grace and mercy for Christ his sake. Romans 8. 17. 18. or, they be called Light,
because God makes them seem light unto us by the strong support and comfort
of his Spirit, Rom.8.37. I reckon (says Saint Paul Rom; 8.18.
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us: word for word it is, the sufferings
of this now season, whereby the Apostle intimates, that our tribulations and
afflictions last but for a (...), that is a moment, in comparison. S^. Paul
cal^s the afflictions of this life light, and but for a moment: Our sufferings,
our sorrow shall have an end, ^aec non d^rabunt atatem, as A^hanasius said of
his troubles: For his anger endures but a moment Psalm. 30. 5. Isai. 54.7. 8.
, his corrections last but a while, but his favor lasts all out life long, our
joy shall have no end. St. Bernard Bern. Sermon 14 (...) Cantic^
computing the time^ of his own assl^ction, and the Saints, reduces it to an
hours space or thereabouts, Opus meum vix unius est horae, and siplus, prae
amore non sentio; my work and labor is but an hours task: if it be more, I
am scarce sensible thereof, by reason of the love I bear to my Savior, who
has suffered so much for me. How graciously has the wisdom of our God
thought fit to temper our afflictions, so contriving them, that if they be
sharp, they are not long: if they be long, they are not over sharp? What a
short moment is it that we can suffer? Yet a little while, and He that shall
come will come, and will not tarry Hebr 10.37.
. Let us wait a^ while, and we shall see the salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14.
13. Sect. IV. Look on cur Comfort, as well as our Cor^asive.


In all our grievances (says an excellent Divine, Dr. Sibbs of the Souls
Conflict. page 171. 173.
let us look to somewhat that may comfort us, as well as discourage us. Look
to that we enjoy, as well as that we want. God usually makes up that with some
advantage in another kind, wherein we are inferior to others. Others are in
greater place, so they are in greater danger. Others be richer, so their cares
and snares be greater: the poor in the world, (as St. James says J^m. (...)
(...).
may be richer in faith then they. Others are not so afflicted as we; why
then they have less experience of Gods gracious power^ than we. Others may
have more healthy bodies, but souls less weaned from the world. We would not
have Nabals wealth, not Hamans preferment, nor change conditions with them, so
as to have their spirits with their condition. For one half of our lives, the
meanest are as happy and free from cares, as the greatest Monarch: that is,
whilst both sleep; and usually the sleep of the one, is sweeter than the
sleep of the other. What is all that the earth can afford us, if God deny
health? And this a man in the meanest condition may enjoy. That wherein one man
differs from another, is but Title, and but for a little time: death levelleth
all.

We have compared our Sect. V. Compare our selves afflicted, with our selves
at ease.
selves with others: compare we now our selves with our selves: our selves
afflicted, with our selves at ease: how languishing in devotion, how
inordinately walking, how secure and forgetful of our God, did prosperity make
us? Before I was afflicted, I went astray, Psalm. 119. 67.
I was a waive and stray, but now have I kept thy word, the use of Gods rods is
to bring us home. To be afflicted, and not to be purged by it, to be stricken
with Gods rod, and not to be thereby corrected and amended, is an ill token. I
will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried,
says the Lord:^ Zach. 13. 9.
Now if the wicked be not plucked away, as the Prophet speaks, Jer 6. 29.30.
that is, if our wickedness be so tough that it will not be wrought out of us
in the Crucible of affliction, then it is a plain token, that we are but base
metal, drossie matter, and refuse silver: the bellows are burnt, the Founder
melts in vain; that is, all the pains and labor that has been taken about
refining of us, is lost. Fire makes mettalls pliable and malleable, so doe^h
the sanctified use of affliction: it works the heart to be pliable and ready
for all good impressions of holicos and obedience.

If we look into the Diary, Sect. VI. Our good days more then our evil
days.
or Journall book of Gods dealing with us from our youth up to this present
time; we shall find, he has sent us more fair Halcionian Halcion is a sea
fowl betokening a calm sea^on whiles ^he hatcheth her young. Isidor. Etim. l.
12. c. 7.
days, than foul weather. There is scarce any man, but the good he receives
from God, is more than the ill he feels, if our unthankefull hearts would
suffer us to think so. Is not our health more then our sickness? Do we not
enjoy more then we want, I mean, of the things that are necessary? are not
our good days more then our evil? Joseph was a precedent of affliction,
insomuch as the Prophet gives instance in him, Amos, 6.6.
they were not grieved for the afflictions^ of Joseph; yet the years of his
affliction were but about thirteen, the years of his honorable preeminence
and principality fourscore: So the Lord blessed the later end of Job Job 42.
^2.
more then his beginning: God made him twice so rich in cattle, as he was
before, and gave him as many children, as he had taken from him, which may
cheer up the hearts of the godly, though for a season they suffer under the
prevailing power, and spite of the ungodly; for they may assure themselves
that God (if they suffer not as evil doers) will do them right, and make them
a full amends for all their wrongs. But we would^ have a velvet Gospel, we
would go to Heaven upon Roses; and usually one cross is more taken to heart,
then an hundred blessings. So unkindly we deal with God. Is God indebted to
us, does he owe us any thing? Shall the River be beholding to him that drinks
of it, because he comes and quenches his thirst? Or shall the Sun be beholding
to him that has the use of his light? Those that deserve nothing, Sect. VII.
Of patience in suffering.
should be content with any thing.

Object.
Alas, I shall never get through such a Cross.

Answ.
But if God bring us into the Cross, he will be with us in the Cross, and at
length bring us out more refined. We shall lose nothing but dross: of our
own strength we cannot bear the least trouble, and by the spirits assistance
we can bear the greatest; the spirit will join his shoulders to help to
bear our infirmities. The Lord will put his hand to heave us up; he will
uphold Psalm. 37. 24.
us with his hand.

Object.
We have prayed for Peace and Prosperity, for Health and Deliverance; and yet
the scre runs and cease not; the sword is not sheathed; we are still exposed
to dangers, and threatened with Famine and cleanness of teeth; we are like to^
Issacha^'s Tribe, couching under two burdens: Genesis 49. 14.
we undergo the heavy burdens of Cesses, and Taxes, and other oppressions.

Answ.
In the midst of these unsupportable Sect. VIII God exchanges his blessings: he
denies us wealth, peace, and deliverance, and gives us contentment, patience,
and supportation.
pressures, it is our comfort, that God will grant us, either what we pray for,
or what he in more wisdom, sees more expedient for us, if we faint not. The
Lord sometimes in bestowing his blessings at our request, deals by way of
exchange, and commutation; and it is well for us, for hereby he makes us, if not
gainers, yet savers by the bargain.

Does the Lord deny wealth, and the peaceable possession of that stock and
store, he has bestowed on us? It is well for us, if he give us contentment.
For godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has.

Does he deny us deliverance from dangers? It Is well if he give us
supportation; if he give us grace to support, and bear up, like the
Palm Tree, against the weighty pressures of these times; if he support us by
grace, his grace is sufficient for us.

Does he deny us Peace? It Is well if he give us Patience, that how-ever we
cannot keep our goods with others^ patience, yet we may possess our own
souls in patience, Luke 21. 19.

Object.
Yea, but we lie long under the Cross, and cry out, how long Lord? How long?
Seven years is a man's age, a long time.

Answ.
Comfort thy self with Sect. IX. We must be fitted for mercy, and then find it.
this, it shall lie no longer on thee then there is need, the plaster shall
not lie a jot longer on thee then the sore is a healing; if it were sooner
heased, it (...) fall off sooner, but then (...) (...) fall off alone. The Lord
will^ hear thee, but it may be, thou art not yet fit for the mercy; not
because he does not hear thy prayer, and tender thee in that case thou art in,
but thou art not yet fit. Herein God deals with us as the Physician with his
Patient; The Patient earnestly desires such and such things; the Physician
wants not will to give them him, but he resolves to give them as soon as he is
fit; and therefore he makes him stay till he have purged him, and made him fit
for it, till he be fit for such a Cordial, for such a Medicine. God hears the
complaints of this our distressed Church and State: it may be, God stays us
for this end; we are not yet^ (happily) in that capacity of mercy, as is fit.
Twice was the Israelits, the better part foiled by the men of Benjamin, the
less in number, and such as had the worse cause. The Israelits, Jud. 20
23.26.30.
they wept, and fasted once or twice, and adventured upon the Benjamits, but
prevailed not till the third time: They were fitted and prepared when they
fasted, and wept, and prayed three times. It Is to be feared we are not yet fit,
there is somewhat more that must be done; we are not yet humbled enough. Some
Colts are so untamed, they must needs be broken; so some corruptions are so
unruly? that they will not be^ wrought out without great afflictions.

We shall have need of Sect. X. The use of Patience and the need of it.
Patience, as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.6.
to endure these penal and painful evils. Fulgentius, a godly Father, was
often diverse days before his (H) sURIUS IN VIL^ Fulgent
death, heard to cry out; Domine da mihi modo patientiam, and postea
indulgentiam: Lord grant me patience here and case hereafter. Lord give us
patience to bear, and constancy to endure, whatsoever it shall please thee to
inflict. And since this evil of pain, this painful evil, must come here,
or elsewhere, say we with S. Austin, Domine hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum
parcas: Lord fear us, lance us here, let us smart here, so thou spare us
hereafter.

And, yet since we must suffer (for our sins have so deserved) it is our
comfort, that we are under the protection of the highest, and guided by such a
providence as stoupeth to the lowest, and wisely disposes of whatsoever can
befall us. Let us then lay our hands upon our mouths, and command our souls
an holy silence, not daring to yield to the least rising of our hearts against
God. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it, says David.
Psalm, 39.9.
That which I^ could not attain to by reason, while I looked on the second
causes, now I have obtained by grace, looking up to thee, now I keep silence.
Thus Aaron when he had lost his two sons, both at once, and that by fire, and
by fire from Heaven, which carried an evidence of Gods great displeasure with
it, yet held his peace. Levit 10.1.2.
In this silence and hope is our strength: Flesh and blood is proane to
expostulate with God, and to question his dealing as Gedeon Judge. 6.13.
did; If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us But after some
struggling between the flesh and the spirit, the conclusion will be,^ yet
howsoever matters go, God is good to Israel. Psalm. 73.1.
Truly God is good to Israel, says David; though God may seem to favor bad
men, because they prosper; De operibus Dei non est judicandum ante Actum
Quintum. (...)
and to hate good men, because they are crossed; yet he assures himself, that
God in the end would bless the godly, and such as were not hypocrites. Hold
out faith and patience then, and our work will speedily be at an end; and, we
shall receive the end of our faith, 1 Pet. 1.9.
even the salvation of our souls; and through faith and patience Hebr. 6.12.
inherit the promise; If we strive but a little we shall be happy for ever.

Here it will (happily) be expected that I should go on, to make up other
Cordials Jos. Hall. D.D. and B. N.
for several maladies, but this is done to my hand by a rare Confectioner, in
his Balm of Gilead, to whose storehouse I refer the Patient.

SECT. VII. Directions for the recovered Patient.
When thou Sect. I. Be thankful after recovery.
art cased of the Cross, be thankful for thy recovery, be not like the
unthankful Lepers Luke 17.17.18.
, or Pharaoh's cup bearer Genesis 10. 23.
, who admired Joseph in the jayle, but forgot him in the Court. Forget not God
in thine health and prosperity, whom thou pliedst with suites and promises in
thine adversity; even the wicked can be somwhat^ good whiles they are under the
cross, and with Ahab hang down the head like a bul-rush, and be humbled: but
take them off the rack, case their pain, and they run to their old Byas
again: these are like Iron, which is soft, and will bow, as the workman will,
when it is in the fire, but soon after it is drawn out, it returns to the old
hardness, like hoggs that seldom look toward heaven, but when they are cast
to ground, and overturned, which if they be let go, they begin to pore on the
ground, and root in the earth.

Try thy self, how the Cross has wrought with Sect. II. See whether
affliction have bettered thee.
thee, whether it has bettered thee or no. Thou call it a visitation, a
correction, how is it so, if thou be not corrected by it? If the mettle be
put into the furnace and not refined, it is but refuse. If after thou have been
humbled under God's hand, thou grow more faithful and Conscionable in thy
calling than before, it is a good token; this is like Triacle out of the Viper,
and with Sampson to taste sweet honey out of the sour carcass of a dead Lion
Judge. (...).
, now that thou art recovered, and the Lord added to thy days,^ as he did to
Ezekiah Esaias 38. 5.
, do thou add Repentance and Amendment of life to thy days: as the Lord has
made thee young and lusty like an Eagle Psalm. 103. 5.
, renewing thy youth and strength like an Eagles beak: do thou likewise renew
thy Repentance, and pay Eccles. 5. 3.
that now in thy health, which thou vowedst on thy sickbed, to wit newness of
life. Sin no more John 5. 14.
lest a worse thing come to thee, to wit death, natural or spiritual. Return
not with the Dog to his vomit 2 Pet. z 20. 22.
, or the Hog that was washed, to wallow in the puddle of thy former
uncleanness. Fall not to thine old diet, lest thou fall to^ thine old disease;
beware of a down-cast, and be more precisely cautionate against spiritual
Relapses.

Take heed of a Relapse, Sect. III. Talre heed of reiapses, they are dangerous.
Relapses are dangerous; when I fell sick, it was some comfort to me, that I
was but in the common condition of mankind; now in my relapse, I am barred
hereof. I charge the fault (and that juftly) upon mine own self, mine own
carelessness and disorder; I have pulled down a falling house on mine own
head; I have marred, what Physicians and friends under God, had amended. At the
first grudging of my^ malady, I had some strength and resisted it, now it
falls upon me, like an enemy, that finding the country weakened and
depopulated, over runs it; the Relapse proceeds without control, now that my
body is weakened, my spirits wasted and my forces spent. If Satan be outed of
possession, we must be watchful, lest he make a Re-entry, he has been our
old guest, and knows every hole and corner in the house. It is this
reiterating, this redoubling of the crime, which the Lord takes so ill. How often
did they psa^ 78.40.
provoke me? How often did they grieve me? Lord, by too lamentable experience,^
we find, how prone we are to recidivate and relapse, how hard it is to leave
an ill custom. Lord if we should (which God forbid) yet let not thy spirit of
remorse and compunction depart from us. Thou that have commanded us to pardon
our trespassing Brother seaventy seven times Math. 38.22,
, that is many times, have not limited thy self to any number, yet far be
it from us, to work upon thy forbearance, and long sufferings. The bone that
is once or twice broken may be set together again^, but (happily) not so
straight; or if it be, yet it will afterward ache and pain a man at certaine^
seasons; a skarre still remains after the wound be healed.

Jacob wrestled with an Sect. IIII. Strive for a blessing, Prayer will get it.
Angel, and had his thigh put out of joint, Genesis 32 25.26.
yet would he not let the Angel go, except he blessed him, he lost a joint,
and won a blessing. Though by his hurt in his thigh, he was made more weak,
yet was he strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. so strong, as to wrestle again for a
blessing. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, Calar. 6. 12. that is, not
against these alone; nor chiefly against these; for our principal enemy is
Satan, who sets the world, and the men of this world,^ Psalm. 17. 14. and the
flesh against us; and they serve, as it were under his banner; we grapple also
with pressures and afflictions, private and public, inward and outward; and
in all these conflicts we receive some venies to humble us, and we feel the
smart thereof, so as it makes us go halting to Canaan. Yet, as the Prophet
says, Hos. 12.4.
Jacob had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept, and made supplication
unto him; he prevailed by a most vehement wrestling with weeping and
supplication, that is the sovereigne Receipt to procure a blessing. The power of
prayer is next to Almighty, and^ by this sometimes are the hands of the
Almighty as it were bound to peace, when he has a quarrel with his people.
Moses after a sort forces the Lord, insomuch that he craves dimission, let me
alone, Exodus 32.10. Deuteronomy. 9. 14.
that I may consume them, let me alone; Domine quis te ligavit? Says a Father,
Greg. l. 2. moral. c. 12.
Lord who stays thee? Surely Moses his instance and importunity. There Is no way
for us to prevail with that Angel of the Covenant, as the Prophet Mal. 3.1.
calls him, but by an holy striving Rom, 15 30.
with God by im portunity of prayer, for a blessing upon our Church and State;
that the God of Peace would be pleased to^ put an end to these our unhappy
Wars, and to settle Peace and Truth amongst us; and to deliver us from every
evil work, 2 Timothy 4. 18.
and preserve us to his Heavenly Kingdom; whither, God the Father, who
prepared it, and God the Son, who purchased it for us, and the Holy Ghost, that
gives the livery and seisin vouchsafe to bring us in his good and appointed
time. Amen.

Amen.
FINIS.

