THE Penitent Bandito: Or the HISTORY Of the Conversion and Death of the most
Illustrious Lord Signor Troilo Sauelli, a Baron of Rome.

The second Edition more correct.

By Sir T. M. Knight.

Matthew. 20.16. Sic erunt novissimi primi.

MDCLXIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE History following has been translated into diverse languages, though not at
all into ours, nor yet so carefully, into others, out of the true Original
Italian, as I could have wished. The differences between the Copies, which walk
up and down the world, are not great; saving that when there is question of
truth; and that, concerning a noble subject; and the same, accompanied with
variety of natural, and lively circumstances, I cannot find in my heart, to let
any difference go for small. I have therefore, at once, taken both pains, and
pleasure, to draw store of Copies into my hand, and it has not been without
success. For, if I have not laid hold upon the very Original, which was
written by the Relator himself; I dare say, I am grown very near it, and that
it is precisely true. And this Elogium I will be bold to give the Discourse we
have in hand that it has been read in several Countries with extreme avidity.
Nay, perhaps there has not issued, in many of these last Ages, any one
historical Relation of a particular accident, the consideration whereof, has
more often been attended by tears, then this.

The birth, person, and parts of this Noble Man.
The Person whom it concerns was a Baron of Rome, Sig. Troile Sauelli, a branch,
sprung up from a root of as noble blood, as a most certain extraction from the
ancient Romans, could tell how to make it. His person, and the parts of his
generous mind, are best described in the History it self, so that, I will not
here, by putting you to pains, prevent the pleasure which there you will have
to overtake them. The cause for which he suffered, is not specified there at
all; because his ghostly Father was the penner of this Narration; and it became
not him, who was the others Judge in foro Conscientiae, to become his Accuser,
in foro Curiae. For, though his crimes were extant then, and are so still upon
Record; and that the Penitent did besides (for his own greater confusion, and
the exaltation of the invincible Patience, and Mercy of Almighty God) give his
Ghostly Father express leave, to declare his sins to the whole world; the
Father yet, would by no means accept of that liberty; but speaking only, in
general, words, of sin at large; he The inviolable seal of the Sacrament of
Confession; and how tender a good Ghostly Father, is, and ought to be.
buries the particulars in profound silence, and under the seal of Confession,
for reverence of that holy Sacrament, which must never upon any terms be
defaced.

But I, who am free, will not consent to have my hands tied up; but think it
fit to let you know, that though his years were few, his crimes were great, and
many; as still appears upon the Record of his Process. And between the
sixteenth, and eighteenth years of his age, (till the former of which times,
his vigilant, and holy Mother, was able to keep him in the disciplin^ of piety,
and virtue) h^ sprouted out into great exorbitances; and, in the Company, and
at the head of the These are men who for murders, and other extreme
insolences use to be banished and proscribed. They were wont in Italy, to go
in great troops up and down, and to infest the passages.
Banditi, he committed both Rapes and Murders (...) with a most tempestuous
(...) and transported mind. Omnis inimica amicitia, seducti^mentis
investigabilis. He did too early cast himself into the hands of flatterers, and
wicked followers; and they made the way of sin so smooth to him, that he could
not hold from sliding through it. Nor was his tender youth so innocent, o^ his
education so excellent but that the moath, and canker of lewd company, did soon
corrode it.

Yet even herein was not his misery so great, as the It is proper to God alone,
to draw good out of evil.
mercy of God, upon this occasion was infinite. His crimes were not known, but
by such alone, as would not easily adventure to draw upon themselves, the
displeasure of so great a House as his, by detecting them. The manner only of
his life, in respect of excess, and riot, was such, in the exterior, as
wounded his noble and tender Mother to the very soul. The passages and
proceedings whereof, are delivered in the History it self, with so great
tenderness, in the person of her son, as strikes the heart of him that reads
the words. I will not therefore touch that flower, for fear of striking off the
dew, every drop whereof is a pearl. One circumstance only, which is not
mentioned there, I will here express, because it will not fail to serve,
toward the increase of compassion, in all their minds, who read this story.

You A circumstance of great importance, toward the moving of compassion.
shall therefore understand, that when the Mother had used all other possible
endeavors, both divine and humane, for the reduction, and reformation of her
son, and all in vain (for ought she was able to perceive) she caused him, for
some offenses (which yet, were far from being Capital) to be committed to
Castle This is the chief prison in Rome, as the Tower in London.
S. Angelo, in hope that such a disgrace, with the help of time, would make him
return into himself. To this course she was the more encouraged, and in this
hope the more confirmd because by this restraint, he might be cut off from that
all company, which was the very pest, and poison of his soul. But see, and
wonder at Gods providence.

He Any little entrance into Public disgrace carries danger with it.
was no sooner in prison, but the fire of eager opposition brake forth of their
hearts; whom, by his other more enormous insolences, he had offended; for till
then, it had been smoother'd under the ashes of that respect, and reverence,
which they carried toward the Dignity, and Nobility of his House. But now
public Justice taking notice of his excesses, and Pope Clement the eight, in
the beginning of his Pontificate, being desirous to show a strong example, of
what impartial Justice the world was to expect at his hands; (especially in
repressing and extinguishing that damnd crew of Banditi, who were so pernicious
to the state of Italy, and of whom this young Lord was grown a leader) did
suffer the Law to pass on his person (for his Estate was not confiscated, but
went to his heirs, in blood). Being even yet therein, more just than Clement;
though perhaps he would have been more Clement in pardoning than just in
punishing, if he could, by way of anticipation, have seen the beauty and
bravery of that noble spirit, which deserved to live as long as a world can do,
as a pattern of a mind most rarely compounded, between perfect Christian piety,
and undanted incomparable magnanimity.

But whilst the This Lady died in the year 16^1. and was buried on the 21. of
October. in the Theatines Church at St. Andrea della valle; where she erected ten
M^sses to be said every day, for ever. She was of the house of the Dukes of
Cesi, and Sister to the Marquess of Riano: Her name was la Signora Plaminia.
Mother and Son are both resting now in peace and glory, as we may piously
believe, I know not how, in this particular, to be silent, concerning the
powerful, and wise, and infinitely good The providence of God, deserves to be
deeply pondered, in this particular.
providence of Almighty God, toward both these servants of his. For, by the
way of the The Cross is the high way to heaven.
Cross, he brought the son, in a few moments of time, to have a Soul in state
of great perfection; and he gave him, in the last hours of his life, that most
happy kind of Purgatory, wherein he might not only suffer, in satisfaction of
the divine Justice, but pass on by merits, (all grounded upon the mercy of
Jesus Christ our No action of man is meritorious, but by the merits and first
mercy of Jesus Christ.
Lord (as all merits are) toward instant, and eternal felicity.

And this he did, by as contrary means, as in the Gospel he cured a certain
Blind man, by The omnipotency of God, is not tied to means, but works his will,
how he pleases.
casting dirt upon his eyes. For here he used the most indulgent tender care of
the Mother, who loved that Son, as her own soul, toward the bringing that
about, which was indeed, to make him happy in the end; but in the mean time,
was the occasion of his sudden, and reproachful death, whereby her very heart
was to be broken. Taking him, so from her sight, that thereby she might enjoy a
glorious sight of him for ever; and dep^^ving her of all human comforts (which
(for as much as concerned her) were abridged, and locked up in him alone) that
so she might, with contempt of the world, send her whole heart up to heaven,
whither now her treasure was gone before; and so be rewarded, for that tender
and entire care, which she had taken, for his pious education.

It matters not much, what the blind, and dull world conceives, which placing
Faith in fancy, and religious reason in the treacherous sense of flesh and
blood, thinks all that to be misery, which carries the face of pain, or shame,
or any difficulty; and that true happiness consists in rowing for a while in
some boat A fit emblem to show the vanity of wotldly pleasure.
of music, down the tide; though it carry them soon after, where they are
either to be split upon rocks, or swallowed up by quicksands. Whereas God knows
(yea and men, who have his grace, are not ignorant) that a course of felicity
not interrupted, or checked by contrary winds, is a kind of fortune (for as
much as concerns the next life) which in this deserves rather pity, then envy;
and that, ever since the death of Jesus Christ our Lord, the way of the Cross,
is The Cross of Christ has made misery to become happy.
not only the more safe, but even the more honorable; and that the pleasures,
and pastimes of this life, are but a kind of butterfly for boys to play with,
and the greatest earthly felicity that ever was enjoyed by man, if it died not
as soon as it was born (which yet is the ordinary case of Worldly pleasure
speaks fair but it lies.
worldly pleasure at least, if it lived till it could learn to speak, it told
as many lies, as it uttered words; and charmed them first, whom quickly after,
it might lead toward a precipice.

How desolate, would a worldling think, the case of Signor Troylo Savelli was,
in that night when he received the news of his so-instantly-approaching,
contumelious death? And of that dear Mother of his, when she heard the blow was
given, which parted that head from those shoulders? And Affliction, made the
Mother, and the Son, seem miserable, and be happy.
yet with all, is it both well known, that the Mothers loss of such a son, did
cast her much more close upon an union and sole dependence, for all her
comfort, upon Almighty God, (wherein all the happiness, we can have in this
life consists) and it is morally certain, that the abundant grace of
Contrition, and Charity, which God infused into the heart of the Son, even by
the occasion of his very sins (so vastly and infinitely good is God) did put
him instantly, after his death, into a state so blessed, as that the Pope
himself, under whom he died, and those Princes among whom he lived, and all the
Monarchs of the whole world, may be accounted miserable, according to their
present state, in respect of him. Our dear Lord Jesus, be eternally praised
(and not only by us, who know not how to do it well, but by all his holy
Angels and Saints) for his own infinite goodness; since he vouchsafes to He
could easily honor himself otherwise, without any benefit to us, if he were so
pleased.
place the point of his honor, in showing mercies, and working wonders upon
man so instantly, so sweetly, so powerfully, and so like a God. And for having
suffered, in his own sacred soul, and body, such desolations, and torments, as
obtained, at the hands of the eternal Father, not only the remission of our
sins, (if we will serve our selves of the Sacraments, and other remedies, he
has left in the bosom of his holy Catholic Church) but the adorning also of
our Souls with the inherent gifts, and graces of the holy Ghost. And yet
further, for that he has known, how to make our very sins, and grievous crimes
themselves, the means, sometimes, whereby we obtain greater graces, then This
indeed is a mercy, which may well become the greatness of our God.
we should have done, if we had not committed those very sins. Let the whole
world therefore adore thee, O Lord, and sing praises to thee; and let all the
powers of all souls cry out, and say with that holy King, and Prophet David, O
Lord who is like to thee?

A great example, and proof of this power of God, and of the divinity of Christ
our Lord, and the(...) need of a great proportion of stupidity, to make him
think, that, since God himself vouchsafed to be at the command of those base
and impure wretches, who too^ off his clothes, and require^ him to submit
himself t^ those scourges, those thorn^ those nails, those blasphemies, for
our sakes, and sins yet, on the other side, thi^ An ugly and abominable
presumption.
man, this proud rebellious worm, this crum o^ dust, this drop of filth might
keep, forsooth, a kin^ of State, and should no^ rather submit himself (i^
imitation of the humilit^ only to superiors, but t^ equals, and even
inferiour^ also, and in fine to al^^ This is the advice of S. Peter Subditi
estote omini creaturae.
the world when just occasion should be offered.

The soul of this noble man, was so well softened, and sweetened by the unction
of the Holy Ghost; as that neither the greatness of his Nobility, nor the
ardor of his youth, nor the natural boiling courage of his heart, nor the fresh
memory of his prosperity, nor the unexpected arrival of his misery, could make
A heart truly touched by Gods holy spirit, will overcome strange difficulties.
him once repine, or keep him from instantly abasing himself. But falling
deeply upon the consideration of his sins; and weighing duly how full of demerit
he was, in the fight of God; and knowing exactly, that nothing is so truly
ignoble, as a Soul which has forfeited his grace; and that rich, or poor, is
little to the purpose; but wherein eternal, true Nobility consists.
that the thing which imports, is to be, or not to be, the servant, or son of
God; it is not strange, to see him east himself at the feet of common soldiers,
and stretch out his hands, with such meekness, at the will of the meanest
Jaylors, for the love of our Lord, to signify thereby the detestation wherein
he had himself, for having so presumptuously offended that Eternal Majesty,
which by all the Angels is adored.

From The reasons why be was so frequent in confessing h^s sins.
hence also did it proceed, that he so frequently confessed himself, in that
last night of h^s life; and could never think he had sufficiently deplored his
errors, and detested the discorrespondence, and ingratitude, wherewith he had
answered the unspeakable benefits of Almighty God. Wherein if any man should
think he used excess, it will be much more lawful for me to doubt, that
himself, either has a mean conceit of the Infinite Majesty which is offended,
or an ignorant apprehension of the deformity of all sin which is committed; or
a proud, and paltry mistaking of the Nothing which man was, till he was
created; and the worse then Nothing, which afterward he grew, by sinning. For
If you weigh these things well, you will change your wondering at him, into
wondering at your self.
he that ponders these particulars, as he ought, and knows, that the offenses
into which he falls are innumerable; and that the least of them, which is
committed against an Infinite Majesty, in respect of the object, is also
infinite; and that, as no one good deed shall be unrewarded, by the rich Mercy
of God, in Christ our Lord; so no one transgression shall be left unpunished,
by his exquisite Justice, will easily believe that in the space of a night, it
is hard for one to be too curious, and too careful, in setting straight the
account of his whole life, under the piercing eye of Almighty God. But this
Baron did, even by moments, in that short time which was left, by the goodness
of God, acquire quire new Great light of God is wont to breed great love of
him, and great sorrow, for having so shame fully offended him.
light, and gain new love of our Lord, and new contempt, and detestation of
himself; and, in the strength thereof, found some actions to confess, which he
had not conceived to be sins before; and others, which he had confessed, he had
done it with a sorrow, far inferior to that he then felt.

For, abstracting from the consideration which he had of his sins, against God
(in respect whereof, no soul is sufficiently able to quake, and tremble under
him) I trust there is not a Readers eye in the world so dim, as not to discern
his undaunted heart. And The undaunted courage of this Baron.
that, no thought of death, had any power, to take the least clarity from his
understanding; the least presence from his memory; the least agility from his
wit; the least order from his speech; or so much as the least puntillio from
the civil respects and complements, which are used among persons of his Nation,
and Condition. Nor yet, on the other side, shall any man have reason to think,
that the punctuality, which (throughout the process of this Relation) he shall
find to have been observed by the Baron, in this last This courtesy and
complement was not affected, but free and natural.
kind of courtesy, did proceed from the least affectation of it. Perhaps, if
we look near home, we may find some example to have been given of this, not
long ago; but in the present case, no suspicion of it can be entertained; both
for many other reasons, which will occur to him that reads the Relation; and
because (as I said before) these exact terms of Honor, and other respects to
the company, then present, are as it were natural to men of his country, and
quality, and there would cost them more pains to omit (unless their minds were
put into disorder, by some passion) then it would cost others, to observe where
they were not so natural, as being learnt by industry, and Art. But yet, that
in so sad a case, this man, would, for good manners, forbear to set up his
legs, or not so much, as stretch himself in the sight of others, though his
body did much incline him to it (according to that mention which the Relation
makes thereof) may well go for a great argument in him, of civility, of
modesty, and of magnanimity.

And this is that which I thought fit to represent to you by way of Preface to
this Story. You will find the traces and footsteps of putting men to death,
and the proceedings against The several manners of treating Delinquents in
several Countries
Delinquents, to be very different, from that of our Country, both in relation
to the body, and the soul. I take not upon me, to say which are better, and
which are worse. With us, the Process of criminal persons, is ever made, in
the face of the world; but they are not sufferd to have any Advocates who may
defend their causes. In most other Countries, the Delinquents are permitted to
have Advocates but the Process is made, though in public Court, yet only in
presence of the Judges and some few Advocates, and Officers. With us, the
Delinquents are suffered to live some days after their condemnation; which
certainly is meant in compassion to them; in other parts, after they are judged
to die, and that it is so declared, they think they do men a greater curtesy, in
putting them quickly out of pain. With us, there is no difference in the manner
of death, between a Clown, and the best Gentleman of the Kingdom, under the
degree of a Baron, unless it be, in some very rare case, by most particular
favor of his Majesty, but in all other places, that I have seen, all Gentlemen
are beheaded, to distinguish them from such as are ignoble. With us, no
indignity is ever done to a Noble man of such as Barons are, and all above them.
Title, by binding his hands, or arms, or the like; and that custom I commend,
as full of Honor; but in many other places, they bear no such respect; in
regard of the experience which they have found, and the fear, which still they
are in, of insolences.

But for as much, as concerns the comfort of criminals, in the preparation of
their souls, toward the death of their bodies, I cannot but note it, as a
point of charity, and piety most It is the greatest charity, to help men to dye
well.
remarkable, that in very many of the good Towns of Italy and Spayn, there are
certain Companies or Confraternities, of Gentlemen, well born and bred; who put
this obligation of duty upon themselves, to visit the prisons, especially in
the night precedent to any execution. And, together with Religious persons, and
Ghostly Fathers, they watch, and pray, and exhort, and comfort the poorest
criminals of the Country, with the same industry, and charity, which is here
afforded to this Noble man; And they all acompany them, to their death; and
sometimes, discharge their dying hearts of care, either by undertaking to pay
some of their debts, or by assisting the poor wife, and children, which are left
behind; or by obliging themselves to get S. Monica upon the point of her death,
desired St. Austin her Son to pray for her soul at the Altar, when she should
be dead: and so he did. Vid. Conf. l. 9. cap. 11. and 13.
Masses celebrated for their souls. And in conformity of these good endeavors,
we see men die in those parts, with another manner of disposition toward God,
than usually they have with us; Where it is a lamentable thing, to see many of
so profane stupidity, that, after lives most lewdly led, they go either drunk,
or dancing to the Gallows. As if, they were but to die in a Play; or as if,
after this life, there were no immortality of the Soul; or else, at least, no
account to be rendered; I say not of idle words (which yet must be done, but of
most wicked deeds, whereof many of them are guilty.

The example we have here in hand, will yield, all the Readers of it in
general, a good lesson of Humility, Patience, Courtesy, Magnanimity,
Obedience, and Charity. And All sorts of people may profit, by the good
lessons here delivered.
it may serve for an instruction, not only to such as die, by the hand of
humane Justice; but to all those also, who are to die by the hand of God, as we
all shall be sure enough to do. That so, we may the better take heed of sin,
which is to be so bitterly bewailed; and the more deeply we are fallen into it,
the more instantly we must implore the mercy and goodness of Almighty God; and
dispose our selves to the doing of Penance; that so, by his favor, we may
secure our souls from the danger of being plunged into that lake of eternal
pain. This lesson I say, may reach to al Readers in general. But particular
Readers may take out particular lessons for themselves. The Mother will admonish
Mothers to be incessantly careful for their Children; the Son will conjure
children from being insolent, or disobedient toward their Parents; and the
These are they who comfort the Delinquents in their death.
Confortatori will exhort all men to show charity to their distressed
neighbors. And I beseech our Lord Jesus, to grant such graces both to them and
me, as divine Majesty knows to be most needful for us,

T. M.

THE HISTORY OF THE CONVERSION and DEATH Of the Most ILLUSTRIOUS LORD SIGNOR
TROILO SAVELLI, Who was beheaded in Rome, in the Castle Sant Angelo, on the 18.
of April, 1592.
THE Writing the lives or deaths of others, if they be full of extraordinary
accidents, does usually make the Readers wonder; if they be dolorous they cause
compassion; if prosperous, men grow thereby into a desire; if adverse, into a
fear. But this death, which now I am about to deliver, does-so embrace the
accidents of all these kinds; that whoever shall read it, as he ought, will The
power which this discourse, will have over many affections, all at once.
easily perceive his mind to be filled at once, with all those affections. And
though, what I write, be, in fine, no more then a mere Relation of a Noble man's
death, yet perhaps it may serve for a guide and example of men, through the
whole course of their lives,

I will nakedly therefore, declare the progress, and period of this accident,
as, in the night when it happened, I went observing it pace by pace, to the
comfort of mine own Soul. For This Relation is purposely written in a natural,
and plain manner.
here, all affectation, and ornament of speech, would but profane the majesty
of the thing; and no endeavor or strife of wit, would ever arrive to the
expression of it. I will direct it only to those, who, if perhaps they have not
personal and proper experience, of the admirable effects of Gods grace; at
least they will either have believed them of others, or read of them in good
books, or heard them often delivered by Preachers. For, as to such, who are
mere strangers thereunto, these things will seem incredible. Though even by
such, they may yet be thought the more probable, when at length they shall
understand, that at the instance of his excellent Mother, one of the Fathers
These are the good Priests of the Oratory, instituted by that great servant of
God, B. Philip Neraeus.
of the Chiesa nova, had, with most diligent, and devout charity, exercised
his life, for the space of a month, in spiritual things, whose conversion and
death I have undertaken to describe; and whatsoever effect it may have, more or
less, I will be sure to write it for the benefit of souls, and upon no other
motive.

It was then, upon the 17. of April at This might be about eleven of the clock
at night, after our account.
four hours of the night, of that Friday, when the news was brought to the Lord
Troilo Savelli of his death, by an inferior Officer; Who coming to that
chamber, where the Noble man was at his rest, said to him in this manner: Your
Lordship may be pleased to rise and apparel your self. Whereunto he answered:
This indeed is an hour, which has a little of the unseasonable; but yet whither
will thou conduct me? The fellow told him, That place was to be made ready for
new Prisoners; so devising this excuse, that he might not fright him all at
once. I believe (says the young Lord) what thou have told me; but I confess,
thou made me half afraid; and then, sitting up in his bed, he said, Let us
apparel our self, in the name of God.

Having begun to put on his clothes, as he was descending from his bed, Give
me leave, says he, for so long, as that I may be ready. And so, casting an
earnest countenance toward a little picture of our B. Lday, with Christ in her
arms (which there he had of purpose) he recommended himself in great earnest to
the mercy of Jesus and in ercession of his Mother, as afterward he related to
me. And the same night (some hour before the arrival of this news) he had
raised himself out of his bed; and (kneeling down before that He prayed before
the Picture, but he prayed to the B. Virgin to pray for him; and he thought
it no ill way to go by the M there to the Son, as the Fathers, and Saints of
Gods Church had done before him.
Picture) he said, with abundant tears, O blessed and glorious Virgin, O that I
might die, if die I must, with this very disposition, which now I find in my
heart. He told me, that the same night, when first he went to bed, he did, in a
manner, assure himself his life would be saved; but that yet, more suddenly
then he ever used, he rose up, and could not hold from discharging his heart
toward his dear Redeemer and the blessed Virgin. This was an ordinary use of
his, as afterward those soldiers, under whose custody he was, related to me;
for they often feigning not to see him, did many times perceave, that by
stealth he cast himself, upon his knees.

As soon as he was apparail'd, the Officer returning, and doubting, lest (by
reason of his fresh youth, being encountered with such a terrible, and sudden
accident) he might, through a kind of despairfull rage, either do hurt to
himself, or others, would needs, upon a sudden, cast the manicles upon his
hands; but gently stretching them out; My friend, his early, and humble
resignst^on.
says he, behold, I am here ready to obey thy will, and the will of all the
world, since the will of God is such. Having manicled him, they lead him
toward the Chapel; when, at the issue out of his chamber, he blessed He armed
himself with the sign of the holy Cross. Ad omnem actum, ad omnem incessum
manus ping^t Crutem. Hier. epist. ad Eustach. 22. cap. 36.
himself, the best he could with the sign of the holy Cross, with both his
hands; and casting up his eyes to Heaven, he profoundly sighed. For, seeing
perhaps, that there were more people, then might be needful for the changing of
his Lodging, This, says he, is another manner of business, then to change me
only, from one place to another; but by the grace of God, I am ready for all.

Thus, silently going down to the Chapel, he was met by the There are
Congregations of Gento in R^me (as the^e are also in other great Cities of
Italy and Spain) who employ themselves for the helping condemned men, to die well.
The Governor and Proveditore are chief officers of these Congregations.
Governor, and the Proveditore, and by three others of them, who are called
Confortatori della misericordia, in a fashion, very suitable to the occasion.
Then one of them said to him in this manner: My Lord, the hour which God has
prefixed for you, is even run out; render your self into his merciful hands.
And he, without being troubled, otherwise, then by fetching a sigh, (which yet
was both soft and short) did answer thus; Let God be blessed; behold I render
my self to him; and dispose you of me. And so those good and charitable
Brothers of that Congregation, with some Fathers of the Society of Jesus,
casting themselves round about him, and endeavoring to sweeten the bitterness
of that news, by discreet and decent means, did comfort him the best they
could. He yielded to all, and did even prevent them; and then, knocking his
breast, and bowing down his head, and kissing the Crucifix, he demanded pardon,
and like gentle wax, sufferd himself to be managed by them all.

One of those Confortatori, did, before all other things, put him in mind of
making his Confession. Upon the very first naming whereof (recollecting himself)
he said, And The first thing he did, was to confess himself.
where is the Confessor? And they showing him a Priest of their Company, with
his Albe These are some of the sacerdot al vestments which are used in
celebrating Divine Service.
upon his back, and his Stole about his neck, (that afterward he might say
Mass, in the proper time) the first thing he did, was to be confessed; and we
all went out, to leave the place free to them.

He being confessed, and we return^d, we began to dispose him toward a good
end, by diverse spiritual exercises, fit for that purpose. And after many had
spoken, I also began thus to say; Signor Troilo, This is that passage, which
whoever does once make well, acquires eternal felicity; and if once it be ill
made, it draws after it everlasting misery. It now imports your Lordship to
make it well, that you may escape that eternity of torment. This passage is
narrow, uneven, hard, and full of stones, and thorns; all the world sees it,
and your Lordship finds it by experience; but Our Lord Jesus, does even the
uneven way of death.
behold sweet Jesus, who, by his goodness, will even it all. Cast your self,
my Lord, upon him; and then you, will be able to say with courage, Omnia I can
do all things in him that comforts me.
Possum, in co qui me comfortat.

He answered thus, with a cheerful, and even smiling countenance, Omnia possum
in eo qui me comfortat. By the mercy of my deer Jesus, I know the necessity of
making this passage well; I acknowledge his providence over me, and to his
providence I add, that of his love. For as much as with extraordinary love it
is, that he has brought me hither. I see it, I confess it. And how often, dear
Father, have I been, as I may say, in the very jaws of death; which, if at that
time it had seized me, infallibly this soul, and body of mine had perished.
Behold He acknowledges, and accents of Gods providence, with great alacrity.
the cunning of my Christ to save me, he has made choice of this way. And then
bowing, and baring his head, and, with great life of spirit, raising himself
from his chair, he further added; I accept of this election which God has made;
and then casting himself upon his knees, before the Alter, Nay I thank thee
(says he) O my good Father, for thy so faithful, and loving care of me; who
have not only been a wandering, but a contumacious Son of thine. To thee it
belongs, to smooth and even the ru^godness of this way; since thou have been
pleased to address me by it.

And so, bowing his face even almost down to the ground, he remayn'd a while,
in mental Prayer.

Being therefore wished to sit down, he was scarce settled in that posture, when
turning toward me, he said thus, in mine ear: You, whom, through my good
fortune, I have here, to help me, in this so weighty and high affayr, in the
place of God do you command me. I I^e gives himself away to his Ghostly Father.
give my self, as bound into your hands. The Prince has disposed of my body; do
you as much with my soul. I said therefore to him: I first desire, my Lord,
that you make the protestation This is a declaration of h^s faith with an
entier submission to the good will of God.
which is wont to be delivered by such as are going to God. Which being
publikly pronounced by him, with great sense and spirit, (he taking up and
repeating my words) I advised him further thus: You shall now make all those
acts of Contrition, which I shall call to your mind; having the eyes thereof,
first bent upon God, being offended, as a Creator, as a Preserver, as a
Iustifier, and as a Glorifier. Next, upon you self, who have offended him;
being his creature, his househould servant, his Christian slave; and one so
deeply obliged, by this benefits. Thirdly, upon the offenses them selves which
you have committed; and be sorry at your heart, for having committed them; and
For who can ever call to mind all his particular sins
if not in particular for them all, at least for the He had already confessed
his sins; and now he is but exhorted to renew his sorrow for them.
most grievous of them, which shall represent themselves to your memory.
Fourthly, upon the good you have omitted; and the time you have lost; and the
years you have misspent. Fifthly, upon the scandal you have given. And if any
thing more be to be done, if We cannot be saved unless first we make
restitution, as well of fame, as ^f goods, if ^^ly^ in our pow^^
to make restitution, either of fame, or goods* if to pardon others, or to ask
pardon your self; restore and pardon, and ask pardon. If to perform any vows,
or fulfill any promises; perform and fulfill them. Or finally, if you leave any
debts, or if you will make any signification of your repentance, and pious end,
you are now to put your hand to work.

To these things he offered himself most readity, and did execute them all with
so great devotion, that ev^ry one now began to change his style in speaking to
him; For finding, that whereas before they thought they should have to do but
with a young man, or rather a youth, and weakling, He infinitely overcame their
expectation.
they were now to treat with a manly, generous, and ripe Christian, far
superior to that, which might peradventure have been expected of him; One of
the Confortatori began, with great discretion, to discourse upon the horror of
Death, which our most sweet Christ Jesus did, by his agony, dispossess of
bitterness. Confi e, says he, and cast your thoughts upon him, and say, Pone
Place me, O Lord, nearthee, and let the hand of any other fight against me.
me Domine juxtate, and cujusvis manus pugnet contrame. And if now you find any
bitter taste in death, during this short night, as without fail you will, say,
O my Father, not as I will, but as thou will, thy will be done.
Pater mi, non sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu, fiat voluntas tua.

The contrite Lord made answer thus, the wickedness of my life frights me,
more, than the bitterness of my death. Oh how wretchedly have I spent these
eightein years? How ill have I understood my Savior? How ungrateful have I
been for his noble favors? How rebelliously have I lived against his laws? And
how have I run like a wild, unbridled horse, in these later years of mine,
without any manner of restraint, wheresoever the present occasions, or
conversations, or The sinner, is only to blame himself for having sinned.
rather (for I have said ill) wheresoever mine own passions, and blind
affections had a mind to plunge me? It is I, and none but I, who did
precipitate my self; and yet you bid me six my thoughts, and hopes upon God;
and say, Pone me, Domine, juxta te, and cujusvis manus pugnet contra me, fiat
voluntas tua.

Upon this, another of the Confortatori proceeded thus: It is an act of
magnanimity, not to fear the angry face of death; and of humility, to
acknowledge our offenses; but of confidence to hope for pardon, as your Lordship
does; who well may say, Propter nomen tuum Domine, propitiaberis peccato meo,
multum est enim. For thy names sake, O Lord, thou shall forgive my sin, for it
is great. O how great, said Signor Troilo? Even as great, after a manner, as is
the mercy of God, which is immense.

The Proveditore then said; Your Lordship, may, if you be so pleased, make your
last Will, and Testament; to the end no other thought may sollitcie you, but
that of your soul.

Hereupon the Baron, without the least delay, by way of answer, bade them
write. And, having taken out of his pocket, a little note, which he carried
about him, he suddenly dictated his Testament; wherein he delivered some
particulars, in my opinion, very considerable. First, The considerations which
may be made upon the manner of penning his Will.
of tender Devotion; for he recommended his soul to God, by most dear and
religious words. Secondly, of Ripeness, which was more than of a young man;
because, in a most particular mann^r, he had remembrance of all his servants.
Thirdly, of a most lively Contrition; because, with a most Profound, internal
affection of mind, he demanded pardon of many, even by name. Fourthly, of great
Magnanimity; because he conjured the Lady his Mother, that she would pardon
all his adversaryes, as he himself did pardon them a thousand times over.
Beseeching what a true, and noble Christian heart was this?
her, by a long, and christian circuit of words, that she would never resent
his death; but he laid the fault upon himself, in all things.

Fifthly, of Religious Piety; leaving large alms to many Churches, and other
holy places; accommodating many poor This is a devotion, and charity, much used
in Italy.
Virgins, with dowryes, at the particular discretion, and to be performed by
the care of his heirs; that God might the rather have mercy on him. Sixthly, of
entire Justice; because he took care, that even more then was due by him,
should be restored. Seaventhly, of noble Gratitude; because he rewarded
whosoever had don him any service in prison. Eighthly, of affectionate
Reverence; because he did in a most sweet, and dear manner, ask pardon of the
Lady his Mother, and the rest of his kindred, besides the expressing of other
complements.

Having ended his last Will, Well Sirs (says he) behold we have this residue
of time, now wholly free, for the care of our soul. And turning toward me,
said, It He speaks of his soul, for as much as concerned the guiding of it,
under God.
is in your hand, and therefore dispose of it; for this only is now in my power
to give you. I then, by way of answer, said, Give your self, my Lord, to JESUS.
I do so, said he; and he said it instantly. And I again, Give your self wholly
to him. He said, I do. Consecrate your self; he still said, I do. Make your
self, said I, entirely his. But how (says he) O Father, shall I make my self
entirely his, if I be unworthy, and perhaps his As all grievous sinners are, if
they do not thoroughly repent, which no man can be sure he has sufficiently
done, though he may have great hope of it.
enemy? But in the mean time, whilst the Will was writing, he that wrote it put
us in mind, it was to be publicly read; that so it might be closed up with a
due A Testam nt is not valid there, if it have not seven witnesses at least.
number of witnesses. And whilst this was in doing, that is, whilst the Notary
was reading it; three things of some consideration did occur. The first, that
when he read how he recommended his soul to God, My body, says he, (drawing
near me, according to his custom) I dispose not of; for now, it is no longer
mine. It once was mine, and I would it had not been so; but He acknowledges the
providence and justice of God in all things.
it is more than reason, that I, having had so great care of it, in my life
time, for my punishment, should not be suffered, to have any power over it, now
in my death. Let them therefore do with it what they will; for I sacrifice it
to God whatsoever it is. Father, will not such an O^lation as this do me good?
It will, said I, without doubt it will: and what For he that gives his body,
shows in good earnest, that he has already given his soul.
more acceptable oblation can be made to our Lord, than that of the body? The
second, That when the Legacies were read, it being observed, by the manner of
expressing one of them, that he delivered himself as faulty, in a certain
thing, wherein indeed he was not so; and therefore the Will was to be
redressed, as I desired, which served not only, (as before) for securing his
conscience, but for the saving also of his honor. Upon this, putting off his
Montiera, or cap, O Father, says he, (and he did it half smiling) are you now
taking care of my reputation, and of the puntillios of Honor, and of that
smoke or vanity of the world? Let my soul be saved, and let all the vain Honor
perish, which I either had, or might have had. Do you not remember that which
even This is not mentioned here before; For he said many other things which are
not mentioned in this short Relation.
now you said, Mihi mundus The world is crucified to me, and I to it.
crucifixus est, and ego mundo. In a word, let not the Soul be touched, but let
my Honor be blasted, according to that accoumpt, which the blind world is wont
to make of Honor; that it may serve as a part of the punishment, which is due
to me. The Third, that at the same instant, his hat was brought him; and one of
his people, being desirous to take his Montiera from off his head, what are you
doing says he? They answered, they would give him his hat. But he bad them let
it alone, saying, it imported not; and he added, with a soft voice, Look here a
while, they would fain honor this head of mine, which I am to lose, within few
hours, for my sins.

The Will being then read, and closed up, he threw himself, as it were upon me,
with a most modest kind of sweetness, and said, Father I am already reconciled;
but I would fain make a general Confession of my whole life, to your Reverence.
And though, since I came into prison, I did the same, in effect, at the
instance of my Lady-Mother; yet know, I had then no light, or feeling of my
sins, in respect of that, I now discover in my heart. It being One thing, dear
Father, for a man to confess himself, when be is in the sight of death; and
another, to do it not thinking of death; or at least but considering it, as
afar off. And so, calling for a There are little books, of address, whereby
men are taught how to confess their sins exactly.
little book, which he had obove in the prison, showing the way, how to
confess ones exactly well (which his good MOTHER had brought him some days
before) he began his Confession; Wherein, my Lord God knows, that, as it is
lawful for me, by that ample authority, himself gave me, to declare as much
thereof, as I should think fit; so if I were able to express it, I say not,
that Rome would be astonished at it, but all Italy would be so. For if I speak
of the exact manner he held; for as much as concerned the particular descending
even to idle words, and any other Confession is no such cursory or superficial
thing, as they who know it not, conceive, and say.
such peccadillo, methought I was hearing some well exercised Religious man. In
the explicating of circumstances, and the unfolding of intricate and entangled
cases, it was, as if he had been some profound Divine. In relating the
determinate number, and the various kinds of his sins, he made proof of one,
who had a most fresh, and happy memory.

This rare Gentleman, pawsing now and then, between the Confession of his sins;
and suffering certain tears to fall quietly upon my knees, would be wiping them
away: and that being don, he would often say with sighs, O Father, how He had
great reason to say so.
good has our Lord been to me? Let him now be blessed, as often, and yet more
often, than I have offended him, in my former life. Whilst he was accusing
himself of his faults, he would express them in certain few, but those all
lively, and most pious words; and in some particular eases, so dearly tender,
that in his countenance, one might see evident signs how his very heart was
even rent within. So that between He pawsed sometimes, both to rest himself,
and to recall his sins, more freshly to his memory; for though it were
interrupted, it was all but one Confession, till Absolution was given.
the times of his Confession, the Confortatori (doubting left perhaps he might
incline to faint) would be asking him, if he needed not somewhat to restore, and
comfort himself. To which he answered, (speaking privately, and more than once
to me) This An admirable Con^r^tion.
only comfort, or restorative I would desire, That my very heart might burst
for grief, and satisfaction might so be To the just^ce of God; his sorrow being
dignified by the death and passion of Jesus Christ our Lord.
given, for my sins, if perhaps even that, would serve the turn.

But forasmuch as, to my thinking, he did melt as it were, by so enlarging
himself in his Confession, I had an eye upon him, and I ventured to say thus to
him. My dear Signor Troilo, be not so excessively curious, and particular, in
accusing your self; especially of those your former sins, whichly not now upon
your soul. O See how truly this heart was touched with sorrow for his sins, and
the knowledge of himself.
Father (said he) I have wasted my whole life, in offending God; and will you
have me, or shall I content my self, in one single hour, to demand pardon for
so many offenses? So long in sinning, and so short in confessing my sins? That
I am troublesome to you, my dear Father, I well discover; but how can I help it,
if I be forced to it? And here again, he began to make for himself, a very bath
of tears. And, interpreting what I had said, after his own conceit, he added,
with ^ears redoubled, And this also do my sins deserve, by way of punishment,
that, having cast so much, so very much time away, in prejudice of my
salvation, I should now want time, wherein I might even confess my sins.
Pardon me, dear Father, and endu e this trouble, for the love of God; for you
shall To do a good work by the grace, and for the love of God, is meritorious;
for so Christ our Lord has made it.
merit, in his sight, by helping this poor soul of mine, toward salvation; and
I will remain with obligation to you, when I shall go by the mercy of God* and
your good means, into the place of rest. And finding that his tears still
increased, I confess my weakness^ was such, that I could not contain my self
from expressing also a tenderness by tears.

As soon as he perceived this, he said; Father, your Reverence weeps, yet you
weep not for your self, but for me; and yet you will not have me weep for my
self. But then, both of us being silent for a time, he after, began again to
confess, with those accustomed short words, but full of substance, and
propriety; making me write down all those things he confided to me, for the
discharge of his conscience. Whilst I was writing, he would needs for his
contentment hold the Standish, in his own hands, and read those lines, when I
had done, and kiss them, and then bath them in tears.

But of nothing did he accuse himself so much, as of all that, which had any
relation to the Lady, his Mother. Nor am I able by any means to express, with
what abundance of tears he accompanied those accusations of himself. For,
beginning even from his very Infancy, Father, (says he) I A large expression
of the unspeakable grief he had, for his disodedience and ingratitude to the
Lady his Mother.
have committed many offenses against God, yet at this time, methinks, I am not
so much afflicted for any thing, as for not having known, how to serve my self
of that tender love, and prudence, and patience, which my Lady Mother
expressed, in the education of me. For even when I was yet a child, she gave me
in charge to certain learned and religious Preceptors; who till I arrived to
have sixteen years of age, did with great fidelity, and sufficiency, teach me,
not only the literature of Humanity, but Philosophy also. And they further
showed how I was to address my self toward piety, by their good example, and
advice. Nor yet content with this; how sollicitous was she also, to procure by
many other means, that I might proceed, both in Learning, and Virtue? For See
here the Image of a holy and tender hearted mother.
concerning that of Learning, she gave me store of books, of time, of
opportunity, and a thousand tender favors, which were convenient for those
years of mine. And for the inducing me to Virtue, she addressed me to choice of
good Conversations, spiritual Discourses, excellent Sermons, and Persons, who
might from time to time give me counsel. Commanding, and causing me to be lead
to Confession; not only upon all the principal Feasts of the year, but once
also every month.

And, till this very time, when I am speaking to your Reverence, you may (if
you will take the payns) find, among my papers, most evident testimonies of
what I am now saying; and especially Note her diligences for the pious
education of her son.
a short manner of Instruction, how to spend the whole day well. The things
besides whereof she did admonish me, were, in a manner, infinite. When I was
yet a little one, she kept me in awe, by threats, yea and by strokes
sometimes; and when I was grown elder, she endeavored to do it, by the fair
means of requests and promises; and oftentimes, with so many tears, as that
now, they are as many lances to pass through my my heart. She likewise
procured that Blessed Philippo Neri, was his Godfather, at Confirmation. The
Chiesa Nuova was a new Church, then and now belonging to the fathers of the
Oratory of Jesus, whence they are called O^atorians.
blessed man Philippo, of the Chiesa nuova to assist, and bold me, when I was
confirmed; and that afward I should make particurar friendship with him.

She kept me far off from looking upon ill examples; and held me near her self,
after the manner, as I may say, of a Religious life; exhorting me often day and
night that I would live Nobly, True Christianity, is true Nobilily.
and like a Christian. Nor did that blessed mouth of hers, ever cease to say,
Troilo, my Son, fear God, and love God. To this end she took upon her, the
government of all my Castello in Italian, signifies both the mansion house, and
the Town, or vilage belonging to it.
Castles; and the care of all my affairs; living in a continual state of,
between hope and fear of the proof I should make. Nor was there a Religious
House, or Monastery, to the prayers whereof, she recommended me not. Nor came
there any Religious persons to her, nor did she meet with any abroad, to whom,
all forgetful of her self, she would not say, Pray Some body prayed so well for
him, as to make him a Sa^nt.
for my Son.

And I, ungrateful to her so great benefits, when I grew to have sixteen years
of age, did render her so ill payment, for such a huge sum of love; as that I
even parted house with her, and did outrage her, both by words and deeds; in
such sort, as that the uttermost of all punishment, seems a hundred times less
to me, then my demerit* And when, dear Father, I think upon the tears she was
ever sheading for me both by day, and in those nights, so sadly spent, and on
the ag^nies she sufferd upon my occasion, I find contentment, in that I am to
die, whereby, me thinks, I may, in part, over-shaddow so many of my lewd
behaviors,

Neither The invincible love of this Mother, to her Son.
yet, after I had separated my self from her, did she give over to solicit me
with notes, and letters, and messages, and a thousand other inventions, that I
would be induced to retire my self from vicious conversations; and she would
p^^y me, and importune me, and conjure me, that I would take to good. And well
I know, that no kind of devotion was omitted by her, for my reformation, by
visiting both as many Churches, and Religious persons, as she knew in Rome.

In fine, she came often to me, both by day and night, whilst I was wandering
up and down in such company: and It seems* to have been a kind of strife and
war; between how kind, a Mother could tell how to be, and how unkind a Son.
when she found me out, she would cast her self, even at my feet, that so I
might once be drawn to open mine eyes, and consider the precipice I was
approaching; and the ruins besides the Shame, that would inevitably come upon
me; and that I would return to Christ; and once truly weigh (for these were her
very words) whose Son I was; and that I would consider, what thing that was,
which had ever been wanting to me, whereby in that desperate fashion, I should
abandon all care of my Estate, Life, and Honor. And usually she accompanied
these admonitions, and requests of hers, with most tender tears.

Sometimes again, she would turn aside, and, casting up her eyes to God, beseech
him, either to convert me, or else Her prayer was heard in a better though in
another manner then she most desired
to take me to himself. And this I can say with all truth, that from the very
beginning, to this instant, wherein now I l^ve, she has never ceased to
endeavor my salvation. For even from the first time she She was in Rome at his
commitment, but when she saw how the World would go with him sheretired thence,
with her load of sorrow.
came to see me here in prison, she exhorted me to Confession, and ever since,
she has come, as thick as hail upon me, sometimes with Religious men, and
sometimes with pious Books. So long, as that now at last, I am, by the favor of
God, returned a little into my self. And, besides the cutting off all occasions
of doing ill, she gave me many great opportunities of good, with fervent
exhortations, that I would restore my self, to the service of God.

Nor could ever any Son desire any favor, or contentment of a Mother, which
mine did not, of her self, impart to me. And I, on the other side, have served,
but to make her life most unfortunate, by this period of mine. I beseech our
Lord forgive me, and to receive the future affliction of her heart, in present
discount of my offenses.

Then toward the end of his Confession; I desire (said he) a favor of you
now, dear Father, which you must not deny me. It is, that I may have liberty to
lament my sins with tears; and that, by them, I may give testimony to the
Divine Majesty, of the That so the penitent himself by finding it, might have
increase of comfort
grief, wherewith my heart abounds within. Weep out, said I, since our Lord
gives you such a desire of weeping.

I had scarce brought forth this last word, when already, there began to fall a
most abundant shower of tears from his eyes; in such sort, An admirable and
almost miraculous Contrition.
as that he bathed a good part of one of my arms; and my sleeve was as wet
through, as if it had rained from above. Which accident I observing, after some
half quarter of an hour, and doubting, lest his heart might so discharge it
self by his eyes, rather for the apprehension he might have of death, then
otherwise; I desired, that, for the love of Jesus, he would quiet himself, and
not multiply his affliction, nor continue to torment his mind, in that manner.
To this he answered; Father, I give you my faith, that I do not, at all, bewail
my death; but I do only, and purely, lament the offenses I have committed
against Almighty God. And A happy conjunction of Christian sorrow, with noble
courage.
I have so much hope in the mercy of my dear Lord, that not only I shall shed
no tears for my death, but not so much as change my countenance. Father, I
bewail my most unfortunate life, and not my most happy death. That life was,
indeed, most unfortunate; whereas this death is most happy; for in fine, if in
that, I lived an enemy to God, I hope, in this, I shall die his friend.

Well then, said I, proceed in your Confession, that so you may die the friend
of God* and lay a part of your tears aside the while. Whereupon, the most
obedient young Gentleman, accommodating himself to my direction, did proceed
just where he had left.

At this I wondered so much the more; for as much as I my self had forgotten it,
though I also had one of those little Books in my hand, which instruct how a
Confession may be well made. But he, going on, laid before me, (as if it had
been in one single prospect) the whole course of his life, with so great
clarity, and brevity, that I found my self obliged to ask him, if during many
days before, he had not applied himself to make such a preparation. To which
the young Noble man made this very answer: So great is the light (as I have
already insinuated) which my dear Lord Jesus vouchsafes at this instant to give
me, of my whole life, that even whilst I am confessing, me thinks I behold all
my actions This was a very extraordinary, supernatural favor of Almighty God.
as in a glass; and I read all my thoughts and words, as in a Book.

And, without doubt, so it was. For he, without ever mistaking a word, did so
call all his sins to mind, that by that time he wanted little of having
declared them all distinctly. Only at the very end, as it were, of his
Confession, he returned to repeat some things which he had already said; and I
doubting that he did so, as having forgotten what he had expressed before, I
told him of that inadvertence (as I reputed it) when yet he made me this
answer: I know well, dear Father, that I repeat some things; but I do it, to
the end I may now more perfectly detest them, and be confounded in my self. And
especially How desirous this Soul was, to make God amends.
since I have passed the greatest part of my life in such things as these, to
the displeasure of our Lord, I do now for the better pleasing of him, pass
this time of my death, in a misliking remembrance of them. And if it be
troublesome to your Reverence, as I know it is, so often to hear my so many
offenses; do you remember once for all, that this is the Soul of a sinner, for
whom Christ dyed.

Nay, said I, if your Lordship, have any such apprehension, you may repeat as
much, and as often as you please; for I only advised you of it before, as
thinking perhaps you might have don it by error. The error (says he) was
m^ne, and a grievous error it was to ^ffend those so many ways, who did ever
stand in my d^fence. But however that be, in this respect as in some others, I
shall die contented, in that I can never satisfy my self, with confessing my
faults to you, dear Father; Which now, by the goodness of God, are as well
known by me, as heretofore they were little esteemed; and are now as bitterly
lamented, as heretofore they gave me gust, though it were a false one. I The
man did even melt between grief and love.
wish, (O thou most sweet Savior of my Soul) I had, as well, a thousand
tongues, that so I might fully cenfesse them; a a thousand eyes, that so, I
might bitterly bewail them; and a thousand hearts, that so, eternally I migh
detest them. And that this grief for my sins, committed against God, might so
break my heart; as the instrument of Justice, will take my head, for those I
have committed concerning men.

I do, good Father, (by the goodness of God) know what a sinner I am. As a
sinner, I lament my self, and as a sinner I will die, but a sinner, all humbled
and contrite; and with my tears I will make my Funerals; then suffer me to
perform them, after mine own fashion. And here even I, not I cannot blame him.
being able to contain my self from weeping, was observed by him, who said
thus. Most happy Funerals are therefore these of mine, which are solemnized by
the servants of God. Yet this part belongs not to you, but only as being a
Father to my Soul. Who knows, but that by these mutual tears, and this exchange
of tenderness, my impure conscience may indeed be cleansed? Thus both of us,
being silent for a while, he then proceeded: Well, my good Father, it is now
high time that by the This authority was given to his true Church by Jesus
Christ, and in his name, and by his power, it is exercised.
Authority, which God has given you, to loose, and bind men on earth, you loose
me, from so many chains of sin, which hang upon me. To the end that, as you
have taught me, I may say, Auditui meo dabis gaudium and laetitiam, and
exultabunt ossa humiliata. And first I besceech you you give me Absolution, and
then, I may perform my Penance. Though indeed what Penance, carrying
proproportion to my sins, is your Reverence able to impose? At this, he cast
himself at my feet, and bowed his head to my knee, where I had laid my left
hand; and he all bathed it with tears, and kissed it, and expected the Penance
and Absolution, Which I gave him, fully, in form of a This is a full remission
of all Canonical Penances required by the ancient discipline of the Church.
Plenary Iubiley, according to the most ample privilege, By the Popes.
granted to those of the Congregation of the It is called a congregation of M
sericordia, because it is so great a woe k of charity and mercy wherein they
employ themselves.
Misericordia. Being absolved, and having don his Penance, with incredible
affection of mind, he sat down again by my direction; and then, the rest cam^,
and encircled him after the accustomed manner.

I then spoke first to him after this sort: Most Illustrious Lord Troilo, our
Blessed Savior Jesus Christ whom here we have present, did, by dying upon the
Cross, give remedy, in his person, this night to three things, among many
others. He An application f^ll of life and comfort.
dyed in the flower and vigor of his youth; that your Lordship might not have
too much indulgence and compassion of your own tender youth, and so might say,
O, but why is my life taken away in so tender years? And this is the first. He
dyed, and he dyed of a violent death; that to your Lordship it might not seem
insupportable, to die upon necessity, and so you might say, O but why is the
flower of my years cut off by a violent hand? and this is the second. He dyed
of the most reproachful death, which in those times was inflicted; that it
might not seem strange to your Lordship, to die by the hand of Justice, and so
you might say, O, but why died not I in my cradle, or at least by some other
natural accident?

Nay, if your Lordship will accept this death in so tender years, you offer him
the best part of your time. By dying a violent death, you may make that which
is necessary, to be voluntary; and by dying a dishonorable death, (taking it as
a Penance for your sins) you may avoid the shame of that last terrible day. And
so much the better, you may accept it, because you are not to die in public,
upon the Bridge, as the ordinary Gustom bears, but It is there accounted of less
dishonor, to be put privately to death. They who die privately, die within the
Castle, they who publicly, at the foot of the Bridge.
privately here below, in the Court, as is wont to be used toward your Peers. I
added also some other considerations, and so ended my speech. To which the
Baron. who was ever ready, made this answer.

And How wise, the grace of God, is able to make a very young man, upon a
s^ddain!
I, O Father, for as much as coneerns the first, die willingly in this fresh age
of mine; because thus I shall be sure not to offend my Lord any more. And, from
this instant, I offer him my years, my age, and my life; and a hundred years,
and a hundred ages, and a hundred lives. As for the second; I will make a
virtue of necessity; and being to die per force, and according to reason, I will
die willingly, that so I may yield willingly to force, and willingly give
satisfaction to reason, But as for the third; I could wish for a more
ignominious death. And be you pleased to know, that to have dyed in public,
would have given me I know not what increase of consolation and gust. For so I
might have hoped by Because public sins require public satisfaction.
public Penance, to have made a better amends, for my public crimes. And
God knows, I take no contentment, to receive the favor of dying privately. But
yet however, if the determination which is made, be such, I resist it not. Our
Lord will accept the promptitude of my will.

Hereupon, the Proveditore took up the speech, and said: Let your Lordship
accommodate it self to the will and providence of God, who has not only one way
of ariving to save our Souls, nor one only means of drawing them to him. He
leads one by one means, and others by another. It imports not that Many of Gods
judgments are secret but they are all just.
his Judgments are hidden from us, but it suffices that they are just. Who can
tell, if your Lordship should have died in any other sort then this whether or
no, you should have been saved? I am he (says the Baron) who can tell you
that; for I should have tumbled headlong into Hell.

Do you not know how God has proceeded with me? It is just as a Hunts-man would
do, when he would take a wild beast, which he would have brought to his hand,
whole and sound, not torn by the teeth or paws of dogs; nor stricken by the
bow, nor bruized by nets, or snares; He arivs this beast, sometimes one way,
sometimes another, but never lets slip the dogs, nor shoots the arrow, nor
spreads the net, or Toil upon the ground or sets the snare; but, at the most,
with some outcries, or else by throwing some stones, he rowseth him, and
addresseth him toward the place designed; and so long he drives the beast by
several ways, that, at last, he brings him thither, where he would have him.
The Huntes-man knows this well, and did long expect him there, and he takes
him, and enjoys him, all sound and safe.

I am Note how wittily, and piously, he makes this application to himself.
he, O my Good Jesus, who have been this beast, hunted hither, and thither; but
thou had a mind, to have me safe; thou had a mind to have me sound. And so
thou did not permit, I should be torn with dogs, nor pierced by arrow, nor
taken by nets, or Toils, or snares; when thou deliveredst me out of so many
dangers of death, in which, though very young, I have found my self, and
wherein if I had died, without fail, I had perished for all eternity: Thou
did only throw stones at me, and cry out after me, when by so many
admonitions, and inspirations, thou did solicit me. And now I repent me,
that I was so deaf to them. But what mervail, if I were deaf, who after a sort
was By sin.
dead? And thus has thy goodness conducted me to this strait pass, without my
knowing it; that so I may be forced to leap into thy lap. For whither am I able
to turn my self more securely, then to my dear Jesus? Yea, and though it were
in my power, I would not turn any way, but to Thee. It is true, I am forced;
but yet I am content withal.

One of the Confortatori then replied: It is enough, Signor Troilo. So great,
and so liberal, is the goodness of God, that he accepts all, and he does it
with delight. And one of the Chiesa nuova said; That, though our Lord received
a Precept, or Commandment that he should die, nevertheless it is affirmed, and
very true, that he died voluntarily. And having accompanied this speech of his,
with diverse choice examples, one of our Fathers concluded that discourse, with
showing, by what means, that which was necessary, That punishment which is
imposed by necessity, may be made voluntary, by a voluntary acceptance of it.
might grow to be voluntary, by a voluntary acceptatation of it: and, that so
much more it would be meritorious, as it should more willingly be embraced.
Then teach me (said the Baron) how I may make this enforced death truly
voluntary. Whereupon certain devout, and apt ways how to do it, being
declared, by the Governor of the Congregation of the Confortatori, and
embraced by the Baron, I said; Perhaps Signor Troilo, we weary you too much;
How can you weary me? said he, These discourses make the night short to me, and
my disastre, fortunate. And here, all were silent a while; when he rising up
(for he was sitting) said, That he would speak with the father. And drawing
near me, the Whom the penitent did accompany therein.
Confortatori said the Confiteor; and, that being ended, I desire (says he) if
it please you, Father, to call again to mind some of the things aforesaid; both
for the better repeting of them, and for the addition of some others. Which I
refusing, out of the assurance I had, that it was not necessary, he said; And
is it possible, dear Father, that you will not give me this last contentment?
Will you not permit, at least, that I may satisfy my self, with confessing the
offenses I have committed against God? And besides, d^es not your Reverence
remember, that we must speak together of The Father, it seems had made him some
such promise before.
Penance? I answered, Let that Penance be, to die, and to die well.

Then teach me that, said he; And I, thus to him: Offer now, this death of
yours, to God, with your whole heart, in penance, for the sins you have
committed. I do (said he) offer it with my heart, and with my mouth; and it
grievs me, (as our Lord knows) that I have not, this night, a thousand heads,
that in this one of mine, they might be all cut off, and a thousand lives, that
they might all be lost. Nay How much he gives to God; and how little he thinks
it to be; and yet how faithfully he acknowledges it all to be of God.
I confess and know, that even that penance, would yet fall short; but since
more I cannot, more I know not what to do; and since more I have not, I can
give no more; and even the doing, and giving this little, I acknowledge to
proceed from the hand of God.

I told him, by way of reply, that it was well; and that he should still be doing
so. And when (said I) you are laying your head upon the block, say thus in your
heart. O Lord, by this act of mine, I protest to do penance for my sins, as if
I had a thousand heads, and thousand lives; and I acknowledge, and confess, it
is all too little. But I doubt Signor Troilo, whether then you will be able to
remember this; for at that time perhaps you will be, as it were, not your self.
It is no trifle to look death in the face, take my word for that. The
magnanimous Lord made this answer. I will not presume so much upon my self, but
He can never fail who puts all confidence in God, and none in himself.
hope well, and confide greatly in God, that he will not let it slip out of my
memory. And if, by any accident, you should perceiv I were unworthy so great a
grace, do me the favor to bring me in mind of it; for you shall find me ready
to put it in execution. In the mean while, I beseech your Reverence tell me some
what else toward this end of mine, and that quickly, for the time has wings. I
bad him leave the care of that to me. For I will (said I) go intimating from
time to time, whatsoever you are to think upon; and whatsoever shall be sit for
you to say, even til your last breath.

And He exhorts him to a great devotion to his good Angel.
very now, you shall begin to make a strait friendship with your Good Angel.
And first ask pardon of him with your heart, for the little gratitude you have
expressed, for the Custody he has afforded you; which has bin so incessant, so
patient, so diligent, and so full of love. Upon which words, he said (casting
himself upon his knees;) Yea, not only with my mouth, but with my heart, I beg
pardon of him, for the very much ingratitude, I have used, notwithstanding his
so great benignity, and love to me; and so kissing my knee, he sat down again.
So that I proceeded, and said: Consider then with your self that your S Hierom
says expressly, That every soul has an Angelus Custos assingd it by Almighty
God, from the first instant of the birth till the last of life. lib. 3. conc.
in 18. Mat. The holy Scriptures and Fathers a bound also in proof of the
ministry of Angels in the help of men.
good Angel now is here, who even from your very birth, and so much more at
this hour, which is so full of danger, assists you, and especially, in six
particulars. First, he hinders the impetuous assaults of the devil, and weakens
the force of all those malign spirits, who at this instant, conspire to the
damnation of your soul. Secondly, he breathes into your heart, preparation,
Generosity, Devotion, and Contrition^ Thirdly, he lightens this darkness, this
anguish, and this Death. Fourthly, with great solicitude, he carries forward,
and backward, those messages, which pass between God and you; he gathers up
your sighs, your very countenances, and the humiliations of your heart; there is
not one of them, which he suffers to lose his way. Fifthly, he negotiates with
other Angels of superior We read in holy scripture ( Dan. 10.) how one Angel
helps another, for the good of men.
Quires, so to procure effectual assistances for your salvation. In most
particular manner, he moves S. Michael the Archangel, that he will defend you
in this night. Sixthly, he sollicites my good Angel also, that he may procure me
to be a competent instrument, in this passage, which you are making toward
your salvation.

Salute him therefore, and say thus with me; Angele Dei, O He ponders the
prayer which Catholics say daily, to their good Angel: Angele Dei, qui custos
es mei, me tibi commissum, pi^tate superna, h^die illumina, custodi, rege, gub^
na.
thou Angel of God, so i^ known, and so ill used by me, qui custos es mei, who
keep me with so continual care, and perfect love, me tibi commissum, who am
committed to thee, being a man so faulty, and brought by the providence of God
to this passage; but yet a sinner who, by his mercy, and thy prayers, is
contrite for his sins, pietate superna, by the goodness of God, for I find no
desert, but cordially confess much demerit, in hac morte, and hac nocte, in
this death, which is due to me for my offenses, and in this last period of my
life, illumina, custodi, rege, and guberna, do thou illuminate, defend,
protect, and govern me, Amen.

This good Noble Man, did repeat these words, with affectuous and abundant
tears; and, even by his countenance, one might see, his very heart split in his
body. And not contenting himself, to say it once, he would needs repeat it
then, three times; and afterward, he did it again so often, the same night, as
that all the times arived, I think, to ten; letting me know withal, that he had
not felt greater solace, and gust, in any one spiritual Exercise, then in this.

Secondly (said I) you shall take the glorious Virgin, for your To pray for
him, as one man may do for another; though all the Saints, and much more, the
glorious Mother of God, do perform it, in a far more ex^ellent manner.
Intercessor; and then S. John the Baptist, and S. Paul, who were both
condemned to the loss of their heads, as your Lordship is. It is true (said
he) they were condemned as I am; but with this difference; they sufferd
innocent, I for my faults; therefore I accuse my self, of such, and such, and
such offenses, which I have committed against God. Which, howsoever I confessed
before, yet for the reasons I have already touched, I do willingly repeat.
After he had ended his Confession, and received Absolution upon his knees, I
desired him to sit down again, that the wonted company might come about him.

And ever, some one of them, would be taking up, some verse of the Holy
Scripture, which might be appropriated to the present occasion. As,

Viam iniquitatis amove a me, and de lege tua miserere mei.
Suscipe servum tuum in bonum, and justificationes tuas edoce me.
Bonum mihi, quia humiliasti me, ut discam justificationes tuas.
Cognovi Domine, quia aequitas judicia tua, and in veritate tua humiliasti me.
Fiat cor meum immaculatum in justificationibus tuis, ut non confundar.
Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiam tuam; and secundum
multitudinem miserationum tuarum, dele iniquitatem meam
Erravi sicut ovis quae perjit, quaere servum tuum Domine.
Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori.
Deus in audiutorium meum intend.
And a hundred other, such as these; which now, and then, were declared by some
one of The Religious men declared them. though the Confortatori might represent
them.
us, according to the present occasion, wherein he took much contentment.

Besides, he had great comfort, in using these other Jaculatory Prayers, Maria
Matter gratiae, Matter misericordiae, Tu nos ab host protege and hora mortis
suscipe; repeating often these last words, and hora mortis suscipe. And again,
Eia ergo advoca nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos ad nos converte, and
Jesum benedictum fructum ventris tui, mihi, post hanc noctem, ostende, O
clemens, O pia, O dulcis Virgo Maria. Ora pro me peccatore indigno, in hac hora
mortis meae, Amen, Amen, Amen. But especially in often, and fervently repeating,

Recordare Jesu pie,
Quod sim causa tuae viae,
Ne me perdas illa die, etc.
In this exercise, those brothers, of the Congregation of the Misericordia,
were very perfect, and discreet; delivering out, in fit times, a great number
of these versicles, without importuning, or perplexing him. And so also did
other Religious men, according to the occasion, without either interrupting one
the other, or overwearying the young Noble man; and they likewise exhibited with
them certain motives and considerations, with much brevity, but with great life
of devotion.

When these things were ended, I said: It will not be amiss that we recite the
Litanies, if these Gentlemen think it fit. And I (said the young Lord) if you,
and they be so pleased, will be he that shall recite them. They all made answer
in the negative, saying Your Lordship would but weary your self too much.
Nothing less, (said he) but to me it will be of extreme contentment. And so,
(without more dispute) they put the Book into his hand; and (kneeling, even, by
me, against a form) he began the Litanies, to which we answering, Ora pro eo,
Pray for him, there It must needs be an object of great compassion.
was not a man among us, who accompanied not the words of his mouth with the
tears of his eyes. And especially, when with incredible affection, and
devotion, he repeated these words, A mala morte, A potestate diaboli, A poenis
inferni, libera me Domine. Deliver me, O Lord, from an evil death, from the
power of the devil, and from the torments of hell. But Nothing but only his
sins could move him to tears.
he (O admirable repose of mind) did not shed one tear. Nay my self, being in
tears, who held the candle by him (and not being able to repress them) he jogd
me with his elbow, and made other signs to them, that so, giving over their
weeping, they might answer him. And, speaking of it to me afterward, he said,
There wanted little, of their making him also weep, for company.

When the Litanies were ended, he said, (turning to me) Father, say you the
Prayers, over me, that follow. And then, he taking the candle out of my hand,
and giveing me the Book, I said those Prayers over him, which are wont to be
said, over such as are in their last agony; Commendo These a^e as admirable and
effectuous prayers, as any are used in the whole of the holy Church, and I wish
all the Readers of this, to procure to see and read them.
te omnipotenti Deo, etc. And that other which follows, Deus misericors, Deus
clemens, etc. And at the end of these, he said with a loud voice, the Pater
Noster, the Ave Maria, the Credo, and the Salve Regina; and so returned to his
seat, the others making the accustomed circle about him. And so one, with
representing some sentence of Holy Scripture, another, some example, another,
some other spiritual Consideration, we always kept him alive, and quick, and
even all kindled in devotion; till such time, as the hour of celebrating Mass
approached.

Then the Noble Man said thus: If these This rigor is used in those parts, for
the great insolences which have sometimes bin acted in the like extremities, by
Delinquents.
Manicles are put upon me to give me pain, or punishment, let the will of my
Prince be done, who is pleased to have it so; but if the meaning be, but to
make me sure; in vain is he tied without, who is bound Because his heart was
more chained, by the love of God, then his hands could be by a load of Iron
within. Upon which words, all of us being full They had great reason
of tenderness; and in particular one of those Confortatori (who showed
himself, through the whole night, a most compassionate Gentleman, in service of
this Noble Man) caused the Keys to be instantly given him, and so took the
Manicles off; which yet, the Baron would needs An humble, natural, and most
Noble Soul.
kiss, and kissing them, he sighed, and so held his peace.

When he had been silent a while, and having made a sign that he desired to
confess again; and when he had blessed himself, with the sign of the Cr^sse;
Father He is much solicitous by the memory of his disobedience to his Mother.
(said he) I who have given so many disgusts, and so bitter ones, to my most
dear Lady and Mother, through the whole course of my life; what comfort does
your Reverence think I might be able to give her in my death? 'By dying well
(said I) and in a holy manner. To which he answered thus; How shall the
unfortunate woman come to know it? I told him, I would relate it to her by word
of mouth, and in fine I would write it for her; and I will not only notify it
(said I) to her, but to any other whom it may import to know it. It is enough,
(said he) and he reached his hands out to me, that I might give him one of
mine, and withal, my word. And so he kissed it often, and holding it between
both his, he continued to speak after this manner.

I could wish, dear Father, that in my place, your Reverence would often visit
and comfort my Lady-Mother, after my death. And when you shall see her first, I
desire you will ask forgivness of her in my name, a thousand, and a thousand
times, as here I have done, both now, and the other day, since I came to
prison. And especially, beg pardon of her, for such, and such a particular
offense, and then say to her thus; Your Troilus who is dead, begs that blessing
from your most afflicted Ladyship, which, being alive, he neither deserved, nor
had time to ask. He further recommends the care of his Soul to your Ladyship.
He prays, he beseeches, he conjures your Ladyship, to grant him this his last
and now only suit; that having put your Soul in peace, you will not so much as
resent, or call to mind, and much less procure to If she thought the adverse
par^ies, whom he had wronged, had prosecuted him with too much eagerness.
revenge your self, for any injury; but that you will remit the whole, and your
self withal, to the Eternal Providence of God. Put her in mind, that it is the
part of a Roman, and Christian heart, after a generous manner to pardon
offenses. And, giving her all comfort, do you assure her, that I have
particularly reversed all those irreverent words I have formerly used toward
her; and remembered all those most sweet, dear benefits, I have received from
her; and all those Maternal favors, which she has vouchsafed me. And above
all, let her know, the inestimable contentment I have, to think of the This was
a Mother, not only of her sons body, but of his soul also.
Christian love, she has expressed to me, in this last passage; without ever
reflecting upon those offenses, and great demerits of mine.

Say to her moreover, that I die her son, and a son, who is most profoundly
penitent, for all the ill words and deeds I have ever uttered, and performed
against her; and that, in the other world, I will by Gods grace be as grateful
to her, as I have been ungrateful here. Relate to her my last passage, in most
particular manner; and oblige her, liberally to reward all my followers, who
have been in prison, upon my account. Of whom, I do, with all the very bowels
of my heart, ask pardon, for the pain, and peril, wherein to I did so idly, and
absurdly cast them. And assure her, in a word, that if for nothing else, yet
even for the very disgusts I have given her, I shall die content; finding a kind
of joy in my heart, that I thus perform this penance, which I have so well
deserved. And so, I dying in such sort, as your Reverence may be pleased to let
her know, she cannot but receive some comfort in my death; and will also find,
herself even engaged, to conform her self to the will of God, as, by his mercy
I have done.

To my Lady, my Grandmother, what shall I say, dear Father? O how compassive
am I of her great age! What pain does my Soul feel, for that affliction of
hers! Give her also to understand, that I beg pardon of her, for so many
disgusts, as, in this old age of hers, I have given her; beseeching her, in my
name, that as long as she lives, she will cause a Mass every week to be
celebrated for my Soul. And in like manner I humbly ask pardon of my Lord
Marquess, my Uncle, from the most inward parts of my Soul, as I also do of
the rest of my Blood; beseeching them all to excuse this youth, or rather
ignorance of mine. Putting them also in mind that once we shall all meet in
Heaven. And if ever your Reverence can procure to be in my Castles, ask pardon,
I beseech you, in my name, of all my vassals. Making a promise to them, that
instead of the ill example I have given them, I will not forget them in Heaven,
when by the mercy of God, I shall be there; and let them in the mean time,
excuse my youth.

Forget not also to do this office, with This was a person of great authority,
who took his examination
Monsignor the Governor of Rome, who, about some four times, has examined me,
with so much respect and curtesi^. Give him assurance from me, that though my
death grieve me, yet I accept it willingly; And beseech him, that when time
shall serve, he will also With how great piety, he speaks of the Pope, as he
was his supre^^ Pastor, and with observance, as his Prince.
assure our Lord, Pope Clement, his Holiness, that I die his most devoted Son;
and most satisfied with the proceeding of his Holiness toward me. With this
moreover, that I am grieved at the very roots of my A noble circumstance of
civility and courtesy.
heart, for having given his Holiness so much cause of trouble and grief,
especially in this beginning of his Pontificate, and in the midst of the joy,
which has been expressed for his assumption to the Sea Apostolic. And let him
be further told, that by placing my self, as I do at your feet, I make account
I lay my head under the feet of his Holiness, that so he might vouchsafe to
give me his benediction. I having this comfort, in the midst of all my
afflictions, that his sentence and my death, will serve to his whole State, for
a lawful, and plentiful example of his Justice. And verily, if it grieve me, at
this time, to die, it also grieves me, that even by my death, I am not able to
give complete satiisfaction to his Holiness; For What a noble civil Soul was
this.
as much as he, being my Father, and Pastor, cannot, in fine, but feel the
death of a Son, and Sheep of his, with displeasure, and grief.

Upon which words, he finding, (even more then before) that there fell some
tears from mine eyes, to his hands, This is well indeed, (said he) your
Reverence commends my courage; but why then do you weep your self? At least,
let not others see you. I replied: Do you believe, my Son, that I have no sense
in me? Do you think perhaps, I am some piece of marble? Proceed you on to the
rest. And then, nameing diverse of his particular friends he desired me to ask
pardon for him, of them all; and this he did, with words of extreme sweetness,
and prudence. This being then said by him with a most admirably intrepid heart,
he concluded with this desire; I beseech your Reverence, that in the last
place, you will beg pardon for me, of Almighty God, as I my self do now, with
the most internal part of my heart; and of your self, I ask my Penance and
Absolution.

Which as soon as I had given him, the Brothers of that Congregation of the
Misericordia, did put us in mind that it was time Mass should be celebrated;
and so the Priest, as soon as he was vested, began. The devout young Lord, and I
kneeling together against a form, he said thus to me. The Priest is beginning
Mass; and I (with your good leave) will have a new Reconciliation, according
to that, which my good Angel shall bring to my remembrance, of whom I have
desired this favor. The Priest was saying the Confiteor at the foot of the
Altar; to whom one of the Congregation (making answer) was so overwrought with
tenderness, that he could not get to the end of it; in such sort, as that it
was necessary, some other should do it for him. Then the good Noble Man, who
answered softly to the Confiteor, leaning toward me, said thus, Give He had
the gift of tears in a strange measure.
me leave to weep, whilst I say the Confiteor, since that Gentleman weeps so
bitterly, to whose office it belongs not greatly, that he should weep. I
answered, he might weep in the name of God; since he had given him such great
desire so to do. And it was an admirable effect of divine grace, that
instantly, I saw the tears streaming down his cheeks, and pouring themselves,
even upon the cushion, that lay before him.

When the Confiteor was don, and all Till after the Gospel.
the while the Priest was reading with a loud voice, he did not move at al, but
wa^ most fixedly attentive, and as it were rapt toward the The Crucifix was of
stone, but his mind was upon the Original, not upon the Original, not upon the
picture.
Crucifix, upon the Altar, which was there most devoutly made. And shortly
after, (turning toward my ear) he accused himself of diverse little things,
which then suddenly surpised his mind. And the Priest being com to About the
middle of Mass.
Sursum corda; Father (said he) do you think indeed, that by such a death as
this, and so well deserved, I may yet go strait to heaven? And why (said I) may
not your Lordship undergo this death with so great and so well conditioned
affectuousness of mind, as that your soul may be sure to fly up instantly, from
the block, into heaven. O my God! (said he) And what kind of affectuousness
must that be! O teach it me a little! O, that our Lord would grant it me! Pray
(said I) very earnestly unto him for it, and peradventure he will grant it At
which time, the Priest being in the very act of the Elevation of the Body of
our Lord, the young Noble Man spoke these very, very words. O bone Jesu, sis
mihi, in hac hora, Jesus. O dear Lord Jesus, be thou, in this hour, a Jesus to
me. And this he said, with so ardent affection of mind, though with a low
voice, as that after it, he was wholly immove-able, till the Priest went on, to
The (...) of (...)
Domine non sum dignus, etc. And then, he said thus to me. I have not, Father,
been attentive, either when the Pater Noster, or the Agnus Dei, was said; may I
yet nevertheless communicate? I answered, that for the present, he should do
such a This was perhaps the knocking of his breast, or some such other thing,
which might be done at the instant
Penance, whilst I was giving him Absolution. Which being done, he went, of
himself, to the Altar; and kneeling down, did with exemplar devotion, receive
the most Blessed Sacrament; and soon after, he came back, toward me where he
remained, without any motion at all.

After this, turning about to all those who assisted, he said, I give thanks to
you all, for your Charity, and courtesy; and, I beseech you, pardon the
painful night I have brought upon you. And then, he desired me, for the love of
him, to repeat those words, to every one of them, in particular; and so I did.
Being then entreated to sit down, the wonted circle was made about him. Where
every one endeavored to animate him, toward the combat then at hand; by
representing the shortness of the pain, the immensity of the reward, the vanity
of the world; and above all, the abundant grace, which, in the space of so few
hours, our Lord had communicated to his Soul, and had given him withal, such a
pregnant sign of his Predestination; wherein the Noble Youth seemed to find
extraordinary gust.

Amongst the many discourses which were made to this purpose, as well by the
Confortatori, as by our Fathers, I used this. And what think you, Signor
Troilo, will the grace, which God has given you, be sufficient to make you
bear this punishment? I tell you truly, that in imitation of Christ, you should
do well to desire it, and that desire, would serve to make it more tolerable to
you; Nay it would make it seem no punishment at all, and lastly it would make
it seem swee^. As it happened to Christ our Lord himself, to The immense love
which our Lord Jesus bare to man, made all he suffered seem little to him.
whom his Passion, seemed so small a matter, that whereas others called it, by
the name of a huge thing, an Ocean, a deep sea, (Veni in altitudinem maris, and
tempestas demersit me) himself calls it, but a Cup full; (Calicem quem dedit
mihi Pater, non vis ut bibam illum?) Again, after that huge heap of bitterness,
and torments which he had endured, it seemed nothing to him. For being asked by
those disciples who were going to Emaus. if he knew of that vast cruelty, which
had then lately bin executed at Jerusalem, upon the person of the greatest
Saint of God, he answered, by asking, Quae? for in fine he esteemed it all as
nothing. Therefore, speaking of his Passion, he used the word Baptism, saying,
Baptismo habeo baptizari, and quomodo coarctor, etc. And you know that bathes
serve for delicacy. What say you then Signor Troilo? Does not your punishment,
by this time, seem small to you? Small; (says he?) it seems nothing. Yet can I
not sa^, either that it is nothing, or yet very pleasant; but nevertheless, it
is dear to me, and as such I prize it. And How mightily this noble man, grew up
in grace, even by moments.
I assure you, at the present, it would be as it were, a kind of trouble for
me, to escape it. Before I desired to escape; I sighed for it; I labored for
it; and I know not what of that kind. But I had not then, that knowledge of my
self, which now, by the favor of God, methinks I have, in such sort, as now, I
can affirm to you, in the word of Truth, that I This so ardent desire, of
suffering for his sins, must needs be a great disposition toward the obtaining
pardon for them, through the mercy of Christ our Lord.
desire my end, how painful soever it may be, toward the remission of my sins.

To this, another Father said; your Lordship speaks wisely; for God knows,
whether otherwise, you should ever have bin so well prepared for death.
Whereupon, one of the Confortatori proceeded thus, If your Lordship had dyed
naturally in your bed; what, with the pain of your body, and the anguish of
your mind; it may be you would scarce have been master of your self. And if you
had dyed, by any other accident, perhaps you would not have had time, to bring
forth, so much as the name of Jesus. Whereas now, it Supposing first, the g^^ce
of God, as is declared afterward.
is in a manner, in your own power, to die as well as you will your self, with
what detestation of your sins you will; with what love of Christ you will; and,
in a word, in that best manner, which the grace of Almighty God will impart to
you; which we perceive, even so to overflow your Soul, that we are as much
astonished, as comforted, by the knowledge of it.

Hereunto the constant Noble Man made this answer. You shall know, that by the
goodness of God, I find in my self, no trouble nor tentation; and me Nothing
but the very hand of God, was able so to have conducted him, through these
stony waye^. And it seems, God commun^ca^ed himself ^o the Delinquent, in a
very particular manner.
thinks I am in a hand which hears me up. I desire, and I resolve to die, in
that manner, which I shall be taught to be the best; and I am most ready, for
the saving of my Soul, to obey whatever shall be commanded me. This, said I,
you shall therefore do. You shall bar your self in that hour, of some ease.
That is, you shall for the love of Jesus, and, in imitation of what he did and
suffered for you, deprive your self of somewhat, which you might have; and
which, at that time, might be agreeable to you. For, if you well remember, they
gave twice unto our Lord, to drink. The first time, when they gave him vinegar,
he drank; but when they gave him wine, as soon as he had tasted it, he put it
by. But do you know the reason? It was this. To such as were condemned to die,
it was the custom to give wine, with an infusion of myrrh; that by the comfort
of it they might faint the less, under their torments. Now our Lord (who was
pleased to deprive himself entirely, and fully, of all consolation, for love of
us, and for our example) refused that, but accepred the vinegar, which was
mingled with With Gall.
another most bitter ingredient; that so he might s ff^r the most he could, for
our example, and benefit.

The Providitore said. that this was most certainly true; whereupon some
expound those words, which Christ spoke upon the cross, Deus Deus m^us, ut quid
dereliquisti me? That Christ our Lord, did grieve thereat, because the Divinity
beg^n, as it were, to hide it self from the Humanity; and consequently by
little and little, his life was leaving him; and by occasion thereof, he was
able to suffer no longer; which the most en^mor'd Jesus observing, complained
of it, to his Father, by the words aforesaid.

To these things a Father of ours, adding other devour, and short discourses,
the Confortatori said; That for the time his Soul was sufficiently fed; and
that it would be well done, to refresh his body. The Baron answered, there was
no need of that. But they pressing it much, there was brought in some wine by a
servant of the Lord This Government, is the place of greatest confidence the
Pope bestows.
G^vernour of the Castle, which, one of the Gentlemen there present, po^ring
forth into a glass, presented to the Baron; who said again, it was wholly
needless; And yet (said he, turning then toward me) if I should need it, your
A good memory he had* and a more pious will.
Reverence told me a while ago, that in imitation of Christ, I should do well
to deprive my self of it. Father, is it not so? Nevertheless being entreated by
all the Assistants, that he would drink, or at least, so much, as wash his
mouth; this last he did twice, without swallowing any wine at all. And this was
so much more remarkable, because such as are in that case, use to be extremely
taken with thirst, which is held to be one of their greatest torments.

The wine being then carried away, diverse questions were asked this most
illustrious Lord, to which he Note and wonder at these answers, which are so
full of piety, wisdom and courage,
answered with so great prudence and judgment, that more could not be
imagined. He was asked first (for, of many, I will mention only a few, and this
first question he was asked often) Signor Troilo, will your Lordship have any
thing? He still answered, that he desired nothing, saving that once he held his
deace, but made a sign up to heaven. Besides, he was often asked, Signor
Troile, of what are you thinking? Sometimes he answered, upon nothing in
particular; Sometimes, upon our Lord; Sometimes upon my sins; Sometimes, upon
my approaching end; Sometimes, he said, I think upon the so many gifts, which
God has bestowed upon me, and that I have been so very ungrateful, yea and even
unmindful of them all. Being then asked in this manner, Does your Lordship die
willingly? He answered: And what? would you have me bustle against the order of
the Prince? Or should I not be content, with the providence, and good pleasure
of God? Is it possible, said one, that the Devil should not strive, to make you
think your death unjust? I do not, (said he) esteem it only to be just; but
most just; and as for the Devil, I neither have, nor will have, any more to do
with him, I have had enough, and too much of him already.

Another asked him, what he said of the Lady his Mother, his Friends, his
Kindred, and himself; if he were not much afflicted with the thought thereof?
Concerning my Lady Mother (said he) I confess, in the most inward parts of my
heart, I find extreme affliction; but, on the other side I rejoice that I am
paying the offenses, I have committed against her, with my blood. And I hope,
the readiness wherewith I embrace this Penance, for my wicked carriage t^wards
her, will be so well accepted by Almighty God, that he may, through his
goodness, give her no small comfort, even by this very death of mine. I think
of my kindred with grief, as having been a cause of Sorrow and trouble to them;
of my friends as having given them ill example; of my self, I take no care;
for behold who A great faith, and hope, and love.
does it for me; making a sign toward the Crucifix, which he had hard by him.

Being asked, whether the time did seem long to him or short. Neither This I
find to be a strange answer, in the superlative de^^ee of strangenes.
long (say he) nor short. And another replying to him thus; Is it possible,
that you are not grieved, you must die; I do not, says he, deny, but I am
grievd at it, but yet it neither troubles me, nor so much, as alters me, more
then you see. It being wished, that he should suffer his chair to be drawn a
little forward, that so he might sit at greater ease; To what end (said he)
should I give my body ease, I am well here; and with the help of God, I shall be
shortly free from needing that, or any thing else. Being desired to raise, and
rest his feet, upon a place of advantage, where they used to kneel, that so he
might be in a more commodious posture; he said, (drawing near my ear,) Father,
it is a piece of ill manners, to sit with a man's legs raised up, in the
presence of others. But I advising him however, that he would set them up; he
did instantly accommodate himself to my desire.

Being asked to what devotions "he had bin most particuler^y affected: He
answered; Above all the Saints in Heaven, to that of our He was ever much
devo^ed to our B. Lady.
Blessed Lady, in whose honor, I did daily recite her Office, but with an
impure mouth; and how then could that be accepted by her? And till within these
two years, I made, said he much account of going to Confession, which through
the mercy of my Lord, I resolved never to intermit, unless it were by some
very unlucky accident, that should interpose i^ self. And I ever carried living
in my heart, the memory of many things which formerly, upon several occasions,
had ^^en represented to me by ^und^^ Religions Fathers, with whom I had much
conversed, (insinuating thereby, as I conceive, the Fathers of the Chiesa
Nuova.) And, When I had means, to do it in private, I never failed any day, to
salute the Blessed Virgin upon my bare knees. And then, I saying (I know not
well, upon what occasion) Ah poor Signor Troilo. Poor (said he) I was, when I
was without the the grace of my Lord God, but now I take myself to he rich.

But then the time of his end drawing on apace, we rising up from our seats,
did encircle him upon our knees. And (after the manner of two Quires,
interch^ngeably answering one another) we began the seven Penitential Psalms;
pondering some of the verses now and then, and causing him to resume diverse of
them. They being ended, he was advised to say often Recordare Jesu pie etc. And
then These are parts of some Hymns which are recited by the holy Church, in
honor of ou^ Lord Jesus, and our B. Lady.
Eia ergo advocata nostro etc. And then again Maria matter gratiae, and the
like. Which he pronounced, with so clear a voice, so constant a memory, and
with a countenance so serene, that all who were present (himself only excepted)
did weep outright; Which he observing made silence, and taking his own face
into his hands, stood still a while, in mental prayer; And then, turning
toward me, said; Confitcor The enatrance whereby we begin to make our
Confession.
Deo Omnipotenti and tibi Pater. I accuse my self of this and this, and that;
Ideo This we use to say when we have ended it.
precor, etc.

And then, instantly he added this: Father I would desire A far greater matter
it was to ask this suit, then to grant it.
this last favor of you, that you would confess me at the block; and that,
whilst I, on the one side, with my Beads in my hand, might say O bone Jesu, sis
mihi Jesus; O good Lord Jesus, be thou a Jesus to me; and you on the other, Ego
te absolvo, etc. I absolve thee, etc. at the same instant the iron might fall
upon my neck. Not so, my Lord, said I. For so by giving a sign to the
Executioner for the cutting off your head, I should become By the canons of the
holy Church, a Priest may not cooperate to the death of any man though never so
far off; but only for the punishment of delinquents in course of Justice; nor
then neither, but with particular dispensation, and that in very rare cases.
The Inquisition has nothing to do herein, but only examines and leaves such as
are faulty and impenitent to the secular Judges.
Irregular. No, no I will not do it, by any means. But then, observing he was
much afflicted by my negative, and so rather to quiet him, then for any thing
else, I said it might perhaps be thus better done, you may confess at the block,
and being confessed, you may begin to invoke the name of Jesus, and when I
shall see the Executioner ready to let down the iron, I may say with a loud
voice, Ego te absolvo. etc. Yet perhaps again this would be more inconvenient,
for by giving you a sign, when the iron were upon the point of falling, it
might fright you in such sort, that if by the motion of your body; it should
not fall just upon your neck it would mangle you, and so afflict you with a
double pain, and a double death, I will not do it by any means.

At these words, casting his head upon my bosom, he said; Ah Father, even by
all the love you bear this miserable sinful Soul, do me this favor; I make a
promise to you in the name, and by the help of God, that you shall not put me
into terror by it. For Gods love believe me; I beseech you give me credit.
Whereupon yet, I continuing, as I had resolved before; O God (said he) and
might not thy divine Majesty move the heart of this my Father, to esteem me
worthy this favor? Well, be of courage (said I, to quiet him) I promise you
that I will do it. Then give me (answered he) that The hands of Catholic
Priests are anointed and consecrated with great solemnity
sacred hand of yours. And I gave it him, with this purpose, that if he should
not remember it, at the block, as I verily though he would not, then I would
let it pass; and that if h^ remembered it, and did franckly call for it, I would
perform it. But it seemd (as I said) to me, that a man co^ld hardly be of so
undanted a mind, as that, in so hard a passage, his memory would serve him for
such a business; and that, whereas all men procure to divert their minds from
such a blow, this Baron would needs have an express sign of it. But in fine,
where the grace of God enters, it produces effects, which far outstrip all the
power of nature and no wit of man arrives to them.

When I had made him this promise; I His heart wrought mightily toward
humility.
would know (said he) whether your Reverence will not think it sit that I give
thanks, and demand pardon of those who have had most to do with me in this
place. I told him I liked well of it; and having given him Absolution, I
entreated him by a sign to sit down. Then he said Father, take you care of my
journey from hence to the block, as you have already promised; and you shall
please to go advertising me from pace to pace of such things as are fit, that I
may have my whole soul for God alone. I will advertise you, (said I) of all,
keep your self prepared, and sit down.

As soon as he was set, all the strings of our very hearts seemd to be moved at
once, to pray him that he would be mindful of us in heaven. And It is a sign
they saw strange tokens of Gods favor in him.
every one of us there present, both with words and tears, did recommend
himself to him the best he could; and we were not able to satisfy our selves
in the desire we had of expressing kindness toward him. And verily this was a
death of so much tenderness, that the remembrance of it at this time affects me
at the very Soul. Only the young Noble Man remained with a most Angelical
Countenance and with a heart which seemed not so much as to know what belonged
to fear.

This A desc^iption of S^gnor Troilo's person and fashion.
Sig. Troilo was tall of statur^, of delicate constitution; of color rather
olivaster then very fair, of black hair and thick, of face neither fat not
lean, his e^es were black, and full, and quick his nose sweetly raised: his
mouth of a just proportion, and rather, smiling, then otherwise; his forehead
competently spacious and he had not so much as one single hair upon his cheeks.
Of a sweet voice, of ready answers; and so complete in good fashion, that, even
at the block, he failed not to salute, and resalute all men, according to the
occasion, and their condition; and, not being able to take off his hat himself,
to make others do it for him.

It happened once, that I desired him to let me wipe his face with a
handkerchief; not that he was in any sweat, but only to refresh him a little:
He suffered me to begin to do him that service, and then said; Father, I need
not this. But I desired, that at least he would rub his face with his own
hands, for it would refresh him; and instantly doing so, he said to me in mine
ear; Father, I had an extreme desire to stretch my self, but methought it had
somewhat of the Clown.

In conclusion, he caused all those soldiers, who had kept guard over him, to
pass before him one by one; and so It i^ a true sign, and a certain fruit of
true penance, to submit a man's self mightily for Gods sake.
casting himself upon his knees to every one of them as they singly p^ssed, he
asked pardon most humbly of them, with Noble and Christian words; and he left
them also liberal donatives. To the Gentleman Porter he did the like, and more;
excusing himself for the trouble he had given him.

But now there remained no more to be done, the time being run out; For the In
those Countries there rings a bell every morning, noon, and night, when all men
recite three short prayers, in remembrance of the Incarnation of Christ our
Lord. This they do wherever they be, when the bell rings, though it be in the
streets; and there they salute one other, with a wish of the good day, or night.
Ave Maria bell did sound. Upon the hearing whereof we all recited that Prayer,
and he said it also upon his knees. Then saluting all the company, he sat
down, and was silent. And whilst he held his peace, we spoke among our selves
with astonishment at many things we had observed in him, and they were these:
He did never sweat, nor ever complained of any thing. He never placed himself
with any show of weariness upon his chair; nor ever showed any unquietness. He
never wept, but whilst he was making his Confession; nor ever sought to ease
himself in the course of Nature. He never had any thirst; nor ever fainted. He
was never sleepy; nor ever overwrought with sorrow. He was ever fresh and
strong; though in that night he had bin so many and very many times upon his
knees. He ever answered readily, and with a lively voice. His memory never
failed, or so much as wavered. He was handsomely and modestly apparelled. He A
strange image of perfection was this young Noble man.
spoke not so much as an inconsiderate word. He never expressed a desire of any
thing. He had at certain times, and upon certain occasions a discharged and
smiling countenance. He did completely give every man those titles of respect
which were his due; without failing so much as once; as to one, of R^verence,
to another of Honor; to another, of You. He declared most currently his last
Will, which was a sheet of paper long. He was not taken by passionate
tenderness, but only upon the speech of the Lady his Mother. He spoke most
honorably and Christianly of the Prince and Judges; and even of those who
prosecuted the cause against him. All which particulars, or the most part of
them happen otherwise in others who fall into the like condition. So that all
those old experienced Confortatori of that Congregation of the M^sericordia
were amazed to see how abundantly the grace of God had wrought upon that Soul
in the space of a few hours.

When this most devout Noble man had thus held his peace, and we had been
discoursing among our selves of the things aforesaid, he, calling me toward
him, who yet was standing not far off, spoke to me in this manner. Dear Father,
let us make our last Reconciliation with God. And then he made a short
recapitulation of all his faults; and began A happy soul to be so speedily, and
so entirely purified.
to accuse himself of things so extremely small; as gave occasion and matter to
this Soul of mine, even till this day wherein I write, and will till the hour
of my death, both to be comforted and confounded.

Being upon the end of his Confession he fell into a most ardent weeping; in
such sort, as that bowing down his head toward my hand, I was not able to
endure the heat of his breath. And when I said to him, Troilo my Son; Cast a
bridle upon those tears of yours; do not exasperate your own wound; it is now
enough, and again enough; you have wept enough, you will have time to weep yet
again, when you come to lay your Head upon the block, for He was to suffer
death for his misde eds, but he was to bear it patiently and willingly for the
love of Christ.
Christ. His answer was this; I have already told you, Father, and now I tell
you once again, I weep for my sins, not for my death. And when your Reverence
shall have given me Absolution, and I have performed the Penance you will
impose (which only deserves to be accompanied with tears) you shall find I will
weep no more. And just so it happened; for, wiping his face when I had absolved
him, and I having acquainted him with some necessities of mine own, to the end
he might give me By his holy prayers in heaven
assistance in the sight of our Lord; he remained with eyes as full of
serenity, and void of tears, as if in all his life he had never wept.

But then having raised himself, it was thought fit by all the Company, that
certain Psalms should be repeated, whereof I, with the Confortator^ were to
ponder some of the verses till such time as his hour should arrive. Whereupon
he said, It is now broad day, and there cannot be much time remaining. Our
Great Piety and gratitude.
Lord be blessed for making me pass through this night so happily and so
holily. I thank you dear Father, and you Gentlemen, for your so great favor.
The good God reward you for it. And here all of us recommending our selves
again to his prayers, we also again began the Psalms.

At this time the Executioner came in, and no man had the heart to tell my Lord
of it; but he, perceiving there was a preass of people, gently turned his face
about, and as soon as he had set eye upon him, he was not troubled with it at
all; but Undauored holy courage.
armed himself only with the sign of the Holy Cross; and, making a countenance
to me, who stood close by him, he rose and said: Well, the hour is come;
Gentlemen, let us go, and that cheerfully. And, they all answering thus; Yea
let it be done cheerfully, Signor Troilo, cheerfully for the love of Jesus; He
turned toward the Executioner, who kneeling down at his feet to ask his
pardon; Do your office (said he) in the name of God, for so He will have it.
Your Lordship (said he) is to unbutton the Collar of your doublet; And he
(being as ready on the one side, as he was modest on the other) with his own
hands began to unbutton. It is not enough, said the chief Execution^r, the
doublet must be put off: But the rest of those Officers of Justice were not
willing he should put it off: Yet the generous Noble man said, That, however he
would do it, if they thought it fit. For (said he) it shall not greatly trouble
me; and if you have a mind to it, I will strip my self from head to foot for
the love of God. Already therefore he was beginning to unty himself; but it
sufficed that he was unbutton'd to the shoulders. Then one of the Confortatori
putting him in mind of Non crubescam, etc. and the Officer coming to tie his
arms in such a fashion, as that when he should be arrived at the block, his
body might not have much leave to move; In the name of God (says he) bind hoth
my arms, and my hands too, if your will be such. For This man had true faith in
Christ our Lord, and his sacred Passion, who in contemplation and imitation
thereof, was so willing to suffer, as you see.
my Lord Jesus was yet much worse bound for me.

Being therefore thus accommodated, they cast a gown about him; and he kneeled
down before the Altar; in act, as if he had craved a benediction at the hands
of our Lord. And, without the least change of color, beginning the Psalm
Miserere of himself; and, being come as far as the outward room, he paused
there with an incredible decency and grace; And said to some of the
bystanders, Might I not thank my Lord, the Governor of the Castle before I
die? But they presenting I know not what excuse of his not being risen, he
accepted thereof, and commanded a Gentleman who served the Governor to thank
him in his name. And, having demanded pardon of many of the Assistants, and
exhorting them, in some very few words, to virtue, by the example, which there
they had before their eyes of the contrary, he went on with the very same verse
of the Miserere, where he had left before. And sometimes turning toward me, he
would be saying* Come See whe^^^r the B^ron (...) ^f^aid of death or no.
Father, come; to heaven to heaven. And it was a strang^ thing, that he being
in pantofl^^ and going down such a long pair of stairs, as that is; and much
broken by reason of the Artillery, which, upon frequent occasions, is drawn up
and down them, yet did not his foot once slip; Though I, who was in shoos,
failing to tread right many times, was willed by him to take care of my self.

When he was arrived to the other open stairs, where many persons of the Castle
were to see him; one of the Confortatori, who was well experienced in those
occasions, and stood on the one hand, placing a Crucifix before him (and as it
were covering him therewith) cried out with a strong voice, Let Viva Giesu
Christo.
Christ Jesus live; be not frighted, my Lord. To which he (after he had ended
the Verse he was pronouncing) made this answer; Yea let Christ Jesus live; in
whom whilst I am hoping, I fear not to be confounded. And then said I, In te
Domine speravi, non confundar in aeternum; which being repeated by him, he
spoke thus to them; Take A noble courage.
the Crucifix aside; let all the people see me. For, if I be good for nothing
else, at least I may serve them for an example. There passed one that way with
a bottle of wine in his hand, who saluted the Baron upon his knee, and the
Baron courteously resaluted him; and so returned to the same verse of the
Psalm, which he had formerly begun. Soon after, passing through the people who
stood there somewhat thick, he said; Learn Few words, and well chosen. It is
not there the fashion for a man to stand preaching at the place of his
execution.
by my example to live well, and pray for me. And thus with Psalms and
Jaculatory prayers he came to the block, where there was store of lookers on.

The intrepid Baron pausing there, said thus. I would desire in these last
moments of my life to see at least, and salute and thank the Lieutenant
Governor of the Castle, since I cannot see my Lord the Governor. But the
Lieutenant by no means resolving to go toward him (for the extreme tenderness
wherewith he was taken) the Noble Youth perceiving it, and turning to me, said;
Father, his heart serves him not to come; and perhaps I make the people stay
too long. O most valiant and most undaunted mind, which was troubled more with
the slight incommodity of others, then with the apprehension of his own
imminent death!

At last he cheerfully advancing forward, the Lieutenant came before him; and
the Baron casting himself upon his knee, said to me, In courtesy, Father, take
off my hat: Which the good Gentleman observing, A kind contention who should
most exceed in courtesy.
did with a most bitter and loud cry of tears even spread himself all upon the
ground; and all the bystanders upon that occasion did cast themselves upon
their knees; nor was there any thing heard but a loud voice of tears. This
generous young Lord said then thus to him. Sir, do not weep; I had no design
but to salute you; to thank you; and to beg pardon, as now I do, both of your
self, and in your person, at the hands of all those who are present here;
desiring them to learn at my cost, and to pray for my Soul. This he said with
so strong a voice, as that he was heard, notwithstanding the noise of their
weeping. I also was not able to stay my tears; when he, leaning toward mine
ear, spoke these very words now below, as before he had done above: Behold,
your Reverence is weeping; and yet still you tell me I must have a Noble Heart.

Then having repeated diverse times, In manus tuas Domine, commendo spiritum
meum; and, Suscipe me Domine, secundum eloquium tuum, and non confundas me ab
expectatione mea; he was wished to ascend and then to lay himself down upon the
Scaffold. At the same instant one of the Confortatori saying to him, Cheerfully
Signor Troilo, courageously Signor Troilo; and a whole cry of prayers being
raised and made by all the company for him, that valiant Heart did answer even
with a smiling countenance; A noble, and holy valiant heart.
Know (a) Gentlemen, that I die cheerfully for the Love of Jesus Christ, and in
Penance for my sins.

As he was laying down his head; where (said he) is the Father? And turning
toward the Executioner, he said, Stay a while; for I will be reconciled. And
beckning me first toward him with his countenance; Father (said he) on this
hand I place my These Saints he used as intercessors for him to Christ our Lord.
Good Angel; and on that S. Paul, and S. John Baptist; our B. Lady shall stand
before. Your Reverence must remember to perform the promise you made me. I will
say, O bone Jesu esto mihi Jesus; O good Lord Jesus, he thou a Jesus to me; and
when you shall see the cord is in cutting, you must say, Egote absolvo, etc.
that so when I shall invoke the name of Jesus, and you absolve me; my soul may
begin her journey from this body of mine toward heaven, by the mercy of my
Lord, as I confide it shall.

I ingeniously confess I was so extremely amazed within my self, and fell into
such an excess of weeping, that I had not a word to answer at the instant, but
in the language of tears. And he, in laying his head upon the block, expressly
spoke these very words: Dear Father, draw near me. Let is suffice, and I take
you to witness, That So that his memory and courage was far from failing him;
and perhaps there is hardly to be found in any history a nobler Character of
wisdom, prudence of mind, magnanimity, and sanctity.
I protest my self in my desire to lay down a thousand heads, in this one head
of mine; and in this one life to offer up a thousand lives. I accuse my self
for not doing it with that fervor of devotion, that vehemence of Contrition,
and that promptitude of resignation, which I have been told and taught. But I
know not how to do more. I accuse my self as truly of all the sins I have
confessed to your Reverence, as if now I did repeat them to you one by one. In
Penance, if it please you, I will give my head to Christ as a punishment most
deserved by me; and of you I desire Absolution.

So did this Noble heart, which neither was, nor was to be conquered or danted,
lay down that head upon the block. And saying then, Bring See how this true
Christian courage continues even to the end, and in the end.
hither the Crucifix that I may see it; he began also to say, O bone Jesu, sis
mihi Jesus; O good Lord Jesus, be a Jesus to me, being accompanied by all the
people, who were already upon their knees, and who also invoked the name of
Jesus. And my self standing close at the one side of his head, and looking
still when the Executioner would go about to cut the cord, as soon as I saw the
knife lifted up for that purpose, I said outright, Ego I absolve thee from all
thy sins in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
te absolvo ab omnibus peccatis tuis in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus
Sancti, Amen. He did then both more speedily and more loudly then was his
custom, say O Jesu, sis mihi Jesus; O Jesus, be thou a Jesus to me. And at the
instant, his head flew off at once, from his body, my self, with many others
also beholding that head thus separated from the body, to produce the last
syllable of the name JESUS, with a strong kind of hiss, or whisper. And I doubt
not but the Son flew up immediately into His body was interred in the Chiesa
Nuova.
Heaven; adorning all his former life with a most holy end; upon that very day
of the year whereon the most Illustrious Lord his Father had departed this
life, before this Son of his was born; that being the eighteenth of April, Anno
Domini 1574. this the eighteenth of the same month. 1592.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS. With an Explication of the ITALIANISMS.
THe hirth, person and parts of this noble man. page 5. and 125 His Crimes,
both Rapes and Murders. p. 8. The Banditi in Italy are outlaws and Rebels,
condemned and proscribed by Proclamation (in that language termed Bando) like
our Moss-troopers, or the Turries of Ireland. p. 8. Castle Sant Angelo, the
chief Prison in Rome. p. 10. This ha^ned in the beginning of P. Clement 8. his
Fontificate. p. 12. Theatins an Order of Religious persons, instituted by John
Peter Caraff, Bishop of Theate in Naples. p. 13. His Mother became unwill^rgly
the occasion of her sons reproachful death. p. 15. The vanity of worldly
pleasure exhibited by a fit Emblem. p. 16. The way of the Cross is the most
safe. p. 17. The benefits of affliction. p. 18 The resignation and humility of
the noble Youth. p. 22, The often confessing his sins. p. 24, 25. The several
manners of proceeding against Delinquents in other Countries compared with
ours. p. 30, 31. The Fathers of the Chiesa Nova. 1. the new Church, are Priests
of the Oratory of Jesus, instituted by S. Philip Nereus. p. 39, 65. How the
young Lord behaved himself when he received the first news of his death. p. 40
The manicling his hands. p 42. The manner how he was met by the Confortatori.
1. the Comforters. p. 43. The first thing he did was to confess himself. p 44.
Accepts of Gods providence with great alacrity. p. 46. Makes a declaration of
his Faith. p. 47. The pious Instructions, and Communications of the
Confortatori. p. 50, 51, 111, 114. His Will made, and the particulars of it. p.
52, 53. It must have seven witnesses in Italy to make it valid. p 55. How he
disposed his body. p. 55. His admirable Contriti^n. p. 60, 61, 69.70 His
unspeakable grief for his disob^^tance to his Mother. p. 63, 97, 117. How she
educated him. p. 64 65. Her invincible love and care of him. p. 67, 68, 69. His
exact method in Confessing. p. 60. He did even melt between grief and love. p.
62. His willingness to die. p. 67. Punishment imposed may be made voluntary by a
voluntary acceptance of it. p. 83. His Devotions to his good Angel. p. 86, 87
88. His ejaculatory Prayers. p 92. He said the Litanies and all the Fathers
wept. p. 94. The Providitore in Italian signifies a Provider, but here it is
tak^^ for an Officer am^ng the Confor^atori della misericorcia, or Sodality of
mercy. p 43 64. His last message and recommendatio^^ (...) his Mother. p 97 98.
To his Grandmother. p. ^00. His humble message to the Pope. p. 102 He found no
trouble nor temptation in himself. p. 112. His dovout receiving the Blessed
Sacrament. p. 107. His pious and prudent Answers to several questions. p. 115,
118. His Devotion to our B. Lady. p. 119. The Confortatori wept bitterly. p.
125. He asked pardon of the Soldiers. p. 127. Remarks of his admirable
Carriage. p 128. He fell into an ardent weeping. p. 130. For his sins, not his
death. p. 131. His great piety and gratitude. p. 132. His words to the
Executioner. p. 133. A loud voice of tears among the Spectators. p. 139. His
cheerfulness at the last moment. p. 135, 140. His advice to the people.
137.139. The L. Governor wept passionately. p 138. S. Troilo's last
jaculatory, Prayers. 139 142 His last words at the block. p. 144. His Ghostly
Fathers tears. p. 141. His Execution. p. 143. The death and burial of Signora
Flaminia his Mother. p. 13.
ERRATA.
Page. 29. line 19. de le not, p. 41. l. 3. r B. Lady. p. ^6. l. 3. p 6. r
consortat. p 27. l. 11. r from. off p. 58. l 74. r ones sins. p. 65. l. 18 r
particular. p. 67, l 2.3. r whereby, p. 59. l. 1. r committed. p 62 l. 23. r
might p. 83. l. 23. r ^he night. p. 83. P. 91 l. 6. r occasion. As. p. 95. in
margin. r whole, ofice of. p. 1 26. l. 6. r peace. p. 1 18. l. 10. r said he.
p. 121. in mergin r entrance.


