THE JACOBITES CATECHISM, That is to say.
An INSTRUCTION to be learned of every Person who either desires, or expects to
be confirmed by the Late Bishop of ELY.

By Benjamin Bird, Rector of Wooton fits Pain, near Lyme Regis in the County of
Dorset.



Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, in the Year, 1691.

TO THE BOOKSELLER.
SIR.
YOU may see by the enclosed that the Jacobite Catechism has left nothing by
the Obstruction it met with; the Author had no design to Burlesque the Church
Catechism, nor to reflect upon the Creed, Lords Prayer, or Sacraments, for
those are all Sacred things, but he was willing it should look something like a
Catechism: He has now omitted their Creed and their Prayer, till he better
understands what they believe and when they Pray. Their Sacraments also are
left out, because some of them have paid dear for drinking Healths to K. James
this last Assizes.

SIR. I am King Williams Loyal Subject, and your Real Friend Philirenes Junior.
Wotton, 29. August, 1691.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere will speedily be published the Williamites Catechism, written by the
Author of this Catechism.

THE JACOBITES CATECHISM.
Quest. WHat is your Name?

Answ.

Quest. Who gave you that name?

Answ.

Quest. Did they promise any thing further for you to make you keep up your
Name;

Answ.

Quest. Pray tell me what it was;

Answ. 1. That as my Forefathers had done so, I should follow their steps, in
siding with French Dragoons, and Irish Cutthroats, against my native Country.
2, That I should renounce the English Laws, and Liberties of the subject; 3.
That I should come very short of that Love I bear to the Reformed Religion, and
my Protestant Brethren


Quest. Do thou think thou art any ways obliged to Act what they promised in
thy Name;

Answ. Romes help so I will, and I heartily thank our Earthly Father Lewis Le
Grand, that he has taken us into his protection, and I question not but he will
be as kind to us as he has been to the Hugonots of his own Country.

Quest. But your Principles of Government both in Church and State, are not the
same which he has taught them there;

Answ. refined in neither as it is there, but we have endeavored to instill them
into the People of our Nation for above these 30. Years.

Quest, What principles have you taught them concerning the State?

Answ. God in Heaven, so there ought to be but one Government one Earth, and
that's Monarchical both in Church and State, for as it is said, by me Kings
Reign, so in the Church Bishops ought to govern, and those two are so twisted
one in the other, that as it is our Maxim, No Bishop, no King, so they who are
Enemies to Monarchy and Episcopacy, are Enemies to all Government both in the
Church and State for as there can be no State without Kings, so there can be no
Church without Bishops, and therefore I blame the New Williamite Church of
England, for composing a Form of Prayer for all the Reformed Churches, seeing we
never owned them for true Churches, though we own the Church of Rome for a true
Church.

Quest. What do these Principles lead you to follow;

Answ. 1. That our gracious Monarch K. James is our only King de Jure. 2. That
his supposed Son the Welsh Prince will in due time redeem us, and all of our
Loyal Principles, from our present Bondage, to a Prince of the Reformed
Religion. 3. That none are truly Loyal who are not of our Club and Societies.


Quest. Is there no Laws or Rule that you are to obey for your better
direction, in practicing what you shall learn;

Answ.

Quest. Which be they;

Answ. 1. Render to Caesar the things which are Cafars. And 2 unto God the
things which are Gods.

What do they chiefly teach you;

Answ.

Quest. Which be they;

Answ. 1. We are taught what we are to render to our King. 2. What we owe
toward God.


Quest. What is it you are to render to your King;

Answ. Caesar, and that he may govern Despotically, and is not tied up to the
Laws of the Land to which he has sworn, but that he may impose Taxes, etc.
without consent of Parliaments, and the People are bound in Conscience on pain
of Eternal Damnation to obey; for we are not to enquire our Duty to our King
out of the known Laws of the Land, but from the Holy Scriptures, as they are
expounded by these Ancient Fathers of the Church, Sibthorp and Manwaring, etc.
that gape after Court preferment* who would fain Enslave the Subject to advance
themselves.

Quest. What have you been taught that you owe to God;

Answ. Ceremonies of our Church, which are in a manner as holy as the Censors
of Old, and we are not to part with the least of them to gratify our weak
Brethren, who are so Sacrilegious, as to endeavor to Rob the Church of the
White Robe, the Wife of the Wedding Ring, the Infant of the Invisible Bag of
Christianity, which he wears in his Forehead, and the devout Christian of his
genuflection at the high Altar.

Quest. know that thou art not able to do all this of thy self without calling
in Foreign Aid and Assistance; Therefore let me hear what Endeavors thou
wilst use to thy power for effecting it;

Answ, 1. I will endeavor it three ways. 1. I will (as we have from the
beginning of the Reformation) labor to foment the differences amongst all
Protestants whatsoever, that I may once more blow those Coals to a Flame, as
may consume them and their Church to Ashes, so as we may once again come to
practice those things which I have now learned. 2. I will endeavor to keep the
wounds of the Church open and Bleeding, and excite the most Furious of both
parties, and villifie moderate Men, and Men of healing Spirits, to make them be
looked on as Lukewarm Laodiceans, and only fit to be spewed out of the mouths
of both Parties, whilst we cry aha! so we would have it. 3. I will as often as
I can possible, keep up a correspondence with Papists and the French Court, as
we have hitherto done, by inviting the French last year, and by our continual
advertising them of the State of the Kingdom, and what Ships are going out or
coming in, that the immortal Lewis may be in the better Capacity to help us:
for at present our Cause is so sunk, and that within these six months, I have
seen the melting down of five of our Golden-Candlesticks, for the support of
the Cause.


Quest. Is there no other Rube that you are to practice;

Answ.

Quest. What is it;

Answ.

Quest. Have you any distinguishing Mark whereby you may know who are of the
same Profession with you.

Answ.

Quest. What are they;

Answ. 1. A Health to our old Master King James: And 2dly. Another to our young
Master the Welsh Prince, who has all our good Wishes.

Quest. Why do you so often drink healths to K. James:

Answ. Mahomes, said, there is a Devil in every Berry of the Grape, and when
the Devil is got in, we are beholding to them that by a good Fine will conjure
him out again.

Quest. What mean you by the word Health.

Answ. James, the Welsh Prince, and the Popish Interest.

Quest. What is required of them who enter into these societies:

Answ. Orange contrary to their Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive
Obedience, and whether they do heartily and unfeignedly repent of that thing,
and steadfastly purpose to continue their Loalty to King James for the time to
come, and if God should restore their old Master again, whether they would not
soon grow weary of him, and Father Peter's, and whether they are in Charity with
all Men, especially with the Prince of Orange, who came in at their Invitation,
but would not be prevailed on to go out again at their Entreaty, being loath to
leave them in a worse condition then he found them.

Qu. But are you not guilty of great ingratitude to the Prince of Orange, that
ventured all he had to save you from Ruin.

Answ.

Quest. But must your Eye be evil because his is good.

Answ.

Quest. What reason can you Jacobites give that you had rather be Papists than
Presbyterians

Answ.

Quest. What think you of some of the Fathers of the Church of the Highest
Rank, that are for Peace and Agreement with others, since it is only in small
matters that we differ.

Answ. ruin of the Church, as it is Established by Law.

Quest, Suppose they were tried, and somewhat less would please them.

Answ. sufficiently Reformed already to our minds, though not to theirs.

Quest. How long may we teach Passive Ob^dience before. the Great Men of the
Kingdom will believe what we say;

Answ. Till Doomsday. For they will give the Parson the hearing, who to get
Preferment will Preach up that Doctrine but are very unwilling to be brought to
Practice it.

Quest. What made you no more concerned for the loss of those brave Patriots of
your Country, Essex, Russel; etc. who lost their Lives in defense of their
Country and its Liberties:

Answ. England, yet they were too moderate for to keep our Friendship long.

Quest. What must the poor Protestants in Ireland think of you, who were so
near Ruin by the means of your slow proceeding here.

Answ, Pack of Phanaticks, and especially Northward Scotch Presbyterians

Quest. What Opinion will the States of Holland and the (...)rotestant princes
of Germany, have of you for your carriage to (...) Prince that they esteemed
with Men and Money to come to our Relief.

Answ. French King it had been no matter if we had perished.

Quest. What shall the Emperor of Germany think of you that you who pretend to
be Protestants should have any kindness for King Lewis, that would root out the
Northern Heresy both at Home and Abroad.

Answ. that the King of England as a King of Devils.

Quest, Why since you have so great a kindness for King Lewis, will be not
allow the English Fugitives a Chapel in your old Masters palace, for the
Exercise of that little Religion they carried over with them.

Answ. Heresy should be preached on Catholic ground, and as for the Doctrine
of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience, his People have been taught that
sufficiently by the Common Hang man, so that there is no need of our Proaching
it up there.

Quest. But are you not Ashamed that you should be Popish Tools so long as you
were in the former Reigns.

Answ

Quest. But willt not the English. and French Papists laugh at you, to see you
so willing to be fooled by them a second time, that have been cheated by them
once already.

Answ; so mad, that we are got under the yoke of Princes, that are Enemies to
Looseness and Debauchery (and as we Jacobites think) smell too much of
Puritanism.

Quest, Seeing you are so much for the Papist and the French Interest, what
would you do if the French King should as last reject and slight you as he did
K. C. and your Old Master.

Answ. Holy Land, for our Master is to succeed Godfrey King of Jerusalem, as
soon as the French Monarch has Conquered Asia, and to be Crowned with Thorns in
that Holy City as Godfrey was formerly.

FINIS.

