Light breaking forth According to The Promise of God: Discovering it self To
the destroying and rasing the Fundamentals of Antichristian Gatherings
together, under the notion of the Churches of Christ: Together with Some
Prophetical Hints touching the Exaltation of the Throne and Kingdom of Christ
in Truth and Righteousness.

WITH A brief Declaration to the Inhabitants of these three Nations, England,
Scotland and Jreland: Also a Letter to Judge Cook.

Consider these things ye great and mighty into of the earth; For, behold the
Lord comes with an Host of hi^ (...) to govern the earth in Righteousness,
establishing equity and ju^, putting an end to all unrighteousness, and all
that work wickedly together.

Written in the year of the worlds wonder, and humbly presented to the Saints
and Servants of the most high God, not in name only, but in deed and in truth.

By a lover of Truth, and Witness hereof, Io. Binckes.

Matthew 15. 13. Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted shall be
rooted out.

London: Printed by R. A: for William Larn^r at the Black-Moor's head near
Fleet-Bridge. 1653.

A word to the Reader.
Dear Friends; and indeed so ye are; even as many of you as walk according to
the commands of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in so doing ye fulfill the whole
Law, that is, love; and whosoever is not found in obedience to the law of love,
is not only an enemy unto his neighbor, but he is an enemy to the Lord
Christ. I shall not trouble you with circumstances, but accordingly as in all
humility I am bound, shall present to your view the consideration of these
things, in which (though darkly) is held forth the fulfilling of many promises
declared in Scripture: Wherefore whoever thou art that read these things,
consider well what thou do e're thou give thy judgment concerning them,
left thou err, not knowing the gift of God; but first bring thy judgment into
the balance of equity, and then try and examine whether it will bear weight
with them, yea or no; for if thy judgment be found too light, thou will suffer
loss, assuring thy self, that the day is at hand, in which shall be discovered
all the folly and madness of men, who are yet in captivity in Babylon, and in
bondage to the Man of sin, that son of perdition, whom the Lord shall destroy
by the brightness of his coming, and then shall be manifested all the deceit
which has been practiced by the Merchants of that great Whore, which is
Babylon in the spirit so called, whose wares shall prove no better to thee then
the garments of an idol, which are worn out; even as filthy rags: for, the Lord
shall utter his voice from on high, even the voice of the Archangel, and all
the Nations of the earth shall fall down and tremble before him, giving glory,
and honor, and praise to him that lives for ever and ever.

Thine in the Lord Jesus; who at his appearing shall change our vile bodies,
and make them like unto his glorious body, that as he is, so shall we be in
this present world. Joseph Binckes.

Acts 13. 41. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish away, for I work a
work in your days, a work which ye shall not believe, if a man would declare
it you.

Acts 2. 17. And it shall be in the last days, says God, I will power out of
my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.


The first Vision.
NOw it came to pass in the beginning, I was carried as it were into a great
wilderness, in which I beheld a woman encompassed with an innumerable company
of people, of all Nations, and kindreds, and tongues, crying out with a loud
voice, saying. How long Lord, how long will it be e're thou avenge me of my
adversary? at which the people ran violently upon her, purposing to have
devoured her, but were not able, only this, they stripped her of her garments,
leaving her naked for a little space, and soon after there appeared a great
cloud, which separated the woman from the people, and the woman lift up her
hands, in which I beheld these two names, Justice, and Mercy, and on her head,
Wonderful Eternity; after a while the cloud passed away, the people as yet
remaining, to whom the woman discovered her self, at which they were filled
with blasphemous outcries, running at her with great violence, as before, but
she became a great fire, and consumed them all; and I beheld another people
brought forth, whose abiding was in and with this fire.

The Exposition of the first Vision.
THe wilderness is Babylon, that place of confusion, the inhabiters whereof
being such as are filled with a beast-like spirit, as Dragonish, or Lionish,
eager of prey, in which, and among whom the true Church, the Spouse of Christ,
as a woman is encompassed, and being in pain to be delivered, that is, to bring
forth righteousness her Son: These as enemies being round about her, and
hearing her cry, run violently upon her, and strip her of her garments, with
which they cloth themselves, and leave her naked; according as it is written,
they parted my garments amongst them; even so the sons of Babel, that great
whore, and all that serve the man of sin, do in behalf of their mother, and
the power to which they are in subjection, strip the truth at this day)
preaching forth strife and contention, subjecting the innocent under a color
of profession, wearing the words of truth, but the truth it self is persecuted
by them; therefore has a cloud separated the truth from them, their
understandings being darkened: this holds forth something of the Ascension of
Christ into heaven, which for the manner or nature how he did ascend, or how he
was received into heaven, is known to none, but those who are indeed the
Disciples of Christ, and I pray consider who they are, not those who love the
uppermost rooms at feasts, not those that love greetings in the markets, not
those that love to be called of all men Rabbi, not those who esteem themselves
above their brethren, not those that persecute strangers for conscience sake,
when indeed they ought rather to have received them, and refreshed them in
love, even as the Apostle Paul writes to the Hebrews, saying, forget not to
entertain strangers, and to do good forget not: I might instance in many other
particulars, but I shall leave that, and show to whom its known, that is to
say, the manner and nature of his Ascension; even to those who like Abraham
obey the voice of the Lord, forsaking their fathers house, and following the
voice of the Lord, not knowing whether they go; as also those whom David speaks
of in the 15. Psalm, or those of whom Isaiah speaks in his 33. chap. ver. 15.
and so forward, as also those who keep their fast according to Isaiah the 58.
ver. 6. and so forward; as also those, who like the Apostles, forsake all that
they have for the love of Christ, whether father or mother, wife or children,
land or livings, goods or good name, yea their own lives also; to these are
made known the mysteries of the Ascension and descending of Christ, or the
Kingdom of the Father, the time therefore is at hand; yea and now is, that the
cloud is passing away, and the glorious appearance of truth presents it self,
at which the sons of Babel are enraged, crying out blasphemy, blasphemy,
executing all that Beastiall power by which Babylon is upheld, and laying hold
on all who own the naked truth, persecuting and imprisoning of them, but the
truth, as a fire from the Lord shall consume them; that is, they being as yet
under the power of sin and Satan, their flesh shall be destroyed or consumed,
that their spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, that is in the day
wherein he shall open their eyes, by which they shall see themselves in
Babylon, and in the practice and power of the man of sin that son of perdition,
then shall they be brought forth a people zealous of good works, and shall
praise God in the fires; wherefore I humbly commend you to the reading with
understanding from the Lord, that 47. chap. of Isaiah, in which ye may see how
the Lord will call to Babylon, although she be a Virgin, yet she shall sit in
the dust; even so all that profess Jesus Christ, although they may appear as a
Virgin in an outside of profession, and yet in their works deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, shall be brought
down to sit in the dust: This only for caution to all such, who under a color
of Saintship deceive the simple, leading them in the way of their Fathers, who
indeed were they which persecuted the Prophets, not knowing that if the blind
lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch, that is, the pit of
destruction.

The second Vision.
IT came to pass also, I being as it were in a desert, beheld an old house
inhabited with all manner of wild beasts, cruel and monstrous, and I heard a
voice saying unto me, See thou this old house, behold I will call my workmen
together, and will show them the pattern of a new building, and they shall pull
down this old house, and the inhabiters thereof shall be destroyed, and all the
stone and timber that is in the old house in which is found life, shall go into
the new building, so that nothing be lost, but that in which is found no life
shall be cast into the fire, for the hands of the workmen shall prove it.

The Exposition of the second Vision.
MAn in this world is as an old house in the desert, which being inhabited with
all manner of beasts cruel and monstrous, so man, yea the best of men in their
first state or being, is but of the earth, that is earthy, and during the time
of this state, until man be changed from earthinesse into spirituality, by the
coming in of the spirit of the Lord: man I say is inhabited or possessed with
sin, death, hell, and the devil, such beasts whom the Lord abhors, but the
Lord will call his workmen together, even all that work righteousness, and to
them he will show the pattern of a new building, that is Christ, after whose
likeness they shall bring forth another building, and the old building shall be
destroyed, together with the inhabiters thereof, that is, whatsoever man by
nature has lived unto, according to the counsel of the man of sin, that son
of perdition, who is exalted above all that is called God, shall be pulled down
and brought low, and sin, death, hell, and the devil shall be no more, for
they shall utterly be destroyed, and all the stone and timber wherein is life
shall go into the new building; that is, all the living properties belonging to
the new man, which are these, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith; these shall go into, and be in the new building, that is, the
new man; but that in which is no life shall go into the fire, that is,
whatsoever lives not in the light and righteousness of God, shall be cast
into the fire of his jealousy, even all unrighteousness, and all ungodliness,
and uncharitableness, of what sort or kind soever, for the hand of the
work-master shall prove it, that is the Lord, who in the day wherein he shall
be revealed, it shall be in flaming fire, to the perdition of ungodly men, but
I forbear.

The third Vision.
IT came to pass again, that I being as it were in a great wilderness, heard a
voice saying unto me, Call to the Lions, and to the Leopards, and to the Foxes,
and to the Lambs; and say unto the Lions, for as much as ye have walked in the
strength of your might, and have taken the prey on my little ones, I will
therefore disappoint you; and to the Leopards the^ shall say, although your
spots appear never so many, I will at length take them away, and ye shall be
exalted; and to the foxes thou shall say, because of your subtilty and deceit,
whereby ye have spoiled my vines, I will also disappoint you; and to the lambs
thou shall say, because ye have given your flesh to feed the hungry, and your
fleece to cloth the naked, ye shall be my delight, and shall abide with me for
ever.

The Exposition of the third Vision.
BAbylon spiritually called, is as this wilderness, in which, and under whose
power abide these four sorts of beasts, viz. Lions, Leopards, Foxes, Lambs, or
comparatively four sorts of men distinguished under these four heads: The Lions
denote unto us the Kings of the earth, and the great and mighty men, with their
Captains, and men of War, who have been bewitched with the Sorceries of that
great Whore, making themselves drunk with the wine of her fornications; to whom
the Lord speaks by the Prophet David, Psalm 34. v. 10. who as yet are under the
power of Antichrist, bearing in the head of their Banner the effigies of the
Beast, with this Motto, Peace, Peace; but as soon as innocence and truth
appears to discover their Idol, then proceeds war and persecution; but the
Lord will disappoint them, as he has already begun, and will not cease, until
he have finished; by the Leopards, it denotes a people, notwithstanding they
are yet in Babylon polluted and stained with her pollutions, yet the Lord will
make choice of them, and shall give them the strength of a Leopard, and they
shall raze the foundations of Babel, notwithstanding their contemptiblenesse
amongst men, for the favor of the Lord shall protect them; by the Foxes is
denoted unto us the Merchants of the Great Whore, who by their craft and
traditions bring in all her gain; these being under her power, execute the will
of the former, making havoc of a good conscience, spoiling the Lords Vineyard,
the true Church, bringing in all their receipts of customs, making the house
of prayer a den of thieves, and devouring the innocent, eating the Lords people
as they were bread, but the Lord shall utterly destroy them; the Lambs denote
unto us, those who live the life of Christ, according to his commands, walking
in the obedience and the simplicity of the Gospel of truth, notwithstanding
they are persecuted, afflicted, imprisoned, and scattered, by reason of the
innumberablenesse of the Foxes which yet remain, having their power from the
beast, making war with the Lamb, but they shall be overcome by the Lamb, and
the Lambs shall be gathered, and shall be the delight of the Lord for ever;
Rejoice therefore O ye that serve the Lord over her, for God has avenged you
on her, therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine, for she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord who
judges her.

The fourth Vision.
IT came also, I being on the side of an high hill, whereon was planted a great
tree, whose arms encompassed the valley round about, so that when it did rain
it rained into the valley, and when the Sun arose it scorched the hill, so that
the tree perished in the root for want of moisture, and at length the tree fell
down, and great was the fall thereof, it being found useful for nothing but
the fire.

The Exposition of the fourth Vision.
BY the hill is held forth the foundation, or womb, out of which, as a tree,
does grow all worldly wisdom, and policy, all fleshly inventions, might,
power, and dominion, all humane traditions, pride, war, and contention, and
whatever is of the world, these being as arms, or twigs over-powring the shrubs
in the valleys, by reason of their greatness and strength, and notwithstanding
the many showers of spiritual mercies, yet is it of no profit to this tree,
because the foundation thereof is so hard, and so steep, that this rain cannot
pierce it, therefore is it, that it runs into the valleys, that is the meek and
humble soul, even he who accompteth all his righteousness, and all the
excellency of things here in this world on this side Christ, whether it be
honor or esteem, riches or preferment, or whatever is near or dear unto him,
yea his own life to be as dross, yea less then nothing in comparison of the
Lord Jesus: the rising of the Sun, and scorching the hill, denotes the
powerful appearing of the presents of the Lord, which shall be in flaming
fire, that shall so scorch this hill, that it shall perish in its root, and
shall assuredly fall, and great will be the fall thereof, as indeed it does
already appear at this day, therefore let them to whom this may speak, observe
this, that the tree is already perished in its root, and will suddenly fall,
woe to them on whom it falls, it shall destroy them together with it self, and
the breath of the Lord as a fire of brimstone shall consume it; consider this,
ye who have set up your seat on high, even ye whose heart is lifted up, who
have given your selves to pleasure, coveting riches, honor and preferment,
putting your trust in the Sword, making flesh your arm, let me tell you in
meekness and sobriety, and in the bowels of unfeigned love yerning toward you,
that these things shall profit you nothing in the day of the Lord, but shall
rather testify against you; be exhorted therefore to follow peace with all
men, and true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

The fifth Vision.
IT came to pass also, I was as it were going through a strange Country, in
which I beheld a great house, and drawing toward it, I heard a great outcry,
and desiring to know what it meant, the woman thereof came unto me, saying, my
husband is gone from home, and has left me with these my merciless servants,
who in his absence have slain my children, and most unhumanely abused me, but
the time of his return is at hand, who will deal with them according to their
doings.

The Exposition of the fifth Vision.
THe Country here is the world, the which every natural man travelleth
through, as through a strange Country, they having here no abiding City, but as
strangers and Pilgrims here on earth, are looking after and for a City, whose
Maker and Builder is God: the house denotes the Tabernacle of God with men, in
which Jerusalem as a solitary woman is complaining for the loss of her
children, they being slain by the power of malitiousness, which proceeds from
wrath, thraldom and death, over which man in the beginning was Lord and
Master; but now these are Masters, and man is in subjection, and become their
slaves, which is far worse then a servant, inasmuch as they have given
themselves to pride, vainglory, and earthly pomp; but its indeed because their
eyes are not yet opened, so that they cannot see the appearance of the Lord
amongst them, therefore men walk as shadows, having no substance, and their
delight is to serve that which the Lord will destroy, which is their pride,
greatness, worldly wisdom, and indeed all that is at enmity to God; but the
time is at hand, yea and now is, that the Lord will break in amongst you, and
your eyes shall be opened, and then ye shall see the emptiness of all those
things wherein ye have comforted your selves, saying, as it were with the rich
man, Soul take thy rest, we have great force in England, in Scotland, and in
Ireland, and a great Fleet at Sea: But let me tell you once more, that except
you keep the commands of the Lord Christ, all these shall profit you nothing,
you know what is commanded in the fifth of Matthew. ver. 44. to the end of the
chap. but these things ye fall short of. I pray ye, where is your going from
house to house to visit the poor, your feeding the hungry, and your clothing
the naked, ought not this to be done? how far then do ye go beyond the Scribes
and Pharisees, read the 23. chap. of Mat. from the beginning to the end, see
what is there written shall assuredly come to pass upon this Generation; for I
say unto you, this generation shall not pass away, until all be fulfilled.

The sixth Vision.
AGain, it came to pass I was as it were in a pleasant field, wherein I beheld
the Moon in the firmament enclose the Sun, but the light of the Sun did
extinguish the light of the Moon: also there appeared three Angels which
guarded the Sun; also there appeared an altar, whereon was a great fire, and in
the midst thereof was a man standing: there was also another man standing by
the side of the altar all alone, and immediately there appeared a most
excellent temple, whose building was of pure gold, very glorious, having many
entrances, to which were as many Angels keeping the way thereof; and the light
thereof was as the light of a great fire: Now there was standing by me a man in
a mean habit, to whom I said, feast thou thou not how excellent this is which
does appear? and he answered and said, how should J, seeing the morning is
dark, and therewith departed?

The Exposition of the sixth Vision.
BY the morning or dawning of the day, is held forth the near approach of the
day of the Lord, therefore has he appointed the Ordinances of the Moon by
night; so that during the time of this night, the Sun is enclosed by the Moon,
that is, the glorious appearance of the Lord Jesus is enclosed and wrapped up in
beggarly rediments and observations, carnal Ordinanc^s, formal worships; but
the time is at hand, in which the glory of the Lord shall put out the light
that is in them, they being but as the light of the Moon; the Firmament denotes
unto us the Scripture, which is indeed the witness and testifier of all truth:
the three Angels hold forth the threefold Office of Christ; that is to say,
Priestly, Prophetically and Kingly, in which, and through which, he appears to
be the Altar, the fire, and the Sacrifice for us, who are as the man standing
all alone by the side of the Altar, whilst we are yet at a distance from
Christ; but the time is at hand wherein we shall see him as he is: the Temple
denotes the love of God, into which he will bring all the sons of
righteousness, even his Saints and Servants, who are afflicted, scattered and
persecuted, not after the formality or rudiments of men's teaching, but by an
angelical way and teaching from himself* himself being the light thereof. Now
the man in the mean habit held forth thus much, man in his natural estate,
being no way invested with the singleness of the love and light of Christ, and
until he be enlightened by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, cannot behold the
things of God.

The seventh Vision.
Again, it came to pass, that J was as it were in a garden, wherein J beheld
a tree most excellent to behold, being full of blooms, and after a while there
arose a great storm, and the blooms fell away, and immediately the fruit
appeared, it being of every kind was found useful for the healing of the
Nations.

The exposition of the seventh Vision.
NOw the Garden is the heart of the new man, in which the Lord Jesus as a tree
of righteousness spreads forth all the graces of his Spirit, which for number
are as the blooms, and no sooner the excellency thereof does appear, but anon
persecution arises as a great storm, being carried on by the power and
insolency of that man of sin, who is exalted in the Temple of God, and is
worshipped above all that is called God, he being the enemy of truth,
notwithstanding this does not hinder the tree from bringing forth its fruit,
but is an advantage rather unto it, therefore is it necessary that the Lords
people should suffer, seeing the seed that is sown is not quickened, except it
die; and if they have persecuted the Lord and Master, how much more will they
persecute the servant also; and to this end, the Lord Jesus said to his
Disciples, except ye suffer with me, ye cannot reign with me; if therefore of
necessity Christ must suffer, then of necessity his servants must suffer also;
be encouraged then all ye who have given up your selves to serve the Lord, who
have not loved your lives unto death for sake of the cross, which at length
shall be your crown, and marvel not that the world hate you, know ye not that
the world is enmity to God, and that whosoever loves the world, and the things
thereof, the love of God is not in them: and now comes the time wherein the
powers of this world, with the wisdom thereof shall be overturned, because we
see the fruit of the tree begins to appear; the Lord having given us this
testimony, saying, Ye know when the fig tree puts forth her leaves, that
Summer is nigh, so when ye see these things, that is, persecution for truths
sake, then lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh; therefore
although the fruit be but in the bud, and the seed of Christ sown in us be but
in its infancy, yet it shall grow and increase, and become a healing to all the
Nations of the earth, and all Nations shall flow in unto us, when the Throne of
his love, that is the fullness of the presence of Christ, shall be advanced as
a Standard amongst us, and in our hearts, the time is at hand, let as many as
are spiritually minded wait for it, forasmuch as they know that their labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

The eighth Vision.
Again it came to pass, I being in a solitary place, in which I beheld a
great number of dead carcasses, and I heard a voice saying, Arise and come to
judgment; and straightway they arose, seeking for justice and judgment, but
there was none found, because the true Judge was not yet come.

The exposition of the eighth Vision.
THe place here which is said to be solitary, is the state of nature or man's
first state, which is corrupt; now all men and creatures living here, that is,
in the state of nature, are dead; now the Lord calls unto man to come from that
state, wherein is no judgment, but that which is altogether unrighteous, and
must be destroyed, unto a righteous judgment, according to the righteousness
of God in Christ; but man by nature being dead to sins and trespasses, goes
about seeking for judgment and justice, but cannot find it, because being dead,
he has not seen the Lord Christ, who is the true Judge of heaven and earth,
who though he is not as yet come to them, yet to as many as are inlivened and
renewed in the inner man, to them he is already come, and will shortly appear
in them to judge the whole world.

The nineth Vision.
AGain it came to pass, that I was in a desert, where I beheld a Pelican
feeding her chickens with her heart blood: soon after the Pelican died, and the
chickens fled away, and straightway there appeared a man having a crown on his
head, and a voice spoke, saying, This is he that shall rule the Nations with a
rod of iron.

The exposition of the nineth Vision.
BY the Pelican in the desert, is held forth, man in honor is like the beast
which perishes, in regard of this, that man by nature brings forth pride,
covetousness, self-love, self-exaltation, envy, wrath, and all that is of this
world, which is contrary to the love and light of Jesus Christ these: man, yea
all men in this station, even as the Pelican feeds his chickens with his
heart blood, adventuring body and goods, yea his life also for the love of
these; but the time comes, yea and now is, that man shall die to these, and
they shall abide no longer, for the Lord shall arise with a crown of love, and
true righteousness, and shall bring in his everlasting power, and the power of
the former shall fly away, and then shall it be that he shall rule the Nations
with a Rod of Iron, according to the Scripture.

The tenth Vision.
MOst worthy friends, since I came to this place it has pleased God to visit
me with this appearance, December. 19. 1652.

I was as it were in a Kings Court, to which were gathered together a great
multitude of people, being poor, and halt, and blind, and naked, to the intent
the King might do them good, it having been the Kings pleasure to make
proclamation for that end; but the Nobles and the great men were displeased
with the King for what he had done, and thereupon fell upon him and flew him;
this done, they caused an image to be set up in the likeness of the King,
adorned in the Kings robes: now it came to pass that the people being wearied
out of their expectation, they departed each to their own home; and after a
while the spirit of the King visited his servants saying, go your way and make
known to those people all that has been done concerning me, and they went
straightway and did as they were commanded; which when the people heard, they
gathered themselves together and took counsel what to do, but the Nobles and
great men made war against the poor, and fortified themselves, but the poor
being led on by the counsel of the Kings servants, at length overcame those
murderers, and dispossessed them, and put them to flight, and put many in ward
till they should give an account for what they had done.

The exposition of the tenth Vision.
NOw the Kings Court is the heart of man, in which the Lord Jesus as King
bears rule, therein is pleased to speak peace to the disquieted and afflicted
soul, giving life to those who are dead, light to them that sit in darkness,
fullness to them who are empty, inrichment to the poor, sight to the blind,
covering to the naked; at which pride, covetousness, vainglory, wrath, malice,
envy, anger, insolency, strife, persecution, these having power and place in
the same Court, that is, in the heart of man, like the Nobles and great men,
privily flay the King, that is, during the time of their bearing Rule, the Lord
as King is as a Lamb slain, and Antichrist is set up in the room of the King,
adorned in the habit of the King, that is, in outward worships and
observations, by which the people are deceived, and being wearied out of their
expectations, return to their home; that is, the time will come that the people
shall see the emptiness of these things, together with the deceit thereof, then
they shall rest wholly in the promise of Christ until his appearing; now the
spirit of the King visited his servants, saying, go your way and make known all
that has been done concerning me, and straightway they went and did as they
were commanded; that is, the powerful appearance of the Lord Christ shall so
appear, that it shall so inlighten, and instruct his servants, who in the light
thereof shall be able to discover Antichrist unto those wno were deceived by
him, he being set up in the Temple of God, being therein as an Angel of light;
and they who were deceiv^d, shall take such counsel from the servants of the
Lord, as that they shall go forth against Antichrist, and all his train, which
is very great amongst us at this day, but notwithstanding all the power, and
all the force and strength that the men of this world can make in the behalf of
the man of sin, that son of perdition, against the poor despised ones, yet they
being led on by the counsel of the Spirit of the Lord, displaying the banner
of his love, shall overcome them, and the adherents of Antichrist shall be
brought into subjection, by the love of Christ exalted in the hearts of his
afflicted people, and persecuted ones.

Thus in brief have I given you a taste of what the Lord has showed me your
unfeigned lover, remembering Mr. Salimarsh my fellow-witness in the things of
God.

A word of Use for all those that profess themselves Saints and Servants of
Jesus Christ, and yet fall short of the true practice practiced by the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles.
NOw whereas God ever appeared for the poor, the fatherless, and afflicted
widow, first under the Law, when as yet there was a yearly tithe for the
Priest, and every third year a Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. Acts 2. 45 Acts 2. 32 34.
Acts 5 4. 1 These. 3. 12. Jam. 1. 17.
tithe for the poor. Secondly, in Gospel Times that spirit of love was much
more enlarged, when not upon any outward command, as before, but merely upon
the influence of the spirit within: Saints were so carried forth in love one
toward another, and toward all men, though every man had a propriety of his
own, yet none of them said, that ought that they possessed was their own, but
they had all things common, and no man lacked, yea none of mankind to their
power, for their love was unto all, that being pure religion and undefiled
before God the Father, to visit the fatherless and widow, and to keep
themselves unspotted from the world: and as it was thus under the Law and
Gospel, so in a third dispensation now approaching, and with some present,
which is the manifestation of the spirit: it is expected according to the
testimony of the Prophets and Apostles, who v^rote and vvaited for this, that
more love should appear among men, and in the Saints, especially toward the
miserable part of mankind; but so it is, that even in the apostasy and darkest
times of Popery, yet much hospitality and houses were provided for the poor,
but now these houses for the most part are taken up for the rich, and that in
these times of reformation, when the Saints reign, as they say, but is indeed
a great dishonor unto Jesus Christ; therefore it is thought most fit that the
fatherless and afflicted vviddovv be had into consideration and provided for.

Much more I might write concerning these things, but let this suffice to
vvarn them who say they are Saints and servants of Jesus Christ, and are in a
most absurd nature guilty of that practice which becom^th not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and do irresistably gainsay and oppose them, who out of
the integrity and innocence of their spirits forevvarn them against such
practices, who indeed keep back the right of the labourer, and put the needy
out of their house; when they ought rather to have refreshed them: let such
know, that the Lord is at hand, even at the door, who will devour their
hypocrisy in the face of the whole world, which is the prayer of me for
their sakes who are scattered and persecuted, troubled and afflicted for the
truths sake, and have not loved their own lives even unto the death for the
testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ.

J. B.

A brief warning to the Inhabitants of England, Scotland, and Jreland.
Or a word of counsel to those that call themselves by the name of SAINTS.
1. WOe to thee, O thou that inhabitest these Isles, who have exalted thy seat
on high, even thou who have given thy self to pride; and whose heart is lifted
up, who have yielded your selves members of unrighteousness, inasmuch as that
you have given your selves to riches, and to honor and preferment, and have put
your trust in the Sword, making flesh your arm, and by these have forsaken the
right way of the most high.

2. Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be done unto him, for the Lord has entered into judgment with the
ancients of his people, and the Princes thereof, for ye have eaten up the
Vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in your houses, what mean you to beat my
people, and grind the faces of the poor, says the Lord?

3. Woe unto you therefore, for the Sword of the Lord is drawn against all
ungodliness and all unrighteousness, the enmity and the malice, the persecution
and the shedding of innocent blood, which still remains in you; as also your
riding the backs of your brethren, even as Balaam rode the Ass, who like the
Ass served you ever since they became yours, and now because the Angel of the
Lord has taken place in the way, they like the Ass being willing to save you,
having given their lives as a prey that you might enjoy your rest, and have not
spared their own interest that you might be inricht, yet they are smitten,
troubled, persecuted.

4. Woe unto you therefore, for the Lord has given command unto his Angel to
withstand you, until your eyes be opened, and ye bow your head, and it be made
known unto you, that unless they had saved you, ye had surely been destroyed.

5. Woe unto you, your men shall fall by the sword, and your mighty men in the
war, for the Lord will not cease, until he have brought forth judgment to
victory, by putting an end to all that work wickedly, and righteousness and
peace perfected with true holiness, be established in you.

6. Woe unto you that have called your selves by the name of Saints, and yet
your practice is as the former, who have refused to be advised, but have out of
the pride of your hearts, resisted them, who out of the innocence of their
Spirits besought you to be reconciled unto God, and to good works, but ye still
retain your old practice, keeping back the right of the labourer, and turning
the needy out of doors, when ye ought rather to have refreshed them.

7. Woe to you therefore, for the day is at hand wherein the Lord will discover
your hypocrisy in the face of the whole world, and that for their sakes, who
are scattered and persecuted for the truths sake, and have not loved their
lives even unto the death, for the testimony of the Lord Jesus, who is our
rejoicing all the day long, because he has dispossessed the man of sin by the
brightness of his appearing, and has redeemed us from the dominion of him, by
taking possession of us, and exalting the Throne of his everlasting lov^ in our
hearts.

8. For which we will sing praises to God on high, because he has judged the
great Whore, who in times past deceived us; and as she has done unto us, she
shall be done unto, yea she shall receive double for all that she has done
unto us, for the Lord has uttered his voice from on high, and will not cease
to plead the cause of his people against her, until her name be perished out
of the earth, it being the accomplishing of that great promise, even the
bringing in of the new heaven, and the new earth, wherein shall dwell
everlasting righteousness, that being the City of the firstborn, to which we
that are redeemed by the coming of the Lord Jesus are interested, having our
fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, together with an
innumerable company of Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect.

6. Be wise now therefore O thou that inhabitest these Isles, and be instructed
ye Rulers thereof, do justice, and love mercy, follow peace and holiness with
all men, without which no man shall see the Lord, for he is King over all the
earth, happy is the man whom the Lord shall deliver, he shall see the salvation
of God.

10. Consider these things, O thou that art exalted, and know that thy
exaltation is no other then the exaltation of Pharaoh, whom God exalted for
this end, that he might manifest his great power, by destroying of him and his
host, and setting the children of Israel free.

11. Even so will the Lord destroy all the powers, and all the counsels, and
shall discover all the secrets, and shall bring all your honors into contempt,
and your rich men shall mourn and weep, and the poor men shall leap as an heart,
for that the Lord has made good his great p^omise unto his people, by exalting
the Throne of his everlasting love in our hearts; as God is love, therefore to
him be all honor, and all glory, and praise, for he only is worthy, inasmuch as
he was manifested in flesh, and was slain, and has redeemed us to God by his
blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and has made
us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth.

A Letter presented to Judge Cook in IRELAND.
Right Honorable,
SInce it has pleased the Almighty God to call you forth into so public a
Work, as the Advancement of the Throne and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
does appear by your late printed Labors, called, Monarchy no Creature of Gods
making, wherein I have observed the most excellent outgoings of God upon your
spirit, bearing witness with my spirit, that he has made you faithful in this
Service, and being hereby invited, and in obedience unto the Command of God,
like faithful Abraham, have forsaken all that is near and dear unto me,
consisting only in external things, and as a stranger am looking after and for
that City whose Maker and Builder is God; the discovery whereof is that which
alone is sufficient to establish our hearts, and to give us rest in these times
of distraction, it being our portion in this world to endure many tribulations;
yet in the Lord alone is our peace, of whom and for whom I have much to speak
when time and your self shall admit: in the mean time be pleased to consider,
that the Lord is not sl^ck in making his great Promise to appear, which for so
long since was prophesied by the Prophets, saying, Behold I work a work in your
days, which you shall in no wise believe, although a man declare it unto you;
Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
visions: To which Truth I am made a Witness at this time, for their sakes who
indeed wait for the fulfilling and accomplishing of that Promise; which for
brevity sake I shall forbear to write, the particulars whereof being many,
until that time wherein the Lord shall give me opportunity to speak with you
face to face; in whom I have boldness to present you with these few lines, no
way doubting but that the Lord will inform your spirit more fully touching
those things which most concern the Exaltation and setting up the Throne and
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ; for whose sake I am made to account all the
excellency of things here below or beneath God to be as dung and dross, whether
it be Honor or Preferment, Riches or Esteem, or whatsoever else that is near
and dear unto me; yea mine own life also, if thereby I might be an advantage to
the setting up of those things which best become the Gospel of the Lord Jesus;
which indeed is of great worth in these our days in these Nations, it being so
lately sown, and scarcely sprung up to any strength, that even those high winds
of Persecution even among our own selves, each man seeking his own good, and
not his Brothers, but rather his destruction; so that except the Lord stand up
and preserve his own Word, it is yet like to dye; even as seed sown in corrupt
ground, which for want of soundness and strength cannot bear, or bring forth.

And now, dear Sir, I humbly beseech you to bear with me, if any way herein I
have overslipt my self, and pass by the failings which happily may appear by my
rude Intrusion; and accept the good intention or meaning of him, who is and
waits to be your faithful Friend and Servant in the Service and Obedience of
the Lord Jesus Christ:

Cork, December. 16. 1652. Joseph Binkes.

The great Men of the Earth, they shall their glory bring,
And lay it down even at his feet, who is their Lord and King.
Their Righteousness alafs, to them shall prove as dross,
When as indeed they shall behold the glory of the Cross:
Then shall the Lord alone be seen to be our praise,
When it shall be our Song, his Kingdom for to raise.
This is Truth: Let him that has an ear to hear, hear.

Some Queres proposed touching the true Ministers of the Gospel, and the false
Prophets.
FIrst, whether any man as a Minister professing himself to be a Minister and
servant of the Lord Jesus, ought not to give a true testimony of his knowing
the Word of God, which is indeed to know God, and eternal l^fe?

Secondly, whether or no he or they who have this testimony, have not put on
the Lord Jesus as a seal of truth, he being the gift of God, and eternal life?

Thirdly, whether or no he or they who after the order of men profess
themselves to be the true Ministers and not having this testimony, are not, or
at least may be accounted the false Prophets?

These being as yet unanswered, I am made silent, and waiting upon God for a
further discovery touching these things, who in that day wherein he shall make
known unto the sons of men those things which belong to their peace and the
spirit of truth, then shall it be made manifest who are the true Prophets from
the false.

My sheep hear my voice, a stranger they ^ill not follow.
FINIS.

