Effigiem spectas; praestat spectare Laborem Ingenio pollet: omnibus Art
praeit.
THOMAE BINNING SCOTT

VERA EFFICIES

Anno Dom 1675. Anno Aetutis suae 55



A Light To the Art of GUNNERY. Wherein the most necessary points belonging to
a Gunner either in Sea or land Service are made Practicable, And faithfully set
forth By Capt. Tho. Binning.


A LIGHT TO THE Art of Gunnery.

WHEREIN Is laid down the True Weight of Powder both for Proof and Action, of
all sorts of Great Ordnance.

Also the True Ball, and allowance for Wind.

WITH The most necessary Conclusions for the Practice of Gunnery, either in Sea
or Land-Service.

LIKEWISE The Ingredients, and making of most necessary Fireworks: As also
many Compositions for the Gunner's Practice, both at Sea and Land.

By Capt. THOMAS BINNING, Mariner.

Licensed Sept. 28. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed by John Darby, for the Author, and are to be sold by Andrew
Forrester, at his Shop in Kings-street, Westminster, next door to the
Mitre-Tavern, 1676.

TO THE High, Potent, and Noble Prince JOHN, Duke of Lauderdale, Marquess of
March, Earl of Lauderdale and Guilford, Lord Thirselstane, Musleburgh, Bolton
and Petersham, Lord President of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council of
Scotland, and sole Secretary of State for that Kingdom; one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council of England, Gentleman of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter.
May it please your Grace,
WHen I consider the many Reasons, and convincing Arguments, both Ancient and
Modern, besides the Commands and Examples laid down in Holy Scripture, of the
dutiful Obedience Subjects owe unto their lawful Kings; not only by the
cheerful assistance of their Estates, and Capacities; but, if need require,
without fear and doubting to put their Lives in hazard for the maintenance of
their Prince's Honor, and the well-being of their Country; I conclude your
Grace in your time to have been herein a perfect Pattern: But when I make
reflection upon those many unmerited and undeservedly continued Favors
(through your Grace's benevolent Aspect) received from His Majesty and Royal
Highness: Knowing also that your Grace is a sure Cherisher and Supporter of
Art, even in the weakest Endeavors, I have been encouraged to offer to your
Gracious Patronage and Protection these my Observations of Gunnery; the use
whereof may in time be serviceable to all His Majesty's Subjects, but more
especially to those of His Majesty's Ancient Kingdom, my Native Country, the
flourishing whereof has been observed to be your Graces constant Care; which
maugre all oppositions of Envy, has not wanted its good Effects. The most of
what I here present your Grace, are of my own Experience, and have not been
formerly published; and which I have so demonstratively laid down, that they
will bear the severest trial of Reason and Art. And as they are the humble
Offering of a Mind truly grateful, so I question not your Grace's favorable
Acceptance, which will be an Encouragement for me to study something further in
this Art, more methodically digested.

Pardon, I beseech your Grace, this Presumption, being the mere Product of my
Loyalty and Duty: And that your Grace may long and happily live, and constantly
enjoy the benign Aspects of his Majesty and Royal Highness, shall be the
Prayers of him, who resolves always to be

Your Grace's Humble and Obedient Servant, Tho. Binning.

To the Reader.
Judicious Reader.
I Am persuaded there are none, though but mean Artists, that will question the
worth of the Art of Gunnery, being founded upon the two principal Pillars of
the Mathematics, viz. Arithmetic and Geometry. For by this Art, and good
Artists, the Artillery has gained Battles, Towns, Castles, Citadels and Forts;
yea, the strong Trenches of a strong Army forced, opened and stormed by the
weaker Army, to the ruin of the Entrenched Forces; which was seen at the
Battle of Lutzen, This Battle was at Lutzen in November 1631.
where the Serene and Potent Gustavus Adolfus King of Sweden was killed; for
there the Swedes Gunners did so artifically ply their Ordnance, that the Swedes
Army stormed the Imperialists in the most secure Trenches that could be made,
and a stronger Army within than those without; and only by the Artificial and
Industrious Carriage of the Gunners. By which you may perceive, that there is
as much lies on the using of the Ordnance, either by Sea or Land, to the
safety of the Ship, Garrison, or Army, and annoyance of the Enemy, as upon any
thing else.

In this little Piece you may find the framing those Draughts, the Calculating
those Tables for Powder and Ball, and laying out those Height-Rules both for
Powder and Shot, with the True Wind of every Gun, with the Dimensions of their
Fortifications, in giving Powder, not having regard at all to the Weight of the
Piece; further, as for the Draught of the Ordnance, likewise what is useful to
a Gunner either by Sea or Land, and how the Gunner may lay or level his Piece
to shoot at a Mark; also several Questions, a Gunner ought to give some account
of ere he be admitted: As also to use his Mortar-Peece and Pattard, with
Fireworks Offensive and Defensive; Whereby I am persuaded, any that will take
notice of the use of the Quadrant and Quadrat, and Observations thereon, will
find as Artificial Recreations in this little Piece, as in any has been
written hitherto on this Subject.

It is visible, the great harm that comes by breaking of Guns in firing, is
the ignorance of those Gunners, and the great allowance of Powder; for if a
True-Fortified Piece of Ordnance shall have to 9 lb Ball 7 lb of Powder; the
Question is, What ought to be given to a Reinforced Piece shooting the same
Ball? This and other such Businesses moved me to write, that thereby Gunners
might be more circumspect.

I have not done this, that thereby I may add any thing to the Artificial
Gunner, but that the younger Brethren may, by reading and observing what is
here made plain, learn to do their Duty.

If this Piece do instruct any yet ignorant, I shall be glad; if it please the
Readers fancy I have content; but if it displease any critical obstinate
Maliguer of the Art, I shall take no more notice of him, but desire he may
amend himself and this also: Nevertheless conclude as thou find, and
consider the good will of

Thy Friend, T. B.

To the Praise of his Countryman Capt. Thomas Binning.
INto this little Book I plainly see
Inventions rare, with Art of Gunnery
Grounded upon two Pillars that must stand,
While God and Nature Earth and Sea command,
Ar'thmetick, Geometry, with new Inventions,
Thy King and Countries Good, being thy Intentions.
Therefore Minerva claims Ingine and Wit,
And Mighty Mars does own this Subject fit.
Seeing from our Countryman it does redound,
(Whose Country has been formerly renowned)
Let us not keep from him deserved Bays,
Which Strangers would afford as his due praise,
Because he has given a Light to Gunnery;
Not craving therefore Gold or other fee.
I do conclude, the like has not been Wrote
In any Language till now by a Scot.
Tho. Orquart.

ERRATA.
PAge 28, in the Quadrant and Scale, after 60 read 70.
Page 96, line 3, for an read and.
Page 136, line 34, for ^^/1^ read 23/^4 parts.
Ditto, Line 35, for 19/18 read 17/18 parts.
And the other, for 20/19 read 21/22 parts.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GUNNER, For his better Understanding.
THere are many who do intrude, and also that have obtained the preferment to
be Gunners, either of Garrisons or Ships, who never understood any the meanest
or least Article (as I may say) in the Gunners A, B, C.

I speak not this to discourage any from engaging in the employment of a
Gunner; But I am sure, except he be qualified with the Principles and
Ground-Rules of Gunnery, he cannot be worthy of the place. And yet there is
more than Art or Action to be obtained ere they begin: For which cause I will
here begin with those Qualifications, that a Man professing, and dignified with
the trust of a Gunners place, ought to have.

1. That he be one that fears God more than his Enemy. 2. That he be
educated, and expert in his Profession: for Experience confirms, some say,
teaches Art. 3. That he be Constant, and not given to change. 4. That he be
Faithful, True, and Honest.
The Reason, wherefore my first Discourse is of Gunners, is only because many
times it falls out, that most Men employed for Gunners are very negligent of
the fear of God. Many Examples of this nature might be alleged and produced
from the sad experience of preceding times: But I thought good to intimate only
this one, for the terrifying of all Godless, and the confirming all Godly
Gunners: Which Example I had from Seyger van Reghterne, General of the Land of
Overyssel, in his Diurnal from Amsterdam to East India; the which Diurnal begun
on the 8th day of December, in the year 1628, from Texel, and ended there at
his return the 12th of July 1633. In the 38th Folio of that Book, he says,
That in the year of our Lord 1631, in the Month of April, There was on the
Island Nero, a Gunner, whose Name was Cornelius Slime, but a very godless and
profane Man, who at no time could speak but he would be Cursing or Swearing;
and when any would ask him what was his hopes after this Life were ended, his
Answer was, It may be to Heaven, or it may be to Hell; but, said he, if I do go
to Hell, there I will sell Tobacco and Brandy, and that would be good Medicine
for the Devils. But one day this Cornelius Slime, in presence of my Author and
many more, being Cursing and Swearing, and many times giving himself to the
Devil; In the mean time, in presence of all those People, the Devil lift him up
in the Air, and let him fall to the Ground, with a great noise; but the second
time being taken up by the Devil, he was carried where never Man living could
find him: From the like the Lord deliver us all. But if Experience had not
taught me, both in this Country and others, what the lives of many Gunners are,
I would have said nothing of it here.

Now for the Education of Gunners in their Profession, it was manifest that
there were not any of the Gunners employed by the Officers of the Army, in our
King's and Countries Service, all the while his Majesty was in Scotland, which
were capable of their Duty, or knew any thing of Art; and it was no wonder to
see our common Gunners so slothful to at attain to perfection in Art, because
if there had been a Man able in his Profession, our Officers of Artillery would
not employ him, lest he should see, and so reveal their own Insufficiency.
Likewise they needed not care what their Abilities were, for those that had
charge over them, durst not put them to examination, for fear their own
insufficiency should be openly known; but if they were able to put them to it,
we might expect to be better Masters of this Art, when now we are scarce good
Scholars. Likewise when there were Able Men in the Country, they could have no
Employment; and for fear they should be employed, there was one Calumny or
another raised to their prejudice; either he is proud, or a Malignant, which
was in effect, he was a true Subject, and therefore not to be employed; and any
of these two Names were enough to keep him from employment; or if he was in
Service, to cause him to be Cashiered, as the Case then stood.

But to encourage Ingenious Spirits to study Art, and to practice the same,
Remark what is said of the Emperor Domitian, That he was so skilful in
shooting, that let a Boy a good distance off hold up his Hand, and stretch
forth his Fingers, and he would shoot through betwixt his Fingers with an
Arrow, and not touch the Boy. Now I am sure, that although the like may not be
done with any great Piece of Ordinance, yet I have seen one, who shooting with
a great Piece, within Point Blank of the same Piece, after Observation and
Trial of that Piece, would shoot within a hand-breadth of any Mark; yea, set a
Drinking-Cup on the end of a Pike, he would take it with a Ball. And because I
have been both at Field, and Sea-Service, and have seen such Errors in Gunners,
my desire is, That those that are in Place, or shall come to it, may exercise
themselves, and study to better their own Credit, and act something for the
benefit and good of their Country, and honor of their King.

As for the Constancy of Gunners, and others; Has it not been seen, since the
beginning of those comfortless Troubles in these Nations, the unconstancy and
instability of Men, how they have varied from the one Party to the other? yea,
they have for Ambition, and greediness of Gain, fled from the Army they have
been sworn to, and gone to the Enemy, to the great loss of their own Souls, and
hazard of the Truth, and an undoubted advantage to the Enemies of his Majesty.

For their Honesty, they are not so much to blame as those that have the charge
of them; for were they drawn to an account of what they receive, and how they
have spent it, then Men durst not but be honest.

All the Powder I spent in the Castle, I weighed, and found every Barrel to
lack 10 or 12, and some 14 pound.
But the Commissary taking from each Barrel 10 or 12 pound weight of Powder, the
Gunner finding this, must be let slip with as much; and I think 20 or 24 pound
in the hundred, is a large Intromission. Probatum.

Now to help this great, and I may say, terrible Theft committed against King
and Country; And that the Ammunition may redound to the profit of the Country,
which is the only Service his Majesty requires: Choose honest Men for
Commissaries, and Keepers of the Magazine, who will require an exact Account of
what is gone or spent, and let every Man be content with his Wages. It is a
true saying, and the Word of God clears it, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the Children of God, Mat. 5.9. Wherefore every Man ought
with all their Hearts, to cry to God for Peace with Truth, the which I pray God
to send us.

To any versed in Military Affairs, is known the great Gain or Loss which may
redound, either to the Country, Army, or Fleet, by the well or bad management
of the Great Ordnance, or Train of Artillery; for which cause, I say, it is
most necessary to try such Men you choose to be Gunners ere ye trust, either for
Land or Sea-Service: And if they be qualified with these forenamed Marks, then
are they fit to act the part of a Man: But it is God by whom increase must come.

Now if there should chance a Man of good Qualifications to be admitted for a
Gunner, and but meanly expert: To them I say, If they follow these following
fundamental Rules, and digested Instructions, which I calculated in the year
1648, and 1651, I hope they shall have pleasure and profit.

As it is without all question or contradiction, that there is nothing more
Holy, more profitable or necessary than a peaceable Condition; for Peace is the
nearest thing to God, in regard where Peace is, there is Love, Charity, Faith,
and all the Virtues: Therefore we ought to pray for Peace, that so living in
obedience to God, our King and Rulers, we may prosper in this World, and live
in Bliss eternally.

But in regard that the great Princes of the World may observe and seek Peace,
we ought to pray, That as God has placed them in Power, so he may direct them
in all their Actions to do nothing contrary to his Glory, or the good of their
Subjects. For what division amongst the Kings and Princes in Christendom, has
done to the destruction of Religion, effusion of Blood, and ruining of their
Estates, is much in Histories made plain: And what has been done by our
unnatural Divisions within these three Kingdoms, is yet fresh in memory, to the
great grief of many good Christians. And in regard that some Princes in
Christendom are forced to keep War, for maintaining of the Christian Faith
against Turks, Saracens, and barbarous Tartars; As also that amongst
themselves, some are either blown up with Pride, or Envy, who would Reign
alone, much amusing the minds of Men what they intend to do; so that War is as
like to be as ever: Therefore any well-wishing Person ought to study for the
advancement of his Kings Honor, and good of his Country.

Now what may be the Actions done by great Ordnance in time of War, may be
thought either needless or hurtful: Because there is nothing thereby to be
taught, but to Raze down Fortifications, and other Strengths to ruin: Or how
an Army, by cutting off the Soldiers, may be shattered and broken, and an
entrenched Leaguer may be broken up and forced.

Truly such Men ought to be in esteem, if we will have any respect to these
dangerous Times wherein we live, they ought to be encouraged; because no
Potentate can be longer in Peace than his Neighbor pleases; and that scarce
any strength is able to resist the fury of terrible Cannon well managed.

And amongst all Arms in time of War the great Ordnance is first in use,
whether it be against, or in a beleaguered Place; and especially when they are
rightly managed with discretion, they are both helpful and encouraging to their
Party.

And contrary, when they are not Men of Judgment and Discretion, but slothful,
and ignorant, then they produce damage to the owner of them. For, as History
declares, the great Ordnance has been the only Winners of the Battle
sometimes, and great Victory, when they have been well managed, while the
opposite Party gave their Ordnance only the blame of their flight, because they
were not well managed.

What a Gunner ought to be, to whom the Charge is committed, and what he ought
to know.
As it is necessary in all Fortified Places, as well in time of Peace as of
War, to have able practiced Gunners, who are able to give an account with
reason, of the things belonging to their Charge, and that they be such as fear
God more than their Enemy; they ought to be honest, and not given to change, as
before is said.

The Gunner ought, besides his true shooting, to be learned in Arithmetic and
Geometry, which will cause him give advice where a Strength may be most
conveniently battered, and what Ordnance is most fitting to accomplish the same.

Also he ought to give Directions to the Engineer, what form of Batteries is
most convenient at such and such places: Likewise that by his Art he give
directions that a Storm be made, where his Party may have the least harm by his
playing with Ordinance upon the places where danger is to be feared: likewise
if in a Beleaguered Place, the Gunner is to defend the same against opposition
of the Enemy, and to order so, as by the assistance of the Ordnance, and by
what other means he can, to oppose and destroy the Enemy for defense of the
Place.

But before all things, and before the Army approach to the Place, to which the
Prince, General, or other Officer who commands in chief, do intend to beleaguer
or take; It is necessary that the experienced Gunner be one to go before, and
view the Place, with the Grounds thereby; the which to do, is best in the
breaking of the day in the morning, to know if the Walls be strong or weak, and
how and by what means they may be brought down; as likewise to find if that
Fort or Garrison be so Fortified, as to annoy the Ground, or what part thereof
is most secure for the Army to lay down Leaguer; and what Ground is best to
annoy the Enemy most in the Garrison, and also what place of the Walls thereof
is best to Batter and Storm, and which way most secure to bring the Scaling
Ladders to set up; and to know if there be any Mount, Steeple, or high Building
within that is Fortified, to overlook the Leaguer; for by such means great
harm may occur, (or near the Leaguer) where the Enemy may overlook and relieve
the Besieged, and so cause the Leaguer to rise; except the Ordnance in the
Leaguer be capable presently to disorder and deface the same, that after the
Leaguer is entrenched, it may be defended by Ordnance, etc. Then he must know
if the Ground be diggable, and on what side of the Leaguer the Proviant may be
best and most securely brought in, and what fresh Water is there-about for
their relief within command of the Leaguer-place: So when it is known where, on
what end of the place or side the Great Ordinance must be placed, and lie from
or in the Leaguer, then must the Batteries be drawn out and measured; and
because it is hazardous to work on a Plain, to break Ground before an Enemy,
but there must Blinds be raised, some must be where you are not to work, as
well as where you intend to build your Batteries: But if you be on such Ground
where you must begin your Approach at a distance, then you must know at what
distance you may with convenience break Ground to run your Trenches for
Approach; and as it is certain the Point Blank Distance of a Piece of Ordnance
is 220, 230, 240, 250 Geometrical Paces, which is also the distance of a
Musquetshot; Therefore the knowing Gunner ought to give the Workmen order, if
there be no other Engineer for the Effect; and in this regard the Gunner ought
to be acquainted in Surveying for this, as well as for his Batteries and
Ordnance placing: For if one would begin an Approach, then he must choose out so
many Soldiers used to Work, as may be able to defend themselves and resist a
Sally, if any be: Not neglecting to have Parties both of Horse and Foot about
the Ground to defend them; in regard they are to carry, besides their ordinary
Arms, Shovels, Pickaxes, Gavelocks, Crows, and what is necessary for their
Work. At the place commanded to break Ground, it is fitting to cast up a
Redoubt or two, from whence the Trenches are to begin; and run the Approaches,
that if any sudden Assault come, the Workmen may retire thereto and defend
themselves, and work till they have assistance: for if the Workmen had no place
of present retreat, they would be forced to run and leave their Work, Tools,
and Arms to the Enemy. To this purpose it is to be observed, That the expert
Gunner, or Engineer, who is employed in this Work, is to use all the Art,
Skill, and Experience they have, to run their Lines in such sort, that those
which are in the Trenches and Approaches may not be discovered and seen by the
Enemy, so that with safety and expedition they may approach near the place, or
part of the Fortress, which the General desires to become Master of.

For now in our Modern Fortifications, there are but two parts in a Town, or
Fortress, of which one must be battered if they mind to take it in; and these
are either a Bulwork or Curtain.

When the General or Commander of the Field, by advice of the Council of War,
has resolved either to batter a Bulwork or Curtain, the Gunner or Engineer
being present at the breaking of Ground, is to show and inform the Workmen how
they are to run their Line, and, as the occasion presents, of diverse lengths;
for they must be turned at every just occasion, which is most necessary. When
the Line is laid out and marked, the Workmen must be divided and placed in
order, that one may not hinder another: Then to give to every Workman the
length of 4, 5, or 6 foot, and then begin they to hasten into the Ground, for
to avoid the danger which they are exposed to, while they stand upon the Earth;
Therefore the Earth which they dig, they cast up before them, and as fast as
can be make a Hole like a Grave; so when they have dug three foot in the
Ground, and three foot broad, then sure they are covered, since from their
Basis to the top of the Cast-up-Work there are six foot: When they are under
Covert, then they enlarge and deepen the Approaches as they are ordered:
Observe, they need not be so deep at the beginning as near to the Fortress;
sometimes the Trenches must be made so broad, as that the Canons and Wagons of
Provision must be drawn to the Batteries or Galleries. These Works are
ordinarily begun in the Night, so when the Night is gone, there are fresh Men
sent to relieve the first, and enlarge the Nightwork, and amend what they could
not see wrong. After this Nights Work, or the same, there are Corpse of Guard
made to contain Soldiers for a Main Guard, which Work ought to be with a Line
of Communication with the Trenches, though they be at a distance, viz. four or
five paces distance. When one Line is finished as abovesaid, and that it must
be run no further that way, the Gunner or Engineer turns it another way,
bearing it from the Town or Fort, and placing the Workmen as aforesaid, and so
continuing by Turnings and Windings, till he has got something near the place
or Fort besieged, and making good the Line continually with Corpse of Guards and
Batteries, until they be at the brim or side of the Moat or Ditch of the Fort:
Then is the Gunner or Engineer so to order his business, as to begin a Sape or
Gallery, or Mine under the Ground, directing his Course by his Compass: as if
Impediment of Rocks happen to stop his Course intended; he may make such Lines
and Angles about the same, as may bring him to his direct Line again; no
resemblance to it, but a Mariners Traverse by cross Winds at Sea.

But for the effectuating of a Mine, there must be provision made of diverse
things necessary thereunto; as Shovels, Spades, Pickaxes, and all kind of
Mason-Tools, with all things requisite to pierce a Wall, wherewith the Rampire
is made: Then one prepares Props to support and bear up the Mine from falling
or sinking, being thick and long, as is requisite; Likewise you must have store
of Fir-Planks to line the Mine within that it may not fall down, for it must
all be lined if the Ground be frush or brittle.

Before you begin to make a Mine, it will be requisite you know the Ground of
the place, whether it be vaulted or not, or on what the Foundation thereof is
laid: The Miners being to break into a Wall, are to carry their Mine as close
and secret as may be, that the Besieged may not hear any noise, or get any
notice where the Mine is made, and how it runs; for if they do, questionless
they will make a Contra-Mine or Traverse above Ground, to discover and spoil
your Mine begun; so that failing, you cannot force the Besieged that way,
except you begin a new Mine in another place: Such as was at the Castle of
Edinburgh.

The Master-Gunner or Engineer that conducts a Mine, ought to be a Man of good
Experience, lest he miscarry in his Traverse; for which cause, he ought to be
well acquainted with the Mariners Compass, and also with the Variation thereof;
for if there be a Mineral of Iron Ore in that Ground, it is like the Compass
will vary, and so miscarry the Mine: He ought also, for his Lines of Traverse,
to be acquainted with the Line of Chords, or Plain-Scale; otherways with the
use of the Protractor, for directing his Course and Traverse in the Mine, that
he mistake not himself either in his Course or Distance, Altitude or
Profunditude, according to the Ground he works in, and the Foundation of the
Rampart. When the Mine is brought to the entry of the place where the Chamber
must be: Sometimes order may be given to blow the Rubbish into the Fort
besieged, or it may be out, into the Moat or Ditch; either which may be done by
making the side thinner, which they would break to, than the other: And our
Experience is sufficient proof of this, either in Cannon or Musket; for if you
load a Piece of Ordnance, that there be a greater weight put after the Powder
than in reason, give fire to the Touchhole, and you will find that Piece fly
out either at Side or Breech.

The proportion of Chambers are as various as the Wall or Rampart which they
are to deface, therefore can have no dimension, but they must be made so large
as to contain Powder sufficient. Some would prescribe Rules for a Barrel of
Powder to blow up a Rod of Earth; but the Earth being of various ponderosity,
and some so much stronger bound than others, that I suppose they must use
rather more than less Powder; yet the Chamber would not be made larger than to
contain the quantity of Powder ordained to open that Breach.

When an Enemy has besieged a Place, Citadel, Fort, Castle, or other
Fortification, and has approached to Batteries; certainly it behooves the
Besieged to look about them, and to do their utmost endeavor to hinder the
Enemy. The Defense against these Approaches is, to strive to make some
Contre-Approaches; which may be done by stoutly sallying out, but withal, to
sally out with discretion, for fear of losing Men, which is to be expected;
(but no Dondass for Governor, who would neither permit sally, nor great Gun or
Musket to be fired against the Enemy): by which sallying, the least offense
you do the Enemy, is to hinder the progress of their Approaches; for if they be
beat back, and constrained to fly into their Works, for so long as the Alarm
endures, they cannot advance their Work, nor begin again to work till the
Besieged be retreated.

Likewise this manner of Defense may be made by Cannon, which may play from all
places upon the Workers of the Approaches, to do them what harm imaginable,
which may put the Workmen in fear, by seeing their Fellows miserably slain by
the By firing six Cannon together over the Mine at Edinburgh Castle, it fell in.
Cannon, which may be a means to make them leave working till there be
Batteries made against the Besieged.

The Contre-Approaches, by which you resist an Enemy, that they may not become
Masters of your Outworks, or Contre-scarf, with their Approaches; These
Contre-Approaches, to hinder the Enemy in their approach, are made by casting
up some By the Traverse I came to the Hole.
Traverses, as I did at the Castle of Edinburgh against the Approaches of that
Rebellious Army, running them so, as to find the Enemies Mines; These Lines of
this Traverse must be cast up toward the Enemy, but left open to the Besieged,
or Garrison, because by them they must be defended: This Traverse must be so
made, that it give no advantage to the Enemy if they take them in; and be sure
they may be flanked both with Cannon and Musket from the Fort or Garrison.

So that as there is an Offensive War, there is also a Defensive War, as does
appear by Mines; for the Besieged having discovered them, and got into them,
may lawfully kill the Miners: Now when the Besieged have found the Mine out, it
is to be known how they may make the way clear before them, and either kill the
Miners, or make them fly, without having the least harm.

After the causing a Hole fall in their Mine, near to my Traverse, I prepared a
Powder-Barrel, with old Rope-yarn, Men's Dung dry about the Walls,
Powder-Meal'd, Brimstone, and Verdigrease, with Camphire; all which being mixed
together, I caused to be put in the Mine, which made Then Governor of Edinburgh.
Overton and all fly: So we entered peaceably, and brought thereout their
Working Tools without any harm.

For the Gunners further knowledge, that is yet in his Minority, this Work is
begun with Decimal Arithmetic, which is very useful in the Art of Gunnery, the
Working and Extracting of the Square and Cube Roots; as also some Definitions
and Problems of Geometry: by which the Gunner may the better make use of his
Compasses, for which he will have several needful uses; for the whole Matter, I
know little in this Book that may be wanting in a Gunner, that may be called a
sufficient Gunner. In fine know, that I shall be glad that every Gunner may
profit by it, and I wish that some may amend it. However know, that I intend
this for your profit and the public Good; for if I had not seen need, I would
never have taken the pains, nor been at the Charges; but (understand me right)
no Pains can exceed the Duty we owe to our King and Native Country. So wishing
every good Subject to employ the Talent he has received of God, to the Honor
of his King, and Good of his fellow Subjects: Committing the Book to thee, and
thee to God Almighty; desiring that if thou have occasion to learn any Gunnery
needful at present, thou would enquire for Robert Webster at the Six Stars at
Wapping, who will teach any thing needful for the young Gunner.

I remain thine, to serve thee, THOMAS BINNING.

Decimal Arithmetic.
CHAP. I. Definitions.
A Fraction or broken Number, is a Number less than an Unite, or One; and
according to the common way of Fractions, is expressed by two Numbers set one
over the other with a small line, thus,; the upper Number is called the
Numerator, and the lower the Denominator.

The Denominator shows into how many parts the Unite or Whole of any thing is
to be divided.

The Numerator shows how many of these parts are signified by the Fraction.

A Decimal Number is that which is expressed by an Unite, with a Cipher, or
Ciphers, as 10: 100: 1000: 10000: 100000: etc.

A Decimal Fraction is that whose Denominator is a Decimal Number, as 3/10:
46/100: 728/1000: 2342/10000: 57689/100000: etc.

Decimal Fractions, whether they stand alone, or be joined with Integers, have
always a Comma, or a small Rectangular Line before them, to distinguish them
from Integers, which is therefore called a Separating Line, as 4, 36, 348, 42,
490086, etc.

As in Integers the Value or Denomination of Places do increase by Tens, from
the Unite place toward the left hand: So in Decimals the Value or Denomination
of places do decrease by Tens, from the Unite place toward the right hand: As
in the Table following.

The Table.
9. 8. 7. 6. 5. 4. 3. 2. 1. 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Thousand Millions.
Hundred Millions. Ten Millions. Millions. Hundred Thousands. Ten Thousands.
Thousands. Hundreds. Tens. Units. Tenths. Hundredths. Thousandths. Ten
Thousandths. Hundred Thousandths. Millionths. Ten Millionths. Hundred
Millionths. Thousand Millionths.

In Decimal Fractions, the Numerators are only set down, without the
Denominators; but the Denominators are easily known, for they are the same with
the Denomination of the last Figure of the Numerator. As in the Examples
following.

Examples.6 is Six. Numerator. Tenths. Denominator. The common way 6/100

42 is Forty two. Numerator. Hundredths. Denominator. The common way 42/100

364 is Threee Hundred sixty four.. Numerator. Thousandths. Denominator. The
common way 364/1000

CHAP. II. Addition and Subduction in Decimals.
ADdition and Subduction in Decimals, whether in pure Decimals, or in Integers
mixed with Decimals, differ not from Addition and Subduction in Integers, only
care must be had to place the separating Lines of the Numbers under one
another; as also the places of like denomination under one another; and the
separating Lines of the Sum or Difference, must be placed under the separating
Lines of the Numbers added, or subducted. See the Examples.

Examples in Addition. 347 268 149 764 8972 643 8 79 31302 34698 742 6934 8 07
428984

In Addition and Subduction, let the place of the Fraction remain so many
places as they were, and no more.

Example. Addition.
3572 7805 11377 Subduction.
7825 3575 4250

Examples in Subduction. 724 482 242 89 5796 3104 6427 36 2827 64279 48384
15895 462 9746 36454 59872 69 52972 740 6598 802 342 642 33558

CHAP. III. Multiplication in Decimals.
THe Numbers to be multiplied together, are called Factors; and the Number
found out by Multiplication, is called Product.

Multiplication, whether in pure Decimals, or in Integers mixed with Decimals,
is the same in Operation with Multiplication in Integers: The last Numbers of
the Factors must be set one under the other, as if they were Integers, not
regarding the placing of the separating Lines under one another, as in Addition
and Subduction: And from the Product must be cut off with a separating Line so
many of the last Figures, as there are places of Decimals in both the Factors.

Examples. ^

If it happen, when the Multiplication is ended, that there be fewer Figures in
the Product, than there are places of Decimals in both Factors (which may often
occur when the Product is a Fraction) in such case, as many places as are
wanting, so many Ciphers must be prefixed to the Product on the left hand
thereof, and then a separating Line must be prefixed to sign the Product so
increased for a Decimal.

Examples. ^

In Multiplication with Fractions, cut off so many places as there are Figures
of the Fractions, in the Multiplicand and Multiplier.

Examples. ^

CHAP. IV. Division in Decimals.
DIvision, whether in pure Decimals, or Integers mixed with Decimals, is the
same in Operation with Division in Integers. But care must be had to give a
true denomination to the first Figure of the Quotient; (according to this Rule).

The Rule.The first Figure of the Quotient is always of the same denomination
with that place of the Dividend, which stands, or is supposed to stand over the
Unite of the Divisor.

It will happen sometimes, that the Unite place of the Divisor will stand
beyond all the significant Figures of the Dividend, toward the right hand, or
toward the left. In this case you must put Ciphers to the right or left of the
Dividend, until you come over the Unite place of the Divisor.

As for Example.If 347 is to be divided by 0000462, they must stand thus;
0000462) 000347 (And the denomination of the first Figure of the Quotient will
be thousands of Integers.

Another Example.If 34 is to be divided by 64279, they must stand thus; 64279)
340000 (And the denomination of the first Figure of the Quotient will be
hundreds of Decimals.

Note, That what Ciphers are added to the right hand of the Dividend,
immediately next the Integers must have a separating Line (or a Comma) before
them.

In Division, the Fractions being equal, the Work is as whole Numbers are.

If unequal, add so many Ciphers to the Dividend, as the Fraction of the
Divisor exceeds the Fraction of the Dividend in places, that you may find
your Fraction in the Quotient.

Examples. ^

Other Examples. ^ Because the Fraction is two Figures in the Divisor;
Therefore I add two Ciphers to the Dividend. As in this third Example.

If in Division I be to divide by a great many Figures, I may make a Table for
them.

Example. Which is done, first doubling of it, then adding it until nine times,
if I will ten, which proves it. ^ 1 52678 2 105356 3 158034 4 210712 5 263390 6
316068 7 368746 8 421424 9 474102 10 526780

Because the Fraction is three Figures in the Divisor, therefore I add three
Ciphers to the Dividend. As in this last Example.

CHAP. V. Of the Square Root.
A Square Number is that which is made and produced of two equal Numbers
multiplied together, or else of one Number multiplied by it self; as 16 is a
Square Number, because it is produced of 4 by 4, (which are Numbers equal, or
one Number multiplied by it self) likewise 25, 36, 49, are three Square
Numbers, for they are Products of the Multiplication of two equal Numbers, or
of one Number multiplied by it self, as 5 by 5, 6 by 6, and 7 by 7. For the
Products may be understood by their Unites in a Plane, of such kind as shall
represent the form and figure of a Geometrical Plane, as you see here under.

The Superfice.
4, the side of the Square.

The Superfice.
5, the side of the Square.



It is evident by the generation of Squares, that you may make a Square of all
Numbers given, and that you may extract the Root of all Squares proposed; and
that likewise all Numbers proposed may be the side of some Square or another.

There is a Double Root and a Double Square, viz. Simple and Compound; The
Simple Root is that which has but one Number, as are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
and 9; the Squares of which are called Simple Squares. The Compound Root, is
that which has more than one Number, as are 10, 11, 12, 20, 30, etc. the
Squares of such are called Compound Squares. And before you will extract the
Compound Root, you must know by heart the nine Simple Roots with their Squares,
by means of the following Table.

A Table of the Simple Roots with their Squares.
Simple Roots. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Simple Squares. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81

To extract all Roots or Sides of Compound Squares. You must well understand
and imprint in your memories the following Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Extraction of the Square Root in Decimals.
IN extracting the Root or Side of a Compound Square, you must first mark the
Square Number given, with Points or Pricks from the right hand to the left,
beginning with the first Figure toward the right hand, marking over that
Figure one Prick or Point, then set another over the third Figure, and another
over the fifth; and so proceeding continually from the right hand to the left,
marking still with a Prick over every third Figure, leaving the other Figures
unmarked, until you come to the last Square toward the left hand.

^ First find the Simple Root of the Figure or Figures that remain toward the
left hand, multiply that Root in it self subtract it out of the Figures toward
the left hand: Then draw down the next two Figures to that Remainder, and say 2
times 5 the Quotient is 10; set 10 under 72, and see how often it may be found
in 72, say 6 times; then set 6 under 6, and set 6 also in the Quotient; then
multiply 106 by 6, comes 636, subtract it from 726, there remains 90: Then
draw down the next two Figures to that Remainder, and say, 2 times 56 in the
Quotient is 112; set 112 under 902, and see how often it may be found in 902,
say 8 times; then set 8 under 4, and set 8 also in the Quotient, then multiply
1128 by 8 comes 9024, subtract it from 9024 there remains nothing; so that
568 the Quotient is the just Root of the Square Number 322624, etc.

Another Example. ^ etc.

CHAP. VII. Of the Cube Root.
A Cube is a Solid Body, comprehended of six equal Square Superficies, and is
like unto the Dye of a Table-board.

Definition. Definition of the Cube Root.
Every Number multiplied in it self makes a Square Number, of which the Root or
Side is the Number multiplied; and every Square multiplied by its Root, makes
a Cube Number, (by the 20th Definition of the 7th Book of Euclide): As 4 times
4 makes 16, (a Square Number, of which the Root is 4) the which 16 being
multiplied by the Root 4, the Product gives 64, a Cube Number, of which the
Root is 4.

Likewise 5 times 5 makes 25, a Square Number, which being multiplied by its
Root 5, the Product gives 125, a Cube Number, of which the Root is 5, and so
of others. And before you can extract the Compound Cube Roots, you must first
know the nine Simple Cube Roots, with their Squares and Cubes. As appears in
the following Table, which is divided in three Lines, whereof the first (which
is the uppermost) contains the nine Simple Roots; and the second Line (which
is the middle Line) contains the nine Squares; and the third Line, which is
the lowest, contains the Cube Numbers.

A Table of the Simple Roots, with their Squares and Cubes.
Simples. Sides. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Squares. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 Cubes. 1 8
27 64 125 216 343 512 729

CHAP. VIII. Extraction of the Cube Root in Decimals.
TO prepare a Cube Number for Extraction, put a Point over the first place
thereof toward the right hand, (to wit, the place of Unites); then passing
over the second and third places, put another point over the fourth; and
passing over the fifth and sixth, put another over the seventh, and in that
order, (to wit, two places being intermitted between every two adjacent Points)
place as many Points as the Number will permit: So 157464 being given, you are
to place the Points as here follows; and so many Points as are in that manner
placed, of so many Figures the Root demanded will consist.

^ Having thus prepared your Number, you may see it distributed by the Points
into several Cubes: So in the same Example 157 is the first Cube, and 464 the
second.

First, Find the Simple Cube Root by the preceding Table of 157, which is 5;
subscribe the Cube of that Root under the first Cube of the Number given; so
125 being the Cube of 5 the Root, I write it under 157 the first Cube of the
Number given, and subtract this Cube from the first Cube of the Number
propounded, placing the remainder orderly underneath the Line: So 125 the Cube
of 5 being subtracted from 157, the remainder is 32: to the said remainder,
bring down the next Cube of the Number propounded, (to wit, the Figures or
Ciphers which stand in the three next places) placing the said Cube next after,
to wit, on the right hand of the remainder; so the next Cube 464 being placed
after the remainder 32, there will be found the Number 32464, which may be
called the Resolvend. Having drawn a Line under the Resolvend, square the Root
in the Quotient, that is, multiply it by it self, and subscribe the triple of
the said Square or Product, under the Resolvend, in such manner, that the first
place (to wit, the place of Unites) of the said triple Square, may stand
directly under the third place (or place of hundreds) in the Resolvend: So the
Square of the Root 5 is 25, the Triple whereof is 75, which I subscribe under
the Resolvend in such manner, that the Figure 5, which is in the first place,
(to wit, the place of Unites) in the Triple Product 75, may stand under 4,
which is seated in the third place of the Resolvend. Triple the Root or Number
in the Quotient, and subscribe this Triple Number in such manner that the first
place thereof, (to wit, the place of Unites) may stand directly under the
second place (to wit, the place of Tens) in the Resolvend: So the triple of the
Root 5 is 15, which I subscribe in such manner, that the Figure 5, which is in
the first place (to wit, the place of Unites) in the said triple Number, does
stand directly under 6, which is seated in the second place of the Resolvend:
The triple Square of the Root, and the triple of the Root being placed one
under the other as is directed, draw a Line underneath, and add them together
in such order as they are seated, and let the Sum be esteemed as a Divisor: So
the Triple Square 75, and the triple Number 15 being added together, as they
are ranked in the Work, the Sum will be 765 for a Divisor: Let the whole
Resolvend, except the first place thereof toward the right hand, (to wit, the
place of Unites) be esteemed as a Dividend; then demanding how often the first
Figure (toward the left hand) of the Divisor is contained in the correspondent
part of the Dividend, and observing in that behalf the Rules before taught in
Division, write the Answer in the Quotient: So I ask how often 7 (the first
Figure of the Divisor toward the left hand) is contained in 32, (the
correspondent part of the Dividend placed above) the Answer will be 4,
wherefore I write 4 in the Quotient: Having drawn another Line under the Work,
multiply the triple Square before subscribed by the Figure last placed in the
Quotient, and subscribe this Product under the said triple Square, (to wit,
Unites under Unites, Tens under Tens, etc.) So 75 being multiplied by 4, the
Product is 300, which I subscribe under 75 (the triple Square). Multiply the
Figure last placed in the Quotient, first by it self, and then the Product by
the triple Number before subscribed; this done, subscribe the last Product
under the said triple Number, (to wit, Unites under Unites, Tens under Tens,
etc.) So 4 being squared or multiplied by it self, the Product is 16, which
being multiplied by the triple Number 15, the Product is 240, this therefore I
subscribe under the aforesaid triple Number 15. Subscribe the Cube of the
Figure last placed in the Quotient, under the Resolvend, in such manner that
the first place of this Cube, (to wit, the place of Unites) may stand under the
place of Unites in the Resolvend: So 64 being the Cube of 4, I write it under
the Resolvend 32464, in such manner, that the Figure 4, which is in the place
of Unites in the Cube 64, may stand under the Figure 4, which is seated in the
place of Unites of the Resolvend: Drawing yet another Line under the Work, add
the three last Numbers together in the same order as they are seated, and
subtract the Sum of them from the Resolvend, placing the Remainder orderly
underneath: So the Sum of the three last Numbers, as they are ranked in the
Work, is 32464, which if you subtract out of the Resolvend 32464, the Remainder
is 0. Thus the whole Work being finished, the Cube Root of 157464, (the Number
propounded) is found to be 54.

Note 1. When the Sum of the three last Numbers before mentioned is greater
than the Resolvend, the Work is erroneous, and then you are to reform it by
placing a lesser Figure in the Quotient.

Note 2. For every one of the particular Cubes (distingushed by the Points)
except the first Cube on the left hand, a Resolvend is to be set apart, by
bringing down to the Remainder the next Cube. And as often as a Resolvend is
set apart, so often is a new Divisor to be found, by adding the triple of all
the Root in the Quotient (consisting of what number of places soever) to the
triple of the Square of such Root, after they are orderly placed, according as
is abovementioned.

Note 3. The Work of the Table of Simple Cubes in Folio 9, for finding the
first Figure of the Root, (as before declared) is but once used in the
Extraction of the Root of any Number whatsoever; but the Work of all the
following Rules, is to be used for the finding of every place in the Root
except the first.

The practice of these three Notes will be seen, when we describe how to
extract the Cube Root of Numbers not Cubical.

CHAP. IX. Another Example wrought by the Genitures.
SUppose a Number given to be 16387064, of which the Cube Root is required:
First, You must cut the Cube given into Ternaries from the right hand to the
left, (as was declared in Chap. 8.) Then find the Root of the first Cube from
the left hand 16. Whereof the greatest Root is 2, for 2 being multiplied
cubically, gives 8, the which 8 being deducted from 16, the first Cube of the
Number propounded, there remains 8, then set the Root found 2, with the
Square thereof above it, and by the same the Geniture, and then find a second
Figure for the Root of the second Cube, and you shall have 5, which ye shall
set down with its Square and Cube under it, right against the Geniture toward
the right hand; then multiply each one by another, and add the Products
together, there comes 7625, which being subtracted from 8387, there does
remain 762; In the same manner find a Root for the Numbers remaining to be
extracted, and it shall be the Root of your third Cube; And the Example will
stand thus.

^

And seeing there remains nothing, it is manifest that the Number propounded
16387064 is a Cube Number, and the Root thereof is 254. By the 4 th Proposition
of the second, and 20 th Definition of the seventh Book of Euclide.

When we come to calculate the Table of Cubes, by which you may make an Inch
Rule for height, or Line of Diameters, the way shall be described how to
extract the Cube Root of Numbers not Cubical, or as they are termed Irrational
Numbers, from which no true Root can be obtained, yet many times the Error will
not be ^/100000 part of an Unite.

CHAP. X. Principles of Geometry.
THere are diverse Reasons which make me to give these few Principles of
Geometry, because the whole Work of this Book, is either to be done by
Arithmetic or Geometry; and besides that a Gunner cannot obtain to know the
truth of a Diameter of a Ball, except he can Geometrically extract the Wind of
the Bore of the Piece, and thereby find the Ball fitting such a Piece: And in
general will be most useful for any Gunner.

Definitions.
1. A Point or Prick, is that which is the least of all Materials, and it is
the beginning of Things, as being void of Length, Breadth, and Depth, having
neither Part nor Quantity (expressible in Numbers), and therefore it admits of
no Division, but that which is mental only. This Point or Prick is represented
unto you by the Letter A. Thus A. 2. A Line is a Magnitude extending it self in
length, without breath or thickness, (whether it be a straight line or crooked)
and (in respect of its length) may be divided into Parts, but will admit of no
other division, but in length only. As is set forth to you by the Line BC; the
extremities whereof being Points as B and C. 3. A Right or Straight Line, is
the nearest Distance that can be betwixt two Points; As is the former Line BC.
4. Circular or Crooked Lines are longer, though they be extended no further
than Right Lines, as are the Lines DE and FG. 5. Right-lined Parallels, are two
straight Lines, so drawn, as they are equi-distant in all places one from the
other; so that although they were infinitely extended, yet could they never
meet; as may be seen by the Lines HI and KL. 6. A Circular Parallel, is a
Circle drawn either within or without another Circle, upon one and the same
Center, as is seen by the two Circles, viz. NOPQ and RSTV, being both drawn
upon the same Center W, and therefore are parallel one to another. 7. A
Superficies is the second kind of Quantity, and to it are attributed two
Dimensions, Length and Breadth, but not Thickness, for a Superficies is the
term or end of a Body, as a Line is the end and term of a Superficies. As WXYZ
is a Superficies. 8. The Extremes of a Superficies are Lines, as the Ends,
Limits, or Bounds of a Line, are Points confining the Line; so are Lines the
Limits, Bounds and Ends enclosing a Superficies; As in the foregoing Figure you
may see the Superficies enclosed with four Lines, viz. YW, WX, XZ, and YZ,
which are the Extremes or Limits thereof. 9. A plain Superficies, is that which
lies equally between his Lines, like as a Right Line is the shortest extention
or draught from one Point to another; so a plain Superficies is the shortest
extention or draught from one Line to another: As in the preceding Figure WXYZ.
10. A Figure is that Magnitude comprehended by one Line, or more Lines than
one: Under one Line is a Circle; Under more Lines is a Triangle, Quadrangle,
Pentagon, Hexagon; and so forth. 11. A Circle is that Figure which is
comprehended under one Line, called the Circumference, as ABCD; in the middle
whereof there is a Point called the Center, as E; from which, to the
Circumference, all Lines being drawn are equal; As in the said Circle the Lines
EA, EB, EC, and ED are equal. 12. The Diameter of a Circle, is a Right Line
drawn through the Center thereof, and ending at the Circumference on either
side, dividing the Circle into two equal parts: As the Line AEC in this Circle
is the Diameter thereof, because it passes from the Point A to the Point C,
and so likewise through the Center E, and divides the whole Circle into two
equal parts. 13. The Semi-diameter being the half thereof; as AE and EC, the
one Term whereof being the Center, and the other the Circumference: It
follows by the 11 th Definition hereof, that all Lines drawn from the Center
to the Circumference are equal; Therefore is BE and ED likewise Semi-diameters.
14. A Semicircle is a Figure which is contained under the Diameter, and under
that part of the Circumference which is cut off by the Diameter, as the
Semicircle ABC, is contained under the Diameter AC, and also under the part of
the Circumference ABC, which is cut off by the Diameter AC. 15. A Quadrant is
the fourth part of a Circle, or is contained under two Semi-diameters, and the
fourth part of the Circumference, as in the preceding Circle AEB or BEC. 16. A
Segment of a Circle, is a part of the Circle contained under a Chord-Line, (not
being the Diameter) and a part of the Circumference, as FBG being the lesser
Segment; and the Remainer to the whole Circle being the greater. 17. A
right-lined Angle, is the Inclination, or bowing of one Line to another, which
being extended, do concur or meet in a Point, as in the preceding Circle AEB or
AEH, etc. the middle Letter signifying always the Angle, as E. 18. Of
Right-lined Angles there be three kinds, viz. A Right-Angle, an Obtuse or
Blunt-Angle, and an Acute or Sharp-Angle. 19. A Right-Angle is that, when one
Line falling upon another makes the Angles on both sides equal, then either of
those Angles is a Right-Angle: and the Right Line which stands erected, is
called a Perpendicular-Line to that upon which it stands. As upon the
Right-Line AC, suppose there do stand another Line BE, (as in the preceding
Circle) in such sort, that it makes the Angles on either side thereof equal,
namely the Angle AEB on the one side, equal to the Angle BEC on the other side,
then are each of those Angles Right Angles, and the Line BE, which stands
erected on the Line AC, is a Perpendicular to the said Line AC. 20. An
Obtuse-Angle is that which is greater than a Right-Angle, as the Angle HEB (in
the preceding Circle) is greater than the Angle AEB, by the Angle AEH, and
therefore is an Obtuse-Angle. 21. An Acute or Sharp-Angle, is that which is
less than a Right-Angle, as the Angle AEH is an Acute-Angle, because it is less
than the Right-Angle AED, by the other Acute-Angle DEH.




I say all these Arches being equal; not according to quantity of extension:
for certain it is that FG will be lesser than AC; but I say that they are equal
according to the number of Parts, for there are more Parts in the Arch AC than
in FG, although the quantity of the one be greater than the quantity of the
other; because all Circles described from the same Center are equal, all being
divided into 360 Degrees.

From hence it follows that every Angle may be measured by an Arch of a Circle
actually divided; whether it be Semicircle, Quadrant, or Line of Chords, (the
construction of which hereafter follows); And first by a Semicircle divided
into 180 Degrees: First, Lay the Center of the same upon the Angular Point, and
the Diameter upon one of the Lines forming the Angle, the Degrees contained
between these two Lines upon your Instrument is the measure of your Angle. As
in this Example, The Center of your Semicircle placed upon the Angular Point
A, and the Diameter upon AC, the Arch contained between AB and AC, such is DE,
which is the measure of the Angle DAE 36 Degrees.



22. The measure of any Right-lined Angle, may be had by a Line of Chords,
which is described upon a Ruler; which Line is virtually the Arch of a Circle;
The Projection whereof is as follows. Let there be a Quadrant, or fourth part
of a Circle, as BAC, divided into 90 Degrees; First, Into three parts, each
containing 30 Degrees, by taking the Semi-diameter, as AB, with your Compasses;
place one foot in C, and with the same wideness set the other foot in F; set
again the one foot of your Compasses in B, (the Compasses not being altered)
and with the other take the extent BG: So your Quadrant shall be divided into
three equal parts, viz. CG 30 Degrees, CF 60, and the rest unto B 90 degrees:
Every one of these being again subdivided into three equal parts; so shall you
have the Quadrant divided into nine parts, or 90 degrees, each part containing
ten degrees: and so into small parts according to the largeness of your
Quadrant.



The Quadrant being performed and truly divided: you shall draw a Line from B
to C, which shall be the Chord of 90 degrees; again you shall place the one
foot of your Compasses at C, and extend the other to 10 degrees; the same
extention you shall lay off from C to D, upon the Line of Chords; still keeping
the one foot of your Compasses at C, again extend your Compasses to 20 degrees,
and lay them off from C to E; and so accordingly to all the rest, till you have
finished the division of your Line. Which being performed, shall serve you to
measure the quantity of all Right-lined Angles, as well as by any Circular
Arch; being more portable, and more ready for use, than any Circular
Instrument, as Semicircle, Quadrant, etc. as by the following practice is
evident.

The Use of the Line of Chords. 23. Let there be an Angle, as ABC, whose
quantity is desired: The same is performed by a Line of Chords; if you place
the one foot of your Compasses at the end of your Line, and the other upon 60
degrees; then the Compasses remaining at the same wideness, place the one foot
at B, and draw an Arch as DE; whose wideness you shall take by your Compasses,
and apply the same to your Scale upon the Line of Chords, you shall have the
Quantity of the Angle 36 degrees. But if the Angle be Obtuse or Blunt, as FBC,
extend the Compasses upon your Scale to 60 degrees, drawing an Arch from the
Angular Point; then first take off 90 degrees from your Line of Chords, and
place the same from E to G, the remainer being taken from G to F, the distance
whereof is 54 degrees; which two Arches being added together, shall give the
quantity of the Angle FBC, reckoned 144 degrees. And thus much for finding the
quantity of all Right-lined Angles, by the Line of Chords upon your Scale.

CHAP. XI. Geometrical Problems.
Prob. 1.
To divide a Line given into two equal Parts, at Right-Angles.
th Definition of this.



Prob. 2.
An Angle being given, to divide the same into two halves.
Let the Angle be ABC, to be divided into two equal halves: Place the one foot
of your Compasses at B, and extend the other at your pleasure to D and E;
describe two Arches cutting each other in the point F: So shall you divide the
Angle ABC into two equal halves, if you draw a Line from B to F, with two
Angles ABF, and FBC, as equal to the whole Angle ABC, being divided into two
halves.



Prob. 3.
From any Point, or from the end of a Line, to erect or raise a Perpendicular.
Let there be given the Line AB, and the Point in the same given C, from which
a Perpendicular is to be raised.

Place the one foot of your Compasses at C, and with the other take at pleasure
above the Line, as D; then from the point D, describe the Arch of a Circle, as
ECF, cutting the Line AB in F; then lay your Ruler at F and D, and where it
cutteth the Arch as in E, draw a Line from C to E, which shall be perpendicular
to AB, from the point C.



Again from the point A, a Perpendicular is raised the same manner of way;
placing one foot of your Compasses at A, extend the other above the Line to the
point G; and draw from G the Arch IAH, cutting the Line at H; then laying your
Ruler by G and H, and where it cutteth the Arch as in I; from A to I draw a
Line, so shall AI be a perpendicular from the end of the Line AB, or from the
point A.

The same may be performed by the Line of Chords, as by the practice is evident.

The same another way. A Perpendicular may be raised after this manner; As let
the Line be AB; and a Point in the same Line given, let be C: place the one
foot of the Compasses at C, and with the other draw an Arch above a Quadrant,
as GED; then place the distance of CD from D to E; then placing the one foot at
E, draw the Arch GF: then removing your Compasses, place the one foot at G, and
with the other cut the Arch in F: Lastly, From F to C, draw a Line FC; so shall
FC be a Perpendicular from the point C.

Prob. 4.
From a Point without a Line, to let fall a Perpendicular to a Line given.
Let the Line given be AB, and the Point without the same at C: Draw a Line to
AB at Oblique Angles, as CD; which you shall cut (by the first Problem) in two
halves at E; then place the one foot of your Compasses at E, extend the other
unto C, drawing the Arch CF: and where the same cutteth the Line AB, as in F,
from C to F draw a Line, as CF; so shall CF be a Perpendicular let fall from
the Point C, upon the Line AB, as was required.

Prob. 5.
A Line being given, to draw a Parallel to the same, at any Distance required.
Let the Line given be AB, and the Distance from C: Extend your Compasses to
the length of C, and placing one foot of your Compasses in any Point of the
Line, draw two Arches; and by the Compass of these Arches, draw a Line as DE;
which shall be parallel to AB required; as CE.

The same another way. Let the Line given be AB, and the Point at C: From the
Point C, draw a Line at pleasure unto AB, which shall touch in F, which you
shall cut (by the first Problem) into two halves at E: take then a Point
betwixt F and A at pleasure, which is here G: draw then a right Line from the
Point G, through E, and set the Distance DE, equal to the Line EG: draw then a
Line through the Points CD; so shall the same Line be parallel to the Line AB.

Prob. 6.
Two Lines being given, to find a third proportional Line.
Let A and B be two Lines given, and let it be required to find a third Line in
proportion to them.

First, Make any Angle as CDH; then set the Line A from D to E, and the Line B
from D to F, and also from D to G; then draw OF: that done, by the Point G draw
a parallel to OF, as GH: So shall DH, be the third proportional Line required.

A. 4.

B. 6.

DE. 4.

DF. 6.

DG. 6.

DH. 9.



Prob. 7.
Three Lines being given, to find a fourth in proportion, that is to perform
the Rule of Three in Lines.
Let AB and C be three Lines given, and it is required to find a fourth
proportional Line.

First (as in the last Problem) make any Angle at Pleasure, as the Angle EFG;
Then take with your Compasses the Line A, and set it from F to H; take also the
Line B, and set it from F to I, and draw the Line HI: That done, take the third
Line C, and set it upon the Line FG, viz. (always upon the same Line where the
first Line A was placed) from F to K; then by K draw a Parallel to HI, as KL,
to cut FE in L: So shall FL be the fourth Proportional Line required.

FH. 12.

FI. 14.

FK. 18.

FL. 21.



Prob. 8.
To divide a Line given into two parts, in proportion one to the other,
according to two Lines given.
Let AB be a Line given, to be divided into two such parts, that the lesser may
be in proportion to the greater: As the Line C, to the Line D.

From the end A draw the Line AE, making the Angle BAE: then set the Line C
from A to F, and the Line D from F to E, and draw the Line EB: Lastly, By the
Point F draw a Parallel to EB, as FG, to cut AB in G: So shall AB be divided in
G, as C to D, which was required.

AF. 20.

FE. 30.

AG. 16.

GB. 24.



Prob. 9.
To cut off from a Line given any part or parts required.
Let in the last Diagram AB be a Line given, and let it be required to cut off
from it parts.

First, From the end A, draw the Line AE, making any Angle as BAE; then set on
any five equal parts from A to E, and also two of the same parts from A to F:
That done, draw the Line EB; then by F draw a Parallel thereunto, to cut AB in
G: So shall AG be the parts of AB, which was required.

Prob. 10.
To divide a Line in such sort, as another Line is before divided.
This Problem differs not much from the two last Problems. Draw a Right Line
at pleasure, as the Line OB, which Line you shall divide into 100 equal parts
as exactly as you can; then extend your Compasses to the Distance OB, and
describe an Arch; in which arch you are to include the desired Line A; then
draw the Line OC, and you have the Angle COB: which we shall hold for a
ground-Rule; because the Legs OB and OC, contain each of them 100 or 1000
parts, which is in the Line A.



For Example.I would have 35 parts of the Line A, (whose whole length making
100 parts, as the Line OB does): I number on the Line OB 35 parts from O to F;
with this distance I draw the Arch FG; then is the nearest Distance from F to G
a Right Line, which is the 35 parts of the Line A.

Likewise if it were desired to have 15 parts of the Line A: Then draw from O
the Arch ED; which Distance is the desired 15 parts of the Line A; as the
Learned Adriani Meti does teach. And also how to find the Parts of a longer
Line, than the Line of Measure it self is; it is done after the same manner;
and is of great use to a Gunner.

Use.This may be of great use, if the Gunner be to find the first Round Ball in
a strange place, and the Weight unequal to Ours.

Prob. 11.
Between two Lines given, to find a mean Proportion.
Let A and B be two Lines given, between the which it is required to find a
mean Proportion.

Join the Lines A and B so together, that they make one Right Line as CD, being
joined together in the Point E: and upon the Line CD describe the Semicircle,
viz. CFD: Then upon the Point E, where the Lines A and B being joined together
meet, erect a Perpendicular to cut the Limb in F, as OF, which shall be a mean
Proportion between the Lines A and B required.



The same another way.

Again in the same Diagram, let the Lines A and G be given, between the which
it is required to find a mean Proportion.

Take the Line G, and lay it down from C to D, and draw CD; whereupon describe
the Semicircle CFD: Then take the Line A, and set it from D to E; Then upon
the Point E, erect a Perpendicular to cut the Limb in F; Lastly, Draw DF, which
shall be a mean Proportion between DE and DC, or between the Lines A and G
required. And if you draw CF, it shall be a mean between B and G, that is
between CE, and CD.

Prob. 12.
To divide a Line given by Extreme and Mean Proportion.
Let AB be a Line given to be divided by Extreme and Mean Proportion. Increase
AB at length to C; then upon the Point A erect a Perpendicular as AD, of the
length of AB: That done, take half AD, or AB, and set it from A to E, then with
the distance ED make the Arch DG: So shall AB be divided by Extreme and Mean
Proportion in G, and AG is the greater Segment, and GB the lesser.



The same another way.

Let HI be a Line given, to be divided by Extreme and Mean Proportion. Upon the
end I, erect a Perpendicular, as I K, of the length of half the given Line HI;
then draw the subtendant side HK: That done, set KI from K to L; again, set HL
from H to M; so shall HI be divided by Extreme and Mean Proportion in M: And HM
shall be the greater Segment, and MI the lesser.

Prob. 13.
The greater Segment of a Line divided by Extreme and Mean Proportion, to find
the whole Line.
Let AB be the greater Segment given, and the whole Line is required. Increase
BA to C; then upon the end B erect a Perpendicular of half the length of AB, as
BD; and draw the subtendant side AD; from which subtract DB, rests AF: That
done, set AF from A to C; so shall CB be the whole Line required.



Prob. 14.
To describe a Circle upon any three Points given, not being in a Right Line.
Let ABC be three Points given. Set one foot of the Compasses in the middle
Point at B, and open your Compasses to any extention that is above one half of
the distance between B, and the farthest of the other two Points, and with that
distance draw the blind Arches DE and FH: with the same extent set one foot in
C, draw the Arch FH: Again with the same extent, setting one foot in the Point
A, draw the Arch DE: then laying a Ruler to the Intersection of these Arches,
draw the Lines DG and HG; which will cross each other in the Point G: and there
is the Center of the Circle inquired. Where setting one foot of your Compasses,
and extending the other to any of the three Points, you describe the Arch of a
Circle, which shall pass through the three Points given, and give the whole
Circumference required: which having, you may find the Diameter by the 12 th
Definition of Chap. 10. of this Book.

Observation. By a Segment, or a piece of a Ball being found, to know the
weight of the whole Ball.
Here is to be observed, That if any Town, Fort or Place be Besieged or Blocked
up by an Enemy, and the Enemy shooting continually, there are diverse Segments
or Pieces of their Ball found in the Place; and it is desired to know what
Ordnance they do Batter with. The Gunner shall take the Segment or piece of the
Ball, and lay it on a piece of Paper, and set there down by the Circumference
three Pricks or Points, as ABC in the Figure following, and thereby, and by the
preceding Problem, shall find the Diameter, Center, and Circumference of the
Ball, whereby you may know the weight of that Ball; as is described in page 54.



Prob. 15.
How to Reduce a Right Line into the Circumference of a Circle.
The Line given being AB, to be reduced into a Circumference.



The which Line AB, you shall first divide into three equal parts, and of these
three Parts you shall make an Equilateral Triangle, as CDE; the half of CD is
F, and the half of the side DE is G; and where they cut one another as in H,
that is the Center of the Triangle CDE: further divide DF into halves with the
point I; draw then a right Line from the Center H, to I, which is HK; and
divide the Line HI into four equal parts, of which you shall add one part unto
HI, which shall be HK, (which is the same fourth part five times set); set then
one foot of your Compasses in the point H, and the other in the point K; and
draw with the same distance a round Circle, whose Circumference shall be equal
to the Line given, viz. the Line AB, which was required.

Prob. 16.
How to reduce the Circumference of a Circle given, into a Right Line.
Let the Circle given be ABCD. Divide the same Circle in four equal parts with
the two Diameters BC, and DL, which cutteth one another at Right Angles in A;
divide AC in the middle in E, through the which draw DI, and from I draw a
Perpendicular upon DL, and divide AB in Extreme and Mean Proportion at F, (by
Problem 12 of this) draw FH, and parallel to the same from B draw BG, which
cutteth the prolonged Line DL in G; so is AG a fourth part of the Circumference
BDCL.

The Mean Proportion betwixt DL and AG, the fourth part of the Circumference,
gives the side of a Square equal to the Circle.

From DE subtract the half of AC, there remains DK, (which is equal to BF)
and is the side of a Decagon inscribed in the Circle.

Prob. 17.
The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find its Proportion to the
Circumference, or the Reverse.
The true knowledge of this Problem is of great use for Gunnders, both by Sea
and Land.
Whenever the Circumference of a Circle is divided into 10000 equal parts,
then does the Diameter thereof contain 3183 of the said parts, says Adriani
Meti. But Archimedes shows us the easiest and fittest for our purpose; to
wit, That if the Circumference be divided into 22 equal parts, then the
Diameter does contain seven of the like parts: as is demonstrated in this
Figure, where you may see, that in the Circle ABC, the Circumference is divided
into 22 equal parts, and the Diameter AB does contain seven of the same parts.



A Light to the Art of Gunnery.
CHAP. XII. How to know the Proportion of a true Fortified Iron Gun.
BY the Demonstration of the last Problem, you have the proportion of a true
Fortified Iron Piece, for a true Fortified Piece of Ordnance being of Iron,
has 11 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, measuring at the Touchhole
betwixt the Rings; which to describe is thus.

In the Diagram of the 17 th Problem, the Diameter being divided into 7 equal
parts, as is the Diameter AB; then take with your Compasses one of the same
parts, and set one foot in the Center, and with the other draw the Circle EGF,
then shall the Line OF be the Diameter of the Bore of that Piece of Ordnance,
and the Circle ACB, the Circumference of the Breech of the same Piece at the
Touchhole: where it follows that one 22 part of a well proportioned Piece of
Ordnance made of Iron, measured about the Breech, is half the Diameter of the
Bore of the same Piece; the which is 11 Diameters of the Bore, as aforesaid:
And therefore one side Metal, or the thickness of Metal at the Touchhole is 1
Diameter of the Bore, as appears from G to C, which is completely
demonstrated by the said Diagram of the 17 th Problem: Also by the Neck, near
the Musle of the Gun, are seven Diameters of the Bore about; which is near
parts of the Diameter in Metal.

The true proportion of a Gun.
If you should take the Diameter of the Breech of this Piece seven times to be
the length of the Piece, and allow three of those parts betwixt the Breech and
the Meeks, or Trunions, and four of these parts betwixt the Meeks and the Musle
of the said Piece, then that Piece has her true proportion.

The Reason why one Gun must have more, and another less Powder. Tho there are
many Guns that are some shorter, and some longer, yet they ought not to be
thinner of Metal; for if they be thinner, then they are not able to have their
true proportion of Powder, either for Proof or Action: Likewise know that true
Fortified Guns, and true Bored Brass Ordnance, be their Denomination what it
will, ought to have at the least 9 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech,
measuring at the Touchhole, and at the Meeks 7 Diameters of the Bore, and 5
Diameters about the Musle at the Neck: if they have less than is abovesaid,
they cannot suffer their true proportion of Powder, either for Proof or Action:
but this you must help, by what shall be fully described in its proper place.

CHAP. XIII. How to Extract the Wind from the Bore of a Piece Geometrically,
and thereby to know a fit Ball for the same.
A good way to find the Wind of a Piece of Ordnance under four pound Ball.
FIrst, You are to draw the Diameter of the Bore BD, and that Line you are to
divide into two equal halves, as EB and ED; then you have the Center E, by
which you draw the Circle ADCB: Which being done, with your Compasses at the
same extent draw an Arch from the point D, extended to AEC; then draw the
Chord-Line ALC; keeping still your Compasses at the same extent, measure from A
to D, then to C, and so to O: then extend your Compasses from D to O, and draw
the Arch ON, which cutteth the Diameter in F: then divide the Line FB into
three equal parts, and take one of these parts and place under the Center E in
H, extend your Compasses from H to D, and draw the Circle, whose Diameter is
DG, and is the Ball fitting for such a Piece, where you are to observe that GB
is the Height of the Wind of the Piece.



Observation.

And though this former Demonstration be approved by many Gunners, yet I find
it by my Observation, better to demonstrate the Wind of a Piece, as in the
Figure following.

First, Draw the Diameter BA, which being divided into two equal parts at C,
extend your Compasses from C to A or B, and draw the Circle 1.2.3.4.5, which
here represents the Bore of the Piece: Keeping your Compasses at the same
extention, place one foot in A, and draw the Arch 2, A true way to Extract the
Wind of a Piece of Ordnance, and thereby to find her true Ball.
C, X; then drawing the Chord-Line 2, X, it divides the Semi-diameter of the
Bore into two equal parts; then you are to extend your Compasses to the
distance AD, or DC: So fixing one foot of your Compasses in A, you are to
measure five of these Dimensions about the Circle, as you see them described,
1.2.3.4.5; then you must extend your Compasses from A to 5, and draw the Arch
5, Q, whereof A is the Center; then you must divide the distance OB into two
equal parts, and take one of these parts, and set it upon the Diameter below C
in the point E; then you are to extend your Compasses from E to A, keeping one
foot in E, draw the Circle, whose Diameter is AEO: and is a Ball fit for such a
Piece as has for Diameter ACB.



The same by Calculation.

In the following Diagram AB, the height of the Bore of a Piece being given, to
find the Diameter of the Ball AO.

First, Take the Semi-Radius AL, and set it off in the Circumference from A
toward B five times, as you see here marked with 1.2.3.4. G; or 1.2.3.4. Q:
then extend your Compasses from A to G, and draw the Arch GOQ, so is AO the
Diameter of the Ball, and BO the Wind.



Now to find this by Calculation, First consider that AG or AQ is equal to AO,
and A 1 equal to AL; then AL being the Semi-Radius 50000, is equal to the Chord
A 1, withal considering that the Chord of an Arch is equal to double the Sine
of half that Arch; Now then 25000 the half of AL is the Sine AE, which in the
Table of Natural Sines, gives 14 29, for the Arch AE, the double whereof
gives 28 58, for the quantity of the Arch A 1, which being quintupled, or
multiplied by 5, gives 144 50 for the Arch AG or AQ, so that the Arch GBQ is
70 20: The Angle ACG may be measured with a Line of Chords from the Plane Scale
to be 144 50. The Chord whereof AG, is equal to twice the Sine of 72 25, viz.
95327; the double whereof is 190654, which is equal to the height of the Ball,
in comparison to the Bore AB, 200000, twice the Radius, or the whole Diameter.

In Proportion, as Double is to Double, so is Single to Single: Therefore as
190654 is unto the Diameter 200000, so is the half thereof 95327, the Sine of
72 25 unto the Radius: I say then, if the height of the Bore of any Piece of
Ordnance be divided into 100000 parts, then the Diameter of the Ball is for the
same Piece 95327 of the same parts; and the Wind is the Difference, which is
4673 parts, so that the Bore will be about 21 times the height of the Wind.

If the Height of the Bore be given, to find the Diameter of the Ball.

The Proportion is: As the Radius is to the Height of the Bore given: So is the
Sine of 72 25, unto the Diameter of the Ball required.

Or, if the Diameter of the Ball be given to find the Bore: Say then,

As the Sine of 72 25 is in Proportion to the Diameter of the Ball: So is the
Radius to the Height of the Bore.

Example 1.I have an Iron Ball whose Diameter is four Inches, and weighs 9 lb
English Weight, and I desire to know what height the Bore of the Piece will be,
which this Ball shall fit, the Wind duly extracted. Sine of 72 25 95327 Inches
4 Radius 100000 4 400000 ^

I Answer, The Height of the Bore of such a Piece of Ordnance is 4 Inches and
part fere.

Example 2.I have a Gun whose Bore is 6 Inches Diameter, and I would know what
Diameter must the Ball have, that will fit such a Piece, the Wind duly
extracted. Radius ^00000 Inches 6 Sine of 72 25 95327 6 571962

I Answer, The Diameter of the Ball that will fit such a Piece, must be 5
Inches, and 7/10 parts of an Inch. And so of others.

Another way to Extract the Wind of a Gun, as well Geometrically as by
Calculation.



The Height of the Bore of any Piece of Ordnance being given, as the Bore AK or
GM (in the preceding Diagram) to find the Diameter of the Ball: First, With 60
of the Line of Chords, I draw the Circle DEF; then with 72 of the same Line, I
draw the Arches EO and OF, which does meet in the Point O: From O through the
Center P, I draw the Diameter KA: then from the Center P, I draw Right Lines
through the Points E and F, which does cut the Circle AK in B and C, and the
Circle GM in H and I: So that BC is 72 of the Circle KA, and HI is 72 of the
Circle GM, as well as OF is of the Circle DEF: then extend the Compasses from A
to B, setting one foot in A, with the other draw the Arch BLC; so is ALL the
Diameter of a Ball for the Bore AK: Or from G to H, setting one foot in G, with
the other draw the Arch HNI; so is GN the Diameter of a Ball for the Bore GM:
Or otherwise, not having a Line of Chords to measure 72, upon the Circumference
of the Bore given: As here in the Bore AK, divide the Circumference of the Bore
into five equal parts, as BCSAR, and every one of these parts shall be 72
Degrees.

Now to Calculate this Arithmetically; the Chord AB being equal to AL
contains 144, or twice 72; the Sine of 72, is 95105, the double whereof is
190210, for the Chord AB or AL, which has such proportion to the height of the
Bore AK 200000, as the Diameter of the Ball is to the Bore. I say then, the
Bore being 200000, and the Diameter of the Ball 190210, the one being
subtracted from the other, the Difference is 9790, which is the height of the
Wind: And if you divide the Diameter of the Bore 200000, by the height of the
Wind 9790, the Quotient will give the Wind to be somewhat less than the 20 part
of the Bore.

The Diameter of the Bore 200000 The Diameter of the Ball 190210 The Difference
is the Wind 9790
^ The Quotient gives 20 42/100 Times, so that it is less than 20 Times.

As the Chord of 144, viz. 190210, is in Proportion to the Diameter 200000; So
is the half thereof the Sine of 72, viz. 95105, unto the Radius 10000.

The Diameter of a Bore being given, to find the Ball.Hence it follows, That
as the Radius is in Proportion to the Diameter of the Bore; So is the Sine of
72 00 to the Diameter of the Ball.

Or if the Diameter of a Ball were given to find the Bore.Then should the
Proportion be, as the Sine of 72 00, viz. 95105 is unto the Diameter of the
Ball: So is the Radius 100000 unto the Height of the Bore.

Example 1. There is a Gun whose Bore is 7 Inches Diameter, I would know what
Diameter must the Ball have, that will fit such a Piece, the Wind duly
extracted. ^

I Answer, The Diameter of the Ball that will fit such a Piece, must be 6
Inches and 65/100 parts of an Inch.

Example 2. There is an Iron Ball whose Diameter is 6 Inches, and weighs 30
lb 6 Ounces, English Weight: I desire to know what height the Bore of a Piece
will be, which this Ball shall fit, the Wind duly extracted. Sine of 72 00
95105 Inches 6 Radius 100000 6 600000 ^

I Answer, The Height of the Bore of such a Piece of Ordnance will be 6 Inches
and 3/10 parts of an Inch. And so of others.

Observation.

The Diameter of the Piece ACB is 4 Inches very near, which is the Diameter of
a Ball of 9 lb Scots weight.

And the Diameter of the Ball which is AEO 4 Inches, is 8 lb Scots weight. Now
the aforesaid Diameter ACB of 4 Inches, is the Diameter of a Ball of 10 lb
English weight.

And likewise the Diameter AEO; of 4 Inches, is the Diameter of a Ball of 9 lb
English weight.

There is a Difference between Scots and English Weight, as So that the
Difference between Scots and English weight is as 8 is to 9; that is to say,8
is to 9.
That 8 lb Scots makes 9 lb English.

For the first Demonstration, the Diameter DB is 3 Inches, which is near the
Diameter of a Ball of 6 17/20 lb Scots weight, And near the Diameter of a Ball
of 7 11/16 lb English weight. And the Diameter DHG is 3 Inches, which is the
Diameter of a Ball of 5 lb 6 Ounces very near of Scots weight. And the Diameter
of 3 Inches, is near 6 lb English weight, not following the Tables of Mr.
Smith, nor any other that I have seen as yet set forth; As I intend to
Demonstrate in its due place.

Objection. This Geometrical Description may be said by some, That they know
better; for Mr. Hexham has deciphered the Bore of the Piece, and the Ball in
another manner: Therefore I will Demonstrate the Way that Mr. Hexam takes to
extract the Wind of a Piece, and thereby to find the true Ball.

Examples. Take the just Diameter of the Bore of your Piece, which you divide
into two equal parts, and draw the Circle ABE; then the Compasses at the same
station, you place one foot in A, and another in B, and draw the Cross Arches
ACB: From C draw a Line through the Center D to E, and then draw the Line AE:
then place one foot of your Compasses in E, and draw the Arch AB: then place
one foot of your Compasses in the Center D, and extend the other to the Arch F,
so draw the Circle FG: which he says is the way to find a true Ball.

Answer to the Objection. Here you have the Demonstration of Mr. Henry Hexham,
where you see a gross mistake; For as he supposes FG, or EK to be the true
Ball: And I find IE is the true Ball for that Piece, and have wrought this as
you have it in Folio 28. Wherefore I leave the Ingenious Gunner to judge, which
of these Experiments are the best and truest.

CHAP. XIV. The Demonstration of the Cannon-Bore, and of all other Pieces of
Ordnance to the Rabinet, by Letters: As also the Geometrical Extracting or
Deducing of the Wind or Vent of those Pieces, whereby you may know the exact
Diameter of the true Ball fitting those Pieces.
Weight of Ball. lb lb WA is the Bore of the Cannon-Royal; the distance betwixt
A and B, is the true Vent or Wind, that ought to be betwixt the Ball B, and the
Bore A -- 64 72 WC is the Bore of the Cannon-Ordinary; the Distance CD is the
Wind; and D the Height of the Ball -- 48 54 WE is the Bore of the
French-Cannon; OF the Wind; F the Diameter of the Ball -- 36 40 WG is the Bore
of the Demi-Cannon Royal; GH the Wind; H the Diameter of the Ball -- 30 33 WI
is the Bore of the Demi-Cannon Ordinary; IK the Wind; K the Diameter of the
Ball -- 24 27 WL is the Bore of the Culvering, or Demi-French Cannon; LM the
Wind; and M the Diameter of the Bore -- 18 20 WN is the Bore of the
Quarter-Cannon Ordinary; NO the Wind; and O the Diameter of the Ball -- 12 13
WP is the Bore of the Demi-culvering; PQ the Wind; and Q the Diameter of the
Ball -- 8 9 WR is the Bore of a large Sacker; RS the Wind; and S the Diameter
of the Ball -- 6 6 WITH is the Bore of a Sacker; VT the Wind; and V the Height of
the Ball -- 5 5 WX is the Bore of a Minion; XY the Wind; and Y the Height of
the Ball -- 3 3 WZ is the Bore of a Faucon; ZX the Wind; and X the Height of
the Ball -- 2 2 W = is the Bore of a Rabinet; = the Wind; and the Height of the
Ball -- 1 1

Note: In the Column next your left hand you have the Scots Weight of the Ball;
and in the Column next your right hand you have the English Weight of the same.

The Ancient and Later Rules given for Gunners, to give Powder to great
Ordnance of all sorts, that are drawn on Carriages.

According to the custom in former times, the loading of Powder.
In Ancient times it is said, That the great Chamber'd-Guns, that shot
Stone-Ball, had for their ordinary one pound of Powder to three pound and half,
or at most four pound weight of their Ball. This was certainly the first
Invention of Guns; and in regard they could not cast Iron, they made their
Guns, as Coopers do Cask, with Staves of Iron and Hoopes. Likewise that those
Guns that shot Iron-Ball, most have to every three pound of Iron-Ball, one
pound of Powder; and this they held for a general Rule, not examining the
Fortification of their Pieces. Now at this time Powder was made of all the
three Ingredients equal, and therefore could not be strong. But afterward it
was found, that all sort of Field-Ordnance, not being Chamber'd, but true
Bored, should be loaded in this manner, (to wit) The Gunner shall take the
Diameter of the Ball, or the Diameter of the Bore of the Piece with a pair of
Compasses; and this Diameter three times the Gunner must set off upon his Gun
from the Touchhole toward the Mussel; which distance being filled with Powder,
then, said they, One pound of Powder was allowed to two pound of Ball: this was
the Rule of the Primitive Gunners. But now in our time Powder is so variously
made, and the difference is such, that it is hardly possible to the best
Judgment, to give a true Rule what Powder is sufficient either for Proof or
Action; and therefore the Gunner ought to try his Powder before he load his
Piece; for it is beyond all question, that if the Powder be decayed, there must
be more of it used than of fresh dry Powder: but if Powder be of his Majesty's
Tower-Proof, as I am informed, that then the Gunner need not take near so much
Powder to shoot among a party of Men, not being at a great distance, as the
Piece would crave to batter a Fortification, or Wall, or Gate, or Ship.

But because the young Gunner, that is not yet experimented in his Practice,
may be taught how he shall load all manner of Guns; and that it is to be
understood, that ordinarily those that will be called Gunners, though not known
in the Art, use to load their Guns with half the weight of the Ball of Powder;
this they hold for a general Rule to all Guns, which Rule is not to be slighted
on some occasions, with true-Bored, true-Fortified Ordnance, (yet it may be
said, they have this by Tradition) to hold this Rule, without adding to
reinforced Ordnance, or deducting from those that are lessened of Metal; so
that by this they not having any other Rule, discover their own nakedness or
emptiness of Art, for I am persuaded that no experienced Gunner, but will hold
that the Gunner ought to search, try, and find the Nature and Fortification of
a Gun or Guns, before he do hold himself obliged to give a Gun Powder, and
thereby to prove a true Charge of Powder for the same.

CHAP. XV. The Reasons why I give Guns Powder according to their Fortifications.
THese first Rules were derived from the weight of Ball; but since the Rules
were made from the weight of the Piece: for they held generally that four
ounces of Powder was sufficient for the Gunner to give a Brass Gun, to every
hundred weight for Service; and three ounces to every hundred weight of Iron
Guns. Neither this nor the other being right, for I have seen Trumpet-bored
Iron Guns of 1200 weight, that could not have half the allowed Powder that
either of these Rules did allow of. And likewise I read the Cause of the death
of King James the second of Scotland, was by the breaking of a great Gun at the
Siege of Rosbrugh.

For these and the following Reasons, I do not hold with that common received
Rule, than which many Gunners know no better, but to give Ordnance Powder by
the weight of the Gun. For if there be a Piece of Ordnance of Iron weighing
1600 pound weight, likewise there is another Piece of the same Bore, and of the
same weight: Now by the Rule of weight it must have the like Powder.

Great Cautions to be observed in giving Guns Powder.
But will you consider, for your Instruction, this Piece is longer, and having
no more Metal in her than the other, of necessity she must be thinner of Metal;
for what she has of the length, she must want of her thickness, the Bore being
both of one denomination; and since she is thinner, it follows she must not
have so much Powder as the other.

That Guns ought to be proportioned in length to their Fortification.
Likewise if by the Weight of Guns they should have their Powder, why then do
not Founders, where they now make them eight foot long, do not make them ten
foot? for it is known to the World, that a Piece of ten foot long will shoot
farther than a Piece of eight foot long, but not without equal Powder:
Wherefore it is to be considered, they must be both of one Fortification; and
being alike in strength, the longest of the two ought to shoot farthest,
because more of her Powder is spent in Fire before she deliver her Ball.

Question. But some may demand what I mean by Fortified Ordnance?

Answer. Curiosity is good, if a man be not taught he cannot be perfect.
For their Fortification, know that there are Ordnance of several
Fortifications, as is before shown in page 41. where it is sufficient to be
understood: and therefore I set the Tables of their Powder here, by their
proportions and shape, and show how to understand the Fortifications of Guns,
and also what Powder ought to be given to Guns according to their
Fortifications: As first you see the Geometrical Demonstration This is the true
Geometrical Demonstration of the Bores of Ordinance, with the height of their
Ball from 1 lib to 64 lib Scots weight, And the true Wind which ought to be
betwixt the Diameter of the Bore and the Diameter of the Ball. Likewayes of the
English weight of the Ball from 1.2 lib. to 72 lib And their Wind betwixt the
Diameter of the Ball, and the Diameter of the Bore. This does not hold with the
General Rule that a 1/20 part of the Diameter of the Ball is the Wind for all
Guns But if all Ball were Cast or Turned to a true Roundness, then though they
did only fit to go home, the less wind the better.
of Archimedes's Proportion in page 40. how fitly that does give the true
Proportion of all true Bored and true Fortified Iron Ordnance.

Now to be capable of the same Proportion Arithmetically, the Proportion is, as
22 the Circumference is unto 7 the Diameter: So must 11 the number of times
which the Diameter of the Bore measured about her Breech be, to a number sought
for; which by the Work I find to be 3 Diameters of the Bore, which this Piece
is of Diameter at the Touchhole.

^

Comes 3 and which is equal to.

Rules to find the thickness of a True Bored Gun in one side Metal, by all the
Diameter.

Whilst the Bore it self is one of the Diameters, that being deduced from 3,
rests 2, whereby 1 is the thickness of that Piece in one side Metal; and
because these be the Ordnance of Iron, by which the Ground-Rule may be and
ordinarily is laid down, to give Guns their Powder of other Fortifications; for
you must know that there are some lessened, as thinner Fortified, and so cannot
have the same proportion of Powder, though they shoot one and the same Ball:
Likewise there are reinforced or thicker Ordnance at the charged Cyllinder,
which shoot the same Ball, and must have more Powder: So you may see that the
Iron Piece is 11 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, 9 Diameters at the
Trunions, and 7 at the Neck.

The true Proportion of a true Bored, and true Fortified Piece of Ordnance.
Likewise the Brass Piece is no thicker at the Charged Cylinder, than the Iron
Piece is at the Trunions, yet shoots the same Ball, and must have the same
Powder; her Proportion is 9 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, 7 about the
Ears, and 5 about the Neck.

Seeing you have the Proportion of these true Fortified Ordnance; now it
follows of necessity that the Powder of all such Ordnance should be known:
And as writing at length would be tedious, therefore I have Calculated Tables
both for Proof and Action, not denominating the Names or Weight of these
Ordnance.

But thus fortified with 11 Diameters of the Bore about the Breeech, if Iron,
Ordnance shooting from one pound Ball to 48 pound.

Also the same Tables will serve for Brass Ordnance, being Fortified with 9
Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, by what name soever you define them,
shooting from one pound Ball, to 48 pound Ball.

The Weight of the Ball and Fortification of Ordnance, are true Rules to give
Guns their Powder.

Hereby it is clear, That we are not to examine the Weight of Ordnance, and
thereby to give them Powder; but inspection is to be had to the Fortification
of all sorts of Ordnance, as also to their Weight of Ball: To find the Ball
fitting a Piece, by extracting the Wind Geometrically, whereby you may have the
true Diameter of the Piece, and by the Diameter you may find the Weight of the
Ball, as shall be shown at large in its place, in Tables, Scale, or
Height-Rule, and also Arithmetically.

But in regard there has never any pains been taken for regulating the true
Powder for Ordnance, I have therefore set down these Tables following for
Powder, for Proof and Action of true-Bored and true Fortified Ordnance.

Table for Proof-Powder, for True-Bored and True-Fortified Ordnance, either of
Brass or Iron.
B P B P B P 1 1 00 17 11 12 33 22 00 2 2 00 18 12 00 34 22 10 3 3 00 19 12 11
35 23 05 4 4 00 20 13 06 36 24 00 5 5 00 21 14 00 37 24 10 6 6 00 22 14 11 38
25 05 7 7 00 23 15 05 39 26 00 8 8 00 24 16 00 40 26 10 9 8 12 25 16 11 41 27
05 10 9 08 26 17 05 42 28 00 11 10 00 27 18 00 43 28 10 12 10 08 28 18 11 44 29
05 13 10 14 29 19 05 45 30 00 14 11 02 30 20 00 46 30 10 15 11 05 31 20 10 47
31 05 16 11 08 32 21 05 48 32 00

In this Table you have the weight of Ball, in the first, third, and fifth
Columns, and is marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and sixth
Columns, the Powder to prove these Guns, which is marked with the Letter P,
being true-Bored and Fortified, Brass 9, and Iron 11 Diameters of the Bore
about the Breech.

Table for Action, of True-Bored and True-Fortified Ordnance, either of Brass
or Iron.
B P B P B P 1 0 10 17 7 11 33 14 10 2 1 02 18 8 00 34 15 02 3 1 12 19 8 07 35
15 09 4 2 05 20 8 14 36 16 00 5 3 00 21 9 05 37 16 07 6 3 09 22 9 12 38 16 14 7
4 03 23 10 03 39 17 05 8 4 12 24 10 10 40 17 12 9 5 02 25 11 01 41 18 03 10 5
06 26 11 08 42 18 10 11 5 10 27 12 00 43 19 01 12 6 00 28 12 07 44 19 09 13 6
06 29 12 14 45 20 00 14 6 12 30 13 05 46 20 07 15 7 02 31 13 12 47 20 14 16 7
07 32 14 03 48 21 05

In this Table you have the weight of Ball, in the first, third, and fifth
Columns, marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and sixth
Columns, being marked with the Letter P, the Powder for Action, for the Guns
being Fortified as before-said, either Brass or Iron. The Proportion you find
in the Copper print, N 1 and N 2.

A Scale you have for Powder, both for English and Scots true-Bored
true-Fortified Ordnance, Brass or Iron, for Service, on the Quadrant-Rule.

Having shown the Proportion of these Ordnance, and their due Powder, both for
Proof and Action, it is now necessary to know the Proportion of their Ladles,
Rammers, and Spong-heads.

First, Know that all true-Fortified Ordnance have not one Proportion of
Powder, as you may see by the foregoing Tables; neither must their Ladles be of
equal length or breadth according to their Bore.

The Proportion of Powder as supposed.
To make this the more clear, know that the Powder does not lie in one
proportioned length in every true-Bored, true-Fortified Piece; For those that
shoot from one pound Ball to eight pound, the Powder lies three Diameters of
the Ball in length in a Cartradge, made on a Mold of the Diameter of the Ball.

Names of Guns.
The names of these Ordnance are these; a Base, a Fauconet, a Faucon, a Minion,
a Saker, and a Demi-culvering.

Proportion of Powder, and names of Guns.
Likewise for these Ordnance that shoot from eight pound Ball to eighteen pound,
the Powder lies about two Diameters and a half long in a Cartradge, made on
the Diameter of the Ball; their names are Demi-Culvering, Quarter-Cannon,
Culvering, or French Demi-Cannon.

Proportion of Powder and names of Ordnance.
And for these true-Bored, true-Fortified Ordnance, that shoot from 18 lb Ball
to 48 lb, the Powder lies two Diameters and a quarter long in a Cartradge,
made on a Mold of the Diameter of the Ball: The names of these Ordnance, are
Culvering, or French Demi-Cannon, Demi-Cannon Ordinary, Demi-Cannon Royal,
French-Cannon, and Cannon-Ordinary; and other names they have, as Bazalisks,
etc.

By what is before taught, you may know that the Ladles of Ordinance, though of
one Fortification, ought not to be of one Proportion.

Proportion of Ladles.
You must make the Ladles for small Ordnance, viz. from one pound to eight, of
three Diameters of the Ball in length, with as much as will nail it on the
Ladle-head, and the breadth of those Ladles ought to be of 1 one Diameter and
five sixth parts of the Ball; this Ladle nailed on a wooden head made of
purpose, three fills thereof of Powder will serve for Proof, and 2 fills of
Powder will serve for Action to these Guns.

And the Ladles for true-Bored, true-Fortified Ordnance, shooting from 8 lb
Ball to 18, ought to be two Diameters and a half of the Ball long, with as much
as will nail it on the Rammer-head; and the Breadth of these Ladles, one and
five sixth parts of the Diameter of the Ball: Three of these Ladles full of
Powder will serve for Proof, and two full of Powder will serve for Action.

Also those Ladles for true-Bored, true-Fortified Ordnance, that shoot from 18
lb Ball to 48 lb, or 64 lb, ought to be two Diameters of the Ball long, and one
and five sixth parts of the Diameter of the Ball broad: Three of these Ladles
full of Powder will serve for Proof, and two full of Powder will serve for
Action.

CHAP. XVI.
AS there are true-Bored, true-Fortified Ordnance both of Brass and Iron; that
is to say, 11 Iron, and 9 Brass: So there are true-Bored Iron Ordnance of 10
Diameters of the Bore in the Breech, and Brass of 8 Diameters of the Bore about
the Breech.

And because I know that some Gunners are not acquainted with Arithmetic, (for
I have been at Sea with a Gunner that could not read) and so such Men not being
able to Calculate the Powder of any Guns: Therefore for the public good of
all, I have taken the pains to Calculate Tables for their help; these Tables
serve for Iron of 10 Diameters of the Breech, and may well serve for Brass of 8
of the Breech, as the Figures hereby shows; For the Iron Gun is 10 Diameters
of the Bore about the Breech, 8 2/11 at the Ears, and 6 4/11 at the Neck.

The Brass Piece is 8 2/11 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, 6 4/11 at
the Ears, and 4 6/11 at the Musle: And their Diameters are wrought by the Rule
of Archimedes; that is to say, As 22 is to 7, so is 10, 8 2/11, 6 4/11, or 8
2/11, 6 4/11, 4 6/11, to their Diameters: As you have it clearly demonstrated
in its proper place; For by their Fortifications they are to have their Powder,
as the Tables following shows.

This Table shows Proof-Powder for Iron Ordnance of 10 Diameters of the Bore,
and for Brass of 8 2/11 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech.
B P B P B P 1 0 12 17 8 13 33 16 08 2 1 08 18 9 00 34 17 00 3 2 04 19 9 08 35
17 08 4 3 00 20 10 00 36 18 00 5 3 12 21 10 08 37 18 08 6 4 04 22 11 00 38 19
00 7 5 03 23 11 08 39 19 08 8 6 00 24 12 00 40 20 00 9 6 09 25 12 08 41 20 08
10 7 02 26 13 00 42 21 00 11 7 08 27 13 08 43 21 08 12 7 14 28 14 00 44 22 00
13 8 02 29 14 08 45 22 08 14 8 06 30 15 00 46 23 00 15 8 08 31 15 08 47 23 08
16 8 10 32 16 00 48 24 00

This Table shows Powder for Action for Iron Ordnance of 10 Diameters of the
Bore about the Breech, and for Brass of 8 Diameters about the Breech.
B P B P B P 1 0 7 17 5 12 33 11 02 2 0 12 18 6 00 34 11 07 3 1 04 19 6 5 35 11
12 4 1 12 20 6 10 36 12 01 5 2 04 21 6 15 37 12 06 6 2 10 22 7 05 38 12 11 7 3
02 23 7 10 39 13 02 8 3 07 24 7 15 40 13 07 9 3 12 25 8 05 41 13 12 10 4 1 26 8
10 42 14 01 11 4 3 27 9 00 43 14 06 12 4 8 28 9 05 44 14 11 13 4 12 29 9 10 45
15 00 14 5 1 30 10 01 46 15 05 15 5 5 31 10 06 47 15 10 16 5 8 32 10 10 48 16
00

The Proportion you have in the Copper Plates, N 3 and 4.

In the last preceding Tables, the first Table or the Table next your left
hand, shows the weight of the Ball, in the first, third, and fifth Columns,
and is marked with the Letter B; in the second, fourth, and sixth Columns, you
have the Powder to prove these Guns, which are marked with the Letter P; being
true-Bored and Fortified as before-said.

In the right hand Table you have the Weight of the Ball in the first, third,
and fifth Columns, marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and
sixth Columns, being marked with the Letter P, the Powder for Action for the
Guns, being Fortified as before-said, either of Brass or Iron.

Now there are Ordnance of Iron Fortified with 9 Diameters of the Bore about
the Breech, and Brass of 7 about; And in regard I have seen diverse mistakes
about giving them Powder, even of Men professing great Knowledge without Reason;
Therefore I will here describe these Tables following, to give them their due
Powder. Lower Fortified than 9 of Iron, and 7 of Brass, you shall hardly find a
true-Bored Piece of Ordance; The Iron Ordnance being 9 Diameters of the Bore
about the Breech, 7 at the Trunions, and 5 8/11 at the Musle or Neck; The Brass
Ordnance of 7 Diameters of the Bore at the Breech, 5 8/11 about the Trunions,
and 4 1/11 at the Neck.

This Table is the Proof for Iron Ordnance of 9 Diamet. in the Breech, and
Brass of 7.
B P B P B P 1 0 8 17 6 06 33 12 00 2 1 1 18 6 09 34 12 06 3 1 10 19 6 12 35 12
12 4 2 03 20 7 02 36 13 01 5 2 12 21 7 09 37 13 07 6 3 4 22 8 00 38 13 13 7 3
13 23 8 6 39 14 03 8 4 04 24 8 12 40 14 09 9 4 13 25 9 02 41 14 15 10 5 3 26 9
6 42 15 05 11 5 08 27 9 13 43 15 11 12 5 12 28 10 03 44 16 01 13 5 15 29 10 09
45 16 07 14 6 1 30 10 15 46 16 13 15 6 2 31 11 05 47 17 03 16 6 04 32 11 10 48
17 08

This Table is the Powder for Action, for Iron of 9, and Brass of 7 Dimeters of
the Bore about the Breech.
B P B P B P 1 0 5 17 4 3 33 8 00 2 0 10 18 4 06 34 8 4 3 0 15 19 4 9 35 8 8 4
1 04 20 4 13 36 8 13 5 1 10 21 5 00 37 9 01 6 1 15 22 5 05 38 9 04 7 2 05 23 5
09 39 9 08 8 2 09 24 5 13 40 9 11 9 2 12 25 6 0 41 9 14 10 2 15 26 6 4 42 10 00
11 3 1 27 6 09 43 10 03 12 3 4 28 6 13 44 10 5 13 3 7 29 7 0 45 10 08 14 3 11
30 7 4 46 10 12 15 3 14 31 7 09 47 11 00 16 4 01 32 7 13 48 11 03

The Proportions you have in the Copper Plate, N 5 and 6.

Now as these are the Tables for true-Fortified, and lessened in Metal, I hold
convenient to give Tables for Reinforced Ordnance; these have commonly, being
Brass, 10 Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, and Iron 12 about the Breech.
And though to some these Tables may seem foolish, I have seen those who have
been esteemed Able Gunners, that knew not how to give such Guns Powder; yea,
they have in my presence wagered, and not one of them knew what they wagered
concerning two such Guns lying at the Head of Ferveer confer; where amongst six
Gunners one only understood to give these two Guns their true Powder; as at the
Discussion, a Gentleman of the Ordnance to the States did manifest in favor of
the one Man. How many Gunners at the Wager, and but one capable.


I also have been in contest with one professing great Art, and was a rare
Person in Art: Yet in the Castle of Edinburgh, there was a Gally-Gun of Brass
that did shoot 28 lb Ball; and thereby he did conclude that Piece to have 13 or
14 lb of Powder for Action: In hearing this Expression I did laugh: This
Dispute was between a general Person and a Gunner.
The Gentleman was offended, and asked if I could teach him, (it was but in
disdain); I answered, Sir, if you know not better than you express, I am sure I
am able to teach you in this point: Whereupon he went out at the Castle-Gate,
and was ever mine Enemy from that time forth. And to satisfy the Reader, I
will give the Dimensions of that Piece: She was but 7 Diameters of the Bore
about the Breech, and 5 about the Musle, for she was plain without Rings,
except the Base and Musle-Rings, or Cornish-Rings; so that by her Fortification
she could suffer but 6 lb and 13 ounces of Powder; and with so much I have
caused her to be discharged diverse times, and could do Service with this Piece,
What may be done with a lessened piece, as if it were a Morter-Peece.
which could not be done with a true-Fortified Piece; for with this Piece I
have shot over the Steeple of Edinburgh, and the Ball has fallen at the next
Lodging where Cromwell did lie. And this I did for three times together, till
our Governor discharged me to shoot any more for troubling his Friend.
Therefore I say, An able Man may be mistaken of a Gun, when he neither knows
the Fortification nor Proportion how to Work to give a Piece Powder.

So to avoid trouble to Artists for Calculating, and to instruct those Gunners
that are not capable of Calculation, I have here set down the Demonstration of
(...) Guns of Iron, having 12 about the Breech, and Brass having near 10
Diameters about the Breech, and are called Reinforced Ordnance. The Figures
following Demonstrate the true Proportion of these Reinforced Ordnance, which
require more Powder than true-Bored, true-Fortified Ordnance, as you may see by
the Tables following; which Tables might have been first of all: but I observe
that the Ground-Rule must be put in the first place; And those that do take
their Demensions from it do follow, whether they be Reinforced or lessened of
Metal, such as are formerly described.

These following Tables, are Tables for Reinforced Ordnance, which are such as
have more strength of Fortification, and are more able to endure firing: Such
as be the Bazalisk, Serpents, or Slings, etc. and are good to shoot with at a
great distance. Having, as I suppose, given a full account of the true
allowance of Powder for all sorts of true-Bored Ordnance, both for Proof and
Action, whether they be Brass or Iron Guns, it follows that the Gunner ought
to know how to go to work with his Piece, when he is to apply these Tables, by
which he is to give fire.

These Rules are to be observed.
First, He shall take a piece of Twine, which is to be well waxed, as the
Shoemakers do their Thread, that it do not stretch nor shrink; then measure the
Piece about at the Touchhole betwixt the Rings, and taking with a pair of
Compasses the Diameter of the Bore at the Musle, measure the Twine how many
Diameters of the Bore is contained about the Breech of the Piece, that keep in
memory. Now you are to know what Ball fits that Piece, as is plainly set down
page 42. Geometrically; but may be exactly found in the Tables of Height and
Weight of Shot, and in the Tables of Diameters of Bores, either Scots or
English. When you have found the Diameter of the Ball, if you cannot
Arithmetically find the Weight by the Diameter of the Ball, then you may resort
to the Tables for such Fortifications, and next the weight of Ball you have the
weight of Powder for that Piece: but you must be sure your Piece must be
true-bored, as is mentioned in page 58. For if the Piece be either Taper'd,
Chamber'd, or Trumpet-bored, these Tables will do no service.

Proof-Powder for Reinforced Ordnance, or Iron Guns of 12 Diameters of the Bore
about the Breech, and Brass Guns near 10 Diameters.
B P B P B P 1 1 05 17 15 01 33 28 08 2 2 09 18 15 05 34 29 10 3 3 10 19 16 07
35 30 08 4 5 01 20 17 05 36 31 08 5 6 08 21 18 02 37 32 04 6 8 05 22 18 15 38
33 01 7 9 01 23 20 00 39 34 02 8 10 06 24 20 12 40 35 00 9 11 06 25 21 09 41 35
12 10 12 05 26 22 08 42 36 08 11 12 15 27 23 07 43 37 08 12 13 10 28 24 12 44
38 05 13 14 01 29 25 01 45 39 04 14 14 07 30 26 00 46 40 02 15 14 10 31 26 14
47 41 00 16 14 14 32 27 10 48 41 12

In this Table you have the weight of Ball, in the first, third, and fifth
Columns, and is marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and sixth
Columns, you have the Powder to prove these Guns, which is marked with the
Letter P; being true-Bored and Fortified, as above written.

Powder for Action of Reinforced Ordnance, or Iron Guns of 12 Diameters of the
Bore about the Breech; and Brass near 10 Diameters about the Breech.
B P B P B P 1 0 13 17 10 02 33 19 04 2 1 7 18 10 05 34 19 14 3 2 4 19 11 01 35
20 08 4 3 00 20 11 10 36 21 01 5 3 15 21 12 03 37 21 09 6 4 14 22 12 15 38 22
01 7 5 08 23 13 08 39 22 10 8 6 02 24 14 00 40 23 03 9 6 10 25 14 08 41 23 12
10 7 02 26 15 00 42 24 06 11 7 09 27 15 12 43 24 14 12 7 15 28 16 03 44 25 08
13 8 05 29 16 12 45 26 03 14 8 14 30 17 04 46 26 13 15 9 06 31 18 01 47 27 04
16 9 12 32 18 10 48 28 14

In this Table you have the weight of Ball, in the first, third, and fifth
Columns, marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and sixth
Columns, you have the Powder for Action, which is marked with the Letter P;
being true-Bored and Fortified, as above written.

These Proportions you have in the Copper Plate, N 7 and 8.

CHAP. XVII. To find the Weight of an Iron Ball in English Inches
Arithmetically for Scots Weight.
FOr those that cannot find the Weight of the Ball by Arithmetic, I will here
show them a Rule, and also Tables which I have Calculated, as well Decimally,
as in Pounds, Ounces, and Drams, from eight parts to eight of an Inch of the
Diameter of a Ball, unto 10 Inches Diameter, both in Scots and English Weight,
and also in Scots and English Inches, for the Artificial Gunner his more ease.

It falls out many times that the Gunner cannot find Weights and Scales to
weigh his Shot; it is therefore necessary the Gunner should know how to find
the Weight of his Shot Arithmetically; as thus, If you desire to know the
weight of a Ball, whose Diameter is just Inches, without any Fraction or parts
of an Inch, then you are to multiply the Diameter Cubically; then double that
Product, and divide the Total by 16, you have in the Quotient the Pounds that
the Ball weighs; and what Remainer you have over, you shall know that
Remainer is Ounces.

Example. There is a Ball of 4 Inches Diameter given, to find his Weight: The
Cube of 4 is 64, which being doubled makes 128; this 128 being divided by 16,
(the ounces in a pound) the Quotient gives 8, which is 8 lb of Scots Weight
which that Ball does weigh.

Behold the Work. 4 4 16 4 64 64 128 ^

Eight pound of Scots weight is the true weight of that Ball.

An because every Gunner has not Arithmetic at his fingers ends, and also to
ease the Artificial Gunner, I have taken the pains to Calculate these following
Tables, both of Scots and English Weight and Measure, etc. as before-said. I do
not take them on trust as others do, but have Calculated them my self from the
Ground-Rules, and have given credit to none, because I never found any yet
truly set forth.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with English Inches, are
exactly Calculated for Scots Weight, from eight parts to eight parts of English
Inches, unto ten Inches: Decimally.
B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. 00 00024 2 02 26099 5 16
82642 7 55 41528 00 00195 2 02 59961 5 18 08789 7 58 18555 00 00659 2 02 97046
5 19 41089 7 61 04663 00 01562 3 03 37500 5 20 79687 8 64 00000 00 03052 3 03
81470 5 22 24731 8 67 04712 00 05273 3 04 29102 5 23 76367 8 70 18945 00 08374
3 04 80542 5 25 34741 8 73 42847 1 00 12500 3 05 35937 6 27 00000 8 76 76562 1
00 17798 3 05 95435 6 28 72290 8 80 20240 1 00 24414 3 06 59180 6 30 51758 8 83
74023 1 00 32495 3 07 27319 6 32 38550 8 87 38062 1 00 42187 4 08 00000 6 34
32812 9 91 12500 1 00 53638 4 08 77368 6 36 34692 9 94 97485 1 00 66992 4 09
59570 6 38 44336 9 98 93164 1 00 82397 4 10 46753 6 40 61890 9 102 99683 2 01
00000 4 11 39062 7 42 87500 9 107 17187 2 01 19946 4 12 36645 7 45 21313 9 111
45825 2 01 42383 4 13 39648 7 47 63476 9 115 85742 2 01 67456 4 14 48218 7 50
14136 9 120 37085 2 01 95312 5 15 62500 7 52 73437 10 125 00000

In this Table you have eight Columns; in the first, third, fifth, and seventh
Columns, there are the Inches, and eight parts of Inches that the Diameter of
the Ball does contain, and are marked with the Letter B: And in the second,
fourth, sixth, and eight Columns, you have the weight of these Diameters of
Iron Ball in Scots Weight; under Li. you have Pounds; and under Parts, you have
the Decimal parts of Pounds.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with English Inches, are
exactly Calculated for Scots Weight, in Pounds, Ounces and Drams, from eight
parts to eights part of English Inches, unto 10 Inches.
B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. 1 00 02 00 4 08 00 00 7 42 14 00 1
00 02 14 4 08 12 06 7 45 03 07 1 00 03 14 4 09 09 08 7 47 10 01 1 00 05 03 4 10
07 08 7 50 02 04 1 00 06 12 4 11 06 04 7 52 11 12 1 00 08 09 4 12 05 14 7 55 06
10 1 00 10 11 4 13 06 05 7 58 02 15 1 00 13 03 4 14 07 11 7 61 00 12 2 01 00 00
5 15 10 00 8 64 00 00 2 01 03 03 5 16 13 04 8 67 00 12 2 01 06 12 5 18 01 06 8
70 03 00 2 01 10 13 5 19 06 09 8 73 06 14 2 01 15 04 5 20 12 12 8 76 12 04 2 02
04 03 5 22 03 15 8 80 03 04 2 02 09 09 5 23 12 03 8 83 11 13 2 02 15 08 5 25 05
09 8 87 06 01 3 03 06 00 6 27 00 00 9 91 02 00 3 03 13 00 6 28 11 09 9 94 15 10
3 04 04 10 6 30 08 04 9 98 14 14 3 04 12 14 6 32 06 03 9 102 15 15 3 05 05 12 6
34 05 04 9 107 02 11 3 05 15 04 6 36 05 09 9 111 07 05 3 06 09 07 6 38 07 01 9
115 13 11 3 07 04 06 6 40 09 14 9 120 05 15

In this Table you have six Columns; in the first, third, an fifth Columns,
there are the Inches, and eight parts of Inches, that the Diameter of the Ball
does contain, and are marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and
sixth Columns, you have the Weight of these Diameters of Iron Ball in Scots
Weight; under Li. you have Pounds, under On. Ounces, and under Dr. Drams.

The Height-Rule you have on the side of the Quadrant, which proves this Table.

This Table be Admirable to some Gunners, and especially English, because their
Weight and the Scots Weight does not hold alike; have perused the Tables of
Weight by most of the Authors of Gunnery, and I find them all to agree, and
hold firm, as Mr. Nigh writes. But indeed I find nothing of ingenuity, for a
Man to copy a Table from another Works, and never examine the Truth of the
Work; But I have made use of their own Ground-Rule, and find not one of them to
have wrought it, or set the Table down truly.

I will here set down the Ground-Rule by which they are to make their Table,
that the Ingenious Gunner may Correct it himself at his pleasure.

Mr. Nigh says, That two Inches Diameter, is 1 pound 1 ounce.
Thus they set it down, 2 Inches Diameter give 1 pound 1 ounce.

Now having this for a Rule, you may, if you please, make a Table.

Behold the Work.^

Where you see, if 2 Inches give one pound one ounce, 2 Inches gives 1 pound,
8 ounces, and 3 drams, whereof 16 make an ounce. And by their Tables, because
they would be near the Right, they set down 4 Inches to give 8 pound 15 ounces;
where by this Work it will be but 8 pound 8 ounces.

The truest Rule.
But there is another more sure way, by this Work following: Say, As 2 Inches is
to one pound two ounces: So is the Diameter given, unto the Weight required.

Behold the Work.^ For by this Rule I have Calculated the Table following.


Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with English Inches, are
exactly Calculated Decimally for English Weight; from eight parts to eight
parts of English Inches, unto 10 Inches.
B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. 00 00027 2 02 54361 5 18
92972 7 62 34219 00 00220 2 02 92456 5 20 34888 7 65 45874 00 00742 2 03 34177
5 21 83725 7 68 67746 00 01758 3 03 79687 5 23 39648 8 72 00000 00 03433 3 04
29153 5 25 02823 8 75 42801 00 05933 3 04 82739 5 26 73413 8 78 96313 00 09421
3 05 40610 5 28 51584 8 82 60703 1 00 14062 3 06 02930 6 30 37500 8 86 36133 1
00 20023 3 06 69864 6 32 31336 8 90 22769 1 00 27466 3 07 41577 6 34 33228 8 94
20776 1 00 36557 3 08 18234 6 36 43369 8 98 30319 1 00 47461 4 09 00000 6 38
61914 9 102 51562 1 00 60342 4 09 87039 6 40 89029 9 106 84671 1 00 75366 4 10
79517 6 43 24878 9 111 29810 1 00 92697 4 11 77597 6 45 69626 9 115 87143 2 01
12500 4 12 81445 7 48 23437 9 120 56836 2 01 34940 4 13 91226 7 50 86478 9 125
39053 2 01 60181 4 15 07104 7 53 58911 9 130 33960 2 01 88388 4 16 29245 7 56
40903 9 135 41721 2 02 19727 5 17 57812 7 59 32617 10 140 62500

In this Table you have eight Columns, in the first, third, fifth, and seventh
Columns, are the Inches and eight parts of Inches that the Diameter of the Ball
does contain, and are marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth,
sixth, and eighth Columns, you have the Weight of these Diameters of Iron Ball
in English Weight: under Li. you have Pounds, and under Parts, you have the
Decimal Parts of of Pounds.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with English Inches, are
exactly Calculated for English Weight, in Pounds, Ounces, and Drams, from eight
parts to eight parts of English Inches, unto 10 Inches.
B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. 1 00 02 04 4 09 00 00 7 48 03 12 1
00 03 03 4 09 13 15 7 50 13 13 1 00 04 06 4 10 12 12 7 53 09 07 1 00 05 14 4 11
12 07 7 56 06 09 1 00 07 10 4 12 13 00 7 59 05 03 1 00 09 10 4 13 14 10 7 62 05
08 1 00 12 01 4 15 01 02 7 65 07 05 1 00 14 13 4 16 04 11 7 68 10 13 2 01 02 00
5 17 09 04 8 72 00 00 2 01 05 09 5 18 14 14 8 75 06 14 2 01 09 10 5 20 05 09 8
78 15 07 2 01 14 02 5 21 13 06 8 82 09 11 2 02 03 03 5 23 06 05 8 86 05 13 2 02
08 11 5 25 00 07 8 90 03 10 2 02 14 13 5 26 11 12 8 94 03 05 2 03 05 07 5 28 08
04 8 98 04 14 3 03 12 12 6 30 06 00 9 102 08 04 3 04 04 11 6 32 05 00 9 106 13
09 3 04 13 04 6 34 05 05 9 111 04 12 3 05 06 08 6 36 06 15 9 115 13 15 3 06 00
08 6 38 09 14 9 120 09 02 3 06 11 03 6 40 14 04 9 125 05 04 3 07 06 10 6 43 04
00 9 130 05 07 3 08 02 15 6 45 11 02 9 135 06 11

In this Table you have six Columns, in the first, third, and fifth Columns,
there are the Inches and eight parts of Inches, that the Diameter of the Ball
does contain, and are marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and
sixth Columns, you have the Weight of these Diameters of Iron Ball in English
weight; under Li. you have Pounds, under On. Ounces, and under Dr. you have
Drams.

This Height-Rule you have on the side of the Quadrant.

By which Work and Tables you may examine any other Weight, if you will compare.

Example. As in the preceding Example, 3 Inches Diameter gives 3 pound 12
ounces and 12 drams, as you may see by the Work.

Also I demand what gives 4 Inches of Diameter. ^

Another Example. If 4 Inches of Diameter give 9 pound weight, what shall 8
Inches give? Answer, 72 pound.^

Another Example with a Fraction. If 4 Inches of Diameter give 9 pound, what
shall 6 Inches give. ^

I Answer, This Ball of 6 Inches Diameter, weighs 43 pound 4 ounces fere;
which proves both the Work and Tables to be true and just.

Observation. The difference betwixt Scots and English Weight.
It is to be observed, That as there is a difference betwixt Scots and English
Weight, viz. as 8 to 9, which was mentioned in page 54. so is there likewise a
difference between Scots and English Inches, which is as 9 to 10; that is to
say, 9 English Inches make 10 Scots Inches; as it appears in the Tables
following.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with Scots Inches, are
exactly Calculated Decimally for Scots Weight; from eight parts to eight parts
of Scots Inches, unto 10 Inches.
B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. 00 00018 2 01 64826 5 12
26646 7 40 39774 00 00142 2 01 89512 5 13 18607 7 42 41726 00 00481 2 02 16546
5 14 15054 7 44 50299 00 01139 3 02 46037 5 15 16092 8 46 65600 00 02225 3 02
78091 5 16 21829 8 48 48877 00 03844 3 03 12815 5 17 32372 8 51 16811 00 06105
3 03 50315 5 18 47826 8 53 52935 1 00 09112 3 03 90698 6 19 68300 8 55 96214 1
00 12975 3 04 34072 6 20 93899 8 58 46754 1 00 17798 3 04 80542 6 22 24731 8 61
04663 1 00 23689 3 05 30216 6 23 60903 8 63 70047 1 00 30755 4 05 83200 6 25
02520 9 66 43012 1 00 39102 4 06 39601 6 26 49691 9 69 23667 1 00 48837 4 06
99527 6 28 02521 9 72 12117 1 00 60068 4 07 63083 6 29 61118 9 75 08469 2 00
72900 4 08 30377 7 31 25587 9 78 12830 2 00 87441 4 09 01515 7 32 96038 9 81
25307 2 01 03797 4 09 76604 7 34 72574 9 84 46006 2 01 22075 4 10 55751 7 36
55305 9 87 75035 2 01 42383 5 11 39062 7 38 44336 10 91 12500

In this Table you have eight Columns, in the first, third, fifth, and seventh
Columns, are the Inches and eight parts of Inches that the Diameter of the Ball
does contain, and are marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth,
sixth, and eighth Columns, you have the Weight of these Diameters of Iron Ball
in Scots Weight: under Li. you have Pounds, and under Parts you have the
Decimal Parts of of Pounds.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with Scots Inches, are
exactly Calculated for Scots Weight; in Pounds, Ounces and Drams, from eight
parts to eight parts of Scots Inches, unto 10 Inches.
B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. 1 00 01 07 4 05 13 05 7 31 04 02 1
00 02 01 4 06 06 05 7 32 15 06 1 00 02 14 4 06 15 06 7 34 11 10 1 00 03 13 4 07
10 01 7 36 08 14 1 00 04 15 4 08 04 14 7 38 07 02 1 00 06 04 4 09 00 04 7 40 06
06 1 00 07 13 4 09 12 04 7 42 06 11 1 00 09 10 4 10 08 15 7 44 08 01 2 00 11 11
5 11 06 04 8 46 10 08 2 00 14 00 5 12 04 05 8 48 07 13 2 01 00 10 5 13 02 15 8
51 02 11 2 01 03 09 5 14 02 07 8 53 08 08 2 01 06 13 5 15 02 09 8 55 15 06 2 01
10 06 5 16 03 08 8 58 07 08 2 01 14 05 5 17 05 03 8 61 00 12 2 02 02 10 5 18 07
10 8 63 11 03 3 02 07 06 6 19 10 15 9 66 06 14 3 02 12 08 6 20 15 00 9 69 03 13
3 03 02 01 6 22 03 15 9 72 01 15 3 03 08 01 6 23 09 12 9 75 01 06 3 03 14 08 6
25 00 06 9 78 02 01 3 04 05 07 6 26 07 15 9 81 04 01 3 04 12 14 6 28 00 06 9 84
07 06 3 05 04 13 6 29 09 12 9 87 12 00

In this Table you have six Columns; in the first, third, and fifth Columns,
there are the Inches, and eight parts of Inches, that the Diameter of the Ball
does contain, and are marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and
sixth Columns, you have the Weight of these Diameters of Iron Ball in Scots
Weight; under Li. you have Pounds, under On. Ounces, and under Dr. Drams.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with Scots Inches, are
exactly Calculated for English Weight, from eight parts to eight parts of Scots
Inches, unto ten Inches: Decimally.
B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. B Li. Parts. 00 00020 2 01 85429 5 13
79976 7 45 44746 00 00160 2 02 13200 5 14 83433 7 47 71942 00 00541 2 02 43615
5 15 91936 7 50 06587 00 01281 3 02 76792 5 17 05604 8 52 48800 00 02503 3 03
12853 5 18 24558 8 54 98702 00 04325 3 03 51917 5 19 48918 8 57 56413 00 06868
3 03 94105 5 20 78805 8 60 22052 1 00 10252 3 04 39536 6 22 14337 8 62 95741 1
00 14596 3 04 88331 6 23 55637 8 65 77600 1 00 20023 3 05 40610 6 25 02823 8 68
67746 1 00 26650 3 05 96493 6 26 56016 8 71 66303 1 00 34599 4 06 56100 6 28
15335 9 74 73389 1 00 43990 4 07 19552 6 29 80902 9 77 89125 1 00 54942 4 07
86968 6 31 52836 9 81 13631 1 00 67576 4 08 58468 6 33 31257 9 84 47027 2 00
82012 4 09 34174 7 35 16286 9 87 89433 2 00 98371 4 10 14204 7 37 08042 9 91
40970 2 01 16772 4 10 98680 7 39 06646 9 95 01757 2 01 37335 4 11 87720 7 41
12218 9 98 71914 2 01 60181 5 12 81445 7 43 24878 10 102 51562

In this Table you have eight Columns; in the first, third, fifth, and seventh
Columns, there are the Inches, and eight parts of Inches that the Diameter of
the Ball does contain, and are marked with the Letter B: And in the second,
fourth, sixth, and eight columns, you have the weight of these Diameters of
Iron Ball in English Weight; under Li. you have Pounds; and under Parts, you
have the Decimal parts of Pounds.

Tables for Iron Ball, whose Diameters being measured with Scots Inches, are
exactly Calculated for English Weight, in Pounds, Ounces, and Drams, from eight
parts to eight parts of Scots Inches, unto 10 Inches.
B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. B Li. On. Dr. 1 00 01 10 4 06 09 00 7 35 02 10 1
00 02 05 4 07 03 02 7 37 01 05 1 00 03 03 4 07 13 15 7 39 01 01 1 00 04 04 4 08
09 06 7 41 01 15 1 00 05 09 4 09 05 07 7 43 04 00 1 00 07 01 4 10 02 04 7 45 07
03 1 00 08 13 4 10 15 13 7 47 11 08 1 00 10 13 4 11 14 01 7 50 10 01 2 00 13 02
5 12 13 00 8 52 07 13 2 00 15 12 5 13 12 13 8 54 15 13 2 01 02 11 5 14 13 06 8
57 09 00 2 01 06 00 5 15 14 11 8 60 03 08 2 01 09 10 5 17 00 14 8 62 15 05 2 01
13 11 5 18 03 15 8 65 12 07 2 02 02 02 5 19 07 13 8 68 10 13 2 02 07 00 5 20 12
10 8 71 10 10 3 02 12 05 6 22 02 05 9 74 11 12 3 03 02 01 6 23 08 14 9 77 14 04
3 03 08 05 6 25 00 07 9 81 02 03 3 03 15 01 6 26 08 15 9 84 07 08 3 04 06 05 6
28 02 07 9 87 14 05 3 04 14 02 6 29 12 15 9 91 06 09 3 05 06 08 6 31 08 07 9 95
00 04 3 05 15 07 6 33 05 00 9 98 11 08

In this Table you have six Columns, in the first, third, and fifth Columns,
there are the Inches and eight parts of Inches, that the Diameter of the Ball
does contain, and are marked with the Letter B; and in the second, fourth, and
sixth Columns, you have the Weight of these Diameters of Iron Ball in English
weight; under Li. you have Pounds, under On. Ounces, and under Dr. you have
Drams.

CHAP. XVII. The Use of the preceding Tables.
Use of the Tables of Iron Ball, measured with Scots Inches.
IF the Diameter of an Iron Ball be measured with Scots Inches, I would know
what the same Ball weighs in English Weight.

Example. There is an Iron Ball, whose Diameter is 5 Scots Inches; I demand
what the same Ball weighs in English Weight.

Look in the Table in page 80. under B in the fifth Column, where you find 5
Inches; and right against it, in the sixth Column, you have 17 pound and
056/1000 pounds, which is the just weight of the same Ball.

Or otherwise, Look in the Table in page 81. under B, in the third Column,
where you find 5 Inches; and right against it, in the fourth Column, you have
17 poound, 00 ounces, and 14 drams, which is also the just Weight of the same
Ball.

Or if the Diameter of an Iron Ball be measured with Scots Inches; I desire to
know what the same Ball weighs in Scots Weight.

Example. There is an Iron Ball whose Diameter is 6 Scots Inches; I demand what
does the same Ball weigh in Scots Weight.

Look in the Table in page 78. under B, in the fifth Column, where you find 6
Inches; and right against it, in the sixth Column, you have 20 pound and
938/1000 parts of a pound, which is the just weight of the same Ball in Scots
Weight.

Or otherwise, Look in the Table in page 79. under B, in the third Column,
where you find 6 Inches; and right against it, in the fourth Column, you have
20 pounds and 15 ounces, which is also the just weight of the same Ball in
Scots Weight. And this I will assure you to be truth, because I have calculated
all these Tables with my own hand, and they are since revised and truly done,
by the laborious pains of Mr. Robert Webster.

CHAP. XVIII. To Extract the Cube Root of a Number not Cubical.
You have the Diameter and Weight of Scots and English Ball, on the Scale, on
the side of the Quadrant: Also the Dimension of one side Metal, both Brass and
Iron Ordnance, by which you may give Powder for Action.
I Doubt not but Men of Reason will think, that in Calculating all these Tables,
I have taken great pains, so that you need to take the less: And because there
are many Gunners that cannot use their Pen, and some that cannot understand the
use of Tables, I therefore for their help will here set down an Height-Rule for
Ball, from one pound to an hundred pound, both in Scots and English Weight. But
before this Height-Rule be made, it is needful to set down a Cubical Table, for
except you have this Table, the Height-Rule cannot be truly made.

To Calculate this Table, it is necessary that you can Extract the Cube Root of
Irrational Numbers; which Numbers are so termed, because that from such Numbers
you cannot extract a true Cube-Root, and therefore to the Number propounded you
must add 3, 6, or 9 Ciphers; by which you may Extract the Cube-Root without
sensible error, as it does appear in the Examples following.

Example. Let it be required to extract the Cube-Root of 8302348.

^Having distributed the Number given into several Cubes by Points, as is
directed in Chap. 8. of this. I demand the Cube-Root of 8, (the first Cube on
the left hand) which I find to be 2; wherefore placing 2 in the Quotient, and 8
the Cube thereof, under 8 the first Cube, I draw a Line, subtracting 8 out of
8, the Remainder is 0, which I subscribe under the Line. This is always the
first Work, and is no more repeated in the whole Extraction, (as was intimated
in the third Note of chap. 8.); then bringing down the next Cube, (to wit, the
Figures standing in the three following places of the Number propounded) which
is 302, I place it after the Remainder 0, so is 302 the Resolvend; this done,
having drawn a Line underneath the Resolvend, I seek for the triple of the
Square of the Root, viz. The Root in the Quotient is 2, which multiplied by it
self produces the Square 4, the triple whereof is 12; this I subscribe under
the Resolvend, in such manner, that the Figure 2 in the Unites place of this
triple Square 12, may stand directly under the Figure 3, which is seated in the
third place of the Resolvend, (to wit, the place of Hundreds): Again, I triple
the Root 2, which produces 6, and subscribe this triple Number 6 under the
second place (or place of Tens) in the Resolvend, to wit, under 0; then drawing
a Line under the Work, and adding together the said two Numbers last
subscribed, as they are ranked, the Sum of them is 126 for a Divisor: That
done, esteeming 30, to wit, all the places except the first or place of Unites
in the Resolvend, as a Dividend, I demand how often the Divisor 126 is
contained in 30, and not finding it once contained therein, I write 0 in the
Quotient; and now because the sum of the three Numbers which ought to have been
produced (according as was mentioned in Chap. 8.) by the multiplication of 0,
(which was last placed in the Quotient) amounts to 0, the Resolvend 302, out of
which the said Sum should have been subtracted, remains the same without
alteration; wherefore having drawn a Line under the Work, I write down anew the
old Resolvend 302, and bringing down the next Cube 348, I annex it to the said
302, so there will be a new Resolvend, to wit, 302348. Then squaring the Root
20, (that is, multiplying of it by it self) the Product is 400; which I triple
or multiply by 3, and subscribe the Product 1200 under the new Resolvend in
such manner, that the place of Unites in this triple Quadrate 1200 may stand
under the place of Hundreds, or third place of the Resolvend 302348, to wit,
under 3: Again, I subscribe the triple of the Root 20, which is 60, in such
manner, that the place of Unites in this triple Root 60 may stand under the
place of Tens or second place of the Resolved; then adding together the two
Numbers last subscribed, to wit, 1200 and 60, in such order as they are ranked
in the Work, the Sum is 12060 for a Divisor. Again, esteeming the whole
Resolvend, except the first place, (or place of Unites) as a Dividend, to wit,
30234, I demand how often 1 (the first Figure of the Divisor toward the left
hand) is contained in 3, the corespondent part of the Dividend; and though it
be three times contained in it, yet (according to the first Note in Chap. 8.) I
dare take but 2; (for if I should take 3, and proceed according as was declared
in Chap. 8. a Number would arise greater than the Resolvend, from which such
Numbers arising ought to be subtracted) wherefore I write 2 in the Quotient.
Then multiplying the triple Square 1200 before subscribed by 2, (the Figure
last placed in the Quotient) the Product is 2400, which I subscribe under the
said 1200, (to wit, Unites under Unites, and Tens under Tens, etc.) Also
multiplying the triple Root 60, before subscribed by 4, (the Quadrate of 2, the
Figure last placed in the Quotient) the Product is 240, which I subscribe under
the said triple Root 60; last of all I subscribe 8 the Cube of the said new
Root 2, under the place of Unites, or first place of the Resolvend, to wit,
under 8; and having added together those three Numbers last subscribed, to wit,
2400, 240, and 8, as they stand in Ranks in the Work, the sum of them is
242408, which being deducted from the Resolvend 302348, there will remain
59940. Wherefore the Work being finished, I find 202 to be the number of Unites
contained in the Cube-Root of 8302348 the Number propounded: and because, after
the Extraction is ended, there happens to be a Remainder, to wit, 59940, I
conclude that the Cube-Root sought is greater than the said 202, but less than
203; yet how much it is greater than 202, no Rules of Art hitherto known will
exactly discover, although we may proceed infinitely near, as by the following
Rule will be manifest.

To find the Fractional part of the Root very near. Ternaries of Ciphers, to
wit, 000,000000, or 000000000, etc. are to be annexed to the Number first
propounded; then esteeming the Number propounded with the Ciphers annexed to be
but one entire Number, the Extraction is to be made according as has been
prescribed in this Chapter; and look how many Points were placed over the
Number first given, so many of the foremost places in the Quotient are the
Integers or Unites contained in the Cube-Root sought, and the rest of the
places in the Quotient are to be esteemed as the Numerator of a Decimal
Fraction; which Numerator consists of so many places as there were Points over
the Ciphers first annexed: so if 8302348 were given as before to find the
Cube-Root thereof, (according to this Rule) annex Ciphers as you here see in
the Work. And then if you prosecute the Extraction according to the Rules
foregoing, you shall find the Cube-Root sought to be 20248, etc. that is, 202
48/100 and more; wherefore you may conclude that 202 48/100 is less than the
true Root, but 202 49/100 is greater than it; So that by annexing two Ternaries
of Ciphers, to wit, six Ciphers to the number propounded, you will not miss
1/100 part of an Unite of the true Root; as also by annexing three Ternaries of
Ciphers, to wit, 9 Ciphers, you will not miss 1/1000 part of an Unite of the
true Root; and in that order you may proceed infinitely near, when you cannot
obtain the true Root. The whole Operation of the said Example you have in the
next page, where you may observe, that for the more certain and easy placing,
as well of the Numbers, which constitute the several Divisors, as of those
which constitute the Ablatitious Numbers to be subtracted from the several and
respective Resolvends, down right Lines are drawn between the particular Cubes
of the Number propounded, first distinguished by Points as below. ^

Another Example wrought by the Genitures. In like manner the Cube-Root of 2,
will be found to be near equal to 125992, etc. that is, 1 25992/100000 parts
and more. And the Work will stand thus. ^

The Proof of the Cube-Root. The Extraction of the Cube-Root is proved by
multiplying the Root Cubically; to wit, the Root being first multiplied by it
self, the Product shall give a Square Number, the which Square being multiplied
again by the said Root, the Number arising, or last Product (in case there be
no Remainder after the Extraction is finished) will be equal to the Number
propounded:

^So in the Example of Chap. 8. the Cube-Root 54 being multiplied first by it
self, produces 2916, which is a Square Number, then the said Square 2916,
being multiplied by the Root 54, produces 157464, which is a Cube Number equal
to the number propounded, whose Cube-Root was required. So that the Extraction
is right, and the same Root found is the true Cube-Root of the Number proposed.
But when after the Extraction is finished, there happens to be a Remainder, and
that the Root is found as near as you please in Integers and Decimal parts, (by
annexing Ciphers as in this Chapter) then such mixed Number expressing the Root,
being multiplied Cubically, must produce a mixed Number less than the Number
first propounded; yet so near unto it, that if the Figure standing in the last
place of the Decimal Fraction in the Root be made greater by 1, and the mixed
number so increased be multiplied Cubically, the Product must be greater than
the Number first propounded: so in the first Example of this Chapter, if 20248
be multiplied Cubically, it produces 830130549, etc. which is less than the
propounded Number 8302348; but if 20249 be multiplied Cubically, therewill
arise 830253549, etc. which is greater than the said given Number.

Behold the Work. ^

The Table of Cubes, whereby the Height-Rule is made. This Height-Rule you have
on the side of the Quadrant Rule, both for Scots and English Ball.
A B A B A B A B A B 1 1000 26 2962 51 3708 76 4235 101 4657 2 1259 27 3000 52
3732 77 4254 102 4672 3 1442 28 3036 53 3756 78 4272 103 4687 4 1587 29 3072 54
3779 79 4290 104 4702 5 1709 30 3107 55 3802 80 4308 105 4717 6 1817 31 3141 56
3825 81 4326 106 4732 7 1912 32 3174 57 3848 82 4344 107 4747 8 2000 33 3207 58
3870 83 4362 108 4762 9 2080 34 3239 59 3892 84 4379 109 4776 10 2154 35 3271
60 3914 85 4396 110 4791 11 2223 36 3301 61 3936 86 4413 111 4805 12 2289 37
3332 62 3957 87 4430 112 4820 13 2351 38 3361 63 3979 88 4447 113 4834 14 2410
39 3391 64 4000 89 4464 114 4847 15 2466 40 3419 65 4020 90 4485 115 4862 16
2519 41 3448 66 4041 91 4497 116 4877 17 2571 42 3476 67 4061 92 4514 117 4890
18 2620 43 3503 68 4081 93 4530 118 4904 19 2668 44 3530 69 4101 94 4546 119
4918 20 2714 45 3556 70 4121 95 4562 120 4931 21 2758 46 3583 71 4140 96 4578
121 4946 22 2802 47 3608 72 4160 97 4594 122 4959 23 2843 48 3634 73 4179 98
4610 123 4973 24 2884 49 3659 74 4198 99 4626 124 4986 25 2924 50 3689 75 4217
100 4642 125 5000

In this Table you have ten Columns, in the 1st, 3d, 5th, 7th, and 9th Columns,
you have the Weight of the Ball, from 1 lb to 125 lb, and are marked with the
Letter A; and in the 2d, 4th, 6th, 8th, and 10th Columns, you have the
Cube-Roots and Parts correspondent to the Weight of Ball, which are marked with
the Letter B; as shall appear in the Examples following.

CHAP. XIX. The way to find the Diameter of the first pound Ball.
NOw if any Artificial Gunner desire to make a Height-Rule or Scale to know the
Weight of his Shot, by measuring the Diameter of the Ball, and by this Cubical
Table: First he must know the exact Diameter of a Ball of one pound weight, of
what sort of Metal or Stone he desires his Height-Rule or Scale for; the which
to do, observe these Rules following.

First, Search until you find a Ball of that Metal very smooth, of any size or
weight, and take the Diameter exactly of that Ball, with a pair of Callabassero
Compasses. Then draw that Diameter on a piece of Paper, or plain Board, and
divide it in as many equal parts as you please; then weigh that Ball exactly
well, which being done, multiply the Divisions of the Diameter of the Ball
Cubically, and divide that Product by the weight of the Ball; so from that
Quotient of your Division, you are to extract the Cube-Root, and the Quotient
is the parts of that Ball which weighs one pound weight of that Metal.

Example. The Ball given is a Ball of Iron, whose weight is 12 lb; and his
Diameter is divided into 300 equal part; which done, work as follows. ^

By which I find 131 parts of the Ball given to be the just Diameter of a Ball
of one pound weight, of that Country-Weight. As you may see by the Diameters
herewith annexed; the Line AB the Diameter of the Ball given, and the Line CD
the Ball found for one pound.

After you have found the true Diameter of one pound Ball, you must divide the
same into 1000 equal parts; or make a Diagonal Scale of the same Diameter of
the one pound Ball, and so resort to the Table of Cubical Numbers; and having a
Scale of Paper or Wood ready, you may set the Diameter of the Ball on it, from
one pound as far as the Table does run.

The Demonstration and Diameter of a Ball of 12 pound being given, the Diameter
of one pound Ball is also given, as in page 92.
And that I may make it the more plain, behold the Diameter of a Ball of 12
pound; and from that, by working as is before taught, you may have the Diameter
of one pound Ball, which is here found, and true in every Condition. Thus
having the Table of Cubical Numbers, wherein you find the first pound is 1000
in its Root, and the second 1259 of the parts of one pound Ball, which is 259
parts more than the Ball of one pound; which added to the Diameter of one
pound, gives the Diameter of a Ball of 2 pound; which place on your Ruler, then
the Table gives 1442, for the Diameter of a Ball of 3 pound; and if you take
442, and add to the Diameter of one pound Ball, you have the Diameter of a Ball
of 3 pound: And thus you may increase and go upward till you have a complete
Height-Rule of what height you please.

So making it, as you are taught, you may answer any Question demanded of the
Weight of Ball, of the Metal and Weights of the place it is made for. For all
places have not one Weight, as you see by the Table following.

The Proof of the Height-Rule. Now every Height-Rule for Ball, of what Metal
soever it be made for, is proved in manner following: That when you extend your
Compasses to the height of one pound, and with the same extention turn your
Compasses, you shall reach 8 pound; and if you take the Diameter of a 2 pound
Ball, and turn the Compasses about, must fall in 16 pound Ball; and of 3 pound
to 24 pound: So that all Ball being twice the Diameter of the other, must carry
8 times the weight of the other.

Further-more, By the Cubical Table, with the Diagonal Scale of the height of
one pound Ball, you may give an account to make Height-Rules, showing the
Weight of Iron Ball in any Place or Country, knowing the proportion it bears
with our own Scots or English Weight: So that here it will be very requisite,
in regard ordinarily every Country have their own dinstinct Weights and
Measures, to give a Catalogue of some several Places and their Weights compared
with ours as you see, and as shall be further demonstrated for the Gunner's
more ease.

Table of the Weights of several Places being compared with ours of Edinburgh.
100 pounds at Edinburgh makes at lb. London 112 Antwerp 108 Bollogne, betwixt
139 and 140 Catalogne 160 Cullen 102 Cureland 98 Dantzick 122 Florence 142
Lubeck 110 Lions 120 Genua, betwixt 152 and 153 Amsterdam 100 Venetia, great
Weight 106 Prague 62 Lublin 128

A Rule to rectify the Weights of diverse Places with ours.
^I set here for Example; There is a Gun in Edinburgh, measured by the
Height-Rule, and is found to shoot 36 lb Ball; Now the Question is, What weight
of Ball the same Piece does shoot at London: And comparing the Weights
together, you will find it stand thus.

And that Piece which shoots 36 lb Ball at Edinburgh, will require at London
a Ball of 40 lb 5 ounces English weight.

Another Example. Likewise if there were a Piece at Edinburgh, which shoots 9
lb Ball; I would know what the Weight of a Ball fit for that Piece shall be of
Dantzick Weight.

Behold the Work. ^ You see that of that Weight it will be 10 pound 15 ounces,
and 68/100 parts of an ounce.

And so generally the Gunner may fit himself with Ball in all Places.

And as there is a diversity in the Weights of several Places, so is there
likewise a diversity in the Foot: And that here it will be necessary to give a
Catalogue of some several places, and their Feet compared with our Foot.

A Catalogue of the Feet of several Places compared with ours of Edinburgh.
100 foot of Edinburgh makes Foot. Of the Ancient Romans 8719 Of the Ancient
Greeks 8314 Of the Ancient Babylonians 7438 Of Alexandria 7273 Of the Isle
Samos 7273 Of Arabia 8182 Of London 9000 Of Paris 8264 Of Leyden 8719 Of
Antwerp 9587 Of Copenhagen 9000 Of Venice 7760 Of Toledo 10000 Of Stratsburg
9422

Example. There is a Gun in Edinburgh, whose Diameter of the Bore is measured
by the Height-Rule to be 6 Inches; I demand how many Inches of London shall the
Diameter of the Bore of the same Piece be. ^

I Answer, That Piece whose Diameter of the Bore is 6 Inches at Edinburgh, is
but 5 Inches of Diameter at London.

Another Example. There is a Gun at London which shoots a Ball of 6 Inches
Diameter; I demand of how many Inches Diameter shall a Ball be at Edinburgh
which shall fit the same Piece. ^

I Answer, That Piece which shoots a Ball of 6 Inches Diameter at London,
shall certainly require a Ball to fit her at Edinburgh of 7 Inches.

Any Ingenious Gunner observing all the Rules that has been described in this
Chapter, may make an Height-Rule for any Metal of Ball.

For more clearing of this, I shall set here a Table of equal Diameters and
different Weight.

The Diameters of Ball of one Country Weight to be found by equal and several
Divisions of several Metals and Stones, as they are compared with Iron.
Iron is in Proportion to The Proportion of Iron Ball compared with other
Metals and Stones. Copper -- as 8 is to 09 Silver -- as 24 is to 31 Lead -- as
16 is to 23 Quicksilver -- as 56 is to 95 Gold -- as 8 is to 19 Tin -- as 120
is to 111 Marble -- as 96 is to 43 Sclate -- as 48 is to 13 Stone -- as 144 is
to 35 Brick -- as 288 is to 65

Example. There is a Gun which shoots a Ball of Iron weighing 24 pounds; I
demand what shall a Ball of Lead of the same Diameter weigh. ^

I Answer, This Piece shall require a Ball of Lead which weighs 34 lb and 8
ounces, which shall be of the same Diameter as was the Iron Ball of 24 pounds.

Another Example. There is a Gun which shoots a Ball of Iron weighing 36
pounds; I demand what shall a Ball of Stone of the same Diameter weigh. ^

I Answer, This Piece shall require a Ball of Stone which weighs but 8 lb and
12 ounces, which shall be of the same Diameter as was the Iron Ball of 36 lb.

CHAP. XX.
FOr the Gunners further ease, I have set down Tables both of Scots and English
Weight of Iron Ball, from 1 lb to 100 lb; with the Diameters of the Ball both
in Scots and English Inches, and parts of Inches; together with the Height of
the Bores of the Ordnance that the same Ball shall fit in the like Inches: So
that he may take the Diameter of a Ball, (only knowing the Weight); as also the
Height of the Bore of the Piece, which the same Ball shall fit, from any
Diagonal Scale of Inches, divided into Decimal parts.

Tables for Iron Ball, wherein you have the Weight of every Ball given in Scots
Weight, from 1 lb to 100 lb; together with the Diameters or Height of every
Ball in Scots Inches and parts of Inches; exactly Calculated to each pound
Weight abovementioned.
A B A B A B A B 1 2.2222 26 6.5833 51 8.2410 76 9.4129 2 2.7998 27 6.6667 52
8.2944 77 9.4540 3 3.2049 28 6.7480 53 8.3473 78 9.4948 4 3.5276 29 6.8273 54
8.3994 79 9.5351 5 3.8000 30 6.9050 55 8.4510 80 9.5752 6 4.0380 31 6.9808 56
8.5019 81 9.6150 7 4.2509 32 7.0551 57 8.5522 82 9.6544 8 4.4444 33 7.1279 58
8.6019 83 9.6934 9 4.6223 34 7.1991 59 8.6511 84 9.7322 10 4.7876 35 7.2694 60
8.6997 85 9.7708 11 4 9421 36 7.3377 61 8.7478 86 9.8089 12 5.0877 37 7.4050 62
8.7953 87 9.8468 13 5.2251 38 7.4709 63 8.8423 88 9.8843 14 5.3559 39 7.5360 64
8.8889 89 9.9217 15 5.4804 40 7.5999 65 8.9349 90 9 9587 16 5.5997 41 7.6627 66
8.9806 91 9.9954 17 5.7140 42 7.7246 67 9.0257 92 10.0319 18 5.8238 43 7.7853
68 9.0703 93 10.0681 19 5.9298 44 7.8452 69 9.1146 94 10.1041 20 6.0320 45
7.9042 70 9.1584 95 10.1398 21 6.1310 46 7.9623 71 9.2018 96 10.1752 22 6.2268
47 8.0196 72 9.2448 97 10.2104 23 6.3197 48 8.0761 73 9 2874 98 10.2454 24
6.4100 49 8.1318 74 9.3297 99 10.2801 25 6.4978 50 8.1868 75 9.3714 100 10.3147

In this Table you have eight Columns, in the 1st, 3d, 5th, and 7th Columns,
marked with the Letter A, is the Weight of the Ball in Scots Weight; and in the
2d, 4th, 6th, and 8th Columns, marked with the Letter B, you have the Diameter
of the Ball in Scots Inches, and Decimal parts of Inches. The Geometrical
Demonstration of these two Tables is in page 54.

Tables for Iron Ball, wherein you have the Weight of every Ball given in Scots
Weight, from 1 lb to 100 lb; together with the Height of the Bore of each Piece
answering to those Balls, given in Scots Inches and parts of Inches, Exactly
Calculated to each pound weight of Ball above mentioned, the Wind being truly
extracted.
A B A B A B A B 1 2.3529 26 6 8695 51 8.5993 70 9.8223 2 2.9645 27 6.9566 52
8.6550 77 9.8650 3 3.3934 28 7.0414 53 8.7102 78 9.9076 4 3.7351 29 7.1241 54
8.7645 79 9 9497 5 4.0235 30 7.2052 55 8 8184 80 9.9915 6 4.2754 31 7.2843 56
8.8715 81 10.0330 7 4.5010 32 7.3618 57 8.9240 82 10.0742 8 4.7058 33 7.4378 58
8.9759 83 10.1149 9 4.8424 34 7.5121 59 9.0272 84 10.1553 10 5.0156 35 7.5855
60 9.0779 85 10.1956 11 5.1774 36 7.6567 61 9.1281 86 10.2354 12 5.3300 37
7.7270 62 9.1777 87 10.2749 13 5.4739 38 7.7957 63 9.2267 88 10.3141 14 5.6109
39 7.8637 64 9.2754 89 10.3531 15 5.7414 40 7.9303 65 9.3234 90 10.3917 16
5.8664 41 7.9959 66 9.3711 91 10.4300 17 5 9861 42 8.0605 67 9 4181 92 10.4681
18 6.1011 43 8.1238 68 9.4647 93 10.5058 19 6.1876 44 8.1863 69 9.5109 94
10.5434 20 6.2943 45 8.2479 70 9.5566 95 10.5807 21 6.3976 46 8.3085 71 9.6016
96 10.6176 22 6.4975 47 8.3683 72 9.6467 97 10.6543 23 6.5945 48 8.4272 73
9.6912 98 10.6909 24 6.6887 49 8.4854 74 9.7353 99 10.7271 25 6.7803 50 8.5427
75 9.7788 100 10.7632

In this Table you have eight Columns, in the 1st, 3d, 5th, and 7th Columns,
marked with the Letter A, is the weight of Ball in Scots Weight; and in the 2d,
4th, 6th, and 8th Columns, marked with the Letter B, you have the Height of the
Bore of each Piece, which those Balls shall fit, the Wind truly Extracted, in
Scots Inches, and Decimal parts of Inches: Which you have in the Copper Plate,
page 56, 57.

Tables for Iron Ball, wherein you have the Weight of every Ball given in
English Weight, from 1 lb to 100 lb; together with the Diameter or Height of
every Ball in English Inches and parts of Inches; exactly Calculated to each
pound Weight of Ball abovementioned.
A B A B A B A B 1 1.9230 26 5.6969 51 7.1313 76 8.1455 2 2.4228 27 5.7690 52 7
1776 77 8.1811 3 2.7735 28 5.8394 53 7.2233 78 8.2163 4 3.0526 29 5.9081 54
7.2685 79 8.2513 5 3.2883 30 5.9752 55 7.3131 80 8.2860 6 3.4943 31 6.0409 56
7.3571 81 8.3203 7 3 6786 32 6.1051 57 7.4007 82 8.3544 8 3.8460 33 6.1681 58
7.4437 83 8.3883 9 4.0000 34 6.2298 59 7.4862 84 8.4218 10 4.1430 35 6.2903 60
7.5283 85 8.4551 11 4.2767 36 6.3496 61 7.5699 86 8.4881 12 4.4026 37 6.4079 62
7.6110 87 8.5209 13 4.5216 38 6.4651 63 7.6517 88 8.5534 14 4.6347 39 6.5223 64
7.6920 89 8.5857 15 4.7425 40 6.5766 65 7.7318 90 8.6177 16 4.8457 41 6.6309 66
7.7712 91 8.6495 17 4 9446 42 6.6844 67 7.8104 92 8.6811 18 5.0397 43 6.7370 68
7.8490 93 8.7124 19 5.1313 44 6.7888 69 7.8873 94 8.7436 20 5.2198 45 6.8399 70
7.9252 95 8.7744 21 5.3054 46 6.8902 71 7.9628 96 8.8051 22 5.3883 47 6.9398 72
8.0000 97 8.8356 23 5.4688 48 6.9886 73 8.0369 98 8.8658 24 5 5469 49 7.0368 74
8.0734 99 8.8959 25 5.6229 50 7.0844 75 8.1096 100 8.9258

In this Table you have eight Columns, in the 1st, 3d, 5th, and 7th Columns,
marked with the letter A, is the Weight of the Ball in English Weight; and in
the 2d, 4th, 6th, and 8th Columns, marked with the Letter B, you have the
Diameter of the Ball in English Inches, and Decimal parts of Inches.

Tables for Iron Ball, wherein you have the Weight of every Ball given in
English Weight, from 1 lb to 100 lb; together with the Height of the Bore of
each Piece answering to those Balls, given in English Inches and parts of
Inches; Exactly Calculated to each pound weight of Ball abovementioned, the
Wind being truly extracted.
A B A B A B A B 1 2.0362 26 5.9446 51 7.4414 76 8.4997 2 2.5653 27 6.0198 52
7.4897 77 8.5368 3 2.9371 28 6.0933 53 7.5374 78 8.5735 4 3.2322 29 6.1650 54
7.5845 79 8.6101 5 3.4817 30 6.2350 55 7.6311 80 8.6463 6 3.6998 31 6.3035 56
7.6770 81 8.6821 7 3.8950 32 6.3705 57 7.7225 82 8.7176 8 4.0722 33 6.4363 58
7.7673 83 8.7530 9 4.2353 34 6.5007 59 7.8117 84 8.7880 10 4 3403 35 6.5638 60
7.8556 85 8.8227 11 4.4804 36 6.6257 61 7.8990 86 8.8571 12 4.6123 37 6.6865 62
7.9419 87 8.8914 13 4.7369 38 6.7462 63 7.9844 88 8.9253 14 4.8554 39 6.8059 64
8.0264 89 8.9590 15 4.9683 40 6.8625 65 8.0680 90 8.9924 16 5.0764 41 6.9192 66
8.1091 91 9.0256 17 5.1801 42 6.9750 67 8.1500 92 9.0585 18 5.2797 43 7.0299 68
8.1903 93 9.0912 19 5.3544 44 7.0840 69 8 2302 94 9.1238 20 5.4467 45 7.1373 70
8.2698 95 9.1559 21 5.5361 46 7.1898 71 8.3090 96 9.1879 22 5.6226 47 7.2415 72
8.3478 97 9.2198 23 5.7066 48 7.2925 73 8.3863 98 9.2513 24 5.7881 49 7.3427 74
8.4244 99 9.2827 25 5.8630 50 7.3924 75 8.4622 100 9.3139

In this Table you have eight Columns, in the 1st, 3d, 5th, and 7th Columns,
marked with the Letter A, is the weight of Ball in English Weight; and in the
2d, 4th, 6th, and 8th Columns, marked with the Letter B, you have the Height of
the Bore of each Piece, which those Balls shall sit, the Wind truly Extracted,
in English Inches, and Decimal parts of Inches: Which you have in the Copper
Piece herewith.

Thus having both Arithmetically, and by Tables, given Instructions how to make
an Height or Diameter-Rule for Ball; and likewise having shown both
Arithmetically, Geometrically, and by Tables, how to deduct the Wind from the
Bore of a Piece, thereby to know her true Diameter of Ball; and having given
Tables of the Weight of Ball by their Diameters: Therefore it follows, by the
Weight of the Ball and Fortification of the Piece, that all Ordnance have their
Powder either for Proof or Action.

And, as I have shown by the Tables, all Brass or Iron Ordnance ought to have
their Powder to their Proof; for True-Bored Ordnance, and True-Fortified, the
Weight of their Ball from 1 lb to 8 lb, and from 8 to 18 three quarters of
their Balls Weight; and from 18 to 48, two third parts of the Weight of the
Ball, and so infinitely.

For their Ordinary, follow the Tables where you may serve sufficiently, and
save Powder.

For Powder in Service or Action, it is to be referred to the Gunners
discretion; and here I will give you Tables, whereby the Gunner may give Powder
to Taper-Bored Ordnance, either for Proof or Action, or any hot Service, from 1
lb Ball to 36 lb Ball.

CHAP. XXI.
AS formerly I have shown, all Ordnance are not true-bored; therefore I suppose
it will be necessary for the Young Gunner to know how to give Taper-Bored Guns
their Powder; and though they are not ordinarily in these Countries, yet it may
happen sometime the Gunner may be ordered to make use of such. In my Judgment
there are no Guns more fit to go in the Head of Regiments in an Army than
Taper-Bored Guns are: I mean not Leather Guns, by which the King and Country
has been cheated, but such as they make in Holland of Brass, Cast Ordnance.
Neither do I mean those Taper'd Guns, with which the Hollanders cheat the
World, being Plates of Brass within and without, betwixt the Skins there are
Bars and Hoops of Iron.

A Table of Powder for Taper-Bored Ordnance, both for Proof, Action, and Storm;
from one pound Iron Ball, to 36 pound.
Iron Ball Proof. Action. Storm. lb lb on. dr. lb on. dr. lb on. dr. 1 00 05 05
00 04 00 00 03 00 2 00 10 11 00 08 00 00 06 00 3 01 00 00 00 12 00 00 09 00 4
01 05 05 01 00 00 00 12 00 5 01 10 11 01 04 00 00 15 00 6 02 00 00 01 08 00 01
02 00 7 02 05 05 01 12 00 01 05 00 8 02 10 11 02 00 00 01 08 00 9 03 00 00 02
04 00 01 11 00 10 03 05 05 02 08 00 01 14 00 11 03 10 11 02 12 00 02 01 00 12
04 00 00 03 00 00 02 04 00 13 04 05 05 03 04 00 02 07 00 14 04 10 11 03 08 00
02 10 00 15 05 00 00 03 12 00 02 13 00 16 05 05 05 04 00 00 03 00 00 17 05 10
11 04 04 00 03 03 00 18 06 00 00 04 08 00 03 06 00 19 06 05 05 04 12 00 03 09
00 20 06 10 11 05 00 00 03 12 00 21 07 00 00 05 04 00 03 15 00 22 07 05 05 05
08 00 04 02 00 23 07 10 11 05 12 00 04 05 00 24 08 00 00 06 00 00 04 08 00 25
08 05 05 06 04 00 04 11 00 26 08 10 11 06 08 00 04 14 00 27 09 00 00 06 12 00
05 01 00 28 09 05 05 07 00 00 05 04 00 29 09 10 11 07 04 00 05 07 00 30 10 00
00 07 08 00 05 10 00 31 10 05 05 07 12 00 05 13 00 32 10 10 11 08 00 00 06 00
00 33 11 00 00 08 04 00 06 03 00 34 11 05 05 08 08 00 06 06 00 35 11 10 11 08
12 00 06 09 00 36 12 00 00 09 00 00 06 12 00

In this Table is four Columns, in the first, under Iron Ball, is the Weight of
the Ball that these Guns ordinarily shoot; in the second, under Proof, is the
Weight of Powder for Proof; in the third, under Action, is the Weight of Powder
for Action; and in the fourth Column, under Storm, is the Powder for Service.
The right order of all Gun-Founders is, That for every 6 lb Ball the Piece
shoots, they allow 1 lb for the Wind.

This is the Ge(...)stration of the Diameter of Ball, And the Diameter of the
Bores of Ordinance From one (...) weight: And as I am informed, commonly used
in England by which Demon(...) of the Diameter of the Bore is Sufficient wind
for all Guns.


CHAP. XXII. To find the Diameter and Length of the Taper'd Chamber of a Piece.
Most necessary.
PRovide a Tamken to the Bore or Height of the Ball; put it on the end of an
Half-Pike, and put it up till it stop at the Chamber or top; take that out
again, having before marked the Half Pike; then put up the Half-Pike in the Gun
to the Breech, and mark the Half-Pike again; then take a Piece of bowed Wire,
and put it in at the Touchhole to the lower part of the Chamber, and mark the
Wire above the Gun; then hale it up till it hack at the upper part of the
Chamber, and mark the Wire there again; so measuring betwixt these two Marks of
the Wire, you have the small end of the Taper-bore; then measuring the Diameter
of the Tamken, and so you have the great End: Then taking the Distance between
the marks of the Half-Pike, so having both Diameters and Length, (if you will)
you may draw the form of a Taper'd Chamber on Paper, and extract the Wind from
it, for the Cartrage going up with more ease.

CHAP. XXIII. For Chamber-Bored Guns.
THese Guns are tried with part of their Balls weight of Powder; So that a
Piece shooting 24 lb Ball, is proved with 6 lb Powder: For Ordinary, there is
allowed for every pound of Ball 3 ounces of Powder, so that there needs no
Table to those Ordnance, for there is not many of those to be found but
Mortar-Peeces.

Chamber-Bored Guns were of old as is supposed.
But certainly those Pieces must be ancient since their Foundation; That
Josephus in his Antiquities of the Jews does say, That there were Stones shot
into Jerusalem at the Siege of great weight; that at one time one of these
Stones shot off the Head of a Man, and carried it several furlongs from the
Body.

As I am here to speak of Chamber-Bored Ordnance, so I do remember that in
Holland they use to bore their Guns of 6 lb Ball to 8 lb, and that there may
come of these Guns to be made use of.

Three sorts of Chamber'd Ordnance.
Now know that of Chamber-Bored Guns, there are three sorts; to wit, first,
Those that shoot Iron Ball; Secondly, Those that shoot Stone Ball; and thirdly,
Those that shoot Grenades and Fireworks.

First, Know that it is a Chamber-Bored Piece which has two right and true
Bores; the one is the vacant Cylinder, all from the Musle till you come to the
Charged Cylinder; the Charged Cylinder is from the Touchhole to the great
Bore, called the Chamber, because it is not so great a Bore as the other.

But if this Chamber be too long and narrow, or small to continue Powder for
this sort of Pieces, then the Ball may be delivered before all the Powder be
fired, and do little Execution; For it is without controversy, that the
vehemence of any Ball struck from a Piece, is by virtue of the Powder fired in
the Piece before it come out, and is rather hindered than furthered by any
Powder that is fired after it is out. Likewise there be Chambers short and
wide, which may be harmful; for the Powder all firing suddenly, before it loose
the Ball, the strength thereof many times does burst the Piece; Therefore it is
best in this, as in all other cases, a true Proportion be kept. Things incident
ought to be with diligence observed for fear of danger.


CHAP. XXIV. To know the true Proportion of the Chambers of Ordnance.
The true Proportion of Right Chambers in Pieces.
ANd first of them which shoot Iron Ball; a well proportioned Chamber for a
Piece that shoots Iron Ball, ought to be three Diameters of the great Bore
long in the Chamber, and three quarters of the Diameter of the Ball, the
Diameter of the Chamber: Having this Proportion, they ought to have one pound
Powder for every three pound of Ball for Proof; and for Action three quarters
of a pound; this being so plain it needs no Tables.

The true Proportion of a Chamber in a Chamber-Bored Piece that shoots Stone,
is once and a half the Diameter of the Ball long, and the Diameter of the
Chamber is two third parts of the Diameter of the Ball; having this Proportion,
one pound of Powder will serve to prove a Piece that shoots 4 pound of Ball,
and three quarters of a Pound for Action, the Ball being Stone.

Now I suppose, and I hope that I need not doubt, but hitherto there is enough
written and declared to the use of great Ordnance of most sorts that are used,
and how with caution they ought to be handled.

I was a Gunner when the Spanish ships came to the Downs, in the year 1639.
And because I in my Youth have served for a Gunner both by Sea and Land, not
doubting that any need Instruction that are undertakers to be Gunners, (but as
aforesaid) it may be some Friends may prefer some Young Men before they be
capable, even to be Gunners of good Ships, who never knew how to shoot a Gun in
anger.

CHAP. XXV. Therefore I will here give some needful Observations for Gunners of
Ships.
1. THe first is, That the careful Gunner coming into a new Ship, diligently
and carefully measure his Guns, to know whether they, or any of them, be full
Fortified, Reinforced, or lessened in Metal.

2. Then he shall with a Ladle and Sponge draw and make clean all his Guns
within, that there remain not any old Powder, Stones, Iron, or any other thing
that may do harm.

3. That he shall search all his Guns within, to know if they be Taper'd,
Chamberd, or true-Bored, or whether they be cracked, flawed, or Hony-comb'd
within: And finding what Ball she shoots, to make the Weight of the Ball above
the Port; that thereby he may set the same Mark or Number upon the Cartrage and
Case, that in time of Service, those who bring the Powder may not go wrong.

4. The Guns being dimensioned and clean as aforesaid, the Gunner shall take
half a Ladle of Powder for every Gun, and blow them off, Sponge them well; and
finding them clean, Load then the Piece or Guns with their respective Cartrages
and Powder; which being rammed home, with a strait Wad after it, then let the
Ball roll home to the Wad, and set a Wad close home to the Ball, that the Ball
roll not out with the tumbling of the Ship; then must he Tamken that Piece at
the Musle or Bore, with a Wooden Tampken, which he must Tallow with hard Tallow
round about for preserving the Powder from Water; Likewise make a little Tapon
of Ockam for the Touch hole, which must be tallowed also for Water, before the
Leaden Apron be put over; then make your Piece fast as occasion best presents.

5. The Piece loaded and fast, then the Gunner is to have to every Piece 24
Cartrages at least ready made; to wit, 12 filled, and 12 empty in sort:
Likewise he must be careful, so long as the Gunner's Crew are busy with the
Powder, that there be no burning Match or other fire in the Ship; also to lay
his Cartrages in Barrels or Chests in sort, that when there is occasion to be
brought, it be without abuse.

Most needful, for great hurt may come by a Ball too high.
6. The Gunner must see that he sort his Ball very well, and lay every sort by
themselves in several Cases, and upon every Case set the weight of one of the
Shot which is in them. Also he ought to make the Bags for H^il, for the Guns
above, ready betime, and fill them with Stones, Small Shot, or pieces of old
Iron, which may do great damage to the Enemies Men.

7. If it fall out that any new Ports must be cut out in the Ship, the Gunner
must be careful that they be above a Beam, or close by if possible; also that
they be not higher or lower than the Ports before; Likewise that there be room
for the Guns to play, because if one Gun should be dismounted, there might be
another brought to her place: And observe, that the Carriage standing on her
Truckes, the uppermost part of the Carriage must come to stand in the middle of
the Port up and down, that a Man may lay his Piece as he pleases.

8. The Gunner must be careful that the Powder in the Room be well covered with
Hides; also that the Axtrees of the Truckes be well smeared with Soap; These
not to be neglected.
also that his Ropes, Rammers, and Sponges be ready at hand; and he must not let
the Powder lie unturned above one month, otherwise the Saltpeter will descend
to the lower part of the Barrel, which is to be feared if Men should make use
of that Powder: And he must every Month draw the Ordnance, if he fear they have
got any Wet or Moist to the Powder, also for fear of the Saltpeter dissolving,
which may prejudice the Piece. And he must be careful of the Candle and Fire
about the Gun-Room and Powder-Room, that there come no disaster. Likewise he
must keep a good Account of all Materials that belong to the Guns, as Ball,
Match, and Powder, what part thereof he spends, and also what now remains, that
he may give a good account what is become of them.

9. A Gunner must use all diligence before he Rencounter with his Enemy, to set
a Balley of Water betwixt every two Guns, that when they see convenience, they
may dip the Sponges for cooling of the Pieces, and fear of Fire remaining,
which may do hurt: And that he be careful not to shoot except he hit, for it is
sure, when the Enemy sees that he is not hurt, it gives him more courage: But
to encourage Young Gunners, I will counsel them at Sea, not to use a Lont-Staff
in Service, but first observing the way of both Ships, whether the one heave
and the other set, or both heave and set together; and also the sailing of the
Ships, if both one way, or on several Tacks, whereby he shoot not in vain: Now
if the Gunner have a small piece of light Match, he standing at the left side
of the Piece, shall set his right foot in the Carriage, looking over the Piece,
and according as he sees occasion give fire, and at the fire giving, retire his
right foot, and before the Piece be recoiling the Gunner is free; and by trying
his Dexterity, will make a good Experiment, and that he will do good Service:
But if the Ball have not done to your expectation, you may help the next; for
when you see from the Breech of your Piece to the Musle, and so to the Mark,
you have a sight of three things; so Euclide avers, that seeing over any three
things, you have a right Line from the first to the third, through the second;
for there is no Man dare promise to make a good Shot at Sea, if he have no
experience of the Piece, and observation of the Ships motion.

10. Also the Gunner must be sure that there be no melted Stuff for Fireworks
done in the Ship but on Shore, for it is dangerous for a Gunner, and great
hazard for Ship and Goods, yea and Men's lives: Likewise there may no Fire-Work
be brought above in the Round-house or Cabin to stand, for fear of shot, but
must be kept below till time of need, either in the Powder-Room, or
Steward-Room: By the hazard of such things there has been many and cruel
Examples.

Of Necessaries that a Sea-Gunner ought to have for his Ordnance. Necessaries
that a Gunner ought to have for his Ordnance are many, and the quantity is
according to the quantity and quality of his Guns; and also if he be in a Man
of War, or a Merchant-Man, then there is difference of Provisions, only I will
here name them, let every Gunner take what he thinks will fit, and at the
Voyage end give an account what is spent, and what he has, and how he spent
that which is gone.

I leave to the Gunners own discretion the quantity of necessaries.
Powder. Round Shot in sort. Double-heads in sort. Cut Iron of foot or foot and
half long. Wooden Tampkens in sort. Cartrage-Paper. Thread, Needles, Twine, and
Starch. Match. Mallets, Hand-Spoaks, Rammer-heads, Worms, Ladles. Sponge-heads,
and Staves to place them on. Beds and Coins in sort. Old Strouds for Breeching,
and twice laid Stuff for Tackles. Lashers, double and single Blocks, new Rope
for Double Tackles, some old Strouds for Sponges, some Lines. Marline, tarred
Twine, Port-Ropes. Moulds for Cartrages in sort, Axel-Trees and Truckes.
Budg-Barrels, and Lint-Spindles, Crows, Splice-Irons. Primes, Staples and
Rings, Tackle-Hooks, Nails. Thimbles, Port-Bands, Sheet-Lead, and Lead-Shot.
Old Canvas, Seals and Weights in sort. Lanthorns, Dark-Lanthorns,
Powder-Measures. Soap, Horns, and Prime-Irons, Height-board. Height-Ruler and
Compasses.
With what other Instruments he finds needful.

CHAP. XXVI. How to Dispart a Piece of Ordnance.


AN easy way to Dispart a Piece of Ordnance. First, Take the Diameter of the
Piece upon the thickest part at the Breech with a pair of Callabasser
Compasses, and likewise at the Musle at the thickest part thereof; then draw
upon a Paper or Board both Diameters: So laying a Ruler through the Center,
draw the Diameter, and then you may the easier take the Difference betwixt them.

Example. The only way to Dispart a Piece of Ordnance.
The Diameter of the Breech (in the preceding Figure) is OF, the Diameter at the
Musle CD, and the Diameter of the Bore AB; so you see the Difference betwixt
the two Circles is DF or EC, which is the true Dispart of that Piece. If you
take a piece of Wax, or Straw, or Stick, of the length DF, and set on the
Muslle at D, you have a true Dispart: I have made them of Iron and screwed them
on.

CHAP. XXVII. How to level a Piece of Ordnance to shoot at Blank.
What Point Blank Distance is.
SHooting Point Blank is a term very much misconstrued amongst our Gunners, for
I have heard some say, they have shot a mile and more Point Blank; the which is
contrary to the nature of Great Ordnance, for it is observed, that it is much
to shoot 350 Paces Blank, accounting 5 foot to a Pace, which is little over the
part of a mile.

But to shoot Point Blank, is to be understood, that then the hollow Cylinder
of the Piece lies upon a level Line, so that the Ruler of the Quadrant being
put into the Mouth of the Piece, the Plumb-Line hangs perpendicular, then
that Piece lies to shoot Point Blank.

To know how to make a good Shot at a Mark, within Point-Blank-reach of the
Piece.

The Piece lying as is before shown, set the Dispart of the Piece at the place
required on the Musle, then a Ruler from the Dispart to the Breech of the
Piece; so turning your Piece to the Mark, you looking from the Breech along
the Ruler to the Mark desired; fire your Piece, and if there be nothing
defective in the Piece, or Carriage, or Platform, you make a good Shot: But if
the Piece lie so, that the Ruler of the Quadrant being in her Concavity, and
the Plumb-Line cut any of the Quadrant, then is that Piece said to be clevated,
and will shoot further than when she lies level, except there be some Object
which lies higher than the Piece to stop it. And if that Piece lie so, that
when the Ruler of the Quadrant is in her, the Plumb-Line hang without the Line
of Level, then that Piece is said to lie under Metal, and will not shoot so far
as if the Piece were lying level, except there be a very great descent under
the Piece.

Moreover it is certain, if Men have time, and the Object lying within
Point-Blank-reach of the Piece, that the industrious Gunner observing these
Rules, may do good Service at the first or second Shot: for it is certain, that
if a Man look along any three things or marks on one Line, then betwixt the
first and third there is a right Line over the second; so that if a Man look
from the Breech of a Piece, over the end of his Dispart on the Musle of the
Piece, and to the Mark he is to shoot at, then the Breech of that Piece and
that Mark lies on a right Line through the Dispart: Therefore it is imagined,
the Mark being within Blank-Reach of the Piece, if the Piece be loaded and
fired she will make a good shoot, all impediments being removed.

CHAP. XXVIII.
IF the Ball err, contrary to your expectation, either above the Mark or below,
or on either side, follow the Rules following to help the next.

Rule 1. If the Shot err too high or too low, help it thus,

When you have done as is described, and that the Shot has carried too high as
in D, or too low as in E, the Mark you shoot at being in C; having loaded your
Piece, you are to find the middle of the Bore of the Piece, and the places on
the Base-Ring and Musle-Ring corresponding, then you are to set the Dispart, so
you cause traverse your Piece till you bring the Breech of the Piece A to the
top of the Dispart at the Musle B, and the Mark C in a Line; after Fire given,
you hold this for a Rule.

But the Gunner may lay his Piece very artificially, and yet the Shot may carry
contrary to expectation several ways; if it be too high as in D, help it thus;
having laid your Piece as at first, in the Line ABC, and found the Ball in D;
then lengthen your Dispart on the Musle-Ring, till looking over the Piece you
find ABD; this done, you are to cause lift the Breech of your Piece, till over
your Piece and Dispart you find the appointed Mark C; then fire, and you will
hit your desired Mark.

Observe the Copper Piece, Numb. 1.
Likewise if your Shot at first had been below the Mark, as in E; you are to
Load her and bring her to her first station, and then you are to take from your
Dispart so much, till you have the Line ABE; this done, you are to lower the
Metal of your Piece, till you find your desired Mark ABC; fire your Piece and
you do good service.

Now if the Ball should come to light on either side of the Mark, as (in the
second Figure of the Copper Piece) in E to the right hand; to help the next,
lay your Piece in all points as before, with her Dispart; then you are to go to
the Breech of your Piece, and find at your convenience a place on the
Base-Ring, looking over the Dispart, you see the mark of the shot at E; mark
narrowly that place of the Base-Ring, (with Chalk or what you please) keeping
that mark to look over your Piece, then you cause traverse your Piece till
looking over your mark on the Breech, your Dispart, and behold C your desired
Mark in a Line; fire that Piece and you have your desire. And if to the left
hand, you may help in the same manner.

Observe the figure in the Copper Piece, Numb. 2.
But if you were to shoot at any known distance, without the Blank-reach of the
Piece, upon any degree of Random, first measure the distance to the Object, and
as you find it in proportion to the Blank-reach of the Piece, the same quantity
you may take from the Dispart. For if your distance be farther than the
Blank-reach of the Piece, then take from the Dispart part of its length; by
holding this proportion, if the Object be on a right Line from you, you will do
good service. Many times it falls out, that when a Gunner enters a Battery,
Castle, or other Fortification; before he can have time to observe Rules,
orders are given to fire some Ordnance; it may be in all his Life he has not
seen the like before that time, therefore he must lay his Piece by the
discretion of his Eye and former experience; if then his Ball strike the Mark,
his experience and discretion is a good Rule; but if the Ball go besides
expectation, you may help as is before taught. For if the Gunner observe these
Rules cautiously, he shall find both pleasure and profit, and have praise of
the Spectators.

CHAP. XXIX. The way to Shoot a Ball from a Hill to a Valley, or from a Valley
to a Hill.
I suppose mistakes, or trusting to other Men's Works, makes one beget another.
MAny and diverse Opinions are there of shooting from Height to Valleys, as
Nicholas Tartaglia in his first Book of Colloquies, and 26 th Colloquie,
affirms, That though the Mark be within Blank-reach of a Piece, the Ball shot
under Metal will strike above the Mark aimed at. Likewise one William Claes, in
his Book called the Practick Busketrie, page 94. affirms the same by many
Instances, That a Ball shot from a Height will over-shoot the Mark, though
there be no impediment. But I cannot blame the Hollander, in regard his Country
is very plain, and no remarkable Height, whereby he might have confirmed what
he says by practice. But I rather adhere to Luigui Callado; for in his
Practick manual de Arteyleria, Chap. 8. he informs, That a Ball being shot from
a Height, will strike below the Mark; as I my self by practice have found
diverse times.

By Experience.
For in the year 1650, I was in the Castle of Edinburgh, when that Army of
Rebels to our King did beleaguer that Castle, so that many times I had occasion
to shoot so far under Metal, or below the Level-Range, that I have been forced
to cut the Brest-band of the Carriage quite out, and so to elevate the Breech
of the Piece, that it has been supposed she would fall over the Wall; and
though in this case I durst not coin my Piece with fast Bed and Coin, yet
always I found the Ball to hit below the Mark till I helped it.

A Remarkable Instance.
One remarkable instance I had of this, in shooting at that Mirror of his time
for loyalty and gallantry, James Marquess of Montr^ss his Head, standing on the
Pinnacle of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, with which the Enemy reproach us, as
counting loyalty a sin worthy of death. Now at this time I was by the Governor
commanded, that there should not a Gun be shot in the Castle; which I took as
an ill Omen of what followed; I demanded a reason for it: he told me I had too
much Blood on my Head already: I being somewhat troubled, lest his Majesty, and
those that loved him, both abroad and in the Castle, should suppose me a helper
to the Treachery, desired the Governor to give me Orders in presence of all the
Soldiers, otherwise I would not desist. When a Sheep is General of an Army of
Lions they may be beat.
So he sent for me, and on the Head of the Parado, commanded me that no Ordnance
should be shot in the Castle; for if any Gunner should do it, I should suffer a
Counsel of War. Nevertheless, being curious to have down the Head, which
deserved Honor above what I can write, I laid a Piece of 24 lb Ball; and
because I durst not be accessory to any Acting, far less to that, I desired
Thomas Kniblo, who was Keeper of the Magazine, that he should fire that Piece,
after he saw the Governor and I gone to walk; which he did. The Governor
hearing a Shot, and I in his company, inquired who had shot that Gun: I
answered, I knew not; so that one returned to the Wall to know who it was, and
whereat he shot; the young Man answered, Sir, I thought that it was sin in you
and the Master Gunner to suffer these Men to fortify themselves, and raise
Batteries before your Nose, and you not stop them, wherefore I shot at this,
meaning the Battery.

But that Providence had ordered that Head to be taken down with more Honor, I
admired of its abiding, for the Ball took the Stone joining to the Stone
whereon it stood; which Stone fell down, and killed a Drummer, and a Soldier
or two, on their march betwixt the Lucken-Booths and the Church, and the Head
remained, till by his Majesty it was caused to be taken down, and buried with
such honor as was due to it.

The Reasons of their former mistakes.
Now any that knows the Place, knows that betwixt the Fore-wall of the Castle
and the Tolbooth is not a quarter of a mile; so that it was in Blank-reach of a
Demi-Cannon: Yet the Piece lying higher than the Mark shot at, shot lower than
the Mark: And I am of Opinion, that Reason must give it to be so, in regard
that the Parallel Line made betwixt the Breech and the Dispart, lay 8 Inches
near above the Bore of the Piece; and if it carried about so far below the
Mark, I am sure she perfected the Line, the Bore made parallel to the Imaginary
Line above: Behold the Figure AC.
So much for shooting from a Height to a Valley, which may be helped, by laying
your Piece so as your Imaginary Line parallel to the Bore, direct you half a
foot above the Mark, then you shall do good Service.

It is also to be observed, that shooting from a Valley to a Height, that a
Ball will over-shoot the Mark, if it lie within point-Blank-reach of the Piece:
Reason should give it so: for the Piece being elevated to a great Height, the
Ball with the force and exaltation of the Powder, does elevate above the true
Line, which the Bore makes to the Mark, in regard of the Wind or Vacancy that
is betwixt the Ball and the Piece: As was found by shooting at the Castle of
Edinburgh, where the Gunners shooting to dismount our Ordnance, most of their
Shot flew over the whole Castle, till observed by the Gunners and helped. But
when we come to treat of Observations of Heights, Depths, and Distances, by the
Quadrant, you will have further satisfaction.

CHAP. XXX. To know how to make as good a Shot by Night as by Day.
Fire in the Night is terror to an Enemy.
AS there is none will deny, that among the many Terrifications which may be put
upon an Enemy, to shoot amongst them by Night is not one of the least of them:
But if you will shoot by Night, you must provide by Day, and observe as
follows.

First, You are to lay your Piece by day, as is formerly taught, being loaded
with Powder and Shot, as if you were to make presently your execution at the
place. Good Observations if followed.
Then take a Mariners Compass, and set that on the Breech of the Piece, and
looking over the Piece you see the Mark, and observe how the place bears off
you, so that in the Night you may know how, and on what Point of the Compass
the Place bears off you, when you are to give Fire; then take a Line and
plummet at the Musle of the Piece, and right over the middle of the Musle let
the Plummet hang to the Platform; so you shall remark, or make a mark on the
Line where it cutteth with the lower edg of the Bore of the Piece at the Musle;
and likewise remark where the Plummet touches the Platform: And for your more
assurance, you may let the Piece be fired in the day time at the same Mark; and
as you find that Shot to prosecute, you may proceed as is before-taught, and in
the Night you may do good Service.

In the Night as by Day.
First, Set your Piece as is before shown by the Compass, causing your Matross
or Pioneer to traverse the Piece to your desire; then go to the Musle with your
Plumb-Line, causing them to elevate or abase the Metal, till you find the
Plumb-Line and Plumb fall in their former stations: So in firing that Piece you
may do good Service by Night or by Day.

But withal you must observe the distance to the Mark, if you be to shoot
beyond Blank-reach of the Piece, also how the Wind is, whether with or against
you, or on which side; for by these means the Ball may change her Course; and
so if you have a Dark Lanthorn, that you may see your Compass and Plumb-Line,
observing all these things, you may shoot by Night as well as by day.

But to know whether you shoot right in the Night or not. To be sure you will
see where your Ball Lights.
It shall be requisite to take some Butter, or Tallow, and melt them in some
Kettle, wherein you shall dip your Ball that is to be shot, and roll the same
Ball in fine Powder, that the Powder may stick fast to it; and when you have
done, put home the Powder in your Piece; and observe you put no Wad betwixt the
Powder and the Ball; so when you give fire, the Ball will flame as a Candle;
and where the Ball does light, the mixture will fly on the Object, by the light
whereof you will see whether you have hit the Object or not.

CHAP. XXXI. To know how far any Piece will shoot at any degree of Random.
Uncertain to find exact truth in Random Tables.
THis task is so difficult as there are Proportions of Ordnance, yea it will
alter by the alteration of Weather; likewise if the place lie higher, the Piece
shall shoot farther over a Valley at the same Random, than she shall from a
Valley to a Height; for these Reasons, I have found none that ever made Tables
for great Ordnance, that would or could make them good on all Accounts and all
Degrees.

Now the only Rule by which a Gunner may know how many Paces his Piece will
shoot, in elevating from Degree to Degree, is to take good notice how far she
shoots Point Blank, as also Horizontal with the Metal; which Distance being
marked to be part, or a half, or parts farther than Point Blank, then has he a
convenient Proportion to work by, and to find his desire reasonably near.

Example.There is a Demi-Cannon shoots Point Blank 200 Geometrical Paces, and
Horizontal with the Metal 400 Paces, this holds proprtion as 2 to 1, the one
half less: Therefore say by the Rule of Three, As 2 is to 1, so is 200 to 100
Paces, that this Piece shoots farther at every Degrees elevation. Yet not
wholly through the Table, for there is a rebating in every Degrees elevation:
Now to find this, you shall yet divide 100 by 44, and you have 2 3/11: So as 3
times 11 is 33, and 11 is 44; therefore when you desire to make this Table,
take 2 from 100 there remains 98, which added to 200 makes 298; then take 2
from 98, and there remains 96, which being added to 298, gives 394: This is
the first and second Degree elevated; this continues till 35 Degrees elevation,
where you have 44; and you have for 35 Degrees elevation 2400 Paces; then the
addition is 28, and the rebate of every Degree 3; by which you may make this
Table following: and in doing so with all others you have your desire.

This Table I had from William Class in his Practice of Gunnery.
A Random-Table for a Demi-Cannon to 45 Degrees.
1 298 16 1528 31 2308 2 394 17 1594 32 2344 3 488 18 1658 33 2378 4 580 19
1720 34 2410 5 670 20 1780 35 2440 6 758 21 1838 36 2468 7 844 22 1894 37 2493
8 928 23 1948 38 2515 9 1010 24 2000 39 2534 10 1090 25 2050 40 2550 11 1168 26
2098 41 2563 12 1244 27 2144 42 2573 13 1318 28 2188 43 2580 14 1390 29 2230 44
2584 15 1460 30 2270 45 2585

This is now a brief way of making a Table of Randoms for a Demi-Cannon, which
may be done in like manner for any Piece of Ordnance whatsoever; first knowing
the true Distance she shoots at Point Blank, and the Distance she shoots lying
Horizontal by the Metal, compute Difference, and work as before, you have your
desire.

As this Table is for a Demi-Cannon, so there must be one for every sort of
Ordnance the Gunner makes use of; And he shall hardly find truth.

CHAP. XXXII. The Geometrical Quadrant, with the Uses in Measuring Distances,
Heights, and Depths, and Distances most useful for a Gunner.
First, To measure the Height of any Tower, Wall, or Castle, or any other Body,
standing on a Plane, if you have access to it, by the Gunter 's Quadrant.

SEt the Ruler of the Quadrant so to your Eye, that you see through the Sights,
from the place where you stand, the mark you desire to observe; then note what
part of Vmbra Recta, or Versa, your Thread cuts, and you shall find the Height
in this manner.

1. If the Thread of the Plummet fall on 100, then is the Height desired equal
to the Distance betwixt the Observers foot, and the Ground or Root of the thing
observed.

Conclusions and Observations done by the Quadrant
2. Otherways, if the Thread fall on the parts of Vmbra Recta, or Right Shadow,
then is the distance betwixt the Observers foot and the ground of the thing
observed, less than the Height of the Body observed, according as the parts cut
off Right Shadow by the Thread is to 100; Therefore use the Rule of Proportion,
otherwise called the Rule of Three, and set the parts of Right Shadow in the
first place, cut by the Thread or Plummet-Line, and the 100 in the second, and
the Distance you are from the Root, or foot of the Mark, in the third, and the
fourth place will show the desired Height; as you may see in the Example
following.

Example. Suppose the Thread to fall on 25 parts of Vmbra Recta, and the
distance betwixt your Foot and the Wall be 30 foot: Then say, as 25 parts of
Right Shadow is to 100; so is 30 foot the distance given, to 120 foot the
Height required: to which you must add the length betwixt the Observers Eye and
the Ground.

3. But if the Gunner cannot Cipher, then do this; go so far back or fore, till
you see the Mark desired, and that the Plummet-Line of your Quadrant (being
still observing) fall on the parts of Right Shadow: And know that if the Line
fall on 100, the Distance is equal to the Height: If the Line fall on 75 parts,
then the Distance is three-quarters of the Height; if it fall on 66 parts, then
is the Distance parts of the Height; if on 50 parts, the half of the Height: if
on 33 parts, one third part of the Height; and if on 25 parts, one, quarter of
the Height; by which you may conclude the Height of what you observe.

4. But in observing, if the Thread fall in parts of Vmbra Versa, or Contrary
Shadow, then know that the Distance of the Ground to the Place observed, is
more than the Height of the same: And the Proportion is, as 100 parts is more
than the parts cut off the Contrary Shadow; so is the Distance from the Mark,
unto the Height of the thing observed.

Example. Suppose the Thread to fall on 25 parts of Vmbra Versa, and the
Distance betwixt your Foot and the Wall be 300 foot: Then say, As 100 parts is
to 25 parts of Contrary shadow; so is 300 foot the Distance given, to 75 foot
the Height required. To which if you add the Distance betwixt the Observers Eye
and the Ground, you shall have the true Height.

5. And if you cannot Cipher, then go so far backward or forward, always seeing
the Mark desired, till the Thread fall on what parts of Contrary Shadow you
would have it; and if it be 100, then is the Distance and Height equal; if it
fall on 75 parts, then is the Distance one quarter more than the Height; if it
fall on 66 parts, then is the Distance one third part more than the Height; if
the Thread fall on 50, then is the Distance one half more than the Height; if
it fall on 33, then is the Distance more than the Height; if on 25, then is the
Distance three quarters more than the Height: Ever adding the length from your
eye to your foot, then you shall certainly have the true Height.

6. This manner is used to measure the Height of any thing, whereto you may
have access: If it were that you must measure the Height of a Wall, or any
other thing standing on the side of a River, then you must have two
Observations; in manner following: First, Measure the distance from your
station to the side of the River; being come to the brim of the Water, stand
perpendicularly upright, draw down the brim of your Hat before your face, till
you looking by the brim of your Hat, see the Foot or Root of the place you
would measure; then turn your self about, observing in all things your gesture,
till you see on that side of the River where you stand, some Hill, Down, House,
or any other Mark; thus you shall measure with your foot the distance to it,
and then Work as is before shown.

Secondly; To measure the Height of any thing standing on a Plane from you,
when you can have no access to it, or were hindered by the Enemy to come near it.

1. To this Work you must have two several Observations, as follows: Put the
Ruler of the Quadrant to your eye, in such manner, that through the Sights you
see the Mark desired; To know how far, or what Distance you are from the
Enemies Forts, or Strengths, is most necessary for a Gunner.
take notice then what parts of Contrary, or Right Shadow is cut by the Thread
or Plummer-Line, and then where you stand set up a Staff; then you are to go a
remarkable distance backward or forward, and take there your second station;
and observe your Mark as before, then note well what parts of Contrary or Right
Shadow your Line cutteth; note that also down: Now if it be so, that in both
your stations the Plummet-Line has fallen on parts of Right Shadow, then
deduce the lesser from the greater, and keep the Difference: Then say by the
Rule of Three, As the Difference in the parts of Vmbra Recta, is to 100 parts
in the Quadrant; So is the Distance between the two Stations to the desired
Height of that Body: But it is to be understood, that you must not forget to
add the Height of your Eye from the Ground.

Example. In the first place, when you find the Thread fall in 25 parts of the
Right Shadow, and in the second on 50; then let the distance betwixt the
stations be 30 foot.

Say then by the Rule of Three; As 25, the difference of the parts of
Observation, is to 100 parts in the Quadrant; So is 30 foot the distance of the
Stations, to 120 foot the Height required; to which add the Height of your Eye.

2. But if at one Station (or possibly at both Stations) the Thread falls on
parts of Contrary Shadow, then the parts must be converted to parts of Right
Shadow, as shall be shown in the following Example.

Example. Experience is the best Schoolmaster.
Suppose there were placed some Guns on the top of a Hill, as in the Figure by
A; by which the Gunners in the Valley B have a great deal of loss and trouble;
wherefore order is given to one of them, to do his endeavor to dismount these
Pieces at A: Now to do this with understanding, and what have convenient;
First, He must know the height of the Hill AD, with the distance BD: Then he
may by Prop. 47. of the first Book of Euclide, find the length of the
Hypothenusal Line AB; to be assured how many degrees of the Quadrant his Piece
must be elevated to the Mark.

Take for Example. We say that the first Station observed, the Thread fell on
25 parts of Contrary Shadow, and at the second on 90 parts of Right Shadow;
then you cannot take 90 parts from 25 parts; therefore you must alter the 25
parts of Contrary Shadow to parts of Right Shadow, in manner following:
Multiply 100, the one side of the Quadrat by it self, and you have 10000; this
you divide by 25 the parts of Contrary Shadow, and you have in the Quotient 400
parts of Right Shadow, which is equal to 25 parts of Contrary Shadow; then take
90 parts from 400 parts, there remain 310 for the Difference: Also let the
Distance betwixt the two Stations, from B to C, be 200 foot: Then say by the
Rule of Three; As 310 is to 100 parts in the Quadrant; So is 200 foot the
Distance of the Stations, to 64 16/31, which is very near 64 foot, the Height
of the Hill AD: We should now show the way to find the Distance AB and BD; that
those who cannot Cipher, may understand this.

Thirdly; Therefore we will give one Example or two, that they may do such
without Arithmetic.

These must search out their Stations, in which the Thread may fall on all such
parts of the Right and Contrary Shadow as they desire, which is easy to be
done, if they go discretly forward or backward, and measure the Distance
betwixt the Stations, till the Thread fall where they desire.

1. If the Thread fall at the first Station upon 100, and at the second on 50
parts of Right Shadow, then is the Distance half the Height.

2. Or if the Thread fall at the first Station upon 100, and at the second on
66 of Right Shadow, then is the Distance betwixt your Stations one third part
of the desired Height.

3. And if the Thread fall at the first Station on 100, and at the second on 75
of Right Shadow, then is your Distance just one quarter of the desired Height.

4. Likewise if at the first Station the Thread fall on 100, and at the second
on 66 parts of Contrary Shadow, then is the Distance half the Height.

5. Or if the Thread fall at the first Station on 100, and at the second on 50
parts of Contrary Shadow, then is the Distance equal to the Height desired.

6. The same it shall be, if at the first Station the Thread fall on 50 parts
of Right Shadow, and the second on 66 of Contrary Shadow: But still remember to
add the Height of your Eye above the Ground.

Fourthly; To measure the Distance to any place, or the Breadth and Length of
any Plane or Water.

By what has been said before, it appears plainly that in the measuring the
Height of any thing, there must be once a known Distance, to wit, some length
of the Plane whereon the Height is erected: Likewise in measuring any
Distances, as the length of a Field, it is very necessary to know the Height of
something thereby; which may be easily done: for if you were to measure the
Distance to a Fort, Battery, Trinal, or Bulwark, which you desire to know; if
the Distance be not great, in that case you need know no Height but your Eye
from the Ground where you stand; But if the Distance you would measure be
great, then it is needful to have a known Height to stand upon, which Height
you must add to the Height of your Eye, which may be done with a Plumb-Line,
whose Marks you know: Then Work as follows.

Example. Take for Example, that you desire to measure the Distance from B to
D; then turn the Center of your Quadrant to your Eye, and observe through both
your Sights the Point D; remark well what part of Right or Contrary Shadow the
Thread cutteth; If it happen to fall on 100 parts, then ought the Distance to
be equal to your Height: But if the Thread fall on parts of Contrary Shadow,
which in such Cases is ordinary, then is your desired Length more than your
known Height, so much in proportion as 100 is more than the parts cut of
Contrary Shadow, which the Line shows. Therefore say by the Rule of Three; As
the parts of Contrary Shadow, which the Plumb-Line shows, is to 100; So is
the known Height unto the Distance required.

Example. The Thread cutteth 1 parts of Contrary Shadow, and the Height from
the Eye to the Ground is 5 foot: Then work as follows, and you will find the
length BD to be 375 foot. ^

Now having the Perpendicular AD, and the Base BD, you may easily find the
Hypothenusal AB, to be near 380 foot: But here you are to extract the Square
Root, for Euclide in the 47 Prop. of the first Book of his Elements, has
proved by Demonstration, That in Right-Angled Triangles, the Square which is
made of the side subtending the Right Angle, is equal to the Squares which are
made of the sides containing the Right Angle. Where if two sides be given, we
may find the third side thus; in the Right-Angled Triangle ADB, you have AD 64
foot, and you have the Base BD 375 foot; whose Squares being added, and the
Square-Root extracted, you shall have the Square-Root near to be 380 foot for
the Hypothenusal AB: For Extracting the Square Root, it is described in Chap.
6, and 7.

This I have done for the use of Young Gunners, that when occasion may present,
they may lay their Pieces at a reasonable Degree, thereby to come near the Mark
at the first Shot; And always may observe a greater distance from a Height to a
Valley.

Example. There is a Castle, as the Figure shows, and in the Battery there
lies a Piece of Ordnance; If it were desired of the Gunner to know if this
Piece might be of service to dismount the Piece in the Battery C: Now the
Gunner must desire time to measure the Distance from him to the Battery C;
whereby he may the more assuredly Answer.

Then shall he take a Line and measure the Height AB; then standing at A, shall
take the Quadrant with the Center to his Eye, and beholding through the Sights
the Mark C, Remark narrowly the parts cut by the Plumb-Line, which is without
fail parts of the Contrary Shadow: Then say, As the parts of Contrary Shadow
are to 100; So is my Height from the low Battery to the Distance required. Let
the Height AB be 95 foot, and the parts of Contrary Shadow 5 and you will find
the Facit to be 1809 foot, or 362 Geometrical Paces very near.

^

But if you please to reduce the Distance to Paces, divide the Quotient by 5,
for 5 foot make a Pace, and you have as aforesaid.

This is so clear, that I think any Gunner may perceive, that if he in the
Battery C, elevate his Piece two Degrees above the Level, that then he might do
good Service, and by once firing, if the Ball go beyond expectation, you may
help the second.

Necessary Observations for Gunners either by Sea or Land.
The like may the Gunner in the Battery B do, and also the Gunner in the Battery
A to C: and so each to other, for they have double Advantages of the Gunner at
Sea, except he be lying in a River; and let his Ship lie never so still, so
long as she is a-float, she has ever a Motion, nevertheless the Observant
Gunner in a Ship may do good Service.

For I my self in the year 1652, or 53, being forced from Scotland, when the
War began betwixt the States of Holland, and the (then) State of England; and
as many better than I were in necessity, I put my self in a Frigot of Terveer,
one Jacques Wolfes Captain, I served there for a Gunner, and in our Voyage to
Shetland to bring home the Hollands East India Fleet, we met with a Storm,
where we lost above 20 Sail of our Fleet, our Ship was called Prince Rupert;
but with this Ship we were forced to come to Anchor betwixt Fulla and Shetland,
and by providence road the Storm out; when we had fair Weather, we went to
Brasa Sound in Shetland, and there riding at Anchor with three Ships of our
Fleet: the Commander or Corporal of the Soldiers and I fell at Dispute
concerning his Men, that they could not shoot at a Mark; whereupon he told me,
That I could not shoot so well with a great Gun, as any of them did with their
Musket; at last I wagered with him that I would shoot as near with a great
Gun, as he himself with a Musket; whereupon we agreed, (the Wager was two Rix
Dollars): I sent the Quartermaster to our Captain, who was aboard one of his
Consorts at Dinner, for liberty to shoot; which was granted: The Mark we were
to shoot at, was the Buoy of the Anchor of the same Ship our Captain was aboard
of; so that we had the four Captains for Judges: I brought a Sacker-Cut, from
the breast of the Steerage to the Mainmast; I disparted and loaded her, and
set her to the Port, I set her to the middle-Port of the Ship; then we were at
a contest who should shoot first; I gave him that privilege: So after he shot,
he found he came not near by three yards, as it was alleged; and that he might
be better pleased, I gave him liberty to shoot again, This is true, and can be
witnessed.
where he made little mends: Then I laid my Gun to the Port, and observing the
ranging of the Ship, I gave fire at my convenience, and struck the Buoy, which
lay about 150 paces from us; there are Men here in London that did see it. I
say, good Service may be done aboard a Ship, if the Gunner be cautious. And by
this I would have you know, that I would have Gunners to consider, that the
middle of a Ship is the only place for to make a good shot, though by accident
there may be some made either before or after; as I will give an Example.

Example. In the Figure, Number. 133.
Suppose there is a Ship in a River or smooth Road a pretty distance off, as
this Ship E F: The Gunner is demanded if he could do any good Service with his
Guns at the Battery on the Shore G, which only could wrong them.

The Piece he is to use here, is a Demi-Cannon, which shoots Point Blank 200
Paces.
This you must consider, could not be answered, till he knew what distance he
lay off; threfore he must observe as follows: First, With a Lead-Line measure
the length from your Topmast-Head to the Water, as from E to F; then go to the
Topmast-Head in F, and observe with the Center of your Quadrant to the Eye,
that through the Sights you see the Battery G, and in all things doing as in
the Battery A for clearing.

Example. Let the Height from the Water to the Topmast-Head be 90 foot, the
parts cut of Contrary Shadow 5; so set it on the the Rule as follows.

^ which is 360 Geometrical Paces.

At a Degrees the Demi-Cannon shoots 394 Paces.
Suppose the Gunner in the Ship had a Demi-Cannon, which shoots Point Blank
200 Paces; Therefore may the Gunner conclude to elevate his Piece 2 Degrees,
and thereby at the first shot be pretty near the Mark; by which he may help the
second: Even so may the Gunner in the Valley at the Battery G, observe to do
good service on the Ship E F: Likewise the Gunner in the Battery A, may do good
Service every where round about, if he observe what is before set down:
Nevertheless my desire is to set down another Example of observing by the
Cross-Staff.

Example. It is desired to know the Breadth of the Bulwork ABC: First, You are
to observe the Distance to the same, as from D to B, which we suppose to be 750
foot: Take the Cross-Staff as EFG, having thus on the end of your Staff a
Cross, as FG, at such distance as you may see by the Transom F in C, and G in
A; The Breadth or Length of a Courtain or Bulwork is all to be done in one
manner.
then divide the length of your Staff in as many equal parts as you please: As
here let be 15 parts, and the Cross FG, we make 7 of the same parts: Then say
by the Rule of Three, As 15 parts the length of the Staff, is to 750 foot E B;
So is 7 parts the length of the Cross, to 350 foot for the Bulwork ABC: Do the
like with all others, and give good heed to the following Questions and
Answers, which are useful for all Commanders, Captains, or practiced Gunners,
as well in Offensive as Defensive Service by Sea or Land.

If a Man were on the top of a Rock or Hill, on the side of a River, and on the
other side saw a Tree, and would know the distance over to that Tree, as the
Figure CAB: To do this you have two Observations, the one is the Line of Level;
then going on a Right Line from A to C, you observe, and find the Thread cut 54
parts of Right Shadow; then measuring your distance AC, and finding it 68 foot,
you follow the Ground-Rules, 54 gives 100, what 63 foot Difference of Stations.
^

CHAP. XXXIII. Questions for the Practice of what has been formerly taught.
Quest. 1. WHen a General with his Army has besieged a strong Fort, Castle, or
Town, and has secured his Army by Intrenchments, and has taken notice of the
most fitting places for Approaches: Now the Question is to the Gunner, How near
they may approach the place with Batteries, and at what Distance the Cannon
will do best service, that there they may be planted and made.

Answer. If I were to answer, I would desire to approach as near as it were
possible to come, and to plant the Batteries about 100, and some 50 foot from
one another; and if it were possible, even to the Counterscarp; not only
thereby to give the place most damage by the Guns, but also to frustrate the
Enemy from sallying out, as likewise to do them most prejudice at their
Casements, to Guns and Gunners, by which they might be forced not to dare to
show a Head above the Wall.

Question 2. This Resolution is good, but very dangerous to perform; for as the
Proverb is, It is dangerous to chase a Dog out of his Nest; for if there be a
brave Enemy within, how could you approach so near, but it should cost many a
brave Soldier his life?

Answer. As it is without controversy, where Carpenters work there must fall
Chips; but that will never cool the courage of a brave generous Spirit, ever
considering, wherever we are, we are in the Hand of God; yea, the danger is
not in all places alike, for if you be where there is Earth enough to work,
there you begin to cast up Trenches and Mounts against the Town to save your
selves from harm; for the higher the Earth is, the deeper is the Trench to be
made, to save you from the sight of the Enemy.

Question 3. When you are approacht so near the Enemies strength, that the
Cannon is to do service, Whether should you choose a Bulwork or a Curtain, for
your storm-place to play upon?

Answer. That must be according to the greatness of the place; if the Bulworks
be of great distance one from another, in that case I would rather choose a
Bulwork than a Curtain, there to make my Breach, thinking that I should come
sooner to my advancement there, because the Bulwork is better fortified than
the Curtain, and is a principal Strength: And if you make your Breach for Men
to enter, you find them sometimes cut off, so that you may begin to fortify
there anew, where you are as it were in the Enemies Bosom; this occasion you
have not in a Curtain. See Capt. Hexham.

Question 4. If you did storm this Bulwork, and found there some Guns that
before you had not seen the like, and that you must presently use them against
the Enemy, and know not what Ball they shoot; What is the quickest way to find
their true Powder and Ball?

Answer. If the Piece be left loaded, she must be drawn; for the Enemy in
policy might so leave a Piece, on purpose to split about their ears that take
her: When drawn, a piece of bowed Wire being put in at the Touchhole down to
the bottom of the Concave, upon the Metal mark that Wire with a Knife; hale the
Wire up till it hack on the upper part of the Metal in the Chamber, and mark as
before your Wire; take the distance betwixt the two marks, and that is the
Diameter of the Bore: And see if it be the Diameter of the Bore at the Musle:
if you find her a true-bored Piece, then take your Compasses, and extend them
to the length betwixt the lower mark and the hack of the Wire; this Extention
being taken on the Scale of Powder gives you her Powder; and extending your
Compasses betwixt the marks, lay that to the Height-Rule, and you will have the
Height of the Ball: Otherwise finding the Weight of the Ball, resort to the
Table of Powder for that Fortification, and where you find her Weight of Ball,
you will find the Weight of Powder for that Piece, for having the Diameter of
the Bore and one side Metal, double the one side Metal, and add the Bore to it,
you have the Diameter of the whole Piece: Then say, As 7 is to 22; So is the
Diameter of the Piece to her Circumference: And having one side Metal at the
Breech and Musle, you have a Dispart: So presently you may do good Service.

Question 5. When you have the Diameter of the Bore of a Piece, How do you know
what Ball will serve that Piece to shoot, and neither be too high, thereby to
hurt the Piece; neither too low, to miscarry by reason of the too much Wind?

Answer. As it is convenient the Ball be something lower than the Bore of the
Gun that it serves for; and some have thought fit to declare one quarter of an
Inch to be a sufficient Wind to all Balls; and others have declared, that a
twentieth part of the Diameter of the Ball, is a sufficient Wind for all Guns:
I hold that quarter of an Inch to be altogether absurd; because except a Man
can give the true Demonstration, as you are taught, and is set forth in page
42, to 52. he shall never know how to extract the Wind betwixt the Bore of a
Piece and her Ball. For if you please to try for fancy; A Cannon of 8 Inches in
the Bore, shall have the Wind for her Ball 1/^^ part of the Diameter; as also a
Base of two Inches in the Diameter of the Bore, has but ^/1^ part of the
Diameter of the Bore; for if a Piece of 1 lb Ball shall have proportionable to
9 lb Ball, she would have no Wind at all; and if a Gun of 63 lb Ball had
proportionable Wind as a Gun of 9 lb Ball, she would have too much by ^/1^
part; behold the Demonstration, Folio 102. and a Piece of 4 Inches in the Bore,
has just 1/20 part of the Diameter of her Bore, for the Wind to her Ball:
which will never stand as a general Rule, except it be Geometrically
demonstrated, where you will find the Height of the Cannon-Ball just 2^/1^
parts of her Bore, the small Ball ^^/1^ parts, and the other 20/19 parts:
Wherefore I aver, all that has been writ to this purpose, is but Supposition
and no real Rule; but Geometrically you have your desire, and need not to
follow any other Rule for extracting the Wind to find the True Ball.

Question 6. When you have obtained Geometrically the True Diameter of a Ball
to fit a Piece, the Question is, How shall you know the Weight of that Ball it
being Iron?

Answer. Some receive this by a common Opinion, that 4 Inches Diameter of a
Cast Iron Ball is 9 lb Averdupoise Weight, as you may see by Dr. Weybard's
Tactimetria; wherefore I say that is the most certain Rule. Now if 4 Inches
Diameter weighs 9 lb; What shall two Inches weigh? you will find the work stand
thus. ^

And it is a general Rule; behold you see a Ball of 2 Inches Diameter weighs
1 lb 2 ounces: If you hold this for a Rule, you may Work and Correct all Tables
of this kind that are made in England: Likewise, I say, you may find the Weight
of any Iron Ball thus; Say, ^

It has been ever observed for good, that the Tables of Mr. Norton, Smith, and
Nigh; and therefore Capt. Sturmy in his Magazine for Mariners, does follow the
same Rule, and gives us the same Tables of Mr. Nigh, as he supposes refined:
for he says, Two Inches and a quarter of a Ball, weighs 1 lb 5 ounces: I
will let you see the Error. ^

Now here a Ball of 4 Inches Diameter by his Tables, weighs but 7 lb 6 ounces:
But I praise Mr. Norton, who says, We must not expect truth from his Tables.
But Capt. Sturmy affirms his translation of Nigh to be truly Calculated; if they
be true, I must be quite wrong.

Mr. Nigh says. ^

Now you may perceive, that they err only by neglecting to Calculate their
Tables; But as the Blind lead the Blind, so they both fall in the Ditch; for he
gives 8 lb, or 8 lb 8 ounces.

And by Capt. Sturmy his Tables, I find a Ball of 8 Inches Diameter to be 58 lb
14 ounces; and yet he has set down in his Tables a Ball of 7 Inches for 58 lb.
And by the Tables of Mr. Nigh, though he has placed 71 lb, I can find by his
working but 68 lb for the weight of a Ball of 8 Inches Diameter.

So this will be proved by the Line of Numbers, for if you say 4 Inches gives 9
lb, what shall 2 Inches give; place one foot of your Compasses in four Inches,
and the other in 2 Inches, keeping the Compasses at the same extent, set one
foot in 9, and measure downwards 3 of these Extents, which will reach to 1 lb 2
ounces; likewise say, if 2 Inches give 1 lb 2 ounces, what shall 8 Inches
weigh; extend your Compasses from 2 to 8 Inches; the Compasses at the same
extent, place one foot in 1 part, and three of these Extents will strike at 72
lb: But if the Weight of a Ball should be demanded in Scotland, you shall find
a Ball of 1 lb is 2 Inches; and one of 4 Inches 8 lb; and 8 Inches Diameter (if
you observe the Work of the Table) 64 lb; you will find the same by using the
Line of Numbers; in saying, a Inches Diameter gives 1 lb, what 4 Inches; and by
laying one foot of your Compasses in 2, the other in 4 Inches Diameter, and
with the same extent set one foot in 1, and with three of these extents you
shall find 8 lb weight: thus you may do in finding the Weight of Ball, knowing
their Diameter to what Height you will; and find the true Weight either Scots
or English, without being beholden to Tables; though you have in page 100,
exact Tables Calculated Arithmetically, from eight parts to eight parts of
Inches unto 10 Inches Scots Weight; And in page 102 you have the like number of
Inches Calculated for Ball in English Weight: This is the quickest way, and
reasonable true; if there be not holes in the Ball, or, as I have seen some, a
great Ring about them, which might have taken up the Wind of the Piece.

Question 6. Pray you what Cautions or Circumspections would you use in order
to your Approaches making, that thereby the Army might have the least hazard,
and greatest speed to come to the Places where the Batteries are to be made for
the Cannon, thereby to be more certain of a hopeful and good success over the
Enemy?

Answer. But not Dundass Governor.
To Answer this, you must know you may have many hindrances, if there be a
resolute Enemy in the Strength; Nevertheless observe; 1. You must be careful of
your Leaguer, that it be well trenched and secure from fear of the Enemy, in
all Quarters, by Trenches and Flank-works; then choose to set your Batteries
most conveniently in the opposition of their Strengths, and observe that there
be no Hill, nor deep Ditch to hinder the Soldiers, if occasion offer to an
Assault. 2. That your Approaches be entrenched to open or shut, and to make
such a way to come to the Batteries, and be sure it be well covered and guarded
with Men to keep it. 3. That the Platforms be large enough for the Guns to
Reverse, and also to command the Place they shoot at. 4. If there be Earth
enough, that you make the Trenches deep and wide enough, and well flanked. 5.
That with advice and deliberation, you Batter all the high Flankers, the while
you are making your Approach-Trenches. 6. When you have brought your Trenches
to the Counterscarp, then make your Platform and Beds for your Pieces by the
Point of the Counterscarp, by which you may hurt their Low-Flankers, and take
them away; and so continuing your Battery that you bring down their
Counterscarp, and the body or face of their Work.


Question 8. When you are approached so near as you can, how shall you then
Storm and Breach a Bulwark at the Point, that is both Offensive and Defensive?

Answer. If you use thereto 18 or 20 Pieces, all Whole or Half-Cannon, and
plant them so as they may shoot Right Angular, and cross one the other; and if
the Approach be so near as ought to be, I would have 4 of my Guns only play to
dismount the Enemies Ordnance in their Places, wherever I could perceive they
lay, and by this means make my Storm more free.

Question 9. If you were to shoot at a distance, what Gun would you choose, a
Reinforc'd-Gun, or a True-Fortified?

Answer. It is true, that if you elevate a Reinforc'd-Gun to 45 Degrees, and
the True-Fortified to the same, shooting both one Ball, that then the
Reinforced Piece will drive his Ball more violently, and shall fly farther than
the Ball of the True-Fortified Piece: And great reason for it, the Reinforced
is long and well Fortified; they of Brass are 10 Diameters of the Bore about
the Breech, and his Proof of Powder is parts of his Balls weight, and some the
whole Balls weight; and the True-Fortified but 9 Diameters of the Bore, which
gives a great difference in Powder, for she is proved with parts of her Balls
weight of Powder; besides the one is longer by half as long again as is the
other; for the one being 18, and some 20 foot long, the other is but 10 or 12
foot long: by these Reasons, being better Fortified, has more Powder, more
length, and but equal Ball; she must burn more of the Powder before the Ball be
delivered, which must of necessity more violently drive the Ball farther than
the True-Fortified Gun.

Question 10. Thus it follows, that the longer a Piece is, the more strength
she has, and does violently carry her Ball farther.

Answer. This is so to appearance; for as we say any thing conveyed through a
Pipe or Bore, has his Course more violent according as the Bore is long, and
has been found so to do by some: But I say experience teaches otherwise now,
for I have seen a Demi-Cannon tried, being of a reasonable length, and broke a
foot and a half at the Musle; yet when the Piece was tried again and again, did
carry her Ball as far as she did before.

Question 11. How is this, that a Sling does shoot farther than a True-Fortied
Piece, or other suchlike Piece, which is shorter than a Sling?

Answer. I hold that which Reason and Experience both shows: Namely, that the
strength of any Piece is so much more as the Piece is longer; but being
fortified accordingly, and with this restriction, that it is done with an
indifferent length; for from 8 to 12 foot long, being of the same Bore and
Fortification, the Piece shall add to the flight of her Ball: But from 12 to 20
foot long, you shall see them abate of the Balls flight; the reason is, in all
those too long Guns, the Powder is burned before she deliver her Ball, whereby
the flame and strength of the Balls flight is abated. This is strange, and
opposes the thoughts of many Gunners; but by my Experience here in England by
Saltwich. I found it so, and therefore not to be controverted.

Question 12. But if you load a long Piece with so much more Powder, and being
thereto Fortified, should not that give strength to the fire, that thereby the
Ball should more vehemently be farther driven?

Answer. It is without all question, that a Piece does most harm having its
greatest Loading; yet it is found ordinarily, that in all Guns having Powder
above half the Balls weight, all takes not fire; yea, I my self at Saltash in
Cornwall, gave a Quarter-Cannon, shooting 12 lb Ball, more than her ordinary
allowance, and laying 6 pair of Sheets on the Ground, on the descent of the
Ground; and after fire given, I found two ounces of the Powder whole, by which
you may guess what more was burnt after it came out of the Piece by the flame;
and so I suppose the Balls flight is not increased but diminished: Whereby you
may understand that too much Powder is disadvantageous for Ordnance, and that
there ought inspection to be had to their Loading: And for these reasons I have
Calculated these Tables, which I am sure is the nearest Truth to give Ordnance
their Powder, of any yet given out by any other. But I know some Gunners will
be offended to think that by these Tables, the Fortification of their Guns
considered, they should be drawn to an Account of what Powder they have spent.

Question 13. If you were to shoot from the Battery G, in the Figure 133, to
the Ship E; if you had your choice, whether would you use a Demi-Cannon or a
Bazilisk?

Answer. If it were a calm day, and the Sky clear, and the distance betwixt
both about 300 or 400 Paces, then I would hold little or no difference which of
the two to choose; but if it were a little Wind, the Sky thick, and the Air
damp and moist, I would rather choose a Demi-Cannon than a Sling, or rather a
Whole-Cannon than a Demi-Cannon. My Reason is this, That the Wind, and Mist, or
Rain, has not so much strength to divert a great Ball as a small, which is
found Experimentally: for diverse times I have shot from the Castle of Edinburgh
to the Links of Leith, when the Enemy was exercising; but when there was a gale
of Wind on either side, or against, I found the small Ball to err; but the
Demi-Cannon came much nearer my expectation.

Question 14. If you were to shoot from a Valley, as at the Point B, against
the Hill A, or from the top of the Hill A to the Valley B; is there any
difference in laying of the Ordnance?

Answer. There are diverse Opinions about shooting of this nature, for most do
say, that shooting against the Hill from a Valley, the Ball will be below the
Mark; and likewise shooting from the Hill to the Valley, that the Ball will
strike below the Mark; but as I have shown by my own Experience, these Authors
are not to be owned: for I doubt it is with diverse that have writ of Gunnery,
as that the Proverb will hold good, viz. Many Men speak of Robin Hood, that
never shot in his Bow. So I doubt some have writ they know not what themselves,
never being experimented.

Question 15. By this I perceive there is no Rule, or Fundamental Ground can be
made, by which you can make a Table of Randoms, whereby the Gunner may lay his
Piece to shoot such Distance by such Degrees of the Quadrant being thereto
elevated.

Answer. This I affirm, and my Reasons you have in page 122, which if any Man
will truly consider, he will either not think to aver Random-Tables, or
otherwise to make Tables for every Gun that is made, and also for every Wind
and Weather that is, when they are to make use of the Guns; and he must not
forget to make Tables for every Ground he is to shoot over: Which will keep
them at work all their lives, and never conclude to any good purpose.

Question 16. Is it possible to give a general Rule, that instantly you may
plant your Ordnance on a March against the Enemy in the Field, when the General
intends to give Battle?

Answer. I believe not, because of the many hindrances and impediments that do
many times follow; for the Rule of Discretion is that which must then be
observed, and the Order of the General, and therefore is carried a competency
of Fieldpieces, which are to be planted at the Head of the Battle, and some
betwixt the Vant and the Middleward, by 2 or 3 together on the Flanks and Wings
of the Musketeers, being covered with the Wings of Horsemen, or as occasion
presents and suffers them; some of these on the Front of the Army, playing with
diligence on the Enemies Brigades; and if the Fields be plain and even, then as
the Army has by them Cannon, Demi-Cannon, Field-Peeces and Slings, which may
be planted for the greater annoyance of the Enemy at a greater distance; for
every Regiment ought to have 2 or 3 Field-Peeces, which must be planted at the
Head of the Leaguer, and must stand a little elevated with Earth, (if
possible); all these will cool the Enemy before the Battles draw near; and some
of these Field-Peeces may be removed as occasion will serve, where they may
gaul the Enemy so, that Gunners being Men expert, and having good Attendants,
may be very advantageous to an Army.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Order and Necessaries for Guns to March by Land, they having
six Demi-Cannons, six Sakers or Demiculverings, with two Whole-Cannons, besides
their Field-Ordnance.
BEfore the Train does march, there goes out Pioneers, each of which is
furnished with either a Shovel, Scoop, Pickax, Crow or Handspike; having for
their Commanders, a Captain, Lieutenant, and two Corporals, with a Drum to
every Company; who are to make plain the way for the Cannon.

After them first follow the 6 Sackers or Demiculverings, drawn with their
respective Horses, with their Provision of Ball in Wagons, and their Powder in
Wagons, besides there must be at the Rear of the Cannon, if any whelm, help
sufficient to mount them again.

Next follow them six Demi-Cannon, with their Shot and Powder conform; Then 2
Whole Cannon, with their Powder and Ball accordingly.

Then the Carriage of Ladles, Sponges, and Rammers, Match, Crows, and
Handspiks, and Budg-barrels: These besides the Field-Peeces for the respective
Regiments, take a great many Horses, Wagons, and Men, for their Attendants.

Now when the Cannons are on their March, every Gunner to his respective place,
must march at the right side of his Piece, and by them their Harbingers, who
take notice of all the Ropes, and other Provisions for Draught, and help them
if defective: and also to see that the Axtrees be well soped or tallow'd, that
thereby the Train may march without stop: The Wagon-Master must have spare
Horses by his Draught, if any fail either in Wagons, or in Draughts of the
Ordnance. Several have given Rules for so many Horses to a Piece of such a
Weight; as thus, every 500 lb of Metal for a Horse-Draught; where the Guns
alone, besides the Carriages, must have 120 Horses: So I reckon for Guns,
Carriages, and spare Horses, there will be 180 Horses: Now for Powder, Ball,
and other Provisions, 100 Horses more with Wagons, besides Wagons for the
Officers.

This is supposed to be for so many Cannon in fine plain Way; but the Horses in
every Country are not all alike, for I have been drawing Cannon, and allowed
but to every Horse 350 lb, and hardly able to perform; but sure it is, where
Horses are to be pressed, there need no halt to be made for Draught, if the
Conductors be provident. But if there should fortune Cannon to be drawn in
places where Horses or Oxen (for if you order a Yoke of Oxen for a
Horse-Draught it will be equal) are not to be found; Therefore I will set down
a general Rule, how these Guns may be drawn by the strength of Men. And the
Calculation shall be made for the forenamed 14 Guns; by which may be reckoned
any other Draught having the Weight.

First, It is conceived an indifferent Man will draw 100 lb for his part, (but
on a plain way); therefore for ordinary, I do allow a Man to draw 80 lb weight:
And you will find, counting the weight of these 14 Pieces thus; The Cannon 7000
lb, a piece, is 14000 lb for them two; then the Demi-Cannon 4500 lb, and these
6 are 27000 lb; for the 6 Demiculverings 3200 lb a piece, and these will weigh
19200 lb; which in all is 60200 lb: which sum being divided by 80, (the pounds
of draught for one Man) will make 752 Men to draw the 14 Pieces of Cannon. Now
these 752 Men to employ with discretion and good order, that every Man may do
his endeavor, you are to make fast your Ropes in this manner, on either side
of the Carriage; before on the Hackes one Rope, and on the middle of the Bolt
or Brestband one; And upon every Rope, shall be so many Ropes so made fast, as
every Man may have 2 foot distance one from another; so that the Draught-Ropes
for a Demiculvering must be 17 fathom long: Now for the Demi-Cannon and Cannon,
they may be reckoned by their proportion; so the Men are set to Work, as the
Figure hereby does show.

This will be thought a new Invention, but I used the same in my Lord Middleton
his Service from Aberdene to Fyvie, where I caused them to make these
Sled-feet, as you see fast to the Carriage, in this manner; near to the Breech
of the Piece there is a Bolt, whereon the end of the Sled-foot is; and under
it, at the foot-end of the Carriage, a Square-hack to lay over the Sled-foot,
and then a Rope through the Sled-foot: And a Man or two thereby shall steer a
Gun by a Height or Hole, in the way where she is to be drawn, so that many
times it saves the Guns from falling over.

And when you are to meet your Enemy, or make use of your Guns, you may lift up
your Sled-feet, and lay them all along the side of the Carriage in manner as
you see, on a Hack where they do not trouble, and unhacking the Ropes from the
Hacks before, you may use your Gun at your pleasure.

CHAP. XXXI. By knowing the Weight of one Piece of Ordnance true-bored, to find
the Weight of another true-bored Piece, being of the same Metal.
BEcause it falls out sometimes, that in a Fort or Ship are Guns, not having
their Weight described upon them; Therefore in such occasions, not to let the
Gunner be to seek, but that he may give her Weight without great trouble, I
shall here set down some Examples, whereby the Gunner may with ease find the
Weight of any great Ordnance whereby he may be able to show, what store of
Horses or Men are competent to draw these Ordnance, if occasion require.

These Examples and Rules I intended to have given by a Gauge-Rule; and because
these ways are more easy to do, and quicker dispatched, I shall only take by
the way to let you know, that I will admit there is a Brass Saker weighing 1900
lb Weight; and as it is given out in other Questions, she is 3 Inches in the
Diameter of the Bore: Now it is commonly found, these Guns are about the
Breech, measuring at the Touchhole, 9 Diameters of the Bore: I say then, if I
bring 3 Inches all into Quarters, then I have 15 Quarters; with which I
multiply the 9 Diameters of her Breech, and I find them 135 Quarters; which
dividing by 4, I bring again to whole Inches, and find 33, which we will here
call 34 Inches, for the Circumference of her Breech: Then I say by the Rule of
Three; As 22 is to 7, So is 34 to 10 9/11 Inches.

The Work. ^

This 10 9/11 of Inches, is the Diameter of that Saker; if she be true-Bored,
she is true-Fortified: And such are the only Guns to make choice of for finding
by their Weight, the Weight of any other Brass Piece: Therefore, I say,

Example. If a Gun of 11 Inches Diameter at the Chamber weighs 1900 lb; What
shall a Piece of 18 Inches Diameter weigh? Thus by the Table of Logarithms.
The Logarithm of 11 Inches, is -- 1,041393 The Logarithm of the greater, 18
Inches is -- 1,255272 Difference Increasing -- 213879 3 The Triple whereof is
-- 641637 The Weight of the known Piece is 1900 lb -- 3,278754 Sum is --
3,920391

Which is the Logarithm of 8325 lb, for the Weight of the great Gun.

Here you see that this operateth well by the Table of Logarithms, and the
Weight of the Piece is found to be 8325 lb. Now to find the same by the Line of
Numbers on the Scale, you are to place one foot of your Compasses in 11, and
the other in 18; keeping the Compasses at the same extent, set one foot in
1900, and then triple turning the Compasses, the last foot will touch at 8325,
as before.

Another Example. Also there is a Piece, I know not what her Weight is; but I
find the Diameter of this Piece to be 8 Inches: And I place the Work to find
her Weight as before. Behold the Work.
The Diameter of the known Piece is 11 Inches -- 1,041393 The Logarithm of the
Diameter of the other 8 -- 0,942008 Difference decreasing -- 99385 3 Triple of
the Difference is -- 298155 Which Subtracted from the Logarithm of 1900 --
3,278754 Rests -- 2,980599 Which is the Logarithm of 956 lb, for the Weight of
the lesser Piece, which was required.

The Weight thus found by Logarithms, you will find the like by the Line of
Numbers, if you extend your Compasses from 11, the known Diameter, to 8, the
Diameter of the Piece whose Weight you would have; the same extent three times
from 1900 down the Scale, will reach to 956.

This former Work you may find on the Line of Numbers, if you place one foot in
9, the Diameter of the Bore that begirts the Piece at the Touchhole, and the
other foot in 7, which is most near the Diameter that begirts the other Piece,
and the Compasses at the same Extent, place one foot in 1900 the Weight of the
known Piece, and three times turned downward, will light on 956, as before.

CHAP. XXXVI. By knowing the Weight of one Piece of Iron Ordnance, to find the
Weight of another Piece of Iron Ordnance.
Suppose an Iron Saker of 3 Inches Diameter of the Bore, this Piece weighs
1600 lb; I find all such Pieces to have 11 Diameters of the Bore about the
Breech; for which cause I work as before, and bring 3 into quarters, which I
multiply by 11 the Diameters of the Bore about the Breech, and I find 165,
which I divide by 4, to bring again into Inches, and the Quotient is 41: Then I
say, by the Rule of Archimedes; As 22 is to 7, so is 41 to 13 1/22 Inches.

^

The Fraction is so small not to be valued.

So that I find 13 Inches to be the Diameter of an Iron Saker, whose Weight is
1600 lb, and that the same is a true-Bored, true-Fortified Piece: Now there is
an Iron Piece whose Weight I know not, but I find the Diameter of that Piece at
the Touchhole or Charged Cylinder to be 21 Inches: To find the Weight of this
Piece Logarithmically.

Example. I say, a Piece of Ordnance of Iron, of 13 Inches Diameter, weighing
1600 lb; What shall an Iron Piece of 21 Inches Diameter weigh? The Work will
stand thus.
The Logarithm of 13 Inches, is -- 1,113943 The Logarithm of 21 Inches, is --
1,322219 Difference increasing -- 208276 3 Triple of the Difference is --
624828 The Weight of the known Piece 1600, is -- 3,204119 Sum is -- 3,828947
Which is the Logarithm of 6744 lb, for the Weight of the Piece inquired.

If you will Work by the Line of Numbers on the Scale, you will find it near
the same; for if you place one foot of your Compasses in 13 inches the Diameter
of the known Piece, and the other in 21 inches the Diameter of the Piece whose
Weight you desire to know; keeping your Compasses at the same extent, set one
foot in 1600, the Weight of the known Piece, turning your Compasses three times
up the Scale, and you will find the third extent will reach 6744, which is the
weight of the Piece required.

Another Example. There is also a Piece of Iron Ordnance, whose Diameter I find
in the charged Cylinder to be 8 inches; the Question is, to find her Weight.
The Log. of the known Piece, 13 inches is -- 1,113943 The Log. of the other
Piece, 8 inches is -- 0,916454 Difference decreasing -- 0,197489 3 Triple of
the Difference is -- 0,592467 Which subtracted from the Log. of 1600 --
3,204119 Rests -- 2,611652 Which is the Logarithm of 409 lb, for the weight of
the Piece inquired.

Finding here the weight of this Piece to be 409 lb, you see it follows, that
great or small Ordnance their Weight may be found; yet for variety we will have
another Example.

Example. I will admit there is a Piece sound, whose Diameter is 10 inches; and
the Weight of this Piece I demand. The Log. of the known Piece, 13 inches is --
1,113943 The Log. of the other Piece, 10 inches is -- 1,021189 Difference
decreasing -- 0,092754 3 Triple of the Difference is -- 0,278262 Which being
subtracted from the Log. of 1600 -- 3,204119 Rests -- 2,925857 Which is the
Logarithm of 843 lb, for the weight of the Piece inquired.

This and the former is found on the Line of Numbers, if you extend your
Compasses from 13, to 8; and with the same extention turned three times down
the Scale, you have 409 lb. If you extend from 13 to 10, and with the same
extent from 1600, three times turned down finds 843 lb for the weight of the
Piece inquired. And so much for the finding the Weight of Ordnance, thereby to
provide what Horses, Oxen, or Men are able to draw them. As the Figure here
demonstrates.

Having, as I suppose, satisfied the Gunner for what is incumbent for him to
act both by Sea and Land, with all sort of great Ordnance, either true-Bored,
Taper'd, or Chamber-Bored: Now it remains that I satisfy my Friends, who
expect to hear something of those Pieces that shoot Granado's, or other
Fireworks; as likewise of the Pattard; and of their Ingredients, Compositions,
and the manner of using them.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Powder and its Ingredients.
IT is a Paradox to many, to think that Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Coal, being
incorporated, should be the only Compositions for Powder: But know this, That
whosoever desires to learn to shoot in great Ordnance, or to make Fireballs,
or any kind of Fireworks, should learn to know the nature and sympathy of
these three.

Saltpeter that is pure and of a Crystal Color is best; the refining whereof
is set down by diverse Authors, as Mr. Nigh, and others; yet the nature of it is
to burn downward, but if pure and well refined, will burn upward, with a great
deal less noise.

Brimstone is hot and loves the fire, and the fire loves it; it is of a sharp
nature; when you kindle it, it fireth upward; its color is of a bright Yellow
if it be good.

The Coal neither augmenteth nor diminishes any strength or force of it self,
only it soon takes fire, by which the Saltpeter and Brimstone receives the
fire, and perfecteth their Work: The best Coal is made of the lightest Wood,
and the lighter the Wood is, the Coal shall be the better. And it is obvious to
all, that when these two opposites, viz. Saltpeter and Brimstone are
incorporate, and fired together, the Coal nourishing the fire, there is nothing
can resist the force thereof, until the fire dissolve the whole in the Air.

Example. If you load a Gun with Powder, (which is nothing but these
Ingredients incorporate) or any other narrow Pipe, so soon as the fire comes to
the Body, and the Composition is separate by the fire; then does it force it
self out to the Air so vehemently that nothing can withstand it.

Powder is made of diverse sorts, as Cannon-Powder, Pistol-Powder,
Musquet-Powder, and Powder for Fireworks.

Powder may be tried three manner of ways; First, Put your hand in a quantity
of Powder, and gripe it hard, if it crack and make a noise in your hand, you
may judge it is good; but if it crack not in your hand, it is either not well
wrought, or it is spoiled.

The second way, is by taking a little Powder, and put it on a smooth plain
Board, or a piece of flat Stone; put fire to it, if it go up quickly to smoke,
and leave no marks behind it, you may judge it good; but if it burn slowly, and
leave white Corns behind it, then you may suppose it is not well incorporated,
and has too much Saltpeter in it, or that there is too much Dust and Coal
therein.

The third is by the Taste; if it be too sharp in the taste, it is like to come
moist; but if it taste a little Niterish and sweet, and hard-corned, it is
good: There are several other ways to try the goodness of Powder, that for
brevity I here omit.

Of Fire Works. There are several Sorts of Fireworks, some for Offensive
Service, some for Defensive Service, and some for Recreations and Sport: I
intend only to speak of those which are to be used in earnest, not minding to
meddle with those for Recreation at this time, in regard they are so learnedly
treated by diverse Authors.

Of Fireworks, and those Ingredients used for Compositions. As there are
sundry and numerous Ingredients that may be used in Fireworks; so Fireworks
are so to be mixed as they may work several effects, according to the several
occasions may be produced in War; therefore it is impossible for any Man to lay
down Rules, which only must be observed; but that the Gunner may have a taste
of every Dish, that are necessary to be used in bringing Enemies to Ruin, and
Rebels to the Obedience of their Lawful Princes, observe these following.

The Loading and Use of the Mortar-Peece. These Pieces are not to be used as
great Ordnance, in shooting at great Distances; but, as it were, to throw a
Granade, or Fire-Ball, or Stones, over Walls, or into Garrisons, being seated
high or low; or from a Garrison to Cast a Ball into the Enemies Works or
Batteries, thereby to frustrate them of their intents, by taking a way those
Men most active in the same.

The Mortar-Peece may be elevated to any degree of the Quadrant; but the
contrary you may observe in great Ordnance, for they cannot be elevated above
45 degrees; and the nearer you approach to any place to shoot at it, you must
deball your Piece under 45 degrees; so that if Tables were to be made for Great
Ordnance, they may not exceed 45; and Tables for Mortar-Peeces may be made from
1 to 45 degrees, and from 45 to 90 degrees.

Now he that would Load a Mortar-Peece, may elevate her Musse to what degree he
will for his own convenience, the Piece made clean, you put the Powder in the
Chamber, and upon the Powder a Wad of Rope-yarn, Hay, or what you can provide;
then you put a Turf of Earth cut on purpose, that is large wider than the
vacant Cylinder upon the Wad, which fills the Chamber, and then you put the
Granade or other Fire-Work above that Turf, and putting Grass or Hay about your
Granade, that it may lie as you would in the Mortar, and also to keep the
Powder in the Mortar from the fire of the Feusey.

The Mortar Piece being thus Loaded, you cannot give fire, with any hope of
success, before you observe and know, how far the Distance is betwixt you and
the place where you would have your Ball to light, and also know, how far that
Mortar-Peece can cast her Ball from Degree to Degree; likewise you must observe
the Weather, whether it be calm, or blows hard, or if the Wind be with or
against you, or if it be to the right or left of you: Having duly considered
these things, the Gunner may do well the first shot; but if he err, he must
amend the next.

So that it stands to reason, that when you have found the Distance to the
place you would lay your Ball at, that you may know by this Table near what
Degree of the Quadrant the Piece must be laid to reach thither.

90 0 75 403 60 661 89 80 74 425 59 673 88 124 73 448 58 693 87 148 72 450 57
708 86 171 71 473 56 723 85 195 70 496 55 737 84 219 69 500 54 751 83 243 68
521 53 765 82 267 67 540 52 779 81 289 66 562 51 792 80 291 65 580 50 804 79
313 64 599 49 816 78 335 63 608 48 827 77 359 62 626 47 838 76 381 61 644 46
848

Now if you were with a Mortar-Peece at the back of a Wall near a beleaguered
place, and there were a remarkable place, as Magazine, or Storehouse, or
Corn-Barn, and it is desired to lay the Granade or Fire-Ball in that place, the
distance betwixt you and this place being found to be 243 paces, as in the
Figure from A to M; Then look in the Table, and see what Degree is opposite to
243, and you will find 83 Degrees, and so the Mortar-Peece A must be elevated
to 83 Degrees to cast her Ball or Granade into the House M. Do so with all
other.

When you would discharge a Mortar-Peece, first you must set fire to the Feusie
of the Granade or Fire-Work, and you must see it burn well before you give fire
at the Touchhole, and mark narrowly where the fall is, thereby to help the
next if need require, in form as aforesaid.

The Feusies for Granades or Fireballs, may be filled with this Receipt; 1
part Powder, part Saltpeter, Brimstone, and part Rosin, being all well beat to
Meal, and moistened with Linseed-Oil.

Now follows the Proportion of the Pattard, and Use thereof with all things
belonging thereto. The best Pattards are made of Copper, to wit, 1/10 part of
Brass: they are made of Iron also, some more some less, as the Figures shows:
The Pattard A is 12 Inches long, the Diameter at the Breech is 7 Inches, and
the Diameter of the Concave is 5 Inches; then the one side Metal must be 1
Inches thick; she is at the Musle inch thick, and the Diameter of the Bore at
the Mouth is 10 inches, and weighs 76 lb.

There is another Pattard as B, which is 9 inches long; the Metal at the Musle
is inch thick, and by the Touchhole 1 inch thick; the Diameter of the Bore at
the Mouth is 7 inches, and the Bore at the Breech 4 inches.

To fix your Pattard to do good Service at a Gate, or Castle, or other Fort, or
Garrison; you must have before the Mouth of the Pattard a good Oaken Plank of
about 2 foot in square; this Plank may be banded with Iron, both on the one
side and on the other, as the 2 Planks D D, both being but one Plank, but the
Bands of Iron are on the one side cross the other; the Plank may be 3 or 4
inches thick; the Powder to the Pattard B may be 4 lb, and the Powder to the
Pattard A about 6 lb; when you have loaded the Pattards, and rammed the Powder
home, you shall put in the Musle of the Pattard a Wooden Tamken, which you
shall beat home with a Wooden Mallet, till it be fast enough; then you may fill
the Chinks with hard Tallow, and melt Pitch or Wax and run round about the
Tamken, that the Powder in the Pattard may be preserved from Water. When you
are to apply the Pattard, and make it fast to a Gate, you must first bore the
Touchhole thereof, and fill the same with some Powder mixed with Linseed-Oil;
but a Feusie may be better, filled with the Composition for Granade Feusies,
that it may take time to burn before the Pattard fire, that the Man may remove
that made it fast. To make it fast, you must have two Hack-Bolts, as E, with
Scrues at the ends, which are to scrue into the Gate, where you have the Plank
D, to which the Pattard G is fast with a Chain by the Ears in the middle, or by
a Staple drove in the Gate, to which the Chain is fast, as you see by the
Figure G and D, to the Gate F: To carry this Pattard, you must have a Wagon
with Wheels, as the Figure H: This Wagon must be as broad as the Plank before
the Pattard, having in the forepart three sharp-pointed Iron Pikes, that when
it is run at the Gate it may hold fast, that the Man or Men may stand thereon,
and fix their Scrues, to which they must make fast the Plank with the Pattard:
Then giving fire to the Feusie, and removing back the Pattard, having done
Execution to expectation, the Parties may enter according to the Commands given.

While this Work was intended for the Young Gunners Instruction, I hold it my
duty to show you that there is no Fire-Work that can be invented or made for
Offensive Service, but the same will and may be made use of for Defensive
Service; but some may be made for Defensive Service, which can hardly be useful
in Offensive Service, as Barrels for smoking out of a Mine, or Balls, or Bags
to burn the Wood, or Rubbish cast in to fill up a Ditch, Powder-pots, and such
like.

Granades to shoot out of a Mortar-Peece. The Mortar-Peece shoots all sorts of
Fireworks; First, Granades, the Shells made of Iron; Secondly, Balls or Bags
made of Canvas, in form of Granades; Thirdly, A Mortar-Peece may shoot Stones
coated with Fireworks, or Stones in the Night to fall among the Enemy, as if
it rained Stones.

1. For the first the Iron Shell of a Granade must be filled with good Powder,
and some well-powdered Brimstone mixed with it, that thereby the Powder may
thoroughly fire the more suddenly. In your Granade you may put some little Balls
of unquenchable Composition, that when the Shell breaks and brings down the
Rubbish of a House, those little Balls may raise Fire afterward; which is
fearful in a Garrison, and is one of the greatest terrors can come among them.

Canvas-Balls for Granades. 2. These Balls must be made of strong Canvas; when
you have made your Canvas-Ball, you may fill it with Sand, and then take two
Iron Rings, and mould your Ball strongly in form as you see the Ball in the
Copper Plate N 3. But if your Ball be of great weight, single Line will not
serve to mould your Ball, and therefore you must make it a great deal less than
the Bore of your Mortar-Peece, both in regard of the moulding and coating of
your Ball.

The Ingredients or Composition to fill this Ball. Take Powder, Saltpeter, and
Brimstone, of each a like quantity, these you shall beat small, and incorporate
them together; moisten them with Linseed-Oil, and work them with your hands
till you make a Paste, that it may stick together in small Balls if need be;
This is a Slow Composition.

Another for the same. To this Composition you must take 4 parts of Powder, 3
of Saltpeter, and 3 of Brimstone; these being severally beat to Meal, moistened
with Linseed-Oil, and wrought as aforesaid; This is a good Composition.

Another for the same. Take 12 parts of Saltpeter, bray it not very small, and
12 parts of Brimstone not small beat, work them well together, and moisten them
with 2 parts of Linseed-Oil; then take 6 parts of good Saltpeter, bray it as
small as Currants; incorporate these Ingredients, and make a Ball thereof as
big as a Walnut; and if it burn as long as you may tell 30 soberly, then is the
Composition both good and strong.

When you have found your Composition good, you may fill your Bag at discretion.

In moulding, you must have 2 Iron Rings of the thickness of of an inch each of
them; the one 4 inches Diameter, and the other 3; and as you mould the Ball,
rive the Line through the Rings; to which you must have a Splice-Iron, or
Marlin-Spike of Horn; a tack of Hartshorn is good to do it with: In the
largest of your Rings you may set your Feusie; the Feusie may be made of Wood,
the Pipe bored; you may bore 3 or 4 small holes near the lower end; it is the
custom of Feusies to reach the middle of the Granade or Ball; you may pierce
this Ball when filled with Fire-Work, and put therein Iron Pipes, loaded with
Powder and Shot; but be sure the Touchhole be wide enough, that Rust does not
stop them from firing; these Pipes must be beat in, till their Musles be equal
to the Line.

Then you must coat this Bag with these Ingredients following; Take Pitch, melt
it, and put therein Oil till it be tough and pliable; then put some Powder in
it; and if you take Hurds or Tow, and spread on a Table, run this Stuff upon
it; then wrap your Ball therein, and open your great Ring for your Feusie-Hole,
and stop it with a Plug.

When you are to use this Ball, take out the Plug, and put therein your Feusie
filled; then Load your Mortar-Peece, and set your Ball in the Mortar in the
same manner you do your Granade; having laid your Piece as she ought to be,
then fire the Feusie, and so your Piece: If this Ball fall near any thing that
will take fire, it will burn, and do the Enemy great harm.

For those Stones, that may be shot from a Mortar-Peece, if you dip them in
Composition made for Water-Balls, with Pitch, Rosin, and Wax, When they are
coming down (as it were from Heaven) into a Garrison, it puts them in great
fear, and makes them gather about the fire.

Then you may have a Mortar-Peece loaded, and put therein stones as big as a
Man's head; and laying her as the other, these stones falling amongst the
people, put them quite out of heart.

Another Granade for a Mortar-Peece. If you make a Ball of Canvas, as is before
shown, well molded and filled with Sand, then melt Pitch and Rosin, and dip
the Canvas Bag in it; but you may have Musket Shot cut in two, and clap them
on this Coat as full as the Bag can stand, as you see in the Copper-Peece N 2;
then Coat it again, put in the Feusie; and if you fire it among Men, it will do
great harm, the Sand being put out, and the Bag filled with Powder.

Another for the same. If you let a Pully-maker or Turner turn of hard Wood two
half Balls to join each in other, as the Figure 2 demonstrates; they two being
joined make a Spheral Body, as you see, then mould them strongly together with
Wire, and with a Goudg cut out little slices of the Wood, as may help lodge half
Musquet-Ball; then dip it in melted Pitch and Rosin one dip over, and set shot;
then Coat it again; this Ball being filled with fine Powder, and a Feusie put
into it, it will serve either to be shot as a Granade, or heaved as a
Hand-Granade, and will do good Service.

To make a Composition for Fire-Arrows. Take 2 parts of Saltpeter, 2 of
Powder, 1 of Rosin, 1 of Brimstone; pound these Ingredients very small, and mix
them together; then moisten them with Brandy-Wine and Linseed-Oil, or Oleum
Benedictum; then fill your Bag of Canvas made for the purpose, very hard and
full, then stick an Arrow-head through the Bag, and make it fast with Twine,
Rope-Yarn, or such like; and put a Plug for the Feusie-Hole, where you mind to
fire it; then coat it over with Pitch, rub Powder in the Touchhole, give fire
to it, and shoot it where you will, and it will burn very well.

But if you would not have it burn, till it light at the place appointed, in
regard you would not have it seen, you shall take a little good Tinder of a
Fingers length, and put it in at the part you mind it shall take fire; put that
Tinder in fire, and shoot it where you please.

There are Gunners, that when they have moistened their Composition, clap it
about the Arrow, and then lay Canvas about it, and few it fast, bore holes,
prime it, fire it, and shoot it, where they have a mind; but it must be coated
first: The form of an Arrow you have in the Copper plate N 5. You may fill the
Hedghog N 4, in the Copper piece with this Composition.

To make Fire-Trunks. Amongst Fireworks a Trunk is one, for they may be made
with easy charge; First, Cause the Block-maker to make a Trunk of hard Wood,
and reasonable thick, (though you make the Ball small) you may put two Hoops of
Iron about it, and at the great end leave Wood enough to make a Socket for the
end of a Pike or Pole.

The Compositions for Trunks. Take Brimstone, Pitch, and Wax, alike quantity,
melt them over a slow fire, and put thereto 2 parts of Saltpeter mealed, with
part of Verdigrease, and 1/^ part of Camphire; all these being mixed together,
add part of Linseed-Oil, stir it well about, and take Hurds, Tow, or Hemp, and
make wet with this Composition, which you shall roll up in form of Balls; these
Balls you tie together with Twine, and when they are cold, you bore them cross
through, which Holes you prime with Powder-dust; you may make of these Balls as
many as you please; you may coat these Balls with melted Pitch, and roll them
in Powder-dust.

To Load the Trunk. First, Load her with a quantity of Powder, as the Gunner
thinks fit to carry out his Ball and not break the Trunk; then put home to the
Powder one of those cross-bored Balls, and for his Wad to keep him to the
Powder, take a little Meal-Powder moistened with Linseed-Oil and made into Dow;
and upon that load Powder and Ball again; then put upon the Ball of this slow
Composition; then load Powder, and then Ball, and then of slow Composition
again, till your Trunk be full; Then take the Lance and make fast in the Trunk,
and set him to your shoulder in form of a Musket; let one fire at the Mouth of
the Trunk, and you may shoot these Balls round about where you please, and they
will burn. These Balls may be used in Iron-Shell Granades, or in Wooden-shell
Granades, if they be so big as to contain them; for when the Granade breaks
they will burn furiously.

To make Balls to show Light in the Night. Take Antimony 1 lb, Rosin 1 lb,
Brimstone 3 lb, Saltpeter 1 lb, Coal 1 lb; make many Balls thereof, bind them
up with Tow: If the Enemy lie near your Walls, Ditches, or Trenches, for your
own satisfaction, you may fire one or more of these Balls, and throw them over,
where you have any suspicion; These Balls will give you light to see, if any be
near your Fortification. And if you find the Enemy, you may fire your great
Guns of what sort you will for their annoyance, still throwing of these Balls
to give light to know the Enemies proceedings.

To make an Extraordinary Fire-Work, which being put into a Mine, or on a
Breach for Storm; shall suffocate or kill those who come in the Smoke of it.
Take of Horse Litter, that has been sufficiently spoiled by the Horses, dry it
in the Sun; likewise take some of the dirt that Hogs have lain upon, and dry it
also; dried Cow-Gall, old woollen Clouts, chop all these small; then take 1 part
of Wax, 1 part of Hogs-Lard, 3 parts of Powder meal'd, part of Ratsbane, part
Orpiment brayed to Meal, part Verdigreese; mix all these things together, and
fill a Bag therewith being well coated, put a Feusie into it, and give fire;
heave it among the Enemy, or shoot it to them, it will do excellent Service.

But if you fill a Barrel of this Composition, and set it in a Breach where the
Enemy is to storm; if the Wind carry the Smoke from you, the more it burns, the
more it will smoke; and I am sure no Man can be able to act in that Smoke, so
that you may have great advantage of your Enemy in contriving this Smoke; as
Figure 8 in the Copper piece shows.

To make a Fire-Work that shall stink fearfully. Take Brimstone 2 lb, Rosin 1
lb, Kitchin-stuff 1 lb, Assa Foetida 1 lb; melt these together, then take
shavings of Horn, or the parings of Horse-Hoofs that are dry, mix a good
quantity with the former melted stuff; then take Hemp, Tow, or Rags of Linen,
or Woollen, or Okam, as much as will drink up the Composition, and make thereof
a Fire-Ball; this being rolled in a little Powder meal'd, and Man's Dung; set
fire to it, and it will stink so, as who comes in the Smoke will rather fly,
than abide the Smoke, (if they be able); you may put this in Bags, and make
Balls or Hedg-Hogs thereof at your pleasure.

To make by Fire, in time of Storm, a Smoke among the Stormers. Take a large
strong Barrel and pitch it close, half full of Quicklime; then set in the
middle of the Barrel such a quantity of Powder in a close Cask, that, when fire
is given, may blow the great Barrel, and all that is in it to pieces; and be
sure you put in this little Barrel a Pipe or Feusie filled with Composition,
that may reach through the great Barrel; Then fill the great Barrel full with
the aforesaid Lime, and lay it at the Breach, where the Enemy is to storm; and
when you see your best advantage, having a Train laid of purpose, you may give
fire, and if fire come to the Powder, it will so spoil those about it, that
they, by filling their Eyes, Throats, and Noses, shall not be able to see, or
walk: by this means the Besieged may have advantage against the Enemy. If Lime
were used for cleansing the Decks, instead of Stones, I believe it would give
much satisfaction at some times; but Quicklime is dangerous, if Water come to
it unawares. This Lime is nothing but Limestone burned, that no Water has
been near; then it must be very well brayed, and made as fine (if possible) as
flower; the finer you make it, the greater harm it shall do to the Enemy; and
being dry and light, will continue the longer ere the Smoke dissolve.

Another Barrel in time of a Storm. But if you would play with your Enemy, you
may fill your great Barrel with fine pibble Stones, Musket Shot, and pieces of
old Iron, in form of our Powder-Chests at Sea; this being fired, while they are
thick about it, will make rare sport for the Defendant, and make them afraid of
worse to follow; and then if you can ply them with Hail-shot from your Guns,
and small shot, Hand Granades may give them cause to retire, if they can, with
the greater safety, as the Figure in the Copper piece 10, does show.

The Proportion of Compositions for Offensive Fireworks.
1. Take one part of good Powder, one part of Saltpeter, and half a part of
Brimstone, and a quantity of Saw-dust, or old rotten Wood, which will make a
great Smoke: These being well mixed with Linseed Oil, and wrought under your
hands, until you make the Composition to a Paste, that it may hold together to
make Balls. 2. Take gross Cannon-Powder 1 lb, Saltpeter 1 lb, Brimstone of a
lb; pound these very well in a Mortar, or a Powder-Mill, and mix them together;
moisten them with Linseed-Oil, and work them well with your hands to a strong
Dow or Paste, as is beforesaid. 3. If you take very good Powder, beat it very
small, searce it through a Sieve, and moisten it with Linseed-Oil, work it to a
Dow or Paste; it is good if you make use of it presently; for this Composition
is too strong to be kept, and therefore you may add to it half so much
Saltpeter, and a little Brimstone, then it may be kept. 4. If you take of the
best Pistol-Powder you can get, beat it very small, searce it through a narrow
Sieve, moisten it with Linseed-Oil, work it well as is before taught, and you
have the best and strongest Composition without doubt amongst all the others;
but it is likewise too strong to be kept long, and fearful, if dry, to be
fired. 5. If you take gross Gunpowder, as much as you please, and as much
Saltpeter, being moistened with Linseed-Oil, and wrought as the rest, with a
little Brimstone. 6. If you take two pound and a half of gross Gunpowder, and
4 lb of Saltpeter, and 1 lb of Brimstone, all well beat, and searced through a
Sieve; then being moistened with Linseed-Oil and wrought as before. 7. Take 1 lb
and a quarter of Powder, 1 lb of Saltpeter, three quarters of a lb of
Brimstone, half a lb of Sponk, the Heart of Willow, or old rotten Wood rubbed
small; all these being moistened with Linseed-Oil, work them well with your
hands as the other Compositions are. 8. To 4 lb of Powder, take half a lb of
Brimstone, and half as much Saltpeter as both the other; all these being well
pounded and searced through a Sieve, (as aforesaid) and being moistened with
Linseed-Oil, work as the rest. 9. If to 2 lb of Powder you take 1 lb of
Saltpeter, half a lb of Brimstone, and half a lb of Coal or rotten Wood, these
all being well moistened with Linseed-Oil, and wrought, this will make a good
ordinary Composition. 10. Take to 1 lb of gross Powder, 2 lb of Saltpeter, and
the quarter part of these two of Brimstone; these being all pounded and
searced, and moistened with Linseed-Oil, and wrought as formerly instructed. 11.
If you take 1 lb of good Powder, a quarter of a lb of Brimstone, and 6 ounces
of Saltpeter; these being all moistened with Linseed-Oil, and well wrought;
then you take one fourth part of Spunk, or Saw-dust well rubbed, mix this
Composition with it, and you have your desire. 12. Take 4 lb of Powder, 1 lb of
Saltpeter, a lb of Brimstone; these being moistened with Linseed-Oil, and well
wrought; Lastly, Take half a lb of Rosin, and as much Pitch small pounded, and
searced through a small Sieve, and then a little Saw-dust mixed therewith, with
rotten Wood rubbed small in your hands; this is for the flame or smoke: If you
would have it to spread abroad, put some brayed Glass therein. This Composition
may be used amongst your Recreations, but it is not to be long kept. 13. Take
of Musket Powder 12 ounces, Coal 4 ounces, Brimstone 3 ounces, moistened with a
little Linseed-Oil; this being well wrought may be likewise used.
These following Compositions should not be moistened at all, but made
altogether dry, and so used.
1. Take what quantity of Saltpeter you will, and the fourth part of that of
Brimstone, with a little Powder, and a little Coal; all these being fiuely
pounded, and searced through a small Sieve; mix therewith some rotten Wood to
increase the flame. 2. If you take 1 lb of Saltpeter, a lb of Brimstone, a
little Coal, and a little rotten Wood, the best you can have, to make a Smoke;
the first two pounded and searced, and the rest mixed therewith. 3. Take 2
ounces of Powder, 1 lb of Saltpeter, 2 ounces of Mercury; these 3 well pounded
and searced; then 2 ounces of rotten Wood rubbed between your hands, and 2
ounces of Pitch; these two beaten small not searced, mix them to the other
Ingredients. 4. You may take 1 lb of Saltpeter, pounded and searced, a little
Spunk, with a little Rosin; work the same as aforesaid, then mix them all
together. 5. If you take Salt-peeer and Brimstone, each alike, and a little
rotten Wood; this is also a good Composition in Balls or Bags, and will keep
long unspoiled, and has likewise no danger in the firing: It is esteemed to be
the best of all Compositions, and gives no strong fire, as the moistened Balls
do. 6. Take 3 lb of Saltpeter, 1 lb of Brimstone, mix them with Coal, or
rotten Wood which is light; if you use to these Balls Feusies it will not be
amiss, or some of the slow Composition moistened with Oil.
All these may be made in Cloth-Balls, coated as aforesaid, and made use of as
the Gunner pleases, for offending of an Enemy.

As there is nothing now unlawful, (though never so base) that can be acted
against an Enemy; so it is very common for Persons to take upon them to be
Spies and Intelligencers, who void of fear will enter with the Enemy in their
Army, Leaguer or Garrison, on purpose to betray them. Those Men who will give
themselves to be Spies, they must certainly be of an idle and base disposition,
void of the fear of God or Man, and subtle, secret, and Masters of all Villainy;
yet there are many simple Men, that for love of Money do put themselves out for
this use; these Men, although they be instructed in what they are to go about,
and how they may carry themselves in the same; nevertheless, either before or
after they have done their Business, by some instinct of fear, otherwise by the
Justice of Heaven, they are cast down, and by their own simplicity divulge
something, which brings them to be apprehended, and through torture confess the
Matter, and according to the Law of Arms receive Justice beyond other
Malefactors, in regard the Offense of Treachery, under the color of
Friendship, is a Treason, and Treason is as the sin of Witchcraft, which will
certainly be punished both by God and Man.

But if the Gunner should have occasion to use one of these for his secret
Business, he should choose one of those, who had been employed in such business
before, and of such a nature, that though he be threatened, and asked questions
seeming as though he might have been betrayed; nevertheless he must stand
unalterably to his own innocence, without fear to change his color, or
coldness of heart to tremble; but with a merry countenance, dexterity in
speech, knowing subtilty to answer what is demanded.

I do remember, at the Line at Leith, when his Majesty's Army lay there; one
day there came a pretty subtle young Man from Cromwell's Army, making his
pretense that he had left his Service of purpose to serve the King; he was
brought before General Alexander Leslie, who put the Matter slightly by, and
gave the young Man leave and freedom to take Service where he pleased;
whereupon he took occasion to go down the Line, see all our Army, and continued
two days: I sent for the young Man, and in company I did alledg he was a Spy;
he put it off with the finest jokes that could be; assuring me, There was not a
faithfuller Subject than he in the Army, swearing effectually to the point; but
that afternoon he went to the Enemy to receive his Reward; he was a sprightly
young Man, but of a solid and discreet behavior, that indeed I did admire his
audacity and impudency; this Fellow was fit for a Spy.

Another; when I was in the Castle of Edinburgh, a Soldier came running right
up from the Enemies Works, that if he had been a Runaway, they might have
killed him; but this fellow came running into our Moat, and when he was there,
feigned himself mad, and would be up; the Governor Dondass desired to have him
up; so I caused hale him up by a Rope about his middle, (I am sure the Wall
rubbed the Skin off his hand); yet when he came in, he was slabbering, as it is
said David did before the King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21. but hear what he would, and
see what he would, he answered nothing to that purpose; but after he had been
that day and night in the House with the Governor, he found the way back to the
Enemy without help: Such as these are worthy to be Spies.

Now though I will not encourage any Person to any Action so far below a good
ingenious Spirit; nevertheless I will show you what Fireballs they use, and
the subtilty they use in the perusing those Fireworks in laying of them: And
therefore for Examples-sake, I will here show the use of them, that thereby you
may the better guard your selves from the treachery of Spies.

They use these following Fireworks, when they intend to burn the Barns of
Corn, or Storehouses where the Corn of the place lies, or Powder-Magazines,
in regard it is impossible for them to come into them, but that it is useful
and necessary they have some Windows or Slits in the Walls, wherein they heave
their Fire-Work, which is made in this manner.

Take one part of Colophony, or Rosin, two parts of quick-Brimstone, one part
of Saltpeter, these three pounded very small and mixed together; put to them
so much Linseed-Oil as will make the Composition like a Conserve; then make
Balls of the same, and if you will, you may make it for Arrows to shoot out of
a Bow, or Cros-bow, or by observing what is said of Fire-Trunks, they may be
used in the same manner, or they may be heaved by a Man's hand.

There are other Fireworks that they use, as this strong Composition.

Take 3 parts of Powder, one part of Brimstone, which being pounded small to
Meal, mix them very well in a Bowl, put into them the bigness of a Walnut of
Greek Pitch, or Colophony, which must also be small stamped, and in the mixing
you shall let some drops of Turpentine fall, as also a spoonful of Linseed-Oil,
and then make it to Paste with Brandy-Wine, that if occasion be you may make
Balls of it.

But if you fill Bags with this Stuff, well packed together, and make therein a
Hole, and put a stopper into it; then dip these Bags in the following
Composition.

Take one part of Brimstone, let it melt, and put into it one quarter part of
Wax; when that is melted, put in one part of Pitch, and let that melt, and stir
them together, take it from the fire, and mix into it one quarter-part of
Powder.

Or Coat these Balls with this Composition; Take 3 parts of Brimstone, melt it,
and put into it 1 part of Wax, and 1 and a half of Grease, one quarter-part of
Turpentine, and as much Vernice; when all is melted, set the Kettle a distance
from the Fire, and put therein 3 parts of fine Powder; mix them, or stir them
well together: when this is to be used, you shall take the stopper out of the
Prime-hole, and in the place thereof, put in a piece of Match as long or short
as you please, according as you would have them to do execution. The making of
this Match you are taught in page 172. To such Actions as these, the Match must
be chosen that smokes not, for they use to lie till a certain time, and
smoking Match will discover them.

Example. I desire a Fire to begin within 3 hours time, therefore I take a long
piece of Match, which I intend to use; and I measure the same exactly; I light
that Match, and mark how much of it burns of an hour; I measure my Match again,
by which I know how much is burned in the quarters time, and 12 times so much
must be the measure of Match for the time appointed; it must be laid
Serpent-like about the Ball, that the parts touch not other, neither the Bag,
as the Figure in the Copper Piece, N 7.

There are some may make use of the Fire-Arrow, which may be made sundry ways;
some make them thus.

Take Powder part, 2 parts Brimstone, and 1 part Saltpeter, each well pounded
to Meal, and searced; mix these three Materials together, moisten them either
with Brandy or Linseed-Oil, and then melt Rosin, and pour it into Water, which
makes it hard; then pulverize it, and take one part of it and mix with the
former Ingredients; then pound them together very well till they are fit to
make Balls of; then may you take of this Composition, and lay about an
Arrow-Head, and wrap it about with Fustian or Canvas, and seiz it about the
shank of the Arrow-Head; this Arrow-Head so armed, you Coat it as other
Fireworks; then make a Priming-hole toward the point of the Arrow; stop it,
and when you make use of it, fire and shoot it where you desire: As the Figure
in the Copper Piece, N 5.

Here follows Compositions for Fireworks for Storm, diverse manner of ways.
1. Take Powder 4 lb, Saltpeter 3 lb, Brimstone 1 lb, Rosin 1 lb; these being
all well beat and mixed together, and moistened with Linseed-Oil. This is a good
Composition for Fireballs, and burn in the Water.
To make Fireballs to burn on the Water.
2. Take Powder 15 lb, Saltpeter 10 lb, Brimstone 4 lb, Rosin 2 lb; moistened
with Linseed-Oil. 3. Take Powder 10 lb, Saltpeter 8 lb, Brimstone 2 lb, Rosin
1 lb; moistened with Linseed-Oil. 4. Take Powder 4 lb, Saltpeter 6 lb,
Brimstone 2 lb, Rosin 1 lb; moistened with Linseed-Oil. 5. Take Saltpeter 8 lb,
Brimstone 8 lb, Coal 1 lb, Antimony 1 lb, Amber 1 lb, Camphire 2 lb, Turpentine
1 lb, Rosin 1 lb; all beat small and moistened with Linseed-Oil.
Another for Water-Balls.
6. Take Powder 9 lb, Saltpeter 7 lb, Brimstone 2 lb, dry Tanners Lee 1 lb;
moistened with Linseed-Oil. 7. Take Powder 3 lb, Saltpeter 2 lb, Brimstone 1
lb, Colophony 1 lb, Amber 1; moistened with Linseed-Oil. 8. Take Powder 6 lb,
Saltpeter 6 lb, Brimstone 4 lb, Colophony 3 lb; all small beaten, and moistened
in Linseed-Oil. 9. Take Powder 1 lb, Saltpeter 1 lb, Brimstone 2 lb; moistened
with Linseed-Oil. 10. Take Powder 2 lb, Saltpeter 1 lb, Brimstone 2 lb;
moistened with Linseed-Oil. 11. Take Powder 2 lb, Saltpeter 2 lb, Brimstone 2
lb; all beat small, and moistened with Linseed-Oil: These Balls may be used to
Fireworks and Fireballs. 12. Take Powder 2 lb, Saltpeter 5 lb, Rotten Wood,
or Tanners Lee 1 lb, good Brimstone 1 lb, Salt 1 lb; these all beat small and
mixed together, moistened with Linseed-Oil.
To make a long burning Composition for Fireballs.
13. Take Powder 10 lb, Saltpeter 4 lb, Brimstone 6 lb, Filings of Steel 4 lb,
Sawdust 4 lb; and after you have moistened the Composition, mix the filings of
Steel and Sawdust amongst it; then make Balls of this Composition, and tie them
as other Balls.
Another that is soften.
14. Take Saltpeter 5 lb, Brimstone 2 lb, Coals 1 lb, Sawdust 1 lb, mixed
amongst it. 15. Take Saltpeter 2 lb, Brimstone 1 lb, Powder 1 lb; these being
beat small and mixed together; take Turpentine, melt it, and moisten these
Ingredients in it.
Another Composition for Fire-Arrows.
16. Take Salt 8 lb, Brimstone 3 lb, Coals 1 lb, Sawdust 1 lb. 17. Take
Saltpeter 2 lb, Powder 2 lb, Brimstone 1 lb; you may use it to what you
please.


For Powder-Pots, or Stink-Pots. Take fine Powder, mixed with some Brimstone
small beat; put therein some Assa Foetida, some pieces of Verdigreese, and some
Camphire: This heaved in a Ships Round-House, Fore-Castle, or betwixt Decks,
will make a fearful stink and smoke.

To make Match that shall not Smoke. Take a glazed Earthen Pot, and put therein
clean red Sand till it be full; coil therein Match, so that no part thereof
touch other; then cover it well with the foresaid Sand, and coil Match thereon
as before, and then put Sand above it till the Pot be full; which done, you are
to put the Cover on the Pot, and lute it close, that no Smoke come forth of it;
put this Pot into a Sinder or Charcoal-Fire, and cover it all over; let the Pot
stand there till the Fire extinguish of it self; then take it out, shake the
Sand off, and your Match is ready.

I could infinitely have added, but being straightened, do conclude, That as yet
to the Art of Gunnery there is

NO END.
At the Six Stars in Wapping are Taught these Mathematical Sciences following.
Arithmetic in Whole Numbers, Fractions, Decimals, Logarithms; Rules of
Practice, or Brief Working, etc.

Algebra, or the Working by Cossick Practice and Surd Numbers.

An exact and perfect Method for keeping Merchants Books of Accounts, by way of
Debtor and Creditor, after the Italian manner.

Geometry, to take Altitudes, Latitudes, Longitudes, and Profunditudes; to
measure Stone, Timber, Board, Glass, Pavement, Tiling, Brick-work, Plaistering,
etc.

Trigonometry both Plain and Spherical, with its Applications, etc.

The three kinds of Navigation, with the Use of the Globes, and all other
Instruments necessary or fitting for that Art.

Astronomy, with the Projections of the Sphere on any Circle, etc.

Surveying of Land, Gauging, Dialling, Fortifications, the Gunner's Art, etc.

By Robert Webster.

