TWO SERMONS. THE FIRST, Showing the Mischiefs of ANARCHY. THE SECOND, The
Mischiefs of SEDITION. AND BOTH OF THEM, The Mischiefs and Treasons OF
CONVENTICLES.

PREACHED At the ASSIZES held for the County of SVFFOLK, Ann. 1682/3. AND
PVBLISHED At the request of THO. WALDEGRAVE, Esquire High Sheriff of the said
County.

By NATH. BISBIE, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIV.

To the Worshipful THOMAS WALDEGRAVE Of SMALBRIDGE, In the County of SVFFOLK,
Esquire High Sheriff of the said County, and one of His Majesty's Deputy
Lieutenants for the County of Essex, and the said County of Suffolk.
I Read in Plutarch of a (...) and a (...), of one that was a great lover of
Alexander, as he was a brave accomplished man; and of another that was a lover
of him as he was his true and lawful Sovereign: And without doubt to have a
Prince both Good and Virtuous, Heroic and Magnanimous; Obliging to Subjects,
Dreadful to Enemies; Victorious at home and abroad, insomuch that by his
Goodness and Virtue he deserves the Title of being Great, it must be the Pride
and Honor of us all: But if here we stick, and view not Majesty as well as
goodness; if we consider not his Power and his Place as well as his Merit and
Desert, we may be (...) lovers of Alexander, but no (...) lovers of the King;
and in truth no more qualified to be Subjects, than was Phoenix and Prothytes
when they would have enfranchised and Commonwealth'd the Thebans; than
Demetrius and Nicanor when they would have set up Amyntas against him; than
Cassander and Jolla when waiting upon his Cup, they would have administered
poison to him. But,

Sir, It is Your Character (Craterum cum Hephaestione) so to love your King, as
to be an admirer and asserter both of His Person and His Power, and with Heart
and Hand equally to engage for both; A Loyalty, justly challenging aemulation
as well as commendation, and which, in spite of all the Apostates of the age,
is every man's great and bounden duty, as well as known to be Your firm and open
practice; and how far the County has been influenced thereby, and the tide
stemmed even (when the raging floods of a new found loyalty had almost washed
the old away) the present change of affairs may easily discover. Its enough for
me that honest discourses might be vented under You, and not threatened with the
Pillory; that I could assert my Princes right, and not be told that my little
learning had made me mad, or that my greater Loyalty (which is but my just
tribute) had hurried me on to be a betrayer of my Religion: Wherefore if what
here I offer, happen to be too hot for the age, and therefore censured; be
pleased to blame Your self for calling me, first to the Pulpit, and now to the
Press; for resolved I was, from the time you pressed me into your Service, and
made me one of your retinue, to keep pace in daring Loyalty as near as I could
unto your self; and shall ever study to abound in that virtue, as knowing, the
more Loyal the more Christian, and far better qualified to be

Long-Melford, Suff. Sept. 9. 1683. Your truly devoted Servant and Chaplain,
NATH. BISBIE.

The Mischiefs of Anarchy: OR, A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT BVRY
St. EDMVNDS, For the County of SUFFOLK, March 13. 1682.

At the request of THO. WALDEGRAVE, Esquire High Sheriff of the said County, Mr
Justice WINDHAM Being Judge there.

By Nath. Bisbie, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, 1684.

JUDGES xvii. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did
that which was right in his own eyes.


That which brings on my Text, and gives it its rise, is this,
The man Micah had an house of Gods, and made an Ephod and Teraphim, and
consecrated one of his Sons, who became his Priest.

THE Jewish Rabbis long ago have observed, That there were three Crowns
indispensably requisite to make a Nation happy; (...) The Crown of the Judge,
the Crown of the Priest, and the Crown of the King: that of the Judge, for the
Peace and Happiness of the State; that of the Priest, for the Welfare and
Establishment of the Church; that of the King, for the Prosperity and
Flourishing both of Priest and Judge, of Church and State. And the Graecians
have luckily lighted upon an Etymology for the same, (...) quasi (...), as if
he were the People's only basis and support; pinning them up, and keeping them
together, that they drop not into a confusion like a tottering Wall, whose
foundation is sunk and gone. For if there be no Magistrate (no King) (...) one
man will eat up another alive, the rich will oppress the poor, and the poor
devour the rich, every one bidding battle and defiance to their Neighbor, till
they have turned our Cities into Dens, and our Villages into Forests for Wolves
and Tigers to inhabit; Creatures, less ravenous and much more orderly in
themselves, than unruly Man (that ravenous Creature Man) when let loose into
the World, and without a King to govern Him. This the Jews full well
experienced; for in those Days when there was no King in Israel (and it seems
there had been such days there, as well as here) every man did that which was
right in his own eyes.

We may call this the Crown-Text, a Text Royal; not only tacitly adjusting the
right of Kings, but openly showing the grand inconveniences and mischiefs that
arise from want of their Inspection and Government. We may talk of Arrows by
day, and of Pestilences by night (of wasting and consuming judgments)
judgments! that leave not one stone upon another, but turn Cities of men into
Golgothas and places of Sculls; Fruitful and Pleasant Vineyards into barren and
naked Wildernesses for the Ostrich and the Owl to dwell in; but of all the
fatal boding Calamities that ever happened to a Nation, or indeed can, there is
not (nor ever was) any like that of Anarchy: for if there be no King, every man
will play Rex, and be a Lord of Misrule, and do whatsoever his Lusts, his
Interests and Passions (which are always prone to be wild and extravagant)
shall say, will be good for him to do. So that we have the Commonwealth of
Israel,

1. Laboring under great and manifold Disorders; Every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. 2. We have the true Reason and Cause of those Disorders;
In those days there was no King in Israel. Look we,
1. Into the Disorders that then, and at that time infected and infested the
Land; Every man did that which was right in his own eyes: (...) what seemed
right and good to him, from (...) rectum esse vel videri: To him, and in his
own eyes good; but bad, stark naught in themselves and in the eyes of God; so
bad, that (as at that time there was no King in Israel, so) if there had been
no God in Heaven, they could not have been much worse. And let but men (I mean
the generality of men, the (...), the rude and ungovernable Multitude) once
arrive at that which they call Liberty and Freedom, to do what pleases them
and what seems good in their eyes; and the Land (within as few Days perhaps
as it was with Noah's flood) will be overrun with an Inundation and Deluge of
Impiety, Injustice, Villainy. We shall be nothing but Teagues and Toryes,
Banditti and enleagued Borderers; no Society or Company of Men, but an Herd of
Wolves and of Bears; a Band and Fraternity of Schismatical Furies, Atheistical
Debochees, Bloody and inhumane Cannibals; Legion will be the Name, the Prince
of the Air the General, and the House divided against it self our Rendezvouze
and Castle. And if our eyes be our own, we may take the truth of what is
offered from the Jews before us; they were all for that which was right in
their own eyes, and what was that? but to make themselves Idols and to
Consecrate their own Priests; to spoil Houses of their Goods, and Women of
their Chastity; to cut poor innocent men's Throats, and to depopulate as well as
deflower a Nation; Israel no longer, but a Bethaven and a Babel; a Stage of
wickedness, and a Theater of Confusion. The Landscape whereof cannot be
over-pleasing to the Spectator; and yet to do right unto my Text, it will be
requisite to make a further enquiry

1. Into the nature of the Disorders; 2. Into the number of the Offenders.
1. Into the Nature of the Disorders; all Monstrous, Horrid, Prodigious: There
were no such deeds done or seen from the day that the Children of Israel came
up out of the Land of Egypt, unto those Days (Chap. 19.30.) Put all the
provocations that had any where happened in the Wilderness together, add to
them the many prevarications that had been acted in the time of Joshua, and no
such Crimes (none so lewdly vile) had ever all that while been perpetrated, as
in those days when there was no King in Israel. Would you have a Catalogue of
them? Then hear O Heavens, and be astonished O Earth! Schism and Idolatry
(those cursed abominations) begin them; Sacrilege and Theft follow; then
marches Whoredom, Rape, Adultery; after these, Murder, Bloodshed, Civil War;
then Parents kill their Children, and Children their Parents; one part of the
Land rises up against the other; Tribe sets against Tribe, City against
City, all embroiled (and eagerly concerned) to undo, destroy and root out each
other. Such lewdness in Israel, and so generally, so warmly pursued (as you may
see in this, and the ensuing Chapters to the end of the Interregnum) that Hell
it self with all her black inhabitants in so short a time could not well be
supposed to have outdone them: Sine Rege, sine Lege, sine Fide; without King,
without Law, without Religion. Loath I am to make England the after-scene, or to
run a parallel of her disorders with those of Isreal's; for though in our late
Anarchy we were as bad as any (as the Jews themselves, even in those days when
there was no King; nay, as in those days when they Crucified and Murdered their
King) yet Cham was accursed for exposing his Parents nakedness; and I had
rather you should make the Jews your spectacle, and from them and their
miscarriages, learn to be more Loyal, and henceforth to love a King (your King)
the better. But to make up the measure of their iniquity, we must consider

2. The Number of the Offenders; Every man did that which was right in his own
eyes. Some (no question) there were who had not bowed their knee to Baal, that
even in those days did, and would do what was right in Gods eyes and not in
their own; and were as good as others could then be bad: But as for the
generality of the land, they were utterly corrupted; Ephraim, Dan, Manasseh;
Ephraim in the midst, Dan and the men of Gibeah in the two ends thereof; so
that this [ every man] is expressive of the greatest part; for not only the
more loose and profane, but the more precise and religious too were thus
wickedly given; not only thieving Dan and adulterous Gibeah, but devout Micah,
the young man his Priest, the old Saint his mother; every one of these did what
was right in their own eyes; which brings on my Text (three times in this, and
the ensuing Chapters set down, but in this first and) upon occasion of this
Micah's self-instituted Place and Worship; for The man Micah had an house of
Gods, and made an Ephod and Teraphim, and consecrated one of his Sons, who
became his Priest. Where we have the whole of his iniquity displayed; and if we
will but take in what was said of him in the preceding verse, that he had
before this a Graven and a Molten Image by him for the said House (which
according to Grotius was an Altar with other the Utensils thereunto belonging)
we have then all the prime and chief furniture of the Tabernacle, that was by
God himself appointed for the Service thereof: and yet it was an evil,

1. That he had an house of Gods; (...) (the word is altogether Plural, but
used mostly Singular) an house of God, a Bethel, a separate place of his own
setting up: Aediculam sive capellam, as some interpret it, a Chapel of ease, a
Religious place of his own, distinct and separate from that of public
assignation at Shiloh, whereunto all were bound to resort. Neither can this
interpretation be quarrelled, provided you will but consider that place in the
Twelfth Chapter of Deuteronomy, which is the first place, (if I be not
mistaken,) wherein this phrase of Every man's doing right in his own eyes, is
used, You shall not do after the things which we do here this day, every man
what is right in his own eyes, (that is, worship where, and in what place you
please, as hitherto has been done in the Wilderness) but when you go over
Jordan, and dwell in the Land which the Lord your God shall give you to
inherit, then there shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to
cause his name to dwell there, thither shall you go: So that Micah's House, and
Micah's Separation, was one of those Evils that then pestered the Land. Nay,
for the palliation of this Evil, and to make the Service (therein performed)
look more innocent, and more like the Service of the Tabernacle,

2. He made him an Ephod. Now an Ephod was a Sacerdotal Garment, proper for the
Tabernacle and the use of the High Priest, never to be used but in Divine
Worship and at the most solemn services of the Tabernacle. A Garment designed
by Micah, that the Priest of his House might every way be clad like one of Gods
Priests; and appear not only Grave and Sacred in his Habit, but as Jure divino,
like as the very best of those, who were of Gods nomination and appointment.
Most evident it is, that when the Danites went up to surprise Laish (Chap.
18.5, 14.) they consulted this Ephod; and that too, with as much Veneration and
Devotion, as if it had been the very Ephod of the Sanctuary, which had the Vrim
and the Thummim, and from whence (as from between the Cherubims) God was
pleased to give forth his Answers. He had also,

3. His Teraphim. What this Teraphim was, whether loquens imago, a blearing
bleating Image, craftily set at work by the Incantations and Charms of the
Knavish Priest its Familiar, to give out its Mysterious Oracles and
Unintelligible Answers to the over-credulous unwary Multitude; or whether an
Astrological Engine shaped and figured like unto the Cherubims of the
Tabernacle, to discover the Planetary Motions and Aspects of the Heavens
(whereby a Guess and Prediction was to be made of things that were to come) is
not much to our present concern: Certain it is, they were used (...) for the
foretelling of future Events, and in all probability designed to Cap and Supply
not only the want of the Vrim and the Thummim, but the very Cherubinical voice
it self, which was confined to, and went along with the established Priesthood.
The word it self is used in a good, as well as in a bad sense; particularly
Hos. 3.4. it being there threatened as a judgment upon Israel, that they should
abide many days without a King, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Ephod,
and without a Teraphim. But this also became an evil to him, for so it is
recorded among other his evil deeds, that he made him a Teraphim. The last
thing mentioned of him is,

4. That he consecrated for himself a Priest; his own Son first, (one neither
of Aarons Lineage nor of his Tribe) willing that any one should be his Priest,
rather than not have one of his own; afterward (for the more Solemnity of the
thing, and to seem more Conformable to the Divine institution) a Levite; one in
Holy Orders, but of the meanest rank, and no less irregular and unlawful than
the former, it being permitted to none to take the Priests Office upon them,
but who were Descendents of Aaron: though indeed not much matter who it be, nor
how dressed, nor if at all consecrated, provided he will but usurp the
Priesthood and give out his Edicts to the Brotherhood of the Gild, as his
inspired brain and the home-made Teraphim shall dictate to him. I know there
are some, that make this Micah's Religion to be perfect Idolatry, and downright
Apostasy from the Religion that Almighty God by his Servant Moses had
established among the Israelites; but if so, what made him so fond of the
Ephod, the Altar, the Cherub, the Levite, and every thing else that did but so
much as Ape the religion of the Tabernacle? Nay, what made him so joyful that
he had got one of Gods Levites to be his Priests? or to make so many
applications to the true God as he did? for my part I do (and thereunto I am
obliged by Vatablus, Grotius and many others, to) think that he was very Dei
cultor, a worshipper of the True God, though (Puritan like) in a separate way;
insomuch, that howbeit he might have a tincture of Idolatry in his worship, yet
it was a fault in him, and a very great one too, that he had set up an house of
his own; and therein an Ephod, an Altar, a Teraphim, a Priest in contradiction
to the Tabernacle, the Ephod, the Altar, the Cherubims, and the established
Priests of God. In short, a Will Worship, (...), a self-pleasing devotion; a
separate house, a separate Priest, a separate Religion (howbeit of the same
God) from the regular national establishment. A thing very pleasing to man! and
so pleasing, that if left unto himself, because there is no King to restrain
him, every man will think himself as good as Micah, and set up an house and a
Priest of his own, and there do whatsoever shall seem right in his own eyes.
Thus it fared of old with Israel, and thus of late with England; for no sooner
began we to grow mad, and to bethink our selves of no King, but immediately (as
if Hell it self had broke loose) all the worm-eaten exploded heresies, from the
very days of Christ, began to make head again; and there came upon the stage a
revived rabble of Gnostics, Arrians, Macedonians, Novatians, Enthusiasts, and
whatever else seemed right to any; every one calling (as it seemed good to
them) for their own Priest, and their own house; till not a Mountain, not a
Grove, not a City, scarce a street but had an house, a God, a Priest of their
own. And if we do but consider how some men of late (good friends, no doubt, to
Micah) to give ease to tender Consciences would have eased us of our religion;
and out of kindness to a little uncouth Protestantism to come into the Church,
would have thrust out the Reformation (nay Christianity it self) out of the
Church, we may say, it was well for us then, that we also had a King. Doubtless
a most sad complaint and account of things! But it leads me from the mischiefs
and disorders that happened in those days,

2. To the Cause thereof; there was no King, no (...)

1. None of Regal Sovereign authority to superintend and command the rest.

2. None of inferior Jurisdiction and government, that had resolution and
courage (suitable to the power they were invested with) either to see the Laws
executed, or the Offenders thereof punished: the want of which (as well as of
the other) will soon fill a land with all manner of disorders, and run it into
Ataxy and confusion. Their misery was

1. That they had no King; no (...) none of Superior Sovereign authority to
superintend, over-aw and set the rest at work. Now this (...) denotes a
government 1. In its nature Monarchical; 2. In its authority Sovereign; 3. In
its continuance Hereditary.
All which conveniences and advantages were wanting at that time in the
government of Israel (as shall more at large be made to appear out of the
history of those days;) from the want of which, those evils (so much complained
on) came upon them. And if I make these three particulars out, I shall settle
the thing, what their (...) was to be; and what indeed they wanted, when they
were so unhappy as to have no (...) no King.

1. It supposes a government truly Monarchical. It has been concluded by
many, That these words [of having no King] bear a particular regard to the
first forty years that the Children of Israel had been in possession of the
Promised land from the death of Joshua; the one part whereof, was under the
government (as some say) of the surviving Elders, which came into the land with
Joshua; as others say, under the Sanedrim or Senate of Elders as they were at
first established by Moses, and afterward renewed by the people; The other
part under Othniel their Judge, to whom though usually the whole forty years be
ascribed, yet it is certain that many of them were passed and gone before ever
he took the office of a Judge upon him ( chapter 3.8.); and it is no less certain,
that the abuse done to the Levites Concubine (which is one of the last recited
Villainies committed in those days) was acted in the time of Phineas* the High
Priest ( chapter 20.28.), who came into that office upon the death of Eleazar about
the death of Joshua, and continued in it (as Chronologers compute) all the
years ascribed to Othniel, dying with or about the same time as Othniel did.
However in those days there was no King; Elders there were (as you have heard)
of the Tribes, and every Elder (as some conceive) governing his own Tribe;
There were moreover the Elders of the Sanedrim superintending and governing the
whole Nation of the Israelites; Nay, as for part of those days, there was a
Judge among them; and yet great oppression, frequent disorders, and all
occasioned by the want of a King. Which shows, That neither Aristocracy nor
Democracy, the Rule of the Nobles, nor the Rule of the People (be it by
themselves or their Representatives) was able of it self, or indeed capable to
secure them from confusion, impiety, oppression. And therefore you shall find
them endeavoring, and upon all occasions laboring after a King; calling first
to Gideon, Do thou King us ( chapter 8.22.); afterward to Samuel, to make them a
King (1 Samuel 8.5.) And its observable, that the nearer they approached to this
kind of government, the better they were; but if at any time the Judge died
(who was instead of a King,) or the government came to be devolved upon their
Sanedrim, all things presently went to confusion, and they reinforced to choose
them a new Judge. And thus it is recorded of them in general ( chapter 2.18, 19.)
That when the Lord raised them up, Judges, the Lord was with the Judge, and
delivered them out of the hand of their enemies: but if the Judge died, then it
came to pass, that they returned and corrupted themselves more than their
fathers had done. And in particular, thus it was when Othniel died ( chapter
3.12.), thus when Ehud died ( chapter 4.1.), thus when Deborah died ( chapter 6.1.)
thus when Gideon died ( chapter 8.33.), and thus, and almost always thus to the end
of the whole government of the Judges: which argues, that the nearer the
advance is made to Kingship, the nearer people get to Order and good
Government; and the further any stand off, still the worse, and every day
worse; for when there was not so much as a Judge among them, they fell not only
into sin but into slavery. So it happened in the Interregnum between Joshua and
Othniel, they were oppressed by Cushan eight years ( chapter 3.8.), by Eglon upon
the death of Othniel eighteen years ( chapter 3.14.), by Jabin upon the death of
Ehud twenty years ( chapter 4.2.), by Midian upon the death of Deborah seven years
( chapter 6.1.), by Ammon upon the death of Jair eighteen years ( chapter 10.8.), by
the Philistines upon the death of Abdon forty years ( chapter 13.1.), In all an
hundred and eleven years; slavery enough (if people would be taught any thing)
to convince them of the necessity of a King and Kingly government, as likewise
of the defects, imperfections, calamities of all other rule, though it be that
of a Senate or a Sanedrim.

2. A King supposes a power Sovereign; One of a Supreme and indefeisable
authority; Superior to all, to the very Senate and Sanedrim: To whom the
appeal must lie, and from whom the final and decretory Sentence must come;
accountable to none but to God, who is the King of Kings, and the last Judge of
men, though in Conscience obliged to do no evil himself, nor to suffer others
to do it; as knowing that he must one day account to the God who first made him
a man, and then gave him his authority. A person (I say) of superior and
uncontrollable authority, for otherwise he is not Supreme, and no better than
one of the Judges of the land; for the Judge was the Leader, the Prime and
Principal of the rest, had the chief honor and conduct, but always subservient
to, and controllable by the Sanedrim; which bred mighty delays, huge
inconveniences, many and lasting confusions: whereupon being wearied and tired
out by the defects of that kind of government, they say to Samuel, Give us a
King; and to Gideon, Be thou a King (a Sovereign) to us, who by an inherent
supercommanding authority may in times of necessity and danger not only silence
the Faction of Tribes, but the heat of Senators; for they also may be faulty,
as in the case of Korah, where no less than two hundred and fifty Princes of
the Assembly rose up against Moses (Number. 16.2.). Nay, probably this was the
reason why they said to Samuel, Give us a King like other Nations (1 Samuel
8.5.); not as if they were desirous to be tyrannized over, or made slaves as
other nations too too often were; that is a thing they were resolved to venture
rather than endure the known mischiefs and barbarisms, that the jealousies,
delays, factions, of the Demagogues and men of renown in the Sanedrim used to
expose them unto. And what if the Prince should be personally wanton, by nature
cruel, upon experience covetous, designing, seeking his own and his family
concerns, and thereupon pervert justice, take illegal occasions to oppress and
revenge? Nay, what if Naboth's Vineyard be to be had, or the Vessels of the
Temple to be rifled, or religion it self to be altered? If these doings are so
criminal, so outrageous, so formidable, when confined to one, what will they be
when they are the espoused Sentiments of many? nay, made their interests and
acted in all the corners and quarters of the land? Put the case as bad as you
can; and what if this be the manner of the King (as Samuel tells the people, 1 Samuel 8.11.) That he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots and his horsemen; and set them to ear his corn, and to make his
instruments of war? and what if he take your fields, your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, and give them to his officers and Servants? This is the worst that
the very worst of them will do: But put the case that this be done; yet if
there be a Decemviri as at Rome; if thirty Tyrants, as at Athens; if two
hundred and fifty, as in the Assembly of the Israelites: These may all (and
every one of them) be as bad, as lascivious, as covetous, as oppressive, as
designing as that One; and so the Tyranny, oppression, impiety be much greater
and more spreading, but not so easily cured, nor so well endured. I am apt to
think, that if our late Calamities (which lasted not full twenty years) were
well reflected upon, there would be found more Tyranny to have been exercised,
more outrages to have been committed, more injustice to have been done by the
Assemblers and Senators of those days, than ever there can be found among all
our Kings since we have had a Monarchy, or (what is altogether the same) since
we have been a Nation.

3. A King supposes one Hereditary; a King with an Heir and known Successor at
hand to step into his place as soon as ever he himself is gone. Hence the
Israelites (full sensible of the want of such a King) call unto Gideon, rule
thou over us, thou and thy son, and thy sons son, (chapter 8.22.) profering thereby
an entail and inheritance; and intimating, that they should never be well, nor
out of danger, till they had a King; not a Judge (for so Gideon was, and had
done as great and as valiant things as ever any Judge had done,) but a King;
and a King, with Offspring and Progeny to succeed and to rule without any
interregnums or new choice, which had too too often proved factious and
tedious, and mostly fatal. Thus the looseness of Laish was ascribed to this
inconvenience, there was no Magistrate, (...) no heir of restraint, no certain
and apparent Successor to the Throne (chapter 18.17.) And indeed interregnums are
always pregnant of mischief and of misery; never any of them happened in Israel
(and yet happen they did, and ever will, where there is not a certain Heir to
succeed) but they brought along with them all manner of Confusion and
Oppression: which very thing made the Israelites so eager to have a King with
Posterity and Succession attending; never happening till King David's time, and
from the reign of Solomon (his Son and Successor) never put by as to Judah from
the Primogeniture and right Heir. This is a most certain truth, that none
illegitimately born could inherit, Thou shall not inherit in our fathers house,
(say the Gibeonites concerning Jephtha, chapter 11.2.) for thou art the son of a
strange woman: but if legitimate and first born of the family, there was no
proscription (no Bill of Exclusion) to be made; nothing being ever accounted
more horrid and vile among the Israelites than to snarl, disturb, interrupt or
displace the Inheritance. Nay, though there had been more wives in the case
(the wrong loved, and the right hated) yet the firstborn of the hated was to
have the Inheritance; the right of the firstborn is his, (Deuteronomy. 21.17.) So
that to set limits to the Monarch, or to minorate and depress him in his
Prerogative, Supremacy, Succession, is to rob Israel of her King; and in truth
to put no difference between a King and an Elder of the Sanedrim, or at the
best, between a King and an ordinary Judge, put on and off according to the
humor and insolence of every designing, prevailing Faction. Certainly it is not
a Purple Robe, nor a Reed put into the hand, that will make Israel a King; the
Jews so served our Savior, and withal bowed the Knee unto him, saying, Hail
King of the Jews: but (says the Text) they first stripped him, and then they
mocked him: and in sooth if Kings come once to be stripped of their own Robes (I
mean their Jura regni, their Preheminences, Regalities, Dignities, whereby they
come to be Kings and to excel others) I cannot see but they are worthily made
the People's scorn; and though Princely clad, yet no better than a
Supposititious Perkin, or a bare King of Clouts. Nay, I cannot see, but that if
King Adonibezek (notwithstanding his eight Kings prostrated and captivated by
him) be himself to be bound and shackled at the will, and by the Votes of his
Subjects, He must be adjudged to be himself enslaved, and as far (in reality)
from being a King in Israel's sense, as those very Captivated Kings were, who
lay gathering their Meat under his Table with their Thumbs and their Toes cut
off. But to end this; The Rabbis have a saying, that there were three things
enjoined the Israelites (whilst they were in the Wilderness) to be performed by
them when they entered into Canaan; (...) to root out the memory of Amalek, to
choose them a King, and to build them an House for a Sanctuary; the first
whereof (if they had proceeded regularly, as Scickard upon Maimonides observes)
was to choose them a King. Its true they displeased Samuel in doing it (1 Samuel
8.6.); nay, God tells them, that by so doing they had rejected him also, (verse.
7.); from which and other like places the Rota-brained Republican takes an
occasion to Blaspheme God and the King, and to decry their Government as if it
were not only Tyrannical but Antitheocratical; and yet God promised Abraham
(soon after that he promised him the Land) that Kings should come out of his
Loins (Genesis 17.6.); and by prediction from Jacob, that the Scepter should not
depart from Judah till Shiloh came, Genesis 49.10. and as they were going to the
Land, he informed them what manner of King they were to choose, when they came
thither ( Deuteronomy. 17.15.); Yea, and when choice was made of Saul, God owned him,
and promised blessings along with him, provided they would but fear God and
walk in his ways (1 Samuel 12.14.); nay, the Scripture brands all the Male
contents and those who refused to congratulate his Choice, for Sons of Belial
(1 Samuel 10.27.). So that if the Israelites offended in asking a King, it was in
forma non jure petendi, in the manner of asking, and not in the thing it self:
either because they did it in a Seditious Tumultuating manner, affecting
Innovation in the Government as some do conceive; or in an affrontive way to
Samuel their present Judge, as others imagine; or to a wrong and evil design,
hoping thereby to make an alteration in the established Religion of the Land,
as a third sort think. All which were not only evil in themselves, but very
culpable, and justly provoked God to say, that He would give them a King in his
Anger: however the desiring or having a King was not evil in it self; for God
gave them one upon their request, and when that Person was dead, he appointed
them another (even David, a man after his own heart;) and under that kind of
Government he continued them so long as he continued them in Canaan. Which
intimates, that the having a King in Israel ((...) one of a Sovereign power,
with a (...) with an Heir of restraint at his back) was one of the blessings of
the Land of Canaan; and the most proper Government that a Nation can wish for
or have, which endeavors after a peaceable and happy settlement. Judges will
not do alone; neither Joshua nor the High Priest must presume too far; nay, the
Sanedrim it self must be modest and humble; these and every one of these in
their proper Spheres may help on the blessing, but to make a Nation perfectly
happy ( Canaan like) God must give them a King. For though he had often changed
their Government before, from Captains to Judges, from Judges to Priests, yet
having once given them a King, he there rests; as having brought all to
perfection, and never changed any more. Which argues, that Kings are not only
Divine, but the best if not the only means to maintain the peace, and to
propagate the welfare of a Nation. And so we pass from the first cause of those
mischiefs that befell the Israelites, they had no (...) no King; unto the
Second, and that was,

2. Because the Magistrates and Judges (who then had the Rule) neglected their
office, and neither suppressed sin, nor punished the offender, which was all
one as if they had had no King in Israel. It is said of the inhabitants of
Laish (afterward Dan) that they lived careless, and after the manner of the
Zidonians; in Lust and Luxury, in Vice and Idleness, in Idolatry and
Profaneness; and the reason given for it is ( Chap. 18.7.) that there was no
Magistrate in the Land to put them to shame in any thing: Magistrates there
were, but none that would enforce the Laws, or prosecute the offenders; none
that would restrain them in their Vices, or be (as the Apostle phraseth it) a
terror to evil doers. The very case of the Israelites before us, for
Magistrates they had, as the Jewish Writers themselves confess; but withal so
backward and tardy in acting like Magistrates, as if they had been afraid to be
Gods Deputies; so shy of executing the Laws, as if (like Draco's) they had been
wrote in blood; and again so fearful of punishing, as if the whipping a Micah
had been the Martyring a Saint; whereas Magistrates ought not to prevaricate in
their office. St. Paul expressly tells them, they must not bear the Sword in
vain; not hold it in their hands as if it were a bare Scepter of ornament for
themselves, but use it as a Sword to be a revenger, and to execute wrath upon
them that do evil. Neither ought the wholesome precept of Charity and forgiveness
(which our blessed Savior so often, and so earnestly inculcates) enervate,
much less evacuate this power; for it does not hinder Parents from chastising
their offending Children, nor Masters from correcting their rebellious
Servants; this were to licentiate Disobedience, and to give a toleration to
Disorder. Suffer but this, and the Parent shall not rule his Child, nor the
Master his Servant, no more than the Prince his Subject; nay, suffer but this,
and the Child will soon make his Parent pass through the fire for him to
Moloch; the Servant will soon bore the ears of his Master; and the Subject get
into the Throne of his Sovereign, and be a thousand times more insolent than
He. Let but this immunity be proclaimed as a voice from Heaven, and the world
will soon be in flames about our ears. The children of God will fall in Love
with the daughters of Men, and the daughters of Men as soon produce a race of
strong and mighty Giants; (a Crew of stubborn, wilful, disobedient men) so
mighty, that neither Reason shall persuade, Kindness oblige, nor Government
hold; Men of renown and famous in their Generations (such as Korah, Dathan, and
their accomplices were said to be); Giants Non tam corporum mole, quam
latrociniis and grassandi libidine, Mighty not so much in bulk as in Will, not
in body as in Humor; Mighty by their Stubbornness and Faction, by their
Wickedness and Villainy, to overthrow and confound a Nation. Wherefore let me
persuade you (You who are the present Guard of our Country; the eyes to find
out, and the hands to punish Offenders) that as you have a King Enthroned, so
you would use your endeavors (as in Duty and Conscience you are bound) to keep
and preserve him on his Throne. Let not the mighty Giants nor their
Weavers-beams scare you; think not that Dan and Benjamin (the Ravishers of
Women, and the Riflers of Houses) are our only Malefactors; but let Ephraim and
his Idols, Micah and his House of Gods be alike enquired into, and punished;
Practices suiting only Anarchy, and the worst of Days when there is no King!
and therefore since we have a King, let these practices (I pray you) have an
end, that it may not be said of us that we live as we did, or indeed as if
there were, or rather as if we would have it so, that there should be no King
in Israel. There will be a Micah if there be no King; and therefore if there be
a King, there ought to be no Micah, nor no House of his in Israel. And here
(that I may not seem Splenetick, nor too much exasperated against a sort of Men
under the name of Malefactors, when Religion is in the case; but rather do the
duty of a good Levite as becomes the Establishment) be pleased to consider with
me,

1. That Micah's House and Religion is an Evil in the Land;

2. That it is an Evil to be enquired into by the King and the Judges of the
Land;

3. That when no care is taken thereof, it is usually the Mother Evil of the
Land. But I know before I proceed, that I shall be accounted (for what I have
to say) no friend to the Religion now on foot called Protestantism; however I
am sure, that I am serving the Church of England, nay, disserving the Church of
Rome, as much as if I were unreeving the Conclave, or pulling the Trentine
Fathers out by the ears. For would we be persuaded to keep to the Fold, and the
Shepherd appointed us (be he on the Mountain or in the Planes) to the Shepherd
whom God, his Church, and the lawful Presidents thereof have set over us; the
Wolves may howl for want of prey, the greedy Itinerant return a perfect
Mendicant, the Seminaries abroad be forced to keep the brood they have hatched,
and the Roman Eagle never more take pleasure to quarry upon our English shore:
for it was Micah's House, and the High Places afterward (like places of
Separation) that first brought Idolatry into Israel; and I am as confident that
if it ever be brought into our English Churches again, these are the Houses
that must dress up the Idol, these the Seminaries that breed the Shavelin who
will say Mass before it. But the Enditement is framed and drawn, come I
therefore briefly to prove the particulars of it; and,

1. That Micah's House and Separation (though never so near a kin to the
Religion of the Sanctuary) is one of the Evils of the Land. Thus it was in our
Micah's days: and thus no less in the days of Gideon; for ( Chap. 8.27.) He
made him an Ephod, and put it in his City (even in Ophra) and all Israel went
thither a Whoreing after it. Now the Ephod (as you have heard) was one of the
Garments that God had appointed for his own Priests; and his making an Ephod
denotes, that he was resolved to turn back upon the Tabernacle, and to have a
Priest and an House of his own; which was no sooner effected, but (as if they
were as naturally given to Faction, as to Lust) all the lascivious Saints and
the wanton Satyrs, both He Is and She Is of the City and the Country round, went
a Whoreing to it; But this (as it there follows) became a snare (an evil) to
Gideon and to his house, and was (as some conceive) the provoking cause why God
suffered the Sons of the said Gideon to be slain in the self same City, where
this Ephod had its entertainment. The like we read of Judah, that they did evil
in the sight of the Lord; nay, they provoked him above all that their Fathers
had done, for they built them High Places and Groves (1 Kings 14.22.); not
contented with the places erected for them (such at that time were the Temple,
the Synagogues, the Sanctuaries of the Land) they would have Places of their
own, High Places and Groves; where the fault (as I conceive) was not, because a
Place of Worship was erected, for that Land was accounted unclean which had no
Sacred place in it ( Josh. 22.19.); nor because they were built on High, for
the Temple was so, if not the Synagogues too ( Prove. 8.2.); nor because near
unto or within a Grove, for the Sanctuaries were so ( Josh. 24.26.); nor
altogether because polluted with Idolatry, for (as Menochius observes) many of
them (those especially in the Land of Judah) had little else in them but the
Service of the Temple. So that the Evil (so much cried out upon) must be
centred in this, and in this mainly, that they (not God, or their Governors for
them, but they) for themselves built to themselves places of Worship, wherein
contrary to the Sanctions and decrees of their guides and Governors they would
serve the Lord. The next thing to be proved upon them is,

2. That this Micah's House and Worship is an Evil to be enquired into by the
King, and the Judges of the Land; such an Evil as is fit only for those days
when there was no King; and therefore if there be a King in the Land, there
ought to be no such Evil there. Thus it is added amongst many other the good
deeds of Jehosophat, and as no small commendation to his Reign, that he took
away the High Places and Groves out of Judah (2 Chronicles. 17.6.); but charged to
the account of Asa his Predecessor (1 Kings 15.14.) that though his heart was
perfect with the Lord, and though otherwise he did that which was right in the
eyes of the Lord, yet he suffered the High Places, (those Assemblies and
Meeting-places of Faction, Sedition, Contradiction) to remain in the Land: He
otherwise did that which was right; intimating that he had done much better and
more like a King, if he had put down those supernumerary and by-places of
worship, and reduced the Service of God unto the Temple, which was the place of
Gods own choosing. And doubtless if it be an unexceptionable prerogative of the
Kings of England to have the same power from God as the godly Princes in
Scripture had (and as our Church asserts;) it will inevitably follow, that they
must have the same power to restrain and suppress the irregular conventions of
the Land, as the Kings of Judah had, these being (some of them) the very best
of Kings that the Scripture makes mention of; and upon that account so far to
be esteemed from doing evil thereby, or being themselves irreligious for doing
it, or indeed from having it done by others their Judges and Officers, as that
God does highly own and applaud the action, and will one day Crown them (both
principal and instrument) with a reward for it. The last thing proveable upon
them is

3. That when no care is taken of this House of Micah, or of the Ephod and the
Teraphim therein, it is usually the mother Evil of the Land; the Shore, the
Chanel into all which the nasty, loathsome draughts of the Land empty
themselves. Is there any in distress, in debt, discontented? hither (as they
did to David, hoping to be armed against their Sovereign) they all fly: Men
ever ready at their Quiver and their Bow, resolved to be gratified with the
prey they aim at, or otherwise to prey upon their Prince, at least to make
Scepters and Crowns stoop unto their ambition and humor. What is the
transgression of Israel (says the Prophet, Mic. 1.5.)? Is it not Samaria, the
Schismatical Temple there? And what are the high places of Judah, are they not
Jerusalem, the Schismatical houses there? Certainly these were the forges
wherein all the Weapons of our late War were formed; these the Cabals wherein
the Leagues, the Covenants, the Associations were framed; these the Chapels
that Consecrate all Misprisions, Treasons, Conspiracies into holiness to the
Lord: the erecting and keeping up of which, was thought a fitting project for
rebellious Jeroboam (that disgraced, disgusted Officer) to keep up the Faction
he had raised, Jeroboam! that son of Nebat, who taught Israel to sin: For (says
he, 1 Kings 12.27.) if this people go up to do Sacrifice in the house of the
Lord, then shall the heart of this people turn again to Rehoboam their Lawful
King; whereupon he made him two Calves (two Teraphims) and Consecrated Priests
thereunto, and said, it is too much for you to go up unto Jerusalem, behold
your gods (or your house of gods) O Israel. Places eminent at home as well as
abroad for Faction and Sedition, and upon known record for being enemies to
Kings and Princes. You may talk of foreign Seminaries and Jesuitical Societies,
and deservedly esteem them the Pests and the bane of the Nation, (Sodalities
erected on purpose to confront Kings, disturb peace, and confound Government;)
but believe me, a Conventicle at home, or in the City of Ophra is as bad; nay
considering the Principles they manage (every way as pernicious to Government
and to the welfare of the land, as any Jesuits College in the world; Doway or
St. Omers have not been more fatal to us than Micah's house or Gideon's City; I
speak not this to excuse the Jesuit or his Faction, but to alarm and caution
all good Christians and Subjects against such places and persons, and their (as
they would have us formidably believe) invincible Armado; for be assured, that
as long as these are kept up and suffered to be frequented, it will be a thing
impossible for us (who live on the top of the Mountain where Micah has his
house, or within five miles of the City or Corporation where Gideon has his
Ephod, though we study the peace of the Tabernacle and of the Temple never so
much) to keep up either Loyalty in our neighborhood, or Conformity in
our-Churches. I am not ignorant that there are other enormities whereunto my
Text (as afterward reiterated) bears a relation, and whereupon I might
seasonably animadvert; for ( chapter 18.) there is Burglary, Felony, Sacrilege; (
chapter 19.) there are Riots, Rapes, Adultery, Murder; ( chapter 20.) there is Civil
war, a great deal of Bloodshed, Firing of Cities, insufferable depopulation of
all that comes to hand; ( chapter 21.) there is Spiriting of Women, enforced and
unlawful marriages, (enough for the charge of a Judge, or the Inquest of a
Jury;) and all this for want of a Judge to punish and restrain them: But these
are matters of daily infliction, it is Micah and his house that is most apt to
escape and be pitied. And hence you may observe how forward the Israelites were
to blame, yea, to revenge the outrage committed on the Levite's Concubine, The
like (say they) was never seen in Israel; nay, they were for the excision of a
whole Tribe to expiate it; But as for this Micah and his house, no man said a
word against it, but passed it over as if it had not been an evil in Israel;
though as injurious to God, and as prejudicial to Society as any other evil of
the land can be, and indeed is the motive why I would have you so earnestly to
fix your eye upon it: Nay, I am prone to think, that though you should rout the
whole Confederacy besides, yet if you let this escape (with a Touch me not, for
I am holier than thou) there will never be want of work for the Judges, nor the
worst of their Executioners, as long as the world endures. I confess their is
another sort of men among us, not altogether of Micah's house, but of Micah's
principles and acquaintance, perfidious, false-hearted Conformists; Men that
can gorge themselves upon the fat of the Altar, and yet for a fuller meal let
out their barns to a Conventicle, and their Vicarages to the Preachers of them;
that can with the Apostate Apostle take the Sop (the maintenance of the Church)
from the hands of Christ, and yet at the same time have it in their hearts to
betray him; known by their Lisping to be Ephramites; Men that have the lingua
and holy dialect of Israel, but withal an accent, a Sibboleth and twang of
their own; who BLOOD-like take to themselves the Priests habit, but upon no
other design (nor for no other end) than to steal away the Crown: Innocent
Churchmen in show, but downright Pensioners to the Faction; dealing through
their Traitorous practices and deceitful behavior with the poor Church their
Mother, as the Priest did ( chapter 19.) by his abused Concubine, hew her to pieces
(limb from limb, bone from bone) and then send them to all the Tribes (the
several parties and factions of the land) to make Protestants of them. This is
also an evil in the Land, and if not looked after and restrained (how right
soever it be in some men's eyes) they will soon fill Micah's house with their
neighborhood, and in a little while more turn Priests themselves unto him. I
might be as long winded in the cause as one of Micah's Priests, but my time and
your business forbids. However

You are called hither to see what Evil is done in the Land, be persuaded
therefore (I pray you) neither to be Ignoramus's nor Gallio's in the case; a
like resolved not to see, or not to care for these things. Not as if I would
have you to deal by those Ephramites of the Mountain, as Herod did by the
Baptist of the Wilderness, cut off their heads to oblige every idle dancing
daughter; much less to think that no atonement (nor settlement) is to be made
without the fore-skins of all the Philistines of the Land: This looks too much
like a Presbyterian root and branch, or (what is much the same) an Independent
Wallinfordian Massacre; A debate! so horrid and barbarous, that it made the
very Atheist (who records the story) to quake and tremble. A little severity,
and rigor (Juridically applied) is enough, and most becoming the gentleness,
the Candor, the Ingenuity of the Church of England; whose Mercies are not
Cruel, whose Hands are not Bloody, whose neither Principles nor Temper ever
lead further than to Conquest or to Peace; always hating to hew Agag to pieces,
or to destroy the Amalekites (as the Israelites were forced to do) till not one
of them be left alive; never aiming at more than to Humble or to make
Tributary; to provide that her Adversaries be modest or tractable, Obedient or
submissive, which indeed is the End and design both of Government and Law: and
without doubt to blindfold the one, or to cramp the other (when open and
notorious malefactors are concerned) instead of righting you will injure us; and
instead of keeping us in Peace, Love and Unity (as the Law and the Makers
thereof design) you will expose us to all the malice and peevishness of a perverse
and froward generation. To day made Execrable, and to morrow a Victime; now
Condemned, and anon Executed; every way exposed to insolence and humor, to
parties and factions, to violence and oppression, and (in short) to whatsoever
seems right to them that are resolved to do wrong. I have but one word more,
and that is to provoke you to a constancy in this your care; That you may not
do, as some are observed and said to do by the Venomous creatures of the Land
where they live; set a day to destroy them, and rid their land of them; which
they observe with the greatest strictness and severity imaginable, searching
all their holes, destroying all their nests and harbors, and sparing neither
young nor old; but if once that day be over, they suffer them ever after freely
to increase and breed; nay, to abide under their very thresholds, and to crawl
into their chambers, never after minding nor concerning themselves with them,
till the year be out, and the day again return upon them. Sirs! it is not the
time of an Assize, a day when you are instigated by a Sermon, or a charge that
will destroy this sort of Vermin, or rid our land of their breed; it must be
your daily Vigilance and care, otherwise before the next return, the Nation will
be as full, and as much overrun with them as ever it was; and the brood as
numerous, as viperous, and as difficult to Master as now it is.

And thus have I shown you, That when there is no King in Israel, nor no
Subordinate Magistrate there; or they neither willing nor ready to punish the
Offenders in Israel, every one will do everything, and all will come to
confusion. Wherefore from those days wherein such evil is done; from the Evil
that is done in those days; and from the Curse and Plague of having no King at
all, or none under him to punish Offenders in Israel; let all those who wish
well to Sion (to the Church and the State there) say, Now and ever, good Lord
deliver us. To whom (Father, Son and Holy Ghost; Three persons, One God;) be
ascribed, all honor, glory, power, and dominion now and for ever, Amen.

KORAH And His COMPANY PROVED To be the Seminary and Seed-plot OF SEDITION and
REBELLION, IN A SERMONOn Numb. xxvi. 9.

Preached at the Assizes held at Bury St. Edmunds, for the County of Suffolk,
July 27. 1683.

At the request of THO. WALDEGRAVE, Esquire High Sheriff of the said County. The
Lord Chief Baron Mountague, and Mr. Sergeant Holloway, being Judges there.

By Nath. Bisbie, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, 1684.

NUMBERS xxvi. 9. This is that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the
Congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the Company of
Korah, when they strove against the Lord.


IT has been observed by no inconsiderable, nor unconsidering Man among us,
That the first Authors and Beginners of the grand Mischiefs and Disorders among
Men, have been ever as to their Persons remarkably punished in this Life; and I
think I may (without presumption) add, that as to their Memories they have no
less been stigmatized to Posterity for ever after. And this eminently appears
in the instance of the three great Sinners before us (the first Public
Mutineers against Kingship and Priesthood that we meet with in the world) Korah
the Author and Leader, Dathan and Abiram his Seconds and Followers; the one a
dissatisfied aspiring Levite, the other disobliged disgusted Reubenites. A sin
perhaps not so timely born into the world as some other sins, but every way as
luscious and pleasing to some sort of Men; nay, as taking and as likely to last
and to abide in the world as any one sin, that the Scripture has any where
took notice of, or the great God at any time punished: a sin attended with the
greatest prosecution of vengeance from Heaven, and charged upon the Memories
and Names of the Acters thereof with the greatest and most durable marks of
infamy. An argument certainly, that how sweet and palatable, how popular and
plausible a thing soever Rebellion and Sedition may seem to be, yet they must
be crimes highly displeasing to Almighty God, ever to be shunned and hated by
the Sons of Men as very great Enormities; so great and so detestable, that they
are not to be thought on without abhorrence, nor mentioned without disgust and
disgrace. We have the whole story of the matter in the Sixteenth of Numbers, at
the beginning of the thirty eighth Lecture of the Law, which the Hebrews
entitle Korah, because the Mutiny and Rebellion, wherein this Korah, Dathan and
Abiram were engaged, is the principal and most remarkable matter there treated
of. We meet with them again in my Text, then in Deuteronomy, then in the
Psalms, and so on to the Epistle of St. Jude, but never without their sin and
their punishment annexed; God being unwilling that such forward and notorious
Malefactors should be had in remembrance without Dirt and Infamy to attend
them: that which brings them upon the Stage here, is the muster that was made
for the distributing the Land among the Israelites, whereunto they were now
got; a time certainly to take notice of Rebels and of Schismatics in, yea, and
of their Posterity too (if the earth has not swallowed them up, or they
repented them of their fathers sins) lest too much of the Land be given them,
and they put into a capacity to rebel and to mutiny again: in this muster the
preference is given to the Tribe of Reuben, the Firstborn of Israel; and among
other the descendants thereof Dathan and Abiram are found; whereupon a stop is
put, and the muster not suffered to go on, till their Names and Villainies are
enrolled for a Sign and Memorial to all after Ages, (to the Reubenites from
whom they descended in particular, to the whole Nation of the Israelites to
whom they belonged in general) thereby hanging them up in Effigy, though
otherwise destroyed, and leaving them to be pointed at by all that survive or
come after (so odious must Schism and Rebellion for ever be) with a This is
that Dathan and Abiram, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the
Company of Korah, when they strove against the Lord.

So that my Text singles out a sort of Sinners above all that then were, or
ever had been sinners in Israel; for we shall not find throughout the whole
Muster-Roll besides, that any one was seized upon, or so much as Chronicled for
his misdeeds, these and these only (besides Nadab and Abihu, Persons much of
the same guilt with themselves) excepted; as being (without doubt) sinners
above others, notoriously and eminently so; or rather such sinners that the
Earth must not bear, nor the Land be divided unto. Please you upon this small
alarm to examine the matter how they come to be so culpable; and in order
thereunto look we,

1. Into their Crime; They strove against Moses and against Aaron. 2. Into the
shame they were thereupon exposed unto; they were made a sign, and set up for
Posterity to behold, with a This is that Dathan and Abiram.
I confess a charge of this nature is an invidious distasting thing; men though
they be actually engaged in rebellion against their King, or in Sedition
against their Priests, yet they care not to be stared in the face, and called
Rebels for it. Though of themselves as bloody as Cain, as imposing as Nimrod,
as Sanctimoniously wicked as Dathan and Abiram, and altogether as resolved to
follow their steps and ways (to the dethroning of Moses, to the unpriesting of
Aaron); yet the gaping earth is not more horrid and scaring than the mouth of
the Priest when opened upon them; they love to act, but they hate to hear, and
though none more despicable to them than the Sons of Aaron when distant, and
apart; yet an Army of Banners is not more terrible than the meanest of them,
when got into his Ebal, or begirt with his linen Ephod, he thunders out his
Anathemas and execrations against them. Wherefore since it is my Task to day
(if not to preach) at least to point with my finger, it were folly in me to
expect much kinder usage (provided they be the inflicters) than what the earth
and the fire afforded, even to be swallowed up and consumed by them; especially
when there are so many undevoured Dathans and Abirams in the land, yea, and so
many of their sons too, who, instead of repenting them of their fathers sins,
go on in their fathers ways. Hence their Censures and their Censers: their
Censures to defame and belly our Persons; their Censers to confront and disturb
our Office: However when the Muster's made, these are to be made a sign. Look
we therefore

1. Into the nature of their Crime; They strove against Moses and against
Aaron; against Moses their King, against Aaron their Priest; persons nominated
and appointed by God himself to be their Leaders and Governors; The one as to
their concerns in State; The other as to their concerns in Religion, yet at all
times envied and accounted the worst of men, no better than Buchanan's wild
beast, that must be hunted down, and at length made a Prey to the Leaders of
them, men famous in the Congregation. Hitherto (say the Jews) all Dominion and
Government from the very days of Adam (to whom it was first given) had gone
along with the firstborn; whose Privileges, Pre-eminences, Prerogatives the
Law declares to be very great, in that they were peculiarly given and
consecrated to God, (Exodus 22.29.) were next in honor to their parents, ( Genesis
49.3.) had a double portion of their fathers goods, ( Deuteronomy. 21.17.) succeeded
them in the government of the family or kingdom, (2 Chronicles. 21.3.) and in the
administration of the Priesthood and service of God, ( Number. 8.17.) Neither was
ever any of them (for ought that I can find) disseiz'd of that his right, but
by special appointment from God, and only for some greater faults, as in the
case of Reuben (from whose loins this our Dathan and Abiram descended); but was
not to excel, because he went up to his fathers bed ( Genesis 49.3, 4.). And thus
it continued till such time that the Israelites were to be led out of Egypt by
the hands of Moses and Aaron (where they had been captives and slaves) to be a
Nation of themselves, and to have a land of their own to dwell in; for the
better accomplishment whereof the Government was given by God to Moses, the
Priesthood to Aaron and his Sons, adding the whole Tribe of Levi to them
(whereof this Korah was one) to be aiding to them in all their ministrations (
Number. 8.18.); and this I take to be the first occasion of the Mutiny and
Insurrection here made. However let not private persons (though as Sacred in
their function as Korah, as great in their places as Dathan and Abiram)
hereupon presume to dispose of birthrights, or displace either Mitre or Crown;
such things are not to be touched, much less transferred, but by the special
appointment of God. Nay, had Moses and Aaron of themselves attempted the
dislocation and change, and without immediate authority from above, they must
have made themselves criminals, and been every way as liable to punishment for
striving against the firstborn to dispossess them of their wonted birthright,
as this Dathan and Abiram afterward were, when they strove against Moses and
against Aaron, to dispossess the first of his Diadem, the second of his Ephod,
after God had so visibly established the one and the other upon them: Nothing
but heaven (and by a voice of its own, thundering as it did from mount Sinai)
can make such an undertaking innocent. Wherefore for Subjects to beleaguer and
beset their King, as if like Moses he were fitter to be wrapped up in Bulrushes
and thrown into the Sea, than preserved upon his Throne; for them to Combine
and Conspire not only against his Servants (to stone and abuse them) but
against his Heir to seize his Inheritance and deprive him of his Birthright,
with a Come, This is the heir, let us kill him, and take the inheritance to our
selves; for them over and above, not only to defy and supplant the High Priest
and his Sons, but the whole Tribe of Levi (howbeit they have reconciled
themselves by their after Zeal) as if they were still to endure the first
curse, and to be divided a new in Jacob, and scattered afresh in Israel;
doubtless it must be a sin so transcendently sinful and provoking to God (who
has set them up and owns them) that both his Heaven and his Earth must be too
hot, the one to bear, the other to receive them. Nay, what can such sinners
expect, since they have been so industrious to divide the Earth, and make
Schisms among the inhabitants thereof, but that the Earth in return should
divide and open upon them? what can they hope for but as they have been the
Incendiaries among men, and set the Earth on fire (ever delighting like so many
Salamanders to dwell in the flames) but that they should live and die in the
said flames? why should not their Perishings as well as their Gainsayings be
the same with Korahs? or why should they not down to the Gulf with Dathan and
Abiram, when (whilst living) they would have no Tents but theirs? such another
Criminal we read of ( Mark 15.7.) who for the Insurrection by him made, and the
Murder thereupon committed was cast into Prison and bound for Execution, and
yet you shall find that when it was moved by Pilate whether Jesus or He should
suffer, the People as one (well wishers all to the proceedings of the man)
cried out, not Barabbas but Jesus: and I am very apt to think, that if it were
left unto the People still to give their Vogue who are the sinners of the Day
(so poisoned have they been of late) that it would not be Dathan nor Abiram, no
nor any of the Sons of Korah (all, and every one of them God wot are Holy,
Ignoramusly Holy) but Moses and Aaron (Gods King and Gods Priest) that would be
brought in for Guilty. However that we may be thoroughly informed and acquainted
with the nature of the Crime (an Horrid Traitorous Conspiracy, it seems, it
was) look we,

1. Into the Persons engaged therein; 2. Into the Motives that induced them to
it; 3. Into the Judgment passed upon the Action.
1. Into the Persons engaged, which were Dathan and Abiram; the only persons
named as being the Ringleaders and Generals of the Faction, and probably more
fully set and resolved to go on with the Mutiny and Insurrection they had made,
than many others that were seduced and decoyed into the quarrel: for I find
Korah and his Company submitting to a Peaceable debate with Moses, though it
ended not so ( Numb. 16.8.); and whereas On the Son of Peleth took men, no less
than others ( Numb. 16.1.) yet we hear of him no more, probably desisting upon
what Moses had said in the case; but as for this Dathan and Abiram they would
no such thing, We will not come up (say they, verse 12.) resolving to stand to
their Arms, and to keep both their Post and Party; Men under Solemn Covenants
and Engagements never to yield whatever others might do; insomuch that
henceforward no Moses and Aaron, or no Dathan and Abiram; no Sons of Amram, or
no Sons of Eliab. Two only named, and yet the Faction Great and Prevalent!
Consider we therefore, 1. Their Quality, 2. Their Confederates and Party.


1. Their Quality, they were famous in the Congregation; said ( Numb. 16.2.) to
be Princes of the Assembly, and Men of renown: Primores and Senatores,
Statesmen and Senators, called to the Parliament or Great Council of the
Nation; from their Place therein said to be Princes of the Assembly, and from
the Bustle and Stir they there made, to be Men famous in the Congregation, Men
of renown: (...) Men of Honorable Note and Name, like those Giants (those
mighty Men of Old) who having got power into their hands, turned Apostates from
God, and fell upon others with Violence and Oppression, exercising an unlimited
Tyranny over all that would be under or less Princes than themselves. One of
the Assembly speaking of them says, that they were men of Note and Fame both
for Parentage and Parts, but grown Notorious and Infamous for the abuse of
them, through an Impious Conspiracy and Rebellion; it being almost impossible
to be Men of Name (Popular and Cried up Statesmen, the Demagogues and Demigods
of the Mobile) but in some measure or other to be given and addicted to Mutiny
and Faction. Some mistake this Assembly for the Sanedrim wherein the Seventy
sat to assist Moses in his matters of Judicature; but altogether against
reason, in regard they consisted but of Seventy in Number ( Numb. 11.16.);
whereas the Assembly before us had many Hundreds in it; no less than Two
Hundred and Fifty of them took part with our Dathan and Abiram, and probably as
many (if not more) might adhere to, and go along with Moses their King; (for it
is not to be supposed, that all of them like the Apostate Angels should quit
their Loyalty and fall together; or like the mighty Men before spoken of become
Giants in a day) a Proof, that it was the National Senate made up (as Abulensis
and others averr) of all the Governors and Heads of the People throughout the
whole Nation of the Israelites. Howbeit if such do Apostatize and decline, turn
Mutineers and Rebels, make or espouse a Faction, its a Thousand to one but
(like Lucifer) they draw a Train (a great part of the Congregation) after them;
the truth whereof England sufficiently knows, having been once quite shattered
and undone, and sithence almost broken to pieces again by such Factious Unruly
Senators, Princes of her Assembly, Men of renown. However I do not find that
the Cause was ever the better, or the more favored for such Senators being in
it; nay, in all probability it sped the worse; for whereas Moses had hitherto
overlooked Korah and his Conventicles (pitying their simplicity, and seemingly
indulging their mistaken Zeal, as if their Separation had been Conscience not
Design) He no sooner hears of the perversion of his Senators, and how the
Conventicle influenced the Assembly, but he immediately calls for Vengeance,
and God executes it; deeming it high time to put a stop to both (by making
examples of some, even of some of the very Princes of the Assembly) lest Church
and State, Priesthood and Government, Religion and Commonwealth be ruined and
fall together. The Apostle speaking but of one unruly Member, in the body
Natural, the Tongue, says ( James 3.6.) that if it be not restrained, it will
set the whole course of nature (the whole wheel of affairs) into combustion;
and what then (do you think) will become of the body Politic, if Two Hundred
and Fifty of them be let alone? especially when to every Tongue there are Two
Hundred Hands, and in every Hand a Granado. Consider we,

2. Their Confederates and Party, It was in the Company of Korah; This is that
Dathan and Abiram, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the Company of
Korah. There must (it seems) be an Assembly of Divines to sanctify Rebellion,
as well as an Assembly of Princes to carry it on; Korah and his Company to
Preach and to Pray, as well as Dathan and Abiram to Fight; State Designers can
never prosper, if there be not Church Revolters; Come now I pray thee (says
Balak to the Prophet Balaam) and curse me this People, for they are too mighty
for me, and peradventure I shall prevail. It was upon this design that Korah
first went out, ( Korah the principal and prime Incendiary who inflamed the
rest) for it is said of him ( Numb. 16.1.) that he took men, that is,
(according to the Chaldee Translation) That he separated and withdrew himself
aloof and apart from the rest of the Congregation, taking along with him such
as were as ready as himself to cast off the Priesthood and Ministration of
Aaron, and to have Meetings and Conventicles of and by themselves; said
therefore for ever after, to be of the Company of Korah. Whither having once
got them, then (according to the Septuagint's Translation) (...), He Preached
unto them; took them by his Seditious Discourses and Sermons, filling their
Ears with noise and clamor, their Hearts with fears and jealousies, their Souls
with Religious fury and Enthusiastical madness, till he had fitted them for
what ever the Ringleaders of the Faction should prompt them to. To this Company
of Men the discontented Reubenites at length joined themselves, as knowing that
if a Crown be to be won, or a Birthright regained, the separated Levites must
be aiding and assisting to them in it: enough certainly to make both Moses and
Aaron to beware, left by conniving too long at Korah, Dathan and Abiram (those
State Engineers) give rout unto them both. However he took, and he took, till
he had took some of the chief Princes of the Land; no less than Two Hundred and
Fifty of them that were within the walls of the Senate, Princes of the Assembly
(Numb. 16.2.), more (as it may be presumed) infinitely more, in and among the
Families and Tribes whom they represented, and for whom they served;
questionless being Men of renown and name, they could not be without a Faction
to cry them up, and (if need were) to follow them: neither indeed durst they
have been so bold and daring, in the very Assembly, where Moses himself sat,
had they not had, and been secured of an interest suitable to their ambition
and designs. However I cannot but remark, that they were all (every one of
them) of the Company of Korah; Men addicted to Separation and Faction, having
Tents, Conventicles, Levites of their own, in opposition to Aaron, the
Tabernacle, and the Priesthood of God. And therefore you shall find, that
though the Censer and the burning of incense properly belonged to the Priest
and to his Office (2 Chronicles. 26.18.); yet there was not one of those Factious
Princes but had a Censer belonging to him, Two hundred and fifty Censers, for
the Two hundred and fifty Princes: ( Numb. 16.18.); and I am apt to think, that
if ever a Rebellion be kindled again in our Israel, it must be by such
Separatists, and through the Fire of their Censers. Its certain, that the only
Mutineers here mentioned (the Apostatized Levites excepted) were the disgusted
Reubenites, whose Tribe was situated next unto the Kohathites (of whose family
this Korah was) as they were lodged about, and surrounded the Tabernacle, (
Number. 2.10.) and thereby influenced by those conventions of theirs to be of
their party and faction. And I dare say, if there be a Rebel, or one that
wishes well to rebellion in England, he is to be met with-in, or upon the
borders of such Tents and places. For my part, were I, for a tribute upon me,
to bring forth one or more of them to my King, I would go but to the next
Conventicle, and the man that I saw first come out, should be he that I would
seize upon, as knowing that if he be found in the Company, he must have the
gainsayings of Korah, and wish well to the Tents of Dathan and Abiram. And so
we pass from the persons engaged in the mutiny unto

2. The Motives that induced them to it; which were either

1. Secret and concealed, and not so much as mentioned by them in the fray, or
2. Divulged, and made the common argument and pretense.
1. Secret and concealed, which (for ought that I can find) was their ambition
and discontent; inwardly repining at the grandeur of Moses and Aaron, and
fretting at their own disappointments, looking on themselves (through, and by
reason of that establishment) as for ever lost touching all future hopes of
greatness. Now this Korah was of himself Cousin German to Moses and Aaron, the
eldest son of Izhar, brother to Amram their father ( Exodus 6.18.); A Levite of
the family of the Kohathites, to whom belonged the charge of the most holy
things within the Sanctuary, and the chiefest place next unto Aaron and his
Priests about it ( Number. 3.19.31.), which one would have thought might have been
preferment enough for the man: But because the firstborn of Izhar, and
moreover Cousin German to Moses and Aaron, who then had the power and the
government in their hands, he thought his birthright and blood might have been
better considered, at least so far forth as not to have had himself and his
family thrust down for ever into the rank and class of ordinary petty Levites;
much less to have Elizaphan the son of the youngest family of the Kohathites,
made Prince over the sons of Kohath, even over this very Korah who was of the
elder house, and himself in the interim neglected ( Number. 3.10.): all which put
together raised his indignation and spleen, and set him first against his King,
and then against his Priest (who should not have degraded, if they had not
preferred him) and was the first occasion (as the Rabbis say) that caused him
to take men. Of the like nature was the disgust that Dathan and Abiram had
taken; for they were of the posterity of Reuben, (Number. 16.1.) who was the
firstborn of Israel (Genesis 49.3.), but forasmuch as he defiled his fathers bed,
his birthright was given from him, (1 Chronicles. 5.1.), that is to say, the
Government to Moses, the Priesthood to Aaron, the double portion to Joseph; all
lost in Reuben: but by his sons sought to be recovered, which was the occasion
also of their taking men, and joining themselves with Korah; hoping by him and
his Company, to re-enstate themselves and their posterity into that Power and
dignity (that Empire, Priesthood, Estate) that originally and of old belonged
unto them. And I am apt to think, that if all after-Mutinyings and Rebellions
were looked into, (yea, that of this very day) the like disappointments,
disgusts, degradations would be found at the bottom of them all. But Rebellion
has always a mask and vizard, a Samuel's mantle to cover its ugliness; Look we
therefore

2. Into the reason pretended, and spread abroad to draw in the populacy after
them; which was Usurpation in Aaron, Tyranny and breach of trust in Moses: the
popular and usual pretense that hunts down government, and gives birth and
encouragement to all manner of anti-regal, anti-priestly factions; and perhaps
has caused more Properties to be altered, more Birthrights to be lost, more
Liberties to be invaded, more Religion to be defaced, yea, and more
Arbitrariness and Tyranny to be set up and exercised in the world, than any one
thing else besides. Hence says Korah to Aaron in behalf of himself and his
Company, you take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation is holy, and
the Lord is among them (Number. 16.3.); and hence again, Dathan and Abiram with
their company in reference to Moses, Is it a small thing that thou have brought
us out of a land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the
wilderness, unless thou make thy self Altogether a Prince over us, a Prince
absolute and uncontrolable ( Number. 16.13.), which if either of them be your
design, (of you Aaron to appropriate the Priesthood, or of you Moses to engross
the Government to your selves) then farefall Pharaoh and his Kingdom; may
Egypt have us before Canaan, the land of thraldom before the land of promise;
if we must be slaves and tyrannized over, then to our furnaces again, where we
had Patriarchs to govern us, and Priests of our own to rule us; where as we
were slaves to others, we were Princes our selves. And how of late did the
like, but false, pretensions prevail with, and befool us? whither did the
outcries of an Arbitrary Government, of a proud and usurping Priesthood hurry
us? As for the Church, her Beauty was defaced to have her Purity restored; they
profaned her Temples, plundered her Revenues, destroyed her Discipline,
poisoned her Proselytes with a thousand follies and phrensies (called indeed
New Lights, but the black Enthusiasms of the Prince of darkness) and all to
reform her; so they murdered the best of Kings for the good of Subjects; wrung
the Scepter out of his hand, and tore the Crown from his head to make him a
great and a glorious Prince; so were we slaves to our own slaves, a company of
Tagaroons hired with our purses to command our persons, and whatever else was
ours; many were no better than Servants, and Prisoners in their own homes, than
Tenants and Farmers to their own estates, and this to preserve the Rights and
Liberties of the good People of England, the right forsooth of Plundering,
Oppressing, Murdering. But for my part I wonder, that the good people of
England did not all as one man rise up in rage, and stone those notorious
impudent Impostors, who so long abused their credulity, cheating them of their
goods, and inthralling their persons, and (as much as in them lay) damning
their Souls; I wonder (I say) that the English Nation should be so dispirited
and crest-faln (as like Izzachars Ass) to be daily laden with blows and
burdens, and tamely to couch under them; that they should be so stupid and
insensible, of such intolerable wrongs, and oppressions; but more, that any of
us all (after such sad and woeful Tragedies acted) should be for the Furnace and
Thraldom of Egypt again; ever any more dote upon the holiness of the Party, or
the sweet Song that the Siren makes. And so having considered the Motives, that
induced them to the Conspiracy, look we into,

3. The Judgment passed upon it, This is that Dathan and Abiram, who strove
against Moses and against Aaron, when they strove against the Lord; in show no
more than a striving against them, but by interpretation, and in guilt, a
striving against the Lord. The iniquity whereof appears,

1. In that it was a striving against his right and power, to make an
establishment among them; as if the setting up of Moses and Aaron over them
(the one in the Government, the other in the Priesthood) had been an invasion
upon the peoples right, and not in the power of any, no, not of the great God
himself to do it: which opposition (in as much as it was against the decrees of
Heaven) is said (in my Text) to be striving against the Lord, and ( Numb.
16.11.) to be a gathering together against the Lord. Thus when the people grew
weary of Samuel, and threw off his Government, says God in the case, They have
not rejected thee, but they have rejected me (1 Samuel 8.7.), intimating, that
the Government, in whose hands so ever regularly it be, is still Gods; and that
the striving against, or opposing of them that have it, is a striving against
and opposing of him; and will as severely and surely be punished, as if it were
acted, or designed against his very Person and Throne. The like our blessed
Savior declares concerning his Ministers, He that hears you, hears me; and
he that despises you, despises me (Luke 10.16.); intimating, that he that
casts off, or rises up against his Priest, does in effect cast off, and rise up
against God, whose Priest he is, and whose Priesthood he exercises. And indeed
it is not for Subjects to trouble themselves about their Governors, whether
Sacred or Civil, farther than to see that they be Gods offspring, and are sent
by him; the rest of their work is to obey and follow, yea, and with as much
readiness, regard, veneration (if God be with them) as if the very Gods
themselves were come down from Heaven among them. Now that Moses was thus
appointed (for we have spoken of Aaron before) is plain from the Commission
given him, which was first sealed ( Exodus 3.10.), afterward ratified and
confirmed unto him (Exodus 4.) by a power to work Miracles, for the convincing
gainsayers, which was fully done, by turning his Rod into a Serpent, and back
into a Rod again; by making his hand Leprous, and then clearing it of that
Leprosy; by causing the water in the River to become blood upon the ground;
though had there been neither Commission at first, nor ratification afterward,
yet the works he had done, and the mighty deliverances, he had wrought for them
(that especially of raising them into a Nation by themselves, when they were,
and had been slaves to others) might have caused not only all the Tribes and
Families, but all the firstborn of Israel, to have surrendered their
birthrights, and become Subjects to him. The Government (thus transferred) was
afterward by a gift of the like nature, settled upon Joshua, then upon the
Judges, and then upon Kings, and at length appropriated, and entailed, upon the
Descendants and Line of David (2 Samuel 7.12.) which shows, that whatever
alteration God is pleased to make, he is always pleased, with the thing called
Succession; for he settled his Priesthood in it, afterward the Government, and
from thence never made nor suffered a deviation; and in truth is a most evident
and plain demonstration, that if God entails, none but God must cut off; and
that every striving afterward against it, is a striving against the Lord.

2. This striving against Moses and Aaron appears to be a striving against the
Lord, in that it was prosecuted against his declared resolution to defend the
establishment he had made. One should have thought, had they not been a
Rebellious gain saying People indeed (a People, who like the Sons of Zerviah
were resolved to be too hard for Government, and to die every one of them in
the cause, rather than to give out) that the fire which broke out to consume
some of them, and the earth that opened its mouth to devour others of them,
should have enlightened the eyes, and stopped the mouths of all the survivers of
them from all after Murmurings. But no sooner is the punishment over and they
safe, but they grow as Mutinous as ever, enter upon new consultations and fresh
complaints; and thereupon gather themselves the second time together, and are a
second time punished; a Plague from Heaven devouring no less than Fourteen
thousand and seven hundred of them ( verse 49.); neither stay they here (so
hard is it to put a stop to Faction), but unless a Miracle be further wrought
for the particular vindication of Aaron and his Priests, they will die on, and
stand the other and the other judgment; which in the last place was finished
and effected in the budding and blossoming of Aarons Rod, amidst the Rods of
the several Tribes of Israel (laid by it) to confront and prove it; and because
it did so, (the other remaining sapless and dry) it became a token against the
Rebels, and so their Murmurings ended ( Numb. 17.10.). And I am apt to think,
that if ever a Mutiny or Rebellion be to be taken away, it must be by the
budding and blossoming of Aarons Rod; for it was by Korah that the Faction
began, and by his Company that it was carried on; and therefore by the Rule of
contraries, it must be by Aaron and his Priests defeated. Hence says God to
Moses (when he would have declined his office for want of an Assistant) Is not
Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know he can speak well, and he shall be to thee
instead of a mouth, and thou shall be to him instead of a God (Exodus 4.16.)
intimating, that if Moses do but interpose, and by his Authority protect Aaron,
to keep him safe in his Office and Duty that the Faction disturb him not; Aaron
and his Priests will do the like for Moses, by Preaching up the Doctrine of
Obedience, and upon all occasions showing the People, that they must be subject
to Principalities and Powers, or else purchase to themselves Damnation, and be
thrown for ever, after Dathan and Abiram into the Fiery Association of Rebels.
My Prayer therefore shall be, that the Rod (which has been so long taken from
Aaron, may be restored to him again; and when restored) that it may for ever
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit; and then I doubt
not, but (as it happened to the Isralites, so) it will be to the Inhabitants of
England, a lasting token against Rebels, and their Murmurings thereby be quite
taken away. And so we pass from their Crime,

2. To their Punishment; This is that Dathan and Abiram who strove against
Moses and against Aaron; and who for their so striving (as in the succeeding
verse) were sent quick to destruction, and thereby made a Spectacle and sign to
all after Ages. To this judgment the Prophet has reference, when praying
against his enemies, he says, Let them go down to Hell (Psalm 55.15.); Now
these things were our examples (says the Apostle) and were written for our
admonition; that we remembering what was done by and upon these sinners here,
may take care of doing and becoming like them: every one of them (by the Sign
and Spectacle they are made) Preaching this Lession to all that come after,
(...), Let every one that looks up unto me (be he a Levite as was Korah; a
Layman as were Dathan and Abiram; famous or infamous in the Congregation) for
ever beware of being Seditious against their Priests, or of being Rebels
against their Prince, lest the earth open, and the fire in like manner consume
them. But passing by the punishment which seized upon their Persons, look we
only at present (as much more proper to our purpose) to what happened to their
Names and Posterity; a Consideration perhaps no less influential with some, to
deter from the sins than the former. And in order hereunto remark we,

1. That Sedition and Rebellion, are two such sins, that they deservedly stain
the memory of the engagers in them with perpetual Infamy, and disgrace; their
Names must never after be mentioned without their Crimes; their Escutcheons
must have their blot, their Arms a bar, their greatness an allay; something or
other to make them infamous, for having once been famous. This, this is that
Dathan and Abiram! This by way of contempt and disgrace; This whom all Records
must stigmatize, all Chronicles defame, all good men loath; This who if but
casually named, must be spat at, spoke against, and made odious to Posterity,
for the crimes they have been guilty of. The like may every way be observed of
Jeroboam, who for turning Rebel to his Lawful Sovereign, and for renouncing and
casting off the Priesthood, and Service of the Temple, to become a King
himself. And to have Service, and Priests of his own, (sins scarce ever
forgiven, but never in History to be forgotten) is said to have taught Israel
to sin; and for his so doing can never after be mentioned (though often and
often in Scripture named) without a record of that his wickedness affixt, with
a This is that Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who taught Israel to sin. Customary
it was among the Jews, at the naming the name of Haman, to beat their fists
upon the Planchers where they were, as if it had been upon Haman's head; not
willing that such an enemy to Religion, and one that had deserved so ill of it,
should have a naming among them, without a blow at the same time (if possible)
to brain him. Now the rest of the Acts of Zimri, and his Treason that he
wrought, are they not written in the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel (1 Kin.
16.20.); such sort of sinners must not off the stage and have their memories
preserved, unless it be to keep up their wickedness, and therewith their
punishments, for an admonition to us that we be not in our generations like
unto them. And wherefore then is it, O Son of Dathan! that thou can glory in
thine or thy fathers shame? That thou can boast of the mutinies thou have
made, of the battles thou have been engaged in, of the murders thou have
therein committed? Do thou think that those arms (those Spears, which hang up
as Trophies by thee of thy wickedness) do, or can give luster to thy name, or
add any merit to thy family? Nay, can thou imagine, that those sinners upon
whom the tower of Siloam fell, or rather those sinners whose limbs are yet upon
the Tower, were sinners above all other men? I tell you nay, but except you
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Remark we

2. That Sedition and Rebelion are two such sins, that God usually punishes
unto the third and fourth generation, unless by their posterity they be
repented of. Here you shall find the whole family of Dathan and Abiram to be
cut off; they and all that appertained unto them, their wives, and their sons,
and their little children, (Number. 16.27.) Insomuch that when the land was to be
divided among the respective families of Israel, there was not one of the
families either of Dathan or Abiram to be found ( Number. 26.); which shows, that
they all dyed with, for, or under their fathers sins. Nay, look into the next
Chapter, and you shall find the daughters of Zelophehad (though their father
was dead) pleading for his inheritance, and using this for an argument why they
should not be overlooked nor passed by in the division, because though dead,
yet he dyed in his own sin and not in the company with Dathan and Abiram; Our
father dyed in the wilderness, and he was not in the company of Korah, but dyed
in his own sin (v. 3.); intimating, that if he had been guilty of the Treason,
or had been in the Conspiaacy with those Traitors and Rebels, his name had
worthily been struck out of the genealogy, and his posterity justly
disinherited, and made objects of scorn, contempt and poverty to all after
ages. The sons indeed of Korah either were not engaged in, or at least repented
them of their fathers sin; and therefore it is sad (in the verse save one
succeeding my Text) that the children of Korah dyed not: nay, they not only
survived the desolation, but they kept their office in Israel; for their
genealogy is reckoned, their posterity appointed by David to be Singers in the
house of the Lord, they had many Psalms dedicated to them, of them came Samuel
the Prophet, and Heman who with his offspring were singers (1 Chronicles. 6.); and I
dare say there is no man living who wishes well either to Moses or to Aaron,
that envies theirs or any other man's reconciliation or preferment. We know,
and we desire that the sons integrity may expiate for their fathers sedition,
and their after Loyalty for all former Rebellions; there is joy in heaven (as
our Savior tells us) over one sinner that repents, and our trouble rather
is, that there are not more, as great an appearance of them as ever marched
against their King, or quarreled their Priests: I should then turn my Sword
into a Plough-share, my Steleteuticks into Euges, my reproofs into Paeans; I
would bless the day, and enter it not into my Rubric (that perhaps may seem
too bloody) but into my Calendar (which has its atros as well as albos dies)
that ever I saw such a reformation; and instead of rearing up gibbets with
Haman, I would venture my life with Hester (were my interest like hers) to lead
such Mordecaies to the King: but since I see, that the dog returns unto his
vomit, and that not only the parents have eaten sour grapes, but that their
childrens teeth are set on edge by them, I hope it will not be amiss to call
unto such to repent lest the tower of Siloam fall also upon them, and they
likewise perish in the gain saying of Korah. For my part, had I been the son of
a Korah, of a Dathan or Abiram, and had not repented me of my fathers sins,
yea, and given a sufficient demonstration to the world of that my repentance, I
should dream of nothing but of murdered Bishops and of martyred Kings, of
Whitehal Scaffolds and of Edghill fights; Cromwell and Bradshaw in their blood
and armor would be all I should see; Certainly the most miserable Caitiff whom
the earth has not as yet swallowed, or whose limbs the justice of God has not
exalted to be a spectacle to Angels and men; I should fancy every corpse I
touch, would bleed; every grave I tread upon, would cry out like Abel's against
me; I should conclude an host of Loyalists and Churchmen always behind me,
chaceing me to the judgment seat to give an account of my actions; but how
others do or can harden themselves, unless they be their fathers own sons in
principles as in blood, I know not, may perhaps pity, but (I am afraid) never
reform. And yet verily there is a generation of men in the world who need none
of this repentance; who have been neither enemies to their King nor opposers of
their Priests; who in the heat of the mutiny have been neither Schismatics
with Korah, nor Rebels with Dathan; but fidi Achates, trusty and Loyal
Subjects; good old Barzillai's, who are feign (God knows) to be content with
their olim meminisse, their wounds and scars, and died garments from Bozrah;
the services they have done, and the sufferings they have undergone; yea, and
others who following their fathers steps, have fought with beasts at Ephesus,
ventured at the dens of Lions, stood the shock of Schismatical envy and
Democratical fury; and whenever the records be searched, I wish their names and
their merits may not be overlooked. But and if this be that Dathan and Abiram,
or if these be the sons of that Dathan and Abiram, whose names are to be
branded to all posterity for their Schismatical rebellious doings, what ought
to be done to those that have been thus faithful and loyal, valiant and
serviceable, ever striving against the strivers, and (as need required)
resisting the resisters unto blood? Verily, Silver and Gold I have none, but
what I have, give I heartily unto you; may the blessing therefore of Aaron and
of his rod fall upon you, and follow you; may the King of Jeshurun (whose
Champions and worthies you have been) with his oil and his fatness reward you,
and (when the day of account comes) may you never be found Rebels to your God,
more than you have been unto your King. Remark we

3. That Sedition and Rebellion are two such sins that will destroy the whole
fabric of Government though never so well reared, and run it eftsoon into
confusion and slavery, if not timely and carefully prevented. They Will divide the
house, and if the house be divided, truth it self will tell us, that it cannot
stand. Humanity will turn into cruelty, nature and friendship into Faction and
fury; to kill one another will be called valor, to disobey the King accounted
loyalty; plain robbery and oppression the best of zeal and Religion; the Sword
(the bloody, heedless, devouring Sword) the only Lord Chief Justice of the
Land. We shall soon see an overthrow of all order and Law, a confusion in our
duties both to God and man, and a Kingdom (which for its pleasure may be a
Paradise, for its Light a Goshen, for its plenty a Canaan) changed into a
Chaos, a worser Chaos than that which the world came out of; for a word put an
end to that ( God spoke, and the world was made, Psalm 38.9.); nay, God divided
the light from the darkness, and he called the light day, and the darkness he
called night, and the Evening and the Morning were the first Day: (Genesis 1.5.)
But if these take place, Evening and Morning will be both alike, we may know
their beginning, but never their ending; darkness and horror of darkness! till
we our selves (if we be not careful) fall thereby into the pit of darkness.
Wherefore let me persuade you (you who are this day to number the people, and
to view the several inheritances among us, that there be no Mutineer nor Rebel
in our Tribes or families.)

To be careful and jealous in that your enquiry, that none such pass your
Tribunal; much less go off from you with Ceremony and Complement (too customary
a thing with some) as if you were lovers of their Nation, and would build them
Synagogues. It is not their being an holy Congregation that will make them
(when they are Seditious) Holy; neither will your punishing them be a slaying
the people of the Lord. We live (you see) in an age full of Sedition and
Conspiracy, where neither our Moses can well keep his Crown upon his head, nor
our Aaron his Ephod upon his breast; the Seditious Levite on one hand, the
Rebellious Reubenite on the other, are so industriously concerned in the
undermining and supplanting them both, that if heaven interpose not to defend
the one and to root out the other, both Moses and Aaron, Priesthood and
Government must sink and fall together. Wherefore to your respective Stations
and Charge; and know

1. That Dathans Conspiracy is still on foot in the land, alive and alive like
to be. The Cause (says one of our late Regicides) lies in the bosom of Christ,
and as sure as Christ arose, the Cause will rise again: I believe (says
another of them, no less Prophet than the former) that at long running there is
not a man that fears the Lord, will have any reason to be sorrowful for
engaging in the Cause; for though the Lord has been pleased to let it be as it
were the Sunsetting for a night, yet it will certainly arise next Morning very
gloriously again. Neither was it (for ought that I cand find) ever thoroughly
brow-beaten, or hissed off the stage; These (says the publishers of their
death) all died in the Faith; Saints who through Faith of the Gospel have
entered into rest. Nay, who of the Company of them (especially if they were
famous either in the Assembly or in the Congregation) ever went unto their
graves (from that day to this) without an Hearse full of Scripture Scutcheons,
and Religious Labels? The memory of the Just is blessed, precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints; enough to give credit to the worst of
Causes, and to draw all the Saints of the land after them: And yet (with horror
be it spoken) some of them have had their bowels burnt alive, and went down
into the earth like Dathan; others of them lived and died in the company of
Korah, and never repented them of their sins though stained with the blood of
the best of Kings, and the devoutest of Prelates. Shall I re-mind you of what
one of the Korathites still living has said of himself? That he has often
searched into his heart whether he did lawfully engage in the late War against
the King, or did well to encourage so many thousands to it, and that he cannot
as yet see that he was mistaken in the Cause, neither dares he repent of it,
nor forbear to do the same if it were to do again. And yet this man lives and
repents him not; nay, has his Company with him still, to whom he preaches
Sedition as of old, and with whom thousands of the Dathanites and Abiramites of
the land do Confederate; whereby you may see the stubbornness and hopes of the
Faction, and how the good Old Cause will go on, if God by his judgments, and
the Magistrate by his care and severity prevent it not. Awake and know,

2. That the Cause not only lives, but there are multitudes in the Land, ready
fixed and prepared to carry it on: dissatisfied Reubenites, who for their own,
or their fathers sins have lost their offices, their honors, their
birthrights; and perhaps not a few of them neither even among the very
Senators of the Land, who (by their having been there) gather hopes to recover
the greatness they have lost; at least to make themselves too great ever after
to be crushed, or degraded again. But lodge they where they will, I will be
bold to say, they are all of the Company of Korah, frequenters of his Tents, or
lovers of his Company; let but his Conventions be searched, and you will find
them all; for of this sort are they which creep into houses (2 Timothy 3.6.).
However of such pernicious influence they have been, that it will be difficult
to say whether the Barrels of Powder once under the Senate, or the Conventicles
afterward adjoining, have been the most fitted and adapted to blow it up; or
indeed whether Faux with his Dark Lanthorn and his Match in his hand, or these
with their New lights and their white and black Caps on their heads, are the
most likely to do the mischief; pardon the expression, but assuredly I my self
in my days of Curiosity, have heard such dangerous Positions, such Fiery
conclusions, such Flambeau Divinity vented in those Assemblies, that I never
read nor met with the like in Bellarmin, Mariana, Reynolds, nor the worst of
Jesuits. Let the Pillar then stand for a lasting Monument, to instruct all that
pass by where the Fire (that consumed the City and impoverished the Nation)
first began; but there are and have been of late so many incendiaries (Firers
of the City and Country) for I look upon every Conventicler to be one, that if
a Column were to be erected at every place where the Nation has been enflamed,
we should not have Purse nor Piety enough to erect them. Habent and Vespae
favos, It seems Wasps as well as Bees have got their hives; but if they be
suffered to breed, and to plant new Colonies, the Honey of the Land will soon be
eaten up, and the Bees that should gather new destroyed. Wherefore awake,
awake, you Sampsons of the Age, (you men of Loyalty and of strength) and know
that the Philistines are upon you; think not that to Address your selves to your
King, to Congratulate his late preservation is Loyalty enough; the better way
in these times of Conspiracy to express it, will be to Address your selves unto
his business; to seize the Tents of Dathan, and to scatter the Company of
Korah: for assuredly, if Korah has his Company, Dathan will have his, and it
shall not be long ere both of them take Men. May the God therefore of Peace,
who stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People, whose is the
Kingdom and the Power, and who sent his Son to reconcile the world unto
himself, and each one therein unto the other, make us all to be of one mind and
of one tongue; and through the assistance of his holy Spirit, to live in the
true faith and fear of God, in humble Obedience to our King, in brotherly love
and Charity one to another, that there may be no more Schisms nor Conspiracies
among us, but that we may (all and every one of us) obey them that have the
rule over us, and submit our selves to them who watch for our souls. To whom
three Persons, one God, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, Power, Adoration now and
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
PRosecution no Persecution: or the difference between Suffering for
disobedience and Faction, and suffering for Righteousness, and Christ's sake;
in a Sermon preached at Bury St. Edmunds in Suffolk, being the time of the
General Assizes there held.

The Modern Pharisees: or a Sermon showing the Principles of the present
Jesuits, and Puritans, to be of the same evil influence with the ancient
Pharisees; and equally vexatious and destructive to Government. Both by Nath.
Bisbie, D. D.

Mr Milbourn's Samaritanism Revived: A Sermon preached on the Ninth of
September, being the day appointed for a solemn Thanksgiving, for the Discovery
of the late Horrid Plot against his Majesty's Person and Government.

Mr Pain, Of the unlawfulness of stretching forth the hand to Resist or Murder
Princes, with the principal cases about Resistance considered, in Two Sermons:
the first preached upon the last Thirtieth of January; the other upon the day
of Thanksgiving, for the Deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the late
Treasonable Conspiracy.

Ahitophel's Policy Defeated: a Sermon preached on the Ninth of September,
being the day appointed by his Majesty for a Public Thanksgiving, for his and
the Kingdoms great Deliverence from the late Treasonable Conspiracy.

Mr Payne's Sermon. Learning and Knowledge, recommended to the Scholars of
Brentwood School in Essex; Preached at their first Feast June 29. 1682.
Published at the earnest desire of the Stewards.


