Unity of Priesthood Necessary to the Unity of Communion in a CHURCH With some
REFLECTIONS ON THE OXFORD MANVSCRIPT, And the PREFACE annexed.

ALSO Collection of CANONS, part of the ^^id MANUSCRIPT, faithfully tran^ated
into English from the Original, but concealed by Mr. Hody, and his Prefacer.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCII.

THE CONTENTS.
1. UNdertaken at the News of the new Bishops. 2. Plurality of Bishops as fatal
as plurality of Kings. 3. The Church founded on Bishops. 4. But one Bishop in a
Church. 5. A Rule generally known and practiced.. 6. More makes a Schism. 7.
Novatianus at Rome did so. 8. So did Meletius at Lycopolis in Egypt. 9.
Majorinus at Carthage, and others elsewhere. 10. Unity of Priesthood under the
old Law. 11. The second Bishop makes the Schism. 12. His Ordination null. 13.
His Person and Office censured. 14. Not sufficient to be of the same Faith with
the first, 15. Though an Assertor of and Sufferer for it. 16. Is rejected by
all. 17. The Bishops renounce Communion with him. 18. The Laity his Presidency.
19. The Compliers guilty. 20. The Ordainers worst of all. 21. A Digression
touching the Oath of Canonical Obedience. 22. The Schism aggravated, 23.
Through the unjust Deprivation of the Bishops; as contrary 24. To the Primitive
Canons, 25. To the Proceedings and Rescripts of Christian Emperors, 26. To the
Methods of England, Saxon or Norman. 27. Not innovated by the Reformation. 28.
State Deprivation a novel and wicked Invention. 29. Through the Primate's being
one of these Bishops, without whom 30. Nothing is to be done in the Church, 31.
No Ordination counted valid. 32. The Case of Abiathar considered, 33. As to the
being of two High Priests at once, 34. As to his Deposition by Solomon. 35.
Regal Depositions fatal to the Church. 36. They proved so to the Jewish, 37.
They proved so to the Greek: 38. An Apology for both. 39. The Case of the
deprived Bishops not the same 40. With those in K. Edward the V^th 's days; as
touching 41. Their Investitures, 42. Their Crimes, 43. The Manner of their
Deprivations. 44. Nor with those in Q. Elizabeth 's days. 45. Preliminary
Observations respecting the same; 46. The number of the deprived, 47. Their
Titles faulty, 48. Their Crimes inexcusable, 49. The Authority unexceptionable.
50. The Parliament cannot authenticate Schism, 51. No Act of Submission to
them, 52. Ecclesiastical Matters out of their Sphere, 53. Never more unhappy
than when meddling in them. 54. The Necessity of the present Separation
evinced, 55. Mr. Hody and his Prefacer detected and confuted.
Unity of Priesthood Necessary to the Unity of Communion in a Church.
SIR,
1. OF all the Ill News you have sent me since the beginning of the late
Revolution, none sits so close upon me, nor has created such deep Thoughts of
Heart within me, as the News of a new Primate, and a new Bishop; the old ones
being living, and neither canonically heard, nor judicially deprived: A Project
utterly dissonant to all primitive Practice, to the ancient Constitutions and
Canons of the Church; and which, if not timely compromised, must necessarily
beget, and perhaps unavoidably propagate a lasting Schism among us, ad natos
natorum, and qui nascuntur ab ipsis.

2. The ancient Cry was, (...). one God, one Theodor. lib. 2. cap. 17. Hom.
I^id. lib. 2.
Christ, one Bishop; answerab le to that of the Poet, (...). let there be but
one King, one Supreme; intimating, that it will be as fatal to the Church to
have Bishop against Bishop, as for the State to have opposite Kings: The one
ever fills a Nation with Bloodshed and Devastation, the other the Church with
Faction and Sedition: The former ruins the Peace, and disturbs the Quiet of
the Commonwealth, disposing it to most certain Anarchy and Confusion; the
other ever confounds the Unity and Concord of Christians, till it turns the
House of God into a Den of Thieves, and of a Bethel makes it a Bethaven: And if
by either of these means we come once to be unsettled, and to have our corner
Stone displaced, we may soon expect that Saying of our Savior to be verified
among us, that an House divided against it self cannot stand. Mark 3. 25. 1
Cor. 3. 4.
This was the fate and sad condition of the Church of Corinth; some were for
Paul, others for Apollos, and others again for Cephas; which at length caused
such a Division among them, that, had not the Apostle come in 1 Cor. 4. 21.
with his superintending Authority, the Church it self had probably been
overlaid and stifled in its Infancy.

3. There might indeed be many subordinate Ministers and Assistants in a
Church; some ^or bringing in new Converts, some for perfecting the o^d ones,
all for the Work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ;
(Cornelius, Bp. of Rome, reckons up under him, in his time, no less than Eusebius.
Hist. lib. 6. cap. 35. Edit. Col. Allob. 1612.
forty six Presbyters, besides seven Deacons, and many other ecclesiastical
Officers; Epiphanius tells us, that at Alexandria (...), to every Church there
was an appointed Haeres. 68. S. 4.
Presbyter;) but Bishop there could be but one, to superintend and preside over
the Church: And therefore St. Cyprian tells us in his Epistle ad Florentium
Puptanum, That a Church is P^ebs Sacerdoti adunata, and Pastori Ep. 66.
suo grex adherens, a People united to their Bishop, and a Flock adhering to
their Pastor; and that Heresies and Schisms therefore arise, quod Sacerdoti Ep.
59. Cornel. Edit. Oxon.
Dei non obtemperatur, because the Bishop is disobeyed and not acknowledged to
be the only Bishop, and the only Judge, for the time being, under Christ in
the Church. Nay, Ignatius makes this union between a Bishop and his People so
absolutely and indefeasably necessary to a Church, that he will not allow it to
be a Church without it; (...), without these (says he) Bishops and their
Clergy, there can be no Ad Fral. c. 3.
Church of God, no Assembly of Saints, no Congregation of Christians: So does
the aforesaid St Cyprtan, Scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, and Ep. 66.
ad Flor.
Ecclesiam in Episcopo; you ought to know, says he, that the Bishop is in the
Church, and the Church in the Bishop; and that he who is not with the Bishop,
is not in the Church. And again, at Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, That
the Church was to be founded upon Bishops; divina lege fundatum, Ep. 33. lapsis.
and was a Sanction at first by the divine Law; and by the various Series of
Time, and successive Ordinations handed down to us. A Sanction designed by
Christ from the beginning; for (says St. Clemens) (...), the Apostles having
beforehand fully learned Ep. ad. Cor. 1. cap. 44.
from Christ, that there would arise a Contention in the Church about the
Episcopal Office, did thereupon constitute Bishops, (...), and for the future
ordered the Rule of Succession for them, that when they themselves, or the
Bishops constituted by them, should happen to dye, (...), other Persons of
approved worth might be substituted in their places. Irenaeus confirms the
same; for (says he) habemus annumer are eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt
Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and Successores eorum; we can name the very Men whom the
Apostles Lib. 3. cap. 3. Basil. 1528.
made Bishops in several Churches, and the Successors of them, down to our
selve^; giving us thereby to know that the Office of Episcopacy was as truly of
di^ine Institution as the Apostolate itself.

4. And as there must be one Bishop, to head and unite the several Christians
into one; so (if primitive Institution and Practice may umpire in the case)
there ought to be but one single Bishop in one single Church, (...), There is,
says Ignatius, but one Flesh of our Lord Ep. ad Philadelph. cap. 4.
and Savior Jesus Christ, one Blood of his shed for us all, one Bread broken
to us, one Cup distributed; (...), but one Altar to a Church, and one Bishop.
Deus unus, and Christus unus; There is, says St. Cyprian, but one God, one
Christ, one Church, one Chair, Ep. 43.
founded by our Lord; another Altar, besides that one Altar and Priesthood,
cannot be erected. And again, Christ warns and teaches us in his De unitat.
Eccles.
Gospel, saying, there shall be one Flock, and one Sheepherd; and can any man
think, aut multos Pastores, aut multos greges? there can be in one place either
many Sheepherds, or many Flocks? The Bees, says St. Jerome, Ep. ad Rust. Mon.
Edit. Basil 1565.
have their King, the Cranes fly after one; there is one Emperor, one Judge of
a Province; singuli Ecclesiarum Episcopi, one single Bishop to one single
Church. Were there many Bishops of one City? says St. Hom. 1 in Ep. ad Philip.
Chrysostom, (...) by no means. God, says St. Ambrose, singulis Ecclesiis
singulos Episcopos, has determined to 1 Cor. 12.
every Church one proper Bishop. It cannot be, says Theodoret, that many
Bishops should be at one and the same time Pastors of one and the same Church.
In 1 cap. ad Philip.
Thus it was carefully provided against by the Fathers of the first Nicene
Council, (...), That two Bishops should not be Can. 8.
placed in one and the same City. The like determination was made in the
Council of Constantinople, (...) Can. 16.
(...), That no Bishop should be constituted in a Church where one that is
alive, and had not voluntarily resigned, is presiding. And so it was also
decreed by the fifth Aurelian Council, Nulli viventi Episcopo Can. 5.
alius superponatur, aut superordinetur Episcopus; That no Bishop be ordained
or placed over the Head of another, whilst that other is living. The like in
the Cabilon Council, ut duo in una Civitate penitus in uno tempore nec Can. 4.
ordinentur nec habeantur Episcopi, That two Bishops are not to be ordained and
placed together in one and the same City at one and the same time. To this
Custom, and particularly to the aforesaid Canon of the Nicene Council, Pope
Innocent had respect, when writing to the Clergy of Constantinople, he says,
(...), Soz. l. 8. c. 26. Edit. Col. Allobr.
We never knew any such thing to be acted by our Forefathers, but rather
forbad, that any should have power (...), to ordain another into the Place of
one that is living.

5. And this of one Bishop (and but of one Bishop in a place) was a Rule so
generally known, and so universally received in those early days of
Christianity, that Cornelius upbraids Novatus, (that Father of Puritanes and
pretending Gospeller, as he calls him,) for being ignorant of it, Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 35.
(...), that but one Bishop ought to be in one Catholic Church: As if it had
been a Rule as necessary to be known and practiced for the well governing of
the Church, and for keeping it in lasting Peace and Unity, as any one Canon
throughout the Scriptures besides: And therefore St. Augustine (though it was
his fortune to be ordained Bishop of Hippo whilst Valerius lived) would by no
means suffer Eradius (and perhaps he at that time needed a Coadjutor no less
than Valerius did) to be superordained upon him, because he then knew it to be
an Act uncanonical; his Words are these: Scio quod scitis and vos, I full Ep.
166. Edit. Paris. 1531.
well know what ye also know, that Eradius is a deserving Man, and every way
qualified to be made a Bishop; sed nolo de illo fieri quod de me factum est,
but I would not have that done to him which was done to me; adhuc enim in
corpore posito, for I was made a Bishop with him whilst he was living, and sat
with him in the same See; quod ergo reprehendum est in me, nolo reprehendi in
filio meo; what therefore was reprovable in me, I will not have to be blamed in
Eradius my Son; erit Presbyter ut est, quando Deus voluerit facturus Ep^scopus;
he shall continue a Presbyter in the station he is, and when God wi^^ (by
taking me away) he shall be a Bishop. Whence we may observe, 1. That he looked
upon his being consecrated Bishop whilst Valerius his Father and Predecessor
lived, to be an act reprehensible in him, and altogether uncanonical. 2. That
afterward knowing the Canon he would not act contrary to it, by having Eradius
superordained upon him, though his declining Age needed it, and both Clergy and
People desired it. 3. That it was done at the Request of the Bishop of the
Place, with the approbation of the Primate of the Province; and, as Possidonius
relates the matter, non tam succedere, quam Consacerdos accedere; not to
dethrone the former, (as now a days its done,) but De vita, A^gust. cap. 8.
to come into the Copartnership of the Bishopric with him, and thereby to
assist in his old Age, that the Affairs of the Church might not be suffered to
run to Ruin by reason of his Infirmities and Inabilities: The only Case
perhaps wherein two Bishops may be allowed in one Church; yea, and not then
neither, (as Gratian makes out the Matter,) unless the infirm one particularly
requests it; the Church rather choosing to Cause. 7. q. 1. cap. 11.
bear the Infirmity of o^d Age in a Bi^hop, than to force an Assistant upon
him, lest thereby Opposition should arise betwixt them.

Now the Reason of all this was to prevent the Mischief of Schism, it being
impossible to have two opposite Bishops in a Church, without disturbing the
Order, and destroving the Unity thereof: For if there be two opposite Bishops,
there must be two opposite Altars, and two opposite Communions; each Bishop
pretending against the other to be the true, catholic, and lawful Bishop, to
which the Flock ought to adhere. The first and true Bishop will do what he can
to keep the Flock from straying after the second and false one, who usurps upon
him; and the Usurper on the other hand will endeavor to the utmost to draw
them after him, and drain the Congregations of him over whom he usurps.

7. Thus when that wicked and turbulent Novatianus, the Author and Founder of
the Schism, was ordained Bp. of Rome over the head of Cornelius, canonically
placed there before: He pretended to be the true and rightful Bishop, and (to
strengthen his own Interest) would admit of none, if formerly of Cornelius his
Party, to communicate with him, unless they would first solemnly swear to
become ever after his. And therefore holding both their hands together, with
the bread in his, (...), Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 35.
swear, says he, to me, that you will never forsake me, nor go back to
Cornelius; and so delivering the Bread, the Communicant (instead of answering
Amen, as the Custom was,) was forced to say, (...), I will never return to
him. And as he was thus forward and active to begin a Schism at Rome, so he was
no less sedulous to propagate it abroad; whereupon St. Cyprian (his
Contemporary) reports it of him, That Ep. 55. Antoniano.
though there were Bishops already regularly ordained, and canonically
constituted throughout all the Provinces, and the several Cities thereof,
(venerable for Age, sound in Faith, approved in Trials and Perfecutions;) yet
he, super eos creare alios Pseudoepiscopos ausus est, was so presumptuous and
daring, as to create over them Bishops (False-bishops) of his own, as if he
were able by the discord he endeavored to foment to overrun the Church of
Christ, and to tear in pieces its whole ecclesiastical Frame. And indeed such
footing it took, that Socrates, speaking of the Sect, tells us, that in the
time of Boniface l. which was full an hundred and fifty Lib. 7. c. 30. Edit.
Col. Allobr.
years after, (...), they mightily flourished at Rome, enjoyed many Churches,
and had under them many great Congregations. Sozomen speaking of them says,
That though other Sects were generally Lib. 2. cap. 30.
short. lived, and soon decayed, yet (...), the Novatians, or they who had
their rise from Novatus, because their Bishops were for the most part good Men,
and they themselves held the Catholic Faith, (...), were numerous at first,
and so continued to be.

8. Such a Mischief arose by Meletius of Lycus in Egypt, from whom the Meletian
Faction took both its Name and Rise. He, quarrelling with Peter his Patriarch,
the Bp. of Alexandria, for that he admitted the Lapsi, being then both in
Prison together, and with them many other Bishops, Ecclesiastics, and
Confessors, (the same Quarrel that Novatianus fifty years before had with
Cornelius,) took part against him; which Peter perceiving, and willing to try
how the rest stood affected, threw his Mantle cross the Prison, crying out,
(...), they that are for Epiph. ad Haeres. lib. 2. T. 2, Haer. 68.
me and my opinion, let them come hither, and they that are for Meletius let
them go to him; which being done, (...), the company, says Epiphanius, was
divided, and the greatest number of them Loc. cit. cap. 3.
went to Meletius; and from thenceforth (...), they parted Companies, and in
acts of divine Worship kept their separate Assemblies: Nay, as soon as ever
released out of Prison he, wherever he went, (...), ordained Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons of his own, against the Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons constituted before by Peter, and thereupon erected Churches for his own
Faction; and so divided the Church, that each Party refused to communicate with
the other; distinguishing their Assemblies (as the aforesaid Author has it) by
an Inscription over their Church doors; those who followed Peter taking to
themselves the ancient name of (...), the Catholic Church; and those who went
after Meletius, (...), the Church of Martyrs. Nay, though many of both sides
were afterward condemned to the Mines, (...), they would not even there so
much as communicate or pray together: A breach of so ill consequence to the
Church, that being brought before the Nicene Fathers, they disabled the Bishops
which Meletius had made, till confirmed by a more holy and warrantable
Ordination; and as for himself, they confined him to his own City, (...),
allowing him no power for the future to elect Socr. l. 1. c. 6.
or to lay hands on any; declaring him to be such an Offender in the Case, that
(...), according to the rigor of Justice he deserved no Favor at all.

9. Such another Schism was that in Africa, begun at Carthage by Majorinus his
being made Bishop there, whilst Caecilian, the preordained Bishop, Advers.
Parm. lib. 1. p. 19. Aug, contra Parm. lib. 1. cap. 3. Paris. 1679.
was living. The Promoters were few, (as Optatus observes,) two baffled
Competitors, two or three sacrilegious Church-robbers, potens and factiosa
Mulier, a rich, factious, and exasperated Woman: The Abetters not many more,
(among whom Donatus, who gave name to the Faction,) all Traditors, and so
incapable of ordaining others, or continuing in their own Orders. But though so
despicable Infects at first, yet Cyp. Ep. 65.
no sooner embodied and winged, but, like the Locusts in the Revelations, they
soon overspread and covered the Land, filled all the Territories and places
thereof; insomuch that in their Council at Bagaia you shall Aug. cont. Ep.
Parm. l. 1. c. 4 Edit. Paris. 1531. Cont. Parm. lib. 1. p. 22.
find no less than three hundred and odd Bishops of their brood: Nay, so
numerous, that whereas formerly men were accustomed to blush and be ashamed of
their Actions, there were none at that time, says Optatus, to do it, quia
praeter paucos Catholicos peccaverunt universi; forasmuch as all were become
Sinners, and all (a few Catholics excepted) Apostates from the Unity of the
Church. A Schism that lasted near an hundred years; Aug. lib. 3. cont. Julianum.
and might have continued much longer in the Church, had not the pars Donati
(upon the death of Parmenian their Bishop) put two new ones, Primianus and
Maximianus, together in the Chair at once, of whom Saint Augustine makes this
Remark, that for any Worth or Excellency in them Ep. 162.
(other than to head a Faction) Maximianus might have been Minimianus, and
Primianus might have been Postremianus. However this Bishop upon Bishop so
divided and subdivided the Party, that it broke their Unity, and made as much
Havoc and Destruction in the Schismatical, as it had done Id. Ep. 50.
before in the Catholic Church. Other Instances might be given, and always
producing the like effect; as at Antioch, when Paulinus was added Socr. l. 5.
c. 2.
to Meletius without his Consent; at The^d. sib. 2. cap. 17.
Rome, when Foelix was put over the head of Liberius; at Sozom. l. 8. cap. 23.
Constantinople, when Arsacius invaded the Throne of St. Chrysostom. In short,
Ambition, Pride, and Interest will never want a Bishop for any See or any
Church. Facite me Romanae urbis Episcopum, make me but Primate or Metropolitan
of Rome, (says Praetextatus, Hierom. ad Pameracb. adv error. Hierosol. po. 2.
p. 165.
that unbaptized Heathen,) and I will forthwith become a Christian; and if once
a Bish^p, he will soon have his Altar and Party; though as soon as ever he be in,
he by his Separation and Schism will put himself out of the Church again, and
turn as rank an Infidel perhaps as ever he was before.

10 Now this Unity of Priesthood and Altar was first commanded under the Law,
as the only Preservative and Remedy against Schism in those days; and
therefore God, to keep his People the Jews in one uniform way of Worship
throughout the Land, appointed but one Altar, one Place of Sacrifice, and one
High Priest; insomuch that to set up another High Priest against the High
Priest already established, though of the Seed of Aaron, as in the case of
Manasses against Jaddus; or another Altar against the Altar of Jerusalem,
though built according to the Pattern of the other, as in the case of Jeroboam,
was to multiply Sin as well as Priests and Altars; because Ephraim, as it is in
Hosea, has made many Chapter 8. v. 11.
Altars to Sin, Altars shall be to him for a Sin. Nay, by this very Strategem
it was that Jeroboam kept up the Rent and Schism which he had made between
Judah and Benjamin, and the other ten Tribes of Israel: For, says he, If this
People go up to do Sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, 1. Kings
12. 27.
as of old, then shall the heart of this People turn again unto their Lord,
even to Rehoboam, the King of Judah: Whereupon he made an House, set up an
Altar, and thereunto consecrated Priests of his own; an action so infamous and
criminal, that though God permitted him to keep the Kingdom to his dying day,
yet he would scarce suffer his Name ever after to be mentioned, without an
eternal Blot upon it, this is that Son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin: Yea,
and so hateful and provoking, that for that very cause, and that cause only,
the Lord rejected all the 2 Kings 17. 20, 21.
Seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of
Spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight. And to this St. Cyprian
alludes, when he would beat down the like Practices among Christians; quam
inseparabile Vnitatis Sacramentum, how inseparable the band of Unity is, and
how without hope, says he, they pull down the wrath Cyp. Ep. 69. p. 182. Magno.
of God upon them, who divide the Church, and by casting off their own Bishops,
assume false ones to themselves, they may sufficiently be admonished from the
Scissure made in Israel, by their making to themselves false Kings: God never
ceased plaguing them till he sent them away Captives, and brought others into
their room; and without doubt tanta Indignatio adversus illos qui Schisma
faciunt, no less Calamity and Destruction will befall those who rend the
Church, and by setting up new Bishops of their own, break the Unity of it.

11. Thus far then it is plain and evident, That in one Church or Diocese there
can be but one Bishop at a time; and that if more happen to be placed therein,
there will arise a Schism. Let us then once more, as the Prophet Jeremy
advises, ask for the old Paths, and enquire for Chapter 6. v. 16.
the old Way, and we shall find it altogether as evident and plain, that the
first Bishop (if canonically placed in the Sea, was ever accounted the true and
catholic, and the second the false and schismatical Bishop; and that the
Church was ever adjuged to go along with those, who by a lawful Ordination
were first set up in it; and the Schism with those who were afterward
superinduced and clapped upon them. Videndum est, we are to observe, says
Optatus, who keeps Apostolical Succession, and who deserts Ad. Parm. l. 1. p.
18. Edit. Paris. 1679.
it; quis Cathedram sederit alteram, quae ante non fuit; who sits in a Chair
that none sat in before, who it is that erects Altar against Altar; quis
Ordinationem fecerit salvo altero ordinato, who ordains another when one was
ordained before, who it is that falls under the Apostle's Saying, that many
Antichrists should go forth, because they were not of us. And 1 John 2. 19.
^p^, ad Parm. l. 2. p. 35, 36.
again, We must be sure to observe, qui prior Cathedra sederit, who the first
is that was placed in the Chair; ut jam Schismaticus and Peccator, qui contra
singularem Cathedram alteram collocaret, for he is the Schismatic and Sinner,
who erects another Chair against that single Chair. Hence was the Novatian
Schism laid at the door of Novatianus, Cornelius being in the Chair, and first
Bishop of the place. Ecclesia una est, the Church, says St. Cyprian, is one;
and if it be with Cornelius, who succeeded Fabian, Ep 69. p. 181. Mag.
and was first ordained, Novatian cannot be in the Church, neither is he to be
accounted a Bishop thereof; Evangelica and Apostolica Traditione contempta, for
in as much as he contemns the Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition, he
succeeds none; a scipso ortus, but is self-begot, and self raised. Again,
Cornelins factus est Episcopus de Dei and Christi ejus judicio, Cornelius Ep.
55. p. 104. Antoniano.
is made Bishop according to the appointment of God and his Christ; wherefore
whosoever is made Bishop after him, foris fiat, must be without, and not of the
Church; qui post unum qui solus esse debet, he that is made Bishop after one
which must needs be alone, non jam secundus est ille, sed nullus, he is not a
second, but no Bishop at all. The like was laid unto the Charge of Majorinus,
who was by a set of Traditors ordained over the head of Caecilian of Carthage;
Whereupon, says Optatus, in Africa sicut Advers. Parm. l. 1. p. 17.
in caeteris Provinciis una erat Ecclesia, there was but one Church in Africa,
as in all other Provinces, till divided by the Ordainers of Majorinus: For till
then conferta erat Ecclesia, the Church was thronged with People, the Page. 21,
22.
Episcopal Chair crowded, the Altar remained in its proper place, whereat St.
Cyprian, Lucian, and many other peaceable Bishops before had ministered; but
upon the unlawful Ordination of Majorinus, exitum est for as, there was a going
forth, and Altar was set up against Altar: And so manifestum est, it is evident
and clear, exiisse de Ecclesia and Ordinatores and Majorinum qui ordinatus est,
that Majorinus and his Ordainers, and not Caecilian and his Followers, went out
of the Church, and made the Schism: And therefore says the same Optatus to
Parmenian, one of the Successors to Majorinus, video te adhuc ignorare, I
perceive thou art still ignorant, Lib. 1. p. 11.
that the Schism was made first by your Leaders and Predecessors; quare harum
originem rerum, look but into the first beginning of it, and you will find that
Caecilian did not go out from Majorinus, but Majorinus from Caecilian; neither
did Caecilian break the Succession by departing from the Chair of St. Cyprian,
but Majorinus. And since so it was, it is evident vos Haeredes Traditorum and
Schismaticorum, that You and Yours are the Offspring of Traditors and
Schismatics; and not Caecilian and his Party.

12. Nay, so far did this Priority of Ordination upon a due and legitimate
Succession prevail, that it not only nulled the Ordination of the super
ordained, but thrust both him and his Ordainers as well out of the Catholic,
whose Rules they had broke, as out of the Particular Church, whose Chair they
had invaded. Episcopatum tenere non posset, etiamsi Episcopus Ep. 55. p. 112.
Antoniano.
prius factus, He cannot, says St. Cyprian, hold a Bishopric, though he
really a Bishop himself, whosoever separates from the Unity of his Fellow
Bishops, and thereby divides the Church; for in so separating he makes a
Defection, and can no longer retain, nec Episcopi Potestatem nec Honorem,
either the Power or the Honor of a Bishop. And again, Christ, Ep. 69. p. 182.
Magno.
says he, insinuating to us his desire of Unity, farther adds, There shall be
one Flock and one Sheepherd; and if one Flock, quomodo potest gregi annumerare?
how can he be accounted to be of that Flock who is not one of it? Aut Pastor
haberi quomodo potest? Or how can he be a Sheepherd there, who (whilst the true
Sheepherd is alive) succeeds none, but is self-created, and self set up; a
perfect Enemy to divine Unity; not of the fold, in as much as none dwell there
but who live in Unity and Concord? Nay, if he must be an Heathen man and a
Publican who neglects to hear the Church, much more must they be so, qui
falsa Altaria, illicita Sacerdotia; who feign to themselves false Altars,
unlawful Priesthoods, unhallowed Sacrifices, corrupt and adulterous Titles.

13. It would almost amaze a man in these loose times to hear what hard
language the holy Fathers bestow upon these unholy Persons, their Ordinations,
their Altars, and their Oblations. As for themselves, they are described to be
Opt. l. ^2.
Peccatores, Schismatici, Cyp. Ep. 59.
Adulteri, Extranei, Ibid.
Pseudoepiscopi, Ep. 69.
Fidei Praevaricatores, Ecclesiae Proditores, Dominicae Pacis ac divine
Vnitatis inimici, nemini succedentes, a seipso orti, nulli; Sinners
Schismatics, Adulterers, Outliers, Mockbishops, Falsifiers of the Faith,
Betrayers of the Church, Enemies to divine Peace and Unity, succeeding none,
from themselves proceeding, and in reality no Bishops at all; their Ordination
Cyp. de unit. Eccl.
contra Ordinationem Dei, Id. Ep. 4. 43.
contra Dispositionem divinam, Ep. 45.
contra Sacramentum semel traditum divinae Dispositionis and catholicae
Vnitatis, Ep. 55.
contra Dei Traditionem, Ep. 46. Opt. lib. 2.
contra ecclesiasticam Dispositionem, contra evangelicam Pacem, contra
Institutionis catholicae Vnitatem; contrary to divine Tradition and
Appointment, ecclesiastical Sanction, evangelical Order, catholic Institution
and Unity. Their Chair Cathedra Pestilentiae, a Chair of Pestilence, that first
infects, then kills, and sends to Hell. Their Altars Cyp. Ep. 68, and 69.
falsa and prophana, false and profane. Their Sacrifices Ep. 68.
sacrilega, irreligiose and illicite contra jus divinae Institutionis oblata;
sacrilegious, unlawful, and affrontive of the divine Institution, The Schism
occasioned thereby Aug. Ep. 162.
horrendum scelus, Cyp. de unit. Eccles.
summum, malum, a most horrid Sin, the chiefest of Crimes; pejus quam quod
admisisse lapsi, worse than the Sins of those that fell by offering to Idols;
yea, and of so deep a stain, nec Sanguine abluitur, that it is not to be washed
out with the Blood of Martyrs; neither will their unity of Faith, or their
being Confessors for it, excuse them from so foul a Charge.

14. In vain do they pretend to the same Religion, to the same Symbol of Faith,
to the same Profession; what if they continue the same way of Worship, the same
Mysteries, the same Rituals, and the very same Form of Ordination? What if they
be chosen by the Suffrage of the greatest part of the People, accepted by the
Majority of the Clergy, consecrated by a sufficient number of Bishops? Yet this
(all this) will not atone, much less expiate for the uncanonicalness of their
superordination, or for the irregularity and injustice of their Usurpation.
Quod vero eundem quem and nos; what if they believe with us, says St. Cyprian
concerning the Novatian Ep. 69. p. 183. Magno.
Schismatics, in the same God the Father, in the same Son Christ Jesus, and in
the same Holy Ghost? Nec hoc adjuvare tales potest, yet even this will not
profit such Prevaricators as they: for Corah, Dathan and Abiram, worshipped one
and the same God, according to one and the same Religion and Law, as Aaron the
High Priest did; tamen quia loci sui Ministerium, yet because they were
disatisfied with their own Station, and would have usurped the Priesthood, and
laid aside Aaron, necpotuerunt rata esse, and proficere Sacrificia, their
Sacrifices were abhorred, and their Censor's made Memorials against them, that
no Stranger (which is not of the Seed of Aaron) should ever after presume to
offer Incense to the Lord. Possumus and nos dicere, we can say (says Optatus
to Parmenian and his Donatists) Pares credimus, We believe alike, and are
sealed with the L. 3. p. 78. and L. 5. p. 99.
same seal as you; We are no otherwise Baptized than you, no otherwise
Ordained; We read the same Scriptures, say the same Prayers, have the same
Ecclesiastical Discipline, the same Sacraments, the same Mysteries; sed
scissura facta, but there is a Scissure made by you, and that is your fault,
and by you it must be amended, and made up. (...), Nothing (says St.
Chrysostom) divides the Church Hom. 2 in Ep. ad Ephesians. Edit. Paris. 1621.
sooner than the love of Pre-eminence, and nothing provokes God more than to
have his Church divided; (...), why do you therefore say, there is still the
same Faith; and they are no less Orthodox than we. But if so, why are they not
with us? (...), there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and if they are
right, we are wrong; but if we are right, they are wrong; (...); do you think
it sufficient they are Orthodox, whilst they overlook and pass by the right of
Ordination, its Priority and Order? (...), we ought certainly as much and as
earnestly to contend for the one as for the other: And not without good reason
too; for if every one may be ordained and made a Bishop in the Church, in vain
was the Altar ercted, the Congregation appropriated, and the Priests limited;
every thing then must come to Ruin and Confusion.

15. And to no more purpose is the Eminency of their Learning, the Excellency
of their Parts, their stout Defense of their Religion, or their Sufferings for
it, pleadable in the Case: What if they have Wrote well, Preached well,
Disputed well, Suffered well; been Banished, Imprisoned, Tormented? What if
they have Converted some, Confirmed others, and (when the foundations of the
Earth were shaken, and the Ark of God tottering) they were seemingly such that
kept the one from being removed, and the other from falling. Quisquis ille est,
and qualiscunque est, Christianus non est, qui in Ecclesia Christi non est,
whosoever, Ep. 55. p. 112. Antoniano.
and how great soever he be, (says St. Cyprian of Novatian,) if he be not in
the Church, a Christian he cannot be; jactet se licet, for though he prides
himself never so much for his Rhetoric and Eloquence, though (like Saul) he
appear for his Piety and Parts taller by the head, than the rest of his
Brethren, yet since he retains not Brotherly Charity and Ecclesiastical Unity,
quod prius fucrat, amisit, what soever he was before, he is now lost as to it
all, and become no better than Salt that has lost his savor. And thus the
Apostle long before had decreed; Though I speak (says he) with the Tongue of
Men 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.
and Angels, and have not Charity; though I understand all Mysteries, and all
Knowledge, and have not Charity; nay, though I bestow my Goods upon the poor,
and give my Body to be burnt, and have not Charity, I am (nay it profitteth me)
nothing. Upon which words the aforesaid St. Cyprian thus discants, Cum Deo
manner non possunt, they cannot be with God who hold not the Unity of De Unit.
Eccl. p. 114.
his Church; for though they suffer themselves to be thrown into the Flames,
though they expose their persons to Wild and Savage Beasts, non erit illi fidei
Corona, sed poena perfidiae, they shall receive the demerit of their perfidity
and unfaithfulness, but not the Crown due to their Faith; occidi talis,
coronari non potest, such an one may indeed be slain, but he cannot be crowned;
Martyrdom is always within the Church; esse Martyr Id. 113.
non potest, qui in Ecclesia non est: Nay, it may be Martydom to suffer, rather
than to divide the Church. Hence Dionysius writing to Novatus, Eusebii Hist. l.
6. (...).
tells him, (...), Thou should have suffered any thing rather than divide
the Church: Neither is that Martyrdom, which is suffered for not divulging the
Church, of l^ss Glory than that which is suffered for not sacrificing to
Devils; (...), nay, in my opinion, it is far greater; For in the one, Martyrdom
is suffered for one Soul, in the other for the Universal Church.

16 Being thus far advanced, and finding it no unprecented Case to have Bishops
set over the head of Bishops, it will be worth our pains to enquire how the
Church resented them, what Communion they held with them, what Deference they
paid them, what Honor they gave them. And I find,

17. That the whole College of Bishops, all the Christian World over (that went
not out with them) ever rejected their Ordination; would neither Communicate
with, nor be Communicated by them; neither send to, nor receive Letters
encyclical from them. Cum ad nos in Africam Legatos misisset, when Novatianus,
that new made Bishop, sent into Africa to us to be received into our
Fellowship; we (says St. Cyprian) with the advices of many of our Colleagues,
returned him this answer, se foris esse, Ep. 68. p. 177. Stephano.
nec a quoquam nostrum sibi communicari; that he was gone out from us, and
therefore could expect no longer to continue a Communion with us. Neither did
Maximus his Presbyter, or Augendus his Deacon (that first brought the news of
his Ordination) escape much better; for illicitae and contra Ecclesiam
Catholicam factae Ordinationis pravitate commoti, being provoked with the
irregularity of the Ordination, as being contrary Ep. 44. p. 85, 86. Cornelio.
to the usuage of the Catholic Church, we forbad them (says St. Cyprian) our
Communion, and gave no other answer to their Embassy, than that laying aside
all dissension and strife, they would consider what an Impiety it was to desert
the Church their Mother; and how Episcopo semel facto, that after one Bishop
was legally Constituted and Eustalled, another could by no means be
superinduced, or put into the same Stall with him, Damasus (says Optatus to
Parmenian) succeeded Liberius, and Siricius Lib. 2. p. 36.
(who is at present our Colleague and fellow Bishop) succeeded Damasus, cum quo
nobis totus orbis commercio formatarum, in una Communionis Societate concerdat,
with whom, as with us, the whole Christian World by their Communicatory Letters
continue in Society and Concord together; a favor never afforded to the
Donatists. I own, says St. Augustine, that Ep. 62. p. 140.
I do write ad nonnullos Donatistarum primarios, to certain of the chief
Bishops and Leaders among the Donatists: But it is to show them their Errors,
privatas tantum qualibus vobis, uti etiam ad Paganos licet; however they are
private Letters, and such as are lawful to send to Pagans; non
Communicatorias, not Letters Communicatory, quas jam olim propter suam
perversitatem ab Vnitate Catholica quae toto orb diffusa est, non accipiunt;
which by reason of their long obstinacy and perverseness, are denied them all
the World over.

18. And no more kind were the Laity to them; for they remonstrated against
their Election, renounced their Precedence, would have nothing to do with their
Altars, their Clergy, or their Oblations; nay, such an abhorrency they had of
them, that they would into Banishment, into Death, rather than into Communion
with them. Hence we find St. Ambrose in his Funeral Oration upon Satyrus his
Brother, approving and commending him for that he avoided the Luciferian
Bishops, their Churches and their Assemblies; for though desirous of the Holy
Sacrament, non it a avidus fuit, ut esset incautus, he was not, says he, so
desirous of it as not to be Orat. in Fun. Frat. Tom. 3. p. 19. Edit. Basil.
1567.
careful from whose hands he took it; and therefore advocavit ad se Episcopum,
he calls first the Bishop that was to administer it, and asked him, utrumnam
cum Episcopis Catholicis conveniret, whether he was one of those that were in
Communion with the Catholic Bishops? non enim putavit fidem esse in Schismate;
for he did not believe that a right Faith could be had in a wrong and
Schismatical Profession. No less a Zeal may be observed in those more
Honorable Ladies, and Worthy Matrons of Rome, when Liberius their Bishop was
banished, and Felix put into his room, they, says the Historian, perceiving
the lukewarmness, or rather cowardice Theod. lib. 2. cap. 17. Edit. Col. Allob.
of their Husbands in the case, dressed themselves as became their Quality,
went to the Emperor, and besought him, (...), that he would take pity upon the
City, and restore to them their Bishop again; or at least give them and others
leave to follow him; adding that though he had placed another over them, (...);
that neither they, nor any other of the Citizens would ever enter the Church
whilst he was in it. And thus it was when Arsacius was thrust into the Sea of
Constantinople in the place of St. Chrysostom; nay, so averse were the Citizens
to, receive him that (...), though they met him in the Streets, they would not so
much as vouchsafe to salute Theod. lib. 5. cap 35.
him. Neither were they more complying when Atticus was put upon them in the
room of Arsacius; none of them would communicate with him. Nay, though an Edict
was procured for the Expulsion and Confiscation of the Goods of all such
Bishops, for the Deprivation of all such public Officers, and for the
Banishment of all such Artificers and Tradesmen that would not communicate with
him; yet none (says Palladius) but the In vit. Chrysostom. c. 10. p. 95, 96. Edit.
Lut. Par. 1680.
poorer Bishops, (...), and those that were weaker in the Faith, went in unto
them; whereas the others despising the World, and willing (...), to keep
themselves upright, and their Consciences undefiled, (...), some of them fled
to Rome, some of them to the Mountains, and some to foreign Monasteries; the
People all the while that staid behind keeping up their Meetings in the open
fields. And thus it happened again at Rome, in the time of the contention
between Damasus and Vrsinus; the tumult Lib. 4. c. 24.
(says Socrates) was great, occasioned (...), not about Faith or Heresy, but
whether of the two by right should be Bishop: And here I pretend not to
determine the Priority of Ordination to either; and Praef. ad lib. precum,
Edit. Oxon. 1678.
yet I know that Marcellinus and Faustinus gives it to Vrsinus, as well as
Socrates and others to Damasus; and perhaps if things were rightly weighed and
duly examined, Vrsinus that lost it, might bid as fair for the Chair as
Damasus, that got and possessed it. However the Vrsinians Loco citat.
buoyed up themselves with the precedence of a seven days Ordination, would
have nothing to do with the other; Nay, when Damasus had prevailed so far with
the Emperor as to have Vrsinus banished, and his Clergy imprisoned, or sent
after him, so that none were left to officiate among them; yet rather than go
in to Damasus, Populus timens Deum, per coemiteria Martyrum stationes sine
Clericis celebrabat, the People that feared God more than the Emperor, his
Judges, or the new made Bishop, met at the Tombs of the Martyrs, and held on
their stations without them.

19. Neither let the Apostatizing Clergy or the complying Laity, who run along
with those disorderly Bishops, think that they, for their so doing, are under
no Crime, or deserve no Censure: Abstinuimus communicatione Felicissimum and
Augendum, item Repostum de extorribus, Irenen Rutilorum, and. Paulam
Sarcinatricem, Sophronium, and ipsum de extorribus Soliassum Budinarium; We
have (says Caldo^ius in a Letter to St. Cyprian) Ep. 42. p. 81.
according to your Order, separated from our Communion Felicissimus and
Augendus, Repostus the Exile, Irene the Radler, Paula the Peddler; as also
Sophronius, and with him Soliassus the Mulettor. As for Felicissimus (says St.
Cyprian) he endeavors, cum Episcopo portionem plebis dividere, Ep. 41. Cyp.
Call.
to share the People with his Bishop; that is, to divide the Sheep from the
Shepherd, and the Children from the Father, and therefore decree him
excommunicated: As for Augendus, nec Episcopum nec Ecclesiam cogitat, he
neither has regard to his Bishop nor the Church, but confederates and combines
with the other; and therefore let the same sentence pass upon him: and quisquis
se conspirationi ejus adjuxerit, and as for the rest that go on in the Faction
with them, let them also know, that they are not to communicate with us in the
same Church. Now of these some were Clericks, as Felicissimus and Angendus;
others Confessors, as Repostus and Soliassus; others common Christians, as
Irene, Paula, and perhaps Sophronius: from whence we may justly infer, that it
is not the high Calling of the Clergy, the meritorious sufferings of the
Confessors, the Simplicity and Plainness of the well-meaning Christian; no, nor
the Trimming between both Parties, flattering the one, and holding Communion
with the other, whilst they herd with the Out-liers, and be found in their
Quarters, that will excuse them from the foul guilt of Schism, or the due
Demerits of it. The Confessors at Rome were very sensible of this, videbamur
quandam Communicationem cum Schismaticis and haeretico homine habuisse: We
seemed, say they to Cornelius, to have held Communion Corn. ad Cyp. Ep. 45.
with Novatian and his Schismatical followers, for we frequented their
Assemblies, appeared amongst them in their Holy Offices of Religion, sincera
tamen men's nostra semper in Ecclesia fuit; yet our Hearts and our Souls ever
went along with the Church. We knew there was but one God, one Christ, one Holy
Spirit, and unum Episcopum in Catholica Ecclesia esse debere, and that there
ought to be but one Bishop in a Church. However nos imposturam passi sumus, we
cannot but say, we were imposed upon, and do heartily pray, ut abolerentur, and
de memoria tollerentur, that those things may be forgiven and forgotten, and we
received again into Communion with Cornelius our lawful Bishop. Such there were
that could run with the Hare, and hunt with the Hounds, and such (without
doubt) there will be amongst us; my Prayer is that their number may be but
small, and (like the beforementioned Confessors) they may soon see their Error
and return.

20. But of all the Sinners in the pack, none more outrageously so, than the
Ordainers and their Accomplices; those Bishops, I mean, that first dressed up the
Ape, set him in the Chair, and bad God speed unto him: Hence, though Submission
and Penance might reconcile the other Clergy, yet nothing less than utter
Deprivation, and loss of their Sacerdotal Honor could atone for such. Of the
three Bishops, says Cornelius in his Synodical Epistle to Fabian, that
ordained Novatian, (...) Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 35.
(...), one of them repented and returned unto the Church, and we received them
into Communion; (...), but no farther did we receive him than to the Communion
of the Laity; and as for the other two engaged with him in the Ordination, we
deposed them, and ordained others in their room. And so it faired with
Trophimus, one of those forward Bishops that received and congratulated
Navatianus in his Election; susceptus est Trophimus, Trophimus upon his
repentance was absolved and admitted; but after all so admitted, ut Laicus
communicet, non quasi locum Sacerdotis usurpet, that he must thenceforth Cyp.
55. p. 105.
communicate but as a Laick, and no longer as a Priest or Bishop. The severity
of this Sentence came indeed afterward to be more or less moderated, wherefore
Melchiades Bishop of Rome, to whom the cause of the Donatists was referred,
would have none but Donatus himself, quem totius mali principem invenerat, whom
he found, as St. Austine records the matter, chief Author of all the mischief,
to bear the burden alone; offering Ep. 162. fol. 141. cap. 3.
the rest upon their return to the Unity of the Church, the continuance of
their Bishoprics, and his Letters Communicatory, though they had been ordained
by Majorinus or any others in the State of Schism: Ita ut quibuscunque locis
duo essent Episcopi, quos dissentio geminasset; so that in all places where the
Schism had caused two Bishops, the prior ordained was to be established, and
the second removed to some other vacancy: But then this was Sanitatis
recuperandae optio, with desire and design to heal the Breach and make up the
Schism. Thus again was Firminus, Bishop of Istria, admitted by St. Gregory
without a deposition: But then this was 300 years after the Greg. lib. 10.
Indict. 5. c. 37. Edit. Paris. 1551.
Schism first commenced, and at a time when it was grown inconsiderable, the
knot being broken almost 200 years before, insomuch that some few scatterings
only were here and there remaining; however not without due caution for the
future, for they were solemnly to swear, se nunquam ad Schisma reversuros, sed
semper in unitate Ecolesiae Catholicae, and communione Romani Pontificis per
omnia mansuros, that they would never thenceforth depart from the Unity of the
Catholic Church, and, because more Greg. Iud. cad. cap. 31.
particularly belonging to the jurisdiction of Rome, not from the Communion of
the Roman See. Such an Oath was not long after, as Petrus de Marca, in his Book
de Concord. Sacerdot. and Imp. informs us, given to Adalbertus before L. 6. c.
3. n. 13. Edit. Paris. 1663.
his Consecration, by Hinemarus his Metropolitan, Privilegio Metropolis Remorum
Ecclesia, ac ejus Praesulis, secundum sacrosanctos Conciliorum Canones, and
Decreta Sedis Apostolicae, ex sacris Canonibus and Legibus promulgata,
proscire, and posse, absque dolo and simulatione, vel indebita and pertinaci
contradictione me obediturum profiteor. I do promise from this time forward, to
the best of my skill and power, without dissimulation and fraud, and all manner
of wilful contradiction, to be obedient to, and observant of, all the Rights
and Privileges of the Metropolitical Church of Rhemes, of the Archbishop
thereof, as they are established and set forth by the Holy Canons of the
Church; and by the Decrees of the Apostolical See, therewith agreeing.

21. An Oath much like that still in being, and hitherto tendered by the
Archbishop of Canterbury to all his Suffragans, at the Consecration of them;
and it were to be wished, that such as have been Consecrated by Form of Conscr.
of Bishops.
him, or by any of his Antecessors, would seriously consider the obligation it
lays on them; in reference to which, I make bold to propose two eminent
instances,; the one of Ivo, the other of our English Bishops. Ivo Carnotensis,
one of the Suffragans to the Archbishop of Sena (as Petrus de Marca relates
the matter) was desired by Hugo Bishop of Lions and L. 6. c. 3. n. 14.
Legate to the Roman Pontife, to assist him at the Consecration of the Bishop
of Niverna, a Suffragan properly belonging to the said Archbishop; without any
consent or approbation had from him, or by whose appointment according to the
Canon of the Church, he ought only to be consecrated: Ivo utterly refuses to
give his assistance, answering, that if he should engage in such an Ordination,
reus fieret violatae sponsionis, quam Sedi Metropolitanae fecerat, he should
become guilty of the breach of his Oath, made at his own Ordination to his
Metropolitan. The other instance shall be in our own Bishops, in the time of
King William the Second; and I take it from the Author of a Discourse
concerning the Illegality of the late Commission, and for which he quotes
Eadmerus; the case thus: Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury was complained of by
the King to the Page 17.
Parliament, with order to the Bishops his Suffragans to depose him, the
Bishops sensible of what Oath they had taken at the time of their Ordination
(instead of proceeding to a Deprivation) declared, they could not deprive him
to whom they had promised Obedience. These things I propose to their
considerations, and wish they would seriously apply them.

22. The nature of Schism being thus set forth, and laid at the doors of them
that cause it; my next work shall be to show the Heinousness and Injustice of
the present Schism; a Schism perhaps capable of as great or greater
Aggravations than any that ever happened in the Church from the first rise of a
Schism in it.

23. It is not the manner of the Romans (says Festus concerning St. Paul) to
condemn any Man before that he who is accused have the accusers Acts 25. 16.
face to face, and have license to answer for himself, concerning the crime
laid against him; nor no more has it been the manner of the Church: Videmus
quae res coegit fieri Altar contra Altar, let us examine (says St. Austin)
what first caused the D^natists to raise their Altar; Si Hypop^al. cont. Donat.
Tom. 7. f. 2.
malus erat Sacerdos, deponendus erat ante, si non poterat deponi, tolerandus
intra rete; if Cacilian had been a Traditor, or done any thing else against the
Canons, meritting a Deposition, he ought to have been deposed before another
Bishop had been put upon him; but if he were guilty of no such thing, he ought
to have continued sole Bishop there; non judices consederunt, non Sacerdotes de
more; There were no Bishops (as usual it was) to hear and judge the matter; no
Accusers, no Witnesses, no Libel whereby his crime might have been made out;
but instead thereof, furor, dolus, tumultus, qui regnant in falsitate, nothing
but Fury, Fraud, Tumult, which ever rule in a bad cause. Nowadays (says Pope
Innocent, in reference to St. Chrysostom) (...), Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 26.
The innocent Bishops in a very preposterous manner are thrust out of their
Churches, for others to be put into their places, having neither their crimes
heard, nor they so much as summoned to desend themselves: A proceeding so novel
and unjust, that we never knew it practiced by our Forefathers, but rather
forbad, (...) (...), for as much as he cannot be a Bishop that is put over
another, unless he be deposed by due process of Law: And so it was determined
by the Fathers in the Constantinopolitan Council, We hold it necessary (say
they) for the avoiding of contentions, and In Temp. Soph. Can. 16.
tumults in the Church, to decree, (...), That none be made a Bishop in a
Church where another presides, and retains his Honor; for though he may be
every way faulty, and justly deserve deposing, (...), yet after all, his Cause
ought first to be heard, and his Crimes thoroughly examined; and if upon that he
be deposed, (...), then may another, though he do survive, be ordained, and
placed in his Chair. But to pass Judgment against any, without citing or
hearing the Party accused, is a procedure, says St. Chrysostom, (...), without
Pallad. de vita Chrysostom. p. 22.
Precedent, and contrary to Law and Canon; never practiced either by the
Heathens or Barbarians in their Judicatories; (...), nay, the very Scythians
and Sarmatans, the most uncivilized Nations of all, never were so unjust,
cruel, or unreasonable.

24. Now the Judgment of these matters in the more early and purer days of
Christianity, was altogether referred to Episcopal Audience; (...). Apos. 74.
We hold it necessary, says the Canon, That Bishops should be convened and
judged by Bishops; and so the Carthaginian Fathers decree, (...), Blast. Synt.
tit. D in Can. 12. ex Edit. Bevereg.
That the faults of Bishops be discussed and determined by a Synod of Bishops;
or if a full Synod cannot be had in time, and it appear necessary that the
Criminal be tried, (...), that then his Cause be referred to twelve of them at
least. And so far did this Canon prevail, that because John Bishop of Amathus
was deposed by fewer, his Deposition was declared, as Balsamon relates, (...),
to be invalid and void. And for this end (that matters arising, and
Controversies between Party and In praed. Can. ex Edit. Bevereg.
Party depending, might timely be decided) it was farther provided by the first
Canons, (...), That yearly Can. Apos. 37. Con. Nic. 5. Ant. 20.
twice in a year such Episcopal Synods should be held; afterward (...), by
reason of the great fatigue expenses and dangers they were put unto by their
journeys, that they should be, (...), but once in the year. Can. 6, 8, 7, 6.


25 Neither did the Emperors by becoming Christians alter the case; for either
they left the Judgment wholly to the Bishops, as was formerly done, or if they
interposed, it was ever in conjunction with them; taking their advice, and
oftentimes their directions from them. Thus when the Donatists petitioned
Constantine the Great, to grant them an hearing of the case between them and
the Caecilianists, he, quia non est ausus de causa Episcopi judicare, because
he did not think it proper for him to sit Aug. Ep. 166.
Judge over Bishops in Episcopal matters, sent them to Melchiades, Bishop of
Rome, and to three other Bishops from France, Rheticius, Marinus, and Maternus,
to be judged by them: But no ways satisfied with their judgment, they desire a
farther hearing, whereupon he, omnino cupien^ tantam impudentiam cohibere,
willing to restrain and suppress so great an A^^. Ep. 162.
insolency, dedit aliud Arelatense Concilium, granted them another Synod at
Arles; adding that it was not for him, ut de judicio Episcoporum, qui Romae
sederunt, ipse judicaret, to judge of the judgment passed by the Bishops at
Rome: But not yet contented, because condemned as before, they appeal to
Constantine himself, ut causam Constantinus audiret, that he would be pleased
to take the judgment upon himself; and in some measure he did, but (as Bishop
Parker observes) it was not to judge, but to Rel. and Royal. Part 1 p. 299.
expose the Schismatics, or to suffer them to expose themselves: For that he
would not meddle with the business at all, till he had the discovery of
Ignatius his forgery in his pocket, to confound them with. And St. Austin by
his charitable wish seems to insinuate something like it: Vtinam ut eis ipse
cessit, ut de causa Episcopos judicaret; would to God, says he, he had
accepted their Appeal, and had judged the matter after the Bishops, Ep. 162.
a sanctis Episcopis veniam petiturus, though he had excused himself afterward
for his so doing. An undertaking that he ever declined and protested against,
quoties a me improbissimis additionibus suis sunt condigna responsione
oppressi? How often, says he, have they been repulsed by me? Co^st. Ep. Cath.
int. gest. purgationis, vid. Optat.
Which if they would but have considered, they would never have desired me to
be their Judge. I say, and I say the truth, Sacerdotum judicium ita debet
haberi, the judgment of Bishops ought as much to be regarded and followed, as
if Christ himself had sat in judgment with them; neither was this the opinion
of Constantine only, but of all his Christian Successors. I shall instance in
Valentinian only (though the same may be verified of Constantius, Valentinian
the younger, Theodosius, Gratian, Arcadius, Honorius, Justinian, Martian, etc.)
he was, says Sozomen, a very Orthodox Hist. lib. c. 20.
and devout Man, (...), and would not suffer any thing to be innovated nor
imposed upon the Bishops, that was any ways contradictory to the Laws and
Canons of the Church: One of his Edicts, as it is given us by St. Ambrose, runs
thus, In causa fidei, vel Ecclesiastici Ordinis, cum Lib. 5. Ep. 32.
judicare debet, qui nec manner impar sit, nec jure dissimilis; they, and they
only are to be deputed Judges over Ecclesiastics who are of the same Order,
and therefore to be presumed the most competent Judges because most knowing in
those Affairs: Hoc est, Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus voluit judicare; that is, as
St. Ambrose comments upon it, he would have Bishops to be the only Judges of
Bishops: An Authority, though partly Temporal, yet of that nature, that instead
of laying waste the Church, of supplanting the Bishops, or of subverting the
Canons, it became a real defense and patronage to them all; and no sooner
experienced, but was as frankly and freely consented to, in reference to the
succeeding Emperors. Placuit ut quicunque ab Imperatore, it seems good, say
the Bishops in the Milevitan Council, that if any shall appeal to the Emperor
to have Cen. 19.
his Cause tried before Secular Judges, he be deprived, but if he appeal to
have an Hearing thereof before a Synod of Bishops, it shall no ways displease.
Thus did Pope Innocent address himself to Honorius, to have the Schism between
St. Chrysostom and Arsacius ended: First he writes to Theophilus (that great
Promoter of it) to challenge him to a Council, We cannot, says he, either in
Reason or Justice withdraw our selves from Chrysostom 's Pallad. de Vit. Chrysostom.
c. 3. p. 24.
Communion, and therefore if you dare abide by the Judgment you have made of
his Deposition, (...), make your Appearance before the next Synod. And after
that he, with the rest of the Italian Bishops, sends to Honorius, that he would
write to his Brother Arcadius, Co Emperor with him, that a Council for that
end might be convened, where both Eastern and Western Bishops might
conveniently meet; which Honorius accordingly did, sending his Letters by five
Bishops, two Presbyters, and one Deacon, assuring him, That if either he or his
Bishops could satisfy them that Chrysostom was duly and justly deposed, he
(for his part) would withdraw all Communion from him; but if not, that he then
hoped He would be prevailed with to desert their Communion, and their new made
Patriarch. Whence it is obvious to infer, 1. That where two Bishops are placed
at one time in a See, a Schism must necessarily ensue. 2. That Synods only are
the Deposers of Bishops, and the only Judges of a Deposition. 3. That neither
Emperor, Senate, Privy Council, or Secular Power whatsoever can do it, without
making a Schism. 4 That till a Synod be called, and has determined the Matter,
the first must be accounted the lawful Bishop, and the second, with his
Adherent, the Schismatic.

26. And as this was the Usage, Practice, and Custom of all foreign Churches;
so it was one of those (...), those ancient Customs that the English Church
has observed. Ego Constantini, vos Petri Gladium habetis in Manibus; I, says
K. Edgar, (as cited by Twisden,) wear the Sword of Vind. Chur. 2. p. 94.
Constantine, and you of St. Peter: Now how far the first exercised his
Authority in reference to the case before us, is already shown; and if K. Edgar
went no farther, we are sure there was no seizing upon Bishops, or of putting
others into their Bishoprics, before they were heard and condemned by Bishops.
Indeed the Author of the Discourse concerning the Illegality of the late
Ecclesiastical Commission, tells us, That P. 11, 12.
the Saxon Laws are a plain Evidence that Church Matters were in those times
determined in the same Assemblies wherein the other Laws of the Kingdom were
determined; and I am apt to think that in a great measure they were: But then,
as the learned Spelman observes, Episcopu^ jura Gloss. Tit. Gemot.
divina enuntiabat, Comes secularia, alter alteri auxilio; the Bishops declared
and vindicated the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Nobles the Secular, each
supporting and assisting the other; the one according to the Canons of the
Church, and the other according to the Municipal Laws of the Land. Nay, I
cannot see, but in some cases their actings might be separate; sure I am that
in the Synod held at Bacanceld, and in that other soon after held at Clovesho,
for the restoring the Jurisdiction of the Metropolitical See of Canterbury to
its Archibishop, of which it had been despoiled by K. Offa, and contra Canones
and Apostolica Statuta in duas scissa Paroechias, and contrary to all Canons
and Constitutions Apostolical divided into two, and Spel. Conc. in Ep. Kenul.
ad Leon. 3.
in part given to Adulphus his Favorite, there was none of the Laity in them,
no Earls, no great Men of the Nation; the one being held (as we see in
Spelman,) Praesidente Kenulso Rege, by the King, Archbishop, Bishops, Conc.
Brit. an. 709, 803.
and Abbats, and multis aliis idoneis personis, and many other (not great Men,
or Nobles, but) fitting persons; the other ab Athelardo Archiepiscopo, cum
duodecim Episcopis and potiori Clero, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
twelve other Bishops, with the chiefest of their Clergy, as may appear by their
respective Subscriptions, and Spelman's Notes upon them; adding this severe and
terrible Denunciation, (Hear oh Heavens, and give ear oh Earth!) Siquis, quod
omnino absit, If any one, which God forbid, shall at any time hereafter presume
against the Apostolical Precepts, and this our Determination, Tunicam Christi
scindere, and Vnitatem ejus Ecclesiae dividere, to tear the seamless Coat of
Christ, and thereby to divide the Unity of the Church of Canterbury, sciat se
esse aeternaliter damnandum, let him know that (if he repents him not of that
his fault) he shall be eternally damned. But be it so or not, as the Author
avers; yet in this we shall not much dissent, that K. William I. having brought
England under the power of his Sword, separated Judicatures, referring, as it
was in Constantine's days, Ecclesiastical Matters to Ecclesiastical Judges.
Thus in a Council held at Winchester, he himself being present, with three
Spelm. anno 1070.
Legates from Rome, totius Cleri populus, the whole Synod of the Antiq. Brit.
de S^igand.
Clergy, after they had heard diverse things objected against Stigand, then
Archbishhp of Canterbury, eum Episcopatu and Ordinibus abdicabant, deprived him
both of his Archbishopric and his Office: The Crimes were chiefly these, quod
Archiepiscopatum, Roberto vivente, neque amoto, possidisset; because he had
possessed himself of the Archbishopric, Robert the Archbishop being alive, and
not deposed, and had worn the Pall which he left behind him, being by Force
most unjustly driven from thence: Crimes every way deserving Deposition, and
(because done by a Synod) justly so punished; and if Crimes then, they are and
must be so now, let Stigand and his Party think what they will. At the same
time, and by the same Synod, was Agelmar, Bishop of the East Angles, deposed;
Spelm. anno 1070.
but whether so justly or no, I shall not determine: And a little after Vlstan
(the good Bp. of Worcester) was by a Synod held at Westminster under Lanfranc
in like manner deposed; and (God wot) for Grounds inconsiderable enough, quia
Linguam gallicam non noverat, only because Mat. Paris Hist. Ang. Edit. Land.
1640.
he did not understand the Norman Language; which methinks to me is much the
same as if at this day Depositions were to proceed against our Bishops, because
they do not understand the Lingua of the Dutch. And at this rate, for ought I
can find, all future Affairs were managed, to K. Stephen's days; only the
Conqueror, nonnullos tam Episcopos quam Abbates, deposed several, both Bishops
and Abbats, as Conquerors use to Spel. an. 1070.
do) quos nec Concilia nec Leges Seculi damnabant, whom neither the Synods of
Bishops, nor the Laws of the Land had pronounced guilty. And thus he did, not
minding the Irregularity or Injustice of the Proceedings, sed ad confirmationem
sui quod noviter acquisiverat Regni, but that he might settle and confirm
himself in the Possession of that Kingdom which by his Arms he had newly
acquired. In K. Stephan's days, if Dr. Brady be not Compl. Hist. p. 216. Edit.
1685.
mistaken, the Canon Law and Lawyers were called into England; and no one need
to doubt, whilst that lasted, and was esteemed good Law among us, that either
the Churches Rights, their Synods, or their Judicatures were invaded. We read
indeed of some Ibid. p. 213.
that were imprisoned, of others P. 481.
that were proscribed, of others P. 479.
that had their Bishoprics seized and their Goods confiscated to the King's
use; but of none, as I can find, deposed without a Synod. There was indeed an
Attempt not long after, as Matthew Paris and Dr. Brady relate the matter, much
of a like nature, against one Adomar, alias Athelmar, the King's Brother, elect
of Winchester: He, say they, was not only forced by the Nobles to quit Hist.
Ang. p. 982. Comp. Hist. p. 635.
the Kingdom, but the King himself was so far wrought upon, that he not only
seized his Temporalties, but judged his Bishopric void; yea, and suffered
Henry de Wenghan his Chancellor to be chosen in his stead: But then Adomar all
this while was no more than elect, never consecrated Bishop; and though no more
than so, yet the very Election of another seemed so irregular to Henry that was
chosen, that he refused it, because it was litigiosa and incerta, litigious and
uncertain: Neither would the King yield unto it, but with a Salvo to his
Brother's Right; namely, Si Frater suus Athelmarus praeelectus, that if the
praeelect his Brother had or should obtain his Consecration from the Pope, to
whom he had applied himself, as it was customary in those days to do, ipsemet
prae omnibus aliis fieret in eadem Ecclesia institutus, he should be first
instituted. Nay, when the Communitas Angliae, the Comites, Proceres and
Magnates, the Nobles Mat. Par. Addit. p. 217.
and the great Men of the Nation supplicated the Pope that he might be put from
his Administration, they used his Non-consecration for an Argument; Et certe,
clementissime Pater, hoc satis credimus sine scandalo faciendum, cum non sit in
Episcopum consecratus; For this, most holy Father, we are well assured may be
granted us, seeing he is not as yet consecrated; thereby intimating and
conceding, that if he had not been consecrated, it could not by them, nor any
other, without eminent Scandal, be desired, much less effected. And if we may
believe the History of the Reformation, this lasted for Law amongst us, till
Henry VIIIth's day; neither would Burnet, part 1. p. 330.
he in any wise suffer an Eversion of it, nor so much as a Purgation, farther
than of those Canons only that were repugnant to the King's Prerogative Stat.
25. H. 8. c. 19.
Royal, and the known Laws of the Land; as certainly those ancient Canons
touching Synods and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction were not, as being in use (even
in England) long before the Italian Bishop, or his encroaching and usurping
Canons were received.

27. Neither did the Reformation innovate in this matter; for by a Preamble to
a Statute, cited by Cosins, we are told, that the People of this Apol. Courts
Eccl. part 1. chapter 14.
Realm have bound themselves, by long Use and Custom, to the Observance of
certain Laws, besides those which were ordained in this Realm (meaning the
Canon Laws) as to the accustomed Laws; and that such Laws were originally
established, as Laws of the same by the Sufferance of Kings, and by the Consent
and Customs of the People. And because some of those Laws were onerous to the
King and his Subjects, Power was granted to the King by another Statute to
nominate and assign two and 25 H. 8. c. 19.
thirty Persons (whereof sixteen of the Clergy) to view, examine, and by the
King's Signature to establish all such as they should think meet to be
established, not being contrariant to the Laws of God, to the Laws and Customs
of the Realm, or to the Damage and Hurt of the Prerogative; continuing however
the aforesaid Laws and Canons in use and vigor, under the aforesaid Proviso
and Restraint, till either the Review be made, or it be otherwise ordered and
determined. This Cranmer often pressed to have been done, says the Historian,
but he could never Hist. Ref. vol. 2. l. 3. p. 330.
obtain it during that King's Reign, insomuch that all things remained as they
were. In the 5th Year of K. Edw. VI. the Design was set on foot again, and the
Act renewed, and accordingly (says Heylin in his Ecclesia Hist. Edw. 6. Edi^.
1670.
restaurata) the King directed his Commission to Archbishop Cranmer, and
others, and afterward appointed a Sub Committee, consisting, says the Author
of the Preface to the Book called Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, of two
Bishops, two Divines, two Doctors of the Law, and two Common Lawyers, to
prepare the Work, and make it ready for the rest, that it might be dispatched
with the more Expedition. By them, says Heylin in the aforequoted place, the
Work was undertaken and digested, fashioned according to the Method of the
Roman Decretals, and called by the Name of Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum.
Nec dubium quin Parliamentari etiam Authoritate eaedem Sanctionis istae
constabilitae, And no doubt, says the same Prefacer, the Decrees had been
established by Act of Parliament, and Praes. ad Ref. Leg Eccl. Edit. 1640.
made the standing Law of the Land, if it had pleased God that the Life of the
King had been continued but a little longer. However it was not so imperfect an
Embryo, nor altogether so unshapen, but we may easily discern what Features it
had, and of what Complexion it would have been; and more particularly as to the
Case before us, Deprivation is declared to be an Ecclesiastical Crime, inter
poenas ecclesiasticis legibus constitutas, and liable to Tit. de Depr. c. 1.
the Punishments assigned by the Ecclesiastical Laws; and thereupon it orders
that a Bishop in amittendi status sui periculum venit, that falls under Cap. 2.
the danger of being deprived, be referred to the Archbishop and two other
Bishops, deputed thereunto by the King, qui Judicium exercebunt, who shall have
Power and Authority to hear and determine the said Cause. And in case of
Appeals it is farther decreed, that they may be made from Tit. de Appel. c. 11.
the inferior Courts to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, from the
Archbishop to the King, quo cum fuerit causa devoluta, which if once brought
thither, it is then to be transmitted, si gravis sit causa, if it be a matter
of great concern, to a Provincial Synod; if of a less, to three or four
Bishops, appointed thereunto to put a final End unto it; a Method purely
ancient and primitive: and if any other were practiced whilst these
Constitutions were framing, it was certainly contrary to the Designs of the
Reformers, and perhaps no more justifiable than the Sacrilege, the filling of
Ecclesiastical Places with Lay Persons, or the Bishops taking Commissions for
the Exercise of their spiritual Offices was, and which I think no Clergyman
that at this day wears a Cassock in England will advocate for. However since
the designed Book was never admitted, and no Review made thereof from that time
to this, I cannot see but what Dr. Heylin has asserted must hold good; to wit,
That all Hist. Edw. 6. p. 19.
the said Canons and Constitutions (so restrained and qualified as above) must
still remain in force, as of old they did; and so we leave the Matter for the
present.

28. And indeed a State Deposition, whatsoever noise it makes in the World, or
how much soever it pleases the Ears of some, is but a novel and wicked
Invention. If Bishops, says St. Clemens, be once constituted Ep. ad Cor. 1. c.
44.
and approved of by the Church, and it appears that they have been faithful in
their Office, constant to their Ministration, and for the time past well
thought of for their Episcopal Qualifications, (...), we cannot (if such as
these be laid aside) but look upon it as a piece of great Injustice; neither
will it be a small Crime in us, (...), if they continue piously and blamelesly
to offer up their Oblations for us, to turn them out of their Bishoprics. A
thing never heard of in the Church for many Centuries of Years: But if at any
time the Bishop became so irregular as that the Church would no longer endure
him in his Office, they deposed as well as deprived him, and reduced the first
Bishop into a Layman before they advanced the second to his See; and probably
upon this very account, to prevent the Inconvenience to which a
State-Deprivation is subject, of having two Bishops pretending to one See at
once. Nay, says Chrysostom, (...), Pallad. p. 20. de Vit. Chrysostom.
if such Proceedings prevail, and it once become lawful to invade and usurp
another's Bishopric, (...), and to cast out what Bps. they please for their
own Interest and Humor, (...), all things will speedily run to ruin, and the
whole Christian World, (...), by the casting out of some, and the being cast
out by others, be turned upside down. An Arian Constantius may then deprive all
the Orthodox, and fill the Church with that Doctrine; Mahomet may pull down the
Cross, and its Followers, and set up the Half Moon and his Musselmen in their
stead. The long Parliament must not be thought to have done amiss, when they
cast off not some but the whole Order of Bishops; nor the Usurper Cromwell the
C. L. Asses that were got into their room; a Matter of such fatal consequ^nce
to the Church, that the divine Hosius, understanding that Constantius was
putting it into practice against the Bishops that would not subscribe to his
Arianism, (and in my opinion Socinianism and Aerianism are not much better,)
steps in on the behalf of the deprived, giving the Emperor to know, that it
belonged not to him to exercise such an Authority over the Church; (...), I
beseech you, says he, leave off these Attemps Athan. Ep. ad solitar. Vit. Edit.
Commet. 1600.
of yours, and remember, that though you be an Emperor, you are not immortal;
dread the Day of Judgment, and keep your self unspotted against that day;
(...), inter meddle not with Ecclesiastical Affairs, neither command us
therein; but rather take your Direction from us: For God has committed the
Care of the Kingdom to you, and to us the Care of his Church; and as he who
invades the Kingdom contradicts the divine Ordinance, so be you careful that
you draw not into your Jurisdiction the things of the Church, lest thereby you
draw Guilt upon your self; Give, as it is written, unto Caefar the things that
belong unto Caesar, and unto God the things that belong unto God, (...), for it
is neither lawful for us to meddle in the Affairs of the Empire, nor for you
to meddle in the more sacred Affairs of the Church. A Power certainly never
designed by Christ, since it is so affrontive to his Institution, and so
destructive to his Church: However I would fain know of these Latitudinarian
Statesmen, who are so zealous to advance it among us, 1. Whether, since
Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, the Kingdoms of the World must have such
Power in and over it, as to deprive it and its Bishops of a Being and Existence
in the World? 2. Whether a Lay-Power (purely such) can operate upon Spiritual
Persons in Matters purely spiritual, so far at least as by their secular Laws
and Sanctions to dissolve that spiritual Union that Christ has made between
them and their Church? And whether it be not as absurd in them to attempt it,
and as great a Nullity in itself when effected, as if the States of England
should make Laws and enact Penalties for the States of Holland? 3. Whether if
the State has such a Power to deprive a Bishop of his Church, as they have put
John upon William, they may not put William upon John again, and at length Jack
Presbyter upon both, as already they have done in Scotland? 4. Whether the new
made Bishops be not as much to be accounted State made, as the other State
deprived? 5. Whether the deprived Bishops, remaining Bishops of the Catholic
Church, as they are pleased to say they do, they do not remain Bishops in and
of the Church of England, since that is a part of the Catholic Church? 6.
Whether, if still Bishops in England, there be not two Bishops in a Church at a
time, from whence Schism of course must arise?

29. Neither is this the only aggravation of the present Schism, that Bishops
of an indisputable Title (without being either previously heard, or judicially
sentenced) are deprived; but that the Primate of all England is one of those
Bishops. The Canon is alike against multiplying of Metropolitans in a Province,
as of multiplying Bishops in a Diocese; Statutum est, it is ordained, says
Gratian, referring us to the twelfth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, quod
duo Metropolitani in una and eadem provincia Did. 101.
esse non d^bent, that two Metropolitans ought not to be had in one and the
same Province; and therefore when Augustine the Monk, by Authority from the
Pope, would have thrust himself upon the British Bishops, they would not
submit, says Bid, to any of his orders, neque illum pro Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Edit. Lova^. 1566.
Archiepiscopo habiturum, nor receive him for their Archbishop, as having an
Archbishop of their own. And Huntington relating the m^tter (as cited by
Baziere) adds, that neither the Britains, nor the Irish would communicate Hist.
l. 36. Lib. Brit. Chur.
with him, or with the English, that were governed by him, more than with
Pagans; giving this for their reason, because he did seem to deal uncanonically
by them, in constraining them to take him for their Archbishop, when they had
an Archbishop before. And if we do but consider the high standing the Primate
has in the Church, and the reason of his being set there, which was (as
Spalato speaks) ut unitas and de Repub. Ec. lib. 3. cap. 2.
concordia inter Episcopos servaretur, that Unity and Concord might be
preserved among the several Bishops of the Province; it must every way be held
as reasonable to have but one Primate in a Province, as one Bishop in a Church.
And hence it is that the Apostolical Canon enjoins the Can. Apost. 34. Conc.
Aut. Can. 9.
the Bishops of every Nation or Province, (...), to have always a regard to him
who is the chief among them, and to esteem him as their head; yea, and so far
to be headed by him, as to come under his Precedence, by virtue whereof the
whole Province becomes but one Church; the Deacons and Presbyters acting under
their Bishop, the Bishops under their Metropolitans, and the Metropolitans
under their Primate or Patriarch. And it is the breaking this Chain, and the
going off from this Subordination that begets a Schism; but never proves it so
fatal as when the Primate suffers in it. This holy Synod (say the
Constantinoplitan Fathers) perceiving, (...) Temp. Apost. Can. 13.
(...), that the Devil is busy through the fury of Schismatics to divide the
Church, does for the prevention of the same, determine, that if any Presbyter
or Deacon suspecting or knowing his Bishop to be faulty, shall presume to
separate himself from him, and forbear naming of him in the Church's Prayers as
it is customary to do, (...), before a Synodical Hearing, Examination and
perfect Judgment shall be had in the case, he for so doing be deposed, (...),
and for the future deprived of all their Sacerdotal Honor, and the like. They
decree to those Can. 14.
Bishops that upon the same account (...) separate themselves from the
Communion of their Metropolitan: And the Can. 15.
like again, to those Metropolitanes that shall separate themselves from their
Primate or Patriarch, thereby making a Schism, and breaking the Unity of the
Church, (...) though guilty of no other fault, than such separation.

30. The old Rule was, that nothing be done in the Church without him, meaning
as it is a Provincial Church. And Balsamon in his Commentaries upon the
aforesaid Apostolical Canon, which commands the Bishops Can. 34.
of every Nation to observe the Primate, (...), and to transact nothing in the
Church, of the more weighty affairs thereof without him, tells us, wherein
these weighty affairs consist; and that they are (...), such as relate to
Ecclesiastical Constitution, (...), and cannot otherwise be transacted by the
respective Bishops in their respective Diocesses. And whence it is, that one of
the chief Branches of his superintended Authority arises, and that is to call
and convene all the Bishops of the Province into a Synod, in order to have all
such matters debated, stated, and provided for; that all Irregularities may be
amended, and all Schisms prevented. Now we are told by the Council of Antioch,
that that, and that only is a true and right Synod, (...), wherein the
Metropolitan Can. 16.
presides; and that it is not lawful for any, (...), Can. 20.
of their own heads, or by a separate Authority from him, to call Synods.
Insomuch, that if the present Metropolitan be usurped upon, and not rightfully
deposed, all Synods that are and shall be called, and all matters that are or
shall be debated therein, and determined thereby, must necessarily fall to the
ground, and have no Virtue or Solidity in them. I am sensible a Man may bear up
the Name, and hold the State of a Bishop, answerably habited, with his Pastoral
Staff in his hand, and a Mitre upon his head, he may call a Synod, and have his
Bishops and Clergy about him, bestowing his Prebendaries to some, his
Archdeaconries to others; nay, reditus, census and capones, he may receive
Rents, Services, Capons, etc. whilst his Regency holds: All this did the
Episcopus Puerorum, as he is described and deciphered by Mr. Gregory of
Christ-Church, Oper. Posth. p. 117. Edit. 1665.
and yet he was but a mock Bishop, and so he died without any farther Character
of a Bishop upon him; notwithstanding he be buried in the Pontifical Ornaments
of a Bishop, and had a Dragon under his feet, with a Motto as great and as
proud as ever Bishop usurped, conculcabis Leonem and Draconem.

31. Another of his unquestionable Prerogatives and Privileges, as he is
Primate of the Province, an Office, according to Petrus, de Marca, of Lib. 6.
c. 1. Part 3.
Apostolical Tradition, and coaeval with Christianity it self, is, that no
Bishop ought to be ordained, or taken for a Bishop within the Province, that is
not ordained by him, or with his approbation and consent: Insomuch that if a
thousand Bishops be made without his consent, and much more against it, they
can be no Bishops. And this is evident from the first Nicene Council, (...),
Can. 6.
if any one be made a Bishop without the allowance and good liking of the
Metropolitan, this great Council decrees (...), that such an one shall be no
Bishop at all; and so it was decreed in the first Council at Antioch, (...),
let no Man be Can. 19.
ordained Bishop without the presence of the Metropolitan, or if any shall be
made, (...), that his Ordination be null and invalid, and that not only as to
himself, but as to all others that shall be afterward ordained: And this was
the plea that Alexius made, when they would unjustly have deposed him from his
Patriarchship, and which in probability prevented his deposition; stoutly
answering (as Doctor Burnet relates the matter) That if his Ordination was
null, then all Regal. cap. 3.
the Metropolitans whom he had ordained, and all the Bishops whom those
Metropolitans had ordained during the eleven years of his Administration, ought
to be likewise degraded: From whence it is evident, that if the Ordination be
at first null, it conveys and entails a nullity upon all its descent, and what
a miserable confusion this will bring in eleven years time upon the Church of
England, he that has but half an eye may foresee. Nay, at this rate Archbishop
John (totius Schismatis Primas and Metropolitanus) will neither be Primate nor
Bishop, nor can it in the least justify him from the Crime of Schism, that the
present Power backs him in his Invasion and Usurpation; (...), if any one
(says the Apostolical Canon) Can. 30.
shall make use of any secular Power to thrust himself irregularly into the
Possession of a Bishopric; (...), let him be deposed and excommunicated,
together with all those that take part with him. The like i^ decreed in the
Council held at Paris, Si quis per ordinationem regiam, if any Bishop shall
unduly and with two much haste ascend to the height of Episcopal Honor by the
strength and interposition of Regal Power, let him no ways be recieved or owned
by the Bishops of the Prov^nce, or if contrary to the Canon, he shall be
received by any of the Comprovincials, then let such be separated from the rest
of his brethren.

32. I here foresee, that the instance of Abiathar will be produced against me,
not only to overthrow the position of one Bishop in a Church, or of one Primate
in a Province; but to show, that is in the Power of Kings upon good reason, to
depose any of them; nay, the highest of them all, that do or can Priest it in
their Dominions. God (say they) app^inted but one High Priest at a time for the
whole Jewish Church, neither do we read of any farther order given for the
displacing of him, or for the putting of others upon him: And yet none can deny
but that in King David's days there were two High Priests together, Zadock the
Son of Ahitub, and Abiathar the Son of Ahimelech; 2 Samuel 15. 29.
and this by the sole order and pleasure of the King: neither do we read that
he was ever the farther from being the Man after God's own heart for his doing
so. And it is as evident on the other hand, that Solomon his Son deposed and
degraded one of them; to wit, Abiathar, 1 Kings 2. 26.
after he had continued in the Office full forty years; and that by no other
Authority than his own. Both which actions plainly demonstrate, That if reasons
of State so require, the King may either multiply Bishops upon a Church, or
depose them; especially as to us in England, since we give the same Prerogative
to our Kings, as was given by Art. 37.
God to all Godly Princes in holy Scriptures: And this they think will be a
sufficient plea and cause for what they are doing But to this I answer; and
first, as to the being of two High Priests at once,

33. I think I may say, that it is the only instance to be met with in
Scripture from the time that the Priesthood was settled upon Aaron and his
Family, to the time that the Jews became Captives, and were carried out of the
Land: And if it had been either convenient or necessary, it would have been
oftener practiced; and if it had been oftener practiced, we should have oftener
heard of it. So that it being a particular case, it must have a particular
reason and foundation proper and peculiar to it self upon which it stands, and
without which it falls. Howbeit it was at a time when the High Priesthood was
got into a wrong Chanel, and possessed by a Family which (according to the Law
of Inheritance) had no present right unto it; I say no present right, a right
it had at large, as b^ing of the Family of Ithamar, one of the Sons of Aaron,
to Lev. 10. 7.
whom (no less than the other) the Priesthood at first was given; but however
not without a Precedence to Eleazar, as being the first born. And hence we
read, that when Aaron was to be taken away by death, Numb. 20. 28.
Moses was commanded to strip him of his Garments, the Garments of Holiness,
which at his Consecration he had put upon him, and to put them upon Eleazar,
signifying thereby the divesting Aaron of his Priesthood, Lev. 8. 7.
to array and invest Eleazar with it. From him it was conveyed to Phineas his
Son, to whom, and to whose Seed it was farther assured and Numb. 25. 13.
granted to be an everlasting Priesthood; but so it happened at present, that
the Posterity of Eleazar was put by, and the Posterity of Ithamar taken into
their room; and so it had been, and continued for four Generations, even from
the time of Ely to this Abiathar's days; who having escaped the Massacre made
at the command of Saul, upon Ahimelech his 1 Samuel 22. 18.
Father and Family, fled unto David, and bringing the Ephod with him, 1 Samuel
23. 6.
was constituted High Priest in the room of his deceased Father; and indeed in
some measure meriting the same, for it was upon David's account, and for
entertaining him in his necessities, that his Father was put to death, and the
whole Family (besides himself) destroyed. But 1 Samuel 22. 13.
this appearing irregular to David, because against the right of Inheritance,
and finding that the line of Eleazar was to be restored in his days, even
before the Temple should be built and Israel be in its full Glory; he 1 Samuel 2.
32, 35.
puts Zadock (the principal of the line at that time) into the Priesthood, and
gives him the Precedence to Abiathar, as being regularly the Heir, and the
person to whom by right thereof the Priesthood belonged; continuing however
Abiathar as a Copartner with him in it during life; the whole afterward to
devolve upon Zadock and his Posterity, as it was at first ordered. So that all
this was but a Pious and Righteous design in David, to restore the Priesthood
to its rightful owner, and not unreasonably to divide the Church, but
reasonably to make up the Breach that had been made in the Inheritance. A
method commended by the Bishops of Sirmium to the Clergy of Rome upon their
having two Bishops at a time, occasioned by the banishment of Liberius, and the
Investiture of Felix during his banishment. Let them, say they, receive
Liberius Soz. Hist. l. 4. cap. 14.
their former Bishop, since he is permitted to return, and let Felix and he,
(...), jointly enjoy the Apostolical Throne, and do all things amicably and in
conjunction together, that so the irregularity of the one, and the misfortune
of the other may both be buried. Neither can it be blame worthy when two
Bishops do arise, (which yet Sozomen in the place before quoted says, is in it
self (...), a certain sign of Schism, and against the Rule of holy Church,)
thus to make up the Feud, and reconcile the Division, persuading them like
Zadock and Abiathar to go hand in hand, and bear up the Ark together whilst
both of 2 Samuel 15. 24, 29.
them do live: Nay, so desirable a thing is Unity and Amity in the case, that
when Mel^tius and Paulinus, the two Bishops of Antioch, would not be persuaded
to agree the matter among themselves, in their lives time, the chief of the
Clergy (...), who were accounted the fittest to be made Bishops after them,
Soz. l. 7. c. 3. Socr. l. 9. c. 4.
or who had the greatest expectation of being so, bound themselves mutually by
an Oath, that they would never so much as attempt to be Bishops in either of
their rooms; or so much as accept if they were chosen; (...), as long as either
Paulinus or Meletius should live, but that when either of them should die, the
Bishopric should remain entire to the Surviver of them; and from thenceforth
continue undivided.

33. Neither will the other part of the Objection much affect us; that I mean
of Solomon's deposing Abiathar. For it was in a case of High Treason, (driven
perhaps thereunto, out of hopes that if Adonijah had prevailed against Solomon,
he might have regained the Priesthood back unto his Family, which he could not
but foresee was quite going from it.) A Crime of so high and malignant a
nature, that the Church will not Advocate for it. Nay, though she be
industrious to defend her Clergy under other Accusations, that they be not too
much oppressed by Secular Powers; yet as to a Delinquent of this nature, she
utterly throws him off, and exposes him to all the hardships he can meet with.
In Matthew Blaster's Syntagma, Chapter de Episcopis ob Crimina sua judicatis, I
find this Law or Canon, (...), Tit. D. cap. 8.
(...), let none of the Laity judge the Clergy, unless they be accused of
Treason; intimating, that if accused of that, no Sacredness of Office, no
Sublimity of Honor must either indemnifie, except or excuse them from
punishment. And yet how far this Deposition wrought, is not to me altogether so
plain: The Scripture says no more concerning it, than that Solomon thrust out
Abiathar from 1 Ki^gs 2. 27.
being Priest unto the Lord; it neither shows how far he thrust him out, nor by
what method he did it. Nihusius, as cited by Frischmuth, in his Treatise de
Rege eligendo and deponendo, would have us believe it was ex Aula solum, S. 63.
Edit. Jenae, 1653.
only from appearing at Court, and exercising his Office in or about Jerusalem,
where the King had his abode; with liberty however to execute it in the
Tabernacle at Gibeon, as Zadock before him had done, when he was Copartner with
Abiathar; and this perhaps may be grounded on the 1 Chronicles. 16. 39.
relation that Josephus makes of the matter, where he brings in Solomon thus
speaking to Abiathar, (...), the pains* says he, that thou have endured by
accompanying Ant. l. 8. c. 1.
my Father David, and attending and bearing the Ark with him, makes thee to
escape from death; yet forasmuch as thou have taken part with Adonijah, I so
far condemn thee, (...), that thou depart hence, and see my face no more;
(...), for since thou have so offended me, it is not convenient that thou
should be in Honor with me. Carthusianus goes farther than Nihusius, and
tells us, Abiatharem de integro, singulari clementia Regis, pristino Officio
restitutum, that he was by the special Frisch. Loc. cit. S. 64.
clemency of the King wholly restored to his Office again. Gersomides brings
him down to a much lower station, yet makes him however to be Loc. cit.
Zadock's Substitute, when ever he was hindered by any defect from executing
the Office of the High Priest himself; and such an one Josephus makes Ellem the
Son of Joseph to be unto Matthias, in the time of his Ant. l. 17. c. 8.
uncleanness. But be it as it will, most certain it is from Scripture; 1. That
he had his life given him. 2. That he had liberty to retire unto his City, and
to dwell quietly there. 3. That he had still the Name and the Title of High
Priest continued to him: I will not (says Solomon) 1 Kings 4. 4.
at this time put thee to death, because thou barest the Ark of the Lord before
David my Father, and because thou have been afflicted in all wherein my Father
was afflicted; it seems Gratitude to past Services, and a Veneration to the
high dignity of Priesthood, was not then perished quite out of the Land, nondam
terras Astraea. Neither are we less in the dark as to the manner how he was
deposed: We read of no formal procedure in the case; all that is said about it,
is, That Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord: And yet
if we will credit Menochius, De rep. Heb. l. 1. c. 6. S 6.
he will tell us, that among many other things to be transacted in the great
Synedrion, the punishing of the High Priest was one, and so says the Tit.
(...) c. 1. l. (...)
Misna, (...) They judged not the High Priest, unless in the Sanedrim, or great
Consistory; meaning, says Seldom out of Mamonides, De Synod. l. 3. c. 8. S. 1.
(...) so far as Life is concerned. Nay, though in other Matters, not
concerning Life, they might judge of him in other Courts, yet both l.. 3. c. 6.
S. 1.
Seldom and De Jure Belli c. 3. S. 20.
Grotius affirm that in that point, ne Regi quidem ipsi permitteretur, it was
not lawful for the King himself to take cognizance of him. Yea, the former of
the two having reckoned up above an hundred and forty irregularities and
defects in reference to his body (besides many more incident to his mind) which
hindered him from being admitted at all into his Office, and rendered him after
liable to be turned out, concludes notwithstanding dum sui juris Hebraei, that
whilst the Jews were governed De Success. in Pontific. l. 2. c. 5, 6, 10. Land.
1636.
by their own Laws, the Legitimate Succession (where no impediments prevented)
ever took place, and that it was high injustice to reject or expel any, to
whom the Priesthood belonged, unless some or more of those irregularities were
really to be found upon him. The Crime indeed of Abiathar being no less than a
Crime of High Treason, could not but be animadverted upon: But then the Crime
being Capital, and the High Priest the Criminal, we may well conclude, that
before ever Solomon thrust him from the Priesthood, the Sanedrim had previously
judged and passed their Sentence upon him. And so it fared with Joab (one of
his fellow Criminals) for it is plain, if Josephus says true, That before Ant.
l. 7, 8. c. 11. Edit. Genesis 1634.
ever Solomon sent Bennajah to fall upon him, he first sent him to fetch him
from the Altar, in order to bring him, (...), to the Seat of Judicature, there
to purge himself, if he could. And if this formality was used toward Joab
before ever the command was given to have him slain, it is probable the like was
used toward Adonijah, the King's Brother, before he was slain; and the like
also to Abiathar, before he was thrust from the Priesthood. Nay, though it
should be true, as some assert, That the Kings of Judah were more absolute in
their Authority than the Kings of Israel, and did not always so formally
proceed by way of Justice as the other did, and that this proceeding against
Abiathar might be one of those extraordinary instances of their power; yet this
is certain, that they had their standing Courts of Judicature all the Land
over, for the right and full administration of Justice to all sorts and degrees
of Men, the chiefest of all which, and to which the last Appeal was made, was
ever at Jerusalem, as being most near unto the King. Thus Jehosaphat, having
constituted Judges throughout all the fenced Cities of the Land, is said to
have done the same at Jerusalem, setting Amariah the High Priest over all in
the matters of the 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
Lord, and Zebadiuh, the Son of Ishmael, for all the King's matters, the
Secular concerns to be transacted by the King, through the assistance of his
Secular Judges, and the Ecclesiastical by the Ministry of his Ecclesiastics.
In like manner David having set out the form of the Temple, and given Solomon
directions for the building and ordering of it, leaves him to his Priests and
Levites to be farther advised: The courses, says he, of the Priests and
Levites shall be with thee for all the service of the House of God. And I dare
say, this power, so fixed and 1 Chronicles. 28. 21.
managed, cannot but be thought so just and reasonable, that as the Church of
England has all along granted it to their Kings, so there is not at this time
one Churchman of the old Foundation among us that will deny it them, but wish
that it were so; are troubled that it is not so; nay, can say, By the waters of
Babylon we sit down and weep, whilst we remember thee O Sion

34. I confess there are not instances wanting in History, to show, that it
has often been the practice of Emperors and Kings by their own Authority (and
without concerning themselves at all with a Synod) to depose Bishops, and
thrust them from their Bishoprics: But then this has been (as Petrus de Marca
observes) in apertissima Canonem violati, Lib. 4. cap. 6. Part 1.
in such cases only where the Canons of the Church have been most notoriously
and scandalously violated; so notoriously, that there needed no proof as to
matter of fact, nor any thing farther to be done but to apply the punishment.
And of this he gives us two instances in reference to the case in hand: The one
of Justinian the Emperor, and the other of Zeno; the first deposing Anthimus,
for that, contrary to the Canon, he had deserted his own Church, and invaded
the Sea of Constantinople; the latter for doing the same thing to Peter,
surnamed Moggus, for that, contrary to the Canon, he had seized upon the
Patriarchship of Alexandria, Timothy, the lawful Bishop thereof, and under
Banishment, being not yet dead. And referring us to the Acts of the Council
held by Mena at Constantiople; he farther tells us, That such violations, aut a
Principe, Loco citat.
aut a Synodo castigari posse, may be punished either by the Prince or by a
Synod. But now for Emperors or Kings to take this power upon them, when there
is no breach of Canon; nay, when it is contrary and contradictory to all Canon;
and purely for their own Will and Pleasure, or because it may serve their
Interest to have others in their Places* and Bishoprics, that may lick their
spittle, and cry (...) to them in all their actions: This certainly must be
pernicious and fatal to the Church, and can bode nothing less than an utter and
speedy ruin to it. Of what dismal consequences this kind of dispositions have
been, and what sad and deplorable mischiefs they have brought along with them
to the most flourishing Churches in the World; I shall in a more particular
manner evidence, from the Jewish and Greek Churches, being provoked thereunto
by some of the late Treatisers.

35. And because the Jewish Church offers it self first to our View, I shall
consider it first, and show what Success it met with whilst it was thus rid:
Josephus tells us, that the first that ever executed this deposing Ant. l. 15.
c. 3.
Power was Antiochus, who depriving Onias, put Jason into his place; a fitting
Priest for so wicked a Tyrant! For no sooner was he made so, Lib. de Mac. cap.
4.
says the same Author, but he forced all the People to Impiety, and to forsake
Religion. Nay, such, says the Author of the Book of Maccabees, was the height
of Greek Fashions, and increase of Heathenish Manners, through 2 Mac. cap. 4.
13, 14.
the exceeding Profaneness of Jason, that ungodly Wretch, that the Priests had
no courage to serve any more at the Altar; but despising the Temple, and
neglecting the Sacrifices, hastened to be partakers of the unlawful Allowance
in the place of Exercise, not setting by the Honor of their Fathers, but
liking the Glory of the Grecians, by reason whereof sore Calamity came upon
them. About three years after Menelaus had Jason laid aside, and himself put
into the 2 Mac. 4. 24. Jos. Ant. l. 12. cap. 15.
High Priesthood, though he was not (...), of the race of the High Priests: He,
says the Book of Maccabees, came with the King's Mandate, having nothing
worthy of the High Priesthood, but having the fury 2 Mac. 4. 25.
of a cruel Tyrant, and the rage of a savage Beast. And such an one he was; for
he stole certain Vessels of Gold out of the Temple, caused Onias, the Chapter 4. v.
32. 2 Mac. 5. 15.
deposed High Priest, to be slain, and was Guide to Antiochus when he went to
the Temple to risle it of its holy Vessels. A wicked and impious man, says
Josephus, who for his ambitious Desire of Authority, had enforced Ant. l. 12.
c. 15.
our Nation to revolt from their Religion. He was slain, and succeeded by
Alcimus, who also is said to have defiled himself wilfully in the time of their
2 Mac. 14. 3, etc.
mingling with the Gentiles; and was the cause of all that Mischief that
afterward happened to Judas, Razis, and the Temple. The next Instance shall be
in Herod and his Successors, after he was by the Roman Emperor created King of
the Jews. In the Roman Times (says the Annotatour, Ham. in Luc. c. 3 2.
quoting Josephus for it,) it is manif^st that the Roman Prefect did, ad
libitum, when he would, and that sometimes once a year, put whom he please into
the Pontificate, to officiate in Aaron 's Office, instead of the lineal
Descendant from him. And this was, as Bp. Overall in his Convocation-Book
suggests, Lib. 1. c. 34.
to keep them from entering into Rebellion; suspecting that if the Priesthood
should have been held by Succession, or for term of Life, by the chief Persons
of Aaron's Posterity, it might have grown dangerous unto their Government. The
last Instance touching the Jews, shall be of the Zealots, not long before, and
hastening on the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple there: They, says
Josephus, not respecting De Bell. Jud. l. 4. c. 5.
the Families out of which it was only lawful to choose the High Priest,
elected strange and base Persons to that sacred Dignity, and such as would be
Partakers of their Villainies and Impietie^; for they who not deserving it
attained to such Dignity, were as it were obliged unto their Will in all things
by whom they were so exalted: A Fact, says ne, contrary to the most firm Custom
that was amongst the People, and only a Device to get all Government into
their hands. From all which we may remark and infer, 1. That the Reason and
End of such Actions is purely to serve the Interest of Government, and to have
such Persons in the Head of the Priesthood that will own their Actions, and
execute their Commands, though never so wicked and sinful. 2. That Religion is
so far from gaining by it, that it is generally forced to give place to
Atheism, Profaneness, Heathenism. 3. That it is a sad Prognostic and
Forerunner of an utter Desolation to the Church, and shows that her Enemies
(the Zealots on the one hand, and the Romans on the other) are either come or
coming upon her, which makes me (with Faustinus) almost to wish, That since the
high Dignities of the Church Libel. Prec. p. 21. Oxon. 1678.
prove so tempting, and do so debauch the Priesthood, she had never been so
richly endowed, sed ut apostolico more vivens, fidem integram inviolabiliter
possideret, but that her Clergy living more after the Apostolic Manner, might
the more inviolably hold the Apostolical Faith; and not for the love of Honor
or Wealth be rempted to decline or withgo it.

36. The like Instance of this Abomination of Desolation may be taken from the
Greek Church. In Andronicus 's long Reign, says the Author of the Burnet, c.
3. Edit. 1682.
Regalia, many were put in and out, to the great Scandal of the Church; and he
makes this Remark upon it, from the Historian which he quotes, That Niceph.
Greg. lib. 7.
Princes choose such Men to that Charge, who may be their Slaves, and in all
things obsequious to what they shall prescribe, and lie at their Feet, and not
so much as have a Thought contrary to their Commands. I might have told you
before from Josephus, that Onias had never been De Mac. c. 4.
turned out of his Priesthood, at least Jason not put in, had it not been for
an annual Payment of three thousand six hundreed and threescore Talents of
Silver to Andronicus: And from the Book of Maccabees, That Menelaus 2 Mac. 4.
24.
had never got over Jason's Head, had he not promised three hundred Talents
more than what Jason gave. So bewitching are the Rewards of Divination, when
proferred by Kings, that Balaam the Prophet (though perhaps his Conscience does
boggle at them at first, no less than his Ass afterward did at the sight of
the Angel, yet) rather than not be fingering of them, he will remove from
Mountain to Mountain, from Hill to Hill, to try whether from some place or
other he may not venture to curse Israel. Nay, I am apt to think, that if the
chief Dignities of the Church come once to be sold by Inch of Candle, all the
burning and shining Lights thereof will soon be turned out of their
Candlesticks, for dim and stinking Snuffs to be put in their rooms; and of what
ill consequence this may prove to a Church, without being a Prophet, or a
Prophet's Son, we may easily guess. The forementioned Author of the Regalia
informs us of the Mischiefs and Misery it has brought upon the Greek Church:
The Turks, says he, having taken this matter into their Hands, have so exposed
Chapter 3. p. 99.
all unto Sale, (and I may add Interest,) and have found so many base minded
and ambitious Churchmen, that are as ready to buy as they are to sell, that
those Churches which were once the Glory of the World, are now become Dens of
Thieves and Robbers; adding, that as those Miseries are to be lamented in them,
so we who hear of them, ought to remember the words of our Savior, If these
things be done in the green Tree, what shall be done in the dry?

37. But what need I aggravate the Mischiefs that attend these Alterations,
especially when continued and daily renewed? There are none so blind but may
see them, none so hardy but must lament them, none so senseless but (as far as
in them lies) will endeavor to prevent them: But (say some) what means the
Bleating of the Sheep, and the Lowing of the Oxen we hear? Why so much noise of
Schism? Why such breaking of Communion? Why such running from our Churches?
Must all be Schismatics that take in with the new Bishops, and follow them? Is
not this to make the Jewish Church schismatical, after the High Priesthood
became annual; and the Greek Church too, as often as the Grand Seignior changes
the Patriarch? Sure we are that our Savior himself at that time communicated
with the Jewish Church, which we presume he would not have done, if it had been
schismatical; and no Man (for ought as we do know) blames the Patriarch who
succeeds, nor yet the Church which receives him. And yet though it be so, I
cannot see that either of these Cases run parallel to ours; for the Jews for
many years before had been under the Roman Yoke, and so have the Greeks for
many Centuries of years under the Turks; both despoiled of their Rights and
Customs, and so far at Mercy, that it was well for the Jew that he could have
any Priest, and for the Greeks that they have any Christianity: And were this
our Condition, I should be glad to herd any where; nay though we had no
Bishops, nay though we had no Priests, nay though we were only Christians at
large, rather than pay no public Devotion: But whether this be an eligible
thing; nay, whether we ought to hasten this upon us, and to count it; nay,
whether we be not bound (though we be forced to take up the Cross and follow)
to resist it, I leave to all pious, sober Christians, whose Gain is not their
Godliness, to consider on. Bp Tailor from Fulgentius tells us, That when
Frazamund, King of Bisac in Africa, had Episcop. asser.
made an Edict under pain of Death, that no more Bishops should be consecrated,
designing by that Device to have the Catholic Faith rooted out of his
Dominions; the Bishops of the Province (no ways affrighted at the Edict) met
together, and consecrated as many as were wanting, considering that those who
were worthy of a Mitre, need not fear to do their Duty, when by so doing they
are sure to receive a Crown of Martyrdom. And had the Greek Bishops been as
resolute and daring, when these Invasions were at first made upon them,
probably their Crown would have been more glorious, and their Religion at this
day more flourishing. However, if I mistake not, the case of the Jews is very
much misrepresented, and to no purpose produced: For though it was their
Infelicity to be reduced almost to an annual Priesthood, yet it was always
given (as Josephus relates the matter) to such, and to none but such, (...)
Ant. l. 20. c. 18.
(...), who were of the order of the Priests: And howbeit it was particularly
entailed upon Phineas the Son of Eleazar, and his Posterity, as has before
been shown, yet it is evident that the entail was conditional, and through the
failures in their Persons or Office, it might be taken from them, as it was
from Eleazar's Family, and given to Ithamar's; from Ithamar's given to
Eleazar's again; and from the chiefest of each, (...), to the meanest in both,
and yet the Priesthood valid, though the mutations and changes were never so
many and frequent. And so Seldom concludes upon the matter; palam quidem est,
si originem tantum sanguinis Sacerdotalis in Aarone spectes, idem esse
Pontificale genus and Sacerdotale, it is evident, says he, that the fountain of
blood in Aaron, from De success. in Pontif. c. 9.
whence the Priestly Office first issued, was the very same that gave being to
the Priests, as to the High Priests; insomuch that if the right of
primogeniture did not interpose, or came once to be neglected, there was not
one of the Posterity of Aaron, but would be aeque capax Pontificiae dignitatis
ac muneris Sacerdotalis, altogether as capable of the Pontifical as of the
Sacerdotal Office. Josephus indeed tells us, That it was an Ordinance of their
Lib. 15. c. 3.
Country, that if any person was once enstalled into the Office, he might not
be displaced during his life; but in Scripture we read of no such thing; the
original grant including no other limitation than that it go along with Aaron
and his Posterity. Hence when the Priesthood was first given, says God to
Moses. Exodus 29. 9. 30. 30.
Thou shall anoint Aaron and his Sons, and consecrate them, that they may
minister to me in the Priests Office; and the Priests Office shall be theirs
for a perpetual Office. And Josephus tells us, That it was a Law observed by
their Ant. lib. 20. cap. 18.
Ancestors, that no Man was to be admitted to the Priesthood, except he were of
Aaron's Posterity; for albeit he were a King, if he were of another line, it
was impossible for him to obtain the Priesthood. And thus it happened through
all the mutations by Herod, or his Posterity, from the time he was created King
over the Jews, until the day that Titus destroyed the Temple. Now the original
Charter requiring no more, but that the Priesthood should be in some or other
of the Seed of Aaron, and since it was so in our Savior's days, albeit it was
made almost annual* I cannot see but that the Office was untainted, and the
High Priest, as soon as created, to be accounted a good and lawful High Priest.
So that though these frequent alterations may make the Jewish Nation unhappy,
yet Schisinatical they could not; they might, and they did portend a speedy
ruin to the Priesthood, and were for a judgment to them all, but a sin they
were not; and if High Priests within the institution, I can see no reason, why
our Savior might not communicate with them as innocently, as he might have
done with Eli, Eleazar, or with Aaron himself; and the Jews all the while
continue free from Schism, though full of misery: But as for us, we have no
such custom, neither we nor the Churches of Christ.

38. Thus discharging my self both of the Greek and Jewish Churches, I shall in
the next place consider the case of the deprived Bishops in the beginning of
the Reformation: A point (say our new Reformers) not to be touched upon, unless
you design to expose the Reformation to the Romanists: For if a legal Prince,
and much more if a Prince in conjunction with his Parliament, has not power,
upon grounds that seem to them just and warrantable, to deprive a Bishop, and
to make a new choice; you can never justify the proceedings either of K.
Edward VI. or of Q. Elizabeth; there being little or nothing done in those days
toward the depriving of the Bishops, for the bringing on of the Reformation,
but what was done merely by Secular Power. And if it was lawful then by that
power to deprive, it is lawful now; or if not lawful now, it was not lawful
then; and by consequence, the Deprivations then were not only uncanonical, but
unjust and tyrannical; and so you destroy the building which your Ancestors
reared, and what you and others have been supporting above these hundred and
fifty years; at least you expose its nakedness to the scoffs and calumnies of
an inveterate, insulting Adversary. And thus intrenching themselves, they
conclude they are invulnerable; at least (...) beyond the reach of any
Argument, that can be levelled against them: But how much they are mistaken in
their confidence, and how little ground they have to think themselves
unassailable, will sufficiently appear by bringing their respective
Deprivations, both as to the matter and manner of them, to a due account; and
in order thereunto as in order they come, and because the former will give
light unto the latter,

39. I shall begin with the Deprivations in King Edward's days, in number
indeed six, as are ours now, and so far alike; but in all things else
altogether unlike:

40. For had they been deprived on the first day they had been enstalled
Bishops, no wrong had been done them; nay, had the King taken away their
Temporalities the next moment that he gave them, no complaint could have been
made. For if it be true, what the Reforming Historian says, That they had
taken out Commissions, as they had done before in the former Reign, to hold
their Bishoprics only at the King's Burnet part 2. lib. 2. p. 6. Edit. 1681.
pleasure, and to exercise them as his Delagates, in his Name and by his
Authority; and of which he gives us a Copy from Bishop Bonner's, wherein he
acknowledges the King to be fons and scaturigo, the Fountain of all
Jurisdiction and Power, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; and that he had it
only of his Bounty, eique quotiens ejus Majestati videbitur, libenter Coll. 14.
p. 267.
concedere, and would deliver it up again, when it should please him to call
for it; it is evident, that when ever, or by whom soever the King was pleased
to call back his Commission, whether faulty or not, they were eo facto, to be
unbishop'd, and no less to be removed, than those State Officers and Ministers
were who held their Places only durante been placito, And to me it seems much
the same thing, whether these his doings were founded on the Determinations of
his Convocation, or on the Acts of his Parliaments; or whether executed by
Delegates or not, his Royal pleasure only was sufficient, though signified by
the meanest Page or Groom that belonged unto him: So that if Heath of
Worcester, if Day of Chichester, if Tonstal of Duresme, and if Voisy of Exeter
(provided he did not resign) were deprived by the Secular Delegates, and not by
any Court consisting of Churchmen, as the Histo Part 2. lib. 1. p. 203. 216.
rian asserts, it was no more than what their sordid compliance and their
unpriestly condescensions justly deserved. Secondly,

41. There was nothing enjoined to make them Criminals, but what had
antecedently been ordered and determined in the Convocation before ever the
Parliament annexed their Penalties, themselves all the while sitting, acting,
and enacting to both in Convocation and Parliament. Hence Fox p. 1189. Edit.
1610.
we are told by the King's Message to the Rebels in Devonshire, that what ever
was contained in the new Common Prayer Book (the non advancement of which,
seems to be their original and fundamental crime) was by the Clergy agreed,
yea, by the Bishops of the Realm devised, as well as by (...) Parliament
established, and more fully by the Letter of the King and his Council to Bishop
Bonner; that after great and serious Debating, and long Conference of the
Bishops, and other grave and learned Men in the holy Scriptures, one uniform
Order for Common*Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, has been, and
is most godly set forth, not only by the full assent of the Nobility and
Commons of the late Parliament, but also by the like assent of the Bishops in
the same Parliament; and of other the learned Men of this our Realm in their
Synods and Convocations Provincial. So that here is no exception to be made
against the Legality, Competency, or Sufficiency of the Powers subscribing; all
being concerned that could, or any ways had right to prescribe to the
Government. The Clergy in their Convocations, the Laity in their Parliaments,
the King in both; all unanimously declaring for, and establishing the Book.
Neither can any thing be objected against the Book prescribed: It Is called by
the King, a Devout and Christian Book; said by the Parliament, to be Fox p.
1235. St. Edw. 6.
concluded upon by the Holy Ghost. Day of Chichester (one of the deprived) was
one of the Composers of it; all of them Heyl. Edw. 6. p. 57.
had their Votes for the establishing of it: Gardener St. Edw. 6. 2, 3. c. 1.
and Bonner K. Edw. 6. Journ. p. 16.
promised Conformity to it, and the latter of them sent out his Fox p. 1186.
Precept to have it published and used. Nay, so universally was it complied
with, that, as their Friend Sanders tells us, Fox id. eodem. De Schis. Ang. l.
2. Ed. 1610.
ne unus quidem videbatur in Regno toto, qui falsorum officiorum ac rituum
communione non fuisset contaminatus, That there was not one throughout the
whole Kingdom (the Lady Mary excepted) that did not receive it, and join in
Communion with it; so that methinks, though they could not themselves minister
in the Service so prescribed, yet considering the fullness, regularity and
competency of the Prescription, they ought (as Christians) quietly to have
acquiesced, and as Bishops to have yielded their Office unto others. Again,

43. Though what was enjoined was legally established; though by taking out
their Commissions their Deprivations were Arbitrary, and at the King's
courtesy; though by Act of Parliament they were for their 2, 3 Edw. 6. cap. 2.
disobedience ipso facto to be deprived of all their Spiritual Promotions; yet
was not that punishment inflicted, till their Case were farther debated by
persons appointed thereunto by the King, to whom both Church and State, the one
in their Convocations, the other in their Parliaments, Annal. Brit. vit.
Warbam. 25 Hen. 8. c. 21. and 2. 6. c. 1.
had justly given the Supremacy: which shows that an ipso facto Deprivation,
without a farther judgment and decision to ratify and put it into execution,
is irregular, and wants both Equity and Precedent. I have evidenced it in four
of the deprived already, who were thus dealt by; and as for the other two (I
mean Bishop Bonner and Gardener) the Procedure will appear more Canonical,
because in a great measure transacted by Men of their own Order, and the
Sentence much more Authentic, because given by the Archbishop, their
Metropolitan and Primate. Hence for the depriving of Bonner (which was the
first of them all that felt the affliction) there were commissioned two
Bishops, says Master Page 1194.
Fox; three, says Edw. 6. p. 78. Edit. 1670.
Dr. Heylin, whereof the Archbishop was one, Dr. May Dean of St. Paul's, and
Secretary Smith Doctor of Laws. For Bishop Gardener, the Archbishop and three
other Bishops, one Judge, three Doctors of Laws, and two Masters of Chancery.
Neither is the Commission Fox p. 1209.
enervated, or in the least to be blamed, or esteemed less Primitive for having
a mixture of Laity in it: For so Constanstine directed his Letter to Aelian,
the Proconsul of Africa, to examine and hear the Cause Optat. cont. Parm. l. 1.
p. 29.
of Felix, Bishop of Aptung, the Ordainer of Caecilian; as also to Zenofilus,
the Proconsul of Numidia, to enquire into the carriage of Silvanus, Gesta purg.
ad Optat.
Bishop of Cirta, one of the Ordainers of Majorinus, thereby to find out which
of the two were Traditors; that the Controversy between the Caecilianists and
the Donatists might be stated and ended: unde pulsa atque exter sa infamia cum
ingenti laud, illo judicio recessit, by which Judgment of theirs (says
Optatus) the infamous aspersions that were cast upon Cont. Par. l. 1. p. 30.
Caecilian and Felix by the Donatists were wiped off, to the eternal Honor of
Caecilian and his adherents. And thus also for the better management of the
Conference between the Catholic and the Donatists Bishops, Honorius the
Emperor appointed Macellinus his Tribune, for a Judge in the case, before whom,
says Possidonius, the Donatists being convicted of De Vita Aug.
their faults, sententia Cognitoris notati sunt, were by his Sentence declared
guilty, and thereupon condemned. And thus might Tonstal of Duresme, as well as
Bonner of London, or as Gardener of Winchester, have had their Cause heard; had
not Archbishop Gardener refused to meddle, because Burnet, Part 2. lib. 1. p.
216.
he was found to lie under a misprison of Treason: And so properly might Voisy
of Exeter been tried, but for the same reason; for he also was found, says
Heylin, to have fomented the Rebellion of the Devonshire Edw. 6. p. 100
Men: And whether Day of Winchester was not in with them, and for that reason
also not tried by Cranmer, to me it is doubtful; for the Historian confesses he
cannot tell us, whether his Deprivation arose from Reform. Par. 2. lib. 1. p.
203.
the refusing to submit to the new Book, or his falling into other
transgressions. However I cannot but observe, 1. That the aforesaid Bishops
enjoyed their Bishoprics, notwithstanding an ipso facto Deprivation, till a
farther process was made, aad a declaratory Sentence passed upon them. 2. That
Bonner, who led the way unto the rest, was not deprived till four months or
more after the Act of Deprivation took Fox 1209.
place; Gardener not till two years almost after Bonner; Voisy not till Heylin,
p. 100.
some months after the Sentence passed upon Gardener; Day, Heath, Tonstal,
Burnet lib. 2. p. 203. 216.
not till some months after him; so slowly was the Act at that time executed.
3. That as they enjoyed their Bishoprics till their Deprivations, so in all
probability they enjoyed the Profits and Revenues thereof; Gardiner's were not
sequestered from him till within three Heyl. Edw. 6. p. 99.
months of the time; yea, and then also his House and Servants were maintained
out of his Bishopric to the very instant that the declarary Fox p. 1218.
Sentence was judiciously pronounced against him. This was the Case of the
deprived Bishops then; and if this method had been taken in reference to our
present Bishops, that is, had the matter for which they are deprived; been
debated in a Convocation of the Clergy, and there concluded, that the
Allegiance they had sworn might lawfully be transferred, without the Breach of
Oath, or guilt of Perjury; had the Refusers of the said transferring been
afterward by a true and legal Parliament decreed to be deprived, and had they
upon that been Legally and Canonically evicted of such a refusal, though no
such time had been allowed them; nor no such favor granted, as in the interim
to enjoy their Bishoprics and the Revenues of them; nay, though after all, the
Sanctions of the one, and the Determinations of the other, had seemed to them
unjust; there would not have been such cause (as there is) for a complaint: So
that I think we may cry out of the Injustice, at least of the unprecedented
Severity of the present Age, and yet neither blemish nor expose the Reformation.

44. Neither will they be assisted or screened by any thing that was done in Q.
Elizabeth's Reign: For though according to Stow there were Ann. 2. Eliz. p.
182. Eliz. p. 36. Ed. Land. 1615.
thirteen or fourteen deprived of their Bishoprics* omnes qui tunc ^ederunt,
praeter unum Antonium Landevensem; all, says Cambden, that were then Bishops,
which he reckons to be sixteen in number, besides him of Landaff, yet will
their Deprivations be found of a quite different nature to those that have been
made in our days: And to make this out, four things are necessary to be
observed:

45. First, That all matters of Ecclesiastical concern, were left at King
Edward's death under a full and regular establishment, consented and agreed
thereunto by the King in his Convocation, as well as by the King in his
Parliament: And so it is asserted to be in the Answer to the Lady Mary's
Letter, (as cited out of Master Fox by the Author of Church Government, viz.)
that the Reformation as touching the Common Prayer Book, Part 5. p. 130.
from the second year of his Reign, and as touching other Articles of Religion
from the fifth, was Regular and Canonical, as being the Act of the Clergy: Thus
was the Supemacy and Service Book established, as is before shown; thus also
were the Articles of Religion, and in them the Tit. Art. 1552. Art. 31. St. 5.
6 Edw. 6. cap. 12.
Marriage of the Clergy agreed upon: owned by the Parliament it self to have
been so, in the Act for adjudging such Marriages lawful, declaring therein,
that the Learned Clergy of the Realm had determined the same by the Law of God
in their Convocations, as well by the common assent, as by the subscription of
their hands. 2. That no less Authority ought to be allowed to null the
establishment, than what was thought necessary by the standing Laws of the Land
at first to make it; and therefore since it had its Birth and Rise from the
King and Convocation, as well as from the King and Parliament, and more
properly from the first, than from the latter; the Queen had not power of her
self, no, nor by the Parliament, without the Convocation, to destroy it: And
hence her own Clergy in Q. Elizabeth's days, foreseeing the ill effect of such
Power, utterly disclaimed it, and in their Convocation declared against it,
telling the Parliament, in hopes to keep their Possessions, but in the mean
time forgetting the method whereby they came possessed, that the Authority to
handle and define such things which belong to Heyl. Q. Eliz. p. 113.
Faith in the Sacraments, and Discipline Ecclesiastical, has hitherto ever
belonged, and only ought to belong to the Pastor of the Church, whom the Holy
Spirit has placed in the Church, and not unto Laymen; no, though in
Parliament (as then they were) assembled. 3. That the Power whereby Q. Mary
acted for dissolving the Reformation, and for the laying aside the Bishops that
asserted it, was a less Authority than that by which at first it was
established: For no sooner was she come unto the Crown upon the death of K.
Edw. VI. but, and before ever a Heyl. Hist. Q. Mary p. 22.
Parliament was called, she purely and by her own Authority removed Bishop
Ridley from London, Poinet from Winchester, Coverdale from Exeter, Scory from
Chichester, and Hooper from the jurisdiction of Worcester, whereinto they had
been regularly inthroned; and in their places reinstalled Bonner, Voisy, Day
and Heath, which in the Reign of K. Edw. as before shown, had been legally and
judicially dispossessed; and all this done, says Heylin, without so much as
any show of legal process, the Hist. Q. Mary p. 22.
conventing of the Person whom it did concern, or any satisfaction given to the
Laws so strangely violated. Soon after she called a Parliament, in which, says
Mr. Fox, all Statutes made of Praemunire in the time of Page 1333.
King Henry VIII. as also other Laws and Statutes concerning Religion decreed
under K. Edw. VI. were dissolved: and thereupon, says the Historian, seven
Bishops were all turned out at a time, viz. the Archbishop B^rnet. vol. 2. p.
274.
of York, the Bishops of St. David's, Chester, and Bristol, for contracting
Marriage, and thereby breaking their Vows, and defiling their Function; Tailor
of Lincoln, Hooper of Worcester and Gloucester, and Harley of Hereford, for
Preaching and setting forth erroneous Doctrines, though the Marriages the one
had contracted, and the Doctrines the other had Preached, were both consonant
to the decrees of the Convocation, which even then remained unrepealed. 4. That
Q. Elizabeth who succeeded Q. Mary, reduced all to the first and legal
Settlement, that was left by K. Edw. insomuch that if there were any
irregularities in the proceedings, or any defect of Power in compassing the
same, there were the same in Q. Mary's. Did she by her Parliament restore the
Reformation? It was by the same way and method that Q. M. pulled it down. Had
not she the concurrence of a Convocation? No more had Q. Mary. Were the Laws
touching Religion made in Q. Mary's, repealed by Q. Elizabeth? So were the like
Laws made in the days of Henry VIII. and Edw. VI. repealed by Q. Mary. In
short, whatsoever false steps were taken, or whatever deviations were made,
contrary to the usual methods and proceedings of our Ancestors, they were all
begun and first attempted by Q. Mary, and no farther, nor no longer practiced
by Q. Elizabeth, than to undo what the other thereby had done; till she had put
things into the same course they were in at the death of K. Edw. leaving for
the Reform. justified, c. 6. Edit. 1657.
future, as Dr. Heylin observes, Church work to the disposing of Churchmen,
who by their Place and Calling are to be adjudged most proper for it.

46. These things being premised, I proceed to consider the Deprivations that
were made thereupon: Cambden gives us their number, and Eliz. p. 37.
their Names; viz. Heath of York, Bonner of London, Tonstall of Durham, Thirlby
of Ely, Bourn of Bath and Wells, Christopherson of Chichester, White of
Winchester, Watson of Lincoln, Baines of Litchfield and Coventry, Oglethorp of
Carlisle, Turbervile of Exeter, Pool of P^terborough, Scot of Chester, Pate of
Worcester, and Goldwell of St. Asaph. I confess L. 3. chapter 12. Land. 1625.
Mason leaves out Christopherson, De Schis. l. 3. p. 335.
Sanders Christopherson and Pate, Eliz. Hist. pt. 2. p. 114.
Heylin Pate and Goldwell, adding Morgan of St. David's to the rest; but
Cambden's Computation being the highest, shall prevail: And yet I doubt not but
by discovering the voluntary Cessions or interpretative Resignations of some,
the illegal Titles of others, the uncanonical Ordinations of many, and the
horrid Crimes of them all, so to charge them, as to bring them all under the
Censure of a just Deprivation, without ever being Patterns or Precedents to the
deprived of our days.

47. And first I find in Cambden, that three of them, to wit, Pate, Scot, L^co
citat.
and Goldwell, solum sponte mutarunt, of their own accord gave up, and quitted
the Land, and therewith their Churches and Cures; the first, according to
Heylin, toward the beginning, the last toward the end of Hist. Q. Eliz. p.
114.
May, the Oath not being tendered, nor Deprivation to any decreed, till near
Stow Q. Eliz. p. 1082.
two Months after; the Reason probably why Heylin leaves them out of his
Catalogue of the deprived: And had not or might not others in their absence
have been put into their places, their Bishoprics might have remained without
Pastors till Death it self had taken them out of the World: A Mischief so
great, and so injurious to Christianity, that the holy Fathers in the
Constantinopolitane Council, taking it into their Consideration, have long ago
ordered such to be deprived: If any Bishop, say they, to the great neglect of
his Fl^ck, shall presume to absent himself from 1 and 2 Can. 16.
his Bishopric, by going into a foreign Nation, (...), and remain there above
the space of six Months, without leave from his Metropolitan, and not
commanded thither by his Prince, we decree him alienated from his Bishopric,
(...), and that another be placed in his room. Three more of them, viz. Bonner,
Tonstal, and Heath, had been (as before was shown) legally deprived in K.
Edward's days; and therefore since all things were reduced to the old Standard,
and resettled in the same way, and by the same Authority as they had been
dissettled, it could not otherwise be expected but that such who had formerly
been deprived, should be sent back to the same state of Deprivation they had
before been sentenced to. Bourn, Turbervile, and Christopherson were Intruders,
and had possessed themselves of the Bishoprics belonging to Barlow, Coverdale,
and Scory, who had been legally invested in them in K. Edward's days, unjustly
turned out in Q. Mary's, but alive in Q. Elizabeth's, to take Possession of
their own again. Two more of them (as well as many of the former) were
irregularly and uncanonically ordained; their Ordinations being celebrated and
performed without their Metropolitan, his Leave, Presence, or Authority; he at
the same time (though in Prison) alive, and undegraded; Burn Hist. vol. 2. p.
332, 257.
The ecclesiastical Canons, as elsewhere has been shown, utterly condemning
and avoiding all such Ordinations that have not the (...) of their
Metropolitan with them: These were Vide Catal. Episc.
White and Baines. The four remaining are Thirlby, Watson, Oglethorp, and Pool:
But if it was lawful for Q. Mary to seize upon Tailor, Hooper, and Harley,
because they had taken out Commissions from one or more of her Predecessors, to
hold their Bishoprics during their good Behavior, and to make it a ground of
their Deprivation, (as certainly she did, if Dr. Burnet be in Hist. vol. 2.
col. 12. p. 257.
the right,) why was it not as lawful for Q. Elizabeth to lay hold upon
Thirlby, and on the same account seize his Bishopric; since he had taken out
the like Commission in the preceding Reigns, both of Henry VIII. Id. vol. 2. p.
6.
and Edward VI. being Heyl. Cat. of Bishops.
Bp. of Westminster in both their Reigns, and no less misbehaving himself than
the former had done. As for Watson, Oglethorp, and Pool, though they were
consecrated after the Degradation of Cranmer, and probably by the Consent of
their Metropolitan, Cardinal Poole being then Archbishop of Canterbury; yet
were the several Bishoprics so filled with uncanonical Bishops, for the reason
before mentioned, that it cannot be otherwise imagined than that their
Ordainers, most or all of them, were of that illegitimate breed. Its certain,
that of the seven who consecrated the Cardinal, Thirlby only stood rectus in
Curia; the Mas. de Minist. l. 2. 4, 17.
other being either deprived, as were Heath and Bonner, or else were of the
number of the ordained in the time of A. Bp. Cranmer, as were Pate, White,
Griffen, and Goldwell, all of them Intruders, and upon that account, as has
been shown, uncanonical, and not qualified to make a good Ordination: Nay,
considering how many such there were, (and many there must be, since no less
than fifteen of them were consecrated in a Burnet, vol. 2. p. 276.
Year,) neither Watson, nor Poole, nor any other Bishop afterward nominated,
could probably be ordained without them.

48. But were it not thus, or had those Bishops been better entitled to their
Bishoprics than it appears they had been; yet such was their Offense, so
provoking their Crime, that a lesser Punishment could not reasonably be awarded
against them. Dr. Burnet tells us, That to refuse the Hist. vol. 2. p. 386.
Oath of Supremacy, (whereby the Papal Jurisdiction was first excluded the
Land,) which was their fault, brought the Refusers of it into a Praemunire; and
to deny the said Superiority and Supremacy to be and to reside in the Prince,
was Treason. And Dr. Heylin tells us, That it has Ref. just. pt. 2. S. 1.
been, and still is the general and constant Judgment of the greatest Lawyers
of this Kingdom, That the Vesting of the Supremacy in the Crown Imperial of
this Realm, was not introductory of any new Right or Power which was not in the
Crown before, but declaratory of an old one, which had been anciently and
originally inherent in it. Now though this Supremacy had been in Q. Mary's
Reign revoked, disannulled, and delivered up unto 1 and 2 Ph. and M. c. 1.
the Pope again, by her and her Parliament, and the several Laws and Statutes
ensorcing the same, repealed; yet both it and the Laws in Q. Elizabeth's Reign
by an equal Authority were restored and reinforced, though 1 Eliz. c. 1.
not under the penalty of Praemunire or of Treason, as formerly, but
nevertheless of Deprivation, to all such of the Spiritualty, Bishops or others,
that should decline the owning or confirming of the same with their Oaths. And
thus Mr. Cambden states the Matter, quotquot jurare abnuerunt, Beneficiis,
Dignitatibus, and Episcopatibus exuuntur; as many, says he, as refused Eliz.
p. 36.
to accept and take the said Oath, were deprived and turned out of their
Dignities and Bishoprics. An Oath containing nothing in it Burnet's Hist. pt.
1. p. 182, and 240. Edit. 1681.
but what had been determined in the greatest and most famous Monasteries of
the Kingdom; concluded Fox, p. 965 Burn. part 1. p. 182.
and agreed upon by the Universities; subscribed to Ant. Brit. p. 324.
by all the Bishops, and others of the Clergy in their Convocation; penned by
some of them; sworn Burnet, pt. 1. p. 18.
unto by most or all of those very Bishops in some part or other of the Reigns
of the two precedent Kings, and by them then in being, before ever there was a
Law for the requiring any such Oath, defended Ant. Brit. p. 330.
both in Press and Pulpit, and with as little reason to be declined in this
Queen's days, as in any of her Predecessors.

49. For though Oaths be not hastily to be given to every one that either takes
or usurps the Throne, yet here was no possible Doubt or Scruple to be made
against the Title of her Majesty, she being declared by the Parliament then
sitting to be Cambd. Eliz. p. 1.
veram legitimamque; Haeredem, the true and rightful Heir, de cujus certissimo
in Successione jure cum nemo dubitare possit, nemo debeat; so true and
rightful, says Arch Bp. Heath in the Hou^e of Ibid.
Peers, that as no body can doubt of the Truth of her Succession, so no body
ought; and so far forth recognized and owned by the present Bishops, Heyl.
Hist. Ref. part 2. p. 102.
that they all went to meet her, and presented themselves before her upon their
knees, in testimony of their Loyalty and Affection: So that here was no calling
her Title in question, no quarrelling the Authority either of her or her
Parliament, no remonstrating to the Matter of the Oath, without condemning
themselves; nothing but their own Perverseness to pull this Deprivation upon
them: A Deprivation I confess not so regular as it should have been, being
executed altogether by a Lay Power; but yet as regular as the Case would bear;
and not without a Commission neither, according to Stow and others, to examine
and make out their Misdemeanors; the utmost that could possibly then be done,
Stow, p. 1082. Holling. p. 182. How, p. 639.
the whole Order of them, Kitchen of Landaff only excepted, being at that time
under one and the same Guilt, and lay alike open to one and the same Penalty:
And had they not for that reason been displaced till there was a College of
Bishops, or a Court of Episcopal Delegates to displace them, they must never
for all their Disobedience, though never so wilful and provoking, have been
displaced, nor indeed have had their Crimes punished. But what is that to us;
or wherein does it concern the Bishops that are now deprived? Had any of them
taken Commission to surrender upon Demand? Had they at any time before been
deprived? Wanted they either due Titles, or canonical Ordination? Were they
^rdained without the presence or Approbation of their Metropolitan? Or was he
himself ordained by such that were so ordained? Was the Oath for which they
were deprived ever formally tendered to them? Or did it ever appear upon tender
that they refused it? Was it of their own framing? Or had they before either
taken, written, or preached for it? Nay, was it not contrary to their former
Preachings, Declarations, and Oaths? Was the Authority imposing it, either in
reference to Prince or Parliament, an unquestionable Authority? Were any
delegated to make out the Disobedience? Or were there not Bishops enough? Nay,
Might not a Convocation of the complying Clergy have been summoned to have
judged and determined of the Case, whether Culprit or no? When these things are
proved and made out against them; I cannot, nay I shall not but confess their
Deprivations to be alike; but till then I must be allowed to cry out, O
Tempora, O Mores! and with the Poet conclude, that

Aetas Parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Carm. Hor. L. 3. Od. 6.

50. I am sensible that there are two grand Mistakes in the World, which
minister to and hasten on these fatal Proceedings: Some think there is no such
thing as Schism; others, that though there be such a thing, yet an Act of
Parliament will authorize the Fact, and justify all; insomuch that through the
Midwifery of a Vote or two of theirs, God's Altar may be turned or overturned,
Aaron and his Priests deposed, or forced to comply, and a new Erection, like
that of Jeroboam's, though of the worst of Men, made as sacred and divine, as
if it were done by (...) or a Voice from Heaven. And from thenceforth if the
Man of God happen, as his Duty binds him, to oppose or gainsay their Sanctions,
so as their Mightinesses become disobliged; though he be sent of God, as Aaron
was, though he rules well, and labors in Word and Doctrine; nay, though he
be doing the Will and Work of his Master; yet a traveling Staff, and a pair of
ill clouted Shoes, must pass for his double Reward. But how contrary this is to
Practice, has already been shown; and how diametrically opposite to the
genuine Constitutions of this Church and State, comes now to be demonstrated.

51. Populus de Republica non de Ecclesia in Parliamentis antiquitus tractare
consuevit; Anciently, says the Author of Antiquitates Britannicae, the People
never meddled with Matters of religious Concern in their Parliaments, De vit.
Cran. p. 339.
but only with Matters purely relating to the State. Nay, I find by the very
Act of Submission it self, which was in the Year 1530. That it was customary
till then for the Clergy, by virtue of the Authority they had in themselves,
without any Ratification or Confirmation from King or Parliament, to make
Canons, declare Heresies, convict and censure Criminals, and to decree and do
all other Matters as seemed good to them, in relation to the Church and Clergy.
A Power thought too great to be in the hands of the Clergy; whereupon (says
Heylin) The House of Commons aggrieved at the inequality and supereminency of
the Power, Ref. just. part 1. S. 1.
remonstrated and complained to the King, that the Clergy should be permitted
to act Authoritatively and Supremely in the Convocation, and they in Parliament
do nothing, but as it was confirmed and ratified by the Royal Assent. This in
all probability hastened on the Submission; for the Clergy soon after being met
in Convocation (as it is recorded in the aforesaid Book of Antiquities)
promised the King in verbo sacerdotis, ne ullas deinceps De Vit. Warh.
in Synodo ferrent Ecclesiasticas leges, that they would not henceforth enact
or execute any Constitutions or Canons in their Synods or Convocations, unless
the King should cause their assembling, and by his Royal Assent approve and
confirm their Canons: But then this only levels them with, and not puts them
under the Parliament, it leaves indeed their Decrees and Sanctions to them to
be farther guarded and secured, by the addition of their civil Penalties and
Inflictions; but no ways subjects them to them, in reference to the Validity,
Authenticalness, or prior Establishment of them. And this the learned Heylin
has elaborately and fully made out, as to the two first Reigns, both in
reference to the points of Doctrine that were reformed, and to the forms of
Worship that were then enjoined, in his Book entitled, The way of the
Reformation of the Church of England declared and justified; to whom for your
farther satisfaction, I refer you and the Reader.

52. But not content to bring them down to their own level, their next design
and work was to bring them under; and of this the aforementioned Antiquary
complains; Ecclesiasticarum legum potestate abdicata populus in Parliamento
cepit de rebus divinis inconsulto Clero sancire; the Submission (says he) being
made, the People in their Parliament (as if the In vita Cranm p. 339.
Submission had been made to them) began to usurp upon the Church's Right, and
without ever consulting the Clergy, to debate and agree such things as formerly
were held peculiarly to the Clergy only. But these (says Heylin) were only
tentamenta, offers and undertakings only, and Lib. p. cit.
no more. And that they were so, and no better, nor otherwise approved of,
during the whole Reign of Q. Elizabeth (under whom the Reformation received its
full and perfect establishment) will sufficiently be evidenced from the
Journals of the Paliaments in her days, handed down to us by Sir Simon D'Ewes:
And I shall give them in the order they lie in.

When a Bill was presented to the House of Commons for Reformation of the
Common Prayer Book, it was agreed upon by them, that a Petition Ann. 13. p. 167.
should be made to her Majesty for her License to proceed in the Bill, before
it be farther dealt in; and to do otherwise (says the Treasure) is to Page 166.
meddle with matters of her Prerogative; and (as the Comptroller phrased it) to
run before the Ball.

Mr. Strickland having pressed very earnestly the Reformation of the Book Page
176.
of Common Prayer and other Ceremonies, was called before her Majesty's
Council, and commanded to forbear coming to the said House, and when Page 130.
the said Articles of Religion were afterward presented to her, she answered,
That she would have them executed by the Bishops, by direction of her
Highness's Regal Authority of Supremacy of the Church of England, and not to
have the same dealt in by the Parliament.

The Lord Keeper in his Speech to the Parliament by her Majesty's Command, Ann.
14. p. 193.
thus utters himself, Because the proceedings of matters in Discipline and
Doctrine do chiefly concern my Lords the Bishops, both for their Understanding
and Ecclesiastical Function; therefore the Queens Highness looks, that they
being called together in Parliament, should take the chifest care to confer and
consult of these matters; and if in their conference, they find it behoofull to
have any Temporal Acts made for the amending and reforming of any of these
lacks, that then they will exhibit it here in Parliament to be considered upon,
and so gladius gladium juvabit, as before time has been used.

The Speaker declared to the House of Commons, That it was her Majesty's
pleasure, That from henceforth no Bills concerning Religion shall be Page 213.
preferred or received into this House, unless the same should be first
considered and liked by the Clergy.

Upon the presenting the Petition concerning the Reformation of the Discipline
of the Church; her Highness answered, That her Majesty, before Ann. 18. p. 257.
the Parliament, had a care to provide in that case of her own disposition; and
that at the beginning of this Session she had conference therein with some of
the Bishops, and gave them in charge to see due Reformation thereof, wherein as
her Majesty thinks, they will have good consideration; and if that the
Bishops should neglect or omit their Duties therein, then she by her Supreme
Power and Authority would speedily see such good Redress therein as might
satisfy the expectation of her loving Subjects to their good contentation.

Mr. Wentworth moved in the House of Commons for a Public Fast, and it was
carried by fifty voices, which being told to the Queen, she sent Ann. 23. p.
284.
a Message to the House, showing That her Highness had great admiration of the
rashnes^ of the House, in committing such great and apparent Contempt of her
express Command, to put in execution such an Innovation, without her privity or
pleasure first known. Whereupon Mr. Vicechamberlain moved the House to make an
humble Submission to her Majesty, acknowledging the said Offense and Contempt,
and to crave Remission for the same, with a full purpose to forbear committing
of the like: So by the Suffrage of the whole House Mr. Vicechamberlain carried
their Submission to the Queen accordingly, which she accepted; but with a
Monition, That they do not misreport the Cause of her Misliking, which was not
for that they Page 285.
desired Fasting and Prayer, but for the manner in presuming to indict a form
of public Fast, without her Order and Privity, which was to intrude upon her
Authority Ecclesiastical.

Upon sundry Motions touching some Reformation in matters of Religion,
contained in the Petitions exhibited to the House of Commons, it was resolved
Page 201.
by the whole House, that Mr. Vicechamberlain, etc. by Order of this House, and
in the Name of the whole House, should move the Lords of the Clergy to continue
unto her Majesty the prosecution of the Purposes of Reformation; and also
farther impart unto their Lordships the earnest desire of the House for the
Redress of such other Griefs contained likewise in the said Petitions.

But not finding the thing done to their liking, they afterward petitioned
Page 303.
the Queen, and received for an Answer, That as her Highness had the last
Session committed the Charge and Consideration thereof unto some of her Clergy,
who had not performed the same; so she would soon commit the same unto such
others of them, as with all convenient speed, without remisness or slackness,
should see the same accomplished accordingly, in such sort as the same shall
neither be delayed nor undone.

The Lords of the upper House being pressed to join with the House of Commons
for redressing some of the aforementioned Grievances, answered, Ann. 27. p. 345.
That they were present when her Majesty gave Commandment not to deal in the
House of Commons with Matters concerning Religion, or the Church, without her
Highness's Pleasure first known; and do take the same Commandment to extend as
well to their Lordships as to the Commons; and therefore have resolved, That
those of the Lords which are of her Majesty's privy Council, do first move her
Highness to know her Majesty's Pleasure therein, before they proceed any
farther in the Matter.

Mr. Leuknor, Hulston, Bainbridge, and Cope were sent unto the Tower Ann. 28.
and 29. p. 412.
for intermeddling with Matters touching the Church, which her Highness had so
often inhibited; and Motion being made by Sr. John Higham for the setting them
at liberty, Mr. Vicechamberlain answered, That perhaps they might be committed
for somewhat that concerned not the Business or Privilege of the House.

Mr. Davenport moved for some Reformation in Church matters; but Ann. 31. p.
438.
this motion was checked by Dr. Wolley, because contrary to the Inhibition of
the Queen.

The Ld. Keeper told the Speaker of the Commons, That their Privilege Ann. 35.
p. 460.
was not to speak what comes into their Brains to utter; and that it was her
Highness's Pleasure, That if he perceived any idle Heads to meddle with
reforming the Church, by exhibiting Bills to that purpose, that he received
them not until they be reviewed and considered by those who it is fitter
should consider of such things, and can better judge of them.

Mr. Speaker tells the Commons, That it was not her Majesty's Pleasure that the
Commons should meddle in matters of State, or Causes Ecclesiastical; Page 479.
That she wondered that any should be of so high Commandment to attempt a thing
so expressly contrary to that which she had forbidden; and that her express
commandment to him was, that no Bill, touching the said matters of State or
Reformation in Causes Ecclesiastical should be exhibited; charging him upon his
Allegiance, That if any such Bill be exhibited, not to read it.

Mr. Morris (an Attorney of the Dutchey of Lancaster) moved for reformation of
Ecclesiastical proceedings; Mr. Dalton answered, that Page 474.
the Ecclesiastical Government was distinct from the Temporal; and that her
Majesty had commanded them not to meddle in such matters. And Dr. Heylin tells
us, that the proceedings of this Morris so angered Pres. to. Hist. of Ref.
the Queen, that she caused the person of the said Attorney to be seized upon,
deprived him of his places in the Dutchey Court, disabled him practicing as a
common Lawyer, and finally shut him up in Tutbury-Castle, where he continued
till his death. By which severity (says he) and keeping the like constant hand
in the course of the Government, she held so great a curb on the Puritan
Faction (the great disturber of the Ecclesiastical Settlement) that neither her
Parliaments nor her Courts of Justice, were from thenceforth much troubled with
them in all the rest of her Reign. So that now lay all these Premises together;
how that no such Bills, touching Ecclesiastical Affairs, are to be received
into the House of Commons without her Majesty's privity and pleasure, or unless
previously considered and liked by the Clergy; that all proceedings tending
thereunto are avowed injuries to the Queen's Supremacy, and her Ecclesiastical
Authority; that the Bishops and Clergy are fitter persons to consult about and
order such matters than the Parliament; that the Ecclesiastical Government is
distinct from the Temporal; and the Penalties of the latter, are only to abet
and enforce the Results of the former; that their attempts to gain a Superior
Jurisdiction have always been checked and ended in disappointments; and that
the persons so attempting were some of them forbad the House, others turned out
of their Offices, and others sent to the Tower, though at the same time actual
Members of Parliament, without having their hard usage remonstrated against, or
their persons remanded; that this was in the best of Reigns, and soon after the
Reformation was completed; nay, finally, that there was a present
abrenunciation of all such Power made, and as absolute a submission as ever had
been made by the Clergy in K. Henry VIII's days; and it will demonstratively
appear, that the Parliament never had, or at least cannot now pretend to have
any such Power, but that when they attempt to meddle and decree in such
matters, they are perfectly out of their Sphere and Bounds, and so far forth
too, that their Acts can be no otherwise accounted of than encroachments, and
their Penalties little less than Oppression.

53. Mistaken too often they are in their own affairs, but never so much as
when they arrogate to themselves the full command over Religion: A sad instance
whereof we have in the late Rebellious Parliaments, whose Ordinances (though
but of small continuance) proved far more bloody and undoing, than all the
Canons that had been made since the beginning of the Reformation. Hence being
Masters of the Sacerdotal, as well as Regal Power; they in the first place fell
foul upon the Bishops (the Fathers and Governors of the Church) and not only
took away the Lives of some, the Liberties of most, and the Estates of all;
but, to the everlasting scandal of Christianity, they voted away Scobel Jun.
12. 1643.
the whole Order of them, sacrilegiously declaring Oct. 9. 1646.
their Government to be evil in it self, justly offensiv^ and burdensome to
the Kingdom, and a great impediment to the Reformation; though a Government
coeval with Christianity, universally received throughout the whole Christian
World, and continued down to the several Provinces thereof (and in Britain as
well as elsewhere) without the least contradiction, from the Apostles days unto
our own. And in their room and stead set up a company of Schismatical
Presbyters, supporting Aug. 29. 1648.
them with a new Sect of Lay Elders; the former never permitted in the
Catholic Church, and the latter never heard of in the World, for the first
fifteen hundred years after Christ. Thus advanced, they next quarrel the
Service Book, Jan. 3. 1644.
vote it out of the Church, and force the Churchwardens Aug. 23. 1646
to turn Traditors, and deliver them up to the Committees of the respective
Counties to be destroyed; permitting the reading thereof soon after to be
ranked Cromw. Let. to Judge Gatford's P^t. 1655.
with the horrid crimes of holding or maintaining Blasphemous and Atheistical
Opinions; of being guilty of Cursing, Swearing, and Perjury; of Adultery,
Fornication, Drunkenness, and such other abominable Crimes; with order to the
Justices of the Peace to be as careful to suppress the reading of the same, as
of Alehouses, and the beforementioned abominations; though a Book eminently
ministering to the best Reformation that ever happened in the Church, composed
by Pious and Orthodox Men, who stuck not to seal their Profession with their
blood; the laying aside whereof in Q. Mary's Reign, was declared in the ensuing
Reign by the united Wisdom of the Nation in their Parliament, to be to the
great decay of the due Honor of God, and discomfort to the Eliz 1. cap.
professors of the truth of Christ's Religion: And all this to trump up their
beloved Directory, a Form of Worship plainly accusing the Primitive Church
Direct. etc. its Pref.
of indiscretion; and which may be abused by the ignorance or malice of every
one that uses it; liable to Heresy and Blasphemy, as well as to ridiculous
Indecencies, Folly and Profaneness; an Office that never absolves Penitents,
has no Blessing, no Creed, no Hymns, no external Adoration, no Amen; and in
truth a form of Prayer without a form, or so much as a Prayer in it, the Lord's
Prayer it self being left to the Caprichio and Pleasure of him that officiates.
Thus engaged they hurry on to the turning out all the Regular, Loyal, and
Conformable Clergy of the Land, under the notion of scandalous delinquent
Ministers; which upon Aug. 23. 1647. Fowlis Hist. of Pret St. l. 3. c. 1.
trial, proved so constant and steady, that Zechary Crofton (one of the
Chieftains of the Party) thought it matter enough to boast of, that among the
ten thousand Clergy in the Church, they had gained six hundred of them (a poor
pittance God wot) to comply and subscribe their Covenant: And then, rather than
be without, whosoever would they consecrated; making the lowest of the People
Priests of the high places. The Author of the Dissenters Sayings, represents us
with a Page 8.
Catalogue of some of them, and by them you may guess at the rest, Godly,
Painful and Laborious Preachers, Fulcher the Egg-Man, Hobson the Tailor, Gree
the Felt-maker, Spencer the Coachman, Potter the Smith, Durance the
Wash-ball-maker, Debman the Cooper, Heath the Coller-maker, Rice the Tinker,
and Field the Bodys-maker. Neither could much better upon the outing of the
other be expected; since the two Universities, those Seminaries of the Church,
designed for the supply of Hist. Oxon. Quaer. Cant.
the vacancies thereof, were forced to run the same risque, and to undergo the
same fate as the constituted Clergy of the Land had done. And no question, like
Preachers like Doctrine! So lewd, extravagant and vile, that many of
themselves, being by experience made sensible thereof, thought sit to complain,
and, when it was too late, seek for redress; you have, most noble Senators,
says Mr. Edwards, done worthily against Ep. Ded. part 1. Gang.
Papists, Prelates, and scandalous Ministers; but what have you done against
Heresy, Schism, Disorder? What against Seekers, Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Brownists, Libertines, and other Sects? You have made a Reformation, but with
the Reformation, have we not a Deformation, and worse things come upon us than
before? You have put down the Book of Common Prayer, you have cast off the
Bishops, you have taken away Ceremonies, you have caused the Imagies to be
broken down, of the Trinity, Christ, the Virgin Mary, and the Apostles; and
instead thereof there are those rose up among us, who throw away the Scripture,
ridicule the Ministry, cast away the Sacraments, and overthrow the Trinity,
deny Christ, undervalue the Virgin, and disown the Apostles. The Sects have
been growing ever since the first year of your sitting, and have every year
increased more and more, and if Schism and Heresy, etc. be let alone, and rise
proportionably for one year longer, we shall need no Enemy from without to undo
us. Thus it fared with our oppressed Church in those days, till her King and
Priests were despised, her solemn Feasts and Sabbaths forgotten, and the
Sanctuary abhorred; and I am afraid thus it will prove again, if Erastus, his
Demagogues and his Party, ever any more happen to dictate Religion to us.

64. And thus I have freely delivered my thoughts concerning this Subject,
insomuch that if you or others will but seriously reflect and consider what
has been offered thereon from authentic and undeniable Testimonies, you may
readily perceive the reason why so many of us at present refuse the Communion
of the new Bishops, and perform our Devotions separate by our selves, under the
presidency of our old ones. The Communion it self was difficult (if at all
tolerable) before the rent was made; for as Baalam said to the Messengers of
Balak, How shall I Numb. 23. 8.
curse whom God has not cursed? Or how shall I defy whom the Lord has not
defied? How could we make him our Enemy, or pray that God would confound his
devices, whom we durst not lift up our hands against, nor so much as curse, no
not in our thoughts? How could we upon our bended knees, with our and eyes
lifted up unto Heaven, go along with the Priest, and with a blessing to attend
his Spirit, when our Consciences in the interim told us, that we must either
say our Prayers backward, or play the part of the greatest Hypocrites in the
World? Certainly it is better (as King Charles the First said, when they would
suffer him to have no other Chaplains to pray with him in his Solitudes, than
what they (...). chapter 24.
put upon him) to seem undevout, and to hear no Men's Prayers, than to be forced
to comply with those Petitions, to which the heart cannot consent, nor the
tongue say Amen, without contradicting a Man's own Understanding, or belying
his own Soul. Terms of Communion may happen to be so sinful and unjustifiable,
that a good and devout Christian ought rather to absent than to join in with
them; into this strait Gr^tius was brought, between the corruptions in the
Roman, and the want of Orders in the Reformed Church, which made him to be
Segrex, a Separatist Watson Pref. Lib. 5. Ep. 27.
and Devotee by himself: And St. Ambrose was so incensed against the Bishops
that took part with Maximus that had invaded the Empire, and put by
Valentinian, that he did abstinere ab Episcopis, withdraw from them, and
refused all Communion with them; and if it once comes to that pass, that we
must either be alone, or so communicate, I think it much safer, to use the
words of the before recited Martyr, to be condemned (...). chapter 24.
to the woe of a Vae soli, than to that of Vae vobis Hypocritis, by seeming to
pray what we do not approve; especially considering that of St. Cyprian, solus
non est cui Christus in fuga comes, that he is never Ep. 58. Pleb. Thib.
alone, nor without the benefit and blessing of public Communion (if driven
thence for Religion sake) who has Christ along with him for his Companion; nec
sine Deo, nor without God and the influences of his Spirit, be he were he will,
if he do but keep himself free from the pollutions that defile the Temple of
the Lord; whose Temple ye are, says the Apostle, speaking of those who would
have nothing to do with the Temporizing Gnostics, their Doctrine and their
Communion. This was the 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
difficulty we labored under then, and should we now any longer consent and
communicate with them, seeing they have cut themselves off from their lawful
Bishops, and turned Subjects to those that have usurped their Thrones, we
should unavoidably involve our selves in their Schism, and there lie as open to
the punishment thereof, as they did who ran in unto Corah, and took part with
his Confederacy to cast off Aaron, and set up a Priesthood against him. St.
Cyprian highly commends the Presbyters and Deacons who refused to communicate
with Gaius, a fellow and neighboring Presbyter; because he was found to be
present at the Prayers of the Lapsi; and tells them, that by so doing they did
act uprightly, and Ep. 34. Presb. Diac.
consonant to the Discipline of the Church. Nor is it enough to plead as the
Confessors did at Rome, sincera men's nostra, we liked well of Cornelius Cornel.
Cyp. Ep. 49.
and always went along with him in our hearts, when at the same time they took
in with Novatian, and became followers of him and his Schism; or as they in
Athanasius's time did, who came to him (Nicodemus like, in the night) to beg
pardon for their Apostasy, Nos animo Synaxin cum Athanasio, we are ever present
with Athanasius, and at his Synaxes with our Souls, when upon all occasions
they daily appeared in the Assemblies and Ep. ad solit: vit.
Meetings of the Schismatical Gregory, his Bishops, and his Presbyters. Neither
can any peace be expected to be given to such, unless the Schism be abjured.
His ita gestis, these things being resolved on, says Cornelius, Ep. 49. Cyp.
concerning the returning Confessors, Maximus, Vrbanus, Sidonius, Macarius, and
many more, qui se eis adjunxerant, who had joined themselves to them in their
Schism, in Presbyterium venerunt, came into the Conistory, and more earnestly
begged that all their Schismatical compliances might be pardoned: And at the
same rate Arsenius Bishop of Hyppolita, with his Presbyters, Deacons, and
Followers, submitted to Athanasius the Patriarch; we, say they, diligentes
pacem and unanimitatem, earnestly Athan. Apolog. 2.
coveting the Peace and Unanimity of the Church, and willing according to the
ancient constitution to become obedient to the Ecclesiastical Canon, do in the
presence of God solemnly promise, nos deinceps non communicaturos cum
Schismaticis, never henceforth to communicate with Schismatics, nor with any
one else to whom the peace of the Church is denied, be they Bishops,
Presbyters, or Deacons, nor have any thing to do with them; neither send t^ or
receive Letters of pacification from them; but for the future wholly to give
our selves up to the Church's Canons, and the direction of you our
Metropolitan. And indeed, less than this cannot hope to speed, ecce incolumis
and immaculata laudis integritas, behold, says St. Cyprian, that is the
unblemished and Praiseworthy Ep. 51. Cornel.
repentance, that is the incorrupt and substantial return, a desertoribus and
profugis recessisse, to desert the deserters, and to fly the fugitives; to bid
adieu to the betrayers of the Faith, and the impugners of Catholic Unity. And
certainly the sooner this is done the better; lest being once out of the
Church, and no longer assisted by the Spirit of Grace that goes along with it;
we be driven from Post to Pillar, from one point of the Compass to another, and
go we shall (provided Poverty or Disgrace, Cross or Faggot be not in the way)
till we have made Shipwreck of the Faith; and in the end finding our selves at
the brink of the Precipice, and not able to return or go farther, we
contentedly drop down and perish. Thus it was with the Meletians, non est
sperandum ut Antichristo Meletiani resistant, it is now no longer to be hoped
(says Athanasius) Ep. ad sol. vit.
that the Meletians should oppose Antichrist, or resist his coming; for they
have thrown off all care of truth, count it no sin to deny Christ, but
(Camelian like) transform themselves into all shapes and colors, semper
mercenarii, always at the lure and beck of those they live under, and
throughout all, preserring Ease before Verity; till addicting themselves to
Voluptuousness and Pleasure, they conclude with an ede bibe, let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we die. The saddest fate that can befall Men in this
World, and such an one that God inflicts on none, but the worst of sinners; and
not on them neither, till he consigns them over (as lost) to everlasting
desolation. So that whatever other punishment Heaven shall think fit to lay
upon me, whilst I am in my journey; I heartily pray it may not be my doom, to
be delivered up to an obdurate Heart, a reprobate Mind, a careless Spirit, or a
seared Conscience.

55. And here, kind Sir, I had thrown my Pen by, had not you sent me a late
Treatise of Mr. Hody's, wherein he endeavors to prove from a Greek Manuscript
out of the public Library at Oxford, That there was never any separation from
the new Bishop, though uncanonically introduced into the room of another, where
there was not Heresy in the case. As for the Manuscript it self, I leave it to
others to inspect and examine; however I cannot but in my own defense observe,

First, That all the instances therein produced, are of much later date than
those produced by me; His not beginning till Mine do end: Most of them the
results of the middle and corrupt Age of the Church; and therefore of little or
no force against the Practice of the more Primitive and purer Age thereof, to
whom mine do pretend. Nay, were the Practices of those times to be urged and
allowed for Precedents, I can see no reason why the Latin Church should not be
permitted the privilege of them, to prove the corruptions of their Doctrines,
as well as the Greek Church, to prove the irregularity of their Disc^^line. A
thing (I am apt to think) Mr. Hody and his Party would have been shie some few
years ago, to have consented to.

Secondly, That in all the instances touching the various Schisms produced by
me, there is no concern of Heresy in the case; and yet the postordained was
always postponed, and as much rejected by the Church, as if he had been as
deeply tainted with Heresy as ever Heretic could be. This Mr. Hody denies, but
'twill undeniably be made out by reflecting on, and calling back some of the
former instances to a farther review. And because Novatianus was the first that
I instanced in, and (for ought it appears to me) the first that ever made a
Schism in the Church, I shall begin with him; and I suppose it will not be
denied, but that if there had been any Heresy in the Master, it would have been
followed and propagated by his Scholars with the Schism; nay, the longer the
Schism lasted, the worse would the Heresy have been; and yet I find that in
Constantine's days (which was near 100 years after the Shism began) when he set
forth his Edict for the putting down the Meetings of Heretics, the Novatians
were not so much troubled about it, because as Sozomen relates the matter,
(...), they held the same Lib. 2. c. 30.
Doctrines as the Catholic Church did: And so it was in Theodosius's Reign
near forty years after that. He admiring (says Socrates) (...), the confent
and harmony of the Novatians Lib. 5. c. 10.
touching the Faith, though he had banished all sorts of Heretics, yet
decreed, that they should enjoy their own Assemblies, and have such liberty and
privileges as the other Churches of the same Opinion and Faith were wont to
have. And when Atticus of Constantinople was some time after that moved to
drive them out of the City, Do you not know, says he, as the same Socrates
relates, what grievous Persecutions and Troubles Lib. 7. c. 25.
they endured with us for the Faith; adding, that though they had been of old
divided from the Church, yet (...), they never attempted to introduce any
Novelty as touching the Faith. The like we find verified of the Schismatical
Donatists, whose Schism arose (as has been shown) by Majorinus his being
uncanonically placed in the Chair of Caecilian, who was stated there before
him. And therefore St. Austin being sent to by Boniface, one of the Emperor's
Lifeguard, to give him an account of the Donatists Creed; hi plurimi se dicunt
omnino credere quod Catholica credit Ecclesia, many of them (saiys he) do say,
Ep. 50.
that they perfectly believe concerning the Holy Trinity, as the Catholic
Church believes; neither is there any difference between the one and the other,
sed de sola communione infeliciter litigant, but only the Donatists perversely
separating themselves from the Church to break the Unity of it, which is the
sole cause of the contention between them. The same is granted by Optatus in
his Book against Parmenian the Donatist; Et apud vos and apud nos una est
Ecclesiastica conversatio, communes lectiones, eadem fides, ipsa fidei
Sacramenta, eadem mysteria; there is, says he, with you, Lib. 5. p. 99.
and with us, one and the same Ecclesiastical Discipline, the same Scriptures,
the same Rule of Faith, the same Administration of Sacraments, and the same
Mysteries: And yet though so alike in all things else, purely because descended
from Majorinus, who was Posterior to Caecilian, all kind of Communion was
denied them. The same was verified of Meletius the Lycopolitan, and his
Faction; for though he ordained and constituted Bishops in all places where
ever he came, in opposition to the Bishops already placed, thereby disturbing
the Church with his New and Schismatical Ordinations; yet, says Epiphanius, he
adhered notwithstanding to the Catholic Adv. Haer. l. 2. Tom. 2. Haer. 18.
Sect. 1.
Church, and the avowed Faith thereof, (...), neither did he at any time
afterward in the least swerve in the same. Nay, though he lived a long while
after that he first set the Schism on foot; yet, says my Author, (...), He all
along studied Id. eod. S. 3.
the good of the Church, and never taught any thing contrary to the Faith
thereof. Thus it fared in the debate at Antioch between the followers of
Meletius and the followers of Paulinus; they held their Synaxes apart, says
Theodorit, (...) Hist. l. 3. c. 4.
(...), and yet both of them professed one and the same Faith, and firmly
adhered to the Doctrine of the Nicene Fathers. Neither did the death of
Meletius put an end to the Controversy, for no sooner was he gone, but his
Party not accepting Paulinus, which had been Co-bishop with him, chose
Flavianus into his room; and then the Church of Antioch was divided again,
(...), not about the Faith, says Hist. l. 5. c. 9.
Socrates, but about their Bishops. Once more, and then most or all my
instances (Chrysostom excepted, of which more anon) will be reviewed and made
good, and that relates to Liberius and Felix: Liberius was banished, and Felix
his Deacon was made Bishop in his stead; a Man, says Sozomen, (...), Hist. l.
4. c. 10.
always reported to be firm to the Nicene Faith, (...), and as to matters of
Religion altogether blameless. And yet when Liberius was recalled from his
banishment, Felix was forced to retire; nay, the People of Rome, though
requ^sted thereunto by the Emperor, would not so much, according to Theodoret,
as suffer him to Hist. l. 2. c. 17.
remain Copartner with the other in the Bishopric. From whence it was evident,
let Mr. Hody say what he will to the contrary, that there is something more
required in a new Bishop, than barely to be Orthodox in the Faith, and
Catholic in his Belief; and that plainly is, if the Canons of the Church,
which were of old looked upon in Sacredness and Authority next to the
Evangelists, may umpire and determine; not to invade another Bishop's See, the Sea not being forfeited, made void, or vacated by the Canons of the Church: A
rule of such Catholic Authority in the Church, that the known Violaters of it
were no less rejected from its Communion, than were the Violators of the most
holy and sacred Evangels; and though otherwise never so deserving a Bishopric,
adjudged ever after altogether unfit to preside and govern in the Church. Nay,
I cannot but in the third place observe, and still my eye is upon Mr. Hody,

Thirdly, That when Heresy prevailed, and made its Bishops and its Party, the
Canon against Intrusion was no less pleaded against them to render them
uncanonical, than was their Heresy. Hence we find Julius of Rome, after he was
informed of the Invasion made by Gregory the Arian upon Athanasius, Patriarch
of Alexandria, complaining no less of the irregularity thereof, than as if
there had been no Heresy at all in the case; (...); where, says he in answer
to his Letter from Antioch, is there any such Ecclesiastical Athan. Apol. 2. p.
201.
Canon, or any such Apostolical Tradition: That a Man who is a Stranger or a
Foreigner should be made Bishop at Antioch, and sent to Alexandria to be Bishop
there, introduced not by the Clergy of the City, nor by the Bishops of the
Province, but by a Guard of Russians and Soldiers, (...). The whole Church at
that same time being at peace within it self, and all the Bishops of the same
in perfect Communion and Concord with Athanasius, their lawful and proper
Bishop; consider, I pray you, if such a thing had been acted against any of
you, (...); Would you not have inveighed against it? Would you not have
required satisfaction for so palpable a Breach of the Canons? Believe me, and I
speak it, says he, in the sincerity of my heart, and as in the presence of God
(...), it is no rihghteous doing, not according to Equity, nor according to
Canon. Nay, so incensed were the Ecclesiastics at this Invasion of his, that
none of them would go unto him, (...) Athan. Ep. ad Orthod. p. 171.
(...), except some that were Heretics like himself, some that for their
irregularities had been cast out of the Church, and some few that had played
the Hypocrite out of fear; yea, and so enraged were the People against him,
that being deprived of their lawful Ministers so as to have none left either
to baptize or to visit them in their sickness, (...), they rather chose to
hazard themselves and their Children, than to have him and his Clergy to bless
them: I confess this might arise in a great measure from their disgust to him,
his dealings, and his Arianism; but withal something of it cannot but be
ascribed to the aversion they had to this uncanonical Promotion; for being
afterward under a far worse usage by Count Syrianus, they applied themselves
to Maximus the Prefect, and other of the Magistrates, telling them, that if it
were the Emperor's pleasure to have them persecuted, they Pope Alex. Ec. Sub.
Athan. p. 240.
were willing and ready to be Martyred; but if not, then they that would be
pleased to intercede for them that they might enjoy the most Reverend
Athanasius, whom God (...), according to the wonted succession of their
forefathers, had set over them to be their Archbishop; and that no other,
contrary to such succession, might be put upon them, (...), which rather (say
they) than suffer, we have even unto death resisted. A zeal that attended the
Primitive Christians from the very first to the last, and as hard to let go, as
the Faith it self. And this in a manner is confessed by Mr. Hody himself, at
least by his Prefacer, Vide Pref.
who tells us, that at the time the Manuscript was wrote, there was a Party of
Men, Friends to the deprived, says he, but perhaps more to the Discipline and
Canons of the Church, who adhering to him, I suppose, because uncanonically
deprived, gave out that the former was still their Genuine and Canonical
Bishop, and that it was sinful to have Communion with the new one. And this as
he guesses, was in the end of the Twelfth or the beginning of the Thirteenth
Century. It seems the Canon for one Bishop in a Church at a time, and the
inconveniency of having more, unless the first be Canonically deprived, even
till then was retained in the minds of Men, and endeavored after for the good
of the Church (if possible) to be received. Nay, I cannot but consider in the
fourth place.

Fourthly, That if there be Heresy in the case, though rising from the more nice
and speculative Doctrines of Christianity; the deprived Bishops are then,
according to Mr. Hody, to stand upon their Right, and the People to adhere to
them. And if so, then certainly much more, when the practical Doctrines of
Faith, Justice, and moral Honesty, and the Commandments that enjoin them are
concerned; which practical Doctrines and Commandments are as holy in
themselves, as dear to God and the Church, as the more speculative Doctrines,
the consubstantial Doctrine not excepted; and more than other nice Theories
which occur in the Controversies concerning Eutychianism, Monothelitism, etc.
the believing contrary to which is called Heresy. Insomuch that if a deprived
Bishop in the Greek Church, must and would have stood out against an Eutychian
or Monothelite Successor, and defended his Church against them; much more our
deprived Bishops to stand out against their Successors, in defense of those
moral Principles, in adherence to which they suffered Deprivation. Doubtless a
virtuous and good Life was as much intended and promoted by our Savior in the
establishment of his Kingdom amongst us, as a good Faith, or a right Belief;
and his Apostles and Ministers, to whom and to whose Successors the care of the
Church was committed, had it as much in charge to propagate the one as the
other. Dr. Sherlock has been heard to say, That he would as soon turn Arian as
take the new Oath of Allegiance; of such concern he then thought the practical
Doctrines to be: And well he might, when the Lawgiver himself has expressly
told us, That whosoever shall break one of the least of these Commandments,
Matthew. 5. 19.
and teach men so to do, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; so
far the least, say Interpreters, that when the enquiry shall be made for the
breakers thereof, they shall not be found to have a Name there. I confess
Bishops, the most unjustly deprived, have often ceded and acquiesced under
their Deprivations; but then this they did, foreseeing that no hurt would
accrue thereby to the interest of Christianity, either in the speculative or
practical Doctrines thereof; they considered that the loss would only be their
own, (...), the Office of teaching, says St. Chrysostom in a like case,
neither Pallad. in vit. Chrysostom. p. 69.
began from me, nor will it end in me. But if the Cause of God and of his
Church thereby do suffer, if Justice, Faith, common Honesty, and whatsoever is
pure, whatsoever is lovely, whatsoever is of good report, or praise worthy, be
thrust out of the World, and all sorts of Immorality and Vice brought into
their room; nay, pass for Virtue, or not be owned to be Sins: If Duty to
Parents must cease, if Obedience to Magistrates must fail, if Oaths must be no
security, nor any longer be counted Sacred; and if that unspotted Loyalty which
hitherto has attended and made the Church of England so famous and so beloved
of Princes, must be deserted and abandoned, as false and erroneous; methinks
this is such a blemish to Religion, and will prove so great a scandal to the
Church, that it should make our deprived Bishops, though otherwise studious of
Peace, to resume their Power, and not to suffer the Church, over which God has
made them Overseers, to be ruined by their Cessions; nay, not only to resume it
themselves, but because they evidently see their Bishoprics supplied by
persons that already have, and upon any other occasion will be ready to betray
it again in these and the like particulars, to take what care they can that
these Doctrines and Principles be defended and propagated to Posterity.
Doctrines certainly, the most likely of any we profess to cause a rebuilding of
our Church; which if I live to see, and shall be thought fit to have a place in
the building, I pray God it may not fall to my share to be set up for the
Weathercock. And so I am come to St. Chrysostom's Case, which the Introduction
to the Treatise tells us ought particularly to be considered, And here I cannot
but observe,

Fifthly, That whatsoever advice St. Chrysostom gave either to his Clergy or
People upon his parting with them, from whence Mr. Hody and his Prefacer would
infer a voluntary Resignation and Cession, it all issued from an apprehension
of a sudden and violent death to befall him, as if he were forthwith to be made
a Sacrifice, and taken out of the World. An apprehension with which he was
warmly and confidently possessed; for (says the Author of his Life, a Bishop
then present) (...), Pallad. in vit. Chrysostom. p. 67.
John being inspired by the Holy Ghost, said to his Friends, (...), pray for me
my Brethren, for I am ready now to be offered, and the time of my departure is
at hand? and then follows the advice, let none of you desert your Church,
(...), for I evidently foresee that I must leave the World. The like he
enjoined the devout Women upon the same account, (...), come hither you my
Daughters, and hearken to what I say; (...), all things I see are at an end
with me; I have finished my course, and in all probability I shall see your
face no more; one thing however I beg of you, that upon this my failure you
would submit your selves no less to my Successor, if fairly set over you, than
you have done to me. Neither were his fears altogether groundless, for it was
every where reported (...), that he was to be beheaded; Nay, it was not long
Id. p. 68.
before, that his life was twice assaulted; once (says Sozomen) by one Lib. 8.
c. 21.
that personated himself distracted; and at another time by a Servant of
Elpidus, one of Chrysostom's mortal Enemies, who, if Palladius says true,
(...), was hired for ^^fty pieces of Gold Page 197.
to dispatch him; and in the attempt slew four and wounded three. From whence
it may rationally be presumed, that the advice here given in reference to a
future Submission unto the Bishop that was to follow him, was purely and wholly
ascribable to the persuasion he had of himself, he that was no better than a
dead Man, willing thereupon to leave peace behind him, at least not to have the
Church divided upon his account when he was dead and gone; without regard in
the least had to an Intruder, either to approve his Intrusion, or to allow
Communion with him. And that this is the true meaning of his advice, will
farther appear from the after behavior both of persons to whom the advice was
given, and of him who gave the advice; as also of other Foreign Churches, who
thought fit to concern themselves in the Affair for the good of the Church, and
for the maintenance of the Discipline thereof. And hence I find,

First, That John was no sooner removed, and Arsacius put into his Bishopric,
but the People, (Populace and Rabble says the Prefacer,) Bankers and chief
Citizens, (...), persons of place and dignity, say the Edicts, as if no such
Advice had been given them, or at least as if it were Pall. p. 96.
never intended to take place during his Life, holding it not lawful, says
Sozomen, to communicate or pray with their new made Bishop, or with any Lib. 8.
c. 23.
in Communion with him, (...), separated themselves from them, and held their
Assemblies apart by themselves; Nay, says Olympias, Pall. p. 89.
who was one of the very Women to whom Chrysostom gave the Advice, being first
fairly solicited, and afterward by Threats menaced, to renounce John, and to
communicate with Arsacius, (...), Though you should compel me never Soz. l. 8. c.
24.
so much against Law and Right to come into his Communion, I will never consent
to do what no pious and good Christian can warrantably do. It seems to own an
Intruder, in her opinion, during St. Chrysostom's being alive, was an
unwarrantable Action, and unbecoming good and pious Christians, and yet she was
a Pall. p. 150.
Deaconess of the Church, regarded and beloved by Chrysostom Id p. 30.
for her good Deeds; present, as has been said, when he gave the Advice, and
upon that account as much to be presumed to be knowing to the Intent and Design
of the Advice and Adviser, as either Mr. Hody or his Prefacer can be presumed
to be.

Secondly, Neither was this the Humor of the People only, but of the Bishops
as well as of them: Hence Atticus, Successor to Arsacius in the Usurpation,
Chrysostom being still alive, (...), perceiving, as Palladius relates the
matter, that De vit. Chrysostom. p. 95.
none of the oriental Bishops would communicate with him, and that the very
People of the City where he was rejected his Communion, procured the like
Prescript of Severity as Arsacius his Predecessor had done before Id. p. 26.
him, which was either to communicate with him, or to be deposed from their
Bishoprics, and to have their Estates and Goods confiscated. But how little
this Edict prevailed, the Issue and Event thereof will show: Some of them,
says Palladius, (...), for continuing their P. 193, 194.
Communion with John, were imprisoned, and there dyed; some were sent into
Banishment, of whom Palladius to whom the Advice was given was P. 66.
one; some of them were beaten, and some slain: Nay, notwithstanding all the
Severities that these Edicts occasioned, (...), the meetings of those that were
Lovers of Chrysostom, or rather of those that were Lovers of God, were not at
all lessoned, but as it is written, says he, in Exodus, (...), P. 86.
the more they slew, the more they grew. And certainly if these or any other of
the Bishops, to whom St. Chrysostom gave the Advice, had thought that he had
designed it should have took place before his Death, or that it had been
fitting it should, they would never have lost their Bishoprics, run such
hazards, or undergone such Difficulties for him.

Thirdly, And that this and no other was the meaning of the Advice, will appear
from the Advisers own Behavior in the case, for being demanded De vit. Chrysostom.
p. 81.
by the Emperor to leave his Church, Palladius tells us that he refused to do
it; answering, (...), I received this Church from Christ, to take care of the
Souls thereunto belonging, and I must not relinquish it; but the Care of the
City is yours, and if I must be gone, force me thence by your Authority, (...),
that I may have some Excuse at least from being absent from my Station. Nay,
when driven away, so far was he from seeming to have given up, and from blaming
others who adhered to him, that writing to the Bishops and Clergy at Chalcedon,
who for his sake were there imprisoned, he commends them for their undaunted
Behavior in their Sufferings, and Chrysostom. Ep. 174.
encourages them to be constant, and under all to concern themselves for the
Good of the Church, and for the allaying that Storm that was risen in it,
telling them, (...), that though their Care and Study might want Success, it
would not want its Reward at the hand of God. And in another to them he not
only commends them but their Cause; (...), you, says he, for adhering to the
Ep. (...), Tom. 4. p. 186.
Laws and Constitutions of the Fathers, which others invade and contaminate,
are made to suffer these things. The like Letters he wrote to the Bishops sent
from the West to procure a Synod for the further hearing and more righteous
determining his Cause, with all Thankfulness acknowledging their Id. Ep. 157.
etc.
pious Care and generous Charity, for undertaking so tedious and dangerous a
Voyage upon his Account. The like also he wrote to the Bishops and Presbyters
that attended them in their Journey; the like to many other Bishops Id. Ep.
161, 165, 166.
by name; to all the Bishops throughout Macedonia, thanking them all, and every
one in particular, for the mighty Care and Compassion they had for him, and
telling them, that not only he, (...) P. 149, etc.
(...), but all the Bishops throughout the East, together with the Clergy and
Laity of the several Cities thereof, were mightily transported with their stout
Behavior, in reference to him and the Church's Concerns; the like Letter of
Thanks he sent to Innocent, Bp. of Rome, one of the last, says Dr. Cave, that
ever he wrote, (...), thus englished by the aforesaid Dr. Cave, We cannot thank
you enough for Vit. Chrysostom. p. 522. Chrysostom. Tom. 4. p. 684.
that Kindness and Compassion you have showed us, beyond the tenderest Bowels
of a Father; for what in you lies you have taken care that all things be duly
performed and rectified, and run in a proper Chanel, and neither the Laws be
subjected to Contempt and Force, nor the Constitutions of the ancient Fathers
violated: And though some have hindered your Designs from taking any effect,
that they now seem incurably disordered, and incapable of a Reformation, yet I
beseech you still endeavor to reclaimt hem, and not give the Affair over in
Despair, considering of what mighty Importance it would be to bring it to an
happy Issue; and indeed in some measure the whole World is interessed and
concerned in this Matter. The Churches are wasted and brought low, the People
dispersed, the Clergy subdued and trampled on, the Bishops banished, and the
Ecclesiastical Canons trodden down: Once therefore and again I beseech you to
use your utmost Care and Diligence, and the greater the Storm is, let your
Study and Endeavor be so much the more. This methinks does not look as if he
had relinquished his Bishopric, or that he ever designed whilst living, to
give place to another; nay, I am apt to think, that if he would have
relinquished, as Mr. Hody and his Prefacer would have him to have done, he
needed not to have been banished, or sent out of the way for another to be put
in.

4. Nay, I cannot find but that the foreign Bishops were as deeply concerned
for his return and restoration to his Bishopric, as either himself or any of
his own Bishops and Clergy were, not regarding his advice, or at least not
thinking it sit, or that ever it was designed to take place till he was dead
and gone; (...), the design of the Roman Church (as it is in Palladius) was not
to comm^^icate p. 214, 215.
with the Oriental Bishops, and more especially with Theophilus, the Author of
these Mischiefs, till God should please to give place to an Oecumenic Council,
that the sores and wounds which are made in the Church might be healed; for
though John should sleep, yet truth (for which in quisition ought ever to be
made) will awake. And I would, says he, fai^ know (...); Where is the
Priesthood for the present to be found? where Religion? Nay, where common
Humanity? or so much as our Savior's commands (whilst the Church is under such
disorder) can be met with? (...), the Bishops of Europe, says Theodorit, so
much detested the dealings and doings against John, that they withdrew
themselves from the Communion Hist. l. 5. c. 34.
of all those that wrought that mischief against him, and with them all the
Bishops of Illyrium did agree. Nay, (...), though that excellent Doctor was
dead, the Western Bishops notwithstanding, were so far from renewing Communion
with the Bishops of Egypt, of the East, of Bosphorus, and of Thrace, that they
would not so much as have a correspondence with them, (...), till they had
entered the Name of that Divine Man into the Dyptichs of the Bishops that were
dead. And though Atticus (one of the Intruders) had often sent Ambassadors to
them, and as often requested the Peace of the Church at their hands, yet they
would never grant it till John was dead, nor then neither, until he inserted
his Name among the dead Bishops; which being done, (...), they from henceforth,
says the same Thodorit, received him into Communion; and without doubt, Ibid.
thereby accepted and authenticated him, and his Ordinations, purging the
Stream of Succession for the future; so as that it might run pure and clean
down to Posterity, without taking their irregularities along with it. And if
so, then the following instances of Maximian, Proclus, and the rest of Atticus
his Successors, will do Mr. Hody no good.

But grant that all which Mr. Hody and his Prefacer ins^nuates was true, that
Chrysostom relinquished, that Separation was contrary to his Spirit, that the
good Man, seeing he was to be Deposed, advised and charged the Bishops his
Friends to keep Communion with his Deposers, and not to rend and divide the
Church for his sake; telling them and their adherents, that the Church could
not be without a Bishop, though it might be without him; yet I pray you what
would he or any other of the deprived Bishops have done under an Emperor which
persecuted the Order and very Office of Bishops, and would suffer no Bishops at
all in the Church. Put the case that the Emperor had deposed all the Bishops in
one part of the Empire, and had set up Schismatical Presbyters, nay,
Pseudopresbyters, who were and are professed Enemies to the Name and Order of
Bishops, in their place; I am apt to think that John Chrysostom would not have
submitted to an unjust Deprivation at such a time, and by such an Emperor who
had sacrificed the Order to his Interest in one part of the Empire, and had no
principle to keep him from doing it in the other, when great and formidable
numbers of all sorts, would desire the deprivation and deposing of the whole
Order; certainly in such a case as this, he would never have receded, but
continued his Order and Office, though a thousand deaths had attended him;
methinks I hear him at the bare thoughts of it, using the words he did when he
was banished the City, (...); will the Empress banish Ep. 125.
me? let her banish me, the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof. If
she command that I be cut in pieces, let me be sawn asunder; the Prophet Esaias
was served so before me. Will she throw me into the Sea? I remember it was the
fate of Jonas; or into a fiery Furnace? I shall have the three Children for my
fellow Sufferers. If she will cast me to wild Beasts, I think how Daniel went
the same way to the Lions. If she command I should be stoned, let it be so; I
have Stephen the Protomartyr on my side. Will she have my Head? Let her have
it, John the Baptist lost his. Has she a mind to my Estate? Let her have it,
naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return thither: But as
for my Office I will never forsake; neither shall my Order perish as long as I
have a Tongue and Hands to propogate it. Thus I persuade my self his zeal would
have inflamed him; and how tamely soever he might otherwise have sat down when
the Interest of the Church was not concerned; yet at such a time as this, he
would have resumed his courage and his power, and never have suffered the
Church to have been ruined for want of his assistance.

And so I have done with Mr. Hody, as far as I am concerned with him: But how
he will come off for shamming the World with part of the Manuscript for the
whole, I am not able to guess. Mr. B. in his Preface to the English Translation
tells us, That there was a singular providence in the discovery of it at this
juncture; and if there were so then I hope the Collection of Canons which both
of them have concealed, may have as good a Title to that singular providence,
and as much (...) in the discovery of it, as that part has which they have
thought fit to Print. It is written in the same hand, and follows immediately
where the Printed Book concludes; and Mr. Hody, as I am informed, having been
told of it, and asked the reason why he did not publish it, answered, That he
believed it was not written by the same Author: But put the case he did believe
so, had it not however been much the more for his honor, and the interests of
truth to have published it, and given his reasons to the learned World why he
did not believe it to be a part of the Manuscript, or that it was written by
the Author of it. This had been fair dealing; but instead of that, both he and
his Prefacer wholly concealed it, though the Canons carry much more venerable
Antiquity and Authority with them, than the examples they have Printed, and are
indeed of that Antiquity and Authority, which, to use the Prefacer's words of
us, we profess to imitate and pretend to allege. I shall here set them down as
they are translated, into English from a Copy of the Original that was sent
from Oxford; and when the learned Reader has perused them, he will be shrewdly
tempted to guess at the reason for which many learned Men suspect Mr. Hody has
concealed them.

(...). The 31 Canon of the Apostles, by a mistake for the 32.
If any Presbyter contemning his own Bishop shall hold a separate Meeting, and
erect an opposite Altar, having nothing werewith to charge the Bishop in
matters of Piety and Justice, let him be deposed as an ambitious affector of
Government; for he is an Usurper: In like manner, as many of the Clergy as
shall join with him, shall be deposed, and the Laics excommunicated: But all
this ought to be done after the first, the second, and third admonition of the
Bishop.

(...). The 6 Canon of the Synod of Gangra.
If any Man hold a private Meeting out of the Church, and despising the Church,
shall presume to perform the Offices of the Church, In the Orig. It is (...) --
for (...) instead of (...), as the Printed Canons have it.
the officiating Presbyter not being thereunto licensed by the Bishop, let him
be Anathema.

(...). The 5. Canon of the Synod of Antioch.
If any Presbyter or Deacon despising his own Bishop has withdrawn himself
from the Church, and set up an Altar in a private Meeting, and shall disobey
the admonitions of the Bishop and will not be persuaded by him, nor submit to
him exhorting of him again and again, he is absolutely to be deposed; and ought
no longer to be treated as a curable person, neither as one who can retain his
honor; and if he shall persevere to make tumults and disturbances in the
Church, he is to be turned over as a seditious person to the Secular Power.

(...) The 15 Canon of the same Synod.
If any Bishop accused of any Crimes, be condemned by all the Bishops of the
Province, who have all with one accord denounced the same sentence against him,
such an one by no means ought to be judged again by others, but the concordant
sentence of the Provincial Bishops ought to remain firm.

(...) The 10 Canon of the Synod of Carthage.
If any Presbyter being puffed up against his own Bishop shall make a Schism,
let him be Anathema.

(...) The 13 Canon of the Synod of Constantinople, called the first and second
Synod.
The Devil having sown the seeds of Heretical Tares in the Church of Christ,
seeing them cut up by the roots by the Sword of the Spirit, has betaken
himself to a new way and method, viz. to divide the Church by the madness of
Schismatics; but the holy Synod being also willing to obviate this Stratagem
of his, has decreed as follows: If any Presbyter or Deacon under pretense of
accusing his own Bishop of any Crimes, shall presume to withdraw from his
Communion, and not to mention his Name in the holy Prayers of the Liturgy
according to the Tradition of the Church, (...).
before Synodical Judgment and Trial, such a one shall be deposed, and deprived
of all Sacerdotal honor: For he that is in the Order of a Priest, and shall
usurp the power of judging b^longing to the Metropolitanes, and as much as in
him lies shall condemn his own Father and Bishop, before sentence pronounced by
them, he is worthy neither of the honor nor appellation of a Presbyter; and
those who are followers of such an one, if they are in Holy Orders, even any of
them shall be degraded from his proper honor; but if they are Monks, or
Laics, they shall by all means be excommunicated from the Church, until
abhorring the conversation of Schismatics, they shall return unto their proper
Bishop.

(...). The 14 Canon of the same Synod.
If any Bishop pretending an accusation against his Metropolitan (...).
before Synodical Judgment, shall withdraw himself from Communion with him, and
shall not recite his Name according to custom in Divine Service, the holy Synod
has decreed that such an one shall be deposed, if after private admonition he
shall depart from his own Metropolitan, and make a Schism: For it behooves
every one to know his own proper bounds, and that neither the Presbyter depise
his own proper Bishop, nor the Bishop his own Metropolitan.

(...). The 15 Canon of the same Synod.
These decrees concerning Presbyters, Bishops and Metropolitanes agree also to
Patriarchs: So that if any Bishop or Metropolitan shall presume to depart from
Communion with his own Patriarch, and shall not mention his Name in the Divine
Offices, as is decreed and ordered, but shall make a separation (...).
before Synodical conviction and final condemnation of him; the holy Synod has
decreed that such an one be absolutely deposed from all Sacred Orders, if he
offend in this kind after private admonition. And these things are decreed and
enacted concerning those who under pretense of any accusations, revolt from
their own Superiors, and make a Schism, (...). In the Prints only.
and break the Unity of the Church. But if any shall separate themselves from
Communion with their Superior for any Heresy condemned by the holy Synods and
Fathers, he publicly Preaching the same Heresy to the People, and teaching it
barefaced in the Church: Such shall not be only free from Canonical censure
for separating themselves from Communion with the Bishop so called (...).
before Synodical condemnation, but shall be thought worthy of the honor that
is due to the Orth^dox, because they have not condemned a Bishop, but a false
Bishop and a false Teacher, and have not divided the Unity of the Church by
Schism, but have studiously endeavored to preserve the Church from Schism and
Divisions.

From this Collection of Canons, which speaks of no Deposition or Deprivation
of Bishops but what is Synodical, an unprejudiced Reader will easily perceive,
that the Author of the Manuscript, of which this Collection is the latter part,
ought to be understood of the former, not of Secular, but of Ecclesiastical
Deprivations by Synods, abusing their lawful power, and unjustly depriving and
deposing Bishops, whom they ought not to have deprived and deposed. And that
the Author ought to be so understood, is farther evident from his citing the
Synods explication of their Canons, as well as the Canons themselves, with
respect to which they tell us, that notwithstanding what is said in those
Canons, the People and Priests may separate from their Bishops, or the Bishops
from their Metropolitan, or the Metropolitan from the Patriarch before
Synodical condemnation; if they openly and publicly Preach any Heresy which
is already condemned by the holy Synods; which strongly implies that he
thought, that they were not upon any other account to forsake them, unless they
were Synodically condemned; and that the unjust deposions he speaks of in his
Treatise, are to be understood of unjust depositions by Synods, i. e. of unjust
depositions by the proper and competent, but erring Judge.

As great as the decay of ancient Discipline was in the Greek Church, in the
Age when Master B. thinks this Manuscript was written, Synodical depositions
(though by most degenerate and corrupt Synods) was still the common practice of
it, and Emperors still deprived Bishops by the old way of Synodical Authority,
as is plain from the deposition of Arsenius, Patriarch of Constantinople, by
the procurement of the usurping Michael Paleologus; of which I will here give a
short account out of Nicephorus Gregoras, because it caused the greatest Schism
that ever happened at Constantinople, but that upon the deposition of John
Chrysostom; and also because it is very probable that this anonymous Treatise
now published against us, was written upon the occasion of this Schism.

The Emperor Theodosius Lascaris, the second Son of Theodorus Ducas, Lib. 3.
by Irene, Daughter of Theodorus Lascaris the first, dying in the 36th year of
his Age, left John Lascaris his Son, a Minor of six years of Age, under the
Tutorship of Muzalon and Arsenius, the Patriarch of Constantinople: But
Muzalon, a Man of inferior Quality, perceiving he was envied by the Nobles and
common People, offered to resign his Trust into the hands of the Nobles,
convened for this purpose; but they refused to let him part with his Trust, and
not long after, with the whole Army took an Oath to him, under the highest
Imprecations to themselves and their Families, that without any Treachery they
would maintain him in the Wardship of the young Prince, and reserve the Empire
for him and his Posterity. But notwitstanding this Oath some of the Nobles six
days after set upon Muzalon in the Church, and slew him and his two Brothers at
the Altar, whither they had fled for Shelter. Upon this Arsenius, very much
perplexed, consults with the Nobles what was to be done for the Safety of the
Prince, in which Consultation they chose Michael Paleologus to take the
Administration upon him, under the Title of Despot, during his Minority.

After this the chief among the Nobles declare him Emperor, which Lib. 6.
troubled the good Patriarch exceedingly, who thereupon had thoughts of
excommunicating the Usurper, and all his Adherents; but upon farther
deliberation he thought it more advisable to give way, and bind both him and
them by new Oaths to give Security to the Prince, both as to his Life, and
Succession to the Throne, when he should come to Age.

Shortly after he had taken this security from them, he was forced at the
instance of the Senate and Clergy to tie the Diadem upon the Head of Paleologus
with his own hands; but when he did it, he made him swear again that he should
recede from the Government, and lay by all the Regalia, to make way for the
Prince when he came of Age. But after this, the good old Man seeing the Prince
his Pupil despised, retired from his Church into a Monastery, and was succeeded
by Nicephorus, Bishop of Ephesus; who died after he had enjoyed his dignity a
year. Soon after this Paleologus being peaceably settled in Constantinople and
the Government, calls back Arsenius, and makes him Patriarch again upon the
vacancy of Nicephorus: And not long after resolving to keep the Empire for
himself, he persisted to marry the Sisters of the Prince to inferior persons,
and without any regard to humanity, or his repeated Oaths, he puts out the Eyes
of the Prince, and sent him to be safely kept in a remote Prison.

The Patriarch upon this excommunicates the Emperor Peleologus, who in a
seeming humble manner desires to be absolved from the excommunication; but not
being able to obtain absolution from the Patriarch, he calls a Synod to meet in
the Palace, to try him for some pretended Crimes, which he picked up here and
there against him The Synod met, and the cowardly time serving Bishops strove
which should be most forward in having their Patriarch ac^used, and accordingly
they cited him to appear, and called for his accuse^s, but he refused to
appear, upon this exception, that the Synod was indicted by the Emperor his
open Adversary, w^^ in effect was also his Judge.

Upon his non appearing, he was deposed by the Synod for contumacy, and upon
(...) Deposition banished by the perjured Emperor; and Germanus Bishop of
Adrianople (the ^^per^r's old Friend) succeeded in his Throne. Upon this a
great Schism arose in Const^^^^nople among the People, who looked upon Germanus
as an Usurper, counting Arse^i^ (...) be their (...), or true Patriarch after
deposition, because he was ^^justly deposed; wherefore Germanus not being able
to endure the affronts and reproac^^^ (...) the people, quitted the Throne, and
was succeeded by Josephus a Monk, who d^^ (...) understand Greek, but absolved
the perjured Emperor, and afterward retired from (...) See into a Monastery;
and during his administration, there was still a strong Part^ (...) adhered to
A^senius, and continued to do so in the time of Becus, who after the de^^^
(...) Lib. 5. Lib. 6.
the Emperor, privately withdrew from his Station into a Monastery, and was
succeede^ (...) Josephus the Patriarch, whom before he had succeeded; but still
the Schism conti^^^^ (...) ^ome being for Josephus, Arsenius being now dead,
and others being against him, be^^^ (...) as they prttended, Arsenius had
excommunicated him in his life time for invad^^^ (...) See while he was alive;
and the Parties thus contesting one with another, Josephus (...) for peace
sake, and partly because he was old and infirm, once more retired, and (...)
succeeded by Gregorius Cyprius, who it seems understood the learned Greek well;
but ^^^ther was the Schism suddenly quieted in his time, though I suppose this
famous Manusc^^^^ had been written under some of the Successors of Arsenius, to
appease it; and I de^^^ Mr. Hody and Mr. B. his Voucher, to tell us how the
People of Constantinople came to ^^pose so many Successors of Arsenius, if
according to the Greek Manuscript, Neither t^^ justly deprived Bishop, nor the
Church ever made a separation from his Successor, if he were ^ Heretic. What!
Are they the first that did so? No, both these Gentlemen and t^^ Graeculus
esuriens know better; but however as he thought it might serve a turn the^
(...) write his Book, so they thought it might serve a turn now to Print it,
and commend (...) an excellent Tract, though it is really a trifling piece,
written with little skill, and le^^ ^^^cerity, by an Author of little Antiquity
and Authority, in a most ignorant and co^^^^^ Age, when it was counted a mighty
thing in a Greek Clergyman to understand the lear^^^ Greek, and the Writings
of their Fathers that was written in it; and when in (...) Greek Church itself
there was a great corruption in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline ^^ well as in
the Morals both of the Laity and Clergy; the latter whereof were of such (...)
Spirits as to court and comply with every base Vsu^per to get Preferment, and
(...) every thing to his and their Covetousness and Ambition, but their
quarrels with the (...) and the Possessions of their Church.

Thus much I have thought fit to say in reference to the Baroccian Manu^cript,
of (...) I was bound to take some notice in behalf of my own Book; which is
taken out of best and purest Antiquity, that calls for much more deference and
veneration from than the thing Collected by the Author of that Tract: And if
our New Bishops have better Authorities than those they find in him to justify
and support them, The Go^ Peace and Unity be merciful unto them, and give them
Grace to consider, that numbers and str^^^ cannot alter the Primitive notion of
Schism, nor change the sinful and direful nature thereon.

September 29. 1691.
FINIS.

