A Salutation of LOVE TO The Seed of God, IN The People called Independents,
and Baptists, Monarchy-men and Seekers: EVEN, The Tender Bowels of the LORD to
them all, Through GEORGE BISHOPE.

Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Receiving the End of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls,

1 Pet. 1. 8, 9. LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1661.

A SALUTATION of LOVE, etc.
FRIENDS,
CHRIST is risen from the Dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept;
For, as in Adam all die, Even so in Christ shall all be made alive: And here is
the Consolation, That Christ being raised from the Dead dies no more, Death
has no more Dominion Over him; For, in that he Dyed, he Dyed unto sin Once,
but in that he Lives, he Lives unto God. So likewise reckon Ye also your
selves to be dead indeed unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. And this old Zachary prophesied when the strings of his Tongue were
untied, after that he had been Dumb for a certain space of time, as a Sign
until the Day, that the things that the Angel said to him concerning John,
which he believed not, should be performed; Who was to prepare his VVayes
before his face, and to go before him in the Spirit and Power of Elias, To turn
the hearts of the Fathers unto their Children, and the Disobedient to the
Wisdom of the Just; To make ready a People prepared for the Lord: And thou
(said the Angel) shall have great Joy and Gladness, and many shall Rejoice at
his Birth: for he shall be great in the sight of the Lord; and he shall drink
neither Wine nor strong Drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even
from his Mothers Womb; and many of the Children of Israel shall be turned to
the Lord his God: which shall be fulfilled in their season: He spoke and
praised God; and he was filled with the Holy Ghost and prophesied, saying, --
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has Visited and Redeemed his People,
and has raised up an Horn of Salvation for Us in the house of his Servant
David, as he spoke by the Mouth of his Holy Prophets, which have been since the
World began; That We should be saved from Our Enemies, and from the hand of all
that that hate us; To perform the Mercy promised to Our Fathers, and to
Remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he swear unto Our Father Abraham,
that he would grant unto us, That we being delivered Out of the hands of our
Enemies, might serve him without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him
all the days of Our life.

Friends, and Brethren in the Flesh, and in the Covenant of God (as many of You
as stand in the Election of Grace) to You am I moved of the Lord God Eternal to
write, and to warn You, That You take heed to that in You, which witnesses to
God, which is the Dayspring from on high, which through the Tender Mercy of
our God has visited You, To Give LIGHT to those that sit in Darkness, and the
shadow of Death, and to guide your feet in the Way of Peace. For this is He
which Zachary prophesied of, which should be called the Prophet of the Highest,
which should go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his Way before him; To
give the knowledge of Salvation unto his People [by] the Remission of their
Sins; which is fulfilled in this Day, Wherein Multitudes of his People has the
Lord Visited with the Dayspring from on High with his Tender Mercy, and given
LIGHT unto, who sat in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death; and guided their
feet in the Way of Peace; and given the knowledge of Salvation [by] the
Remission of their Sins, through that which has gone before his Face to
prepare his Ways; who has given the knowledge of Salvation unto them [by] the
Remission of their Sins; Who is come the Second time without Sin unto
Salvation, which they witness; Who was dead, and is alive, and behold I live
for evermore (said he to John) and have the Keys of Hell, and of Death; Whom
it was not possible that he should be holden of Death: For, he said in a
certain place, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer
thine Holy One to see Corruption; but wilt show me the Path of Life of all
Pleasures and Stores, which are at thy right hand, and fullness of Joy for
evermore: Whose Day Abraham saw, and rejoiced; and before Abraham was, I am,
said he, who lives for ever, Jesus Christ; Yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever: Who comes in Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him; and all Kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him;
Even so Amen. Who is the Faithful VVitness, the first begotten of the Dead,
and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; The Alpha, and the Omega, the
beginning and the ending, says the Lord; which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty, who is come; and that of God in all witnesses to him,
and that he is raised from the Dead; and being raised from the dead, Death has
no more Dominion over Him; He dies no more, but lives unto God; and shall come
to Judge the Quick and the Dead at his Appearing and Coming: To whom be
Blessing, and Glory, and Dominion for ever and ever.

Now, Friends, this is manifest, in that every One of You, has that in you
which does witness, and which is not blotted out; Nor has Death Dominion over,
though Death Reigns in your Mortal flesh: For, it witnesses against Sin, and
shows that its Deeds are evil; and is stronger than Sin, though you obey it
not; and judges Sin and Evil, and reproves it, and thereby exercises its
Dominion; and shows its Kingdom over that which It reproves and judges; Who
came in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for Sin condemns Sin in the Flesh,
that We might be made the Righteousness of God in him, Not having Our Own
Righteousness; but that Righteousness which is through Faith in Him. For, by
Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift
of God: Through Faith in his Name, who is the Power of God unto Salvation, unto
as many as Obey him, Even to as many as believe in his Name; Who are born, not
of Blood, nor of Man, nor of the Will of the Flesh, but of God; To whom he gave
Power to be called the Sons of God, Even to as many as Received Him: Who came
unto his Own, but his Own Received him not.

So, Friends, Mind Ye in your selves, and see whether there is not such a thing
in You, which always is for God, and against all Evil, which judges Evil,
which condemns Evil, and speaks for God, whether You Obey it, or not? And then
tell me, whether this does not live? and whether it lives not unto God? and
whether Death has Dominion Over it, which judges Death? And whether this be
not the Consolation? Though you Die, and Sin and Death has Dominion Over You,
by being become servants of Sin, and so are free from Righteousness, yet that
lives which would gather You to God? And whether you should not be gathered
unto It, which Death has no Dominion Over; who is the Son of God; who lives
for ever, making Intercession for us; Who seeks to gather You who are gone
astray, who is the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. Out of whose hands none
can pluck his Sheep: Whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion
that which never shall have end.

Friends and Brethren, Let me speak freely to You of the Patriarch Abraham, and
David, and the Holy Men of God who are gone before; They are fallen asleep, and
their flesh has seen Corruption; but him whom God has raised up, that he
should see No Corruption, dies no more; Him preach I unto You, who is a Priest
for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck; Who is made, not after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life; Who is risen from
the Dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept; In whom All are made
alive, Who in that he died, died but once unto Sin, but in that he lives, he
lives unto God; That we should no longer live the rest of our time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the Will of God: For, he that has suffered
in the flesh, has ceased from Sin; and he whom the Son has made free, is free
indeed; and he that is a servant of Righteousness is free from Sin. So likewise
reckon ye also your selves, to be indeed dead unto Sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now here is the Consolation, That We have such an High Priest, who is set on
the Right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. A Minister of the
Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pi^c^ed, and not man; by
whom We have Access unto God, Even by Faith in His Blood; the New and Living
Way, which He has consecrated for Us through the Vail, that is to say, His
Flesh, which is near You, and in you, So that ye need not say in your hearts,
Who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is to say, to bring down Christ from
above) Or, Who shall descend into the Deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again
from the Dead) but the Word is Nigh you, in your Mouth, and in your Heart;
which is the Word of Faith which we Preach (said Paul) and the Righteousness
which is of Faith, which speaks on this wise, says he, as aforesaid. So, to
this New and Living Way come, which he has consecrated unto Us, through the
Vail, that is to say his Flesh; that Ye may have boldness to Enter into the
Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, Whose Blood cleanses from all Sin. So the thing
is not far from You, but Nigh You; the Way is not without you, but within You,
into the Holiest; the New and Living Way unto God, which tenders it self unto
You, to be a Light unto your feet, and a Lanthorn unto your Paths; Even the
Word, The Immortal Word, The Word Nigh You in Your Mouth, and in Your Heart;
The Law of the Lord, which Enlightens the Soul; which is Light; Christ Jesus
the Light, which enlightens Every Man that comes into the World; the true
Light, in whom was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; Who was in the
World, and the World was made by Him, and the World knew him not: Who came
unto his Own, but his Own Received him not; but to as many as Received him, to
them gave he Power to be called the Sons of God, Even to them that believe in
his Name; Whose Name is called The Word of God; which was in the Beginning,
which was with God, which was God; the same was in the Beginning with God. All
things were made by Him, and without Him was not any thing made that was made.

So, Friends, The Way is Easy, and the Lord has made it so, Even the Way
unto Himself by CHRIST, and You know it: Now, it is for You to walk therein;
For there is No Other Name given under Heaven by which We can be saved, but
CHRIST the LIGHT; the True Light which lights Every Man that Comes into the
World; Which John bore Testimony of and said, That he came for a VVitness, to
bear Witness of the Light; The Man that was sent of God, whose Name was JOHN:
and he says, That the LIGHT shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended
it not; which was in Him who was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; by
whom all things were made, as aforesaid.

So then, CHRIST is Life, and the Life is Light; and the Light is in You:
CHRIST the Way, the Truth, and the Life, which makes manifest: For, Whatsoever
is made manifest, is made manifest by the LIGHT: Unto this Come, in this
Believe: For, this I testify unto You in the Name of the LORD, whose Word it
is, and You shall Witness it; who has moved me to write, That if You Return
unto This, unto the LORD, the Rod which is prepared for Others shall not fall
upon You; but if Ye do not, Ye shall fall in your Blood; The LORD has spoken
it. So Farewell. I am

Your Friend, GEO. BISHOPE.
BRISTOL, 17th day of the 9th month, 1661.
THE END.

