A Book of Warnings OR, THE VISITATION OF THE LORD'S Love

To
The KING and his PARLIAMENT. The NOBILITY and GENTRY. The ARCHBISHOPS and
BISHOPS. etc. The PRESBYTERY. The INDEPENDENTS and BAPTISTS. The PEOPLE of
these Nations.
Thorough His Servant GEORGE BISHOPE.

But the end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch unto
Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at the Black-spread
Eagle and Windmill in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

To the KING, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
Friends,
YOU have time to Work, and it is not long: The Lord has been very Gracious
unto you, and Done for you above What ye were able to Ask or Think, as it is at
this Day; He has Replenished Your Sorrows and Troubles with Joy and Peace, and
made Your Dominion larger than Ye could Wish: What is there that Your hearts
can reasonably ask, that You have not? Was ever Such a Day seen by a People, as
by You? Was ever such a Wonder wrought to make You so? Did the Earth ever know
the like? Or can the Records of Ages parallel it? Was it not as much beyond
Your thoughts (and that not long since) as You are above Your Enemies? Could Ye
have thought that Ye should be Rulers over these Nations, and so as at this
Day, some few years since? Was it not Done in a Moment, as it were, without
Blood or Price of War, which brought, and long kept Ye under? How calm? How
still? How in subjection are these Nations at this Day? Have Ye an Enemy? Can
Ye think of one that can hurt You? The Hearts, the Persons, the Purses of the
Generality of the Nations are Under You. A large Dominion; a goodly Heritage;
England, the fairest and best of Nations; England the most secure and safe of
Nations: England the fattest and most fertile of the Nations: Men prompt, and
ready, and bold, and active: A Seed Plot of Understanding; An Academy of
Learning; A Nation of Men; A Warlike Nation; A People whom the Lord has owned
above any people. A People whom the Lord has appeared to save, more than any
people; A people whom He has sought to gather, whom He has gathered (many of
them) into his Rest, and who know the Lord.

This is your state, this your Condition; and thus has the Lord done for you,
that ye may observe his Statutes, and keep his Judgments, that ye may live, and
it may be well with you and your posterity after you, and that ye may know his
Rest, which is Eternal, as he has given you here a Rest temporal.

And now, what does the Lord require of you? but that you Do Justly, and love
Mercy, and walk humbly with God; that you break every yoke, and unbind every
burden, and let the Oppressed go free: That you love Justice and Judgment;
that you rule for God, who has brought you into Rule, and hitherto preserved
you: That you take not upon you to Rule over his Kingdom, or to prescribe to
his Dominion; Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion that
which shall never have end, that of him in the Conscience: That ye make not his
innocent people to suffer, who suffered with you, and by, and under your
Enemies; who have good will toward you and all men; though they war with the
Spirit of iniquity which holds Men's souls in Captivity, with Weapons that are
not Carnal, but Spiritual; who desire your everlasting welfare; and that it may
be well with you and yours for ever; who are innocent as to you, neither has
there been any ill will found in them against you, in thought or in deed; who
are peaceable in the Land, and seated in it by Natural Right; who consist of
Many Thousands of Families, Men, Women, Children and Servants, Natural English;
who wrong no man; who resist not Evil; who are good Examples of Holiness, of
Virtue, of Temperance, and Testimonies against Evil; which causes the Wrath of
God to come upon Nations, and to afflict and destroy them, Whose Desire is that
none may perish, but that all might come to the knowledge of the truth: The
Lord God has called them; the Lord God is with them; the Lord God has kept,
and will keep them, as they abide with him: The Lord God has made them to
stand, and will make them: He has made them a People, and they shall be so: He
has observed all that has been done for, and against them; and he has
recompensed, and will recompense it; they fear before him; they dare not
displease him; they may not set up Man above him; they must obey him before
man; they obey man in him: He cannot see them wronged, and not require it; they
are his Jewels, (his People are) and as the Apple of his eye: He that touches
you, touches the Apple of mine eye, says the Lord; they tremble before him,
and of him stand in awe, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth; they fear not man
whose breath is in his Nostrils, because they may not: Their fear toward him
is not taught by the precepts of men, because it ought not; Christ Jesus says
so, Matt: 15. 7, 8, 9. Ye Hypocrites, says he to the Pharisees) well did
Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people draw nigh unto me with their
mouth, and honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; But in
vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the [Traditions] of men. And the
Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 29 13, 14. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
[Precepts] of men. Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous Work
amongst this people, and a wonder; for the Wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the Understanding of their Prudent shall be hid. They worship God
in spirit and in truth, neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, because
the Father seeks such to worship him; whom the Son says will be so
worshipped. God. is a Spirit (says he) and they that worship him, must worship
him in spirit and in truth. Woman believe me, the hour comes when ye shall
neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father: Ye worship
ye know not what; we know what we Worship; for salvation is of the Jews: But
the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him, John 4. 21,
22, 23, 24. They cannot bow to any thing but what is of the Lord in his Worship,
because the Lord has sworn, As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God, Romans 14. 11. They cannot owe their
Consciences to any but to God, because He is Lord of Conscience: They cannot
but meet together to Worship God, and to wait upon him; because they that
feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard
it, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him for them that feared the
Lord, and thought on his Name; and they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts,
in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares
his own son that serves him, Mal. 3. 15, 16. And not forsaking the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another,
and so much the more as you see the day approaching, Heb 10. 25. They cannot
swear, because Christ says, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for its God's
throne; neither by the Earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem,
for it is the City of the Great King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head, for
thou can not make one hair white or black: But let your communication be Yea,
Yea, Nay, Nay, for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil, Matt. 5. 34,
35* 36, 37. And his Apostle James says, But above all things my Brethren,
swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath:
But let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation, Jam.
5. 12. And the swearing [by] any thing, was that which made it an Oath; and
they used in their swearing to mention [by] something, which made it an Oath;
and they were gone (many of them) from that of the Law, (which Christ the end
of the Law for Righteousness, also repeals, in that he says, Ye have heard it
has been said by them of Old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall
perform unto the Lord thine Oath's; but I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc.
as aforesaid) which Law required them to swear, and to swear by the Lord: Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and swear By his Name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
I say, they were gone from that of the law, which required them when they
swore, to swear [by] the Lord; Thou shall swear the Lord lives in truth, in
judgment, and in righteousness, Jer. 4. 2. and swore [by] the Lord, and [by]
Malcom, Zeph. 1. 5. And, they taught my people to swear [by] Baal, Jer. 12. 16.
And they that swear [by] the sin of Samaria, and say, thy God O Dan lives; and
the Manner of Beersheba (the Calves there by which they worshipped God) lives,
even they shall fall, and never rise up again, Amos 8. 14. And [by the Heaven,
and [by] the Earth, and [by] Jerusalem, etc. He repeals it all: But I say unto
you, swear not at all; neither [by] the Lord, nor any other thing: Swear not at
all, I say unto you so, though ye have heard it has been said by them of old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform to the [Lord] thine
Oaths. This was not Cursorie swearing, or in ordinary Communication (as people
would have it, a^^ some say so, but without proof) for it appears not that
there was any such kind of swearing among the Jews, for they were not to take
his Name in vain; but such Oath's as were made to God, solemn Oaths, (as I may
so say) by which they bound their souls to God to perform, as it was then
required; and when they swore so, they mentioned [by] something (as I have
said) and this [By] made it an Oath; and that which they swore [by] was to be
that which was Paramount to all, and could witness, and was able to avenge,
which the Lord was only, therefore they were to mention his Name when they
swore; and it was a figure of something which was to come, which was not then
come, Christ Jesus (whom that Nation, and the Body of all that worship and
service typified, and which had their end in him, and which he when he was
come, put thus an end unto; who is the Oath of God -- to perform the mercy
promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he
swear to our Father Abraham that he would grant unto us, Luke 1. 72, 73, 74 --
And who it is that binds the soul to God: In whom all the promises of God are
Yea and Amen; Even in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 1, 20. who says, But I say unto
you, Swear not at all: And he that said so, is the same that said, Whosoever is
angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment,
etc. And whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
Adultery with her already in his heart in the same Chapter Mat. 5. They cannot
maintain a Priesthood by tithes, because that Priesthood which had the tithes
is done away, and ended in him to whom Abraham paid tithes, in Melchizedeck,
who is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck, Psalm. 110. 4. whom it
figured. They cannot maintain temples of stone, or come to Worship in them, as
places consecrated by man; or because they have in them, more than other
places, or for that God is more to be found in them, or will be found in them;
or that he has so signified more than in other places; or that he will be
present: Because God dwells not in temples made with hands, neither is
worshipped with men's hands. God that made the world, and all things therein,
seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in temples made with
hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing that he gives unto all, life, and breath, and all things, Acts 17. 24,
25. And the temple at Jerusalem was a figure of him who was to come, which is
ended in him who is come. And now the temple of God is those in whom the Holy
Ghost dwells. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit
of God dwells in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God
destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3. 16 17.
And, what agreement has the temple of God with idols? For ye are the temple of
the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people; Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. They cannot be in
the Observation of Days and times set in the will of man; Because such things
also had their Day, and End; even those which were commanded of the Lord; Ye
observe Days, and Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4. 10, 11. And, let no man
therefore judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in respect of a Holy Day; or of
the New Mood, or, of the Sabbath-Dayes, which are a shadow of things to come,
but the Body is of Christ, Col. 2. 16, 17. And, He that regards a Day,
regards it unto the Lord; and, he that does not regard the Day unto the Lord,
he does not regard it. He that Eats, Eats to the Lord, for he gives God
thanks; and he that eats not unto the Lord, he eats not, and gives God
thanks. For none of Us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself. For,
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord; whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. For to this end
Christ both Died and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead
and Living. But why do thou judge thy Brother? Or, why do thou set at
naught thy Brother? We shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ; As
it is written, As I live, says the Lord, Every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God. So then every One of Us shall give account of
himself to God. Let us not the before judge one another any more, but judge
this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or occasion to fall, in his
brother's way. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is
nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean,
to him it is unclean. But if thy Brother be grieved with thy Meat, Now walk
thou not Charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed. Let
not then your good be evil spoken of. For the Kingdom of God is not meat, and
drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. For he that in
these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Let Us,
therefore, follow after the things that make for Peace, and things wherewith we
may edify one a^o^her; for meat destroy not the work of God; one man esteems
one day above another; Another esteems every day alike. Let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14. 5. to the end.

Now, these things I am moved of the Lord to lay before you; to the End that
ye may take heed of Doing any thing by which the Lord may be Displeased with
you; Or that may grieve his Spirit, or, make him to Repent of the good he has
done you; or to become your Enemy. For certainly if ye shall impose upon
Conscience in things appertaining to the Worship of God; or cause his Innocent
People to suffer; or, not Answer the End of the Lord in giving you this Day and
Trial; His hand will be against you, and he will reckon these things with you;
and it will be sad for you in that Day; When he shall render unto you according
to your Works. And therefore in love to you, and in the fear of God, and as
moved of him, and as desiring your welfare both here and hereafter, I have
written.

GEO. BISHOPE.

To the Nobility and Gentry of These Nations.
Friends!
YOur Opportunities are great to do Good; the Lord has not dealt by You as
with Other men; You have Estates Great and Large; Lands and Revenues, and many
your Servants; in the most sweet and flourishing Places of the Nation. You are
Seated, and your World abounds: You have in a manner what ye can wish; and
your Travel is little (most of you); from your Ancestors ye have received from
Generation to Generation with little Toil, or Trouble, as to you; unless your
Desire of Increase, or falling below by other Miscarriages has occasioned it:
You are full of Ease and Pleasure; and if any thing be of more De^ectableness
then other, you have it; Ride in and out; Rise, Walk, lie down at your
pleasure; when multitudes of others rise early, and lie down late, and Eat the
bread of carefulness, and are your servants.

And this is the state of many, or most of you; and it is great and large as to
the Outward, Who are like to you? Now, it concerns you to see how you Answer
the Lord for all his kindness* and how ye Return to him according to the
benefits received; For, the End of the Lord in all this is not that ye should
do as ye list, and because ye have your Wills as to this World; therefore ye
should do your Wills in this world; but the Will of him that gave it you.
Excess, Riot, Pride, Haughtiness, Surfeting, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Wantonness,
Cursing, Swearing, Diceing, Gaming, Chambering, Revelling, spending the
Creatures on your Lusts, Living in pleasure, loving of pleasures more then God,
with such like; were not the things that he minded as his End who with a
liberal hand has ministered to you; but to be humble, sober, meek, just,
temperate; lovers of good things, lovers of God; liberal, charitable, given to
good works, lovers of Hospitality, kind, virtuous, serving the Lord without
distraction; Passing the time of your sojourning here in fear. For, the Lord
will require an account of you for all the deeds done in the body, and his
judgment ye cannot escape; and the more kind and liberal he has been to you,
and put it into your hands to do good, the more he will require at your hands:
For, to whomsoever much is given, of him much will be required.

Therefore, Friends, it concerns you (as I have said) to mind your state, and
see how it is with you; That within you which witnesses to God will show you
if you heed it, and become obedient thereunto; which knows your Up-risings, and
your Downsittings; the thoughts and intents of your hearts, and tries them;
which is with you wherever you go, and wherever you lie down, and whatever you
do; which is Gods witness, and takes account of all your Actions; and speaks to
you from God, and bids ye not to do the Abominable thing that his soul
abhorrs; which judges ye for Evil; which shows ye Evil; which tells ye what
ye should do; and which will make up the Reckoning for God; and will leave you
without excuse in the Day that he shall Judge the Quick and the Dead, at his
appearing and coming.

Now, Friends, this is of Concernment to You, that this be your friend; and
that this answer for you in that Day, that ye have done the Will of God, and
Answered the Requirings of his Spirit in you; and what it moved you from God.
Well done thou good and faithful servant, Enter into thy Masters Joy, will the
Lord say then to that which has Done his Will; and that will be a good word
for you in the Day of the Lord, when amazement and horror shall seiz upon all
who know not God, neither yield Obedience to his God; and all faces shall
gather Blackness, and Paleness; and the Mighty shall be afraid, and the Strong
man shall weep bitterly, and the Heavens shall depart as a Scrowl, and the
Elements melt with fervent heat; and the Earth, and the works thereof be burnt
up; and Men at their Wits Ends, expecting what the End of those things will be;
and an Eternal End abides it to every one, either of joy. or sorrow, for ever
and ever. But if it be otherwise, and that condemn you which should be your
Peace, and that plead against ye, which you should now mind to plead for you
in that Day; and be a Witness to the Lord that ye have not hearkened, nor
heard, nor obeyed, nor received Instruction, nor drawn near to the Lord; but
you would do as ye listed, and serve your pleasures more then God, and consume
his Creatures on your Lusts; and swear by, and blaspheme his Name; and make no
other use of your time, then to please your selves, and not the Lord; nor of
your Estates, but in order thereunto; and your time be over, and the Day of
your Visitation be closed up, and at an End, then it will be sad indeed; and
better it had been for you that you had never been born; when with Rich Dives,
you, who have had in your lifetime your Pleasure, must be tormented for ever
and ever.

Therefore, my Friends, whilst ye have time mind it; Let not the gracious hour
of the Lord's tender Visitation pass Over you; but be ye gathred unto it: Come
into his Arms now they are Open; approach unto him, now that he calls upon you.
It Is your need, not his, that makes him call on you: Come to him when he calls;
He knows your state; He knows what it will be for you to be Undone for ever; He
knows the power of his wrath, though man does not; He knows how it will sink;
how it will lay Low; how it will bring to the dust; how it will bow the Pride
of Man; and lay his Haughtiness in the Dust; and how intolerable it is. He
calls that ye may hear whilst ye have time; He calls that your souls may
live: Why will ye die, O house of Israel? Return, and your souls shall live:
He desires not your death; he has sworn it; This is a testimony of it, that
he calls upon you; and that he calls upon you, you know; because ye find that
in you which shows ye Evil, and judges ye for Evil, and tells ye what ye
should do, and Answers to what I have said to you: And, this is the power of
God to salvation to as many as believe in it, and obey it. It Is stronger then
the Powers of Darkness; It steps thorough it; It comes before it; it shows ye
what the Enemy is doing; and where he is leading you; and what is the Path; and
whither it tends; and shines before you for you to see the Path of Life, and to
walk in it; and it will lead you into the Path of Life, as you believe in it,
heed it, and obey it. And this is the loving kindness of God to you; and his
free Grace, and his Mercy, his Redemption if you will receive, and accept it;
For, to as many as received him, it was, that to them he gave power to be
called the Sons of God, even to as many as believe in his Name; which were born
not of Blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the Flesh, but of God; Who was in
the World, and the World was made by him; and the World knew him not; who came
unto his Own, and his Own received him not.

Live not then in Pleasures; for he that lives in pleasure is dead whilst he
lives: But draw nigh unto God, and He will draw nigh unto you; Cleanse your
hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded: Be afflicted, and
mourn, and weep; Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to
heaviness: Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you
up. Come to that which judges you, and love that which shows you, and follow
that which draws you; Least the hour of your Visitation pass Over you, and you
be swept away by the overflowing scourge which is near to come on the head of
the wicked; So will ye feel my Love, and the Arms of the Lord which seeks to
draw you with the Cords of a Man, with the bands of love, of which I am
Witness; who so moves in me to you-wards; whose love is to you; and who am
willing in any thing in the Will of God to be serviceable unto your Eternal
Welfare, and that which is here, which is desired by him, who is,

Your Friend, GEO. BISHOPE.

To the Archbishops (so called) and Bishops, Deans and Prebends, Chancellors
and Chor^sters, and the rest of the Priesthood and its Officers under
Episcopacy in these Nations.
Friends,
EVery Plant that my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up,
says Christ: And you being not Plants of his planting, ye will be rooted up.
Therefore look to your selves, and see in this your hour, whether ye be Plants
which he has set, which shall not be rooted up.

Look thorough the New Testament (so called) the Scriptures of the Apostles and
Disciples of Jesus, and see whether ye have any footing there, or in the Garden
of God, where they planted who were sent of him, who were able Ministers of the
New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for, the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives life, 2 Cor. 3 6.

See whether ever Jesus Christ planted such a thing in his Church as to be
called Fathers, or Reverend Fathers, or Right Reverend Fathers? seeing that he
said unto his Disciples, Call no man Father on the eart^; for one is your
Father which is in Heaven, Matt. 23. 9. And seeing of the Lord it is said --
Holy and Reverend is his Name, Psalm. 111. 9. And whether this be Right, or in
God, seeing it is Out of the Scriptures, and from the Church of Christ which is
in God, 1 These 1. 1. And none of the Gifts which when he ascended up on high,
and led Captivity captive, he gave unto men, which were some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8, to the 14. And seeing that Christ Jesus himself calls not
himself Father, but the Son, though he be the Head of the Church, Col. 1. 18?
And whether These be not Names of Blasphemy? And whether the Woman Which John saw
(being carried away by the Angel which had the seven Vials in the Spirit into
the Wilderness) was not sitting on a scarlet colored Beast full of Names of
Blasphemy? Rev. 17. 1, 3. And whether she was not drunken with the Blood of the
Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus? Ver. 6. And, whether these
be not some of the Names?

Again, look and see whether Lords, Archbishops, and Lord-Bishops, or any such
thing be found written in the Lambs Book of Life, who exercise Dominion over
the Lord's Herltage, and are called of men Lords? Seeing that Christ Jesus
says -- The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that
exercise Authority over them, are called Benefactors; but ye [shall not] be so;
but he that is greatest among ye, let him be as the younger; and he that is
chief, as he that does serve; For, whether is greater, he that sits at Meat,
or he that serves? Is not he that sits at Meat? but I am amongst ye as he
that serves, Luke 22. 25, 26, 27. And seeing that his Apostle says -- For,
though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven, or in Earth, (as there
be Gods many, and Lords many) but to Us there is but one God, the Father of
whom are all things, and We in him; and one Lord Jesus, by whom are all things,
and we by him, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5. And seeing another of his Apostles says, -- The
Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a Witness of the
sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the Glory which shall be revealed.
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither
as being [Lords] over Gods Heritage, but being examples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.
23. And seeing the same Apostle also says -- And when the chief Shepherd (No
Archbishop, no chief Shepherd of the sheep but him) shall appear, we shall
receive (who are not as [Lords] over Gods Heritage, or who Lord it not over
them as aforesaid) a Crown of glory that fades not away, ver. 4.

Thirdly, look and see whether ever the Apostles had the disposal of Lands,
otherwise then what every one that had a willing mind did sell, and lay the
money down at the Apostles feet for the relief of the Disciples, that none
amongst them might want, and this in time of persecution? Seeing that the
Scripture says -- And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart,
and of one soul, neither said any of them, that ought of the things that he
possessed were his own; but they had all things common: And that with great
power gave the Apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and
great Grace was on them all; neither was there any among them that lacked; For
as many as were possessors of Lands, sold them, and brought the price of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet: And
distribution was made unto every man according to his need: And Joses, who by
the Apostles was called Barnabas, (which is by interpretation the Son of
Consolation) a Levite, and of the Country of Cyprus, having Land, sold it, and
brought the Money (not the Land) and laid it at the Apostles feet, Acts 4. 32.
to the end. And whether Palaces and yearlie Revenues of thousands of pounds in
Land, and Houses (which they neither ploughed for, or eared, planted or sowed)
as proper to their Place and Function; Or Earthly Dignities, or Superiorities,
or Powers, or Preheminencies, or State, or Grandeur, was entailed by Christ to
his Apostles and Disciples whom he sent forth to Minister, to whom he said
(after he was risen from the Dead, and near ascending) -- And lo I am with you
to the end of the World, Matt. 28. 20. seeing that himself also says to Pilate
-- My Kingdom is not of this world; if my Kingdom were of this world, then
would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is
my Kingdom not from hence, John 18. 36. -- And to Peter -- Put up thy sword
into the sheath; the Cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?
Ver. 31 -- Put up thy sword (Peter) into his place; for all they that take the
sword, shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26. 52 -- And to his Disciples* The
Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have Nests, but the Son of man has
not where to lay his head, Matt. 8. 20. -- And, When I sent you without purse
and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing, Luke 22. 35
-- And his Apostle says -- For though I preach the Gospel; I have nothing to
glory of; for necessity is laid on me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not the
Gospel: For if I do this thing (willingly) I have my reward; but if against my
will, a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me, what is my reward then?
Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, that I may make the Gospel of Christ
[without] charge; that I [abuse] not my power in the Gospel; for though I be
free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all that I might gain
the more, 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Fourthly, look and see whether they had any Courts or Synagogues, or places of
Judicature, or sat as Judges over Men's Persons or Estates, or had their
Officers to summon or bring before them to censure, and to punish them? And
whether they had, or sought for, or used, or taught of such a Power, or any
thing like it to that, or succeeding ages, that might then, or hereafter, or at
any time be used by the Apostles and the Disciples of Jesus? Seeing that he
says -- Man, who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? to him that said,
Master, speak to my Brother that he divide the Inheritance with me -- Who was
one of the company that followed him, Luke 12. 13, 14. And seeing that he said
to his Disciples -- Take heed to your selves, for they shall deliver ye up to
Counsels, and in the Synagogues ye shall be beaten, and ye shall be brought
before Rulers and Kings for my sake, for a testimony against them, Mark 13. 9.
And that they were so delivered and beaten, and brought before, the Acts of the
Apostles testify.

Fifthly, Look and see whether the Apostles and Ministers of Jesus had fixed
places, or settled stations or Houses and Land appropriated to them by the Laws
of Nations, and such a Circuit of ground, and all within it, whether one or the
other, to be at their Order, and this to be called their Diocese, or Deanary,
or Parish, or Cure of Souls? Seeing that of Christ Jesus it is said, That he
went about all the Cities and Villages, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing every sickness, and every
disease among the people, Mat. 9. 35. And he said to his Disciples, Freely ye
have received, freely give, Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead,
cast out Devils: Freely ye have received, freely give -- And this was to the
lost sheep of the House of Israel, Matt. 10. 6, 7, 8. And seeing his Apostle
said of himself and Brethren -- Even to this present time we both hunger and
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have No certain dwelling place;
and labor, working with our hands, being reviled, we bless; being persecuted,
we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: We are made as the filth of the world,
and are the offscouring of all things unto this day, 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12, 13. And
they wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted
and tormented, of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in Deserts and
in Mountains, and in Dens, and in Caves of the Earth, Heb. 11. 37, 38 And how
the Apostles went about from Nation to Nation, from City to City, preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom, their Epistles and Acts manifest, unto which I refer.

And Paul says -- A Bishop then must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to teach; not
given to Wine; no striker, nor given to filthy Lucre; but patient; not a
Brawler; not Covetous; One that rules well his Own house, having his Children
in subjection with all gravity: For, if a man know not how to rule his Own
house, how shall he take Care of the Church of God?) Not a Novice, least being
lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. Moreover, he
must have a good Report of them that are without; least he fall into Reproach,
and the snare of the Devil. These things write I unto Thee (says he to
Timothy) hoping to come unto thee shortly; but if I tarry long, that thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the
Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, (which no Temples
made with hands are, but the Church which is in God) 1 These. 1. 1. Lively
stones built upon that spiritual house; an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.) 1 Timothy 3.
2. to the 8. 14, 15.

And the same Apostle says to Titus -- For this Cause left I thee in Creet,
that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders
in every City as I had appointed thee. If any be blameless, the husband of one
wife, having faithful Children; not accused of Riot, or unruly. For a Bishop
must be blameless as the Steward of God; not self-willed, not soon angry; not
given to wine; no striker; not given to filthy lucre, but a lover of
hospitality, a lover of good men; Sober, just, holy, temperate; holding fast
the faithful word as he has been taught; that he may be able by sound doctrine
both to Exhort, and to Convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1. 5. to the 10.

And this Paul was an Apostle not of men, neither by man; but by Jesus Christ,
and God the Father who raised him from the Dead: So he says himself, Gal. 1.
1. And Timothy had the Gift by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. And the Apostles laid their hands on them that believed, and they
received the Holy Ghost, Act. 8. 17. which Simon the Sorcerer would have bought
with money. For when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the
Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also this Power,
that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost: But Peter said
unto him, Thy Money perish with thee, because thou have thought the Gift of God
can be purchased with Money: Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter; For
thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God if perhaps the thoughs of thine heart may be forgiven
thee; for I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of
iniquity, ver. 18. to the 24 And Paul said to Timothy -- Lay hands suddenly on
no man; neither be partakers of other men's sins; Keep thy self pure, 1 Timothy 5.
22.

And that Ministration had an End with them, and Antichrist was then entering,
and the Apostles prophesied of the Apostasy; and Jude (speaking of what was
already entered, which the Prophets and the Apostles of the Lord Jesus had
foretold should come, which was then already come) But, Beloved, (says he,
ver. 17.) Remember ye the words that were spoken by the Apostles of the Lord
Jesus Christ, how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time,
which should walk after their ungodly lusts. These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, ver. 18, 19. And John says
expressly, That it was then the last time -- Little Children (says he) it is
the [last] time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even Now
there are many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the [last] time, 1 John 2 18
-- And in the Revelations he saw the Court which was without the Temple, to be
given to the Gentiles, and that they should tread the holy City under foot
forty and two Months, Rev. 2. 21. And in the Overthrow of Babylon, and the
Return from the Apostasy, and after it, he speaks not of the Return again of
that Ministration, but of a More glorious, a City wherein the Lamb was the
light thereof: And I saw (says he) [No] Temple therein; for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. And the City had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof: And the Nations of them that are saved shall
walk in the light of it, and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and
honor unto it, Rev. 21. 22, 23, 24. And the gates of it shall not be shut at
all by day; for there shall be no night there. And they shall bring the glory
and the honor of the Nations unto it: And there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works an abomination, or makes a
lie; but they that are written ia the Lambs book of life, ver. 25, 26, 27. And
all sorrows (here) are wiped away; and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying; neither
shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away. And he
that sat on the Throne, said, Behold, I make all things new: And he said unto
me, Write, for these things are true and faithful, Rev. 21. 4, 5.

And, to the Lambs Wife was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen,
clean and white; for the fine Linen is the righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19.
8. And, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,
and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their
God, Rev. 21. 3. And he saw the holy City, the New Jerusalem coming down from
God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, ver. 2. And the
Angel that flew through the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, said with a loud Voice, Fear God, and give glory to him;
for the hour of his Judgment is come; and worship him who made Heaven and
Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters. And the other Angel that
followed him, said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she
made all Nations drink of the wrath of her Fornication, Rev. 14. 6, 7, 8. And
rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has
avenged ye on her, Rev. 18. 20. And the Victory was to the Lamb and his
followers, who sat on the white Horse, whom the Armies of Heaven followed on
white Horses, clothed in fine Linen, white and clean, Rev. 19. 11. 16. And
the Angel which stood in the Sun, cried with a loud voice, and said to all the
Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, Come and gather your selves unto the
Supper of the great God, that ye may eat the Flesh of Kings, and the Flesh of
Captains, and the Flesh of mighty Men, and the Flesh of Horses, and of them
that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and
great, ver. 17, 18.

And, he that testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly: Amen; Even
so come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 20. And behold I come quickly, and my Reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall be, ver. 12. And I Jesus
have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the Churches: I am
the Root and the Offspring of David, and the bright and Morning Star: And the
Spirit and the Bride say Come; and let him that hears, say Come; and let him
that is athirst Come, and take of the Water of Life freely, ver. 16. 17.

And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book; for
the time is at hand: He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which
is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is Righteous, let him be
righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still. And I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, Blessed are they that
do his Commandments that they may have right to the Tree of Life, aad may enter
in through the gates unto the City; For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and
Whoremongers, and Murderers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, Ver. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this Book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this Book: And if any man shall take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy; God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life, and from the holy City, and from the things that are
written in this Book. Ver. 18, 19.

And so I have said to you what at present lies upon me from the Lord; whether
you will hear or forbear; it shall witness for God against ye all (if ye hear
not) in the Day that he shall tender to every man according to his Deeds. So
farwell: It Is my love unto you that has drawn this for you from the movings of
the Lord. It concerns you to mind whether your state stands not so as is here
represented; and to turn unto the Lord, lest being so, ye be plucked up; For,
every Plant tha^ my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up, says
Christ: It Is that which I said to ye in the beginning, in the Word of the Lord,
and which I now say unto you in the same, at the End: And the time is near.

Geo, Bishope.

To the PREYSBTERY (so called) in these Nations.
Friends,
YOu have been staggering as Drunkards, and starting aside like a Deceitful
Bow: You were of the Bishops, and came out from the Bishops, and covenanted
against the Bishops, and have let in the Bishops, and have (many of you)
turned, and many are returning to the Bishops; and this has been, and is the
Work of you, and of many of you, to be upwards and downwards, and backwards and
forwards; now here, and now there; reeling and rouling; pinching here
sometimes, and drawing as contrary at another: You had a tender Principle once,
which kept ye from evil as ye kept to it, whilst ye were under sufferings; but
no sooner were you free, but ye took the places of them that made ye to suffer,
and sought to make all others to suffer that differed from you; ye have been
true to Nothing, not to your own Principles: Ye have built again the things
that ye have destroyed, and so have made your selves Transgressors: None should
live but you, had ye power to your Wills; and you would live with, and above
every one: The Lord has tried you, and let the World see what you would do;
and his servants have suffered sorely by you; and now he has tried you before
his servants, and ye are fallen before them whilst they stand: And yet there is
not confideration with you, so as to think, Is not there a lie in our right
hand? The Lord has born long with you, and loath he is that you should perish:
He has suffered ye to fall into the same condemnation in which others are whom
you would not have free: Ye had a Day which ye long strove for, and had the
Door in your hands; You let it open against your selves (as it has proved) as
well as others; and it is well if so be it were not something in that your
wariness, lest you being so, others should be free: And now see what you have
done; the Lord has befooled you, and suffered ye to befool your selves, and to
be befooled, because ye departed from the Counsel of the Lord; and so what
wisdom is in you? Whilst Age and Generation lasts, this your Work will be your
shame, and the Lord will be against you whilst ye turn not to him: For here was
your miss at first, Ye kept not to your principle; you turned to persecute, who
were persecuted your selves; and the farther ye went on in this, the more you
were mad, as Paul sometimes was, and so says of himself when he was as to the
Law blameless, and yet without Law as to Christ; and what your madness has
brought forth upon your selves, judge ye. This (Friends) is to you in love,

It Is time for you to consider, and to mind, that ye may see your state, and
know what the Lord is doing to you, and the end of his working: He would have
you to bethink your selves, and see where ye are: He would have you to mind
that in you which shows you your state, and to hearken to the Reproof of Life,
the Voice of Wisdom that your souls may live; and that out of all heats and
rashness, and anger, ye may be brought into that calm state which does unto
others what it would have others do unto its self. A Zeal there is in many of
you, and as to God; and something in some of you* which is sincere to him; but
your Zeal is not according to Knowledge; for whilst ye go about things in the
will of man, ye cannot accomplish the Righteousness of God; nor does the
sincerity always guide you; for then you would not hurt your principle, which
was once to suffer, in making, and in a mind that would make others to suffer;
nor comply to things against your Principle because of suffering; For Truth is
great, and the Righteous is bold as a Lion; and the feeling of a true Witness
of God in a Man, carries thorough, as he abides in it, all that he shall meet
with because of it; and neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate between a man and
it (as he abides therewith) and that which turns from it is separate, because
in the Testimony of Truth there is the Love of God, and where the Love of God
is, it is in Christ Jesus; and the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy; and that which witnesses, prophesies, teaches, and it bears
witness to God in this World, and to his Truth, and that there is nothing
greater than it, or more to be desired; yea, it is more desirable than life;
and this is made manifest when life and all is laid down for it; and this
glorifies God, and is a Confession of him before men; as Christ himself made a
good Confession before Pontius Pilate; And, he that confesses me before men,
him shall the Son of Man also confess before the Angels of God (says he) and
he that denies me before men, shall be denied before the Angels of God: And,
to him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even as I
also overcame, and am sat down with my Father in his Throne: And he that
starts aside, never Overcomes; and he that does not overcome, cannot sit in the
Throne: But the fearful, and the unbelieving, and the abominable, and
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall
have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death: And because thou have kept the Word of my patience, I also will
keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the World, to
try them that dwell upon the Earth.

Be still therefore, and cool, and come into consideration, and heed that in
you which shows ye what ye have done; which shows ye all things that ever ye
have done, as ye heed it; Is not this the Christ? And let the time past be
sufficient, wherein ye have walked according to your own minds, and the will of
the Flesh, which lusts after envy, and return to the Lord, to the old state,
which kept ye tender to God, and keeps ye still as ye keep unto it, and made ye
not to dare to do any thing against him; and judged ye when ye so did; and
judges ye still as ye heed it, when ye transgress it: This, this is the Way to
God; the Reproof of Wisdom is the way of Life, and there is no other: It Is from
Christ Jesus the chief Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, (said the Apostle)
unto whom ye Return when ye are turned from going astray; which turns to him
those who are turned from going astray; which is that which turns from going
astray; For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned to the Shepherd
and Bishop of your Souls; and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away; said Peter to the strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithina, elect
according to the fore knowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of
the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, 1 Pet. 2. 25.
And to the Elders that were amongst them, who fed the Flock of God that was
amongst them, and took the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being Lords over God's
Heritage, but being Examples to the Flock, Chap 5. Ver. 4. This said the holy
Man of God.

Friends, the tender Bowels of my Love is to that in you which suffers through
all this heat and Lust, and the Will and Wrath of Man: This Doing that which ye
would not be done unto; this turning to, and for, and against; this condemning
your selves in the things that ye allow; this building again the things that ye
have destroyed; this Violence to your Brother Jacob; this rest less spirit any
where but where you would your selves; this contradictory spirit which is not
of God, which is meek and gentle, and easy to be entreated; which does no
wrong; which suffers wrong; which avengeth not it self; whose is Vengeance; and
who will repay it: Which when it suffers threatens not; which when it is
reviled, reviles not again, but commits it to him who judges righteously; and
this is the Spirit of Christ: The Bowels of the Lord God is the same in me to
you: I am witness through the shedding abroad of whose Love in my heart to his
Seed in you which suffers, and in his moving I have written: Who am*

Your Friend, who truly desires your welfare in this world, and that which is
to come: Geo. Bishope

To the People called Independents and Baptists.
Friends,
YOU must come down to that which witnesses in you, which is the Cross of
Christ, the Power of God to salvation to as many as believe; and not live above
it, and yet think in your hearts that Abraham is your Father; for, if Abraham
were your Father, you would do the deeds of Abraham (said Christ to the
Pharisees) but in that ye seek to kill me, a man which has told ye the truth
which I have heard of God, this did not Abraham. Now in that you obey not that
which witnesses in you, nor believe in it, you do not the deeds of Abraham;
for, Abraham (said he) saw my day, and rejoiced; and before Abraham was, I am.
Now in this Day he believed, or he could not have seen it; and his day he saw,
or he could not have rejoiced; and his Deeds he did, whose Day he saw, or he
could not have believed: For, I believed, therefore I spoke: And I know Abraham
that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him; and thou meetest him that
rejoiceth and works righteousness. So the Joy is in that which works
righteousness, and that which works righteousness is of Abraham; and that
which does the deeds of Abraham, sees his day, and rejoiceth; and that kills
not, nor seeks to kill a man that tells ye the truth he has heard of God. This
did not Abraham.

Now (Friends) to be plain and short with you; You are the Children of Abraham
no farther, and no longer than ye do the deeds of Abraham; but his Children ye
are whose works ye do: And therefore said John to the Pharisees who came to his
Baptism, O Generation of Vipers, who has forewarned ye to flee from the wrath
to come? Bring forth therefore, fruits meet for repentance; and think not to
say in your selves, that we have Abraham to our Father; for I say unto you, God
is able of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. And now also the Axe
is laid to the Root of the Tree; therefore every Tree that brings not forth
[good] fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. I indeed, baptize you with
water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me, is mightier then I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire; whose Fan is in his hand; and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
gather his Wheat into his Garner; but he will [burn up the Chaff] with
unquenchable fire.

So see (Friends) what fruit you bear, and whose Works ye do; Whose Tree ye are
of; for, as is the Tree, so is the fruit; and as is the Fruit, so is the Tree:
And if the Tree be evil, the Fruit is so; and if the Fruit be evil, the Tree is
so: And every Tree that brings not forth [good] fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire. And see (Friends) whether ye are Chaff or Wheat: For to this ye
must come, if ever it be well with you: For he will thoroughly purge his Floor,
whose Fan is in his hand, who baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with Fire;
whose shoes (John says) he was not worthy to bear, and that he was mightier
then he who came to baptize with water unto Repentance; and he will gather his
Wheat into the Garner, and burn up the Chaff with unquenchable fire, as has
been declared.

In Bowels of tender love I write these things, as being moved of the Lord for
his Seed's sake in you, that ye be not deceived in a wrong apprehension of your
state, as in another, when you are not as he is in your selves: For, if whilst
we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found sinners (says Paul)
is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid: For if I build again the
things that I have destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor. And if any man be
in Christ Jesus, he is a new Creature. Old things are passed away; behold all
things are become new; for, as he is, so must be that which is in him: For,
What fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? And what Communion
has Light with Darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? Or what
part has he that believes, with an Infidel? And what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God (said Paul to
the Corinthians, the Church there) as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And he that
does righteousness (says John) is righteous, as he is righteous: And, every
man that has this hope in him, purifies himself as he is pure; For as he is,
so are we in [this] World: And whosoever sins, has neither seen him, nor
known him: And the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are: And, if any man
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. And, know ye not that ye are
the Temples of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you, says Paul
again to the same Church? And he that is born of God, does not commit sin, for
his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God, He that
commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil s^nneth from the beginning. For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil. Whosoever abides in him, sins not. Little Children, let no man
deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous as he is righteous. In
this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever
[doth] not righteousness, is [not] of God, neither he that loves not his
Brother, says John again in his first Epistle.

Now (Friends) these things I have written unto you (as I have said* that ye
may not be deceived; for while ye think to be justified by Christ, and yet keep
a liberty in some things to transgress, and in some things to heed the Witness
of God, and believe not in him in that which witnesses that that is He; ye
will dye in your sins. Except ye believe that I am he (said he to the
Pharisees) ye shall die in your sins: For, he became the Author of eternal
salvation to as many as obey him, even to as many as believe in his Name: And
this is his Name, The true and faithful Witness -- Unto which answers that of
him in the Conscience, and by which he will judge all men, and they shall be
left without excuse; For, if ye were blind (said he to the Pharisees) ye should
have no sin; but now ye say. We see, therefore your sin remains. And, he was
manifest to take away sin. And for this purpose was the Son of God made
manifest, that he may destroy the works of the Devil. And sin is the work of
the Devil. And he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
Now how can these things be, and Men abide in sin, and that to their Death? And
how are they purged and purified from sin* who abide in sin? And how are they
justified that are condemned for sin? And how are their sins taken away, whose
sin remain? And how are they in Christ Jesus who are not new Creatures? And how
are they as he is in this world, who sin while they are in this world? And how
are they righteous even as he is righteous, who do unrighteousness? and all
unrighteousness is sin: And how do they purify themselves as he is pure, who
abide in sin! And how is he become the Author of Eternal Salvation to them who
neither obey him, nor believe in his Name? And how are old things passed away,
when they are there still? And how are all things become new, when there is the
old? And how can that be in him, which has neither seen him, nor known him?
And how can that have Eternal life, which will not come to him?

Friends, These things are deep and weighty, and it behooves ye to consider
whilst ye have time, for the Door is near shutting, and the Lord is at hand, to
render unto every man according to his [work] and as your works are, so will be
your reward. So it is high time to look about you, that ye may be sure of your
works, and that they be wrought in God; For, the Night is at hand wherein none
can work; but every man must be tried according to his work, for what he has,
not what has another. The Lord has long waited on you, and his presence has
been amongst ye, and he has been with you whilst ye have been with him. He is
now come whom ye knew not, though he was with you: The times of this ignorance
God winked at; now he commands men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a Day in the which he will judge the World in righteousness by that
man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead; and if Christ be not risen, then are ye
yet in your sins: But Christ is risen, and is become the first fruits of them
that slept. And that he is risen, appears by his Witness in all men, which
testifies to all, and witnesses to his K^ngdom, which is an everlasting
Kingdom; and to his Dominion, which shall never have end. And it bears witness
to the Lord, that he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may
return and live (as he has sworn) because there is that of him in every one
that seeks them to live; over which Death has no more dominion: For, in that
he is risen, Death has no more dominion over him, but he lives unto God: And,
he is the propitiation for our sins: By Faith in whose Blood we have access
unto God by this grace in which we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered in the flesh, arm your selves with
the same mind; for he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin,
that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, in the lusts
of men, but to the will of God.

And so (Friends) I leave you to the Witness of God to answer to me in this
thing (which will answer to me if you heed it, you will hear it) for I am moved
of the Lord unto this in bowels of Love, and it will leave you without excuse.
So Farewell: My Love is to the Seed of God in you, who am known to many of you
by the Name of

GEO. BISHOPE.

To the People of these Nations.
Friends,
YOu have had Long and Great Warning; the Lord has raised up from amongst ye
of your Sons, and of your Daughters; of your servants, and of your Neighbors,
faithful Witnesses unto his Name; who by Word and Writing; Conversation and
Example; Doing and Suffering have testified of his Day that is come; wherein he
will judge every one according to his Works; and that the Axe is laid to the
Root of the Tree; and every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down, and cast into the fire; and therefore he warned you by them all to bring
forth fruits meet for Repentance whilst the Door was open, and whilst he
called; that when you should call in the Day of your distress, he might arise
and deliver you. And by them he showed you the way unto himself, even by
harkening to, and obeying that of him within every one of you; which showed ye
evil, and reproved and judged you, and showed to you what ye should do; by
which the Holy Men of God of Old drew near unto, and were drawn to the Lord;
and by which those of your Sons and Daughters, Servants and Neighbors, who
have testified as aforesaid, and remained faithful have drawn near, and were
brought to the Lord, and have felt his power to give them Victory over sin and
evil, and the corrupt Conversation in which they lived whilst they were
ignorant of, and believed not in him who witnessed in them; who is the Power of
God to salvation to as many as obey him; even to as many as believe in his Name.

Now, Friends, after all this Warning, and gracious Visitation the Lord has
long waited to see whether ye would turn to that which witnesses in you; which
is of God, and obey it, that your souls may live, and be redeemed out of Death,
and from the bondage of Corruption, In which you are who are servants unto sin.
For as many as are led by sin, are servants unto sin; and as many as are
servants unto sin, are in bondage to sin; and as many as are in bondage to sin,
are in Death, and the Son has not made them free; For if the Son make ye free,
then are ye free indeed, says Christ; and the Truth makes free, and this is
Truth, To believe in the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent;
and that of him in you which shows ye your state, and your condition, and your
Enemy, and his working, and where ye are, and how ye are fallen, and gone Out
of the Way; Is that which is come to redeem you out of that state; and to
deliver you from your Enemy, and to recover you back again, and to guide your
feet in the way of Peace, that your Souls may have rest with God.

And this you know every one of you, You cannot stifle it; It Is too late to do
it; the Lord has reached to his Witness in you; and has given you to see all
this, and how you should hearken to that of him in you which shows ye all this,
and the secrets of your hearts, and searches your hearts, and tries your
reins, and shows you the compass and end of your actions, and that ye should do
none iniquity, it tells you in secret. Now that which shows ye this, is greater
then all; for, it should never shine in your Consciences, and show you this,
and the way to God, could that which has you in Captivity keep it out, and it
concerns you to heed, and to have heeded this, that so the Lord's
loving kindness might not be in vain as to you, nor the striving of his Spirit,
nor the stretching forth of his Arms to draw and gather you; for this of a
truth I have to say unto you, That ye have all need of him, and of his mercy;
not that he has need of you: And he might have left ye all in the state
wherein ye were by Nature, even Children of Wrath, and never have shown ye
where you were, or that ye were sinners; or, in such a state; nor your Enemy;
nor what an Enemy he is, until ye come to feel his Wrath, and to be tumbled
into the Pit, out of which none that goes, ever comes. But he has visited you,
and shown you what is good, To do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with the Lord; and something has striven in you since the time you could
remember, and showed you evil, and judged you for evil; yet it ye have not
obeyed, but have been conformed to the World, and to the Fashions and Customs
of the World, which are evil, as you have been led, and you have done the thing
which ye have been convinced is evil; although ye have been judged in your
selves, that that was evil; and knew that that was the Judgment of God and
that his Judgment is Just: And you know that the things which ye have been
convinced of to be evil many years ago, and have been judged* for it, do yet
remain with you, and that the Lord has been rejected, and his drawings
slighted, and his Enemy and yours heeded, and that ye have refused to come to
him that ye might have life, to the light which makes manifest; for whatsoever
is made manifest, is made manifest by the Light; and, I am the Light of the
world (says he) he that believes in me, shall not abide in darkness, but
shall have the light of life. And, this is the condemnation, that Light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds
are Evil. And, in him was life (says John) and the Life was the Light of men;
that is the true Light that lighte^h every man that comes into the world.

And this you know (as I have said) viz. That there is such a thing in you, and
the thing in you witnesses that it is so; and ye cannot blot it out; and that
ye have disobeyed it, and do disobey it; and that it suffers in you; and yet
you are vain, and proud, and wanton, and lustful, and do conform to this world,
and do lie, and deceive, and cheat, and cozen, and swear, and are drunk, and do
spend the creatures upon your Lusts; and do hate, and do kill, and do steal,
and do commit Adultery, and do covet your Neighbors Goods, and do grind the
Faces of the Poor, and oppress and smite with the Fist of Wickedness, and take
the Name of the Lord in vain; and do go beyond one another in dealing where you
would not be done so to your selves: These things I say ye know are so; and yet
ye contlnue as ye were before; and these things continue in you; and ye think
the Lord is such a one as your selves, because he holds his peace and has a
long time been silent, and has not brought his Judgment upon you; nor caused
ye to feel the Power of his Wrath; and ye think to morrow shall be as to day,
and much more abundant, because the Lord has been long-suffering, slow to
anger, abundant in goodness and truth; not willing that any of you should die,
but rather that ye should return and live.

And this is the Use ye have made (many of you) of his loving kindness, and
mercy, his long-suffering and forbearance; to add Drunkenness to Thirst,
Iniquity unto iniquity, and to draw iniquity with Cart-ropes of Vanity: And you
cannot think (many of you) how to be Vain enough, nor Drunken enough; nor Proud
enough; nor Voluptuous enough, nor Consumptive of his Creatures enough; and ye
declare your sin as Sodom; the show of your countenance witnesses it against
ye; and ye think that ye are delivered to commit all these Abominations; as if
the Lord took Pleasure in these things, or delighted in them; and as if this
was a Retribution Equivalent to him for all your deliverances; and as if it
were the sum, and the end of all his working; and as if the more vain and
wicked ye are, the more ye give him thanks; and the more ye answer the end of
his working* and so ye lavish out your selves in all riot and excess, as he
has been liberal to you in his Mercies; as if this were the thing the Lord
aimed at in all, and expected as the Return of his Goodness; and ye have been
very bold (many of you) thus to do, notwithstanding that that of him in you
tells you (and ye know it) that ye should do otherwise, and judges ye; and so
ye overturn your own Mercies, and provoke the Lord to be jealous of his Name
and Glory, which he has said he will not give unto another; and to make ye
examples to the ages to come of his judgments, as he has made ye patterns of
his mercies; and to let the world know, by what he shall do unto you, that he is
a God that delights not in iniquity, nor shall sin come near his Dwelling;
but that he is holy, and will be sanctified in all that draw near him, and be
had in Reverence by all that are about him.

And this I am moved of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to warn ye of; and to
let ye know that he will appear against you; and that he will vindicate his
Name and his Glory in what he shall do unto you; and that he is drawing near to
plead with you, and to render unto you according to your works.

Therefore in the Bowels of Love, I exhort and warn you to break off your sins
by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor; if so be
there may be yet a lengthening of your tranquillity. For this I have received
from the Lord God; whose Word and Warning it is, that he will make a short work
with you; and after ye have filled up the measure of your Iniquity, (which he
will suffer ye to fulfill, if so be yet ye shall not hearken, nor yield
obedience to his voice, nor depart from iniquity, nor choose to do the thing
that is good, which that of him shows ye in your hearts) He will cut ye Down,
and his judgments shall come upon you; and ye shall know that this is the Word
of the Lord, and his Warning unto you, through his servant

GEO. BISHOPE.
Bristoll, 25 8 Month, 1661.
THE END.

