THE ESSAYS, OR Councils, Civil and Moral, OF Sir FRANCIS BACON, Lord Verulam,
Viscount St. Alban. With a TABLE of the Colors OF Good and Evil. And a
Discourse Of the WISDOM of the ANCIENTS. To this Edition is added the Character
of Queen ELIZABETH; never before Printed in English.

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, R. Scot, R. Chiswell, A. Swalle, and R.
Bentley, 1696.

TO THE Right Honorable my very good Lord, THE Duke of Buckingham his Grace,
LORD HIGH-ADMIRAL OF ENGLAND.
Excellent Lord,
SOlomon says, A Good Name is a precious Ointment; and, I assure my self, such
will Your Grace's Name be with Posterity; for your Fortune and Merit, both have
been Eminent; and You have planted things that are like to last. I do now
publish my Essays; which, of all my other Works, have been most current: For
that, as it seems, they come home to Men's Business, and Bosoms. I have
enlarged them both in Number and Weight; so that they are indeed a New work. I
thought it therefore agreeable to my Affection, and Obligation to Your Grace,
to prefix your Name before them, both in English and Latin: For I do conceive,
that the Latin Volume of them, (being in the Universal Language) may last as
long as Books last. My Instauration I dedicated to the King; my History of
Henry the Seventh (which I have now also translated into Latin) and my Portions
of Natural History to the Prince. And these I dedicate to Your Grace, being of
the best Fruits, that, by the good increase which God gives to my Pen and
Labors, I could yield. God lead Your Grace by the hand.

Your Graces most obliged and Faithful Servant. Fr. St. ALBAN.

Elogies on the Illustrious Author.
Ben. Johnson, in his Discoveries, p. 101.
THere happened in my time, one Noble Speaker [Lord Verulam] who was full of
gravity in his speaking. His Language (where he could spare or pass by a jest)
was nobly censorious. No Man ever spoke more neatly, more prestly, more
weightily, or suffered less emptiness, less Idleness in what he uttered. No
member of his Speech but consisted of his own graces. His Hearers could not
cough or look aside from him without loss. He commanded where he spoke; and had
his Judges angry and pleased at his devotion. No Man had their affections more
in his power. The fear of every man that heard him, was, lest he should make an
end. And afterward, Lord Egerton, the Chancellor, a great and grave Orator,
etc. But his Learned and able, (though unfortunate) Successor, [Lord Bacon] is
he, who has filled up all members, and performed that in our tongue, which may
be compared or preferred, either to insolent Greece or haughty Rome. In short,
within his view, and about his times, were all the Wits born, that could honor
a Language or help study. Now things daily fall; Wits grow downward, and
Eloquence goes backward: So that he may be nam^d and stand as the mark and
(...) of our Language.

And a little after, My conceit of his Person was never increased toward him,
by his place or honors. But I have and do reverence him for the greatness that
was only proper to himself, in that he seemed to me ever by his work, one of
the greatest Men, and most worthy of admiration, that had been in many Ages. In
his Adversity I ever prayed, that God would give him strength, for greatness he
could not want. Neither could I condole in a word or syllable for him; as
knowing no Accident could do harm to Virtue, but rathe^ help to make it
manifest.

A. Cowley, in his Poem to the Royal Society, after some reflections upon the
State of Philosophy aforetime, goes on.
SOme few exalted Spirits this latter Age has shown,
That labored to assert the Liberty
(From Guardians, who were now Usurpers grown)
Of this Old Minor still, Captived Philosophy;
But 'twas Rebellion called to fight
For such a long oppressed Right.
BACON at last, a mighty Man, arose,
Whom a wise King and Nature chose
Lord Chancellor of both their Laws,
And boldly undertook the injured Pupils cause.
III.
Authority, which did a Body boast,
Though 'twas but Air condensed, and stalked about,
Like some old Giants more Gigantic Ghost;
To terrify the Learned Rout
With the plain Magic of true Reasons Light,
He chased out of our sight,
Nor suffered Living Men to be misled
By the vain shadows of the Dead:
To Graves from whence it rose, the conquered Phantome fled*
He broke that Monstrous God which stood
In midst of the Orchard, and the whole did claim,
Which with a useless Sith of Wood,
And something else not worth a name,
(Both vast for show, yet neither fit
(...) Defend, or to Beget;
Ridiculous and senceless Terrors!) made
Children and superstitious Men afraid.
The Orchard's open now, and free;
BACON has broke that Scarecrow Deity;
Come, enter, all that will,
Behold the rip'ned Fruit, come gather now your fill.
Yet still, methinks, we fain would be
Catching at the Forbidden Tree,
We would be like the Deity,
When Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil, we
Without the Senses aid within our selves would see;
For it is God only who can find
All Nature in his Mind.
IV.
From Words, which are but Pictures of the Thought,
(Though we our Thoughts from them perversely drew)
To Things, the Minds right Object, he it brought,
Like foolish Birds to painted Grapes we flew;
He sought and gathered for our use the True;
And when on heaps the chosen Bunches lay,
He pressed them wisely the Mechanic way,
Till all their juice did in one Vessel join,
Ferment into a Nourishment Divine,
The thirsty Souls refreshing Wine.
Who to the Life an exact Piece would make,
Must not from others Work a Copy take;
No, not from Rubens or Vandike;
Much less content himself to make it like
The Idaeas and the Images which lie
In his own Fancy, or his Memory.
No, he before his sight must place
The Natural and Living Face;
The real Object must command
Each Judgment of his Eye, and Motion of his Hand.
V.
From these long Errors of the way,
In which our wandering Predecessors went,
And like the ^ld Hebrews many years did stray
In deserts but of small extent,
BACON, like Moses, led us forth at last,
The barren Wilderness he past,
Did on the very Border stand,
Of the blessed promised Land,
And from the Mountains Top of his Exalted Wit,
Saw it himself, and showed us it.
But life did never to one Man allow
Time to Discover Worlds, and Conquer too;
Nor can so short a Line sufficient be
To fathom the vast depths of Natures Sea:
The work he did we ought to admire,
And were unjust if we should more require
From his few years, divided 'twixt the Excess
Of low Affliction, and high Happiness:
For who on things remote can fix his sight,
That Is always in a Triumph, or a fight?
A. Cowley.

ESSAYS.
I. Of Truth.
WHAT is Truth? said jesting Pilate, and would not stay for an answer.
Certainly there be that delight in giddiness, and count it a Bondage to fix a
Belief; affecting free will in thinking, as well as in acting. And though the
Sects of Philosophers of that kind be gone, yet there remain certain
discoursing Wits, which are of the same Veins, though there be not so much
Blood in them, as was in those of the Ancients. But it is not only the
difficulty and labor, which men take in finding out of Truth; nor again, that
when it is found, it imposes upon Men's thoughts, that does bring Lies in
favor; but a natural, though corrupt Love, of the Lie it self. One of the
later Schools of the Grecians examineth the matter, and is at a stand, to think
what should be in it, that Men should love Lies; where neither they make for
pleasure, as with Poets, nor for Advantage, as with the Merchant, but for the
Lies sake. But I cannot tell. This same Truth is a Naked and Open daylight,
that does not show the Masks, and Mummeries, and Triumphs of the World, half so
stately and daintily as Candlelight. Truth may perhaps come to the price of a
Pearl, that shows best by day; but it will not rise to the price of a Diamond
or Carbuncle, that shows best in varied Lights. A mixture of a Lie does ever
add pleasure. Does any man doubt, that if there were taken out of Men's minds
vain Opinions, flattering Hopes, false Valuations, Imaginations as one would,
and the like; but it would leave the minds of a number of Men, poor shrunken
things, full of melancholy and indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves? One
of the Fathers in great severity called Poesy, Vinum Daemonum, because it
fills the Imagination, and yet it is but with the shadow of a Lie. But it is
not the Lie that passes through the mind, but the Lie that sinketh in, and
settleth in it, that does the hurt, such as we spoke of before. But howsoever
these things are thus in Men's depraved judgments and affections; yet Truth,
which only does judge it self, teaches, that the enquiry of Truth, which is
the love-making, or wooing of it: the knowledge of Truth, which is the presence
of it: and the belief of Truth, which is the enjoying of it, is the sovereign
good of Humane Nature. The first Creature of God in the works of the Days, was
Light of the Sense; the last was the Light of Reason; and his Sabbath-Work ever
since, is the illumination of his Spirit. First, he breathed light upon the
face of the Matter or Chaos; then he breathed light into the face of Man; and
still he breaths and inspireth light into the face of his Chosen. The Poet
that beautified the Sect, that was otherwise inferior to the rest, says yet
excellently well: It is a pleasure to stand upon the shore, and to see Ships
tossed upon the Sea; a pleasure to stand in the Window of a Castle, and to see a
Battle, and the adventure thereof below: but no pleasure is comparable to the
standing upon the vantage-ground of Truth: (an Hill not to be commanded, and
where the Air is always clear and serene:) and to see the Errors, and
Wanderings, and Mists, and Tempests in the Vale below: So always that this
prospect be with Pity, and not with swelling or Pride. Certainly it is Heaven
upon Earth, to have a Man's mind move in Charity, rest in Providence, and turn
upon the Poles ^f Truth.

To pass from Theological and Philosophical Truth, to the Truth of Civil
business, it will be acknowledged, even by those that practice it not, that
clear and round dealing is the honor of Man's nature, and that mixture of
falsehood is like allay in Coin of Gold and Silver, which may make the Metal
work the better, but it embaseth it. For these winding and crooked courses are
the goings of the Serpent, which goes basely upon the Belly, and not upon the
feet. There is no Vice that does so cover a Man with shame, as to be found
false and perfidious. And therefore Mountaigne says prettily, when he enquired
the reason, Why the word of the Lie should be such a disgrace, and such an
odious charge: Says he, If it be well weighed, To say that a Man lies, is as
much as to say, that he is a Brave toward God, and a Coward toward Men. For a
Lie faces God, and shrinks from Man. Surely the wickedness and Falsehood, and
breach of Faith, cannot possibly be so highly expressed, as in that it shall be
the last Peal, to call the Judgments of God upon the Generations of Men; it
being foretold, that when Christ comes, He shall not find faith upon the Earth.

II. Of Death.
MEN fear Death, as Children fear to go in the dark: And as that natural fear
in Children is increased with Tales, so is the other. Certainly the
contemplation of Death, as the wages of sin, and passage to another World, is
Holy and Religious; but the fear of it, as a tribute due unto Nature, is weak.
Yet in religious Meditations, there is sometimes a mixture of vanity and
superstition. You shall read in some of the Friars Books of Mortification, that
a Man should think with himself, what the pain is, if he have but his fingers
end pressed or tortured, and thereby imagine what the pains of Death are, when
the whole body is corrupted and dissolved; when many times Death passes with
less pain, than the torture of a Limb: For the most Vital parts are not the
quickest of Sense. And by him that spoke only as a Philosopher, and natural
man, it was well said; Pompa mortis magis terret, quam Mors ipsa, Groans, and
Convulsions, and discolored Face, and Friends weeping, and Blacks, and
Obsequies, and the like, show Death terrible. It is worthy the observing, that
there is no passion in the mind of Man so weak, but it mates and masters the
fear of Death: and therefore Death is no such terrible Enemy, when a Man has
so many attendants about him, that can win the combat of him. Revenge triumphs
over Death; Love slights it; Honor aspireth to it; Grief flies to it; Fear
pre-occupateth it. Nay we read, after Otho the Emperor had slain himself, Pity
(which is the tenderest of Affections) provoked many to die, out of mere
compassion to their Sovereign, and as the truest sort of Followers. Nay, Seneca
adds Niceness and Satiety; Cogita quandiu eadem faceres; Mori velle, non tantum
Fortis, aut Miser, sed etiam Fastidiosus potest. A man would die, though he
were neither valiant nor miserable, only upon a weariness to do the same thing
fo often over and over. It is no less worthy to observe, how little alteration in
good Spirits the approaches of Death make. For they appear to be the same Men
till the last instant. Augustus Caesar died in a complement; Livia, Conjugii
nostri memor, vive, and vale. Tiberius in Dissimulation, as Tacitus says of
him; Jam Tiberium Vires, and Corpus, non Dissimulatio deserebant. Vespasian in
a jest, sitting upon the stool; Ut puto, Deus sio. Galba with a Sentence; Feri,
si ex re sit populi Romani, holding forth his neck. Septimius Sev^rus in
dispatch; Adeste, si quid mihi restat agendum. And the like. Ce^^ainly the
Stoics bestowed too much cost upon Death, and by their great preparations made
it appear more fearful. Better, says he, Qui finem vitae extremum inter munera
ponat Naturae. It is as natural to die, as to be born; and to a little infant
perhaps the one is as painful as the other. He that dies in an earnest pursuit,
is like one that is wounded in hot blood, who for the time scarce feels the
hurt; and therefore a Mind fixed, and bent upon somewhat that is good, does
avert the dolours of Death. But above all, believe it, the sweetest Canticle
is, Nunc dimittis, when a Man has obtained worthy ends and expectations. Death
has this also; that it opens the Gate to good Fame, and extinguisheth Envy.

-- Extinctus amabitur idem. III. Of Unity in Religion.
REligion being the chief band of Humane Society, it is a happy thing when it
self is well contained within the true band of Unity. The Quarrels and
Divisions about Religion were Evils unknown to the Heathen. The reason was,
because the Religion of the Heathen consisted rather in Rites and Ceremonies,
than in any constant belief. For you may imagine what kind of Faith theirs was,
when the chief Doctors and Fathers of their Church were Poets. But the true God
has this Attribute, that he is a Jealous God, and therefore his Worship and
Religion will endure no mixture or Partner. We shall therefore speak a few
words concerning the Unity of the Church; What are the Fruits thereof, what the
Bonds, and what the Means.

The Fruits of Unity (next unto the well-pleasing of God, which is All in All)
are two; the one toward those that are without the Church, the other toward
those that are within. For the former, It is certain, that Heresies and Schisms
are of all others the greatest Scandals, yea, more than corruption of Manners.
For as in the Natural Body, a Wound or Solution of continuity, is worse than a
corrupt Humor; so in the Spiritual. So that nothing does so much keep Men out
of the Church, and drive men out of the Church as a breach of Unity: And
therefore whenever it comes to that pass, that one says, Ecce in deserto,
another says, Ecce in penetralibus; that is, when some Men seek Christ in the
Conventicles of Heretics, and others in an outward face of a Church, that
Voice had heed continually to sound in Men's Ears, Nolite exire, Go not out. The
Doctor of the Gentiles (the propriety of whose vocation drew him to have a
special care of those without) says, If an Heathen come in and hear you speak
with several Tongues, will he not say that you are mad? and certainly it is
little better, when Atheists and profane persons do hear of so many discordant
and contrary Opinions in Religion; it does avert them from the Church, and
makes them to sit down in the Chair of the Scorners. It is but a light thing
to be vouched in so serious a matter, but yet it expresses well the deformity.
There is a Master of Scoffing, that in his Catalogue of Books of a feigned
Library, sets down this Title of a Book, The Morrice-dance of Heretics. For
indeed every Sect of them has a diverse posture, or cringe by themselves,
which cannot but move derision in Worldings, and depraved Politics who are apt
to contemn holy things.

As for the Fruit toward those that are within. It is Peace, where contains
infinite Blessings; it establishes Faith; it kindles Charity; the outward
peace of the Church distilleth into peace of Conscience; and it turns the
Labors of Writing and Reading of Controversies, into Treatises of
Mortification and Devotion.

Concerning the Bonds of Unity, the true placing of them imports exceedingly.
There appear to be two extremes. For to certain Zelots all speech of
pacification is odious. Is it peace, Jehu? What have thou to do with peace?
turn thee behind me. Peace is not the matter, but following a party.
Contrariwise certain Laodiceans, and lukewarm persons, think they may
accommodate points of Religion by middle ways, and taking part of both, and
witty reconcilements, as if they would make an arbitrament between God and Man.
But these extremes are to be avoided; which will be done, if the league of
Christians, penned by our Savior himself, were in the two cross clauses
thereof, soundly and plainly expounded. He that is not with us, is against us:
And again, He that is not against us, is with us: That is, if the points
Fundamental, and of Substance in Religion, were truly discerned and
distinguished from points not merely of Faith, but of Opinion, Order, or good
Intention. This is a thing may seem to many a matter trivial, and done already;
but if it were done less partially, it would be embraced more generally.

Of this I may give only this advice, according to my small model: Men ought to
take heed of rendering God's Church by two kinds of controversies: The one is,
when the matter of the point controverted is too small and light, not worth the
heat and strife about it, kindled only by contradiction. For, as it is noted by
one of the Fathers, Christ's Coat indeed had no seam, but the Churches Vesture
was of diverse colors; whereupon he says, In vest varietas sit, scissura non
sit; they be two things, Unity and Uniformity. The other is, when the matter of
the point controverted is great, but it is driven to an overgreat subtilty and
obscurity, so that it becomes a thing rather ingenious than substantial. A Man
that is of judgment and understanding, shall sometimes hear ignorant Men
differ, and know well within himself, that those which so differ, mean one
thing, and yet they themselves would never agree. And if it come so to pass, in
that distance of judgment which is between Man and Man, shall we not think,
that God above, that knows the heart, does not discern that frail Men in some
of their contradictions intend the same thing, and accepts of both? The
nature of such controversies is excellently expressed by St. Paul, in the
warning and precept that he gives concerning the same, Devita profanas vocum
novitates, and oppositiones falsi nominis scientiae; Men create oppositions
which are not, and put them into new terms so fixed, as whereas the meaning
ought to govern the term, the term in effect governs the meaning. There be
also two false Peaces, or Unities; the one, when the Peace is grounded but upon
an implicit ignorance; for all Colors will agree in the dark: the other when
it is pieced up upon a direct admission of contraries in Fundamental points.
For Truth and Falsehood in such things, are like the Iron and Clay in the toes
of Nebuchadnezzar's Image, they may cleave, but they will not incorporate.

Concerning the Means of procuring Unity; Men must beware, that in the
procuring or muniting of Religious Unity, they do not dissolve and deface the
Laws of Charity, and of Humane Society. There be two Swords amongst Christians,
the Spiritual and Temporal; and both have their due office and place in the
maintenance of Religion. But we may not take up the third Sword, which is
Mahomet's Sword, or like unto it; that is, to propagate Religion by Wars, or by
sanguinary Persecutions to force Consciences, except it be in cases of overt
Scandal, blasphemy or intermixture of practice against the State; much less to
nourish Seditions, to authorize Conspiracies and Rebellions, to put the Sword
into the peoples hands, and the like, tending to the subversion of all
Government, which is the Ordinance of God. For this is but to dash the First
Table against the Second, and so to consider Men as Christians, as we forget
that they are Men. Lucretius the Poet, when he beheld the Act of Agamemnon,
that could endure the sacrificing of his own Daughter, exclaimed; Tantum
Religio potuit suadere malorum. what would he have said, if he had known of the
Massacre in France, or the Powder Treason of England? He would have been seven
times more Epicure and Atheist than he was: For as the Temporal Sword is to be
drawn with great circumspection in cases of Religion; so it is a thing
monstrous, to put it into the hands of the common people. Let that be left unto
the Anabaptists, and other Furies. It was great blasphemy, when the Devil said,
I will ascend and be like the highest; but it is greater blasphemy to personate
God, and bring him in, saying, I will descend and be like the Prince of
Darkness; And what is it better, to make the cause of Religion to descend to
the cruel and execrable actions of Murdering Princes, Butchery of People, and
Subversion of States and Governments? Surely this is to bring down the Holy
Ghost, instead of the likeness of a Dove, in the shape of a Vulture or Raven;
and to set out of the Bark of a Christian Church, a Flag of a Bark of Pirates
and Assassins. Therefore it is most necessary, that the Church by Doctrine and
decree, Princes by their Sword, and all Learnings both Christian and Moral, as
by their Mercury Rod, do damn and send to Hell for ever those Facts and
Opinions, tending to the support of the same, as has been already in good part
done. Surely in Councils concerning Religion, that Counsel of the Apostle would
be prefixed, Ira hominis non implet justitiam Dei. And it was a notable
observation of a wise Father, and no less ingeniously confessed, That those
which held and persuaded pressure of Consciences, were commonly interessed
therein themselves for their own ends.

IV. Of Revenge.
REvenge is a kind of wild Justice; which the more Man's Nature runs to, the
more ought Law to weed it out. For as to the first wrong, it does but offend
the Law, but the Revenge of that wrong puts the Law out of Office. Certainly
in taking Revenge, a Man is but even with his Enemy; but in passing it over he
is superior: for it is a Princes part to pardon. And Solomon, I am sure,
says, It is the Glory of a Man to pass by an offense. That which is past, is
gone, and irrecoverable; and wise Men have enough to do with things present,
and to come: therefore they do but trifle with themselves, that labor in past
matters. There is no Man does a wrong for the wrongs sake, but thereby to
purchase himself profit, or pleasure, or honor, or the like. Therefore why
should I be angry with a Man for loving himself better than me? And if any Man
should do wrong merely out of ill nature why? yet it is but like the Thorn or
Bryar, which prick and scratch, because they can do no other. The most
tolerable sort of Revenge, is for those wrongs which there is no Law to remedy:
But then let a man take heed, that the Revenge be such, as there is no Law to
punish; else a Man's Enemy is still beforehand, and it is two for one. Some
when they take Revenge, are desirous the Party should know whence it comes:
this is the more generous. For the delight seems to be not so much in doing
the hurt, as in making the party repent. But base and crafty Cowards are like
the Arrow that flies in the dark. Cosmus Duke of Florence had a desperate
saying against perfidious or neglecting Friends, as if those wrongs were
unpardonable: You shall read (says he) that we are commanded to forgive our
Enemies; but you never read, that we are commanded to forgive our Friends. But
yet the Spirit of Job was in a better tune; shall we (says he) take good at
God's hand, and not be content to take evil also? And so of Friends in a
proportion. This is certain, that a Man that studieth Revenge, keeps his own
wounds green, which otherwise would heal, and do well: Public Revenges are for
the most part Fortunate, as that for the death of Caesar, for the death of
Pertinax, for the death of Henry the Third of France, and many more. But in
private Revenges it is not so. Nay, rather vindicative persons live the life of
Witches; who as they are mischievous, so end they unfortunate.

V. Of Adversity.
IT was an high Speech of Seneca, (after the manner of the Stoics) That the
good things which belong to prosperity are to be wished, but the good things
that belong to adversity are to he admired: Bona rerum secundarum optabilia,
adversarum mirabilia. Certainly, if Miracles be the command over Nature, they
appear most in Adversity. It is yet a higher Speech of his, than the other,
(much too high for a Heathen) It is true greatness to have in (...) the frailty
of a Man, and the security of a God; Vere mag^^m habere fragilitatem hominis,
securitatem Dei. This wou^^ have done better in Poesy, where transcendencies
(...) more allowed. And the Poets indeed have been busy with it; for it is in
effect the thing, which is figured in that strange Fiction of the ancient
Poets, which seems not to be without mystery; nay, and to have some approach
to the State of a Christian: That Hercules, when he went to unbind Prometheus)
by whom Humane Nature is represented) sailed the length of the great Ocean in
an Earthen Pot or Pitcher; Lively describing Christian resolution, that saileth
in the frail Bark of the Flesh, through the waves of the World. But to speak in
a mean: The Virtue of Prosperity is Temperance, the Virtue of Adversity is
Fortitude, which in Morals is the more heroical Virtue. Prosperity is the
Blessing of the Old Testament, Adversity is the Blessing of the New, which
carries the greater Benediction, and the clearer Revelation of God's favor.
Yet even in the Old Testament, if you listen to David's Harp, you shall hear as
many Hearse-like Airs, as Carols. And the Pencil of the Holy Ghost has
labored more in describing the Afflictions of Job, than the Felicities of
Solomon. Prosperity is not without many fears and distastes; and Adversity is
not without comforts and hopes. We see in Needle-works and Embroyderies, it is
more pleasing to have a lively work upon a sad and solemn ground, than to have
a dark and melancholy Work upon a lightsome ground. Judge therefore of the
pleasure of the Heart, by the pleasure of the Eye. Certainly Virtue is like
precious Odours* most fragrant when they are incensed or crushed: For
Prosperity does best discover Vice, but Adversity does best discover Virtue.

VI. Of Simulation and Dissimulation.
DIssimulation is but a faint kind of Policy or Wisdom; for it asks a strong
Wit and a strong Heart, to know when to tell truth, and to do it. Therefore it
is the weaker sort of Politics, that are the great Dissemblers.

Tacitus says, Livia sorted well with the Arts of her Husband and
Dissimulation of her Son; attributing Arts or Policy to Augustus, and
Dissimulation to Tiberius. And again, when Mucianus encourages Vespasian to
take Arms against Vitellius, he says, We rise not against the piercing
Judgment of Augustus, nor the extreme Caution or Closeness of Tiberius. These
properties of Arts, or Policy and Dissimulation, or Closeness, are indeed
habits and faculties, several, and to be distinguished. For if a man have that
penetration of Judgment, as he can discern, what things are to be laid open,
and what to be secreted, and what to be showed at half lights, and to whom, and
when (which indeed are Arts of State, and Arts of Life, as Tacitus well calls
them) to him; a habit of Dissimulation is a hindrance, and a poorness. But if a
Man cannot attain to that Judgment, then it is left to him generally to be
Close, and a Dissembler. For where a man cannot choose or vary in Particulars,
there it is good to take the safest and weariest way in general; like the going
softly by one that cannot well see. Certainly the ablest Men that ever were,
have had all an openness and frankness of dealing, and a Name of Certainty and
Veracity: but then they were like Horses, well managed; for they could tell
passing well, when to stop or turn; And at such times, when they thought the
case indeed required Dissimulation, if then they used it, it came to pass, that
the former Opinion spread abroad of their good faith, and clearness of dealing,
made them almost invisible.

There are three degrees of this hiding and veiling of Man's self. The first
Closeness, Reservation, and Secrecy; when a Man leaves himself without
observation, or without hold to be taken what he is. The Second Dissimulation
in the Negative, when a Man lets fall Signs and Arguments, that he is not that
he is. And the third Simulation in the Affirmative, when a Man industriously
and expressly feigns and pretends to be that he is not.

For the first of these, Secrecy: It is indeed the virtue of a Confessor; and
assuredly the Secret Man hears many Confessions: For who will open himself to
a Blab, or a Babbler? But if a man be thought Secret, it inviteth discovery, as
the more close Air sucketh in the more open: And as in confession, the
revealing is not for worldly use, but for the ease of a Man's heart; so Secret,
Men come to the knowledge of many things in that kind, while Men rather
discharge their minds, than impart their minds. In few words, Mysteries are due
to Secrecy. Besides (to say truth) Nakedness is uncomely, as well in mind as in
body; and it adds no small reverence to Men's manners and actions, if they be
not altogether open. As for Talkers, and Futile persons, they are commonly
vain, and credulous withal. For he that talks what he knows, will also talk
what he knows not. Therefore set it down, that an habit of Secrecy is both
politic and moral. And in this part it is good, that a Man's face give his
tongue leave to speak. For the discovery of Man's self, by the tracts of his
countenance, is a great weakness and betraying, by how much it is many times
more marked and believed, than a Man's words.

For the second, which is Dissimulation: It followed many times upon Secrecy by
a necessity; so that he tha^ will be Secret, must be a Dissembler in some
degree. For men are too cunning, to suffer a man to keep an indifferent
carriage between both, and to be Secret without swaying the balance on either
side. They will so before a Man with questions, and draw him on, and pick it
ou^ of him, that without an absurd silence, he must show (...) inclination one
way; or if he do not, they will gather as much by his Silence, as by his
Speech: As for Equivocations, or Oraculous Speeches, they cannot hold ou^ long:
so that no man can be Secret, except he give himself a little scope of
Dissimulation, which is, as it were, bu^ the skirts or train of Secrecy.

But for the third degree, which is Simulation, and false profession: That I
hold more culpable, and less politic, except it be in great and rare matters.
And therefore a general custom of Simulation (which is this last degree) is a
Vice, rising either of a natural falseness or fearfulness, or of a mind that
has some main faults; which because a man must needs disguise, it makes him
practice Simulation in other things, lest his hand should be out of use.

The great advantages of Simulation and Dissimulation are three. First, To lay
asleep opposition, and to surprise: For where a Man's intentions are published,
it is an alarm to call up all that are against them. The second is, to reserve
to a Man's self a fair retreat: For if a man engage himself by a manifest
Declaration, he must go through, or take a fall. The third is, the better to
discover the mind of another: For to him that opens himself, Men will hardly
show themselves averse, but will (fair) let him go on, and turn their freedom
of speech to freedom of thought. And therefore it is a good shrewd Proverb of
the Spaniard, Tell a Lie, and find a Truth; as if there were no way of
discovery, but by Simulation.

There be also three disadvantages to set it even. The first, That Simulation
and Dissimulation commonly carry with them a show of fearfulness, which in any
business does spoil the feathers of round flying up to the mark. The second,
That it puzzleth and perplexeth the conceits of many, that perhaps would
otherwise cooperate with him, and makes a man walk almost alone to his own
ends. The third and greatest is, That it depriveth a man of one of the most
principal instruments for action, which is Trust and Belief. The composition
and temperature is, to have Openness in fame and opinion, Secrecy in habit,
Dissimulation in seasonable use, and a power to feign, if there be no remedy.

VII. Of Parents and Children.
THE joys of Parents are secret, and so are their griefs and fears; they cannot
utter the one, nor they will not utter the other. Children sweeten labors, but
they make misfortunes more bitter: they increase the cares of Life, but they
mitigate the remembrance of Death. The perpetuity by generation is common to
Beasts; but memory, merit, and noble works are proper to Men: and surely a man
shall see the noblest Works and Foundations have proceeded from Childless Men,
which have sought to express the Images of their minds, where those of their
bodies have failed: So the care of posterity is most in them that have no
posterity. They that are the first raisers of their Houses, are most indulgent
toward their Children; beholding them as the continuance, not only of their
kind, but of their work, and so both Children and Creatures.

The difference in affection of Parents toward their seval Children, is many
times unequal, and sometimes unworthy, especially in the Mother; as Solomon
says, A wise Son rejoices the Father, but an ungracious Son shames the
Mother. A man shall see, where there is a House full of Children, one or two of
the eldest respected, and the youngest made wantons; but in the midst, some
that are as it were forgotten, who many times nevertheless prove the best. The
illiberality of Parents in allowance toward their Children, is an harmful
error, makes them base, acquaints them with shifts, makes them sort with mean
company, and makes them surfeit more when they come to plenty: and therefore
the proof is best, when men keep their authority toward their Children, but
not their purse. Men have a foolish manner (both Parents, and Schoolmasters,
and Servants) in creating and breeding an emulation between Brothers, during
Childhood, which many times sorteth to discord when they are men, and
disturbeth Families. The Italians make little difference between Children and
Nephews, or near Kinsfolks; but so they be of the lump they care not, though
they pass not through their own body. And to say truth, in Nature it is much
alike matter, insomuch that we see a Nephew sometimes resembles an Uncle, or a
Kinsman, more than his own Parent, as the blood happens. Let Parents choose
betimes the vocations and courses they mean their Children should take, for
then they are most flexible; and let them not too much apply themselves to the
disposition of their Children, as thinking they will take best to that which
they have most mind to. It is true, that if the affection or aptness of the
Children be extraordinary, then it is good not to cross it: but generally the
precept is good, Optimum elige, suave and facil^ illud facit consuetudo,
younger Brothers are commonly fortunate, but seldom or never where the elder
are disinherited.

VIII. Of Marriage and Single Life.
HE that has Wife and Children, has given hostages to Fortune, for they are
impediments to great enterprises, either of Virtue or Mischief. Certainly the
best works, and of greatest merit for the public, have proceeded from the
unmarried or Childless Men, which both in affection and means have married and
endowed the public. Yet it were great reason, that those that have Children,
should have greatest care of future times, unto which they know they must
transmit their dearest pledges. Some there are, who though they lead a Single
Life, yet their thoughts do end with themselves, and account future times
impertinencies. Nay, there are some other, that account Wife and Children but
as Bills of Charges. Nay, more, there are some foolish rich covetous men, that
take pride in having no Children, because they may be thought so much the
richer. For perhaps they have heard some talk, Such an one is a great rich Man;
and another except to it, Yea, but he has a great charge of Children; as if it
were an abatement to his riches. But the most ordinary cause of a Single Life
is Liberty, especially in certain self pleasing and humorous minds, which are
so sensible of every restraint, as they will go near to think their Girdles and
Garters to be Bonds and Shackles. Unmarried men are best Friends, best Masters,
best Servants, but not always best Subjects; for they are light (...) run away,
and almost all Fugitives are of that condition. A single life does well with
Churchmen: for Charity will hard^y water the Ground, where it must first fill
a Pool. It is indifferent for Judges and Magistrates; for if they be facile and
corrupt, you shall have a Servant five times worse than a Wife. For Soldiers,
I find the Generals commonly in their hortatives put men in mind of their Wives
and Children. And I think the despising of Marriage amongst the Turks, making
the vulgar Soldier more base. Certainly Wife and Children are a kind of
humanity; and Single men, though they be many times more charitable, because
their means are less exhaust: yet on the other side, they are more cruel and
hard hearted, (good to make severe Inquisitors) because their tenderness is not
so often called upon. Grave natures, led by custom, and therefore constant, are
commonly loving Husbands; as was said of Ulysses, Vetulam suam praetulit
immortalitati. Chaste Women are often proud and froward, as presuming upon the
merit of their chastity. It is one of the best bonds both of chastity and
obedience in the Wife, if she thinks her Husband wise, which she will never do,
if she find him jealous. Wives are young men's Mistrisses, Companions for middle
Age, and old men's Nurses; so as a man may have a quarrel to marry when he will.
But yet he was reputed one of the wise men, that made answer to the question;
When a man should marry? A young man not yet, an elder man not at all. It is
often seen, that bad Husbands have very good Wives; whether it be, that it
raises the price of their Husbands kindness when it comes, or that the Wives
take a pride in their patience. But this never fails, if the bad Husbands were
of their own choosing, against their Friends consent; for then they will be sure
to make good their own folly.

IX. Of Envy.
THERE be none of the Affections, which have been noted to facinate or bewitch,
but Love and Envy. They both have vehement wishes, they frame themselves
readily into imaginations and suggestions; and they come easily into the eye,
especially upon the presence of the objects, which are the points that conduce
to fascination, if any such thing there be. We see likewise the Scripture
calls Envy, an evil eye; and the Astrologers call the evil influences of the
Stars, Evil Aspects; so that still there seems to be acknowledged in the act
of Envy, an ejaculation or irradiation of the Eye. Nay, some have been so
curious, as to note, that the times, when the stroke or percussion of an
Envious Eye does most hurt, are, when the Party envied is beheld in Glory or
Triumph; for that sets an edge upon Envy: And besides, at such times the
spirits of the Person envied do come forth most into the outward parts, and so
meet the blow.

But leaving these curiosities, (though not unworthy to be thought on in fit
place) we will handle, What Persons are apt to envy others, what Persons are
most subject to be envied themselves, and what is the difference between
public and private Envy.

A man that has no virtue in himself, ever envieth virtue in others. For men's
minds will either feed upon their own good, or upon others evil; and who
wants the one, will pray upon the other; and who so is out of hope to attain
to another virtue, will seek to come at even-hand by depressing another
Fortune.

A man that is busy and inquisitive, is commonly Envious: for to know much of
other men's matters cannot be, because all that ado may concern his estate;
therefore it must needs be, that he takes a kind of playpleasure in looking
upon the fortunes of others; neither can he that minds but his own business,
find much matter for Envy: For Envy is a gadding passion, and walks the
Streets, and does not keep home, Non est curiosus, quin idem sit malevolus.

Men of noble Birth are noted to be envious toward new Men when they rise: For
the distance is altered; and it is like a deceit of the eye, that when others
come on, they think themselves go back.

Deformed persons, and Eunuchs, and old Men, and Bastards are envious: for he
that cannot possibly mend his own case, will do what he can to impair another,
except these defects light upon a very brave and heroical nature, which
thinks to make his natural wants part of his honor; in that it should be
said, that an Eunuch, or lame man, did such great matters, affecting the honor
of a miracle, as it was in Narses the Eunuch, and Agesilaus, and Tamberlanes,
that were lame men.

The same is the case of men that rise after calamities and misfortunes; for
they are as men fallen out with the times, and think other men's harms a
Redemption of their own sufferings.

They that desire to excel in too many matters, out of levity and vain glory,
are ever Envious; For they cannot want work, it being impossible but many in
some one of those things should surpass them; which was the character of Adrian
the Emperor, that mortally envied Poets and Painters, and Artificers in works
wherein he had a vein to excel.

Lastly, near Kinsfolks and Fellows in Office, and those that have been bred
together, are more apt to Envy their equals, when they are raised: For it does
upbraid unto them their own fortunes, and points at them, and comes oftener
into their remembrance, and incurreth likewise more into the note of others;
and Envy ever redoubleth from Speech and Fame. Cain's Envy was the more vile
and malignant toward his Brother Abel, because when his Sacrifice was better
accepted, there was no body to look on. Thus much for those that are apt to
Envy.

Concerning those that are more or less subject to Envy: First, Persons of
eminent virtue, when they are advanced are less envied: For their fortune
seems but due unto them; and no man envyeth the payment of a Debt, but
Rewards and Liberality rather. Again, Envy is ever joined with the comparing of
a man's self; and where there is no comparison, no Envy; and therefore Kings
are not envied, but by Kings. Nevertheless it is to be noted, that unworthy
persons are most envied at their first coming in, and afterward overcome it
better; whereas contrariwise, Persons of worth and merit are most envied, when
their fortune continues long. For by that time, though their virtue be the
same, yet it has not the same Luster; for fresh men grow up that darken it.

Persons of noble blood are less envied in their rising; for it seems but
right done to their Birth. Besides, there seems not much added to their
fortune; and Envy is as the Sunbeams, that beat hotter upon a Bank or steep
rising Ground, than upon a Flat. And for the same reasons, those that are
advanced by degrees are less envied, than those that are advanced suddenly, and
per saltum.

Those that have joined with their Honor great Travels, Cares or Perils, are
less subject to Envy: For men think that they earn their Honors hardly, and
pity them sometimes; and Pity ever heals Envy: Wherefore you shall observe,
that the more deep and sober sort of politic Persons in their greatness, are
ever bemoaning themselves, what a life they lead, chanting Quanta patimur. Not
that they feel it so, but only to abate the edge of Envy. But this is to be
understood of business that is laid upon men, and not such as they call unto
themselves. For nothing increases Envy more than an unnecessary and ambitious
engrossing of business; and nothing does extinguish Envy more, than for a great
Person to preserve all other inferior Officers in their full rights and
preheminencies of their places: for by that means there be so many Skreens
between him and Envy.

Above all, those are most subject to Envy which carry the greatness of their
fortunes in an insolent and proud manner, being never well but while they ar^
showing how great they are, either by outward pomp, or by triumphing over all
opposition or competition* whereas wise men will rather do Sacrifice to Envy,
in suffering themselves sometimes of purpose to be crossed and overborn of
things that do not much concern them. Notwithstanding so much is true, That the
carriage of greatness in a plain and open manner (so it be without arrogance
and vainglory) does draw less Envy, than if it be in a more crafty and cunning
fashion. For in that course a man does but disavow fortune, and seems to be
conscious of his own want in worth, and does but teach others to Envy him.

Lastly, To conclude this part; As we said in the beginning, that the Act of
Envy had somewhat in it of witchcraft, so there is no other cure of Envy but
the cure of witchcraft; and that is, to remove the Lot (as they call it) and to
lay it upon another. For which purpose, the wiser sort of great Persons, bring
in ever upon the Stage some body upon whom to drive the Envy that would come
upon themselves; sometimes upon Ministers and Servants, sometimes upon
Colleagues and Associates, and the like; and for that turn there are never
wanting some Persons of violent and undertaking Natures, who, so they may have
Power and Business, will take it at any cost.

Now to speak of public Envy. There is yet some good in public Envy; whereas
in private there is none. For public Envy is an Ostracism, that eclipseth men
when they grow too great. And therefore it is a bridle also to great ones, to
keep them within bounds.

This Envy being in the Latin word Invidia, goes in the modern Languages by
the name of Coffeehouse, of which we shall speak in handling Sedition. It is
a disease in a State like to infection; for as infection spreads upon that
which is sound, and tainteth it; so when Envy is gotten once in a State, it
traduceth even the best actions thereof, and turns them into an ill odor.
And therefore there is little won by intermingling of plausible actions. For
that does argue but a weakness and fear of Envy, which hurts so much the
more, as it is likewise usual in infections; which if you fear them, you call
them upon you.

This public Envy seems to bear chiefly upon principal Officers or
Ministers, rather than upon Kings and Estates themselves. But this is a sure
rule, that if the Envy upon the Ministers be great, when the cause of it in him
is small; or if the Envy be general, in a manner, upon all the Ministers of an
Estate, then the Envy (though hidden) is truly upon the State it self. And so
much of public Envy or Coffeehouse, and the difference thereof from private
Envy, which was handled in the first place.

We will add this in general, touching the Affection of Envy; that, of all
other Affections, it is the most importune and continual. For of other
Affections there is occasion given but now and then. And therefore it was well
said, Invidia festos dies non agit. For it is ever working upon some or other.
And it is also noted, that Love and Envy do make a man pine, which other
Affections do not; because they are not so continual. It is also the vilest
Affection, and the most depraved: for which cause it is the proper Attribute of
the Devil, who is called the envious Man, that sows Tares amongst the Wheat
by night: as it always comes to pass, that Envy works subtly, and in the
dark, and to the prejudice of good things, such as is the Wheat.

X. Of Love.
THE Stage is more beholding to Love than the Life of Man. For, as to the
Stage, Love is even matter of Comedies, and now and then of Tragedies: but in
Life it does much mischief; sometimes like a Syren^ sometimes like a Fury. You
may observe, that amongst all the great and worthy persons (whereof the Memory
remains, either Ancient or Recent) there is not one that has been
transported to the mad degree of Love: which show, that great Spirits, and
great Business, do keep out this weak Passion. You must except nevertheless,
Marcus Antonius, the half Partner of the Empire of Rome; and Appius Claudius
the Decemvir, the Lawgiver: whereof the former was indeed a Voluptuous Man,
and Inordinate; but the Latter was an Austere and Wise Man. And therefore it
seems, (though rarely) that Love can find entrance, not only into an open
Heart, but also into a Heart well fortified, if watch be not well kept. It is a
poor saying of Epicurus, Satis magnum Alter Alteri Theatrum sumus. As if Man,
made for the contemplation of Heaven, and all noble Objects, should do nothing
but kneel before a little Idol, and make himself a Subject, though not of the
Mouth (as Beasts are) yet of the Eye, which was given him for higher purposes.
It is a strange thing to note the Excess of this passion; and how it braves the
Nature and value of things by this, that the speaking in a perpetual Hyperbole
is comely in nothing but in Love. Neither is it merely in the Phrase: for,
whereas it has been well said, that the Arch-flatterer, with whom all the
petty flatterers have intelligence, is a Man's self; certainly, the Love is
more. For there was never a proud Man thought so absurdly well of himself, as
the Lover does of the Person Loved: and therefore it was well said, that it is
impossible to Love, and to be wise. Neither does this weakness appear to others
only, and not to the Party Loved: but to the Loved most of all; except the Love
be reciproque: for it is a true rule, that Love is ever rewarded, either with
the reciproque, or with an inward and secret Contempt. By how much the more men
ought to beware of this Passion, which loses not only other things, but it
self. As for the other losses, the Poets Relation does well figure them; that
he that prefers Helena, quitteth the gifts of Juno and Pallas. For whosoever
esteems too much of amorous affection, quitteth both Riches and Wisdom. This
Passion has his Floods in the very times of weakness: which are great
Prosperity, and great Adversity; though this latter has been less observed.
Both which times kindle Love, and make it more frequent, and therefore show it
to be the Child of Folly. They do best, who, if they cannot but admit Love; yet
make it keep Quarter, and sever it wholly from their serious Affairs and
Actions of Life: for if it check once with Business, it troubles men's
Fortunes, and makes men that they can no ways be true to their own Ends. I
know not how, but martial men are given to Love; I think it is but as they are
given to Wine; for Perils commonly ask to be paid in Pleasures. There is in a
man's Nature a secret Inclination and Motion toward Love of others; which if it
be not spent upon some one, or a few, does naturally spread it self toward
many, and makes men become Humane and Charitable; as it is seen sometime in
Friars. Nuptial Love makes Mankind; Friendly Love perfecteth it; but wanton
Love corrupts and embaseth it.

XI. Of Great Place.
MEN in Great Place are thrice Servants: Servants of the Sovereign or State;
Servants of Fame; and Servants of Business. So as they have no Freedom, either
in their Persons, nor in their Actions, nor in their Times. It is a strange
desire to seek Power, and to lose Liberty; or to seek Power over others, and to
lose Power over a Man's self. The Rising unto Place is laborious; and by Pains
men come to greater Pains: and it is sometimes base; and by Indignities men
come to Digniti^^* The Standing is Slippery, and the Regress is either*
Downfall, or at least an Eclipse, which is a melanch^ly thing. Cum non sis, qui
fueris, non esse, cur velis vi^^re. Nay, retire men cannot when they would;
n^^ther will they, when it were Reason: but are impatient of Privateness, even
in Age and Sickness, which require the Shadow: Like old Townsmen; that (...) be
still sitting at their Street Door, though thereby they offer Age to Scorn.
Certainly Great Persons had nee^ to borrow other men's Opinions, to think
themselves happy; for if they judge by their own feeling, they cannot find it:
but if they think with themselves wh^^ other men think of them, and that other
men would fain be as they are, then they are happy, as it were by report; when
perhaps they find the contrary within* For they are the first that find their
own griefs; though they be the last that find their own fault. Certainly Men,
in great Fortunes are strangers to themselves, an^ while they are in the puzzle
of Business, they have n^ time to tend their Health, either of body or mind. I^
Mors gravis incubat, qui notus nimis omnibus, ignotus mor^tur sibi. In Place,
there is license to do Good and Evil, whereof the latter is a curse; for in
Evil, the best condition is not to Will, the second not to Can. But Power to do
good, is the true and lawful end of aspiring: for good thoughts (though God
accept them,) yet toward Men are little better than good dreams, except they
be put in Act; and that cannot be without Power and Place, as the Vantage and
Commanding Ground Merit and good Works is the end of man's motion; and
Conscience of the same is the accomplishment of man's rest: for if a man can be
partaker of God's Theater; he shall likewise be partaker of God's Rest. Et
conversus Deus, ut aspiceret opera, quae fecerunt manus suae, vidit quod omnia
essent bona nimis; And then the Sabbath. In the Discharge of thy Place, set
before thee the best Examples; for Imitation is a Globe of Precepts. And after
a time set before thee thine own Example; and examine thy self strictly whether
thou did not best at first. Neglect not also the Examples of those that have
carried themselves ill in the same Place: not to set off thy self by taxing
their memory; but to direct thy self what to avoid. Reform therefore without
bravery or scandal of former Times and Persons; but yet set it down to thy
self, as well to create good precedents as to follow them. Reduce things to the
first Institution, and observe wherein, and how they have degenerated; but yet
ask Counsel of both Times, of the Ancienter Time what is best, and of the
Latter Time what is fittest. Seek to make thy Course Regular, that men may know
beforehand what they may expect, but be not too positive and peremptory; and
express thy self well when thou digressest from thy Rule. Preserve the right of
thy Place, but stir not questions of Jurisdiction; and rather assume thy Right
in Silence and de facto, than voice it with Claims and Challenges. Preserve
likewise the Right of Inferior Places; and think it more Honor to direct in
chief, than to be busy in all. Embrace and invite Helps and Advices, touching
the Execution of thy Place: and do not drive away such as bring Information, as
medlers, but accept of them in good part. The Vices of Authority are chiefly
four: Delays, Corruption, Roughness and Faction. For Delays, Give easy access,
Keep Times appointed, Go through with that which is in hand, and interlace not
business but of necessity. For Corruption, Not only bind thine own hands, or
thy Servants hands from taking, but bind the hands of Suitors also from
offering: For integrity used, does the one; but Integrity professed, and with a
manifest detestation of Bribery, does the other; and avoid not only the Fault,
but the Suspicion. Whosoever is found variable, and changes manifestly,
without manifest Cause, gives suspicion of Corruption. Therefore always when
thou changest thine opinion or course, profess it plainly, and declare it,
together with the Reasons that move thee to change, and do not think to steal
it. A Servant, or a Favorite, if he be inward, and no other apparent Cause of
Esteem, is commonly thought but a By-way to close Corruption. For Roughness, It
is a needless cause of Discontent; Severity breeds Fear, but Roughness
breeds Hate. Even Reproofs from Authority ought to be grave, and not
taunting. As for Facility, It is worse than Bribery: for Bribes come but now
and then; but if Importunity, or idle Respects lead a Man, he shall never be
without, as Solomon says, To respect Persons is not good; for such a Man will
transgress for a piece of bread. It is most true that was ancily spoken; A
Place shows the Man: and it shows some to the better, and some to the
worse: Omnium consensu; capax Imperii, nisi imperasset; says Tacitus of Galba:
but of Vespasian he says, Solus imperantium Vespasianus mutatus in melius.
Though the one was meant of Sufficiency, the other of Manners and Affection. It
is an assured Sign of a worthy and generous Spirit, whom Honor amends: for
Honor is, or should be, the place of Virtue; and as in Nature things move
violently to their place, and calmly in their place: so Virtue in Ambition is
violent, in Authority settled and calm. All rising to Great Place, is by a
winding Stair; and if there be Factions, it is good to side a Man's self, whilst
he is in the Rising; and to balance himself when he is placed. Use the memory
of thy Predecessor fairly and tenderly; for if thou do not, it is a debt will
sure be paid when thou art gone. If thou have Colleagues, respect them, and
rather call them when they look not for it, than exclude them when they have
reason to look to be called. Be not too sensible, or too remembering of thy
Place in Conversation, and private Answers to Suitors; But let it rather be
said, When he sits in Place he is another Man.

XII. Of Boldness.
IT is a trivial Grammar School Text, but yet worthy a wise Man's consideration.
Question was asked of Demosthenes, What was the chief part of an Orator? He
answered, Action; What next? Action; What next again? Action; He said it that
knew it best, and had by nature himself no advantage in that he commended. A
strange thing, that that part of an Orator which is but ^uperficial, and rather
the virtue of a Player, should be placed so high above those other noble parts
of Inven^ion, Elocution, and the rest: Nay, almost alone; as if ^t were All in
All. But the reason is plain. There is ^n Humane Nature generally more of the
Fool than of the Wise; and therefore those faculties, by which ^he foolish part
of men's minds is taken are most potent. Wonderful like is the case of Boldness
in civil business: What first? Boldness; What second and third? Boldness. And
yet Boldness is a Child of Ignorance and Baseness, ^ar inferior to other parts.
But nevertheless it does fascinate and bind hand and foot, those that are
either ^hallow in judgment, or weak in courage, which are the greatest part;
yea, and prevails with wise men at weak times. Therefore we see it has done
Wonders in popular States, but with Senates and Princes less; and more, ever
upon the first entrance of Bold Persons into action, than soon after: for
Boldness is an ill Keeper of Promise. Surely, as there are Mountebanks for the
Natural Body, so are there Mountebanks for the Politic Body: Men that
undertake great Cures, and perhaps have been lucky in two or three Experiments,
but want the grounds of Science, and therefore cannot hold out. Nay, you shall
see a Bold Fellow many times do Mahomet^s miracle: Mahomet made the People
believe, that he would call an Hill to him; and from the top of (...) offer up
his Prayers for the observers of his Law. (...) people assembled, Mahomet
called the Hill to him again and again; and when the Hill stood still, he was
never a whit abashed, but said, If the Hill will not come (...) Mahomet,
Mahomet will go to the Hill. So these (...) when they have promised great
matters, and failed mo^^ shamefully, yet (if they have the perfection of
Boldness they will but slight it over, and make a turn, and no more ado.
Certainly to men of great judgment, (...) persons are a sport to behold; nay,
and to the Vulga^ also, Boldness has somewhat of the Ridiculous. For (...)
absurdity be the subject of laughter, doubt you no^ but great Boldness is
seldom without some absurdity Especially it is a sport to see, when a Bold
Fellow is ou^ of countenance; for that puts his face into a mo^^ shrunken and
wooden posture, as needs it must: for i^ b^shfulness the Spirits do a little go
and come, but with Bold men, upon like occasion, they stand at a stay, lik^ a
Stale or Chess, where it is no Mate, but yet the Ga^^ cannot stir. But this
last were fitter for a Satyr tha^ for a serious Observation. This is well to be
weighe^* That Boldness is ever blind; for it sees not danger and
inconveniences; therefore it is ill in Counse^ good in Execution: so that the
right use of Bold persons i^, that they never command in Chief, but be Seconds,
and under the direction of others. For in Counsel it is good to see Dangers,
and in Execution not to se^ them, except they be very great.

XIII. Of Goodness, and Goodness of Nature.
I Take Goodness in this sense, the affecting of the we^^ of Men, which is that
the Grecians call Philanthropi^^ and the Word Humanity (as it is used) is a
little too ligh^ to express it. Goodness I call the Habit, and Goodness of
Nature the Inclination. This of all Virtues and Dignities of the mind is the
greatest, being the Character of the Deity; and without it man is a busy,
mischievous wretched thing, no better than a kind of Vermin. Goodness answers
to the Theological Virtue, Charity, and admits no excess, but error. The desire
of power in excess caused the Angels to fall; the desire of knowledge in excess
caused Man to fall; but in Charity there is no excess, neither can Angel or Man
come in danger by it. The inclination of Goodness is imprinted deeply in the
nature of man; insomuch, that if it issue not toward men, it will take unto
other living Creatures; as it is seen in the Turks, a cruel people, who
nevertheless are kind to Beasts, and give Alms to Dogs and Birds: Insomuch as
Busbechius reports, a Christian Boy in Constantinople had like to have been
stoned for gagging, in a waggishness, a long-billed Fowl. Errors indeed, in
this Virtue, in Goodness or Charity may be committed. The Italians have an
ungracious Proverb, Tanto buon che val niente; So good that he is good for
nothing. And one of the Doctors of Italy, Nicholas Macchiavel, had the
confidence to put in writing, almost in plain terms, That the Christian Faith
had given up good men in prey to those that are tyrannical and unjust: which he
spoke, because indeed there was never Law, or Sect, or Opinion, did so much
magnify Goodness as the Christian Religion does: therefore, to avoid the
scandal, and danger both, it is good to take knowledge of the errors of an
Habit so excellent. Seek the good of other men, but be not in bondage to their
faces or fancies; for that is but facility or softness, which takes an honest
mind prisoner. Neither give the Aesop's Cock a Gem, who would be better pleased
and happier if he had had a Barley Corn. The Example of God teaches the Lesson
truly: He sends his Rain, and makes his Sun to shine upon the Just and
Unjust; but he does not rain Wealth, nor shine Honor and Virtues upon Men
equally. Common Benefits are to be communicated with all; but peculiar benefits
with choice. And beware, how in making the Portraiture, thou breakest the
Pattern; for Divinity makes the love of our selves the Pattern; the love of
our Neighbors but the Portraiture. Sell all thou have and give it to the poor,
and follow me: but sell not all thou have, except thou come and follow me; that
is, except thou have a Vocation, wherein thou may do as much good with little
means as with great: for otherwise, in feeding the Streams thou driest the
Fountain. Neither is there only a Habit of Goodness directed by right Reason:
but there is in some Men, even in Nature, a disposition toward it; as on the
other side, there is a natural malignity. For there be that in their Nature do
not affect the good of others. The lighter sort of malignity turns but to
crossness, or frowardness, or aptness to oppose, or difficileness, or the like;
but the deeper sort to envy and mere mischief. Such men in other men's
calamities, are as it were in season, and are ever on the loading part; not so
good as the Dogs that licked Lazarus's sores, but like Flies, that are still
buzzing upon any thing that is raw; Misanthrop, that make it their practice to
bring men to the Bough, and yet have never a Tree for the purpose in their
Gardens, as Timon had. Such dispositions are the very errors of Humane Nature;
and yet they are the fittest Timber to make great Politics of: like to
knee-Timber, that is good for Ships that are ordained to be tossed, but not for
building Houses, that shall stand firm. The parts and signs of Goodness are
many. If a Man be gracious and courteous to Strangers, it shows he is a Citizen
of the world; and that his heart is no Island cut off from other Lands, but a
Continent that joins to them. If he be compassionate toward the afflictions of
others, it shows that his heart is like the noble Tree, that is wounded it
self, when it gives the Balm. If he easily pardons and remits offenses, it
shows that his mind is planted above Injuries, so that he cannot be shot. If he
be thankful for small benefits, it shows that he weighs men's minds, and not
their trash. But above all, if he have Saint Paul's perfection, that he would
wish to be an Anathema from Christ, for the Salvation of his Brethren, it shows
much of a Divine Nature, and a kind of conformity with Christ himself.

XIV. Of Nobility.
WE will speak of Nobility, First as a Portion of an Estate, then as a
Condition of Particular Persons. A Monarchy, where there is no Nobility at all,
is ever a pure and absolute Tyranny, as that of the Turks, for Nobility
attempers Sovereignty, and draws the eyes of the People somewhat aside from the
Line Royal. But for Democracies they need it not: and they are commonly more
quiet, and less subject to Sedition, than where there are Stirps of Nobles. For
men's eyes are upon the business, and not upon the persons; or if upon the
persons, it is for business sake, as the fittest, and not for flags and
pedigree. We see the Switzers last well, notwithstanding their diversity of
Religion, and of Cantons: for Utility is their Bond, and not Respects. The
United Provinces of the Low Countries in their Government excel: for where
there is an equality, the Consultations are more indifferent, and the payments
and tributes more cheerful. A great and potent Nobility adds Majesty to a
Monarch, but diminishes Power; and puts Life and Spirit into the People,
but presses their Fortune. It is well when Nobles are not too great for
Sovereignty, nor for justice; and yet maintained in that height, as the
Insolency of Inferiors may be broken upon them, before it come on too fast
upon the Majesty of Kings. A numerous Nobility causes Poverty and
inconvenience in a State: for it is a furcharge of expense; and besides, it
being of necessity that many of the Nobility fall in time to be weak in
Fortune, it makes a kind of Disproportion between Honor and Means.

As for Nobility in particular Persons, It is a reverend thing to see an
ancient Castle or Building not in decay; or to see a fair Timber Tree sound and
perfect: how much more to behold an Ancient Noble Family, which has stood
against the Waves and Weathers of Time. For New Nobility is but the Act of
Power; but Ancient Nobility is the Act of Time. Those that are first raised to
Nobility are commonly more virtuous, but less innocent than their Descendents;
for there is rarely any Rising, but by a commixture of good and evil Arts. But
it is reason the memory of their Virtues remain to their Posterity; and their
faults die with themselves. Nobility of Birth commonly abateth industry; and he
that is not industrious, envieth him that is. Besides, Noble Persons cannot go
much higher; and he that stands at a stay when others rise, can hardly avoid
motions of Envy. On the other side, Nobility extinguisheth the Passive Envy
from others toward them; because they are in possession of Honor. Certainly
Kings that have able Men of their Nobility, shall find ease in employing them,
and a better slide into their business: for people naturally bend to them, as
born in some sort to command.

XV. Of Seditions and Troubles.
SHepherds of People had need know the Kalenders of Tempests in State; which
are commonly greatest when things grow to equality; as natural Tempests are
greatest about the Aequin^ctia. And as there are certain hollow blasts of Wind,
and secret swellings of Seas before a Tempest, so are there in States. -- Ille
etiam coecos instare Tumultus
Saepe monet, Fraudesque and operta tumescere Bella.
Libels and Licentious Discourses against the State, when they are frequent and
open; and in like sort, false News often running up and down to the
disadvantage of the State, and hastily embraced; are amongst the Signs of
Troubles. Virgil giving the pedigree of Fame, says, She was Sister to the
Giants. Illam Terra Parens ira irritata Deorum,
Extremam (ut perhibent) Caeo Enceladoque sororem
Pregenuit. --
As if Fames were the Relics of Seditions past; but they are no less indeed,
the Preludes of Seditions to come. Howsoever he notes it right, That Seditious
Tumults, and Seditious Fames, differ no more but as Brother and Sister,
Masculine and Feminine; especially if it come to that, that the best Actions of
a State, and the most plausible, and which ought to give greatest contentment,
are taken in ill sense, and traduced: for that shows the envy great, as Ta^itus
says, Conflata magna Invidia, se^^ been, seu male, gesta premunt. Neither does
it follow, that because these Fames are a sign of Troubles, that the
suppressing of them with too much severity, should be a Remedy of Troubles: for
the despising of them many times checks them best; and the going about to stop
them, does but make a Wonder longliv'd.

Also that kind of obedience which Tacitus speaks of is to be held suspected;
Erant in officio, sed tamen qui mallent mandata Imperantium interpretari, quam
exequi; Disputing, Excusing, Cavilling upon Mandates and Directions, is a kind
of shaking off the yoke, and essay of disobedience; especially, if in those
Disputings, they which are for the direction, speak fearfully and tenderly; and
those that are against it audaciously.

Also, as Machiavel notes well; when Princes, that ought to be common Parents,
make themselves as a Party, and lean to a side, it is a Boat that is overthrown
by uneaven weight on the one side; as was well seen in the time of Henry the
third of France: for first himself entered League for the extirpation of the
Protestants, and presently after the fame League was turned upon himself: for
when the Authority of Princes is made but an Accessory to a Cause, and that
there are other Bands that tie faster than the Band of Sovereignty, Kings begin
to be almost put out of possession.

Also, when Discords, and Quarrels, and Factions are carried openly and
audaciously, it is a sign the Reverence of Government is lost. For the Motions
of the greatest Persons in a Government, ought to be as the motions of the
Planets under Primum Mobile (according to the old Opinion:) which is, that
every of them is carried swiftly by the highest Motion, and softly in their own
Motion. And therefore when great Ones in their own particular Motion move
violently; and as Tacitus expresses it well, Liberius quam ut Imperantium
meminissent, it is a sign the Orbs are out of Frame: for Reverence is that
wherewith Princes are girt from God, who threatens the dissolving thereof;
Solvam cingula Regum.

So when any of the four Pillars of Government are mainly shaken or weakened,
(which are Religion, Justice, Counsel, and Treasure) Men had need to pray for
fair weather.

But let us pass from this part of Predictions (concerning which, nevertheless,
more light may be taken from that which follows) and let us speak first of
the Materials of Seditions; then of the Motives of them; and thirdly, of the
Remedies.

Concerning the Materials of Seditions; It is a thing well to be considered:
For the surest way to prevent Seditions (if the times do bear it) is to take
away the matter of them. For if there be fuel prepared, it is hard to tell
whence the spark shall come that shall s^t it on fire. The Matter of Seditions
is of two kinds; much Poverty and much Coffeehouse. It is certain, so many
Overthrown Estates, so many votes for Troubles. Lucan notes well the State of
Rome before the Civil War.

Hinc Usura vorax, rapidumque in tempore Foenus,
Hinc concussa Fides, and multis utile Bellum.
This same multis utile Bellum is an assured and infallible sign of a State
disposed to Seditions and Troubles. And if this Poverty and broken Estate in
the better sort, be joined with a want and necessity in the mean People, the
danger is eminent and great; sor the Rebellions of the Belly are the worst. As
for Discontentments, they are in the Politic Body like to Humors in the
Natural, which are apt to gather pre-natural Heat, and to inflame. And let no
Prince measure the danger of them by this, whether they be just or unjust: for
that were to imagine People to be too reasonable, who do often spurn at their
own good: nor yet by this, whether the griefs whereupon they rise, be in fact
great or small: for they are the most dangerous Discontentments, where the fear
is greater than the feeling. Dolendi modus, Timendi non item. Besides, in great
Oppressions, the same things that provoke the Patience, do withal make the
courage; but in fears it is not so. Neither let any Prince or State be secure
concerning Discontentments because they have been often, or have been long, and
yet no Peril has ensued; for as it is true, that every Vapor or Fume does not
turn into a Storm: So it is nevertheless true, that Storms though they blow
over diverse times, yet may fall at last: and as the Spanish Proverb notes
well; The Cord breaks at the last by the weakest pull.

The Causes and Motions of Seditions are, Innovation in Religion, Taxes,
Alteration of Laws and Customs, breaking of Privileges, General Oppression,
Advancement of unworthy Persons, Strangers, Dearths, Disbanded Soldiers,
Factions grown desperate. And whatsoever in offending People, joyneth and
knitteth them in a Common Cause.

For the Remedies; there may be some general Preservatives whereof we will
speak; as for the just Cure, it must answer to the particular Disease, and so
be left to Counsel rather than Rule.

The first Remedy or Prevention is, to remove by all means possible that
Material Cause of Sedition, whereof we speak; which is Want and Poverty in the
Estate. To which purpose serves the Opening and well Ballancing of Trade, the
Cherishing of Manufactures, the Banishing of Idleness, the Repressing of Waste
and Excess by Sumptuary Laws, the Improvement and Husbanding of the Soil, the
Regulating of Prices of Things vendible, the Moderating of Taxes and Tributes,
and the like. Generally it is to be foreseen, that the Population of a Kingdom
(especially if it be not mowen down by Wars) do not exceed the Stock of the
Kingdom, which should maintain them. Neither is the Population to be reckoned
only by number; for a smaller number that spend more, and earn less, do wear
out an Estate sooner than a greater number that live lower, and gather more.
Therefore the multiplying of Nobility, and other Degrees of Quality, in an over
Proportion to the Common People, does speedily bring a State to Necessity: and
so does likewise an overgrown Clergy, for they bring nothing to the Stock. And
in like manner, when more are bred Scholars than Preferments can take off.

It is likewise to be remembered, that forasmuch as the increase of any Estate
must be upon the Foreigners; (for whatsoever is somewhere gotten, is somewhere
lost.) There be but three things which one Nation sells unto another; the
Commodity as Nature yields it; the Manufacture and the Vecture or Carriage:
So that if these three Wheels go, Wealth will flow as in a Springtide. And it
comes many times to pass, that Materiam superabit Opus; that the Work and
Carriage is more worth than the Materials, and inricheth a State more: as is
notably seen in the Low Countrymen, who have the best Mines above Ground in
the World.

Above all things good Policy is to be used, that the Treasure and Moneys in a
State be not gathered into few Hands. For otherwise a State may have a great
Stock, and yet starve. And Money is like Muck, not good except it be spread.
This is done chiefly by suppressing, or at the least keeping a straight hand
upon the Devouring Trades of Usury, Ingrosing, great Pasturages, and the like.

For removing Discontentments, or at least the danger of them, there is in
every State (as we know) two portions of Subjects, the Nobless and the
Commonalty. When one of these is Discontent, the danger is not great: for
common people are of slow motion, if they be not excited by the greater sort;
and the greater sort are of small strength, except the multitude be apt and
ready to move of themselves. Then this is the danger, when the greater sort do
but wait for the troubling of the Waters amongst the meaner, that then they may
declare themselves. The Poets feign, that the rest of the Gods would have bound
Jupiter; which he hearing of, by the Counsel of Pallas, sent for Briareus with
his hundred hands, to come in to his aid. An Emblem no doubt, to show how safe
it is for Monarchs to make sure of the good will of common people.

To give moderate liberty for Griefs and Discontentments to evaporate (so it be
without too great Insolency or bravery) is a safe way. For he that turns the
Humors back, and makes the Wound bleed inwards, endangereth malign Ulcers,
and pernicious Imposthumations.

The part of Epimetheus might well become Prometheus in the case of
Discontentments; for there is not a better provision against them. Epimetheus,
when griefs and evils flew abroad, at last shut the Lid, and kept Hope in the
bottom of the Vessel. Certainly the politic and artificial nourishing and
entertaining of Hopes, and carrying men from Hopes to Hopes, is one of the best
Antidotes against the Poison of Discontentments. And it is a certain sign of a
wise Government and Proceeding, when it can hold men's hearts by Hopes when it
cannot by satisfaction; and when it can handle things in such manner, as no
evil shall appear so peremptory but that it has some outlet of Hope: which is
the less hard to do, because both particular Persons and Factions art apt
enough to flatter themselves, or at least to brave that which they believe not.

Also the foresight and prevention, that there be no likely or fit Head,
whereunto Discontented Persons may resort, and under whom they may join, is a
known, but an excellent point of caution. I understand a fit Head to be one
that has Greatness and Reputation, that has Confidence with the Discontented
Party, and upon whom they turn their eyes; and that is thought Discontented in
his own particular; which kind of Persons are either to be won, and reconciled
to the State, and that in a fast and true manner; or to be fronted with some
other of the same Party that may oppose them, and so divide the Reputation.
Generally the dividing and breaking of all Factions and Combinations that are
adverse to the State, and setting them at distance, or at least distrust among
themselves, is not one of the worst Remedies. For it is a desperate case, if
those that hold with the proceeding of the State, be full of Discord and
Faction; and those that are against it, be entire and United.

I have noted, that some witty and sharp Speeches, which have fallen from
Princes, have given fire to Seditions. Caesar did himself infinite hurt in that
Speech, Sylla nescivit literas, non potuit dictare: for it did utterly cut off
that Hope which men had entertained, that he would at one time or other give
over his Dictatorship. Galba undid himself by that Speech, Legi a se militem
non emi, for it put the Soldiers out of Hope of the Donative. Probus likewise
by that speech, Si vixero, non opus erit amplius Romano Imperio militibus: A
Speech of great despair for the Soldiers: And many the like. Surely Princes had
need, in tender matters, and ticklish times, to beware what they say;
especially in these short Speeches, which fly abroad like Darts, and are
thought to be shot out of their secret Intentions. For as for large Discourses,
they are flat things, and not so much noted.

Lastly, Let Princes against all Events not be without some great Person, one,
or rather more, of Military Valor near unto them, for the repressing of
Seditions in their beginnings. For without that, there uses to be more
trepidation in Court, upon the first breaking out of Troubles, than were fit.
And the State runs the danger of that, which Tacitus says; Atque is habitus
animorum fuit, ut pessimum facinus auderent pauci, plures vellent, omnes
paterentur. But let such Military Persons be assured, and well reputed of,
rather than Factious and Popular, holding also good correspondence with the
other great Men in the State, or else the Remedy is worse than the Disease.

XVI. Of Atheism.
I Had rather believe all the Fables in the Legend, and the Talmud, and the
Alcoran, that this Universal Frame is without a Mind. And therefore God never
wrought a Miracle to convince Atheism, because his ordinary Works convince it.
It is true, that a little Philosophy inclines Man's mind to Atheism, but depth
in Philosophy brings Men's minds about to Religion, for while the mind of man
looks upon second Causes scattered, it may sometimes rest in them, and go no
further: but when it beholds the Chain of them Confederate and Linked
together, it must needs fly to Providence and Deity. Nay, even that School
which is most accused of Atheism, does most demonstrate Religion: That is, the
School of Leucippus and Democritus, and Epicurus. For it is a thousand times
more credible, that four mutable Elements, and one immutable fifth Essence,
duly and eternally placed, need no God, than that an Army of infinite small
Portions, or Seeds unplaced, should have produced this order and beauty without
a Divine Marshal. The Scripture says, The Fool has said in his heart, there
is no God: it is not said, The fool has thought in his heart: So as he rather
says it by rote to himself, as that he would have, than that he can thoroughly
believe it, or be persuaded of it. For none deny there is a God, but those for
whom it makes that there were no God. It appears in nothing more, that
Atheism is rather in the Lip, than in the Heart of Man, than by this; That
Atheists will ever be talking of that their Opinion, as if they fainted in it
within themselves, and would be glad to be strengthened by the consent of
others. Nay more, you shall have Atheists strive to get Disciples, as it fares
with other Sects. And, which is most of all, you shall have of them that will
suffer for Atheism and not recant; whereas if they did truly think, that there
were no such thing as God, why should they trouble themselves? Epicurus is
charged, that he did but dissemble for his credits sake, when he affirmed,
there were Blessed Natures, but such as enjoyed themselves, without having
respect to the Government of the World: wherein, they say, he did temporize;
though in secret he thought there was no God. But certainly he is traduced; for
his Words are Noble and Divine; Non Deos vulgi negare profanum, sed vulgi
Opiniones Diis applicare profanum. Plato could have said no more. And although
he had the confidence to deny the Administration, he had not the power to deny
the Nature. The Indians of the West have names for their particular gods,
though they have no name for God; as if the Heathens should have had the names
of Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, etc. but not the word Deus: shows, that even those
barbarous People have the notion, hough they have not the latitude and extent
of it. So that against the Atheist the very Savages take part with the very
subtilest Philosophers: The Contemplative Atheist is rare: A Diagoras, a Bion,
a Lucian perhaps, and some others; and yet they seem to be more than they are:
For that all that impugn a received Religion or Superstition, are by the
adverse part branded with the name of Atheists. But the great Atheists indeed
are Hypocrites, which are ever handling Holy things, but without feeling; so as
they must needs be cauterized in the end. The Causes of Atheism are Divisions
in Religion, if they be many: for any one main Division adds Zeal to both
sides, but many Divisions introduce Atheism. Another is, Scandal of Priests,
when it is come to that which Saint Bernard says, Non est jam dicere, ut
populus, sacerdos: quia nec sic populus, ut sacerdos. A third is, Custom of
Profane Scoffing in Holy Matters, which does by little and little deface the
Reverence of Religion. And lastly, Learned Times, especially with peace and
prosperity: for troubles and adversities do more bow Men's minds to Religion.
They that deny a God, destroy Man's Nobility: for certainly Man is of kin to the
Beasts by his Body; and if he be not of kin to God by his Spirit; he is a base
and ignoble Creature. It destroys likewise Magnanimity, and the raising Humane
Nature: for take an example of a Dog, and mark what a generosity and courage he
will put on, when he finds himself maintained by a Man, who to him is instead
of a God. or Melior natura: Which courage is manifestly such, as that Creature
without the confidence of a better Nature than his own, could never attain. So
Man, when he rests and assures himself upon Divine protection and favor,
gathers a force and faith, which Humane Nature in it self could not obtain.
Therefore as Atheism is in all respects hateful, so in this, that it depriveth
Humane Nature of the means to exalt it self above Humane Frailty. As it is in
particular Persons, so it is in Nations. Never was there such a State for
Magnanimity, as Rome. Of this State hear what Cicero says, Quam volumus,
licet, Patres Conscripti, nos amemus, tamen nec numero Hispanos, nec robore
Gallos, nec calliditate Poenos, nec artibus Graecos; nec denique hoc ipso hujus
Gentis and Terrae domestico nativoque sensu Italos ipsos and Latinos; sed
Pietate ac Religione, atque hac una Sapientia, quod Deorum Immortalium Numine,
omnia regi gubernarique perspeximus, omnes Gentes Nationesque superavimus.

XVII. Of Superstition.
IT were better to have no opinion of God at all, than such an opinion as is
unworthy of him: For the one is Unbelief, the other is Contumely; and certainly
Superstition is the reproach of the Deity. Plutarch says well to that purpose:
Surely (says he) I had rather a great deal men should say, there was no such
man at all as Plutarch, than that they should say, that there was one Plutarch,
that would eat his Children as soon as they were born; as the Poets speak of
Saturn. And as the Contumely is greater toward God, so the Danger is greater
toward Men. Atheism leaves a man to Sense, to Philosophy, to Natural Piety, to
Laws, to Reputation; all which may be guides to an outward Moral Virtue, though
Religion were not; But Superstition dismounts all these, and erecteth an
absolute Monarchy in the minds of Men. Therefore Atheism did never perturb
States; for it makes men weary of themselves, as looking no further: And we see
the times inclined to Atheism (as the time of Augustus Caesar) were civil
times. But Superstition has been the Confusion of many States, and brings in
a new Primum Mobile, that ravisheth all the Spheres of Government. The Master
of Superstition is the People; and in all Superstition, Wise men follow Fools,
and Arguments are fitted to Practice in a reversed order. It was gravely said
by some of the Prelates in the Council of Trent, where the Doctrine of the
Schoolmen bare great sway, That the Schoolmen were like Astronomers, which
did feign Eccentricks, and Epicycles, and such engines of Orbs, to save the
Phoenomena; though they knew there were no such things. And in like manner,
that the Schoolmen had framed a number of subtle and intricate Axioms and
Theorems, to save the practice of the Church. The Causes of Superstitions are,
pleasing and sensual Rites and Ceremonies: Excess of Outward and Pharisaical
Holiness: Overgreat Reverence of Traditions, which cannot but load the Church:
the Stratagems of Prelates for their own Ambition and Lucre: the favoring too
much of good Intentions, which opens the Gate to Conceits and Novelties: the
taking an Aim at Divine Matters by Humane, which cannot but breed mixture of
Imaginations: And lastly, Barbarous Times, especially joined with Calamities
and Disasters. Superstition without a veil is a deformed thing; for, as it
adds deformity to an Ape to be so like a Man: so the similitude of
Superstition to Religion makes it the more deformed. And as wholesome Meat
corrupts to little Worms: so good Forms and Orders corrupt into a Number of
petty Observances. There is a Superstition in avoiding Superstition, when men
think to do best, if they go furthest from the Superstition formerly received.
Therefore Care would be had, that (as it fares in ill Purgings) the good be
not taken away with the bad, which commonly is done, when the People is the
Reformer.

XVIII. Of Travel.
TRAVEL, in the younger Sort, is a part of Education; in the elder, a part of
Experience. He that Travelleth into a Country before he has some Entrance
into the Language, goes to School and not to Travel. That young men Travel
under some Tutor, or grave Servant, I allow well, so that he be such a one that
has the Language, and has been in the Country before, whereby he may be able
to tell them, what things are worthy to be seen in the Country where they go,
what Acquaintances they are to seek, what Exercises or Discipline the Place
yields. For else young men shall go hooded, and look abroad little. It is a
strange thing, that in Sea-voyages, where there is nothing to be seen but Sky
and Sea, men should make Diaries; but in Land-Travel, wherein so much is to be
observed, for the most part they omit it; as if Chance were fitter to be
registered than Observation. Let Diaries therefore be brought in use. The things
to be seen and observed are the Courts of Princes, especially when they give
Audience to Ambassadors: The Courts of Justice, while they sit and hear Causes,
and so of Consistories Ecclesiastic: the Churches and Monasteries, with the
Monuments which are therein extant: the Walls and Fortifications of Cities and
Towns; and so the Havens and Harbors: Antiquities and Ruins: Libraries,
Colleges, Disputations and Lectures, where any are: Shipping and Natives:
Houses and Gardens of State and Pleasure near great Cities: Armories, Arsenals,
Magazines, Exchanges, Burses, Warehouses: Exercises of Horsmanship, Fencing,
Training of Soldiers, and the like: Comedies, such whereunto the better sort
of Persons do resort. Treasures of Jewels and Robes: Cabinets and Rarities. And
to conclude, whatsoever is memorable in the Places where they go. After all
which the Tutors or Servants ought to make diligent enquiry. As for Triumphs,
Masks, Feasts, Weddings, Funerals, Capital Executions, and such Shows; Men
need not to be put in mind of them; yet are they not to be neglected. If you
will have a young man to put his Travel into a little room, and in short time
to gather much, this you must do. First, as we said, he must have some entrance
into the Language before he goes. Then he must have such a Servant or Tutor as
knows the Country, as was likewise said. Let him carry with him also some
Chard or Book, describing the Country where he Travelleth, which will be a
good key to his Enquiry. Let him keep also a Diary. Let him not stay long in
one City or Town, more or less, as the Place deserves, but not long: Nay, when
he stays in one City or Town, let him change his Lodging from one end and
part of the Town to another, which is a great Adamant of Acquaintance. Let him
sequester himself from the Company of his Contrymen, and diet in such Places
where there is good Company of the Nation where he Travelleth. Let him upon his
Removes from one Place to another, procure recommendation to some Person of
Quality, residing in the Place whither he removes, that he may use his Favor
in those things he desires to see or know. Thus he may abridge his Travels
with much profit. As for the Acquaintance which is to be sought in Travel, that
which is most of all profitable, is Acquaintance with the Secretaries and
employed Men of Ambassadors; for so in Traveling in one Country, he shall suck
the experience of many. Let him also see and visit eminent Persons, in all
kinds, which are of great Name abroad; that he may be able to tell how the Life
agrees with the Fame. For Quarrels, they are with Care and Discretion to be
avoided: They are commonly for Mistresses, Healths, Place, and Words. And let a
Man beware how he keeps Company with Choleric and Quarrelsome Persons, for
they will engage him into their own Quarrels. When a Traveller returns home,
let him not leave the Countries where he has Traveled, altogether behind him,
but maintain a Correspondency by Letters with those of his Acquaintance which
are of most worth. And let his Travel appear rather in his Discourse, than in
his Apparel or Gesture; and in his Discourse let him be rather advised in his
Answers, than forward to tell Stories: And let it appear, that he does not
change his Country Manners for those of Foreign Parts; but only prick in some
Flowers of that he has learned abroad, into the Customs of his own Country.

XIX. Of Empire.
IT is a miserable State of Mind, to have few things to desire, and many things
to fear, and yet that commonly is the Case of Kings, who being at the highest,
want matter of desire, which makes their minds more languishing, and have many
Representations of Perils and Shadows, which makes their minds the less clear.
And this is one reason also of that effect which the Scripture speaks of;
That the King's heart is inscrutable. For, multitude of Jealousies, and lack of
some predominant desire that should marshal and put in order all the rest,
makes any Man's heart hard to find or sound. Hence it comes likewise, that
Princes many times make themselves Desire, and set their Hearts upon Toys:
sometimes upon a Building, sometimes upon erecting of an Order, sometimes upon
the advancing of a Person, sometimes upon obtaining excellency in some Art or
Feat of the Hand; as Nero for playing on the Harp, Domitian for Certainty of
the Hand with the Arrow, Commodus for playing at Fence, Caracalla for driving
Chariots, and the like. This seems incredible unto those that know not the
principal; That the mind of Man is more cheared and refreshed by profiting in
small things, than by standing at a stay in great. We see also that the Kings
that have been fortunate Conquerours in their first years, it being not
possible for them to go forward infinitely, but that they must have some check
or arrest in their Fortunes, turn in their latter years to be Superstitious and
Melancholy: as did Alexander the Great, Dioclesian; and in our memory, Charles
the Fifth, and others: For he that is used to go forward, and finds a stop,
falls out of his own favor, and is not the thing he was.

To speak now of the true Temper of Empire; It is a thing rare, and hard to
keep; for both Temper and Distemper consist of Contraries. But it is one thing
to mingle Contraries, another to interchange them. The Answer of Apollonius to
Vespasian is full of excellent Instruction; Vespasian asked him, What was Nero
's overthrow? He answered, Nero could touch and tune the Harp well, but in
Government sometimes he used to wind the pins too high, sometimes to let them
down too low. And certain it is, that nothing destroys Authority so much, as
the unequal and untimely interchange of Power Pressed too far, and Relaxed too
much.

This is true, that the Wisdom of all these latter Times in Princes Affairs, is
rather fine Deliveries, and Shiftings of Dangers and Mischiefs, when they are
near, than solid and grounded Courses to keep them aloof. But this is but to
try Masteries with Fortune: and let men beware how they neglect and suffer
matter of Trouble to be prepared: for no man can forbid the spark, nor tell
whence it may come. The difficulties in Princes Business are many and great;
but the greatest difficulty is often in their own mind. For it is common with
Princes (says Tacitus) to will Contradictories. Sunt plerumque Regum
voluntates vehementes, and inter se contrariae. For it is the Solecism of
Power, to think to Command the end, and yet not endure the means.

Kings have to deal with their Neighbors, their Wives, their Children, their
Prelates or Clergy, their Nobles, their Second Nobles or Gentlemen, their
Merchants, their Commons, and their Men of War. And from all these arise
Dangers, if Care and Circumspection be not used.

First, For their Neighbors: There can no general Rule be given (the occasions
are so variable) save one, which ever holds, which is, that Princes do keep
due Sentinel, that none of their Neighbors do over-grow so, (by increasing of
Territory, by embracing of Trade, by Approaches, or the like) as they become
more able to annov them, than they were. This is generally the work of standing
Counsels to foresee, and to hinder it. During that Triumvirate of King's, King
Henry the 8th of England, Francis the 1st King of France, and Charles the 5th
Emperor, there was such a Watch kept, that none of the Three could win a Palm
of Ground, but the other Two would straight-ways balance it, either by
Confederation, or if need were, by a War, and would not in any wise take up
Peace at Interest. And the like was done by that League, (which Guicciardine
says, was the Security of Italy) made between Ferdinando King of Naples,
Lorenzius Medices, and Ludovicus Sforza, Potentate, the one of Florence, the
other of Milain. Neither is the opinion of some of the Schoolmen to be
received* That a War cannot justly be made but upon a precedent Injury or
Provocation. For there is no question, but a just Fear of an imminent Danger,
though there be no Blow given, is a lawful Cause of a War.

For their Wives: There are cruel examples of them Livia is infamed for the
poisoning of her Husband: Rolaxana, Solyman's Wife, was the destruction of that
renowned Prince, Sultan Mustapha, and otherwise troubled his House and
Succession: Edward the Second of England, his Queen had the principal hand in
the deposing and murder of her Husband. This kind of danger is then to be
feared, chiefly when the Wives have Plots for the raising of their own
Children, or else that they be Advoutresses.

For their Children: The Tragedies likewise of dangers from them have been
many. And generally the entering of Fathers into suspicion of their Children,
has been ever unfortunate. The destruction of Mustapha (that we named before)
was so fatal to Solyman's Line, as the Succession of the Turks from Solomon
until this day, is suspected to be untrue, and of strange blood; for that
Selymus the second was thought to be supposititious. The destruction of
Crispus, a young Prince of rare towardness, by Constantinus the Great, his
Father, was in like manner fatal to his House; for both Constantinus and
Constance his Son died violent Deaths; and Constantius his other Son did little
better, who died indeed of Sickness, but after that Julianus had taken Arms
against him. The destruction of Demetrius, Son to Philip the Second of Macedon,
turned upon the Father, who died of Repentance. And many like Examples there
are, but few or none where the Fathers had good by such distrust, except it
were where the Sons were up in open Arms against them; as was Selymus the first
against Bajazet, and the three Sons of Henry the Second, King of England.

For their Prelates: When they are proud and great, there is also danger from
them; as it was in the times of Anselmus and Thomas Becket, Archbishops of
Canterbury, who with their Crosiers did almost try it with the Kings Sword; and
yet they had to deal with stout and haughty Kings; William Rufus, Henry the
First, and Henry the Second. The danger is not from the State, but where it
has a dependence of Foreign Authority; or where the Churchmen come in, and
are elected, not by the collation of the King, or particular Patrons, but by
the People.

For their Nobles: To keep them at a distance it is not amiss, but to depress
them may make a King more absolute, but less safe, and less able to perform any
thing that he desires. I have noted it in my History of King Henry the Seventh,
of England, who depressed his Nobility; whereupon it came to pass, that his
times were full of Difficulties and Troubles; for the Nobility, though they
continued loyal unto him, yet did they not cooperate with him in his business;
so that in effect he was fain to do all things himself.

For their Second Nobles: There is not much danger from them, being a Body
dispersed. They may sometimes discourse high, but that does little hurt.
Besides they are a counterpoize to the higher Nobility, that they grow not too
potent: and lastly, being the most immediate in Authority with the Common
People, they do best temper popular Commotions.

For their Merchants: They are Vena porta; and if they flourish not, a Kingdom
may have good Limbs, but will have empty Veins, and nourish little. Taxes and
Imposts upon them, do seldom good to the Kings Revenue; for that he wins in the
Hundred, he loses in the Shire; the particular Rates being increased, but the
total bulk of Trading rather decreased.

For their Commons: There is little danger from them, except it be where they
have great and potent Heads, or where you meddle with the point of Religion, or
their Customs, or means of Life.

For their Men of War: It is a dangerous State, where they live and remain in a
Body, and are used to Donatives, whereof we see examples in the Janissaries and
Pretorian Bands of Rome: But Trainings of Men, and Arming them in several
places, and under several Commanders, and without Donatives, are things of
Defense, and no danger.

Princes are like to Heavenly Bodies, which cause good or evil times; and which
have much Veneration, but no Rest. All Precepts concerning Kings, are in effect
comprehended in those two Remembrances, Memento quod es Homo, and Memento quod
es Deus, or Vice Dei; the one bridleth their Power, and the other their Will.

XX. Of Counsel.
THE greatest trust between Man and Man is the trust of Giving Counsel: For in
other confidences Men commit the parts of Life, their Lands, their Goods, their
Children, their Credit, some particular Affair: but to such as they make their
Counselors, they commit the whole, by how much the more they are obliged to
all faith and integrity. The wisest Princes need not think it any diminution to
their Greatness, or derogation to their Sufficiency, to rely upon Counsel. God
himself is not without, but has made it one of the great Names of his blessed
Son: The Counselor. Solomon has pronounced, that in Counsel is Stability.
Things will have their first or second agitation; if they be not tossed upon
the arguments of Counsel, they will be tossed upon the waves of Fortune, and be
full of inconstancy, doing and undoing, like the reeling of a drunken man.
Solomon's Son found the force of Counsel, as his Father saw the necessity of
it. For the beloved Kingdom of God was first rent and broken by ill Counsel;
upon which Counsel there are set for instruction the two marks, whereby Bad
Counsel is for ever best discerned, that it was young Counsel for the Persons,
and violent Counsel for the Matter.

The ancient times do set forth in figure, both the incorporation, and
inseparable conjunction of Counsel with Kings, and the wise and politic use of
Counsel by Kings; the one in that they say, Jupiter did marry. Metis, which
signifies Counsel, whereby they intend that Sovereignty is married to Counsel;
the other in that which follows, which was thus: They say, after Jupiter was
married to Metis, she conceived by him, and was with Child: but Jupiter
suffered her not to stay till she brought forth, but eat her up; whereby he
became himself with Child, and was delivered of Pallas Armed out of his Head;
which monstrous Fable contains a secret of Empire, how Kings are to make use
of their Council of State. That first they ought to refer matters unto them,
which is the first begetting or impregnation; but when they are elaborate,
molded, and shaped in the Womb of their Council, and grow ripe, and ready to
be brought forth, that then they suffer not their Council to go through with
the resolution and direction, as if it depended on them; but take the matter
back into their own hands, and make it appear to the World, that the Decrees
and final Directions (which, because they come forth with Prudence and Power,
are resembled to Pallas Armed) proceeded from themselves: And not only from
their Authority, but (the more to add reputation to themselves) from their Head
and Device.

Let us now speak of the Inconveniences of Counsel, and of the Remedies. The
Inconveniences that have been noted in calling and using Counsel, as three:
First, the revealing of Affairs, whereby they become less secret. Secondly, the
weakening of the Authority of Princes, as if they were less of themselves.
Thirdly, the danger of being unfaithfully Counseled, and more for the good of
them that Counsel, than of him that is Counseled. For which Inconveniences,
the Doctrine of Italy, and practice of France in some Kings times, has
introduced Cabinet Councils; a Remedy worse than the Disease.

As to Secrecy: Princes are not bound to communicate all matters with all
Counselors, but extract and select. Neither is it necessary, that he that
consulteth what he should do, should declare what he will do. But let Princes
beware, that the unsecreting of their Affairs comes not from themselves. And as
for Cabinet Counsels, it may be their Motto; Plenus rimarum sum: One futile
Person, that makes it his glory to tell, will do more hurt, than many that
know it their duty to conceal. It is true, there be some Affairs which require
extreme Secrecy, which will hardly go beyond one or two Persons beside the
King: Neither are those Counsels unprosperous; for besides the Secrecy, they
commonly go on constantly in one Spirit of Direction without distraction. But
then it must be a prudent King, such as is able to grind with a Hand-mill; and
those Inward Counselors had need also be wise Men, and especially true and
trusty to the King's ends; as it was with King Henry the Seventh, of England,
who in his greatest business imparted himself to none, except it were to Morton
and Fox.

For weakening of Authority: The Fable shows the Remedy. Nay, the Majesty of
King's is rather exalted than diminished, when they are in the Chair of
Counsel. Neither was there ever Prince bereaved of his dependencies by his
Counsel, except where there has been either an over-greatness in one
Counselor, or an over-strict combination in diverse, which are things soon
found and helped.

For the last Inconvenience, that Men will Counsel with an Eye to themselves:
Certainly, Non inveniet fidem super terram, is meant of the nature of times,
and not of all particular Persons. There be, that are in nature, faithful and
sincere, and plain, and direct, not crafty and involved: Let Princes above all
draw to themselves such natures. Besides Counselors are not commonly so
united, but that one Counselor keeps Sentinel over another; so that if any
do Counsel, out of faction, or private ends, it commonly comes to the King's
Ear. But the best Remedy is, if Princes know their Counselors as well as their
Counselors know them: Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos.

And on the other side, Counselors should not be too speculative into their
Sovereigns Person. The true composition of a Counselor, is rather to be
skilled in their Masters business, than in his Nature; for then he is like to
advise him, and not to feed his humor. It is of singular use to Princes, if
they take the Opinions of their Counsel, both separately and together. For
private opinion is more free, but opinion before others is more reverend. In
private, Men are more bold in their own humors; and in consort, Men are more
obnoxious to others humors: therefore it is good to take both. And of the
inferior sort, rather in private, to preserve freedom; of the greater, rather
in consort, to preserve respect. It is vain for Princes to take Counsel,
concerning Matters, if they take no Counsel likewise concerning Persons: for
all Matters are as dead Images; and the life of the execution of Affairs
rests in the good choice of Persons. Neither is it enough to consult
concerning Persons, secundum genera, as in an Idea or Mathematical Description,
what the kind and character of the Person should be; for the greatest errors
are committed, and the most judgment is shown in the choice of Individuals. It
was truly said, Optimi Consiliarii mortui; Books will speak plain when
Counselors blanch. Therefore it is good to be conversant in them, especially
the Books of such as themselves have been Actors upon the Stage.

The Councils at this day in most places are but familiar meetings, where
matters are rather talked on than debated. And they run too swift to the Order
or Act of Counsel. It were better, that in Causes of weight, the Matter were
propounded one day, and not spoken ^ill the next day, In nocte Consilium. So
was it done in the Commission of Union between England and Scotland, which was
a grave and orderly Assembly. I commend set days for Petitions: for it gives
both the Suitors more certainty for their attendance, and it frees the meetings
for matters of Estate, that they may Hoc agere. In choice of Committees for
ripening Business for the Council, it is better to choose indifferent Persons,
than to make an Indifferency, by putting in those that are strong on both
sides. I commend also standing Commissions; as for Trade, for Treasure, for
War, for Suits, for some Provinces: For where there be diverse particular
Councils, and but one Council of State, (as it is in Spain) they are in effect
no more than standing Commissions; save that they have greater Authority. Let
such as are to inform Councils out of their particular Professions (as Lawyers,
Seamen, Mint-men, and the like) be first heard before Committees, and then, as
occasion serves, before the Council. And let them not come in multitudes, or in
a Tribunitious manner; for that is to clamor Councils, not to inform them. A
long Table, and a square Table, or Seats about the Walls, seem things of Form,
but are things of Substance; for at a long Table, a few at the upper end in
effect sway all the business; but in the other Form, there is more use of the
Counselors Opinions that sit lower. A King, when he presides in Council, let
him beware how he opens his own inclination too much in that which he
propounds; for else Counselors will but take the wind of him, and instead of
giving Free Counsel, sing him a Song of Placebo.

XXI. Of Delays.
FORTUNE is like the Market, where many times if you can stay a little, the
Price will fall. And again, it is sometimes like Sibylla's Offer, which at
first offers the Commodity at full, then consumes part and part, and still
holds up the Price. For Occasion (as it is in the Common Verse) turns a
bald Noddle, after she has presented her Locks in Front, and no hold taken; or
at least turns the handle of the Bottle first to be received, and after the
Belly, which is hard to clasp. There is surely no greater Wisdom, than well to
time the Beginnings and Onsets of Things. Dangers are no more light, if they
once seem light; and more Dangers have deceived Men, than forced them. Nay, it
were better to meet some Dangers half way* though they come nothing near, than
to keep too long a watch upon their Approaches; for if a Man watch too long, it
is odds he will fall asleep. On the other side, to be deceived with two long
Shadows (as some have been, when the Moon was low, and shone on their Enemies
back, and so to shoot off before the time* or to teach Dangers to come on, by
over-early Buckling toward them, is another extreme. The Ripeness or
Unripeness of the Occasion, (as we said) must ever be well weighed; and
generally it is good to commit the Beginnings of all great Actions to Argus
with his hundred eyes, and the Ends to Briareus with his hundred hands; first
to Watch, and then to speed. For the Helmet of Pluto, which makes the Politic
Man go invisible, is Secrecy in the Counsel, and Celerity in the Execution. For
when things are once come to the Execution, there is no Secrecy comparable to
Celerity; like the motion of a Bullet in the air, which flies so swift, as it
out-runs the Eye.

XXII. Of Cunning.
WE take Cunning for a Sinister or Crooked Wi^dom. And certainly there is
great difference between a Cunning Man and a Wise Man, not only in point of
Honesty, but in point of Ability. There be that can pack the Cards, and yet
cannot play well: so there are some that are good in Canvasses and Factions,
that are otherwise Weak Men. Again, it is one thing to understand Persons, and
another thing to understand Matters; for many are perfect in Men's Humors, that
are not greatly capable of the real part of Business, which is the Constitution
of one that has studied Men more than Books. Such Men are fitter for Practice
than for Counsel: and they are good but in their own Alley, turn them to new
men, and they have lost their Aim: so as the old Rule to know a Fool from a
Wise man; Mitte ambos nudos ad ignotos, and videbis, does scarce hold for them.
And because these Cunning Men are like Haberdashers of small Wares, it is not
amiss to set forth their shop.

It is a point of Cunning to wait upon him, with whom you speak, with your eye,
as the Jesuits give it in precept: For there may be many wise men that have
secret Hearts and transparent Countenances. Yet this would be done with a
demure Abasing of your eye sometimes, as the Jesuits also do use.

Another is, that when you have any thing to obtain of present dispatch, you
entertain and amuse the party with whom you deal, with some other Discourse,
that he be not too much awake to make Objections. Iknew a Counselor and
Secretary, that never came to Queen Elizabeth of England with Bills to sign,
but he would always first put her into some Discourse of Estate, that she might
the less mind the Bills.

The like surprise may be made by moving things, when the party is in have, and
cannot stay to consider advisedly of that is moved.

If a Man would cross a Business, that he doubts some other would hansomely and
effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and move it himself in such
^o^t as may foyl it.

The breaking off in the midst of that one was about to say, as if he took
himself up, breeds a greater Appetite in him with whom you confer to know more.

And because it works better, when any thing seems to be gotten from you by
Question, than if you offer it of your self; you may lay a Bait for a Question,
by showing another Visage and Countenance than you are wont; to the end, to
give occasion for the party to ask, what the matter is of the Change, as
Nehemia^ did; And I had not before that time been sad before the King.

In things that are tender and unpleasing, it is good to break the Ice by some
whose words are of less weight, and to reserve the more weighty voice to come
in as by chance, so that he may be asked the Question upon the other Speech; as
Narcissus did in relating to Claudius the marriage of Messalina and Silius.

In things that a Man would not be seen in himself, it is a point of Cunning to
borrow the name of the World, as to say; The World says, or, There is a Speech
abroad.

I knew one, that when he wrote a Letter, he would put that which was most
material in the Postscript, as if it had been a By-matter.

I knew another, that when he came to have speech, he would pass over that he
intended most, and go forth, and come back again and speak of it, as a thing
that he had almost forgot.

Some procure themselves to be surprised at such times, as it is like the party
that they work upon will suddenly come upon them, and to be found with a Letter
in their hand, or doing somewhat which they are not accustomed; to the end they
may be opposed of those things, which of themselves they are desirous to utter.

It is a point of Cunning, to let fall those Words in a man's own Name, which he
would have another man learn and use, and thereupon take advantage. I knew two
that were Competitors for the Secretaries Place, in Queen Elizab^th's time, and
yet kept good Quarter between themselves, and would confer one with another
upon the Business; and one of them said, That to be a Secretary in the
Declination of a Monarchy, was a ticklish thing, and that he did not affect it:
the other strait caught up those Words, and discoursed with diverse of his
Friends, That he had no reason to desire to be a Secretary in the Declining of
a Monarchy. The first man took hold of it, and found means it was told the
Queen, Who hearing of a Declination of a Monarchy, took it so ill, as she would
never after hear of the other's Suit.

There is a Cunning, which we in England call, The turning of the Cat in Pan;
which is, when that which a man says to another, he lays it as if another had
said it to him; and to say truth, it is not easy, when such a matter passed
between two, to make it appear from which of them it first moved and began.

It is a way that some men have to glance and dart at others, by justifying
themselves by Negatives; as to say, This I did not: As Tigellinus did toward
Burrhus; Se non diversas spes, sed incolumitatem Imperatoris simpliciter
spectare.

Some have in readiness so many Tales and Stories, as there is nothing they
would insinuate, but they can wrap it into a Tale, which serves both to keep
them selves more in Guard, and carry it with more Pleasure.

It is a good point of Cunning, for a man to shape the Answer he would have in
his own Words and Propositions; for it makes the other party stick the less.

It is strange, how long some men will lie in wait to speak somewhat they
desire to say, and how far about they will fetch, and how many other matters
they will beat over to come near it; it is a thing of great Patience, but yet
of much Use.

A sudden, bold, and unexpected Question, does many times surprise a man and
lay him open: Like to him, that having changed his Name, and walked in Paul's,
another suddenly came behind him, and called him by his true Name, whereat
streight-ways he looked back.

But these small Wares, and petty points of Cunning are infinite; and it were a
good deed to make a List of them: for that nothing does more hurt in a State,
that that Cunning Men pass for Wise.

But certainly some there are, that know the Resorts and Falls of Business,
that cannot sink into the Main o^ it: Like a House that has convenient Stairs
and Entries, but never a fair Room. Therefore you shall see them find out
pretty Looses in the Conclusion, but are no ways able to examine or debate
Matters: and yet commonly they take advantage of their Inability, and would be
thought Wits of direction. Some built rather upon the abusing of others, and
(as we now say) Putting tricks upon them; than upon the soundness of their own
proceedings. But Solomon says, Prudens advertit a^ gressus suos, Stultus
divertit ad dolos.

XXIII. Of Wisdom for a Man's self.
AN Ant is a wise creature for it self, but it is a shrewd thing in an Orchard
or Garden. And certainly men that are great Lovers of Themselves, waste the
Public. Divide with reason between Self-love and Society, and be so true to
thy Self, as thou be not false to others, especially to thy King and Country.
It is a poor Center of a man's Actions, Himself. It is right Earth; for that
only stands fast upon its own Center; whereas all things that have affinity
with the Heavens, move upon the Center of another which they benefit. The
referring of all to a Man's Self, is more tolerable in a Sovereign Prince;
because Themselves, are not only Themselves; but their Good and Evil is at the
peril of the public Fortune. But it is a desperate Evil in a Servant to a
Prince, or a Citizen in a Republic. For whatsoever Affairs pass such a man's
hands, he crooketh them to his own ends, which must needs be often Eccentrick
to the ends of his Master or State: Therefore let Princes or States choose such
Servants as have not this mark; except they mean their Service should be made
but the accessory. That which makes the effect more pernicious, is, that all
proportion is lost; it were dis-proportion enough for the Servants good, to be
preferred before the Masters; but yet it is a greater extreme, when a little
good of the Servant shall carry things against the great good of the Masters.
And yet that is the case of bad Officers, Treasurers, Ambassadors, Generals,
and other false and corrupt Servants, which set a Bias upon their Bowl, of
their own petty ends and envies, to the overthrow of their Masters great and
important Affairs. And for the most part, the Good which Servants receive, is
after the model of their own fortune; but the Hurt they sell for that Good, is
after the model of their Masters Fortune. And certainly it is the nature of
extreme Self-Lovers, as they will set an House on fire, if it were but to roast
their eggs: And yet these men many times hold credit with their Masters,
because their study is but to please them, and profit Themselves; and for
either respect they will abandon the good of their Affairs.

Wisdom for a Man's self is in many branches thereof a depraved thing. It is
the Wisdom of Rats, that will be sure to leave the House sometime before it
falls. It is the Wisdom of the Fox, that thrusts out the Badger, who dug and
made room for him. It is the Wisdom of Crocodiles, that shed tears when they
would devour. But that which is specially to be noted, is, that those which (as
Cicero says of Pompey) are, Sui amantes sine rivali, are many times
unfortunate. And whereas they have all their time sacrificed to Themselves,
they become in the end themselves Sacrifices to the Inconstancy of Fortune,
whose wings they thought by their Self-Wisdom to have pinnioned.

XXIV. Of Innovation.
AS the births of living Creatures at first are ill shapen, so are all
Innovations, which are the births of Time. Yet notwithstanding, as those that
first bring Honor into their Family, are commonly more worthy than most that
succeed: So the first Precedent (if it be good) is seldom attained by
imitation. For Ill to Man's nature, as it stands perverted, has a natural
motion, strongest in continuance: But Good as a forced motion, strongest at
first. Surely every Medicine is an Innovation; and he that will not apply new
Remedies, must expect new Evils: for Time is the greatest Innovator. And if
Time of course alter things to the worse, and Wisdom and Counsel shall not
alter them to the better, what shall be the end? It is true, that what is
settled by custom, though it be not good, yet at least it is fit. And those
things which have long gone together are as it were confederate within
themselves, whereas new things piece not so well: But though they help by their
utility, yet, they trouble by their Inconformity. Besides, they are like
strangers, more admired, and less favored. All this is true, if Time stood
still; which contrariwise moves so round, that a froward retention of custom
is as turbulent a thing, as an Innovation: and they that reverence too much old
times, are but a scorn to the new. It were good therefore, that men in their
Innovations would follow the example of Time it self; which indeed Innovateth
greatly, but quietly, and by degrees, scarce to be perceived: for otherwise
whatsoever is new, is unlooked for; and ever it mends some, and pairs other:
And he that is helped, takes it for a Fortune, and thanks the Time; and he that
is hurt, for a Wrong, and imputes it to the Author. It is good also, not to
try experiments in States, except the necessity be urgent, or the utility be
evident; and well to beware, that it be the Reformation that draws on the
Change, and not the desire of Change that pretends the Reformation. And
lastly, that the Novelty, though it be not rejected, yet be held for a suspect:
And as the Scripture says, That we make a stand upon the ancient way, and then
look about us, and discover what is the straight and right way, and so to walk
in it.

XXV. Of Dispatch.
AFfected Dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to business that can be.
It is like that which the Physicians call Pre-digestion, or Hasty Digestion,
which is sure to fill the Body full of Crudities, and secret seeds of Diseases.
Therefore measure not dispatch by the times of sitting, but by the advancement
of the business. And as in Races, it is not the large Stride, or high Lift that
makes the Speed; so in business, the keeping close to the matter, and not
taking of it too much at once, procures Dispatch. It is the care of some only
to come off speedily for the time, or to contrive some false periods of
business, because they may seem Men of Dispatch. But it is one thing to
abbreviate by contracting, another by cutting off; and business so handled at
several sittings or meetings, goes commonly backward or forward in an unsteady
manner. I knew a Wise Man, that had it for a byword, when he saw men hasten to
a Conclusion; Stay a little, that we may make an end the sooner.

On the other side, True Dispatch is a rich thing. For Time is the measure of
Business, as Money is of Wares; and business is bought at a dear hand, where
there is small Dispatch. The Spartans and Spaniards have been noted to be of
small Dispatch, Mivenga la Muerte de Spagna, Let my death come from Spain, for
then it will be sure to be long in coming.

Give good hearing to those that give the first Information in Business; and
rather direct them in the beginning, than interrupt them in the continuance of
their Speeches: for he that is put out of his own order, will go forward and
backward, and more tedious while he waits upon his memory, than he could have
been, if he had gone on in his own course. But sometimes it is seen, that the
Moderator is more troublesome than the Actor.

Iterations are commonly loss of time; but there is no such gain of time, as to
iterate often the State of the Question; for it chaseth away many a frivolous
Speech as it is coming forth. Long and curious Speeches are as fit for
Dispatch, as a Robe or Mantle with a long train is for a Race.

Prefaces, and Passages, and Excusations, and other Speeches of reference to
the Person, are great wasters of time; and though they seem to proceed of
modesty, they are bravery. Yet beware of being too material, when there is any
impediment or obstruction in men's Wills; for pre-occupation of mind ever
requires preface of Speech, like a fomentation to make the unguent enter.

Above all things, Order, and Distribution, and Singling out of Parts, is the
life of Dispatch: so as the Distribution be not too subtle; for he that both
not divide, will never enter well into business: and he that divides too much
will never come out of it clearly. To choose time, is to save time, and an
unseasonable motion is but beating the Air. There be three parts of Business;
the Preparation, the Debate or Examination, and the Perfection; whereof if you
look for Dispatch, let the middle only be the work of many, and the first and
last the work of few. The proceeding upon somewhat conceived in writing, does
for the most part facilitate Dispatch: for though it should be wholly rejected,
yet that Negative is more pregnant of direction, than an Indefinite; as Ashes
are more generative than Dust.

XXVI. Of seeming Wise.
IT has been an opinion, that the French are wiser than they seem, and the
Spaniards seem wiser than they are. But howsoever it be between Nations,
certainly it is so between Man and Man. For as the Apostle says of Godliness,
Having a show of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; so certainly there
are in points of wisdom and sufficiency, that to do nothing or little very
solemnly; Magno conatu nugas. It is a ridiculous thing, and fit for a Satyr, to
persons of judgment, to see what shifts these Formalists have, and what
prospectives to make Superficies to seem Body, that has depth and bulk. Some
are so close reserved, as they will not show their Wares, but by a dark light;
and seem always to keep back somewhat: And when they know within themselves,
they speak of that they do not well know, would nevertheless seem to others, to
know of that which they may not well speak. Some help themselves with
countenance and gesture, and are wise by Signs; as Cicero says of Piso, that
when he answered him, he fetched one of his Brows up to his Forehead, and bent
the other down to his Chin: Respondes, altero ad Frontem sublato, altero ad
Mentum depresso supercilio, crudelitatem tibi non placere. Some think to bear
it, by speaking a great word, and being pertemptory; and go on, and take by
admittance that which they cannot make good. Some, whatsoever is beyond their
reach, will seem to despise or make light of it, as impertinent or curious, and
so will have their ignorance seem Judgment. Some are never without a
difference, and commonly by amusing men with a subtilty, blanch the matter; of
whom A. Gellius says, Hominem delirum qui verborum minutiis rerum frangit
pondera. Of which kind also Plato in his Protagoras brings in Prodicus in
scorn, and makes him make a Speech, that consists of distinctions from the
beginning to the end. Generally such men in all deliberations find ease to be
of the Negative side, and affect a credit to object and foretell difficulties:
For when Propositions are denied, there is an end of them; but if they be
allowed, it requires a new work; which false point of wisdom is the bane of
business. To conclude, there is no decaying Merchant, or inward Beggar, has so
many tricks to uphold the credit of their Wealth, as these empty Persons have
to maintain the credit of their sufficiency. Seeming Wise Men may make shift to
get opinion, but let no man choose them for employment; for certainly you were
better take for business a man somewhat absurd, than over-formal.

XXVII. Of Friendship.
IT had been hard for him that spoke it, to have put more truth and untruth
together in few words, than in that Speech, Whosoever is delighted in solitude,
is either a wild Beast, or a God. For it is most true, that a natural and
secret hatred, and aversation toward Society in any Man, has somewhat of the
savage Beast; but it is most untrue, that it should have any character at all
of the Divine Nature, except it proceed not out of a pleasure in Solitude, but
out of a love and desire to sequester a man's self for a higher conversation;
such as is found to have been falsely and feignedly in some of the Heathen, as
Epimenides the Candian, Numa the Roman, Empedocles the Sicilian, and Apollonius
of Tyana; and truly and really in diverse of the ancient Hermits and Holy
Fathers of the Church. But little do men perceive what Solitude is, and how far
it extends: for a Crown is not Company, and Faces are but a Gallery of
Pictures, and Talk but a Thinking Cymbal, where there is no Love. The Latin
Adage meets with it a little, Magna Civitas, magna solitudo; because in a
great Town Friends are scattered, so that there is not that fellowship, for the
most part, which is in less Neighbourhoods. But we may go further, and affirm
most truly, that is a mere and miserable solitude to want Friends, without
which the World is but a Wilderness: and even in this Sense also of Solitude,
whosoever in the Frame of his Nature and Affections is unfit for Friendship, he
takes it of the Beast, and not from Humanity.

A Principal Fruit of Friendship is, the Ease and Discharge of the Fullness and
Swellings of the Heart, which Passions of all kinds do cause and induce. We
know Diseases of Stoppings and Suffocations are the most dangerous in the Body,
and it is not much otherwise in Mind: You may take Sarza to open the Liver,
Steel to open the Spleen, Flower of Sulphur for the Lungs, Castoreum for the
Brain; but no Receipt opens the Heart, but a true Friend, to whom you may
impart Griefs, Joys, Fears, Hopes, Suspicions, Counsels, and whatsoever lies
upon the Heart to oppress it, in a kind of Civil Shrift or Confession.

It is a strange thing to observe, how high a Rate great Kings and Monarchs do
set upon this Fruit of Friendship whereof we speak; so great, as they purchase
it many times at the hazard of their own Safety and Greatness. For Princes, in
regard of the distance of their Fortune from that of their Subjects and
Servant, cannot gather this Fruit except (to make themselves capable thereof)
they raise some Persons to be, as (...) were, Companions, and almost Equals to
themselves, which many times sorteth to Inconvenience. The modern Languages
give unto such Persons the name of Favorites or Privadoes, as if it were
matter of Grace o^ Conversation. But the Poman name attaineth the true Use and
Cause thereof, naming them (...) Curarum; for it is that which tyeth (...)* And
we see plainly that this has been done, not by weak and passionate Princes
only, but by the Wisest* and most Politic that ever reigned: who have
oftentimes joined to themselves some of their Servants, whom both themselves
have called Friends, and allowed others likewise to call them in the same
manner, using the word which is received between private men.

L. Sylla, when he commanded Rome, raised Pompey (after surnamed the Great) to
that Height, that Pompey vaunted himself for Sylla's Over-match: for when he
had carried the Consulship for a friend of his against the pursuit of Sylla,
and that Sylla did a little resen^ thereat, and began to speak great, Pompey
turned upon him again, and in effect bad him be quiet; For th^^ more men adored
the Sunrising than the Sunsetting. With Julius, Decius Brutus had obtained
that Interest, as he set him down in his Testament, for Heir in Remainder after
his Nephew. And this was the man that had power with him, to draw him forth to
his Death. For when Caesar would have discharged the Senate, in regard of some
ill presages, and especially a Dream of Calpurnia; This man lifted him gently
by the Arm out of his Chair, telling him, he hoped he would not dismiss the
Senate, till his Wife had dreamed a better Dream. And it seems his favor was
so great, as Antonius in a Letter which is recited verbatim in one of Cicero's
Philippiques, called him Venefica, Witch; as if he had enchanted Caesar.
Augustus raised Agrippa (though of mean Birth) to that Height, as when he
consulted with Moecenas about the Marriage of his Daughter Julia, Moecenas took
the Liberty to tell him, That he must either marry his Daughter to Agrippa, or
take away his Life; there was no third way, he had made him so great. With
Tiberius Caesar, Sejanus had ascended to that Height, as they two were termed
and reckoned as a pair of Friends. Tiberius in a Letter to him, says, Hac pro
Amicitia nostra non occultavi; and the whole Senate dedicated an Altar to
Friendship, as to a Goddess, in respect of the great Dearness of Friendship
between them two. The like or more was between Septimius Severus and
Plantianus; for he forced his eldest Son to marry the Daughter of Plantianus,
and would maintain Plantianus in doing affronts to his Son, and did write also
in a Letter to the Senate these words; I love the man so well, as I wish he may
over love me. Now if these Princes had been as a Trajan, or a Marcus Aurelius,
a Man might have thought, that this had proceeded of an abundant Goodness of
Nature; but being men so Wise, of such strength and severity of Mind, and so
extreme Lovers of themselves, as all these were; it proves most plainly, that
they found their own Felicity (though as great as ever happened to mortal man)
but as an half Piece, except they might have a Friend to make it Entire; and
yet, which is more, they were Princes that had Wives, Sons, Nephews, and yet
all these could not supply the Comfort of Friendship.

It is not to be forgotten, what Commines observes of his Master, Duke Charles
the Hardy; namely, That he would communicate his Secrets with none; and least
of all those Secrets which troubled him most. Whereupon he goes on, and says,
that toward his latter time; That closeness did impair, and a little perish
his understanding. Surely, Commines might have made the same Judgment also, if
it had pleased him, of his second Master, Lewis the Eleventh, whose Closeness
was indeed his Tormentor. The Parable of Pythagoras is dark, but true, Cor ne
edito, Eat not the Heart. Certainly if a man would give it a hard Phrase, those
that want Friends to open themselves unto, are Cannibals of their own Hearts.
But one thing is most admirable, (wherewith I will conclude this first Fruit of
Friendship,) which is, That this Communicating of a Man's Self to a Friend,
works two contrary effects; for it redoubleth Joys, and cutteth Griefs in
Halfs; for there is no man that imparteth his Joys to his Friend, but he Joyeth
the more; and no man that imparteth his Griefs to his Friend, but he grieveth
the less. So that it is in truth an Operation upon a Man's mind of like virtue,
as the Alchymists use to attribute to their Stone for Man's Body, that it
works all contrary effects, but still to the Good and Benefit of Nature; but
yet without bringing in the Aid of Alchymists, there is a manifest Image of
this in the ordinary course of Nature: For in Bodies Union strengthens and
cherishes any natural Action; and on the other side, weakneth and dulleth any
violent Imperssion; and even so it is of Minds.

The second Fruit of Friendship is Healthful and Sovereign for the
Understanding, as the first is for the Affections: for Friendship makes indeed
a fair Day in the Affections from Storm and Tempests; but it makes Daylight in
the Affections from Tempests; but it makes Daylight in the Understanding out
of Darkness and Confusion of Thoughts. Neither is this to be understood only of
Faithful Counsel which a man receives from his Friend: but before you come to
that, certain it is, that whosoever has his Mind fraught with many Thoughts,
his Wits and Understanding do clarify and break up in the Communicating and
Discoursing with another; he tosseth his Thoughts more easily, he marshalleth
them more orderly, he sees how they look when they are turned into words.
Finally, he waxes wiser than Himself; and that more by an hours Discourse,
than by a days Meditation. It was well said by Themistocles to the King of
Persia, That Speech was like Cloth of Arras opened and put abroad; whereby the
Imagery does appear in Figure, whereas in Thoughts they lie but as in Packs.
Neither is this second Fruit of Friendship, in opening the Understanding,
restrained only to such Friends as are able to give a Man Counsel; (they indeed
are best) but even without that a Man learneth of himself, and brings his own
Thoughts to Light, and whetteth his Wits as against a Stone, which its self
cuts not. In a word, a Man were better relate himself to a Statue or Picture,
than to suffer his Thoughts to pass in smother.

And now, to make this second Fruit of Friendship complete, that other Point
which lies open, and falls within Vulgar Observation, which is Faithful
Counsel from a Friend. Heraclitus says well in one of his Aenigma's; Dry Light
is ever the best. And certain it is, that the Light that a Man receives by
Counsel from another, is drier and purer than that which comes from his own
Understanding and Judgment, which is ever infused and drenched in his
Affections and Customs, so as there is as much difference between the Counsel
that a Friend gives, and that a man gives himself, as there is between the
Counsel of a Friend, and of a Flatterer; for there is no such Flatterer as in a
Man's Self; and there is no such remedy against Flattery of a man's self, as
the liberty of a Friend. Counsel is of two sorts; the one concerning Manners,
the other concerning Business, For the first; the best preservative to keep the
Mind in Health, is the faithful Admonition of a Friend. The calling of a Man's
self to a strict account is a Medicine sometime too piercing and Corrosive.
Reading good Books of Morality, is a little Flat and Dead. Observing our Faults
in others, is sometimes unproper for our case. But the best Receipt (best, I
say) to work, and best to take, is the Admonition of a Friend. It is a strange
thing to behold, what gross Errors, and extreme absurdities many (especially of
the greater sort) do commit, for want of a Friend to tell them of them, to the
great damage both of their Fame and Fortune: for, as St. James says, they were
as Men that look sometimes into a Glass, and presently forget their own shape
and favor. As for Business, a man may think, if he will, that two Eyes see no
more than one; or that a Gamester sees always more than a Looker on; or that a
Man in Anger is as wise as he that has said over the four and twenty Letters;
or that a Musket may be shot off as well upon the Arm, as upon a Rest; and such
other fond and high Imaginations, to think himself All in All. But when all is
done, the help of good Counsel is that which sets Business straight; and if
any man think that he will take Counsel, but it shall be by pieces, asking
Counsel in one business of one man, and in another business of another man; it
is well, (that is to say, better perhaps than if he asked none at all) but he
runs two dangers; one, that he shall not faithfully be Counseled; for it is
a rare thing, except it be from a perfect and entire Friend, to have Counsel
given, but such as shall be bowed and crooked to some ends, which he has that
gives it. The other, that he shall have Counsel given, hurtful and unsafe,
(though with good meaning) and mixed; partly of mischief, and partly of remedy:
even as if you would call a Physician, that is thought good for the Cure of the
Disease you complain of, but is unacquainted with your Body; and therefore may
put you in a way for present Cure, but overthrows your Health in some other
kind, and so cure the Disease, and kill the Patient. But a Friend that is
wholly acquainted with a Man's Estate, will beware by furthering any present
Business, how he dasheth upon other Inconvenience; and therefore rests not upon
scattered Counsels, for they will rather distract and mis-lead, than settle and
direct.

After these two noble Fruits of Friendship, (Peace in the Affections, and
Support of the Judgment) follows the last Fruit which is like the
Pomegranate, full of many kernels; I mean Aid, and Bearing a part in all
Actions and Occasions. Here the best way to represent to the life the manifold
use of Friendship, is to cast and see, how many things there are, which a man
cannot do himself; and then it will appear, that it was a sparing Speech of the
Ancients, to say, That a Friend is another himself; for that a Friend is far
more than himself. Men have their time, and die many times in desire of some
things, which they principally take to heart; The bestowing of a Child, the
finishing of a work, or the like. If a Man have a true Friend, he may rest
almost secure, that the care of those things will continue after him: so that a
Man has as it were two Lives in his desires. A Man has a Body, and that Body
is confined to a place; but where Friendship is, all Offices of Life are as it
were granted to him and his Deputy; for he may exercise them by his Friend. How
many things are there, which a Man cannot, with any face or comeliness, say or
do himself? A man can scarce allege his own merits with modesty, much less
extol them: A man cannot sometimes brook to supplicate or beg; and a number of
the like. But all these things are graceful in a Friend's mouth, which are
blushing in a man's own. So again, a man's Person has many proper Relations,
which he cannot put off. A man cannot speak to his Son, but as a Father; to his
Wife but as a Husband; to his Enemy, but upon terms. Whereas a Friend may speak
as the case requires and not as it sorteth with the Person: But to enumerate
these things were endless: I have given the Rule, where a man cannot fitly play
his own part: If he have not a Friend, he may quit the Stage.

XXVIII. Of Expense.
RICHES are for spending, and spending for Honor and good Actions: Therefore
Extraordinary Expense must be limited by the worth of the occasion. For
Voluntary Undoing may be as well for a man's Country, as for the Kingdom of
Heaven, but Ordinary Expense ought to be limited by a Man's Estate, and
governed with such regard, as it be within his compass, and not subject to
deceit and abuse of Servants, and ordered to the best show, that the Bills may
be less than the Estimation abroad. Certainly, if a man will keep but of even
hand, his Ordinary Expenses ought to be but to the half of his Receipts: And if
he think to wax Rich, but to the third part. It is no baseness for the greatest
to descend and look into their own Estate. Some forbear it, not upon negligence
alone, but doubting to bring themselves into melancholy, in respect they shall
find it broken; but Wounds cannot be cured without searching. He that cannot
look into his own Estate at all, had need both choose well those whom he
employeth, and change them oftener; for new are more timorous, and less subtle.
He that can look into his Estate but seldom, it behooves him to turn all to
certainty. A man had need, if he be plentiful in some kind of Expense, to be as
saving again in some other: as if he be plentiful in Diet, to be saving in
Apparel: If he be plentiful in the Hall, to be saving in the Stable, and the
like. For he that is plentiful in Expenses of all kinds, will hardly be
preserved from decay. In clearing of a man's Estate, he may as well hurt
himself, in being too sudden, as in letting it run on too long. For hasty
Selling is commonly as disadvantageous as Interest. Besides, he that clears at
once will relapse; for finding himself out of streights, he will revert to his
customs: But he that clears by degrees, induces a habit of frugality, and
gains as well upon his mind as upon his Estate. Certainly, who has a State
to repair, may not despise small things: and commonly it is less dishonorable
to abridge petty Charges, than to stoop to petty Gettings. A man ought warily
to begin Charges, which once begun will continue; but in matters that return
not, he may be more magnificent.

XXIX. Of the true Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates.
THE Speech of Themistocles the Athenian, which was haughty and arrogant, in
taking so much to himself, had been a grave and wise observation and censure,
applied at large to others, Desired at a Feast to touch a Lute, he said, He
could not fiddle, but yet he could make a small Town a great City. These words,
(helped a little with a Metaphor) may express two differing abilities in those
that deal in business of Estate. For if a true Survey be taken of Counselors
and Statesmen, there may be found (though rarely) those which can make a small
State great, and yet cannot fiddle: As on the other side, there will be found a
great many that can fiddle very cunningly, but yet are so far from being able
to make a small State great, as their Gift lies the other way, to bring a
great and flourishing Estate to ruin and decay. And certainly those degenerate
Arts and Shifts, whereby many Counselors and Governors gain both favor with
their Masters, and estimation with the Vulgar, deserve no better name than
Fidling, being things rather pleasing for the time, and graceful to themselves
only, than tending to the weal and advancement to the State which they serve.
There are also (no doubt) Counselors and Governors which may be held
sufficient (Negotiis pares) able to manage Affairs, and to keep them from
Precipices, and manifest inconveniences, which nevertheless are far from the
ability to raise and amplify an Estate in power, means, and fortune. But be
the Workmen what they may be, let us speak of the Work; That is, the true
Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates, and the Means thereof. An Argument fit for
Great and Mighty Princes to have in their hand, to the end, that neither by
over-measuring their Forces, they leese themselves in vain Enterprises; nor on
the other side, by undervaluing them, they descend to fearful and pusillanimous
Counsels.

The Greatness of an Estate in Bulk and Territory, does fall under measure; and
the Greatness of Finances and Revenue, does fall under computation. The
Population may appear by Musters, and the Number and Greatness of Cities and
Towns by Cards and Maps. But yet there is not any thing among Civil Affairs,
more subject to error, than the right valuation, and true judgment, concerning
the Power and Forces of an Estate.

The Kingdom of Heaven is compared not to any great Kernel or Nut, but to a
Grain of Mustard Seed, which is one of the least Grains, but has in it a
property and Spirit hastily to get up and spread. So are their States great in
Territory, and yet not apt to Enlarge or Command; and some that have but a
small dimension of Stem, and yet apt to be the Foundations of great Monarchies.

Walled Towns, Stored Arsenals and Armouries, Goodly Races of Horse, Chariots
of War, Elephants, Ordnance, Artillery, and the like: All this is but a Sheep
in a Lions skin, except the breed and disposition of the People be stout and
warlike. Nay, Number (it self) in Armies imports not much, where the People
is of weak courage: For, (as Virgil says) It never troubles a Wolf, how many
the sheep be. The Army of the Persians, in the Plains of Arbela, was such a
vast Sea of People, as it did somewhat astonish the Commanders in Alexander's
Army; who came to him therefore, and wished him to set upon them by night; but
he answered, He would not pilfer the Victory: And the defeat was easy.

When Tigranes the Armenian, being encamped upon a Hill with 400000 Men,
discovered the Army of the Romans, being not above 14000 marching toward him,
he made himself merry with it, and said, Yonder Men are too many for an
Embassage, and too few for a Fight: But before the Sun set, he found them
enough to give him the Chase with infinite slaughter. Many are the examples of
great odds between Number and Courage; so that a man may truly make a judgment,
That the principal point of Greatness in any State, is, to have a Race of
Military men. Neither is Money the Sinews of War, (as it is trivially said)
where the Sinews of Men's Arms in Base and Effeminative People are failing. For
Solon said well to Croessus, (when in ostentation he showed him his Gold) Sir,
If any other come, that has better Iron than you, he will be Master of all
this Gold. Therefore let any Prince or State think soberly of his Forces,
except his Militia of Natives be of good and valiant Soldiers. And let Princes
on the other side, that have Subjects of Martial disposition, know their own
strength, unless they be otherwise wanting unto themselves. As for Mercenary
Forces, (which is the Help in this Case) all examples show, that whatsoever
Estate or Prince does rest upon them, He may spread his Feathers for a time,
but he will mew them soon after.

The Blessing of Judas and Issachar will never meet, That the same People or
Nation should be both the Lion^ whelp, and Ass between Burdens: Neither will
it be, that a People over-laid with Taxes, should ever become Valiant and
Martial. It is true, that Taxes levied by Consent of the State, do abate men's
Courage less, as it has been seen notably in the Excises of the Low Countries;
and in some degree, in the Subsidies of England: for you must note, that we
speak now of the Heart, and not of the Purse. So that although the same Tribute
and Tax, laid by Consent, or by Imposing, be all one to the Purse, yet it works
diversely upon the Courage: so that you may conclude, That no People,
overcharged with Tribute, is fit for Empire.

Let States that aim at Greatness take heed how their Nobility and Gentlemen do
multiply too fast: For that makes the Common Subject grow to be a Peasant, and
a base Swain, driven out of Heart, and in effect but a Gentleman's Laborour:
even as you may see in Coppice Woods. If you leave your Stadles too thick, you
shall never have clean Underwood, but Shrubs and Bushes. So in Countries, if
the Gentlemen be too many, the Commons will be base: and you will bring it to
that, that not the hundredth Poll will be fit for an Helmet; especially as to
the Infantry, which is the Nerve of an Army; and so there will be great
Population and little Strength. This which I speak of, has been no where
better seen, than by comparing of England and France: whereof England, though
far less in Territory and Population has been nevertheless an Over-match; in
regard the Middle People of England make good Soldiers, which the Peasants of
France do not. And herein the device of King Henry the Seventh (whereof I have
spoken largely in the History of his Life) was Profound and Admirable in making
Farms and Houses of Husbandry, of a Standard: that is, maintained with such a
Proportion of Land unto them, as may breed a subject to live in Convenient
Plenty, and no Servile Condition; and to keep the Plough in the hands of the
Owners and not mere Hirelings. And thus indeed you shall attain to Virgil's
Character which he gives to Ancient Italy

-- Terra potens armisque atque ubere Gleba. Neither is that State (which for
any thing I know, is almost peculiar to England, and hardly to be found any
where else, except it be perhaps in Poland) to be passed over; I mean the State
of Free Servants and Attendants upon Noblemen and Gentlemen, which are no ways
inferior to the Yeomanry for Arms: and therefore, out of all Question, the
Spendor and Magnificence, and great Retinues, and Hospitality of Noblemen and
Gentlemen received into custom, does much conduce unto Martial Greatness:
Whereas contrariwise, the close and reserving Living of Noblemen and Gentlemen,
causes a Penury of Military Forces.

By all means it is to be procured, that the Trunk of Nebuchadnezzar's Tree of
Monarchy, be great enough to bear the Branches, and the Boughs; that is, That
the Natural Subjects of the Crown or State, bear a sufficient Proportion to the
Stranger Subjects that they govern. Therefore all States that are liberal of
Naturalization toward Strangers are fit for Empire. For to think that an
Handful of People can with the greatest Courage and Policy in the World,
embrace too large extent of Dominion, it may hold for a time, but it will fail
suddenly. The Spartans were a nice People in point of Naturalization; whereby,
while they kept their compass they stood firm; but when they did spread, and
their Boughs were become too great for their Stem, they became a Wind-fall upon
the sudden. Never any State was in this Point so open to receive Strangers into
their Body, as were the Romans, therefore it sorted with them accordingly: for
they grew to the greatest Monarchy. Their manner was to grant Naturalization,
(which they called Jus Civitatis) and to grant it in the highest Degree; that
is, not only Jus Commercii, Jus Connubii, Jus Haereditatis, but also Jus
suffragii, and Jus Honorum. And this, not to singular Persons alone, but
likewise to whole Families; yea, to Cities, and sometimes to Nations. Add to
this their Custom of Plantation of Colonies, whereby the Roman Plant was
removed into the Soil of other Nations; and putting both Constitutions
together, you will say, that it was not the Romans that spread upon the World,
but it was the World that spread upon the Romans; and that was the sure Way of
Greatness. I have marvelled sometimes at Spain, how they clasp and contain so
large Dominions with so few natural Spaniards: but sure the whole Compass of
Spain is a very great Body of a Tree, far above Rome and Sparta at the first:
and besides, though they have not had that usage to Naturalize liberally, yet
they have that which is next to it; that is, To employ, almost indifferently,
all Nations in their Militia of ordinary Soldiers: yea, and sometimes in their
Highest Commands. Nay, it seems at this instant, they are sensible of this
want of Natives, as by the Pragmatical Sanction, now published, appears.

It is certain, that Sedentary and Within-door Arts, and delicate Manufactures,
(that require rather the Finger, than the Arm) have in their Nature a
Contrariety to a Military disposition. And generally all Warlike People are a
little idle, and love Danger better than Travel: neither must they be too much
broken of it, if they shall be preserved in vigor. Therefore it was great
Advantage in the Ancient States of Sparta, Athens, Rome, and others, that they
had the use of Slaves, which commonly did rid those Manufactures: but that is
abolished in greatest part by the Christian Law. That which comes nearest to
it, is to leave those Arts chiefly to Strangers (which for that purpose are the
more easily to be received) and to contain the principal Bulk of the vulgar
Natives within those three kinds; Tillers of the Ground, Free Servants, and
Handicrafts Men of strong and manly Arts; as Smiths, Masons, Carpenters, etc.
not rekoning professed Soldiers.

But above all, for Empire and Greatness it imports most, that a Nation do
profess Arms as their principal Honor: Study and Occupation: for the things
which we formerly have spoken of, are but Habilitations toward Arms; and what
is Habilitation, without Intention and Act? Romulus after his death (as they
report or feign) sent a present to the Romans, that above all they should
intend Arms, and then they should prove the greatest Empire of the world. The
fabric of the State of Sparta was wholly (though not wisely) framed and
composed to that Scope and End. The Persians and Macedonians had it for a
flash. The Galls, Germans, Goths, Saxons, Normans, and others had it for a
time. The Turks have it at this day, though in great Declination. Of Christian
Europe, they that have it, are in effect only the Spaniards. But it is so
plain, That every Man profits in that he most intends, that it needs not
to be stood upon. It is enough to point at it, that no Nation which does not
directly profess Arms, may look to have Greatness fall into their mouths. And
on the other side, it is a most certain Oracle of Time, that those States that
continue long in that profession (as the Romans and Turks principally have
done) do wonders; and those that have professed Arms but for an Age, have
notwithstanding commonly attained that Greatness in that Age, which maintained
them long after, when their Profession and exercise of Arms are grown to decay.

Incident to this Point is, for a State to have those Laws or Customs which may
reach forth unto them just Occasions (as may be pretended) of War: for there is
that justice imprinted in the Nature of Men, that they enter not upon Wars
(whereof so many Calamities do ensue) but upon some, or at least specious
Grounds and Quarrels. The Turk has at hand, for cause of War, the Propagation
of his Law or Sect, a Quarrel that he may always command. The Romans, though
they esteemed the extending the Limits of their Empire to be great Honor to
their Generals, when it was done; yet they never rested upon that alone to
begin a War. First therefore, let Nations that pretend to Greatness, have this;
that they be sensible of wrongs, either upon Borders, Merchants, or Politic
Ministers, and that they sit not too long upon a Provocation. Secondly, let
them be pressed, and ready to give Aids and Succors to their Confederates; as it
ever was with the Romans: Insomuch as if the Confederate had Leagues defensive
with diverse others States, and upon Invasion offered, did deplore their Aids
severally; yet the Romans would ever be the foremost, and leave it to none
other to have the Honor. As for the Wars which were anciently made on the
behalf of a kind of Party, or tacit Conformity of Estate, I do not well say,
how they may be well justified: As when the Romans made a War for the Liberty
of Graecia; or when the La^edaemonians and Athenians made Wars to set up or
pull down Democracies and Oligarchies; or when Wars were made by Foreigners,
under the pretense of Justice or Protection, to deliver the Subjects of others
from Tyranny and Oppression, and the like. Let it suffice, That no Estate
expect to be Great, that is not awake, upon any just Occasion of Arming.

No Body can be Healthful without Exercise, Neither Natural Body, nor Politic;
and certainly to a Kingdom or Estate, a just and Honorable War is the true
Exercise. A Civil War indeed is like the Heat of a Fever; but a Foreign War is
like the Heat of Exercise, and serves to keep the Body in health: for in a
slothful Peace both Courages will effeminate, and Manners corrupt. But
howsoever it be for Happiness without all Question; for Greatness, it makes to
be still, for the most part in Arms; and the strength of a Veterane Army
(though it be a chargeable Business) always on Foot, is that which commonly
gives the Law, or at least the Reputation amongst all Neighbour-States; as may
well be seen in Spain, which has had in one part or other a Veterane Army,
almost continually, now by the space of sixscore years.

To be Master of the Sea, in an Abridgment of a Monarchy. Cicero writing to
Atticus, of Pompey his Preparation against Caesar, says, Consilium Pompeii
plane Themistocleum est; Putat enim qui Mari potitur, eum Rerum potiri. And
without doubt Pompey had tired out Caesar, if upon vain Confidence he had not
left that Way. We see the great effects of Battles by Sea. The Battle of Actium
decided the Empire of the World. The Battle of Lepanto arrested the Greatness
of the Turk. There be many examples, where Sea Fights have been Final to the
War: but this is when Princes or States have setup their Rest upon the Battles.
But thus much is certain, that he that commands the Sea, is at great liberty,
and may take as much, and as little of the War, as he will; whereas those that
be strongest by Land, are many times nevertheless in great streights. Surely at
this day, with us of Europe, the Vantage of strength at Sea (which is one of
the principal Dowries of this Kingdom of Great Britain) is great: both because
most of the Kingdoms of Europe are not merely Inland, but girt with the Sea,
most part of their Compass; and because the Wealth of both Indies seem in great
part but an Accessory to the Command of the Seas.

The Wars of Latter Ages seem to be made in the Dark, in respect of the Glory
and Honor which reflected upon Men from the Wars in Ancient Time. There be now
for Martial Encouragement, some Degrees and Orders of Chivalry, which
nevertheless are conferred promiscuously upon Soldiers, and no Soldiers; and
some Remembrance perhaps upon the Scutcheon; and some Hospitals for maimed
Soldiers, and such like things. But in Ancient Times, the Trophies erected upon
the place of the Victory; the Funeral Laudatives and Monuments for those that
died in the Wars; the Crowns and Garlands personal; the Style of Emperor, which
the great King of the World after borrowed; the Triumphs of the Generals upon
their Return; the great Donatives and Largesses upon the Disbanding of the
Armies, were things able to inflame all men's Courages. But above all, that of
the Triumph amongst the Romans, was not Pageant or Gaudary, but one of the
Wisest and Noblest Institutions that ever was: for it contained three things:
Honor to the General; Riches to the Treasury out of the Spoil; and Donatives
to the Army. But that Honor perhaps were not fit for Monarchies, except it be
in the Person of the Monarch himself, or his Sons; as it came to pass in the
times of the Roman Emperors, who did impropriate the Actual Triumphs to
themselves, and their Sons, for such Wars as they did atchieve in Persons; and
left only for Wars achieved by Subjects, some Triumphal Garments and Ensigns
to the General.

To conclude, No Man can, by Care taking (as the Scripture says) add a cubit
to his Stature, in this little Model of a Man's Body; but in the great Frame of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, it is in the power of Princes or Estates to add
Amplitude and Greatness to their Kingdoms. For by introducing such Ordinances,
Constitutions and Customs, as we have now touched, they may sow Greatness to
their Posterity and Succession. But these things are commonly not observed, but
left to take their chance.

XXX. Of Regiment of Health.
THERE is a Wisdom in this beyond the Rules of Physic: A Man's own observation
what he finds good of, and what he finds hurt of, is the best Physic to
preserve Health. But it is a safer conclusion to say, This agrees not well
with me, therefore I will not continue it, than this, I find no offense of
this, therefore I may use it. For strength of Nature in Youth passes over many
Excesses which are owing by a Man till his Age. Discern of the coming on of
years, and think not to do the same things still; for Age will not be defied.
Beware of sudden change in any great point of Diet; and if necessity enforce
it, fit the rest to it: For it is a secret both in Nature and State, that it is
safer to change many things than one. Examine thy Customs of Diet, Sleep,
Exercise, Apparel, and the like: And try in any thing thou shall judge hurtful,
to discontinue it by little and little; but so, as if thou do find any
inconvenience by the change, thou come back to it again: For it is hard to
distinguish that which is generally held good and wholesome, from that which is
good particularly, and fit for a man's own Body. To befree minded, and
cheerfully disposed at hours of Meat, and of Sleep, and of Exercise, is one of
the best precepts for long Life. As for the Passions and Studies of the Mind;
avoid envy, anxious Fears, Anger fretting inwards, subtle and knotty
Inquisitions, Joys, and Exhilarations in Excess, Sadness not communicated;
entertain Hopes, Mirth rather than Joy, variety of Delights, rather than
Surfeit of them, Wonder and Admiration, and therefore Novelties, Studies that
sill the mind with splendid and illustrious Objects, as Histories, Fables, and
Contemplations of Nature. If you fly Physic in Health altogether, it will be
too strange for your Body when you shall need it. If you make it too familiar,
it will work no extraordinary effect when Sickness comes. I commend rather
some Diet for certain Seasons, than frequent use of Physic, except it be grown
into a custom: For those Diets alter the Body more, and trouble it less.
Despise no new accident in your Body, but ask opinion of it. In Sickness
respect Health Principally, and in Health, Action: For those that put their
Bodies to endure in Healths may in most Sicknesses, which are not very sharp,
be cured only with Diet and tending. Celsus could never have spoken it as a
Physician, had he not been a wise Man withal, when he gives it for one of the
great Precepts of Health and Lasting, That a Man do vary, and enterchange
contraries, but with an inclination to the more benign extreme. Use Fasting and
full Eating, but rather full Eating; Watching and Sleep, but rather Sleep;
Sitting and Exercise, but rather Exercise, and the like: So shall Nature be
cherished, and yet taught Masteries. Physicians are some of them so pleasing,
and conformable to the humor of the Patient, as they press not the true cure
of the Disease; and some other are so regular, in proceeding according to Art
for the Disease, as they respect not sufficiently the condition of the Patient.
Take one of a middle temper, or if it may not be found in one Man, combine two
of either sort; and forget not to call as well the best acquainted with your
Body, as the best reputed of for his Faculty.

XXXI. Of Suspicion.
SUSPICIONS amongst thoughts are like Bats amongst Birds, they ever fly by
twilight. Certainly they are to be repressed, or at least well guarded; for
they cloud the Mind, they leese Friends, that they check with Business, whereby
Business cannot go on current and constantly. They dispose Kings to Tyranny,
Husbands to Jealousy, Wise Men to Irresolution and Melancholy. They are
defects, not in the Heart, but in the Brain; for they take place in the
stoutest Natures: As in the example of Henry the Seventh of England, there was
not a more Suspicious Man, nor a more Stout: And in such a composition they do
small hurt. For commonly they are not admitted, but with examination whether
they be likely or no; but in fearful Natures they gain ground too fast. There
is nothing makes a Man suspect much, more than to know little; and therefore
Men should remedy Suspicion, by procuring to know more, and not to keep their
Suspicions in smother. What would Men have? Do they think those they employ and
deal with are Saints? Do they not think they will have their own ends, and be
truer to themselves than to them? Therefore there is no better way to moderate
Suspicions, than to account upon such Suspicions as true, and yet to bridle
them as false. For so far a Man ought to make use of Suspicions, as to provide,
as if that should be true that he suspects, yet it may do him no hurt.
Suspicions that the mind of it self gathers are but Buzzes, but Suspicions that
are artificially nourished, and put into Men's heads by the tales and whispering
of others, have Stings Certainly the best means to clear the way in this same
Wood of Suspicions, is frankly to communicate them with the Party that he
suspects; for thereby he shall be sure to know more of the truth of them than
he did before; and withal, shall make that Party more circumspect, not to give
further cause of Suspicion. But this would not be done to Men of base Natures:
For they, if they find themselves once suspected, will never be true. The
Italians say, Sospetto licentia feda; as if Suspicion did give a Passport to
Faith: But it ought rather to kindle it, to discharge it self.

XXXII. Of Discourse.
SOME in their Discourse desire rather commendation of Wit, in being able to
hold all Arguments, than of Judgment in discerning what is true: As if it were
a praise to know what might be said, and not what should be thought. Some have
certain Common Places, and Themes, wherein they are good, and want variety;
which kind of Poverty is for the most part tedious, and when it is once
perceived, ridiculous. The honourablest part of Talk, is to give the Occasion,
again, to moderate and pass to somewhat else; for then a Man leads the Dance.
It is good in Discourse and Speech of Conversation, to vary and intermingle
Speech of the present occasion with Arguments, Tales with Reasons, asking of
Questions with telling of Opinions, and Jest with Earnest: For it is a dull
thing to Tire, and as we say now, to Jade any thing too far. As for Jest, there
be certain things which ought to be privileged from it; namely, Religion,
Matters of State, Great Persons, any Man's present Business of importance, and
any Case that deserves pity. Yet there be some that think their Wits have been
asleep, except they dart out somewhat that is piquant, and to the quick: That
is a vein which should be bridled.

Parce, Puer, stimulis, and fortius utere loris. And generally men ought to
find the difference between Saltness and Bitterness. Certainly he that has a
Satirical Vein, as he makes others afraid of his Wit, so he had need be afraid
of others Memory. He that questioneth much, shall learn much, and content much;
but especially if he apply his Questions to the skill of the Persons whom he
asks: For he shall give them occasion to please themselves in speaking, and
himself shall continually gather knowledge. But let his Questions not be
troublesome; for that is fit for a Poser: And let him be sure to leave other
Men their turns to speak. Nay, if there be any that would reign, and take up
all the time, let him find means to take them off, and to bring others on, as
Musicians use to do with those that dance too long Galliards. If you dissemble
sometimes your knowledge of that you are thought to know, you shall be thought
another time to know that you know not. Speech of a man's self ought to be
seldom, and well chosen. I knew one was wont to say in scorn, He must needs be
a Wise Man, he speaks so much of himself: And there is but one case, wherein a
Man may commend himself with good Grace, and that is, in commending Virtue in
another; especially if it be such a Virtue whereunto himself pretends. Speech
of touch toward others should be sparingly used: For Discourse ought to be as
a Field, without coming home to any Man. I knew two Noblemen of the west part
of England, whereof the one was given to Scoff, but kept ever Royal Cheer in
his House: The other would ask of those that had been at the others Table, Tell
truly, was there never a Flout or dry blow given? To which the Guest would
answer, Such and such a thing passed: The Lord would say, I thought he would
mar a good Dinner. Discretion of Speech is more than Eloquence; and to speak
agreeably to him with whom we deal, is more than to speak in good words, or in
good order. A good continued Speech, without a good Speech of Interlocution,
shows slowness; and a good Reply, or second Speech without a good settled
Speech, shows Shallowness and Weakness; as we see in Beasts, that those that
are weakest in the Course, are yet nimblest in the Turn; as it is betwixt the
Greyhound and the Hare. To use too many Circumstances e're one come to the
Matter, is wearisome; to use none at all, is blunt.

XXXIII. Of Plantations.
PLANTATIONS are amongst Ancient, Primitive, and Heroical Works. When the World
was young, it begat more Children; but now it is old, it begets fewer: for I
may justly account new Plantations to be the Children of former Kingdoms. I
like a Plantation in a pure Soil, that is, where People are not Displanted, to
the end, to Plant others; for else it is rather an Extirpation, than a
Plantation. Planting of Countries is like Planting of Woods; for you must make
account to lose almost Twenty years Profit, and expect your Recompense in the
end. For the principal thing that has been the destruction of most
Plantations, has been the base and hasty drawing of profit in the first years.
It is true, Speedy Profit is not to be neglected, as far as may stand with the
good of the Plantation, but no further. It is a shameful and unblessed thing,
to take the Scum of People, and wicked condemned Men, to be the People with
whom you Plant: and not only so, but it spoileth the Plantation; for they will
ever live like Rogues, and not fall to work, but be lazy, and do mischief, and
spend Victuals, and be quickly weary; and then certify over to their Country
to the discredit of the Plantation. The People wherewith you Plant, ought to be
Gardners, Plough-men, Laborers, Smiths, Carpenters, Joyners, Fishermen,
Fowlers, with some few Apothecaries, Surgeons, Cooks, and Bakers. In a Country
of Plantation, first look about what kind of Victual the Country yields of it
self to Hand; as Chestnuts, Walnuts, Pine-Apples, Olives, Dates, Plumbs,
Cherries, Wild-Honey, and the like, and make use of them. Then consider what
Victual, or Esculent things there are, which grow speedily, and within the
year; as Parsnips, Carrots, Turnips, Onions, Raddish, Artichoaks of Jerusalem,
Maiz, and the like. For Wheat, Barley, and Oats, they ask too much labor: But
with Pease and Beans you may begin, both because they ask less labor, and
because they serve for Meat as well as for Bread. And of Rice likewise comes a
great increase, and it is a kind of Meat. Above all, there ought to be brought
store of Biscuit, Oat-meal Flour, Meal, and the like, in the beginning, till
Bread may be had. For Beasts and Birds, take chiefly such as are least subject
to Diseases, and multiply fastest; as Swine, Goats, Cocks, Hens, Turkeys,
Geese, House Doves, and the like. The Victual in Plantations ought to be
expended, almost as in a besieged Town; that is, with a certain Allowance; and
let the main part of the Ground employed to Gardens or Corn, be to a common
stock, and to be laid in, and stored up, and then delivered out in Proportion,
besides some Spots of ground that any particular Person will manure for his own
private use. Consider likewise what Commodities the Soil, where the Plantation
is, does naturally yield, that they may some way help to defray the charge of
the Plantation: So it be not, as was said, to the untimely Prejudice of the
main business; as it has fared with Tobacco in Virginia. Wood commonly
abounds but too much, and therefore Timber is fit to be one. If there be Iron
Ore, and streams whereupon to set the Mills, Iron is a brave commodity where
Wood abounds. Making of Bay Salt, if the Climate be proper for it, would be
put in experience. Growing Silk likewise if any be, is a likely commodity.
Pitch and Tar, where store of Firs and Pines are, will not fail. So Drugs, and
Sweet Woods, where they are, cannot but yield great profit. Soap Ashes
likewise, and other things that may be thought of. But moil not too much under
Ground; for the hope of Mines is very uncertain, and uses to make the Planters
lazy in other things. For Government, let it be in the hands of one assisted
with some Counsel; and let them have commission to exercise Martial Laws with
some limitation. And above all, Let Men make that Profit of being in the
Wilderness, as they have God always, and his service before their eyes. Let not
the Government of the Plantation depend upon too many Counselors and
undertakers in the Country that Planteth, but upon a temperate number; and let
those be rather Noblemen and Gentlemen, than Merchants; for they look ever to
the present Gain. Let there be Freedoms for Custom, till the Plantation be of
Strength; and not only Freedom from Custom, but Freedom to carry their
Commodities, where they may make the best of them, except there be some special
cause of Caution. Cram not in People, by sending too fast, Company after
Company, but rather hearken how they waste, and send supplies proportionably;
but so, as the number may live well in the Plantation, and not by surcharge be
in penury. It has been a great endangering to the health of some Plantations,
that they have built along the Sea and Rivers in marish and unwholesome
Grounds. Therefore, though you begin there to avoid carriage, and other like
discommodities, yet build still rather upwards from the Streams, than along. It
concerns likewise the health of the Plantation, that they have good store of
Salt with them, that they may use it in their Victuals, when it shall be
necessary. If you Plant where Savages are, do not only entertain them with
trifles and gingles, but use them justly and graciously, with sufficient guard
nevertheless; and do not win their favor by helping them to invade their
Enemies, but for their defense it is not amiss. And send often of them over to
the Country that Plant, that they may see a better condition than their own,
and commend it when they return. When the Plantation grows to strength, then it
is time to Plant with Women as well as with Men, that the Plantation may spread
into Generations, and not be ever pieced from without. It is the sinfullest
thing in the World to forsake or destitute a Plantation once in forwardness;
for besides the dishonor, it is guiltiness of Blood of many commiserable
Persons.

XXXIV. Of Riches.
I Cannot call Riches better than the baggage of Virtue. The Roman word is
better, Impedimenta; for as the Baggage is to an Army, so is Riches to Virtue.
It cannot be spared, nor left behind, but it hinders the March: Yea, and the
care of it sometimes loses or disturbeth the Victory. Of great Riches there is
no real use, except it be in the Distribution, the rest is but conceit: So
says Solomon, Where much is there are many to consume it; and what has the
owner, but the sight of it with his eyes? The personal Fruition in any man
cannot reach to feel great Riches: There is a Custody of them, or a power of
Dole and Donative of them, or a Fame of them, but no solid use to the owner. Do
you not see what feigned Prices are set upon little Stones and Rarities? And
what works of Ostentation are undertaken, because there might seem to be some
use of great Riches? But then you will say, they may be of use to buy men out
of dangers or troubles: as Solomon says, Riches are a strong Hold in the
Imagination of the Rich Man. But this is excellently expressed, That it is in
Imagination, and not always in Fact: For certainly great Riches have sold more
Men than they have bought out. Seek not proud Riches, but such as thou may
get justly, use soberly, distribute cheerfully, and leave contentedly: Yet have
no Abstract nor Frierly contempt of them, but distinguish, as Cicero says well
of Rabirius Posthumus; In studio rei amplificandae apparebat, non Avaritiae
praedam, sed instrumentum Bonitatis, quaeri. Hearken also to Solomon, and
beware of hasty gathering of Riches: Qui festinat ad Divitias, non erit insons.
The Poets feign, that when Plutus (which is Riches) is sent from Jupiter, he
limps and goes slowly; but when he is sent from Pluto, he runs, and is swift of
foot; meaning, that Riches gotten by good means, and just labor, pace slowly:
But when they come by the death of others, (as by the course of inheritance,
Testaments, and the like) they come tumbling upon a Man. But it might be
applied likewise to Pluto, taking him for the Devil; for when Riches come from
the Devil (as by Fraud, and Oppression, and unjust means) they come upon Speed.
The Ways to enrich are many, and most of them foul; Parsimony is one of the
best, and yet is not innocent; for it withholdeth Men from works of Liberality
and Charity. The Improvement of the ground is the most natural obtaining of
Riches; for it is our Great Mothers Blessing, the Earths, but it is slow; and
yet where the Men of great wealth do stoop to Husbandry, it multiplieth Riches
exceedingly. I knew a Nobleman of England, that had the greatest Audits of any
Man in my time: A great Grasier, a great Sheep-Master, a great Timber-Man, a
great Collier, a great Corn-Master, a great Lead-Man, and so of Iron, and a
number of the like points of Husbandry; so as the Earth seemed a Sea to him in
respect of the perpetual Importation. It was truly observed by One, that
himself came very hardly to a little Riches, and very easily to great Riches;
for when a Man's stock is come to that, that he can expect the Prime of Markets,
and overcome those bargains, which for their greatness are few Men's money, and
be Partner in the industries of Younger Men, he cannot but increase mainly. The
Gains of ordinary Trades and Vocations are honest, and furthered by two things,
chiefly, by Diligence, and by a good Name, for good and fair dealing. But the
Grains of Bargains are of a more doubtful Nature, when Men shall wait upon
others Necessity, broke by Servants and Instruments to draw them on, put off
others cunningly that would be better Chapmen, and the like practices which are
crafty and naught. As for the Chopping of Bargains, when a Man buys, not to
hold, but to sell over again, that commonly grindeth double, both upon the
Seller and upon the Buyer. Sharings do greatly enrich, if the Hands be well
chosen that are trusted. Usury is the certainest means of Gain, though one of
the worst; as that whereby a Man does eat his Bread, In sudore vultus alieni:
And besides, does plow upon Sundays. But yet, certain though it be, it has
Flaws; for that the Scriveners and Brokers do value unsound Men to serve their
own turn. The Fortune, in being the first in an Invention, or in a Privilege,
does cause sometimes a wonderful overgrowth in Riches; as it was with the first
Sugar-Man in the Canaries: therefore if a Man can play the true Logician, to
have as well Judgment as Invention, he may do great matters, especially if the
Times be fit. He that rests upon Gains Certain, shall hardly grow to great
Riches; and he that puts all upon Adventures, does oftentimes break, and come
to Poverty: It is good therefore to guard Adventures with Certainties that may
uphold losses. Monopolies and Coemption of Wares for Resale, where they are not
restrained, are great means to enrich, especially if the Party have
intelligence what things are like to come into request, and to store himself
beforehand. Riches gotten by Service, though it be of the best Rise, yet when
they are gotten by Flattery, feeding Humors, and other servile Conditions,
they may be placed amongst the Worst. As for fishing for Testaments and
Executorships, (as Tacitus says of Seneca, Testamenta and Orbos tanquam
Indagine capi) it is yet worse, by how much men submit themselves to meaner
persons, than in Service. Believe not much them that seem to despise Riches;
for they despise them that despair of them, and none worse when they come to
them. Be not Penny-wise; Riches have Wings, and sometimes they fly away of
themselves; sometimes they must be set flying to bring in more. Men leave their
Riches either to their Kindred, or to the Public; and moderate Portions
prosper best in both. A great State left to an Heir, is as a Lure to all the
Birds of prey, round about to seize on him, if he be not the better established
in Years and Judgment. Likewise glorious Gifts and Foundations are like
Sacrifices without Salt, and but the Painted Sepulchers of Alms, which soon
will putrefie and corrupt inwardly: Therefore measure not thine advancements by
quantity, but frame them by measure; and defer not Charities till death: For
certainly if a man weigh it rightly, he that does so is rather liberal of
another man's, than of his own.

XXXV. Of Prophecies.
I MEAN not to speak of Divine Prophecies, nor of Heathen Oracles, nor of
Natural Predictions, but only of Prophecies that have been of certain Memory,
and from hidden Causes. Says the Pythonissa to Saul, To morrow thou and thy
Son shall be with me. Homer has these Verses, At domus Aeneae cunctis
dominabitur oris
Et nati natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis.
A Prophecy, as it seems, of the Roman Empire. Seneca, the Tragedian, has
these Verses. -- Venient Annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat Tellus, Tiphysque novos
Detegat orbs; nec sic terris
Ultima Thule:


A Prophecy of the Discovery of America. The Daughter of Polycrates dreamed,
that Jupiter bathed her Father, and Apollo anointed him; and it came to pass
that he was Crucified in an open Place, where the Sun made his Body run with
Sweat, and the Rain washed it. Philip of Macedon dreamed he sealed up his
Wife's Belly; whereby he did expound is that his Wife should be barren: But
Aristander the South-Sayer told him his Wife was with Child, because Men do not
use to seal Vessels that are empty. A Phantasm that appeared to M. Brutus in
his Tent, said to him, Philipps iterum me videbis. Tiberius said to Galba, Tu
quoque, Galba, degustabis Imperium. In Vespasian's time there went a Prophecy
in the East, that those that should come forth of Judea should reign over the
World: Which though it may be was meant of our Savior, yet Tacitus expounds it
of Vespasian. Domitian dreamed the night before he was slain, that a Golden
Head was growing out of the Nape of his Neck: And indeed the succession that
followed him for many years made Golden Times. Henry the Sixth of England, said
of Henry the Seventh, when he was a Lad, and gave him Water, This is the Lad
that shall enjoy the Crown for which we strive. When I was in France, I heard
from one Doctor Pena, that the Queen Mother, who was given to curious Arts,
caused the King her Husband's Nativity to be Calculated under a false Name: And
the Astrologer gave a Judgment, that he should be killed in a Duel; at which
the Queen laughed, thinking her Husband to be above Challenges and Duels: But
he was slain upon a Course at Tilt, the Splinters of the Staff of Mongomery
going in at his Bever. The trivial Prophecy that I heard when I was a Child,
and Queen Elizabeth was in the Flower of her Years, was;

When Hemp is spun,
England 's done.
Whereby it was generally conceived, that after the Princes had Reigned, which
had the principal Letters of that Word Hemp, (which were Henry, Edward, Mary,
Philip, and Elizabeth,) England should come to utter Confusion; which thanks be
to God is verified in the Change of the Name; for that the King's Style is no
more of England, but of Britain. There was also another Prophecy, before the
Year of 88. which I do not well understand: Three shall be seen upon a day,
Between the Baugh and the May,
The Black Feet of Norway.
When that is come and gone,
England build Houses of Lime and Stone,
For after Wars shall you have none.
It was generally conceived to be meant of the Spanish Fleet that came in 88.
For that the King of Spain's Surname, as they say, is Norway. The Prediction of
Regiomontanus, Octogessimus octavus mirabilis Annus, Was thought likewise
accomplished, in the sending of that great Fleet, being the greatest in
strength, though not in number, that ever swam upon the Sea. As for Cleon's
Dream, I think it was a Jest; It was, That he was devoured of a long Dragon;
and it was expounded of a Maker of Sausages that troubled him exceedingly.
There are numbers of the like kind, especially if you include Dreams and
Predictions of Astrology. But I have set down these few only of certain credit
for example. My judgment is, that they ought all to be despised, and ought to
serve but for winter-talk by the fireside: Though, when I say Despised, I mean
it as for belief; for otherwise, the spreading or publishing of them is in no
sort to be Despised; for they have done much mischief. And I see many severe
Laws made to suppress them. That that have given them grace, and some credit,
consists in three things: First, That Men mark when they hit, and never mark
when they miss; as they do generally also of Dreams. The second is. That
probable Conjectures, or obscure Traditions, many times turn themselves into
Prophecies, while the Nature of Man, which coveteth Divination, thinks it no
peril to foretell that which indeed they do but collect: As that of Seneca's
Verse. For so much was then subject to Demonstration, that the Globe of the
Earth had great Parts beyond the Atlantic; which might be probably conceived
not to be all Sea: And adding thereto, the Tradition in Plato's Timaeus, and
his Atlanticus, it might encourage one to turn it to a Prediction. The third
and Last (which is the Great one) is, That almost all of them, being infinite
in number, have been Impostures, and by idle and crafty Brains merely contrived
and feigned after the Event past.

XXXVI. Of Ambition.
AMBITION is like Choler, which is an Humor that makes Men Active, Earnest,
full of Alacrity, and Stirring, if it be not stopped, but if it be stopped and
cannot have its way, it becomes a dust, and thereby Malign and Venomous. So
Ambitious Men, if they find the way open for their Rising, and still get
forward, they are rather Busy than Dangerous; but if they be checked in their
desires, they become secretly discontent, and look upon Men and Matters with an
Evil Eye, and are best pleased when things go backward, which is the worst
property in a Servant of a Prince or State. Therefore it is good for Princes,
if they use Ambitious Men, to handle it so, as they be still Progressive, and
not Retrograde; which, because it cannot be without inconvenience, it is good
not to use such Natures at all. For if they rise not with their Service, they
will take order to make their Service fall with them. But since we have said,
it were good not to use Men of Ambitious Natures, except it be upon necessity,
it is fit we speak in what cases they are of necessity. Good Commanders in the
Wars must be taken, be they never so Ambitious; for the use of their Service
dispenses with the rest; and to take a Soldier without Ambition, is to pull
off his Spurs. There is also great use of Ambitious Men, in being Skreens to
Princes in matters of danger and Envy; for no man will take that part, except
he be like a seeld Dove, that mounts and mounts, because he cannot see about
him. There is use also of Ambitious Men, in pulling down the greatness of any
Subject that over-tops; as Tiberius used Macro in pulling down of Sejanus.
Since therefore they must be used in such cases, there rests to speak how
they are to be bridled, that they may be less Dangerous. There is less Danger
of them, if they be of mean Birth, than if they be Noble; and if they be rather
harsh of Nature, than Gracious and Popular; and if they be rather new raised,
than grown cunning, and fortified in their Greatness. It is counted by some a
weakness in Princes to have Favorites; but it is of all others the best remedy
against Ambitious Great Ones. For when the way of pleasuring and displeasuring
lies by the Favorite, it is impossible any other should be Overgreat.
Another means to curb them, is to balance them by others as proud as they. But
then there must be some middle Counselors to keep things steady; for without
that Ballast the Ship will roll too much. At the least* a Prince may animate
and inure some meaner Persons, to be as it were Scourges to Ambitious Men. As
for the having of them obnoxious to ruin, if they be of fearful Natures, it
may do well; but if they be stout and daring, it may precipitate their Designs,
and prove dangerous. As for the pulling of them down, if the Affairs require
it, and that it may not be done with fafety suddenly, the only way is, the
enterchange continually of Favors and disgraces; whereby they may not know
what to expect, and be as it were in a Wood. Of Ambitions, it is less harmful
the Ambition to prevail in great things, than that other to appear in every
thing; for that breeds confusion, and mars business. But yet it is less Danger,
to have an Ambitious Man stirring in business, than great in dependences. He
that seeks to be eminent amongst able Men, has a great task; but that is
ever good for the Public; but he that plots to be the only Figure amongst
Ciphers, is the decay of an whole Age. Honor has three things in it: The
Vantage Ground to do good, the approach to Kings and Principal Persons, and the
raising of a Man's own Fortune. He that has the best of these Intentions when
he aspireth, is an honest Man; and that Prince that can discern of these
Intentions in another that aspireth, is a wise Prince. Generally, let Princes
and States choose such Ministers as are more sensible of Duty, than of Rising;
and such as love Business rather upon Conscience, than upon Bravery; and let
them discern a busy Nature from a willing Mind.

XXXVII. Of Masks and Triumphs.
THESE Things are but Toys, to come amongst such serious Observations. But yet,
since Princes will have such things, it is better they should be graced with
Elegancy, than daubed with Cost. Dancing to Song, is a thing of great State and
Pleasure. I understand it, that the Song be in Choire, placed aloft, and
accompanied with some broken Music, and the Ditty fitted to the Device. Acting
in Song, especially in Dialogues, has an extreme good Grace: I say Acting, not
Dancing, (for that is a mean and vulgar thing) and the Voices of the Dialogue
would be strong and manly, (a Base, and a Tenor, no Treble,) and the Ditty High
and Tragical, not Nice or Dainty. Several Choires placed one over against
another, and taking the Voice by Catches, Anthem-wise, give great Pleasure.
Turning Dances into Figure is a childish curiosity; and generally let it be
noted, that those things which I here set down, are such as do naturally take
the Sense, and not respect petty Wonderments. It is true, the Alterations of
Scenes, so it be quietly, and without noise, are things of great Beauty and
Pleasure, for they feed and relieve the Eye, before it be full of the same
Object. Let the Scenes abound with Light, specially Colored and Varied; and
let the Maskers, or any other that are to come down from the Scene, have some
motions upon the Scene it self, before their coming down; for it draws the Eye
strangely, and makes it with great pleasure to desire to see that it cannot
perfectly discern. Let the Songs be Loud and Cheerful, and not Chirpings or
Pulings. Let the Music likewise be Sharp and Loud, and well placed. The
Colors that show best by Candlelight, are White, Carnation, and a kind of
Seawater Green; and Oes or Spangs, as they are of no great Cost, so they are
of most Glory. As for Rich Embroidery, it is lost, and not discerned. Let the
Suits of Maskers be graceful, and such as become the Person when the Vizars are
off, not after examples of known Attires; Turks, Soldiers, Mariners, and the
like. Let Anti-masks not be long, they have been commonly of Fools, Satyrs,
Baboons, Wild-men, Antiques, Beasts, Spirits, Witches, Ethiops, Pigmies,
Turquets, Nymphs, Rusticks, Cupids, Statua's moving, and the like. As for
Angels, it is not Comical enough to put them in Anti-masks; and any thing that
is hideous, as Devils, Giants, is on the other side as unfit. But chiefly, let
the Music of them be Recreative, and with some strange Changes. Some sweet
Odours suddenly coming forth, without any drops falling, are in such a Company,
as there is Steam and Heat, things of great pleasure and refreshment. Double
Masks, one of Men, another of Ladies, adds State and Variety. But all is
nothing, except the Room be kept clear and neat.

For Justs, and Turneys, and Barriers, the Glories of them are chiefly in the
Chariots, wherein the Challengers make their Entry, specially if they be drawn
with strange Beasts, as Lions, Bears, Camels, and the like; or in the Devices
of their Entrance, or in the bravery of their Liveries, or in the goodly
Furniture of their Horses and Armor. But enough of these toys.

XXXVIII. Of Nature in Men.
NATURE is often Hidden, sometimes Overcome, seldom Extinguished. Force makes
Nature more violent in the Return; Doctrine and Discourse makes Nature less
importune: But Custom only does alter and subdue Nature. He that seeks
Victory over his Nature, let him not set himself too great, nor too small
Tasks, for the first will make him dejected, by often Failings; and the second
will make him a small Proceeder, though by often Prevailings. And at the first,
let him practice with Helps, as Swimmers do with Bladders or Rushes; but after
a time let him practice with disadvantages, as Dancers do with thick Shoes:
For it breeds great Perfection, if the practice be harder than the Use. Where
Nature is mighty, and therefore the Victory hard, the Degrees had need be,
First, to stay and arrest Nature in time, like to him that would say over the
Four and Twenty Letters when he was Angry, than to go less in quantity: As if
one should in forbearing Wine, come from drinking Healths to a Draught at a
Meal, and lastly to discontinue altogether: But if a Man have the Fortitude and
Resolution to enfranchise himself at once, that is the best;

Optimus ille animi vindex, laedentia pectus
Vincula qui rupit, dedoluitque semel.
Neither is the Ancient Rule amiss to bend Nature, as a wand to a contrary
Extreme, whereby to set it right, understanding it where the contrary Extreme
is no Vice. Let not a Man force a Habit upon himself with a perpetual
Continuance, but with some Intermission; for both the Pause re-inforceth the
new Onset: And if a Man that is not perfect be ever in practice, he shall as
well practice his Errors, as his Abilities, and induce one Habit of both; and
there is no means to help this, but by seasonable Intermission. But let not a
Man trust his Victory over his Nature too far; for Nature will lie buried a
great time, and yet revive upon the Occasion of Temptation. Like as it was with
Aesop's Damsel, turned from a Cat to a Woman, who sat very demurely at the
Boards end, till a Mouse run before her. Therefore let a Man either avoid the
Occasion altogether, or put himself often to it, that he may be little moved
with it. A Man's Nature is best perceived in privateness, for there is no
Affection in Passion, for that puts a Man out of his Precepts; and in a new
Case of Experiment, for their Custom leaves him. They are happy Men whose
Natures sort with their Vocations, otherwise they may say, Multum Incola fuit
Anima mea; when they converse in those they do not effect. In Studies
whatsoever a man command upon himself, let him set hours for it; but
whatsoever is agreeable to his Nature, let him take no care for any set Times,
for his thoughts will fly to it of themselves; so as the spaces of other
business or Studies will suffice. A man's Nature runs either to Herbs or Weeds;
therefore let him seasonably water the one, and destroy the other.

XXXIX. Of Custom and Education.
MEN'S Thoughts are much according to their Inclination, their Discourse and
Speeches according to their Learning and infused Opinions; but their Deeds are
after as they have been accustomed: And therefore as Machiavel well notes,
(though in an ill-favored Instance) there is no trusting to the force of
Nature nor to the bravery of Words, except it be corroborate by Custom. His
instance is, that for the atchieving of a desperate Conspiracy, a Man should
not rest upon the fierceness of any Man's Nature, or his resolute undertakings;
but take such an one as has had his hands formerly in Blood. But Machiavoel
knew not of a Friar Clement, not a Ravilliac, nor a Jauregy, nor a Baltazer
Gerrard; yet this Rule holds still, that Nature, nor the Engagement of Words
are not so forcible as Customs. Only Superstition is now so well advanced, that
Men of the first blood are as firm as Butchers by Occupation, and Votary
Resolution is made Equipollent to Custom, even in matter of blood. In other
things the predominancy of Custom is every where visible, insomuch as a man
would wonder to hear men Profess, Protest, Engage, give great Words, and then
do just as they have done before, as if they were dead Images, and Engines
moved only by the wheels of Custom. We see also the Reign or Tyranny of Custom,
what it is. The Indians (I mean the Sect of their Wise Men) lay themselves
quietly upon a stack of Wood, and so Sacrifice themselves by fire. Nay, the
Wives strive to be burned with the Corpse of their Husbands. The Lads of Sparta
of ancient time, were wont to be scourged upon the Altar of Diana without so
much as Squeeking. I remember in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time, of
England, an Irish Rebel condemned, put up a Petition to the Deputy, that he
might be hanged in a With, and not in an Halter, because it had been so used
with former Rebels. There be Monks in Russia, for Penance, that will sit a
whole night in a Vessel of Water, till they be engaged with hard Ice. Many
examples may be put down of the Force of Custom, both upon mind and body.
Therefore since Custom is the Principal Magistrate of Man's life, let Men by
all means endeavor to obtain good Customs. Certainly Custom is most perfect
when it begins in young years: This we call Education, which is in effect
but an early Custom. So we see in Languages, the Tongue is more pliant to all
Expressions and Sounds, the Joints are more supple to all Feats of Activity and
motions in Youth than afterward. For it is true, the late Learners cannot so
well take the ply, except it be in some minds that have not suffered themselves
to fix, but have kept themselves open and prepared to receive continual
amendment, which is exceeding rare. But if the Force of Custom, Simple and
Separate, be great, the Force of Custom Copulate, and Conjoined, and
Collegiate, is far greater. For their Example teaches, Company comfort,
Emulation quickneth, Glory raises: So as in such Places the Force of Custom is
in his Exaltation. Certainly the great multiplication of Virtues upon humane
Nature, rests upon Societies well ordained and disciplined: for
Commonwealths and good Governments do nourish Virtue Grown, but do not much
mend the Seeds. But the misery is, that the most effectual Means are now
applied to the Ends least to be desired.

XI. Of Fortune.
IT cannot be denied, but outward accidents conduce much to Fortune: Favor,
Opportunity, Death of others, Occasion fitting Virtue. But chiefly the mould of
a Man's Fortune is in his own hands. Faber quisque Fortunae suae, says the
Poet. And the most frequent of External Causes is, that the Folly of one man is
the Fortune of another. For no man prospers so suddenly, as by others errors.
Serpens nisi Serpentem comederit non fit Draco. Overt and Apparent Virtues
bring forth Praise; but there be Secret and Hidden Virtues that bring forth
Fortune. Certain Deliveries of a Man's self, which have no Name. The Spanish
Name, Desemboltura, partly expresses them, when there be not Stands nor
Restiveness in a Man's Nature, but that the Wheels of his Mind keep way with
the Wheels of his Fortune. For so Livy (after he had described Cato Major, in
these words, in illo viro, tantum Robur Corporis and Animi fuit, ut quocunque
loco natus esset, Fortunam sibi facturus videretur) falls upon that, that he
had Versatile Ingenium. Therefore if a man look sharply and attentively, he
shall see Fortune: For though she be blind, yet she is not invisible. The way
of Fortune is like the Milkie Way in the Sky, which is a Meeting or Knot of a
number of small Stars; not seen asunder, but giving Light together: So are
there a number of little, and scarce discerned Virtues, or rather Faculties and
Customs that make men Fortunate. The Italian note some of them, such as a Man
would little think: When they speak of one that cannot do amiss, they will
through in into his other Conditions that he has, Poco di Matto. And
certainly, there be not two more Fortunate properties, than to have a little of
the Fool, and not too much of the Honest. Therefore extreme Lovers of their
Country, or Masters, were never Fortunate, neither can they be. For when a man
places his thoughts without himself, he goes not his own way, and hasty
Fortune makes an Enterpriser and Remover; (the French has it better.
Enterprenant or Remuant) but the exercised Fortune makes the able Man. Fortune
is to be Honored and Respected, if it be but for her Daughters, Confidence and
Reputation: For those two Felicity breeds; the first, within a Man's self,
the latter in others toward him. All wise men to decline the Envy of their own
Virtues, use to ascribe them to Providence and Fortune; for so they may the
better assure them: And besides, it is Greatness in a Man to be the Care of the
Higher Powers. So Caesar said to the Pilot in the Tempest, Caesarem portas, and
Fortunam ejus. So Sylla chose the Name of Felix, and not of Magnus. And it has
been noted, that those that ascribe openly too much to their own Wisdom and
Policy, end Unfortunate. It is written, That Timotheus the Athenian, after he
had, in the account he gave to the State of his Government, often interlaced
his Speech, And in this Fortune had no part, never prospered in any thing he
undertook afterward. Certainly there be, whose Fortunes are like Homer's
Verses, that have a Slide and Easiness more than the Verses of other Poets, as
Plutarch says of Timoleon's Fortune, in respect of that of Agesilaus, or
Epaminondas: And that this should be, no doubt it is much in a Man's self.

XLI. Of Usury.
MANY have made witty Invectives against Usury. They say, That it is pity the
Devil should have God's part, which is the Tithe. That the Usury is the
greatest Sabbath-breaker, because his Plough goes every Sunday. That the
Usurer is the Drone that Virgil speaks of: Ignavum fucus pecus a praesepibus
arcent. That the Usurer breaks the first Law that was made for Mankind after
the Fall; which was, In sudore vultus (...) comedes panem tuum, not, In sudore
vultus alieni. That Usurers should have Orainge-tawny Bonnets, because they do
Judaize. That it is against Nature, for Money to beget Money, and the like. I
say this only, that Usury is a Concessum propter duritiem cordis: For since
there must be Borrowing and Lending, and Men are so hard of Heart, as they will
not lend freely, Usury must be permitted. Some others have made Suspicious and
Cunning Propositions of Banks, discovery of Men's Estates, and other
Inventions, but few have spoken of Usury usefully. It is good to set before us
the Incommodities and Commodities of Usury, that the good may be either Weighed
out, o^ Culled out; and wearily to provide, that while we make forth to that
which is better, we meet not with that which is worse.

The Discommodities of Usury are, First, That it makes fewer Merchants: for
were it not for this lazy Trade of Usury, Money would not lie still, but would
in great part be employed upon Merchandising, which is the Vena Porta of Wealth
in a State. The second, That it makes poor Merchants; for as a Farmer cannot
husband his Ground so well, if he sit at a great Rent: So the Merchant cannot
drive his Trade so well, if he sit at great Usury. The third is incident to the
other two; and that is, The decay of Customs, of Kings, or States, which Ebb or
Flow with Merchandising. The fourth, That it brings the Treasure of a Realm
or State into a few hands; for the Usurer being at Certainties, and others at
Uncertainties, at the end of the Game most of the Money will be in the Box; and
ever a State flourishes, when Wealth is more equally spread. The fifth, That
it beats down the price of Land; for the employment of Money is chiefly either
Merchandising or Purchasing and Usury way-lays both. The Sixth, That it does
dull and damp all Industries, Improvements, and new Inventions, wherein Money
would be stirring, if it were not for this Slug. The last, That it is the
Canker and Ruin of many Men's Estates, which in process of time breeds a
public Poverty.

On the other side, the Commodities of Usury are: First, That howsoever Usury
in some respect hinders Merchandising, yet in some other it advances it; for
it is certain, that the greatest part of Trade is driven by young Merchants,
upon borrowing at Interest: So as if the Usurer either call in, or keep back
his Money, there will ensue presently a great stand of Trade. The second is,
That were it not for this easy borrowing upon Interest, Men's necessities would
draw upon them a most sudden undoing, in that they would be forced to sell
their Means (be it Lands or Goods) far under foot; and so whereas Usury does
but gnaw upon them, bad Markets would swallow them quite up. As for Mortaging
or Pawning, it will little mend the matter; for either men will not take Pawns
without Use, or if they do, they will look precisely for the forfeiture. I
remember a cruel Monied Man in the Country, that would say, The Devil take this
Usury, it keeps us from Forfeitures of Mortgages and Bonds. The third and last
is, That it is a vanity to conceive, that there would be ordinary borrowing
without profit; and it is imposible to conceive, the number of inconveniences
that will ensue, if borrowing be cramped: Therefore to speak of the abolishing
of Usury is idle. All States have ever had it in one kind, or rate or other: so
as that opinion must be sent to Utopia.

To speak now of the Reformation and Reiglement of Usury how the Discommodities
of it may be best avoided, and the Commodities retained. It appears by the
Balance of Commodities and Discommodities of Usury, two things are to be
reconciled: The one, that the Tooth of Usury be grinded, that it bite not too
much: The other, that there be left open a means to invite Monied Men to lend
to the Merchants, for the Continuing and Quickening of Trade. This cannot be
done, except you introduce two several sorts of Usury, a less and a greater.
For if you reduce Usury to one low rate, it will ease the Common Borrower, but
the Merchant will be to seek for Money. And it is to be noted, that the Trade
of Mercha^dize, being the most Lucrative, may bear Usury at a good rate; other
Contracts not so.

To serve both Intentions the way would be chiefly thus: That there be two
Rates of Usury, the one Free and General for all, the other under License only
to certain Persons, and in certain Places of Merchandising. First therefore,
let Usury in general be reduced to Five in the Hundred, and let that Rate be
proclaimed to be Free and Current; and let the Sat shut it self out to take
any penalty for the same. This will preserve Borrowing from any general Stop or
Dryness. This will ease infinite Borrowers in the Country. This will in good
part raise the price of Land, because Land purchased at Sixteen years purchase,
will yield Six in the Hundred, and somewhat more, whereas this Rate of Interest
yields but Five. This by reason will encourage and edge Industrious and
Profitable Improvements, because many will rather venture in that kind, than
take Five in the Hundred, especially having been used to greater profit.
Secondly, Let there be certain Persons Licensed to lend to known Merchants,
upon Usury, at a High-Rate; and let it be with the Cautions following. Let the
Rate be, even with the Merchant himself, somewhat more easy than that he used
formerly to pay: for by that means all Borrowers shall have some ease by this
Reformation, be he Merchant or whosoever. Let it be no Bank or Common Stock,
but every man be Master of his own Money. Not that I altogether mislike Banks,
but they will hardly be brooked, in regard of certain suspicions. Let the State
be answered some small matter for the License, and the rest left to the Lender;
for if the abatement be but small, it will no whit discourage the Lender. For
he, for example, that took before Ten or Nine in the Hundred, will sooner
descend to Eight in the Hundred, than give over his Trade of Usury, and go from
Certain Gains to Gains of Hazard. Let these Licensed Lenders be in number
indefinite, but restrained to certain principal Cities and Towns of
Merchandising, for then they will be hardly able to color other men's moneys in
the Country, so as the License of Nine will not suck away the current Rate of
Five; for no man will Lend his Moneys far off, nor put them into unknown hands.

If it be objected, That this does in a sort Authorize Usury, which before was
in some places but permissive: The Answer is, that it is better to mitigate
Usury by Declaration, than to suffer it to rage by Connivence.

XLII. Of Youth and Age.
A Man that is Young in Years, may be Old in Hours, if he have lost no time,
but that happens rarely. Generally Youth is like the first Cogitations, not
so wise as the second; for there is a Youth in Thoughts as well as in Ages: And
yet the Invention of Young Men is more lively than that of Old, and
Imaginations stream into their minds better, and, as it were, more Divinely.
Natures that have much heat, and great and violent desires and perturbations,
are not ripe for Action till they have passed the Meridian of their years; as
it was with Julius Caesar, and Septimius Severus, of the latter of whom it is
said, Juventutem egit Erroribus, imo Furoribus plenam; and yet he was the
ablest Emperor almost of all the List. But reposed Natures may do well in
Youth, as it is seen in Augustus Caesar, Cosmus Duke of Florence, Gaston de
Fois, and others. On the other side, Heat and Vivacity in Age, is an excellent
Composition for business. Young Men are fitter to invent than to judge, fitter
for Execution than for Counsel, and fitter for new projects than for settled
business, for the Experience of Age in things that fall within the compass of
it directs them, but in new things abuses them. The Errors of Young Men are
the ruin of Business; but the Errors of Aged Men amount but to this, that more
might have been done or sooner. Young Men in the conduct and manage of Actions
embrace more than they can hold, stir more than they can quiet fly to the end
without consideration of the means and degrees, pursue some few Principles
which they have chanced upon absurdly, care not to innovate, which draws
unknown Inconveniences: Use extreme Remedies at first, and that which doubleth
all Errors, will not acknowledge or retract them, like an unready Horse, that
will neither Stop nor Turn. Men of Age object too much, consult too long,
adventure too little, repent too soon, and seldom drive business home to the
full period, but content themselves with a mediocrity of Success. Certainly it
is good to compound Employments of both; for that will be good for the present,
because the virtues of either Age may correct the defects of both, and good for
Succession, that Young Men may be Learners, while Men in Age are Actors. And
lastly, good for Extern Accidents, because Authority follows Old Men, and
Favor and Popularity Youth. But for the moral part, perhaps Youth will have
the pre-eminence, as Age has for the politic. A certain Rabbis upon the
Text, Your young Men shall see visions, and your old Men shall dream dreams,
infers, that Young Men are admitted nearer to God than Old, because Vision
is a clearer Revelation than a Dream. And certainly the more a Man drinks of
the World, the more it intoxicateth; and Age does profit rather in the powers
of Understanding, than in the Virtues of the Will and Affections. There be some
have an over-early Ripeness in their years, which fades betimes: These are
first such as have brittle Wits, the edge whereof is soon turned; such as was
Hermogenes the Rhetorician, whose Books are exceeding subtle, who afterward
waxed stupid. A second sort is of those that have some natural Dispositions
which have better grace in Youth than in Age; such as is a fluent and luxuriant
Speech, which becomes Youth well, but not Age: So Tully says of Hortensius,
Idem manebat, neque idem decebat. The The third is, of such as take too high a
strain at the first, and are magnanimous more than Tract of years can uphold:
As was Scipio Africanus, of whom Livy says in effect, Ultima primis cedebant.

XLIII. Of Beauty.
VIRTUE is like a rich Stone, best plain set; and surely, Virtue is best in a
Body that is comely, though not of delicate Features, and that has rather
Dignity of Presence, than Beauty of Aspect. Neither is it almost seen that very
Beautiful Persons are otherwise of great Virtue, as if Nature were rather busy
not to err, than in labor to produce Excellency; and therefore they prove
accomplished, but not out of great Spirit, and study rather Behavior than
Virtue. But this holds not always, for Augustus Caesar, Titus Vespasianus,
Philip de Belle of France, Edward the fourth of England, Alcibiades of Athens,
Ismael the Sophy of Persia, were all high and great Spirits, and yet the most
Beautiful Men of their times. In Beauty, that of Favor is more than that of
Color; and that of decent and gracious Motion, more than that of Favor. That
is the best part of Beauty which a Picture cannot express, no nor the first
sight of the Life. There is no excellent Beauty that has not some strangeness
in the proportion. A Man cannot tell, whether Apelles or Albert Durer were the
more trifler; whereof the one would make a Personage by Geometrical
Proportions, the other by taking the best Parts out of diverse Faces to make one
excellent. Such Personages I think would please no body, but the Painter that
made them. Not but I think a Painter may make a better Face than ever was, but
he must do it by a kind of Felicity, (as a Musician that makes an excellent
Air in Music) and not by Rule. A Man shall see Faces, that if you examine them
part by part, you shall find never a good, and yet altogether do well. If it be
true, that the principal part of Beauty is in decent motion, certainly it is no
marvel, though Persons in Years seem many times more amiable, Pulchrorum
Autumnus pubcher; for no Youth can be comely, but by pardon, and considering
the Youth, as to make up the comeliness. Beauty is as Summer-Fruits, which are
easy to corrupt, and cannot last, and for the most part it makes a dissolute
Youth, and an Age, a little out of countenance; but yet certainly again, if it
light well, it makes Virtues shine, and Vices blush.

XLIV. Of Deformity.
DEFORMED Persons are commonly even with Nature; for as Nature has done ill by
them, so do they by Nature, being for the most part (as the Scripture says)
void of Natural Affection, and so they have Revenge of Nature. Certainly, there
is a consent between the body and the mind, and where Nature erreth in the one,
she ventureth in the other; Ubi peccat in uno, periclitatur in altero. But
because there is in Man an Election touching the Frame of his mind, and a
Necessity in the Frame of his body, the Stars of natural Inclination are
sometimes obscured by the Sun of Discipline and Virtue: Therefore it is good to
consider of Deformity, not as a Sign which is more deceivable, but as a Cause
which seldom fails of the Effect. Whosoever has any thing fixed in his
Person that does induce Contempt, has also a perpetual Spur in himself to
rescue and deliver himself from Scorn. Therefore all Deformed Persons are
extreme bold. First, as in their own Defense, as being exposed to Scorn, but in
process of time, by a general Habit. Also it stirs in them industry, and
especially of this kind, to watch and observe the weakness of others, that they
may have somewhat to repay. Again, in their Superiors, it quenches Jealousy
toward them, as Persons that they think they may at pleasure despise; and it
lays their Competitors and Emulators asleep, as never believing they should
be in possibility of Advancement, till they see them in Possession; so that
upon the matter in a great Wit, Deformity is an advantage to Rising. Kings in
ancient times (and at this present in some Countries) were wont to put great
Trust in Eunuchs; because they that are envious to all, are more obnoxious and
officious toward one. But yet their Trust toward them has rather been as to
good Spials, and good whisperers, than good Magistrates and Officers. And much
like is the Reason of Deformed Persons. Still the ground is, they will if they
be of Spirit, seek to free themselves from Scorn, which must be either by
Virtue or Malice; and therefore let it not be marvelled if sometimes they prove
excellent Persons; as was Agesilaus, Zanger the Son of Solomon, Aesop, Gasca
President of Peru, and Socrates may go likewise amongst them, with others.

XLV. Of Building.
HOUSES are built to live in, and not to look on: Therefore let Use be
preferred before Uniformity, except where both may be had. Leave the goodly
Fabrics of Houses, for Beauty only, to the Enchanted Palaces of the Poets, who
build them with small cost. He that builds a fair House upon an ill Seat,
commits himself to Prison. Neither do I reckon it an ill Seat only wherethe
Air is unwholesome, but likewise where the Air is unequal; as you shall see
many fine Seats set upon a knap of Ground, environed with higher Hills round
about it, whereby the Heat of the Sun is pent in, and the Wind gathers as in
Troughs; so as you shall have, and that suddenly, as great Diversity of Heat
and Cold, as if you dwelt in several Places. Neither is it ill Air only that
makes an ill Seat, but ill ways, ill Markets; and if you will consult with
Momus, ill Neighbors. I speak not of any more: Want of Water, want of Wood,
Shade and Shelter, want of Fruitfulness, and mixture of Grounds of several
Natures, want of Prospect, want of level Grounds, wnat of Places at some near
Distance for Sports of Hunting, Hawking, and Races; Too near the Sea too
remote, having the Commodity of Navigable Rivers, or the Discommodity of their
Overflowing: Too far off from great Cities, which may hinder Business, or too
near them which lurcheth all Provisions, and makes every thing dear: Where a
Man has a great Living laid together, and where he is scanted. All which, as
it is impossible perhaps to find together, so it is good to know them, and
think of them, that a Man may take as many as he can; And if have several
Dwellings, that he sort them so, that what he wants in the one, he may find
in the other. Lucullus answer Pompey well, who when he saw his Stately
Galleries and Rooms so large and lightsome in one of his Houses, said, Surely
an excellent Place for Summer, but how do you in Winter? Lucullus answered, Why
do you not think me as wise as some Fowl are, that ever change their abode
toward the Winter?

To pass from the Seat to the House it self, we will do as Cicero does in the
Orator's Art, who writes Books De Oratore, and a Book he Entitles Orator;
whereof the former delivers the Precepts of the Art, and the ^a^ter the
Perfection. We will therefore describe a Princely Palace, making a brief model
thereof. For it is strange to see now in Europe such huge Buildings, as the
(...), and Escurial, and some others be, and yet scarce a very fair Room in
them.

First therefore, I say, you cannot have a perfect Palace, except you have two
several Sides; a Side for the Banquet, as is spoken of in the Book of Hester,
and a Side for the Household; the one for Feasts and Triumphs, and the other for
Dwelling. I understand both these Sides to be not only Returns, but Parts of
the Front, and to be uniform without, though severally Partitioned within, and
to be on both sides of a great and Stately Tower in the midst of the Front,
that as it were joyneth them together on either hand. I would have on the side
of the Banquet in Front one only goodly Room above Stairs, of some forty foot
high, and under it a Room for a Dressing or Preparing Place at times of
Triumphs. On the other side, which is the Household side, I wish it divided at
the first into a Hall and a Chapel, (with a Partition between) both of good
state and bigness, and those not to go all the length, but to have at the
further end a Winter and a Summer Parlor, both fair; and under these Rooms, a
fair and large Cellar sunk under Ground; and likewise some Privy Kitchens, with
Buteries and Pantries, and the like. As for the Tower, I would have it two
Stories, of eighteen foot high apiece above the two Wings, and goodly Leads
upon the Top, railed with Statua's interposed, and the same Tower to be divided
into Rooms as shall be thought fit; the Stairs likewise to the upper Rooms, let
them be upon a fair open Newel, and finely railed in with Images of Wood, cast
into a Brass color, and a very fair Landing Place at the Top. But this to be,
if you do not point any of the lower Rooms for a Dining Place of Servants, for
otherwise you shall have the Servants Dinner after your own; for the steam of
it will come up as in a Tunnel. And so much for the Front, only I understand
the Height of the first Stairs to be sixteen Foot which is the Height of the
lower Room.

Be^ond this Front is there to be a fair Court, but three sides of it of a far
lower Building than the Front. And in all the four Corners of that Court fair
Stair-Cases, cast into Turrets on the out side, and not within the Row of
Buildings themselves. But those Towers are not to be of the height of the
Front, but rather proportionable to the lower Building. Let the Court not be
Paved, for that strikes up a great Heat in Summer, and much Cold in Winter;
but only some Side-Alleys, with a Cross, and the Quarters to Graze being kept
Shorn, but not too near Shorn. The Row of Return on the Banquet Side, let it be
all Stately Galleries, in which Galleries let there be three or five fine
Cupola's in the length of it, placed at equal distance, and fine Colored
Windows of several Works. On the Household side, Chambers of Presence and
ordinary Entertainment, with some Bed-Chambers, and let all three Sides be a
double House, without through Lights on the Sides, that you may have Rooms from
the Sun, both for Fore-noon and Afternoon. Cast it also, that you may have
Rooms both for Summer and Winter, Shady for Summer, and Warm for Winter. You
shall have sometimes fair Houses so full of Glass, that one cannot tell where
to become to be out of the Sun, or Cold, for Inbowed Windows I hold them of
good use; (in Cities indeed Upright do better, in respect of the Uniformity
toward the Street) for they be pretty Retiring Places for Conference; and
besides, they keep both the Wind and the Sun off: For that which would strike
almost through the Room, does scarce pass the Window. But let them be but few,
four in the Court on the Sides only.

Beyond this Court let there be an Inward Court of the same Square and Height,
which is to be environed with the Garden on all sides; and in the inside
Cloistered upon all sides; upon decent and beautiful Arches, as high as the
first Story. On the Under Story toward the Garden, let it be turned to a
Grotta, or place of Shade or Estivation; and only have opening and Windows
toward the Garden, and be level upon Floor, no whit sunk under Ground, to
avoid all dampishness: And let there be a Fountain, or some fair Work of
Statua's in the midst of this Court, and to be Paved as the other Court was.
These Buildings to be for Privy Lodgings on both Sides, and the end for Privy
Galleries: whereof you must foresee that one of them be for an Infirmary, if
the Prince or any special person should be Sick, with Chambers, Bed-Chambers,
Anticamera, and Recamera, joining to it: This upon the second Story. Upon the
Ground Story a fair Gallery, open upon Pillars; and upon the third Story
likewise, an open Gallery upon Pillars, to take the Prospect and Freshness of
the Garden. At both Corners of the furthest Side, by way of Return, let there
be two delicate or Rich Cabinets, daintily Paved, Richly Hanged, Glazed with
Crystalline Glass, and a Rich Cupola in the midst, and all other Elegancy that
may be thought upon. In the Upper Gallery too I wish that there may be, if the
Place will yield it, some Fountains running in diverse Places from the Wall,
with some fine Avoidances. And thus much for the model of the Palace; save that
you must have, before you come to the Front, three Courts: and a Green Court
Plain, with a Wall about it; a Second Court of the same, but more Garnished
with little Turrets, or rather Embellishments upon the Wall; and a third Court,
to make a Square with the Front, but not to be Built, nor yet Enclosed with a
Naked Wall, but Enclosed with Tarasses leaded aloft, and fairly Garnished on
the three sides; and Cloystered on the inside with Pillars, and not with
Arches below. As for Offices, let them stand at distance with some
Low-Galleries, to pass from them to the Palace it self.

XLVI. Of Gardens.
GOD Almighty first Planted a Garden; and indeed it is the purest of Humane
pleasures. It is the greatest refreshment to the Spirits of Man; without which,
Buildings and Palaces are but gross Handy-works. And a Man shall ever see, that
when Ages grow to Civility and Elegancy, Men come to Build Stately, sooner than
to Garden Finely: as if Gardening were the greater Perfection. I do hold it in
the Royal Ordering of Gardens, there ought to be Gardens for all the Months in
the Year, in which, severally, things of Beauty may be then in season. For
December and January* and the latter part of November, you must take such
things as are green all Winter; Holly, Ivy, Bays, Juniper, Cypress Trees, Yews,
Pineapple Trees, Fir Trees, Rosemary, Lavender, Perriwinckle the White, the
Purple, and the Blew, Germander, Flags, Orange Trees, Limon-Trees, and Myrtle,
if they be stoved, and sweet Marjoram warm sets. There follows for the latter
part of January and February, the Mezerion Tree, which then blossoms, Crocus
Vernus, both the Yellow and the Gray prim-Roses, Anemones, the Early Tulippa,
Hyacinthus Orientalis, Chamairis, Frettellaria. For March there comes Violets,
specially the Single Blew, which are Earliest, the Yellow Daffadil, the Daizy,
the Almond-Tree in Blossom, the Peach-Tree in Blossom, the Cornelian-Tree in
Blossom, sweet Briar. In April follow the double White Violet, the Wall-Flower,
the Stock Gilly-Flower, the Cowslip, Flower-de-Lices, and Lilies of all
Natures, Rosemary-Flower, the Tulippa, the Double Piony, the Pale Daffadill,
the French Honey-Suckle, the Cherry-Tree in Blossom, the Damascen and
Plumb-Trees in Blossom, the White Thorn in Leaf, the Lelack-Tree. In May and
June come Pinks of all Sorts, specially the Blush-Pink, Roses of all kinds,
except the Musk, which comes later, Honey Suckles, Strawberries, Bugloss,
Columbine, the French Marygold, Flos Africanus, Cherry-Tree in Fruit, Ribes,
Figs in Fruit, Rasps, Vine-Flowers, Lavender in Flowers, the Sweet Satyrian
with the White Flower, Herba Muscaria, Lilium Convallium, the Apple Tree in
Bossom. In July come Gilly-flowers of all Varieties, Musk-Roses, and the
Lime-Tree in Blossom. Early Pears and Plumbs in Fruit, Gennitings, Quodlings.
In August come Plumbs of all sorts in Fruit, Pears, Apricocks, Barberries,
Filbeards, Musk-Melons, Monks-hoods of all Colors. In September comes, Grapes,
Apples, Poppies of all Colors, Peaches, Melo-Cotones, Nectarines, Cornelians,
Wardens, Quinces. In October and the beginning of November, come Servises,
Medlars, Bullises; Roses Cut or Removed to come late, Holly-oaks, and such
like. These particulars are for the Climate of London: But my meaning is
perceived, that you may have Ver Perpetuum, as the place affords.

And because the Breath of Flowers is far Sweeter in the Air, (where it comes
and goes, like the Warbling of Music) than in the Hand, therefore nothing is
more fit for that Delight, than to know what be the Flowers and Plants that do
best perfume the Air. Roses Damask and Red are Flowers tenacious of their
Smells, so that you may walk by a whole Row of them, and find nothing of their
Sweetness; yea, though it be in a Morning Dew. Bays likewise yield no Smell as
they grow, Rosemary little, nor Sweet-Marjoram. That which above all others
yields the Sweetest Smell in the Air, is the Violet, specially the White double
Violet, which comes twice a year, about the middle of April, and about
Bartholomew-tide. Next to that is the Musk Rose, then the Strawberry Leaves
dying with a most excellent Cordial Smell. Then the Flower of the Vines, it is
a little Dust, like the Dust of a Bent, which grows upon the Cluster in the
first coming forth. Then Sweet-Briar, then Wall-Flowers, which are very
delightful to be set under a Parlour, or lower Chamber Window. Then Pinks and
Gilly-Flowers. especially the matted Pink, and Clove Gilly-Flower. Then the
Flowers of the Lime-Tree. Then the Hony-Suckles, so they be somewhatafar off.
Of Bean-Flowers I speak not, because they are Field-Flowers. But those which
perfume the Air most delightfully, not passed by as the rest, but being Trodden
upon and Crushed, are three, that is, Burnet, Wild-Time, and Water-Mints.
Therefore you are to set whole Alleys of them, to have the Pleasure when you
walk or tread.

For Gardens, (speaking of those which are indeed Princelike, as we have done
of Buildings) The Contents ought not well to be under Thirty Acres of Ground,
and to be divided into three parts; a Green in the entrance, a Heath or Desert
in the going forth, and the Main Garden in the midst, besides Alleys on both
sides. And I like well, that four Acres of Ground be Assigned to the Green, six
to the Heath, four and four to either Side, and twelve to the Main Garden. The
Green has two pleasures; the one, because nothing is more pleasant to the Eye
than Green Grass kept finely shorn; the other, because it will give you a fair
Alley in the midst, by which you may go in front upon a Stately Hedge, which is
to enclose the Garden. But because the Alley will be long, and in great Heat of
the Year or Day, you ought not to buy the shade in the Garden, by going in the
Sun through the Green; therefore you are of either Side the Green to plant a
Covert Alley upon Carpenters Work, about twelve foot in Height, by which you
may go in shade into the Garden. As for the making of Knots of Figures, with
Diverse Colored Earths, that they may lie under the Windows of the House, on
that Side which the Garden stands, they be but toys, you may see as good sights
many times in Tarts. The Garden is best to be square, encompassed on all the
four Sides with a Stately Arched Hedge: the Arches to be upon Pillars of
Carpenters Work, of some ten foot high, and six foot broad, and the spaces
between of the fame Dimension with the Breadth of the Arch. Over the Arches let
there be an entire Hedge, of some four foot high, framed also upon Carpenters
Work, and upon the Upper Hedge, over every Arch a little Turret, with a Belly,
enough to receive a Cage of Birds; and over every Space between the Arches some
other little Figure, with broad Plates of Round Colored Glass gilt, for the
Sun to play upon. But this Hedge, I intend to be raised upon a Bank, not steep,
but gently slope, of some six foot, set all with Flowers. Also I understand,
that this Square of the Garden, should not be the whole breadth of the Ground,
but to leave on the either side Ground enough for diversity of Side Alleys unto
which the two Covert Alleys of the Green may deliver you; but there must be no
Alleys with Hedges at either and of this great Enclosure: not at the Higher
End, for letting your prospect upon this fair Hedge from the Green; nor at the
further End, for letting your prospect from the Hedge through the Arches upon
the Heath. For the ordering of the Ground within the Great Hedge, I leave it to
Variety of Device. Advising nevertheless, that whatsoever form you cast it
into; first it be not too busy, or full of Work; wherein I, for my part, do
not like Images cut out in funiper, or other Garden-stuff, they for Children.
^ittle low Hedges, Round like Welts, with some pretty Pyramids, I like well:
And in some places Fair Collums upon Frames of Carpenters Work. I would also
have the Alleys spacious and fair. You may have closer Alleys upon the Sid^
Grounds, but none in the Main Garden. I wish also in the very middle a fair
Mount, with three Ascents and Alleys, enough for four to walk a breast, which I
would have to be perfect Circles, without any Bulwarks or Imbossments, and the
whole Mount to be thirty foot high, and and some fine Banqueting House, with
some Chimnies neatly cast, and without too much Glass.

For Fountains, they are a great Beauty and Refreshment, but Pools mar all,
and make the Garden unwholesome, and full of Flies and Froggs. Fountains I
intend to be of two Natures, the one that sprinkleth or spouteth Water, the
other a fair Receipt of Water, of some thirty or forty foot square, but without
Fish, or Slime, or Mud. For the first, the Ornaments of Images Guilt, or of
Marble, which are in use, do well; but the main matter is, so to convey the
Water, as it never stay, either in the Bowls, or in the Cistern, that the Water
be never by rest Discolored, Green or Red, or the like; or gather any
Mossiness or Putrefaction. Besides that, it is to be cleansed every day by the
hand; also some steps up to it, and some Fine Pavement about it does well. As
for the other kind of Fountain, which we may call a Bathing-Pool, it may admit
much Curiosity and Beauty, wherewith we will not trouble our selves, as that
the bottom be finely paved, and with Images, the sides likewise; and withal
Embellished with colored Glass, and such things of Luster; Encompassed also
with fine Rails of low Statues. But the main point is the same, which we
mentioned in the former kind of Fountain, which is, that the Water be in
perpetual motion, fed by a Water higher than the Pool, and delivered into it by
fair Spouts, and then discharged away under Ground by some equality of Bores,
that it stay little. And for fine Devices of Arching Water without spilling and
making it rise in several forms (of Feathers, Drinking-Glasses, Canopies, and
the like) they be pretty things to look on, but nothing to Health and Sweetness.

For the Heath, was the third part of our Plot, I wish it to be framed, as much
as may be, to a Natural Wildness. Trees I would have none in it, but some
Thickets, made only of Sweet-Briar, and Hony-Suckle, and some Wild Vine
amongst, and the Ground set with Vi^lets, Strawherries and Primroses: for these
are Sweet, and prosper in the Shade. And these to be in the Heath, here and
there, not in any Order. I like also little Heaps, in the Nature of Mole-Hills
(such as are in Wild-Heaths) to be set, some with Wild-Thyme, some with Pinks,
some with Germander, that gives a good slower to the eye; some with Periwinkle,
some with Violets, some with Strawberries, some with Cou^lips, some with
Daizies, some with Red-Roses, some with Lilium Convallium, some with
Sweet-Williams Red, some with Bears-Foot, and the like Low Flowers, being
withal Sweet and Sightly. Part of which Heaps, to be with Standards, of little
Bushes, pricked upon their top, and part without; the Standards to be Roses,
Juniper, Holly, Bear-berries, (but here and there, because of the smell of
their blossom) Red Currants, Gooseberries, Rosemary, Bays, Sweet-Briar, and such
like. But these Standards to be kept with Cutting, that they grow not out of
Course.

For the Side Grounds, you are to fit them with variety of Alleys, private, to
give a full shade, some of them, wheresoever the Sun be. You are to frame some
of them, likewise for shelter, that when the wind blows sharp, you may walk as
in a Gallery. And those Alleys must be likewise hedged at both ends, to keep
out the Wind, and these closer Alleys must be ever finely Gravelled, and no
Grass, because of going wet. In many of these Alleys likewise, you are to set
Fruit Trees of all sorts; as well upon the Walls, as in Ranges. And this would
be generally observed, that the Borders wherein you plant your Fruit Trees, be
sair and large, and low, and not steep, and set with fine Flowers, but thin and
sparingly, lest they deceive the Trees. At the end of both the side Grounds, I
would have a Mount of some pretty Height, leaving the Wall of the Enclosure
breast-high, to look abroad into the Fields.

For the Main Garden, I do not deny, but there should be some fair Alleys
ranged on both sides with Fruit Trees, and some pretty Tufts of Fruit Trees and
Arbors with Seats, set in some decent Order; but these to be by no means set
too thick; but to leave the Main Garden so, as it be not close, but the Air
open and free; for as for Shade I would have you rest upon the Alleys of the
Side Grounds, there to walk, if you be disposed, in the Heat of the Year or
Day: but to make account, that the Main Garden is for the more temperate parts
of the Year; and in the Heat of Summer, for the Morning and the Evening, or
Over-cast Days.

For Aviaries, I like them not, except they be of that largeness, as they may
be turfed, and have Living Plants and Bushes set in them, that the Birds may
have more scope, and natural Nesting, and that no foulness appear in the floor
of the Aviary. So I have made a Platform of a Princely Garden, partly by
Precept, partly by Drawing, not a Model, but some general Lines of it, and in
this I have spared for no cost. But it is nothing, for Great Princes, that for
the most part taking advice with Workmen, with no less Cost, set their things
together, and sometimes add Statua's and such things, for State and
Magnificence, but nothing to the true pleasure of a Garden.

XLVII. Of Negotiating.
IT is generally better to deal by Speech, than by Letter; and by the mediation
of a Third, than by a man's self. Letters are good, when a Man would draw an
Answer by Letter back again; or when it may serve for a Man's Justification
afterward to produce his own Letter, or where it may be danger to be
interrupted or heard by pieces. To deal in Person is good, when a Man's face
breeds Regard, as commonly with Inferiors; or in tender Cases, where a Man's
Eye upon the Countenance of him with whom he speaks, may give him a Direction
how far to go: And generally where a man will reserve to himself liberty either
to Disavow, or to Expound. In choice of Instruments, it is better to choose men
of a plainer sort that are like to do that is committed to them, and to report
back again faithfully the success, than those that are cunning to contrive out
of other Men's Business somewhat to grace themselves, and will help the matter
in Report for satisfaction sake. Use all such Persons as affect the business
wherein they are employed, for that quickneth much; and such as are fit for the
matter: As bold Men for Expostulation, fair spoken Men for Persuasion, crafty
Men for Enquiry and Observation, froward and absurd Men for business that does
not well bear out it self. Use also such as have been lucky, and prevailed
before in things wherein you have employed them, for that breeds confidence,
and they will strive to maintain their Prescription. It is better to sound a
Person with whom one Deals afar off, than to fall upon the point at first;
except you mean to surprise him by some short Question. It is better Dealing
with Men in Appetite, than with those that are where they would be. If a Man
Deal with another upon Conditions, the start of the first Performance is all,
which a Man cannot reasonably Demand, except either the nature of the thing be
such which must go before; or else a Man can persuade the other Party that he
shall still need him in some other thing; or else that he be counted the
honester Man. All Practice is to Discover, or to Work: Men Discover themselves
in Trust, in Passion, at unawares, and of necessity, when they would have
somewhat done, and cannot find an apt Pretext. If you would Work any Man, you
must either know his nature and fashions, and so lead him; or his ends, and so
persuade him; or his weakness and disadvantages, and so awe him; or those that
have Interest in him, and so govern him. In Dealing with cunning Persons we
must ever consider their ends to interpret their Speeches; and it is good to
say little to them, and that which they least look for. In all Negotiations of
difficulty a Man may not look to sow and reap at once, but must prepare
business, and so ripen it by degrees.

XLVIII. Of Followers and Friends.
COSTLY Followers are not to be liked, lest while a Man makes his Train
longer, he makes his Wings shorter. I reckon to be costly, not them alone which
charge the Purse, but which are wearisome and importunate in Suits. Ordinary
Followers ought to challenge no higher Conditions than Countenance,
Recommendation, and Protection from wrongs. Factious Followers are worse to be
liked, which follow not upon Affection to him with whom they range themselves,
but upon Coffeehouse conceived against some other; whereupon commonly
ensues that ill intelligence that we many times see between great Parsonages.
Likewise glorious Followers who make themselves as Trumpets of Commendation of
those that follow, are full of Inconvenience; for they taint business through
want of Secrecy, and they export Honor from a Man, and make him a return in
Envy. There is a kind of Followers likewise which are dangerous, being indeed
Espials; which enquire the secrets of the House, and bear Tales of them to
other; yet such Men, many times, are in great favor; for they are officious,
and commonly exchange Tales, the Following by certain Estates of Men,
answerable to that which a great Person himself professes, (as of Soldiers to
him that has been employed in the Wars, and the like) has ever been a thing
Civil, and well taken even in Monarchies; so it be without too much pomp of
popularity. But the most honorable kind of Following, is to be followed, as
one that apprehends to advance Virtue and Desert in all sorts of Persons. And
yet where there is no eminent odds in sufficiency, it is better to take with
the more passable, than with the more able. And besides, to speak truth, in
base times Active Men are of more use than Virtuous. It is true, that in
Government it is good to use Men of one Rank equally; for to countenance some
extraordinarily, is to make them insolent, and the rest discontent, because
they may claim a due. But contrariwise, in favor to use Men with much
difference and election is good; for it makes the Persons preferred more
thankful, and the rest more officious, because all is of favor. It is good
discretion not to make too much of any Man at the first; because one cannot
hold out that proportion. To be governed (as we call it) by one, is not safe;
for it shows Softness, and gives a freedom to Scandal and Disreputation; for
those that would not censure or speak ill of a Man immediately, will talk more
boldly of those that are so great with them, and thereby wound their honor,
yet to be distracted with many is worse; for it makes Men to be of the last
Impression, and full of Change. To take advice of some few Friends is ever
honorable; for Lookers on, many times, see more tha^ Gamesters, and the Vale
best discovers the Hill. There is little Friendship in the World, and least
of all between equals, which was wont to be magnified. That that is, is between
Superior and inferior, whose Fortunes may comprehend one the other.

XLIX. Of Suitors.
MANY ill matters and projects are undertaken, and private Suits do putrefie
the public Good. Many good matters are undertaken with bad minds, I mean, not
only corrupt minds, but crafty minds that intend not Performance. Some embrace
Suits which never mean to deal effectually in them; but if they see there may
be life in the matter by some other mean, they will be content to win a Thank,
or take a second Reward, or at least to make use in the mean time of the
Suitor's hopes. Some take hold of Suits only for an occasion to cross some
other; or to make an information, whereof they could not otherwise have apt
Pretext, without care what become of the Suit when that turn is served; or
generally, to make other Men's business a kind of Entertainment to bring in
their own. Nay, some undertake Suits with a full purpose to let them fall, to
the end, to gratify the adverse Party or Competitor. Surely there is in some
sort a Right in every Suit; either a Right of Equity, if it be a Suit of
Controversy; or a Right of Desert, if it be a Suit of Petition. If Affections
lead a Man to favor the wrong side in Justice, let him rather use his
Countenance to compound the matter, than to carry it. If Affection lead a Man
to favor the less worthy in Desert, let him do it without depraving or
disabling the better Deserver. In Suits which a Man does not well understand,
it is good to refer them to some Friend of Trust and Judgment, that may report,
whether he may deal in them with Honor; but let him choose well his
Referendaries, for else he may be led by the Nose. Suitors are so distasted
with Delays and Abuses, that plain dealing in denying to deal in Suits at
first, and reporting the success barely, and in challenging no more thanks than
one has deserved, is grown not only Honorable, but also Gracious. In Suits of
Favor, the first coming ought to take little place; so far forth Consideration
may be had of his Trust, that if intelligence of the matter could not otherwise
have been had, but by him, advantage be not taken of the Note, but the Party
left to his other means, and in some sort recompensed for his Discovery. To be
ignorant of the value of a Suit is simplicity; as well as to be ignorant of the
Right thereof is want of Conscience. Secrecy in Suits is a great mean of
obtaining; for voicing them to be in forwardness, may discourage some kind of
Suitors; but does quicken and awaken others; but Timing of the Suit is the
principal. Timing, I say, not only in respect of the Person that should grant
it, but in respect of those which are like to cross it. Let a Man in the choice
of his mean, rather choose the fittest mean, than the greatest mean; and rather
them that deal in certain Things, than those that are General. The Reparation
of a Denial, is sometimes equal to the first Grant; if a Man show himself,
neither dejected, nor discontented: Iniquum petas, ut Aequum feras; is a good
rule, where a Man has strength of Favor: But otherwise a Man were better rise
in his Suit; for he that would have ventured at first to have lost the Suitor,
will not in the Conclusion lose both the Suitor, and his own former favor.
Nothing is thought so easy a request to a great Person as his Letter; and yet,
if it be not in a good Cause, it is so much out of his Reputation. There are no
worse Instruments than these general Contrivers of Suits, for they are but a
kind of poison and infection to public proceedings.

L. Of Studies.
STUDIES serve for Delight, for Ornament, and for Ability. Their chief use for
Delight is in Privateness and Retiring; for Ornament is in Discourse; and for
Ability, is in the Judgment and Disposition of Business. For expert Men can
execute, and perhaps judge of particulars one by one; but the general Counsels
and the Plots, and Marshalling of Affairs, come best from those that are
Learned. To spend too much time in Studies is sloth; to use them too much for
Ornament is affectation; to make Judgment wholly by their Rules is the humor
of a Scholar. They perfect Nature, and are perfected by experience: for Natural
Abilities are like Natural Plants, that need Proyning by Study, and Studies
themselves do give forth Directions too much at large, except they be bounded
in by experience. Crafty Men contemn Studies, Simple Men admire them, and Wise
Men use them: For they teach not their own use, but that is a Wisdom without
them, and above them, won by Observation. Read not to Contradict and Confute,
nor to believe and take for granted, nor to find Talk and Discourse, but to
weigh and consider. Some Books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and
some few to be chewed and digested; that is, some Books are to be read only in
parts; others to be read, but not curiously; and some few to be read, wholly,
and with diligence and attention. Some Books also may be read by Deputy, and
Extracts made of them by others: But that would be only in the less important
Arguments, and the meaner sort of Books, else distilled Books are like common
distilled Waters, flashy things. Reading makes a full Man; Conference a ready
Man; and Writing an exact Man. And therefore if a Man Write little, he had need
have a great memory; if he Confer little, he had need have a present Wit; and
if he Read little, he had need have much cunning to seem to know that he does
not. Histories make Men Wise, Poets Witty, the Mathematics Subtle, Natural
Philosophy Deep, Moral Grave, Logic and Rhetoric able to Contend. Abiunt
Studia in Mores; Nay, there is no Stand or Impediment in the Wit, but may be
wrought out by fit Studies: Like as Diseases of the Body may have appropriate
Exercises. Bowling is good for the Stone and Reins, Shooting for the Lungs and
Breast, Gentle Walking for the Stomach, Riding for the Head, and the like. So
if a Man's Wit be wandering, let him Study the Mathematics; for in
Demonstrations, if his Wit be called away never so little, he must begin again:
If his Wit be not apt to distinguish or find differences, let him Study the
Schoolmen; for they are Cumini sectores. If he be not apt to beat over
matters, and to call up one thing to prove and illustrate another, let him
Study the Lawyers Cases; so every Defect of the mind may have a special Receipt.

LI. Of Faction.
MANY have an Opinion not Wise; that for a Prince to govern his Estate, or for
a great Person to govern his Proceedings, according to the respect of Factions,
is a principal part of Policy; whereas contrariwise, the chiefest Wisdom is,
either in ordering those things which are General, and wherein Men of several
Factions do nevertheless agree; or in dealing with correspondence to particular
persons one by one. But I say not, that the consideration of Factions is to be
neglected. Mean Men in their rising must adhere, but great Men that have
strength in themselves, were better to maintain themselves indifferent and
Neutral: Yet even in beginners to adhere so moderately, as he be a Man of the
one Faction, which is most passable with the other, commonly gives best way.
The lower and weaker Faction is the firmer in Conjunction: and it is often
seen, that a few that are stiff, do tire out a great number that are more
moderate. When one of the Factions is extinguished, the remaining subdivideth:
As the Faction between Lucullus, and the rest of the Nobles of the Senate
(which they called Optimates) held out a while against the Faction of Pompey
and Caesar; but when the Senates Authority was pulled down, Caesar and Pompey
soon after brake. The Faction or Party of Antonius, and Octavianus Caesar,
against Brutus and Cassius, held out likewise for a time: But when Brutus and
Cassius were overthrown, then soon after Antonius and Octavianus brake and
subdivided. These examples are of Wars, but the same holds in private
Factions: And therefore those that are Seconds in Factions, do many times, when
the Faction subdivideth, prove Principals; but many times also they prove
Ciphers and cashiered. For many a Man's strength is in opposition, and when
that fails, he grows out of use. It is commonly seen, that Men once placed,
take in with the contrary Faction to that, by which they enter, thinking belike
that they have their first sure, and now are ready for a new Purchase. The
Traitor in Faction lightly goes away with it; for when matters have stuck long
in Ballancing, the winning of some one Man casts them, and he gets all the
thanks. The even carriage between two Factions, proceeds not always of
moderation, but of a trueness to a Man's self, with end to make use of both.
Certainly in Italy, they hold it a little suspect in Popes, when they have
often in their mouth padre commune, and take it to be a Sign of one that
means to refer all to the greatness of his own House. Kings had need beware,
how they side themselves, and make themselves as of a Faction or Party; for
Leagues within the State are ever pernicious to Monarchies; for they raise an
Obligation, Paramount to Obligation of Sovereignty, and make the King, Tanquam
unus ex nobis; as was to be seen in the League of France. When Factions are
carried too high, and too violently, it is a sign of weakness in Princes, and
much to the prejudice both of their Authority and Business. The motions of
Factions under Kings, ought to be like the motions (as the Astronomers speak)
of the Inferior Orbs, which may have their proper motions, but yet still are
quietly carried by the higher motion of Primum Mobile.

LII. Of Ceremonies and Respects.
HE that is only real, had need have exceeding great parts of Virtue, as the
Stone had need to be rich, that is set without foil. But if a Man mark it well,
it is in praise and commendation of Men, as it is in gettings and gains: For
the Proverb is true, That light gains make heavy purses; for light gains come
thick, whereas great come but now and then. So it is true, that small matters
win great commendation, because they are continually in use, and in note;
whereas the occasion of any great Virtue comes but on Festivals. Therefore it
does much add to a Man's Reputation, and is, (as Queen Isabella said) Like
perpetual Letters Commendatory, to have good forms. To attain them, it almost
suffices not to despise them; for so shall a Man observe them in others: And
let him trust himself with the rest. For if he labor too much to express them,
he shall lose their Grace, which is to be Natural and Unaffected. Some Men's
behavior is like a Verse, wherein every Syllable is measured. How can a Man
comprehend great matters, that breaks his mind too much to small
observations? Not to use Ceremonies at all, is to teach others not to use them
again; and so diminish respect to himself; especially, they are not to be
omitted to strangers, and formal Natures: But the dwelling upon them, and
exalting them above the Moon, is not only tedious, but does diminish the faith
and credit of him that speaks. And certainly, there is a kind of conveying of
effectual and imprinting Passions amongst Complements, which is of singular
use, if a Man can hit upon it. Amongst a Man's Peers, a Man shall be sure of
familiarity; and therefore it is good a little to keep State. Amongst a Man's
Inferiors, one shall be sure of Reverence; and therefore it is good a little to
be familiar. He that is too much in any thing, so that he gives another
occasion of Society, makes himself cheap. To apply ones self to others is
good, so it be with Demonstration, that a Man does it upon regard, and not
facility. It is a good Precept generally in seconding another, yet to add
somewhat of ones own; as if you would grant his opinion, let it be with some
distinction; if you will follow his Motion, let it be with Condition; if you
allow his Counsel, let it be with alleging further Reason. Men had need
beware, how they be too perfect in Complements: For be they never so sufficient
otherwise, their enviers will be sure to give them that Attribute, to the
disadvantage of their greater Virtues. It is loss also in business, to be too
full of respects, or to be too curious in observing Times and Opportunities.
Solomon says, He that considers the Wind shall not Sow, and he that looks
to the Clouds shall not Reap. A wise Man will make more opportunities than he
finds. Men's Behavior should be like their Apparel, not too Strait, or point
device, but free for Exercise or Motion.

LIII. Of Praise.
PRAISE is the Reflection of Virtue, but it is as the Glass or Body which
gives the Reflection. If it be from the common People, it is commonly false
and naught, and rather follows vain Persons than virtuous. For the common
People understand not many excellent virtues: the lowest virtues draw praise
from them, the middle virtues work in them Astonishment or Admiration, but of
the highest Virtues they have no sense or perceiving at all, but shows and
Species virtutibus similes serve best with them. Certainly Fame is like a
River, that bears up things light and swollen, and drowns things weighty and
solid: But if Persons of Quality and Judgment concur, then it is, (as the
Scripture says) Nomen bonum instar ung^enti fragrantis. It fills all round
about, and will not easily away: For the Odours of Ointments are more durable
than those of Flowers. There be so many false Points of Praise that a Man may
justly hold it a suspect. Some Praises proceed merely of Flattery, and if he be
an ordinary Flatterer, he will have certain common Attributes, which may serve
every Man: If he be a cunning Flatterer, he will follow the Arch Flatterer,
which is a Man's self: And wherein a Man thinks best of himself, therein the
Flatterer will uphold him most; but if he be an impudent Flatterer, look
wherein a Man is conscious to himself that he is most defective, and is most
out of Countenance in himself, that will the Flatterer Entitle him to per
force, Spreta Conscientia. Some Praises come of good wishes and respects, which
is a form due in Civility to Kings and great Persons, Laudando praecipere, when
by telling Men what they are, they represent to them what they should be. Some
Men are praised maliciously to their hurt, thereby to stir envy and jealousy
toward them, Pessimum genus inimicorum laudantium, insomuch as it was a
Proverb amongst the Grecians; that he that was praised to his hurt should have
a push rise upon his Nose; as we say, That a blister will rise upon ones Tongue
that tells a Lie. Certainly moderate praise, used with opportunity, and not
vulgar, is that which does the good. Solomon says, He that praises his friend
aloud, rising early, it shall be to him no better than a Curse. Too much
magnifying of a Man or matter, does irritate contradiction, and procure envy
and scorn. To praise a Man's self cannot be decent, except it be in rare cases;
but to praise a Man's Office or profession, he may do it with good Grace* and
with a kind of Magnanimity. The Cardinals of Rome, which are Theologues, and
Friars, and Schoolmen, have a Phrase of notable contempt and scorn toward
civil business: For they call all Temporal business, of Wars, Embassages,
Judicature, and other employments, Shirreri, which is under Sheriffries, as if
they were but matters for Under-Sheriffs and Catchpoles: though many times
those Under-Sheriffries do more good than their high speculations. Saint Paul,
when he boasts of himself, he does often interlace; I speak like a Fool; but
speaking of his Calling, he says, Magnifico Apostolatum meum.

LIVE. Of Vain Glory.
IT was prettily devised of Aesop, The Fly sat upon the Axletree of the
Chariot-Wheel, and said, What a Dust do I raise? So are there some vain
Persons, that whatsoever goes alone, or moves upon greater means, if they
have never so little hand in it, they think it is they that carry it. They that
are glorious, must needs be factious; for all bravery stands upon comparisons.
They must needs be violent, to make good their own vaunts. Neither can they be
secret, and therefore not effectual; but according to the French Proverb,
Beaucoup de Bruit, peu de Fruit; Much Bruit, little Fruit. Yet certainly there
is use of this Quality in Civil Affairs. Where there is an Opinion and Fame to
be created, either of Virtue or Greatness, these Men are good Trumpeters.
Again, as Titus Livius notes in the case of Antiochus, and the Aetolians,
There are sometimes great effects of cross Lies: As if a Man that Negotiates
between two Princes, to draw them to join in a War against the third, does
extol the Forces of either of them above measure, the one to the other: And
sometimes he that deals between Man and Man, raises his own credit with both,
by pretending greater Interest than he has in either. And in these and the
like kinds, it often falls out, that somewhat is produced of nothing: For Lies
are sufficient to breed Opinion, and Opinion brings on Substance. In Military
Commanders and Soldiers, Vain Glory is an essential Point: For as Iron sharpens
Iron, so by Glory one Courage sharpneth another. In cases of great Enterprise,
upon Charge and Adventure, a Composition of Glorious Natures does put Life into
Business; and those that are of solid and sober Natures have more of the
Ballast than of the Sail. In Fame of Learning the Flight will slow, without
some Feathers of Ostentation. Qui de contemnenda Gloria Libros scribunt, Nomen
suum inscribunt. Socrates, Aristotle, Galen, were Men full of Ostentation.
Certainly Vain Glory helps to perpetuate a Man's Memory; and Virtue was never
so beholden to humane Nature, as it received his due at the Second Hand.
Neither had the Fame of Cicero, Seneca, Plinius Secundus, born her Age so well,
if it had not been joined with some Vanity in themselves; like unto Varnish,
that makes Cielings not only shine, but last. But all this while, when I speak
of Vain Glory, I mean not of that property that Tacitus does attribute to
Mucianus, Omnium quae dixerat, feceratque, Art quadam Ostentator: For that
proceeds not of Vanity, but of Natural Magnanimity and Discretion: And in some
Persons, is not only Comely, but Gracious. For Excusations, Cessions, Modesty
it self well governed, are but Arts of Ostentation. And amongst those Arts
there is none better than that which Plinius Secundus speaks of, which is to
be liberal of Praise and Commendation to others, in that wherein a Man's self
has any Perfection. For, says Pliny very wittily, In commending another, you
do your self right: For he that you commend, is either Superior to you, in that
you commend, or Inferior. If he be Inferior, if he be to be commended, you much
more: If he be Superior, if he be not to b^ commended, you much less.
Glorious.Men are the scorn of wise Men, the admiration of Fools, the Idols of
Parasites, and the Slaves of their own Vaunts.

LV. Of Honor and Reputation.
THE Winning of Honor is but the revealing of Man's Virtue and Worth without
Disadvantage. For some in their Actions do woo and affect Honor and
Reputation; which sort of Men are commonly much talked of, but inwardly little
admired. And some, contrariwise, darken their Virtue in the show of it, so as
they be undervalued in Opinion. If a Man perform that which has not been
attempted before, or attempted and given over, or has been achieved, but not
with so good circumstance, he shall purchase more Honor, than by effecting a
matter of greater difficulty or virtue, wherein he is but a follower. If a Man
so temper his Actions, as in some one of them he does content every Faction or
Combination of People, the Music will be the fuller. A Man is an ill Husband
of his Honor that enters into any Action, the failing wherein may disgrace
him more than the carrying of it through can Honor him. Honor that is gained
and broken upon another, has the quickest reflection, like Diamonds cut with
Fascets. And therefore let a Man contend to excel any Competitors of his in
Honor, in out-shooting them, if he can, in their own Bow. Discreet Followers
and Servants help much to Reputation: Omnis fama a Domesticis emanat. Envy,
which is the Canker of Honor is best extinguished by declaring a Man's self in
his ends, rather to seek Merit than Fame; and by attributing a Man's successes,
rather to Divine Providence and Felicity than to his own Virtue or Policy. The
true marshalling of the Degrees of Sovereign Honor, are these. In the first
place are, Conditores Imperiorum, Founders of States, and Commonwealths; such
as were Romulus, Cyrus, Caesar, Ottoman, Ismael. In the second place are,
Legislatores, Lawgivers; which are also called Second Founders, or Perpetui
Principes, because they govern by their Ordinances after they are gone; such
were Lycurgus, Solon, Justinian, Edgar, Alphonsus of Castile the wise, that
made the Siete Patridas. In the third place are, Liberatores or Salvatores;
such as compound the long miseries of Civil Wars, or deliver their Countries
from Servitude of Strangers or Tyrants; as Augustus Caesar, Vespasianus,
Aurelianus, Theodoricus, King Henry the Seventh of England, King Henry the
Fourth of France. In the fourth place are Propagatores, or Propugnatores
Imperii; such as in Honorable Wars enlarge their territories, or make noble
defense against Invaders. And in the last place are Patres Patriae, which Reign
justly, and make the times good wherein they live. Both which last kinds need
no Examples, they are in such number. Degrees of Honor in Subjects are: First,
Participes Curarum, those upon whom Princes do discharge the greatest Weight of
their Affairs, their Right Hands, as we call them. The next are, Duces Belli,
Great Leaders, such as are Princes Lieutenants, and do them notable services in
the Wars. The third are Gratiosi, Favorites, such as need not this scantling,
to be Solace to the Sovereign, and harmless to the People. And the fourth
Negotiis Pares, such as have great places under Princes, and execute their
places with sufficiency. There is an Honor likewise which may be ranked
amongst the greatest, which happens rarely, that is, of such as Sacrifice
themselves to Death or Danger for the Good of their Country; as was M.
Regulus, and the two Decii.

LVI. Of Judicature.
JUDGES ought to remember, that their Office is, Jus dicere, and not Jus dare:
To interpret Law, and not to make Law, or give Law: Else will it be like the
Authority claimed by the Church of Rome, which under pretext of exposition of
Scripture, does not stick to add and alter, and to pronounce that which they do
not find; and by show of Antiquity to introduce Novelty. Judges ought to be
more learned than Witty, more Reverend than Plausible, and more advised than
Confident. Above all things Integrity is their Portion and proper Virtue:
Cursed (says the Law) is he that removes the Land Mark. The mislayer of a
meer-Stone is to blame; but it is the unjust Judge that is the Capital Remover
of Landmarks, when he defines amiss of Lands and Property. One foul Sentence
does more hurt than many foul Examples; for these do but corrupt the Stream,
the other corrupts the Fountain. So says Solomon, Fons turbatus, and V^na
corrupta, est Justus cadens in causa sua coram Adversario. The Office of Judges
may have reference unto the Parties that sue, unto the Advocates that plead,
unto the Clerks and Ministers of Justice underneath them, and to the Sovereign
or State above them.

First, For the Causes or Parties that sue. There be (says the Scripture) that
turn Judgment into Wormwood; and surely there be also that turn it into
Vinegar; for Injustice makes it bitter, and Delays make it sour. The principal
Duty of a Judge is to suppress force and fraud, whereof force is the more
pernicious when it is open, and fraud when it is close and disguised. Add
thereto contentious Suits, which ought to be spewed out as the Surfeit of
Courts. A Judge ought to prepare his way to a Just Sentence, as God uses to
prepare his way by raising Valleys, and taking down Hills: So when there
appears on either side an high Hand, violent Prosecution, cunning Advantages
taken, Combination, Power, Great Counsel, then is the Virtue of a Judge seen,
to make Inequality Equal, that he may plant his Judgment as upon an even
Ground. Qui fortiter emungit, elicit sanguinem; and where the Wine Press is
hard wrought, it yields a harsh Wine that tastes of the Grape-Stone. Judges
must beware of hard Constructions, and strained Inferences; for there is no
worse Torture than the Torture of Laws, especially, in case of Laws penal; they
ought to have care, that that which was meant for Terror, be not turned into
Rigor, and that they bring not upon the People that Shower whereof the
Scripture speaks, Pluet super eos Laqueos: for penal Laws pressed are a
Shower of Snares upon the People. Therefore let Penal Laws, if they have been
Sleepers of long, or if they be grown unfit for the present Time, be by wise
Judges confined in the Execution, Judicis Officium est, ut Res ita Tempora
Rerum, etc. In Causes of Life and Death, Judges ought (as far as the Law
permits) in Justice to remember Mercy; and to cast a severe Eye upon the
Example, but a merciful Eye upon the Person.

Secondly, For the Advocates and Council that plead; Patience and Gravity of
hearing is an essential part of Justice, and an over-speaking Judge is no
well-tuned Cymbal. It is no Grace to a Judge, first to find that which he might
have heard in due time from the Bar, or to show quickness of conceit in cutting
off Evidence or Counsel too short, or to prevent Informations by Questions
though pertinent. The parts of a Judge in hearing are four; To direct the
Evidence; to moderate length, repetition, or impertinency of Speech. To
Recapitulate, Select, and Collate the material Points of that which has been
said; And to give the Rule or Sentence. Whatsoever is above these, is too much;
and proceeds either of Glory and willingness to speak, or of Impatience to
hear, or of shortness of Memory, or of want of a stayed and eq^^l Attention. It
is a strange thing to see, that the boldness of Advocates should prevail with
Judges; where as they should imitate God in whose seat they sit, who represseth
the Presumptuous, and gives Grace to the Modest. But it is more strange, that
Judges should have noted Favorites; which cannot but cause multiplication of
Fees* and suspicion of By-ways. There is due from the Judge to the Advocate
some Commendation and Gracing, where Causes are well handled, and fair pleaded;
especially toward the side which obtains not; for that upholds in the Client
the Reputation of his Counsel, and beats down in him the conceit of his Cause.
There is likewise due to the Public a civil Reprehension of Advocates, where
there appears cunning Counsel, gross Neglect, slight Information, indiscreet
Pressing, or an overbold Defense. And let not the Counsel at the Bar chop with
the Judge, nor wind himself into the handling of the Cause anew, after the
Judge has declared his Sentence: But on the other side, let not the Judge meet
the Cause half way, nor give occasion to the Party to say, His Counsel or
Proofs were not heard.

Thirdly, For that that concerns Clerks and Ministers. The Place of Justice is
an hallowed Place; and therefore not only the Bench, but the Foot-pace, and
Precincts, and Purprise thereof ought to be preserved without Scandal and
Corruption. For certainly Grapes (as the Scripture says) will not be gathered
of Thorns or Thistles; neither can Justice yield her Fruit with Sweetness
amongst the Briars and Brambles of Catching and Poling Clerks and Ministers.
The Attendance of Courts is subject to four bad Instruments: First, Certain
Persons that are sowers of Suits which make the Court swell, and the Country
pine. The second sort is, Of those that engage Courts in Quarrels of
Jurisdiction, and are not truly Amici Curiae, but Parasiti Curiae, (...)
puffing a Court up beyond her bounds, for their own Scraps and Advantage. The
third sort is, Of those that may be accounted the Left hands of Courts; Persons
that are full of nimble and finister tricks and shifts, whereby they pervert
the plain and direct Courses of Courts, and bring Justice into oblique Lines
and Labyrinths. And the fourth is, the Poller and Exacter of Fees, which
justifies the common resemblance of the Courts of Justice to the Bush,
whereunto while the sheep flies for Defense in Weather, he is sure to lose part
of his Fleece. On the other side, an Ancient Clerk, skilful in Precedents, wary
in proceeding, and understanding in the Business of the Court, is an excellent
Finger of a Court, and does many times point the way to the Judge himself.

Fourthly, For that which may concern the Sovereign and Estate. Judges ought
above all to remember the conclusion of the Roman Twelve Tables, Salus Populi
Suprema Lex; and to know, that Laws, except they be in order to that end, are
but things captious, and Oracles not well inspired. Therefore it is an happy
thing in a State, when Kings and States do often consult with Judges; and
again, when Judges do often consult with the King and State: The one, when
there is a matter of Law intervenient in business of State; The other, when
there is some consideration of State intervenient in matter of Law. For many
times the things deduced to Judgment may be Meum and Tuum, when the reason and
consequence thereof may Trench to point of Estate. I call matter of Estate not
only the parts of Sovereignty, but whatsoever introduces any great Alteration,
or dangerous Precedent, or concerns manifestly any great portion of People.
And let no Man weakly conceive, that Just Laws and true Policy have any
Antipathy: For they are like Spirits and Sinews, that one moves with the other.
Let Judges also remember, That Solomon's Throne was supported by Lions on both
sides: Let them be Lions, but yet Lions under the Throne; being circumspect,
that the^ do not check or oppose any points of Sovereignty. (...) not Judges
also be so ignorant of their own right, as to think there is not left to them,
as a Principal part of their Office, a wise Use and Application of Laws; for
they may remember what the Apostle says of a greater Law than theirs, Nos
scimus quia Lex bona est, modo quis ea utatur legitime.

LVII. Of Anger.
TO seek to extinguish Anger utterly, is but a bravery of the Stoics. We have
better Oracles: Be angry, but sin not. Let not the Sun go down upon your anger.
Anger must be limited and confined, both in Race and Time. We will first speak,
how the Natural Inclination and Habit to be angry, may be attempted and calmed.
Secondly, How the particular motions of anger may be repressed, or at least
refrained from doing mischief. Thirdly, How to raise anger, or appease anger in
another.

For the first: There is no other way but to Meditate and Ruminate well upon
the effects of Anger, how it troubles Man's Life. And the best time to do this
is, to look back upon Anger, when the fit is thoroughly over. Seneca says well;
That Anger is like Ruin, which breaks it self upon that it falls. The
Scripture exhorts us, To possess our Souls in patience. Whosoever is out of
patience, is out of Possession of his Soul. Men must not turn Bees;

-- Animasque in vulnere ponunt. Anger is certainly a kind of Baseness; as it
appears ^^ll in the Weakness of those Subjects in whom it ^^gns, Children,
Women, Old Folks, Sick Folks. Only Men must beware, that they carry their Anger
rather with Scorn, than with Fear: So that they may seem rather to be above the
injury than below it, which is a thing easily done, if a Man will give Law to
himself in it.

For the second Point. The Causes and Motives of Anger are chiefly three:
First, to be too sensible of hurt: For no Man is Angry that feels not himself
hurt; and therefore tender and delicate Persons must needs be often Angry: They
have so many things to trouble them, which more robust Natures have little
sense of. The next is, the Apprehension and Construction of the Injury offered,
to be in the circumstances thereof, full of contempt. For contempt is that
which puts an edge upon Anger, as much or more than the hurt it self: And
therefore when Men are ingenious in picking out circumstances of contempt, they
do kindle their Anger much. Lastly, Opinion of the touch of a Man's Reputation
does multiply and sharpen Anger: Wherein the remedy is, that a Man should have,
as Gonsalvo was wont to say, Telam Honoris Crassiorem. But in all refrainings
of Anger, it is the best remedy to win Time, and to make a Man's self believe
that the Opportunity of his revenge is not yet come; but that he foresees a
time for it, and so to still himself in the mean time, and reserve it.

To contain Anger from Mischief, though it take hold of a Man, there be two
things, whereof you must have special Caution: The one, of extreme bitterness
of Words, especially if they be Aculeate and Proper; for Communia Maledicta are
nothing so much. And again, That in Anger a Man reveal no Secrets; for that
makes him not fit for Society. The other, That you do not peremptorily break
off in any business in a fit of Anger; but howsoever you show bitterness, do
not act any thing that is not revocable.

For raising and appeasing Anger in another: It is do^^ chiefly by choosing of
Times; when Men are frowardest and worst disposed, to incense them. Again, by
gathering (as was touched before) all that you can find out to aggravate the
contempt; and the two remedies are by the contraries: The former, to take good
Times, when first to relate to a Man an angry business: For the first
Impression is much; and the other is, to sever as much as may be the
Construction of the Injury from the Point of contempt; imputing it to
Misunderstanding, Fear, Passion, or what you will.

LVIII. Of Vicissitude of Things.
SOLOMON says, There is no new thing upon the Earth. So that as Plato had an
imagination, That all knowledge was but a remembrance: So Solomon gives his
sentence, That all Novelty is but Oblivion: Whereby you may see, That the River
of Lethe runs as well above ground as below. There is an abstruse Astrologer
that says, If it were not for two things that are constant, (The one is, That
the fixed Stars ever stand at like distance one from another, and never come
nearer together, nor go further asunder; the other, That the Diurnal Motion
perpetually keeps Time) no Individual would last one moment. Certain it is,
That the matter is in a perpetual Flux, and never at a stay. The great
Winding-Sheets that bury all things in Oblivion are two; Deluges and
Earthquakes. As for Conflagrations and great, Droughts, they do not merely
dispeople, but destroy. Phaeton's Car went but a Day: And the Three years
Drought, in the time of Elias, was but particular, and left People alive. As
for the great burnings by Light^^ngs, which are often in the West Indies, they
are but ^arrow. But in the other two Destructions, by Deluge and Earthquake, it
is further to be noted, That the remnant of People which hap to be reserved,
are commonly ignorant and mountainous People, that can give no account of the
time past; so that the Oblivion is all one, as if none had been left. If you
consider well of the People of the West Indies, it is very probable, that they
are a newer or younger People, than the People of the Old World. And it is much
more likely, that the destruction that has heretofore been there, was not by
Earthquakes, (as the Egyptian Priest told Solon, concerning the Island of
Atlantis, That it was swallowed by an Earthquake) but rather, it was Desolated
by a particular Deluge: For Earthquakes are seldom in those parts. But on the
other side, they have such pouring Rivers, as the Rivers of Asia, and Africa,
and Europe, are but Brooks to them. Their Andes likewise, or Mountains, are far
higher than those with us; whereby it seems, that the Remnants of Generations
of Men were in such a particular Deluge saved. As for the observation that
Michiavel has, That the Jealousy of Sects does much extinguish the memory of
things; traducing Gregory the Great, that he did what in him lay to extinguish
all Heathen Antiquities. I do not find that those Zeals do any great Effects,
nor last long; as it appeared in the Succession of Sabinian, who did revive the
former Antiquities.

The Vicissitude or Mutations in the Superior Globe, are no fit matter for this
present Argument. It may be Plato's Great year, if the World should last so
long, would have some effect; not in renewing the State of like Individuals,
(for that in the Fume of those, that conceive the Celestial Podies have more
accurate Influences upon these things below, than indeed they have) but in
Gross. Cemets out of question have likewise Power and Effect over the Gross and
Mass of things: But they are rather gazed upon, and waite^ upon in their
Journey, than wisely observed in the^ Effects, especially in their respective
Effects; that (...)* What kind of Comet for Magnitude, Color, Version of the
Beams, placing in the Region of Heaven, or lasting, produces what kind of
effects.

There is a Toy which I have heard, and I would not have it given over, but
waited upon a little. They say it is observed in the Low Countries, (I know not
in what part) That every five and thirty Years, the same kind and suit of Years
and Weathers comes about again, as great Frosts, great Wet, great Droughts,
warm Winters, Summers with little Heat, and the like; and they call it the
Prime. It is a thing I do rather mention, because computing backwards, I have
found some concurrence.

But to leave these points of Nature, and come to men. The greatest Vicissitude
of things amongst men, is, The Vicissitude of Sects and Religions: For those
Orbs rule in men's minds most. The true Religion is built upon the Rock, the
rest are tossed upon the Waves of Time. To speak therefore of the Causes of new
Sects, and to give some Counsel concerning them, as far as the weakness of
Humane Judgment can give stay to so great Revolutions.

When the Religion formerly received, is rent by Discords; and when the
Holiness of the Professors of Religion is decayed, and full of Scandal, and
withal the Times be Stupid, Ignorant, and Barbarous, you may doubt the
springing up of a new Sect, if then also there should arise any extravagant and
strange Spirit to make himself Author thereof: All which points held, when
Mahomet published his Law. If a new Sect have not two properties, fear it not;
for it will not spread. The one is, The Supplanting or the Opposing of
Authority established: For nothing is more popular than that. The other is, The
giving License to pleasures and Voluptuous Life. For as for Speculative
Heresies, (such as were in Ancient Times the (...), and now the Arminians)
though they work mightily upon Men's Wits, yet they do not produce any great
alteration in States, except it be by the help of Civil Occasions. There be
three manner of Plantations of new Sects, By the Power of Signs and Miracles,
by the Eloquence and Wisdom of Speech and Persuasion, and by the Sword; for
Martyrdo^s, I reckon them amongst Miracles, because they seem to exceed the
strength of Humane Nature: And I may do the like of Superlative and Admirable
Holiness of Life. Surely there is no better way to stop the rising of new Sects
and Schisms, than to reform abuses, to compound the smaller differences, to
proceed mildly, and not with Sanguinary persecutions; and rather to take off
the principal Authors by winning and advancing them, than to enrage them by
violence and bitterness.

The Changes and Vicissitude in Wars are many, but chiefly in three things: In
the Seats or Stages of the War; in the Weapons, and in the manner of the
Conduct. Wars in Ancient Time, seemed more to move from East to West: For the
Persians, Assyrians, Arabians, Tartars (which are the Invaders) were all
Eastern People. It is true, the Gauls were Western, but we read but of two
Incursions of theirs, the one to Gallo-Graecia, the other to Rome. But East and
West have no certain Points of Heaven, and no more have the Wars, either from
the East or West any certainty of Observation. But North and South are fixed,
and it has seldom or never been seen, that the far Southern People have
invaded the Northern, but contrariwise. Whereby it is manifest, that the
Northern Tract of the World is in nature the more Martial Religion; be it in
respect of the Stars of that Hemisphere, or of the great Continents that are
upon the North, whereas the South Part, for ought that is known, is almost all
Sea; or (which is most apparent) of the Cold of the Northern Parts, which is
that, which without Aid of Discipline does make the bodies hardest, and the
Co^rages warmest.

Upon the Breaking and Shivering of a great State and Empire, you may be sure
to have Wars. For great Empires, while they stand, do enervate and destroy the
forces of the Natives which they have subdued, resting upon their own
Protecting forces; and then when they fail also, all goes to ruin, and they
become a Prey. So was it in the decay of the Roman Empire; and likewise in the
Empire of Almain, after Charles the Great, every Bird taking a Feather, and
were not unlike to befall to Spain, if it should break. The great Accessions
and Unions of Kingdoms do likewise stir up Wars. For when a State grows to an
Overpower, it is like a great flood that will be sure to overflow. As it has
been seen in the States of Rome, Turkey, Spain, and others. Look when the World
has fewest Barbarous People, but such as commonly will not marry or generate,
except they know means to live; (as it is almost every where at this day,
except Tartary) there is no danger of Inundations of People; but when there be
great Shoals of People, which go on to populate without foreseeing means of
Life and Sustentation, it is of necessity that once in an Age or two, they
discharge a Portion of their People upon other Nations, which the ancient
Northern People were wont to do by Lot, casting Lot what part should stay at
home, and what should seek their Fortunes. When a Warlike State grows soft and
effeminate, they may be sure of a War; for commonly such States are grown rich
in the time of their Degenerating, and so the Prey inviteth, and their decay in
valor encourages a War.

As for the Weapons, it hardly falls under Rule and Observation; yet we see
even they have Returns and Vicissitudes. For certain it is, that Ordnance was
known in the City of the Oxydrakes in India; and was that which the Macedonians
called Thunder and Lightning, and Magic. And it was well known, that the use
Ordnance has been in China above 2000 Years. The conditions of Weapons, and
their improvement are; First, the fetching afar off; for that out-runs the
danger, as it is seen in Ordnance and Muskets. Secondly, The strength of the
Percussion, wherein likewise Ordnance do exceed all Arietations, and ancient
Inventions. The Third is, The commodious use of them; as that they may serve in
all Weathers, that the Carriage may be light and manageable, and the like.

For the Conduct of the War; at the first Men rested exreamly upon Number, they
did put the Wars likewise upon main Force and Valor, pointing days for pitched
Fields, and so trying it out upon an even match, and they were more ignorant in
Ranging and Arraying their ^^ttles. After they grew to rest upon Number, rather
Competent than Vast, they grew to advantages of Place, Cunning Diversions, and
the like; and they grew more skilful in the ordering of their Battles.

In the Youth of a State, Arms do flourish; in the middle Age of a State
Learning, and then both of them together for a time: In the declining Age of a
State, Mechanical Arts and Merchandise. Learning, has his Infancy when it is
but beginning, and almost Childish; then his Youth when it is Luxuriant and
Juvenile; then his strength of Years, when it is solid and reduced; and lastly,
his Old Age; when it waxed dry and exhaust: But it is not good to look too long
upon these turning Wheels of Vicissitude, lest we become giddy. As for the
Philology of them, that is but a Circle of Tales, and therefore not fit for
this Writing.

LIX. A Fragment of an Essay of Fame.
THE Poets make Fame a Monster. They describ^ her in part finely and elegantly;
and in pa^^ gravely and sententiously. They say, look how many Feathers she
has, so many Eyes she has underneath; so many Tongues; so many Voices; she
pricks up so many Ears.

This is a flourish: There follow excellent Parables* as that she gathers
strength in going; that she goes upon the ground, and yet hides her head in
the Clouds. That in the daytime she sits in a Watchtower, and flies most
by Night: That she mingleth things done, with things not done: And that she
(...) a terror to great Cities: But that which passes all the rest is: they do
recount that the Earth, Mother of the Giants, that made War against Jupiter,
and were by him destroyed, thereupon, in anger, brought forth Fame: For certain
it is, that Rebels figured by the Giants and Seditious Fames, and Libels, are
but Brothers and Sisters; Masculine and Feminine. But now if a Man can tame
this Monster, and bring her to feed at the hand, and govern her, and with her
fly other ravening Fowl, and kill them, it is somewhat worth. But we are
infected with the style of the Poets. To speak now in a sad and serious manner:
There is not in all the Politics, a Place less handled, and more worthy to be
handled, than this of Fame. We will therefore speak of these points. What are
false Fames; and what are true Fames; and how they may be best discerned; how
Fames may be sown and raised; how they may be spread and multiplied, and how
they may be checked and laid dead: And other things concerning the Nature of
Fame. Fame is of that force, as there is scarcely any great Action wherein it
has not a great part, especially in the War. Mucianus undid Vitellius by a
Fame that he scattered; that Vitellius had in purpose to remove the Legions of
Syria into Germany: and the Legions of Germany into Syria: whereupon the
Legions of Syria were infinitely inflamed. Julius Caesar took Pompey
unprovided, and laid asleep his industry and preparations, by a Fame that he
cunningly gave out, how Caesar's own Soldiers loved him not; and being wearied
with the Wars, and laden with the spoils of Gaul, would forsake him as soon as
he came into Italy. Livia settled all things for the Success^on of her Son
Tiberius, by continual giving out, that her Husband Augustus was upon recovery
and amendment. And it is an usual thing with Bashaws, to conceal the Death of
the great Turk from the Janissaries and Men of War, to save the Sacking of
Constant^^ple, and other Towns, as their manner is. Themis^^cles made Xe^xes
King of Persia post apace out of Graecia, by giving out that the Graecians had
a purpose to break his Bridge of Ships, which he had made athwart Hellespont.
There be a thousand such like Examples; and the more they are, the less they
need to be repeated; because a Man meets with them every where: Therefore,
let all wise Governors have as great a watch and care over Fame, as they have
of the Actions and designs themselves.

The rest was not finished.
LX. A Civil Character of Julius Caesar.
JULIUS CAESAR was partaker at first of an exercised Fortune; which turned to
his benefit* For it abated the haughtiness of his spirit, and whetted his
Industry. He had a Mind, turbulent in his Desires and Affections; but in his
judgment and understanding very serene and placid: And this appears by his
easy deliverances of himself, both in his Transactions and in his Speech. For
no Man ever resolved more swiftly, or spoke more perspicuously and plainly.
There was nothing forced or difficult in his expressions. But in his will and
appetite, he was of that Condition, that he never rested in those things he had
gotten; but still thirsted and pursued after new; yet so, that he would not
rush into new Affairs rashly, but settle and make an end of the former, before
he attempted fresh Actions. So that he would put a seasonable period to all his
Undertakings. And therefore, though he won many Battles in Spain, and weakened
their Forces by degrees; yet he would not give over, nor despise the Relics of
the Civil War there, till he had seen all things composed: But then as soon as
that was done, and the State settled, instantly he advanced in his Expedition
against the Parthians.

He was, no doubt, of a very noble Mind; but yet such as aimed more at his
particular Advancement, than at any Merits for the Common Good. For he referred
all things to Himself; and was the true and perfect Center of all his Actions.
By which means, being so fast tied to his Ends, he was still prosperous, and
prevailed in his Purposes; Insomuch, that neither Country, nor Religion, nor
good Turns done him, nor Kindred, nor Friendship diverted his Appetite, nor
bridled him from pursuing his own Ends. Neither was he much inclined to works
of Perpetuity: For he established nothing for the future; He founded no
sumptuous Buildings; He procured to be enacted no wholesome Laws, but still
minded himself: And so his thoughts were confined within the Circle of his own
Life. He sought indeed after Fame and Reputation, because he thought they might
be profitable to his Designs: Otherwise, in his inward thoughts be propounded
to himself rather Absoluteness of Power, than Honor and Fame. For as for
Honor and Fame, he pursued not after them for themselves; but because they
were the Instruments of Power and Greatness. And therefore he was carried on
through a Natural Inclination, not by any Rules that he had learned, to effect
the sole Regiment* and rather to enjoy the same than to seem worthy of it. And
by this means he won much Reputation amongst the People, who are no valuers of
true Worth: But amongst the Nobility and great Men, who were tender of their
own Honors, it procured him no more than this, that he incurred the Brand of
an Ambitious and Daring Man.

Neither did they much err from the Truth who thought him so; for he was by
Nature exceeding bold; and never did put on any show of Modesty, except it were
for some purposes. Yet notwithstanding, he so attempted his Boldness, that it
neither impeached him of Rashness; nor was burdensome to Men; nor rendered his
Nature suspected, but was conceived to flow out of an Innate Sincerity and
freeness of Behavior, and the Nobility of his Birth: And in all other things
he passed, not for a Crafty and Deceitful Person, but for an open hearted and
plain-dealing Man. And whereas he was indeed an Arch-Politician, that could
counterfeit and dissemble sufficiently well; and was wholly compounded of
Frauds and Deceits, so that there was nothing sincere in him, but all
artificial; yet he covered, and disguised himself so, that no such Vices,
appeared to the Eyes of the World; but he was generally reputed to proceed
plainly and uprightly with all Men. Howbeit, he did not stoop to any petty and
mean Artifices, as they do, which are ignorant in State Employments; and depend
not so much upon the strength of their own Wits, as upon the Counsels and
Brains of others, to support their Authority; for he was skilled in the
Turnings of all Humane Affairs; and transacted all Matters, especially those of
high Consequence by himself, and not by others.

He was singularly skilful to avoid Envy; and found it not impertinent to his
Ends, to decline that, though it were with some diminution of his Dignity. For
aiming at a Real Power, he was content to pass by all vain Pomp and outward
shows of Power throughout his whole Life; Till at the last, whether high-flown
with the continual Exercise of Power, or corrupted with Flatteries, he affected
the Ensigns of Power, (the Style and Diad^m of a King,) which was the Bait that
wrought his Overthrow.

This is true, that he harbored the thoughts of a Kingdom from his very youth:
And hereunto the Example of Sylla, and the Kindred of Marius, and his Emulation
of Pompey, and the Corruption and Ambition of the Times, did prick him forward:
But then he paved his way to a Kingdom, after a wonderful and strange manner.
As first, by a Popular and Seditious Power; afterward by a Military Power, and
that of a General in War. For there was required to effect his Ends; First,
That he should break the Power and Authority of the Senate; which, as long as
it stood firm, was adverse, and an hindrance, that no Man could climb to
Sovereignty and Imperial Command. Then the Power of Crassus and Pompey was to
be subdued and quelled, which could not be done otherwise, than by Arms. And
therefore (as the most Cunning Contriver of his own Fortune) he laid his first
Foundation by Bribes; By corrupting the Courts of Justice, by renewing the
memory of Caius Marius, and his party; For most of the Senators and Nobility
were of Sylla's Faction: by the Law of distributing the Fields amongst the
Common People: by the Sedition of the Tribunes, where he was the Author: by the
madness and fury of Catiline, and the Conspirators, unto which Action he
secretly blew the Goals! By the Banishment of Cicero, which was the greatest
Blow, to the Authority of the Senate, as might be; and several other the like
Arts: But most of all by the Conjunction of Crassus and Pompey, both betwixt
themselves, and with him; which was the thing that finished the work.

Having accomplished this part, he betook himself to the other; which was to
make use of, and to enjoy his power. For being made Proconsul of France for
five years; and afterward continuing it for five years more; he furnished
himself with Arms and Legions, and the power of a Warlike and Opulent Province;
as was formidable to Italy.

Neither was he ignorant, that after he had strengthened himself with Arms and a
Military Power, neither Crassus nor Pompey could ever be able to bear up
against him; whereof the one trusted to his great Riches, the other to his Fame
and Reputation; the one decayed through Age, the other in Power and Authority:
And neither of them were grounded upon true and lasting Foundations. And the
rather, for that he had obliged all the Senators and Magistrates: And in a
word, all those that had any power in the Commonwealth, so firmly to himself,
with private benefits, that he was fearless of any Combination or Opposition
against his Designs, till he had openly invaded the Imperial Power.

Which things, though he always bare in his Mind, and at the last acted it, yet
he did not lay down his former person; but colored things so, that what with
the reasonableness of his Demands, what with his pretenses of Peace, and what
with the moderate use of his Successes, he turned all the Envy of the Adverse
Party, and seemed to take up Arms upon necessity for his own preservation and
safety. But the falseness of this pretense manifestly appeared; inasmuch as
soon after having obtained the Regal Power, all Civil War being appeased, and
all his Rivals and Opposites, which might put him to any fear, being removed
out of the way by the stroke of Death; notwithstanding he never thought of
resigning the Republic; no, nor ever made any show or offer of resigning the
same. Which showed plainly, that his ambition of being a King was settled in
him, and remained with him unto his last breath. For he did not lay hold upon
occasions, as they happened, but molded and formed the occasions, as himself
pleased.

His chief Abilities consisted in Martial Knowledge; in which he so excelled,
that he could not only lead an Army, but mould an Army to his own liking. For
he was not more skilful in managing Affairs, than in winning of Hearts. Neither
did he affect this by any ordinary Discipline, as by inuring them to fulfill all
his commands; or by striking a shame into them to disobey, or by carrying a
severe Hand over them: But by such a way as did wonderfully stir up an alacrity
and cheerfulness in them: and did in a sort assure him of the Victory
aforehand, and which did oblige the Soldier to him, more than was fit for a
Free Estate. Now whereas he was versed in all kinds of Martial Knowledge, and
joined Civil Arts with the Arts of War; nothing came so suddenly, or so unlookt
for upon him, for which he had not a remedy at hand: And nothing was so averse,
but that he could pick something for his Turn and Benefit out of it.

He stood sufficiently upon his State and Greatness. For in great Battles, he
would sit at home in the Head Quarter, and manage all Things by Messages, which
wrought him a double benefit. First, that it secured his Person more, and
exposed him the less to Danger. Secondly, that if at any time his Army was
worsted, he could put new spirit into them with his own presence, and the
Addition of fresh Forces, and turn the Fortune of the Day. In the conducting of
his Wars, he would not only follow former Precedents, but he was able to devise
and pursue new Stratagems, according as the accidents and occasions required.

He was constant, and singularly kind, and indulgent in his Friendships
contracted. Notwithstanding, he made choice of such Friends, as a Man might
easily see, that he chose them rather to be Instruments to his Ends, than for
any Good will toward them. And whereas, by Nature, and out of a firm
Resolution, he adhered to this Principle; not to be eminent amongst Great and
deserving Men; but to be chief amongst Inferiors and Vassals: he chose only
mean and active Men, and such as to whom himself might be all in all. And
hereupon grew that saying; So let Caesar live, though I die; and other Speeches
of that kind. As for the Nobility, and those that were his Peers, he contracted
Friendship, with such of them as might be useful to him; and admitted none to
his Cabinet Council, but those that had their Fortunes wholly depending upon
him.

He was moderately furnished with good Literature, and the Arts; But in such
sort as he applied his skill therein to Civil Policy. For he was well read in
History: and was expert in Rhetoric, and the Art of speaking. And because he
attributed much to his good Stars, he would pretend more than an ordinary
Knowledge in Astronomy. As for Eloquence, and a prompt Elocution, that was
Natural to him, and pure.

He was dissolute, and propense to Voluptuousness and Pleasures; which served
well at first for a Cover to his Ambition. For no Man would imagine, that a Man
so loosely given could harbor any Ambitious and Vast Thoughts in his Heart.
Notwithstanding, he so governed his Pleasures, that they were no hindrance,
either to his profit, or to his business: And they did rather whet, than dull
the vigor of his Mind. He was Temperate at his Meals; free from Niceness and
Curiosity in his Lusts; pleasant and Magnificent at public Interludes.

Thus being accomplished, the same thing was the Means of his downfall at
last; which in his Beginnings was a step to his Rise, I mean his Affectation of
Popularity: For nothing is more popular, than to forgive our Enemies. Through
which, either Virtue or Cunning, he lost his Life.

LXI. A Civil Character of Augustus Caesar.
AUGUSTUS CAESAR, (if ever any Mortal Man) was endued with a greatness of Mind,
undisturbed with Passions, clear and well ordered; which is evidenced by the
High Achievements which he performed in his early youth. For those persons
which are of a turbulent Nature or Appetite, do commonly pass their youth in
many Errors; and about their middle, and then, and not before, they show forth
their Perfections; but those that are of a sedate and calm Nature, may be ripe
for great and glorious Actions in their youth. And whereas the Faculties of the
Mind, no less than the Parts and Members of the Body, do consist and flourish
in a good temper of Health, and Beauty, and Strength; So he was in the strength
of the Mind, inferior to his Uncle Julius; but in the Health and Beauty of the
Mind, superior. For Julius being of an unquiet and uncomposed Spirit, (as
those, who are troubled with the Falling Sickness for the most part are,)
notwithstanding he carried on his own ends with much Moderation and Discretion;
but he did not order his ends well, propounding to himself, vast and high
Designs, above the Reach of a Mortal Man. But Augustus, as a Man sober, and
mindful of his Mortality, seemed to propound no other ends to himself, than
such as were orderly and well weighed, and governed by Reason. For first he was
desirous indeed to have the Rule and Principality in his hands; then he sought
to appear worthy of that Power which he should acquire: Next, to enjoy an High
Place, he accounted but a Transitory Thing: Lastly, He endeavored to do such
Actions, as might continue his memory, and leave an Impression of his good
Government to After Ages. And therefore, in the beginning of his Age, he
affected Power; in the middle of his Age, Honor, and Dignity; in the decline
of his years, Ease and Pleasure; and in the end of his Life, he was wholly bent
to Memory and Posterity.

THE TABLE.
OF Adversity. Page 11 Of Ambition. 101 Of Anger. 150 Of Atheism. 41 Of Beauty.
156 Of Boldness. 29 Of Building. 119 Of Ceremonies and Respects. 138 Of
Counsel. 53 Of Cunning. 58 Of Custom and Education. 107 Of Death. 3 Of
Deformity. 117 Of Delays. 57 Of Discourse. 89 Of Dispatch. 65 Of Empire. 48 Of
Envy. 18 Of Expense. 76 Of Faction. 136 Of Followers and Friends. 131 Of
Fortune. 109 Of Friendship. 69 Of Gardens. 123 Of Goodness, and Goodness of
Nature. 30 Of Great Place. 25 Of the true Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates. 77
Of Regiment of Health. 86 Of Honor and Reputation. 144 Of Innovations. 64 Of
Judicature. 146 Of Love. 23 Of Marriage and Single Life. 17 Of Masks and
Triumphs. 103 Of Nature in Men. 105 Of Negotiating. 129 Of Nobility. 33 Of
Parents and Children. 15 Of Plantations. 92 Of Praise. 140 Of Prophecies. 98 Of
Revenge. 9 Of Riches. 95 Of Seditions and Troubles. 34 Of Seeming Wise. 67 Of
Simulation and Dissimulation. 12 Of Studies. 135 Of Superstition. 44 Of
Suspicion. 88 Of Suitors. 133 Of Travel. 46 Of Truth. 1 Of Vain Glory. 142 Of
Vicissitude of Things. 152 Of Unity in Religion. 5 Of Usury. 110 Of Wisdom for
a Man's Self. 62 Of Youth and Age. 114 A Fragment of an Essay of Fame. 158 A
Civil Character of Julius Caesar. 160 A Civil Character of Augustus Caesar. 166

FINIS.
OF THE COLORS OF GOOD and EVIL A Fragment.

IN Deliberatives, the Point is, what is Good, and what is Evil; and of Good
what is greater; and of Evil what is less.

So that the Perswader's Labor, is to make things appear Good or Evil, and
that in an higher or lower Degree; which as it may be performed by true and
solid Reasons, so it may be represented also by Colors, Popularities, and
Circumstances, which are of such force, as they sway the ordinary Judgment
either of a weak Man, or of a wise Man, not fully and considerately attending
and pondering the matter. Besides their power to alter the nature of the
Subject in appearance, and so to lead to Error, they are of no less use to
quicken and strengthen the Opinions and Persuasions which are true: for Reasons
plainly delivered, and always after one manner, especially with Fine and
Fastidious Minds, enter but heavily and dully; whereas if they be varied, and
have more Life and Vigor put into them by these Forms and Insinuations, they
cause a stronger Apprehension, and many times suddenly win the mind to a
Resolution. Lastly, To make a true and safe Judgment, nothing can be of greater
Use and Defense to the Mind, than the Discovering and Reprehension of these
Colors, showing in what Cases they hold, and in what they deceive; which, as
it cannot be done, but out of a very universal knowledge of the Nature of
things; so being performed, it so clears M^n's Judgment and Election, as it
is the less apt to slide into any Error.

Capita Sectionum, quae in Boni Malique Colorum Tabula continentur.
1. CVi caeterae Parts, vel Sectae, secundas unanimiter deferunt, cum singulae
principatum sibi vendicent, Melior reliquis videtur. Nam primas quaeque ex zelo
videtur sumere, secundas autem ex vero and merito tribuere. 2. Cujus
excellentia, vel exuperantia Melior; id toto genere Melius. 3. Quod ad
Veritatem refertur, Majus est, quam quod ad Opinionem. Modus autem and probatio
ejus, quod ad Opinionem pertinet, haec est: Quod quis, si clam putaret forte,
facturus non esset. 4. Quod rem integram servat, Bonum: Quod sine receptu est,
Malum; Nam se recipere non posse, impotentiae genus est; potentia autem Bonum.
5. Quod ex pluribus constat, and divisibilibus, est Majus, quam quod ex
paucioribus, and Magis Vnum: Nam omnia, per parts considerata, majora
videntur; quare and pluralitas partium Magnitudinem prae se fert. Fortius autem
operatur pluralitas partium, si Ordo absit: Nam inducit similitudinem Infiniti,
and impedit comprehensionem. 6. Cujus privatio bona, Malum: Cujus privatio
mala, Bonum. 7. Quod Bono vicinum, Bonum: Quod a Bono remotum, Malum. 8. Quod
quis culpa sua contraxit, Majus Malum: Quod ab externis imponitur, Minus Malum.
9. Quod opera and virtute nostra partum est, Maj^s Bonum: Quod ab alieno
beneficio, vel ab indulgentia Fortunae, delatum est, Minus Bonum. 10. Gradus
Privationis major videtur, quam gradus Diminutionis; and rursus gradus
Inceptionis major videtur, quam gradus Incrementi. 11. Quod laudant homines and
celebrant, bonum; quod vituperant and reprehendunt, malum. 12. Quod etiam ab
inimicis laudatur, magnum Bonum; quod vero ab amicis reprehenditur, magnum
Malum.
The Heads of the Sections of the Table of the Colors of Good and Evil,
rendered into English, are as follow.
1. SInce all Parties, or Sects, challenge the pre-eminence of the First Place
to themselves; that, to which all the rest with one consent give the Second
Place, seems to be better than the others. For every one seems to take the
First Place out of Zeal to it self; but to give the Second where it is really
due. 2. That kind is altogether best, whose Excellence, or Pre-eminence is
best. 3. That, which has a relation to Truth, is Greater than that which
refers to Opinion. But the Measure, and Trial of that, which belongs to
Opinion, is this: It is that which a Man would not do, if he thought it would
not be known. 4. That, which keeps a matter safe and entire, is Good; but what
is destitute and unprovided of Retreat is Bad. For whereas all Ability of
Acting is Good, not to be able to withdraw ones self, is a kind of Impotency.
5. That which consists of more Parts, and those Divisible, is Greater, and more
one, than what is made up of Fewer: For all things when they are looked upon
piecemeal, seem Greater; when also a Plurality of Parts make a show of a Bulk
considerable: Which a Plurality of Parts effects more strongly, if they be in
no certain Order; for it then resembles an Infinity, and hinders the
comprehending of them. 6. That, whose Privation (or, the Want of which) is
Good, is in it self Evil: that, whose Privation (or the Want whereof) is an
Evil, is in it self Good. 7. What is near to Good, is Good; what is at distance
from Good, is Evil. 8. That, which a Man has procured by his own Default, is a
Greater Mischief (or Evil:) that, which is laid on him by others, is a Lesser
Evil. 9. That, which is gotten by our own Pains and Industry, is a greater
Good: that, which comes by another Man's Courtesy, or the Indulgence of
Fortune, is a lesser Good. 10. The Degree of Privation seems Greater than the
Degree of Diminution: And again, the Degree of Inception (or Beginning) seems
greater than the Degree of Increase. 11. That, which Men commend and celebrate,
is good; that, which they dispraise and reprehend, is evil. 12. That, which
draws commendation even from Enemies, is a great Good; but that, which is
reprehended even by Friends, is a great Evil.
A Table of the Colors (or Appearances) of Good and Evil; and their Degrees,
as Places of Persuasion, and Disswasion, and their several Fallaxes, and the
Elenchs of them.
1. CUI caeterae Parts, vel Sectae, secundas unanimiter deferunt, cum singulae
principatum sibi vendicent, Melior reliquis videtur. Nam primas quaeque ex zelo
v^detur sumere; secundas autem ex vero and merito tribuere. That is, Since all
Parties, or Sects, challenge the Pre-eminence of the first Place to themselves;
that, to which all the rest with one consent give the second Place, seems to be
better than the others. For every one seems to take the first Place out of zeal
to it self, but to give the second where it is really due. SO Cicero went about
to prove the Sect of Academicks, which suspended all Asseveration, for to be
the best. For, says he, ask a Stoic, which Philosophy is true, he will prefer
his own: then ask him, which approaches (next) the Truth, he will confess, the
Academicks. So deal with the Epicure, that will scant endure the Stoic to be
in sight of him; so soon as he has placed himself, he will place the
Academicks next him.

So if a Prince took diverse Competitors to a place, and examined them
severally, whom next themselves they would chiefly commend; it were like the
ablest man should have the most second Voices.

The Fallax of this Color happens often in respect of Envy; for men are
accustomed, after themselves, and their own fashion, to incline unto them which
are softest, and are least in their way, in despite and derogation of them,
that hold them hardest to it. So that this Color of Meliority and Pre-eminence
is a sign of Enervetion and Weakness.

2. Cujus excellentia, vel exuperantia Melior; id toto genere Melius. That is,
That kind is altogether best, whose Excellence, or Pre-eminence is best.

APpertaining to this are the Forms: Let us not wander in generalities. Let us
compare particular with particular, etc. This appearance, though it seem of
strength, rather Logical than Rhetorical, yet is very often a Fallax.

Sometimes; because some things are in kind very casual; which if they escape,
prove excellent: so that the kind is inferior, because it is so subject to
peri^; but that, which is excellent, being proved, is superior. As the Blossom
of March, and the Blossom of May, whereof the French Verse goes: Burgeon de
Mars, enfans de Paris,
Si un eschape, bien vaut dix.
So that the Blossom of May is generally better than the Blossom of March; and
yet the best Blossom of March is better than the best Blossom of May.

Sometimes, because the nature of some kinds is to be more equal, and more
indifferent, and not to have very distant Degrees; as has been noted in the
warmer Climates, the people are generally more wise, but in the Northern
Climate, the Wits of chief are greater. So in many Armies, if the matter should
be tried by (...) between two Champions, the Victory should go on the one side;
and yet, if it were tried by the gross, it would go on the other side. For
Excellencies go as it were by chance, but kinds go by a more certain Nature as
by Discipline in War.

Lastly, Many kinds have much refuse, which countervail that which they have
excellent; and therefore generally Metal is more precious than Stone, and yet a
Diamond is more precious than Gold.

3. Quod ad Veritatem refertur, Majus est, quam quod ad Opinionem. Modus autem
and probatio ejus, quod ad Opinionem pertinet, haec est: Quod quis, si clam
putaret fore, facturus non esset. That is, That which has relation to Truth,
is greater than that which refers to Opinion. But the Measure, and Trial of
that, which belongs to Opinion, is this: It is that which a Man would not do,
if he thought it would not be known.

SO the Epicures say to the Stoics Felicity placed in Virtue; that it is like
the felicity of a Player, who, if he were left of his Auditors, and their
Applause, would straight be out of Heart and Countenance; and therefore they
call Virtue, bonum theatrale; that is, a Stage good. But of Riches the Poet
says, Populus me sibulat,
At mihi plaudo:
i. e. Me People hiss abroad,
But I my self applaud.
And of Pleasure, -- Grata sub imo
Gaudia cord premens, vultu simulato Pudorem:
i. e. Your welcome Joys within let stifled lie,
But counterfeit abroad a Modesty.


The Fallax of this Color is somewhat subtle, though the Answer to the Example
be ready: For Virtue is not chosen propter auram popularem, for the applause of
People; but contrariwise, Maxim omnium teipsum reverere, a Man ought to stand
most in awe of himself; so as a Virtuous Man will be Virtuous in solitudine, in
a Desert, and not only in theatro, upon the Stage: though percase it will be
more strong by Glory and Fame, as an Heat, which is doubled by Reflection. But
that denies the Supposition, it does not reprehend the Fallax, whereof the
Reprehension is a Law, that Virtue (such as is joined with Labor and Conflict)
would not be chosen, but for Fame and Opinion; yet it follows not, that the
chief Motive of the Election should not be real, and for it self; for Fame may
be only causa impulsiva, the impelling or urging Cause, and not causa
constituens, or efficiens, the constituting, or efficient Cause. As if there
were two Horses, and the one would do better without the Spur than the other:
but again, the other with the Spur would far exceed the doing of the former,
giving him the Spur also; yet the latter will be judged to be the better Horse:
and the Form, as to say, Tush, the Life of this Horse is but in the Spur, will
not serve as to a wise Judgment: for, since the ordinary Instrument of
Horsmanship is the Spur, and that it is no matter of Impediment or Burden, the
Horse is not to be accounted the less of, which will not do well without the
Spur, but the other is to be reckoned rather a Delicacy, than a Virtue. So
Glory and Honor are the Spurs to Virtue: and, although Virtue would languish
without them, yet since they be always at hand to attend Virtue, Virtue is not
said to be the less chosen for it self, because it needed the Spur of Fame and
Reputation. And therefore that Position, Nota ejus rei, quod propter Opinionem,
and non propter veritatem eligitur, haec est; Quod quis, si clam putaret fore,
facturus non esset; (That is, That the Mark of a Thing chosen for Opinion, and
not for Truth-sake; is this, That one would not do it, if he thought it would
not be known,) is reprehended.

4. Quod rem integram servat, Bonum: quod sine receptu est, Malum. Nam se
recipere non posse, impotentiae genus est: potentia autem Bonum: That is,

That, which keeps a matter safe and entire, is Good: but what is destitute,
and unprovided of a retreat, is bad. For, whereas all Ability of Acting is
Good, not to be able to withdraw ones self, is a kind of Impotency. HEreof
Aesop framed the Fable of the two Frogs, that consulted together in the time of
drought, (when many Plashes that they had repaired to were dry,) what was to be
done: and the one propounded to go down into a deep Well, because it was like
the Water would not fail there; but the other answered, Yea, but if it do fail,
how shall we get up again? And the Reason is, that Humane Actions are so
uncertain, and subject to perils, as that seems the best course, which had
most passages out of it. Appertaining to this Persuasion, the Forms are, You
shall engage your self: on the other side, Tantum, quantum voles, sumes ex
fortuna, i. e. Take what Lot you will; or, you shall keep the matter in your
own Hand. The reprehension of it is, that preceding and resolving in all
actions is necessary. For, as he says well, Not to resolve, is to resolve; and
many times it breeds as many necessities, and engages as far in some other
sort, as to resolve. So it is but the covetous Man's Disease translated in
power; for the covetous Man will enjoy nothing, because he will have his full
store, and possibility to enjoy the more; so, by this Reason, a Man should
execute nothing, because he should be still indifferent, and at liberty to
execute any thing. Besides Necessity and this same Jacta est alea, or, once
having cast the Dice, has many times an advantage; because it awaketh the
powers of the mind, and strengthens endeavor, (Caeteris pares, necessitate
certe superiores istis:) which are able to deal with any others, but master
these upon necessity.

5. Quod ex pluribus constat, and divisibilibus, est majus, quam quod ex
paucioribus, and magis Unum: nam omnia, per parts considerata, majora
videntur; quare and pluralitas partium Magnitudinem prae se fert. Fortius autem
operatur Pluralitas partium, si Ordo absit: nam inducit similitudinem Infiniti,
and impedit comprehensionem; That is,

That, which consists of more parts, and those Divisible, is greater, and more
One, than what is made up of fewer; for all things, when they are looked upon
piecemeal, seem greater; whence also a purality of Parts make show of a Bulk
considerable, which a Plurality of Parts effects more strongly, if they be in
no certain Order; for it then resembles an Infinity, and hinders the
comprehending of them. THIS Color seems palpable, for it is not Plurality of
Parts, without Majority of Parts, that makes the total greater; yet
nevertheless, it often carries the mind away; yea, it deceives the sense; as
it seems to the Eye a shorter distance of way, if it be all dead and
continued, than if it have Trees, or Buildings, or any other marks, whereby the
Eye may divide it. So when a great-monied man has divided his Chests, and
Coyns, and Bags, he seems to himself richer than he was. And therefore the
way to amplify any thing is to break it, and to make Anatomy of it in several
parts, and to examine it according to several circumstances. And this makes
the greater show, if it be done without Order, for confusion makes things
muster more. And besides, what is set down by Order and Division, does
demonstrate, that nothing is left out or omitted; but all is there: whereas, if
it be without Order, both the mind comprehends less that which is set down,
and besides it leaves a suspicion, as if more might be said than is expressed.

This Color deceives, if the mind of him that is to be persuaded, do of it
self overconceive or prejudge of the greatness of any thing; for then the
breaking of it will make it seem less, because it makes it to appear more
according to the Truth. And therefore, if a Man be in Sickness or Pain, the
time will seem longer without a Clock, or Hourglass, than with it: for the mind
does value every moment; and then the Hour does rather sum up the moments than
divide the Day. So in a dead Plain the way seems the longer, because the Eye
has pre-conceived it shorter, than the truth: and the frustrating of that
makes it seem longer than the truth. Therefore, if any Man have an overgreat
Opinion of any thing, then if another think, by breaking it into several
Considerations, he shall make it seem greater to him, he will be deceived. And
therefore, in such Cases, it is not safe to divide, but to extol the Entire
still in general.

Another Case, wherein this Color deceives, is, when the matter broken, or
divided, is not comprehended by the sense, or made at once in respect of the
distracting or scattering of it: and being entire, and not divided, is
comprehended. As an Hundred Pounds in Heaps of five Pounds will show more than
in one gross Heap: so as the Heaps be all upon one Table to be seen at once,
otherwise not. As Flowers, growing scattered in diverse Beds, will show more,
than if they did grow in one Bed: so as all those Beds be within a Plot, that
they be object to view at once; otherwise not. And therefore men, whose Living
lies together in one Shire, are commonly counted greater landed, than those,
whose Livings are dispersed, though it be more; because of the notice and
comprehension.

A third Case, wherein this Color deceives, which is not so properly a Case
or Reprehension, as it is a counter Color, being in effect as large as the
Color it self is, Omnis compositio indigentiae cujusdam videtur esse
particep^. That every Composition seems to partake of a certain want; because,
if one thing would serve the turn, it were ever best; but it is the Defect and
Imperfection of things that has brought in that help to piece them up: as it
is said, Luke 10. 41, 42.
Martha, Martba, attendis ad plurima, unum sufficit: that is, Martha, Martha,
thou art troubled about many things; one thing is sufficient. So likewise
hereupon Aesop framed the Fable of the Fox and the Cat: wherein the Fox
bragged, what a number of shifts and devices he had, to get from the Hounds;
and the Cat said, He had but one, which was to climb a Tree* which in proof was
better worth than all the rest; whereof the Proverb grew, Multa novit Vulpes,
sed Felis unum magnum. Reynard the Hounds to escape had shifts not small,
Grimalkin only one, as good as all.
And in the Moral of this Fable, it comes likewise to pass, That a good sure
Friend is a better help at a pinch, than all the Stratagems and Policies of
Man's own wit. So it falls out to be a common Error in Negotiating; whereas
Men have many Reasons to induce or persuade, they strive commonly to utter, and
use them all at once, which weakeneth them. For it argues, as was said, a
neediness in every of the Reasons by it self, as if one did not trust to any of
them, but fled from one to another, helping himself only with that.

Et quae non prosunt singula, multa juvant. And what helped not alone before,
Does help full well, when joined with more.
Indeed, in a set Speech in an Assembly, it is expected, a Man should use all
his Reasons in the Case he handles: but in private persuasions it is always a
great Error.

A fourth Case, wherein this Color may be reprehended is in respect of that
same vis unita fortior, the acknowledged strength of an united Power; according
to the Tale of the FRENCH King, who, when the Emperor's Ambassador had recited
his Master's Style at large, which consists of many Countries, and Dominions,
the FRENCH KING willed his Chancellor, or other Minister, to repeat over FRANCE
as many times as the other had recited the several Dominions; intending, it was
equivalent with them all, and more compacted and united.

There is also appertaining to this Color another Point, why breaking of a
thing does help it; not by way of adding a show of Magnitude unto it, but a
note of Excellency and Rarity: whereof the Forms are, Where you shall find such
a Conourrence? Great, but not complete: for it seems a less work of Nature or
Fortune, to make any thing in his kind greater than ordinary, than to make a
strange Composition. Yet, if it be narrowly considered, this Color will be
reprehended, or encountered, by imputing to all Excellencies in Compositions a
kind of Poverty, or (at least) a Casualty, or Jeopardy: for from that, which is
excellent in greatness, somewhat may be taken, or there may be a decay, and yet
sufficient left; but from that which has his price in Composition, if you take
away any thing, or any part do fail, all is Disgrace.

6. Cujus Privatio bona, Malum: cujus Privatio mala, Bonum. That is,

That, whose Privation (or, the want of which) is Good, is in it self Evil:
that whose Privation (or, the want thereof) is an Evil, is in it self Good. THE
Forms to make it conceived, that that was Evil, which is changed for the
better, are, He that is in Hell thinks there is no Heaven. Satis quercus;
Acorns were good, till Bread was found, etc. And on the other side, the forms
to make it conceived, that that was good, which was changed for the worse, are;
Bona magis carendo quam fruendo sentimus: That is, we understand the Goodness
of things more by wanting, than enjoying them. Bona a tergo formosissima: i. e.
Good things never appear in their full Beauty, till they turn their back, and
be going away, etc.

The Reprehension of this Color is, That the Good or Evil which is removed,
may be esteemed Good or Evil comparatively: and not positively or simply. So
that if the Privation be Good, it follows not, that the former condition was
Evil, but less Good: For the Flower or Blossom is a positive Good; although the
remove of it, to give place to the Fruit, be a comparative Good. So in the Tale
of Aesop, when the old fainting man in the heat of the day cast down his
Burden, and called for Death; and when Death came to know his will with him,
said, It was for nothing, but to help him up with his burden again: It does
not follow, that because Death, which was the privation of the Burden, was
ill, therefore the Burden was good. And in this part the ordinary Form of
Malum Necessarium, a necessary Evil, aptly reprehended this Color: For
privatio mali necessarii est mala, the privation of a necessary Evil is Evil;
and yet that does not convert the Nature of the necessary Evil, but it is Evil.

Again it comes sometimes to pass, that there is an equality in the change of
privation, and (as it were) a Dilemma boni, of the good; or, Dilemma mali, of
the Evil; so that the Curruptio unius est generatio alterius.
corruption of one Good is a Generation of the other.

Sorti pater aequus utrique est:

Both Chances the same equal Parent have:

And contrarily, the remedy of the one Evil, is the occasion and commencement
of another; as in Scylla and Cha^^^dis.

9. Quod Bono vicinum, Bonum: quod a Bono remotum, Malum. That is,

What is near to Good, is Good: What is at distance from Good, is Evil.

SUCH is the Nature of things, that things contrary, and distant in nature and
quality; and also severed and disjoined in Place; and things like, and
consenting in quality, are placed, and (as it were) quartered together: For
partly, in regard of the Nature, to spread, multiply, and infect in similitude;
and partly, in regard of the Nature to break, expel, and alter that which is
disagreeable and contrary, most things do either associate, and draw near to
themselves the like, or (at least) assimilate to themselves that which
approaches near them, and do also drive away, chase, and exterminate their
contraries. And that is the reason commonly yielded, why the middle Region of
the Air should be coldest; because the Sun and Stars are either hot by Direct
Beams, or by reflection. The direct Beams heat the upper Region; the reflected
Beams from the Earth and Seas, heat the lower Region. That which is in the
midst, being farther distant in place from these two Regions of heat, is most
distant in Nature, that is coldest, which is that they term cold, or hot, per
Antiperistasis is a Philosophical Term, signifying a repulsion on every part,
whereby either Heat or Cold is made more strong in it self, by the restraining
of the contrary.
Antiperistasin, that is, environing by contraries: which was pleasantly taken
hold of by him, who said, that an honest man ^^ these days must needs be more
honest than in Ages heretofore, propter Antiperistasin, because the shutting of
him in the mid^st of Contraries must needs make the honester stronger, and more
compact in it self.

The Reprehension of this Color is:

First, Many things of Amplitude in their kind do (as it were) engross to
themselves all, and leave that which is next them most destitute. As the
Shoots, or Under-Wood, that grow near a great and spread Tree, is the most
pined and shrubby Wood of the Field; because the great Tree does deprive and
deceive them of the sap and nourishment; so he says well, Divit is servi
maxim Servi, That rich men's Servants are the greatest Slaves: And the
Comparison was pleasant of him, that compared Courtiers attendant in the Courts
of Princes, without great Place or Office, to Fasting-days; which were next the
Holy Days; but otherwise were the leanest days in all the Week.

Another Reprehension is, that things of Greatness and Predominancy, though
they do not extenuate the things adjoining in substances, yet they drown them,
and obscure them in show and appearance. And therefore the Astronomers say;
that, whereas in all other Planets Conjunction is the perfectest amity, the Sun
contrariwise is good by Aspect, but evil by Conjunction.

A third Reprehension is, because Evil approaches to Good, sometimes for
concealment, sometimes for protection: And Good to Evil for conversion and
reformation. So Hypocrisy draws near to Religion for covert and hiding it
self. Saepe latet vitium proximitate boni. Often, under neighb-ring Good, Vice
shrouded lies.

And Sanctuary-men, which were commonly inordi^ate men, and Malefactors, were
wont to be nearest to Priests, and Prelates, and Holy-men: for the Majesty of
good things is such, as the Confines of them are reverend. On the other side,
our Savior charged with nearness of Publicans and Rioters, said Matt. 9. 11.
The Physician approaches the sick rather than the whole.

8. Quod quis culpa sua contraxit, Majus Malum: quod ab externis imponitur,
Minus Malum. That is,

That, which a Man has procured by his own Default, is a greater mischief (or
Evil;) that, which is laid on by others, is a lesser Evil. THE Reason is,
because the sting and remorse of the mind, accusing it self, doubleth all
Adversity: Contrariwise, the considering and recording inwardly, that a man is
clear and free from fault, and just imputation, does attempt outward
Calamities. For if the Will be in the Sense, and in the Conscience both, there
is a gemination of it: But if Evil be in the one, and Comfort in the other, it
is a kind of Composition: So the Poets in Tragedies do make the most passionate
Lamentation, and those that fore-run final despair, to be accusing,
questioning, and torturing of a man's self. Seque unum clamat causamque
caputque malorum. She railing does confess her self to be
The cause and source of her own misery.
And contrariwise, the extremities of worthy Persons have been annihilated in
the consideration of their own good deserving. Besides, when the Evil comes
from without, there is left a kind of evaporation of grief, if it come by
humane injury, either by indignation, and meditating of revenge from our selves
or by expecting, or fore-conceiving, that Ne^esis and Retribution will take
hold of the Authors of our hurt; or, if it be by fortune or accident; yet the^
is left a kind of expostulation against the Divine Powers*

Atque Deos atque Astra vocat crudelia Matter: The God's and cruel Stars the
Mother does charge. But, where the Evil is derived from a man's ow^ fault,
there all strikes deadly inwards and suffocateth.

The Reprehension of this Color is:

First in respect of Hope: For Reformation of our fault is in nostra potestate,
our own power; but amendment of our fortune simply is not: Therefore
Demosthenes in many of his Orations says thus to the People of Athens; That
which having regard to the time past, is the worse Point and circumstance of
all the rest; That as to the time to come, is the best. What is that? Even
this, that by your Sloth, Irresolution, and Misgovernment, your affairs ^re
grown to this Declination and Decay: For, had you used and ordered your means
and forces to the best, and done your parts every way to the full; and
notwithstanding your matters should have gone backward in this manner as they
do; there had been no hope left of Recovery or Reputation. But since it has
been only by your own errors, etc. So Epictet^s in his Degrees says, The worst
state of man is to accuse extern Things, better than that to accuse any man's
self, and best of all to accuse neither.

Another Reprehension of this Color, is in respect of the well bearing of
Evils, wherewith a man can charge no body but himself, which makes them the
less. -- Leve fit, quod been fertur onus: The Burthen's light, that is on
discreetly laid. And therefore many natures, that are either extremely proud,
and will take no fault to themselves; or else very true, and cleaving to
themselves, (when they see the ^lame of any thing that falls out ill, must
light upon themselves) have no other shift, but to bear it out well, and to
make the least of it: For, as we see, when sometimes a fault is committed, and
before it be known who is to blame, much ado is made of it; but after, if it
appear to be done by a Son, or by a Wife, or by a near Friend; then it is light
made of: So much more, when a man must take it upon himself. And therefore it
is commonly seen, that Women which marry Husbands of their own choosing, against
their Friends consents, if they be never so ill-used, yet you shall seldom see
them complain, but set a good face on it.

9. Quod opera and virtute nostra partum est; Majus Bonum: Quod ab alieno
beneficio, vel ab indulgentia Fortunae, delatum est; Minus Bonum. That is,

That which is gotten by our own Pains and Industry, is a greater good; that
which comes by another man's Courtesy, or the Indulgence of Fortune, is a
lesser Good. THE Reasons are,

First, The future Hope: Because in the favor of others, or the good Winds of
Fortune, we have no state, or certainty; In our endeavors, or abilities, we
have. So as when they have purchased us one good Fortune, we have them as
ready, and better edged and environed to procure another.

The Forms be: You have won this by play. You have not only the Water, but you
have the Receipt: You can make it again, if it be lost, etc.

Next, because these Properties, which we enjoy by the benefit of others, carry
with them an obligation, which seems a kind of burden: Whereas the other,
which derive from our selves, are like the freest Patents, Absque aliquo inde
reddendo, without making any restitution. And if they proceed from Fortune, or
Providence, yet they seem to touch us secretly with the reverence of the ^^vine
Powers, whose Favors we taste, and therefo^^ work a kind of Religious Fear and
restraint: Whereas in the other kind, that comes to pass, which the Prophet
speaks, Ezekiel. Laetantur, exaltant, immolant plagsuis and sacrificat reti suo:
Men are glad, they rejoice, they offer to their Toils, and sacrifice to their
Nets.

Thirdly, Because that, which comes unto us without our own Virtue, yields
not that Commendation and Reputation: For Actions of great Felicity may draw
wonder, but praise less; as Cicero said to Caesar, Quae miremur, habemus; quae
laudemus, expectamus: That is, They had what they might wonder at; but expected
what they might praise.

Fourthly, Because the purchases of our own industry are joined commonly with
labor and strife; which gives an edge and appetite, and makes the fruition of
our Desires more pleasant. Suavis cibus a venatu: Venison is sweet of ones own
killing.

On the other side, there be four Counter-Colours to this Color, rather than
Reprehensions; because they be as large as the Color it self.

First, Because felicity seems to be a Character of the Favor and Love of
the Divine Powers; and accordingly works both of confidence in our selves, and
respect and authority from others. And this felicity extends to many casual
things; whereunto the care and virtue of man cannot extend; and therefore
seems to be at large Good. As when Caesar said to the Sailer; Caesarem
portas, and fortunam ejus; That he carried Caesar and his Fortune: If he had
said, Et virtutem ejus, and his Valor; it had been small comfort against a
Tempest; otherwise than if it might seem upon Merit, to induce Fortune.

Next, whatsoever is done by Virtue and Industry, seems to be done by a kind of
Habit and Art; and thereupon open to be imitated and followed: Whereas Felicity
is imitable. So we generally see, that things of Nature seem more excellent
than things of Art, because they be imitable; for, Quod Imitabile est, potentia
qual^m vulgatum est: What is imitable, is by a certain power ^ade known abroad.

Thirdly, Felicity commends those things which come without our own labor:
For they seem Gifts, and the others seem Peny-worths. Whereupon Platarch says
elegantly of the Acts of Timoleon, who was so fortunate, compared with the Acts
of Agesilaus and Epaminondas, That they were like Homer's Verses; they ran so
easily, and so well. And therefore it is the Word we give unto Poesy, terming
it a happy Vein; because Facility seems ever to come from Happiness.

Fourthly, This same praeter spem, vel expectatum, when things happen besides
Hope or Expectation, it does increase the Price and Pleasure of many things;
and this cannot be incident to those things that proceed from our own care, and
compassing.

10. Gradus Privationis major videtur, quam gradus Diminutionis: Etrursus,
Gradus inceptionis major videtur, quam Gradus Inorementi: That is,

The Degree of Privation seems greater than the Degree of Diminution: And
again, the Degree of Inception, (or Beginning,) seems greater than the Degree
of Increase. IT is a Position in the Mathematics, that there is no Proportion
between somewhat and nothing: Therefore the Degree of Nullity and Quiddity, (or
Act) seems Larger than the Degrees of Increase and Decrease. As to a
Monoculus, it is more to lose one Eye, than to a Man that has two Eyes. So, if
one have lost diverse Children, it is more grief to him to lose the last, than
all the rest; because he is Spes Gregis, the Hope of his Stock. And therefore
Sibylla, when she brought her Three Books, and had burned Two did double the
whole price of both the other; because the burning of that had been gradus
privationis, a Degree of Privation, and not Diminutionis, of Dimi^^tion.

This Color is reprehended:

First, in those things, the Use and Service whereof reste^ in sufficiency,
competency, or determinate quantity: As if (...) man be to pay one hundred
Pounds upon penalty, it is mo^^ to him to want twelve Pence, than after that
twelve Penc^^ supposed to be wanting, to want ten Shillings more. (...) the
decay of a Man's Estate seems to be most touched in the Degree, when he first
grows behind, more than afterward, when he proves nothing worth. and hereof
the common Forms are: Sera in fundo parsimonia; or, It is too (...) to pinch
when the Purse is at the bottom; and, as good ne^^ a whit as never the better.

It is reprehended also in respect of that Notion, C^ruptio unius, generatio
alterius: That the Corruption (...) one thing is the Generation of another. So
that Grad^^ Privationis, the Privative Degree is many times less Matter,
because it gives the cause and motive to some (...) Course. As when Demosthenes
reprehended the People for harkening to the Conditions offered by K. Philip,
being not honorable, nor equal, he says, They were but Element of their sloth
and weakness; which if they were taken away, necessity would teach them
stronger Resolutions. So Doctor Hector was wont to say to the Dames of London,
when they complained, they were they could not tell how, but yet they could not
endure to take any Medicine, he would tell them, their way was only to be sick;
f^^ then they would be glad to take any Medicine.

Thirdly, This Color may be reprehended in respect that the degree of Decrease
is more sensitive than the Degree of Privation; for in the mind of Men, Gradus
Diminutionis, the Degree of Decrease, may work a wavering between Hope and
Fear, and keep the mind in suspense, from settling, and accommodating in
Patience, and Resoluti^^ Hereof the common Forms are; Better cry out, than
always ask; make or mar, etc.

For the second Branch of this Color, it depends upon the same General Reason:
Hence grew the Common Place of extolling the beginning of every thing;

Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet. He has his Work half done,
Whoever has well begun.
This made the Astrologer so idle, as to judge of Man's Nature, and Destiny by
the Constellation of the moment of his Nativity, or Conception.

This Color is reprehended, because many Inceptions are but (as Epicurus
terms them) Tentamenta, that is, im^erfect Offers, and Essays, which vanish,
and come to no s^^stance, without any iteration; so as, in such Cases, the
second Degree seems the worthiest; as the Body-Horse in the C^rt, that draws
more than the Fore-Horse. Hereof the common Forms; The second Blow makes the
Fray. The second Word makes the Bargain. Alter principium dedit, alter modum
abstulit, etc. The one began, the other kept no mean.

Another Reprehension of this Color, is in respect of De^^tigation, which
makes perseverance of greater Dignity than Inception: For Chance or Instinct of
Nature may cause Inception: but settled Affection, or Judgment, makes the
Continuance.

Thirdly, This Color is reprehended in such things, which have a Natural
Course and Inclination, contrary to ^n Inception: So that the Inception is
continually evacuated, and gets no start; but there behooves perpetua Inceptio,
that there be always a beginning; as in the common Forms: Non progredi, est
regredi. Not to go forward, is to go backward. Qui non proficit, deficit. He
who makes no Progress decays. Running against an Hill; ^owing against the
Stream, or with the Hill, then the (...) of Inception is more than all the rest.

Fourthly, This Color is to be understood of Gradus Inceptionis a potentia ad
actum comparati, non gradus a^ actu ad Incrementum; Of the Degree of Inception,
in comparison of the Power with the Act, not of the Degree from the Act to the
Increase. For otherwise, Major videt^^ gradus ab impotentia ad potentiam, quam
a potentia ad actum, The Degree from Impotency to Potency, seems greater, than
from the Power to the Act.

11. Quod laudant homines and celebrant, bonum; quod vi^^perant, and
reprehendunt, malum.

11. That which Men praise and celebrate, is good; that which they disgrace,
and reprehend, is bad.

THis Color deceives four ways, viz. either through Ignorance, or through want
of Integrity; o^ through particular Respect and Faction, or through the natural
inclination of those that praise, or dispraise. First, Through Ignorance; for
what signifies the Judgment of the Rabble in distinguishing and determining
Good and Evil? Phocian knew well enough, who, when the People applauded him
more than ordinary, asked, Whether he had done any thing amiss? Secondly,
Through want of Integrity; for those that praise and dispraise commonly carry
on their own Designs and don't speak what they think. Laudat venales qui vult
extrudere merces. Every Man praises the Wares he would put off. It is naught,
it is naught, says the Buyer; but when he is gone, he vaunteth. Thirdly, Out of
Partiality; for every one knows, that Men use to extol with immoderate praise
those that are on their own side, and to depress those of the adverse Party
below their desert. Lastly, Through a natural Inclination; for some Men are by
nature framed and molded for servile Fawning and Flattery, whilst others on
the contrary are stiff, captious and morose; and when these commend or inveigh,
they do but comply with their own Humors, not troubling their heads overmuch
about the Truth of the business.

12. Quod etiam ab inimicis laudatur, magnum bonum; quod vero etiam ab amicis
reprehenditur, magnum malum.

12. That which draws commendation even from Enemies, is a great Good; but that
which is reprehended even by Friends, is a great Evil.

THis Color seems to stand upon this Foundation, That it may well be believed,
that the force of Truth extorts from us whatsoever we affirm to be against our
Wills, and contrary to the bent and inclination of our Minds.

This Color deceives through the subtilty, as well of Enemies as Friends: For
the praises of Enemies are not always against their Wills, nor as forced by
Truth, but they choose to bestow them in such cases where they may create Envy
or Danger to their Adversaries. Therefore the Grecians had a superstitious
Fancy, that if a Man were commended by another out of spite, and with a
mischievous design, he would have a push rise upon his Nose: Besides, sometimes
Enemies bestow Praises, like Preambles as twere, that they may the more freely
and maliciously calumniate. On the other side, this Color deceives, from the
craft of Friends; for they will sometimes take notice of the faults of their
Friends, and speak freely of them; but they choose such as may do them little
hurt, as if for all the rest they were the best Men in the World. Again, it
deceives, because Friends use their Reprehensions (as we said Enemies do their
Commendations) as certain little Prefaces, after which they may expatiate more
freely in their Praises.

FINIS.
THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS.

Written in Latin by the Right Honorable Sir FRANCIS BACON, Knight, Baron of
Verulam, and Lord Chancellor of England. Done into English by Sir ARTHVR
GORGES, Knight.

Scutum invincibile fides.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1696.

THE PREFACE.
THE Antiquities of the first Age (except those we find in Sacred Writ) were
buried in Oblivion and Silence: Silence was succeeded by Poetical Fables; and
fables again were followed by the Records we now enjoy. So that the Mysteries
and Secrets of Antiquity were distinguished and separated from the Records and
Evidences of succeeding Times by the veil of Fiction, which interposed it self,
and came between those things which perished, and those which are extant. I
suppose some are of opinion, that my purpose is to write Toys and Trifles, and
to usurp the same liberty in applying, that the Poets assumed in feigning,
which I might do (I confess) if I listed, and with more serious contemplation
intermix these things, to delight either my self in Meditation, or others in
Reading. Neither am I ignorant how fickle and inconstant a thing Fiction is, as
being subject to be drawn and wrested any way, and how great the commodity of
Wit and Discourse is, that is able to apply things well, yet so as never meant
by the first Authors. But I remember that this liberty has been lately much
abused, in that many, to purchase the reverence of Antiquity to their own
Inventions and Fancies, have for the same intent labored to wrest many
Poetical Fables: Neither has this old and common Vanity been used only of
late, or now and then* For even Chrysippus long ago did (as an Interpreter of
Dreams) ascribe the Opinions of the Stoics to the Ancient Poets; and more
sottishly do the Chemists appropriate the Fancies and Delights of Poets in the
Transformation of Bodies, to the Experiments of their Furnace. All these
things, I say, I have sufficiently considered and weighed, and in them have
seen and noted the general Levity and Indulgence of Men's Wits above
Allegories; and yet for all this I relinquish not my Opinion.

For first it may not be, that the Folly and Looseness of a few should
altogether detract from the respect due to the Parables: For that were a
conceit which might savor of Profaneness and Presumption: For Religion it
self does sometimes delight in such Veils and Shadows: So that who so exempts
them, seems in a manner to interdict all Commerce between things Divine and
Humane. But concerning Humane Wisdom, I do indeed ingenuously and freely
confess, that I am inclined to imagine, that under some of the Ancient Fictions
lay couched certain Mysteries and Allegories, even from their first invention.
And I am persuaded (whether ravished with the Reverence of Antiquity, or
because in some Fables I find such singular proportion between the similitude
and the thing signified; and such apt and clear coherence in the very Structure
of them, and propriety of Names wherewith the Persons or Actors in them are
inscribed and entitled) that no man can constantly deny; but this Sense was in
the Authors intent and meaning, when they first invented them, and that they
purposely shadowed it in this sort: For who can be so stupid and blind in the
open Light, as (when he hears how Fame, after the Giants were destroyed, sprung
up as their youngest Sister) not to refer it to the Murmurs and seditious
Reports of both sides, which are wont to fly abroad for a time after the
suppressing of Insurrections? Or when he hears how the Giant Typhon, having cut
out and brought away Jupite 's Nerves, which Mercury stole from him, and
restored again to Jupiter; does not presently perceive how fitly it may be
applied to powerful Rebellions, which take from Princes their Sinews of Money
and Authority; but so, that by affability of Speech, and wise Edicts (the Minds
of their Subjects being in time privily, and as it were by stealth reconciled)
they recover their strength again? Or when he hears how (in that memorable
Expedition of the Gods against the Giants) the braying of Silenus his Ass,
conduced much to the profligation of the Giants, does not confidently imagine
that it was invented to show how the greatest enterprises of Rebels are
oftentimes dispersed with vain Rumors and Fears.

Moreover, to what Judgment can the Conformity and Signification of Names seem
obscure? Seeing Metis, the Wife of Jupiter, does plainly signify Counsel:
Typhon, Insurrection: Pan, Universality: Nemesis, Revenge, and the like:
Neither let it trouble any man, if sometimes he meet with Historical
Narrations, or Additions for Ornament's sake, or confusion of Times, or
something transferred from one Fable to another, to bring in a new Allegory:
For it could be no otherwise, seeing they were the Inventions of Men, which
lived in diverse Ages, and had also diverse Ends: Some being ancient, others
neoterical; some have an eye to things Natural, others to Moral.

There is another Argument, and that no small one neither, to prove that these
Fables contain certain hidden, and involved meanings, seeing some of them are
observed to be so absurd, and foolish in the very relation that they show, and
as it were proclaim a Parable afar of: For such Tales as are probable, they may
seem to be invented for delight, and in imitation of History. And as for such
as no man would so much as imagine or relate, they seem to be sought out for
other ends: For what kind of Fiction is that, wherein Jupiter is said to have
taken Metis to Wife; and, perceiving that she was with Child, to have devoured
her; whence himself conceiving, brought forth Pallas armed, out of his Head?
Truly, I think there was never Dream (so different to the course of Cogitation,
and so full of Monstrosity,) ever hatched in the Brain of Man. Above all
things, this prevails most with me and is of singular moment, many of these
Fables seem not to be invented of those by whom they are related, and
celebrated, as by Homer, Hesiod and others. For if it were so, that they took
beginning in that Age, and from those Authors by whom they are delivered* and
brought to our hands: My Mind gives me, there could be no great or high Matter
expected, or supposed to proceed from them in respect of these Originals. But
if with attention we consider the Matter, it will appear, that they were
delivered, and related as things formerly believed, and received, and not as
newly invented, and offered unto us. Besides, seeing they are diversely related
by Writers that lived near about one and the self-same time, we may easily
perceive that they were common things, derived from precedent Memorials; and
that they became various* by reason of the diverse Ornaments bestowed on them by
particular Relations: And the consideration of this must needs increase in us a
great opinion of them, as not to be accounted either the effects off the time,
or inventions of the Poets, but as sacred Relics, or abstracted Airs of better
times, which by Tradition from more Ancient Nations, fell into the Trumpets and
Flutes of the Graecians. But if any do obstinately contend, That Allegories are
always adventitially, and as it were by constraint, never naturally, and
properly included in Fables, we will not be much troublesome, but suffer them
to enjoy that gravity of Judgment, which I am sure they affect, although indeed
it be but lumpish, and almost leaden. And (if they be worthy to be taken notice
of,) we will begin a fresh with them in some other fashion.

There is sound among Men, (and it goes for current,) a twofold use of
Parables, and those, (which is more to be admired) referred to contrary ends;
conducing as well to the folding up, and keeping of things under a Veil, as to
the enlightening and laying open of obscurities. But omitting the former,
(rather than to undergo wrangling, and assuming ancient Fables as things
vagrant, and composed only for delight,) the latter must questionless still
remain as not to be wrested from us by any violence of Wit, neither can any
(that is but meanly learned) hinder; but it must absolutely be received, as a
thing grave, and sober, free from all vanity, and exexceeding profitable, and
necessary to all Sciences. This is it, I say, that leads the understanding of
Man by an easy and gentle passage through all novel and abstruse inventions,
which any way differ from common received Opinions. Therefore in the first Ages
(when many humane Inventions and Conclusions, which are now common, and vulgar,
were new, and not generally known,) all things were Full of Fables, Enigma's,
Parables, and Similies of all sorts: By which they sought to teach, and lay
open, not to hide and conceal Knowledge; especially seeing the Understandings
of Men were in those times rude and impatient, and almost incapable of any
Subtilties; such things only excepted, as were the Object of Sense; for as
Hieroglyphics preceeded Letters, so Parables were more ancient than Arguments.
And in these days also, he that would illuminate Men's minds anew in any old
Matter, and that not with disprofit, and harshness, must absolutely take the
same Course, and use the help of Similies. Wherefore after all that has been
said, we must thus conclude: The Wisdom of the Ancients, it was either much, or
happy: Much, if these Figures and Tropes were invented by study and
premeditation; Happy, if they (intending nothing less,) gave Matter, and
Occasion to so many worthy Meditations. As concerning my Labors, (if there be
any thing in them which may do good,) I will on neither part count them ill
bestowed, my purpose being to illustrate either Antiquity, or Things
themselves. Neither am I ignorant that this very Subject has been attempted by
others: But to speak as I think, and that freely without ostentation, the
Dignity and Efficacy of the Thing, is almost lost by these Men's Writings,
though voluminous, and full of Pains, whilst not diving into the depth of
Matters, but skilful only in certain common places, have applied the sense of
these Parables to certain vulgar, and general Things, not so much as glancing
at their true Virtue, genuine Propriety, and full Depth. I (if I be not
deceived,) shall be new in common Things. Wherefore leaving such as are plain
and open, I will aim at farther and richer Matters.

TO THE BOOK.
RIch Mine of Art, Minion of Mercury,
True Truch-Man of the Mind of Mystery;
Invention's Storehouse, Nymph of Helicon;
Deep Moralist of Time, Tradition.
Unto this Paragon of Brutus Race,
Present thy Service, and with cheerful Grace,
Say, (if Pythagoras believed may be,)
The Soul of Ancient Wisdom lives in Thee.
THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS.
CASSANDRA, or, Divination.
THE Poets Fable, That Apollo being enamoured of Cassandra, was by her many
shifts and cunning slights still deluded in his Desire; but yet fed on with
hope, until such time as she had drawn from him the Gift of Prophesying; and
having by such her Dissimulation, in the end, attained to that which from the
beginning she sought after; at last, flatly rejected his Suit. Who finding
himself so far engaged in his Promise, as that he could not by any means revoke
again his rash Gift, and yet enstamed with an earnest desire of Revenge, highly
disdaining to be made the scorn of a crafty Wench, annexed a Penalty to his
Promise, viz. that she should over foretell the truth, but never be believed: So
were her Divinations always faithful, but at no time regarded; whereof she
still found the experience, yea, even in the ruin of her own Country, which
she had often forewarned them of; but they neither gave credit nor ear to her
words. This Fable seems to intimate the unprofitable liberty of untimely
admonitions and counsels: For they that are so over-weened with the sharpness
and dexterity of their own wit and capacity, as that they disdain to submit
themselves to the documents of Apollo, the God of Harmony, whereby to learn and
observe the method and measure of affairs the grace and gravity of Discourse,
the differences between the more judicious and more vulgar Ears, and the due
times when to speak, and when to be silent; be they never so sensible, and
pregnant, and their judgments never so profound, and profitable; yet in all
their endeavors either of persuasion, or perforce, they avail nothing, neither
are they of any moment to advantage or manage matters; but do rather hasten on
the ruin of all those that they adhere, or devote themselves unto. And then at
last, when calamity does make men feel the event of neglect, then shall they
too late be reverenced as deep, foreseeing, and faithful Prophets. Whereof a
notable instance is eminently set forth in Marcus Cato Utic^nsis, who, as from
a watchtower, discovered afar of^, and, as an Oracle, long foretold the
approaching ruin of his Country, and the plotted Tyranny hovering over the
State, both in the first Conspiracy, and as it was prosecuted in the Civil
Contention between Caesar and Pompey, and did no good the while, but rather
harm^d the Commonwealth, and hastened on his Countrey's bane; which M. Cicero
wisely observed, and writing to a familiar Friend, does in these terms
excellently describe, Cato optime se^tit, sed nocet interdum Reipublicae:
Loquitur enim tanquam in Republica Platonis, nor tanquam in faece Romuli. Cato
(says he,) judges profoundly, but in the mean time damnifies the State; for
he speaks in the Commonwealth of Plato, and hot as in the Dregs of Romulus.

TYPHON, or a Rebel.
JUNO being vexed (say the Poets) that Jupiter had begotten Pallas by himself
without her, earnestly pressed all the other Gods and Goddesses that she might
also bring forth of her self alone without him; and having by violence, and
importunity obtained a grant thereof, she smote the Earth, and forthwith sprang
up Typhon, a huge, and horrid Monster: This strange Birth she commits to a
Serpent, (as a Foster-Father,) to nourish it; who no sooner came to ripeness of
years, but he provokes Jupiter to Battle: In the Conflict the Giant getting the
upper hand, takes Jupiter upon his shoulders, carries him into a remote, and
obscure Country, and (cutting out the sinews of his Hands and Feet,) brought
them away, and so left him miserably mangled and maimed. But Mercury recovering
these Nerves from Typhon by stealth, restored them again to Jupiter. Jupiter
being again by this means corroborated, assaults the Monster afresh, and at the
first strikes him with a Thunderbolt, from whose Blood Serpents were
engendered. This Monster at length fainting, and flying, Jupiter casts on him
the Mount Aetna, and with the weight thereof crushed him.

This Fable seems to point at the variable fortune of Princes, and the
rebellious insurrection of Traitors in a State: For Princes may well be said to
be married to their Dominions, as Jupiter was to Juno; but it happens now and
then, that being deboshed by the long custom of empiring, and bending toward
Tyranny, they endeavor to draw all to themselves, and (contemning the Counsel
of their Nobles and Senators) hatch Laws in their own Brain; that is, dispose
of things by their own fancy, and absolute power. The people (repining at this)
study how to create, and set up a Chief of their own choice. This Project by
the secret instigation of the Peers, and Nobles, does for the most part take
his beginning; by whose connivence the Commons being set on edge, there follows
a kind of murmuring, or discontent in the State, shadowed by the Infancy of
Typhon, which being nursed by the natural pravity, and clownish malignity of
the vulgar sort, (unto Princes, as infestuous as Serpents,) is again repaired
by a renewed strength, and at last breaks out into open Rebellion, which
(because it brings infinite mischiefs upon Prince and People) is represented by
the monstrous deformity of Typhon: his hundred heads signify their divided
powers; his fiery mouths, their inflamed intents; his Serpentine Circles, their
pestilent Malice in besieging; his Iron Hands, their merciless slaughters; his
Eagles Talons, their greedy Rapines; his plumed Body, their continual Rumors,
and Scouts, and Fears, and such like; and sometimes these Rebellions grow so
potent, that Princes are enforced (transported as it were, by the Rebels, and
forsaking the chief Seats and Cities of the Kingdom,) to contract their Power,
and (being deprived of the Sinews of Money and Majesty,) betake themselves to
some remote and obscure corner within their Dominions: but in process of time,
(if they bear their Misfortunes with moderation,) they may recover their
strength, by the virtue and industry of Mercury; that is, they may (by becoming
affable, and by reconciling the minds and wills of their Subjects with grave
Edicts, and gracious Speech,) excite an Alacrity to grant Aids, and Subsidies,
whereby to strengthen their Authority anew. Nevertheless, having learned to be
wise and wary, they will refrain to try the chance of Fortune by War, and yet
study how to suppress the reputation of the Rebels by some famous Action, which
if it fall out answerable to their expectation, the Rebels finding themselves
weakened, and fearing the success of their broken Projects; betake themselves to
some slight, and vain Bravadoes, like the hissing of Serpents, and at length in
despair betake themselves to flight; and then when they begin to break, it is
safe and timely for Kings to pursue, and oppress them with the Forces and
Weight of the Kingdom, as it were with the Mountain Aetna.

The CYCLOPS, or the Ministers of Terror.
THey say that the Cyclops, for their fierceness, and cruelty, were by Jupiter
cast into Hell, and there doomed to perpetual imprisonment; but Tellus
persuaded Jupiter that it would do well, if being set at liberty, they were put
to forge Thunderbolts, which being done accordingly, they became so painful
and industrious, as that day and night they continued hammering out in
laborious diligence Thunderbolts, and other instruments of Terror. In process
of time Jupiter having conceived a Displeasure against A sculapius, the Son of
Apollo, for restoring a dead Man to life by Physic; and concealing his
dislike, (because there was no just cause of anger, the deed being pious and
famous,) secretly incensed the Cyclops against him, who without delay slew him
with a Thunderbolt. In revenge of which Act, Apollo (Jupiter not prohibiting
it) shot them to Death with his Arrows.

This Fable may be applied to the Projects of Kings, who having cruel, bloody,
and exacting Officers, do first punish and displace them; afterward by the
counsel of Tellus, that is, of some base, and ignoble Person, and by the
prevailing respect of Profit, they admit them into their Places again, that
they may have Instruments in a readiness, if at any time there should need
either severity of execution, or acerbity of exaction. These servile Creatures
being by nature cruel, and by their former fortune exasperated, and perceiving
well what is expected at their hands, do show themselves wonderful officious in
such kind of Employments; but being too rash, and precipitate in seeking
countenance, and creeping into favor, do sometimes take occasion from the
secret Beckonings, and ambiguous Commands of their Prince, to perform some
hateful execution. But Princes (abhorring the Fact, and knowing well, that they
shall never want such kind of Instruments,) do utterly forsake them, turning
them over to the Friends and Allies of the wronged, to their Accusations and
Revenge, and to the general Hatred of the People; so that with great Applause,
and prosperous Wishes and Acclamations toward the Prince, they are brought,
rather too late, than undeservedly, to a miserable end.

NARCISSUS, or, Self-Love.
THey say, that Narcissus was exceeding fair and beautiful* but wonderful proud
and disdainful; wherefore despising all others in respect of himself, he leads
a solitary Life in the Woods and Chases, with a few Followers, to whom he alone
was all in all; amongst the rest, there follows him the Nymph Ech^. During his
Course of Life, it fata^ly so chanced, that he came to a clear Fountain, upon
the Bank whereof he lay down to repose himself in the heat of the Day. And
having espied the shadow of his own Face in the Water, was so besotted, and
ravished with the con^^mplation and admiration thereof, that he by no mea^s
possible could be drawn from beholding his Image in this Glass; insomuch, that
by continua^ gazing thereupon, he ^in^d away to nothing, and was at last turned
into a F^ower of his own Name, which appears in the beginning of the Spring,
and is sacred to the infernal Powers, Pluto, Pr^s^^pin^, and the Furi^s.

This Fable seems to show the Dispositions, and Fortunes of those, who in
respect either of their Beauty, or other Gift wherewith they are adorned, and
graced by Nature, without the help of industry, are so far besotted in
themselves, as that they prove the cause of their own destruction. For it is
the property of Men infected with this Humor, not to come much abroad, or to
be conversant in Civil Affairs, specially seeing those that are in pub^ick
Place, must of necessity encounter with many Contempts, and Scorns, which may
much deject, and trouble their Minds; and therefore they lead for the most part
a solitary, private, and obscure Life, attended on with a few Followers, and
those, such as will adore, and admire them, like an Echo flatter them in all
their Sayings, and applaud them in all their Words. So that being by this
Custom seduced, and puffed up, and as it were, stupefied with the admiration of
themselves, they are possessed with so strange a Sloth add Idleness, that they
grow in a manner benumbed, and defective of all vigor and alacrity. Elegantly
does this Flower, appearing in the beginning of the Spring, represent the
likeness of these Men's Dispositions, who, in their youth do flourish, and wax
famous; but being come to ripeness of years, they deceive and frustrate the
good hope that is conceived of them. Neither is it impertinent that this Flower
is said to be consecrated to the infernal Deities, because Men of this
disposition become unprofitable to all humane things: For whatsoever produces
no Fruit of it self, but passes* and vanishes as if it had never been, (like
the way of a Ship in the Sea,) that the Ancients were wont to dedicate to the
Ghosts, and Powers below.

STYX, or Leagues.
THE Oath by which the Gods were wont to oblige themselves, (when they meant to
ratify any thing so firmly as never to revoke it,) is a thing well known to
the Vulgar, as being mentioned almost in every Fable, which was when they did
not invoke or call to witness any Celestial Majesty, or Divine Power, but only
the River Styx, that with crooked and Meandry Turnings incircleth the Palace of
the infernal Dis. This was held as the only manner of their Sacrament; and
besides it, not any other Vow to be accounted firm, and inviolable; and
therefore the punishment to be inflicted, (if any did perjure themselves,) was,
that for certain years they should be put out of Commons, and not to be
admitted to the Table of the Gods.

This Fable seems to point at the Leagues and Pacts of Princes, of which, more
truly, than opportunely, may be said, That be they never so strongly confirmed
with the Solemnity and Religion of an Oath, yet are for the most part, of no
validity; insomuch that they are made rather with an Eye to Reputation, and
Report, and Ceremony, than to Faith, Security, and Effect. Moreover, add to
these the Bond of Affinity, as the Sacraments of Nature, and mutual Deserts of
each Part, and you shall observe, that with a great many, all these things are
placed a degree under Ambition and Profit, and the licentious desire of
Domination; and so much the rather, because it is an easy thing for Princes to
defend and cover their unlawful Desires and unfaithful Vows, with many
outwardly seeming fair Pretexts, especially seeing there is no Umpire or
Moderator of Matters concluded upon to whom a Reason should be tendered.
Therefore there is no true and proper thing made choice of, for the
confirmation of Faith, and that no celestial Power neither, but is indeed
Necessity, (a great God to great Potentates,) the Peril also of State, and the
Communication of Profit. As for Necessity, it is elegantly represented by Styx,
that fatal and irremeable River; and this Godhead did Iphicrates, the Athenian,
call to the Confirmation of a League; who because he alone is found to speak
plainly that which many hide covertly in their Breasts, it would not be amiss
to relate his words. He observing how the Lacedaemonians had thought upon, and
propounded diverse Cautions, Sanctions, Confirmations and Bonds, pertaining to
Leagues, interposed thus: Unum Lacedaemonii, nobis vobiscum v^^^ulum and
securitatis ratio esse p^ssit; si plane demonstretis, vos ea nobis conc^ssisse,
and inter manus posuisse, ut vobis fa ultas lae lendi nos, si maxim velletis,
minime suppetere p^ss^^. There is one thing (O Lacedaemonians) that would link
us unto you in the Bond of Amity, and be the occasion of Peace and Secu^ity;
which is, if you would plainly demon^t^ate, that you have yielded up and put
into our hands such things as that, would you (...) us never so fain, you
should yet be disfurni^hed of means to do it. If therefore the power of hurting
be taken away, or if by breach of League there follow the danger of the ruin
or diminution of the State or Tribute; then indeed the Leagues may seem to be
ratified and established, and as it were confirmed by the Sacrament of the
Stygian Lake; seeing that it includes the fear of Prohibition and Suspension
from the Table of the Gods, unger which name the Laws and Prerogatives, the
Plenty and Felicity of a Kingdom were signified by the Ancients.

PAN, or Nature.
THE Ancients have exquisitely described Nature under the Person of Pan, whose
original they leave doubtful; for some say that he was the Son of Mercury,
others attribute unto him a far different beginning, affirming him to be the
common Offspring of Penelope's Suitors, upon a suspicion, that every one of
them had to do with her; which latter relation doubtless gave occasion to some
after-Writers to entitle this ancient Fable with the name of Penelope, a thing
very frequent amongst them, when they apply old Fictions to young persons and
names, and that many times absurdly and indiscreetly, as may be seen here: For
Pan being one of the Ancient Gods, was long before the time of Ulyss^s and
P^nelope. Besides (for her Matronal Chastity) she was held venerable by
Antiquity. Neither may we pretermit the third conceit of his Birth: For some
say, That he was the Son of Jupiter and Hybris which signifies contumely or
disdain. But howsoever begotten, the Parcae (they say) were his Sisters. He is
pourtrayed by the Ancients in this guise; on his Head a pair of Horns to reach
to Heaven, his Body rough and Hairy, his Beard long and shaggy, his shape
biformed, above like a Man, below like a Beast, his Feet like Goat's-hoofs,
bearing these Ensigns of his Jurisdiction, to wit, in his left hand a Pipe of
seven Reeds, and in his right a Sheep-hook, or a Staff crooked at the upper
end, and his Mantle made of a Leopard's Skin. His Dignities and Offices were
these: He was the God of Hunters, of Shepherds, and of all Rural Inhabitants:
chief President also of Hills and Mountains, and next to Mercury, the
Ambassador of the Gods. Moreover, He was accounted the Leader and Commander of
the Nymphs, which were always wont to dance the rounds, and frisk about him; he
was accosted by the Satyrs and the old Sileni. He had power also to strike Men
with terrors, and those especially vain and superstitious, which are termed
Panick fears. His acts were not many, for ought that can be found in Records,
the chiefest was, that he challenged Cupid at wrestling, in which conflict he
had the soil. The Tale goes too, how that he caught the Giant Typhon in a Net,
and held him fast. Moreover, where Ceres (grumbling and chasing that Proserpina
was ravished) had hid her self away, and that all the Gods took pains (by
dispersing themselves into every corner) to find her out, it was only his good
hap (as he was hunting) to light on her, and acquaint the rest where she was.
He presumed also to put it to the trial who was the best Musician, he or
Apollo, and by the judgment of Midas was indeed preferred: But the wise Judge
had a pair of Asses Ears privately chopped to his Noddle for his sentence. Of his
Love-tricks, there is nothing reported, or at least not much, a thing to be
wondered at, especially being among a Troop of Gods so profusely amorous. This
only is said of him, that he loved the Nymph Ec^^ (whom he took to Wife) and
one pretty Wench more called Syrinx, toward whom Cupid (in an angry and
revengeful humor, because so audaciously he had challenged him at Wrestling)
inflamed his des^re Moreover, he had no Issue (which is a marvel also, seeing
the Gods, especially those of the Male kind, were very generative) only he was
the reputed Father of a little Girl called Jambe, that with many pretty Tales
was wont to make strangers merry; but some think that he did indeed beget her
by his Wife Jambe. This (if any be) is a noble Tale, as being laid out and
big-bellied with the Secrets and Mysteries of Nature.

Pan (as his name imports) represents and lays open the All of Things or
Nature. Concerning his original there are two only Opinions that go for
current; for either he came of Mercury, that is, the Word of God, which the
Holy Scriptures without all controversy affirm, and such of the Philosophers
as had any smack of Divinity assented unto; or else from the confused Seeds of
things. For they that would have one simple beginning, refer it unto God; or if
a materiate beginning, they would have it various in power. So that we may end
the Controversy with this Distribution, That the World took beginning, either
from Mercury, or from the Seeds of all things.

Virg. Eclog. 6. Namque canebat uti magnum per inane coacta
Semina terrarumque, animaeque, marisque fuissent,
Et liquidi simul ignis: Et his exordia primis
Omnia, and ipse tener mundi concreverit Orbis.
For rich-vein'd Orpheus sweetly did rehearse
How that the Seeds of Fire, Air, Water, Earth,
Were all pact in the vast void Universe:
And how from these as Firstlings, all bad birth,
And how the Body of this Orbick frame,
From tender infancy so big became.
But, as touching the third conceit of Pan's Original, it seems that the
Graecians (either by intercourse with the Egyptians, or one way or other) had
heard something of the Hebrew Mysteries; for it points to the state of the
World, not considered in immediate Creation, but after the fall of Adam,
exposed and made subject to Death and Corruption: For in that state it was (and
remains to this day) the Offspring of God and Sin. And therefore all these
Three Narrations concerning the manner of Pan's birth may seem to be true, if
it be rightly distinguished between Things and Times. For this Pan or Nature
(which we suspect, contemplate and reverence more than is fit) took beginning
from the Word of God by the means of confused matter, and the entrance of
Prevarication and Corruption. The destinies may well be thought the Sisters of
Pan or Nature, because the beginnings and continuances, and corruptions and
depressions, and dissolutions, and eminences, and labors and felicities of
things, and all the chances which can happen unto any thing, are linkt with the
Chain of Causes natural.

Horns are attributed unto him, because Horns are broad at the root and sharp
at the ends, the nature of all things being like a Pyramid, sharp at the top.
For individual or singular things being infinite are first collected into
species, which are many also; then from species into generals, and from
generals (by ascending) are contracted into things or notions more general; so
that at length Nature may seem to be contracted into an unity. Neither is it to
be wondered at, that Pan touches Heaven with his Horns, seeing the height of
Nature or universal Ideas do, in some sort, pertain to things Divine, and there
is a ready and short Passage from Metaphysick to natural Theology.

The Body of Nature is elegantly and with deep judgment depainted hairy,
representing the beams or operations of creatures; for beams are as it were the
Hairs and Bristles of Nature, and every creature is either more or less beamy,
which is most apparent in the faculty of seeing, and no less in every virtue
and operation that effectuates upon a distant Object, for whatsoever works upon
any thing afar off, that may rightly be said to dart forth Rays or Beams.

Moreover, Pan's Beard is said to be exceeding long, because the beams or
influences of Celestial Bodies do operate and pierce farthest of all; and the
Sun, when (his higher half is shadowed with a Cloud) his Beams break out in the
lower, and looks as if he were bearded.

Nature is also excellently set forth with a biformed Body, with respect to the
differences between superior and inferior Creatures. For one part, by reason of
their Pulcritude, and equability of motion, and constancy and dominion over the
Earth and earthly things, is worthily set out by the shape of Man: and the
other part in respect of their perturbations and unconstant motions, (and
therefore needing to be moderated by the Celestial) may be well fitted with
the Figure of a Brute Beast. This Description of his Body pertains also to the
participation of Species, for no natural being seems to be simple, but as it
were participated and compounded of two. As for example, Man has something of
a Beast, a Beast something of a Plant, a Plant something of inanimate Body, of
that all natural things are in very deed biformed, that is to say, compounded
of a superior and inferior Species.

It is a very witty Allegory, that same of the Feet of the Goat, by reason of
the upward tending motion of Terrestrial Bodies toward the Air and Heaven, for
the Goat is a climbing Creature, that loves to be hanging about the Rocks and
steep Mountains; and this is done also in a wonderful manner, even by those
thing which are destinated to this inferior Globe, as may manifestly appear in
Clouds and Meteors.

The two Ensigns which Pan bears in his hands do point, the one at Harmony, the
other at Empire: For the Pipe consisting of seven Reeds, does evidently
demonstrate the consent, and Harmony, and discordant concord of all inferior
Creatures, which is caused by the Motion of the seven Planets: And that of the
Sheep-hook may be excellently applied to the order of nature, which is partly
right, partly crooked: This Staff therefore or Rod is specially crooked in the
upper end, because all the works of Divine Providence in the World are done in
a far fetched and circular manner, so that one thing may seem to be affected and
yet indeed a clean contrary brought to pass; as the selling of Joseph into
Egypt, and the like. Besides in all wise Humane Government, they that sit at
the Helm do more happily bring their purposes about, and insinuate more easily
into the minds of the People, by pretexts and oblique courses, than by direct
methods: so that all Scepters and Masses of Authority ought in very deed to be
crooked in the upper end.

Pan's Cloak or Mantle is ingeniously feigned to be a Skin of a Leopard,
because it is full of Spots: So the Heavens are spotted with Stars, the Sea
with Rocks and Islands, the Land with Flowers, and every particular Creature
also is for the most part garnished with diverse colors about the superficies,
which is as it were a Mantle unto it.

The Office of Pan can be by nothing so lively conceived and expressed, as by
feigning him to be the God of Hunters, for every natural action, and so by
consequence, Motion and Progression, is nothing else but a Hunting. Arts and
Sciences have their works, and Humane Counsels their ends which they earnestly
hunt after. All natural things have either their Food as a Prey, or their
Pleasure as a Recreation which they seek for, and that in most expert and
sagacious manner.

Torva Leaena Lupum sequitur, Lupus ipse Capellam.
Florentem Cytisum sequitur lasciva Capella.
The hungry Lioness, (with sharp desire)
Pursues the Wolf, the Wolf the wanton Goat:
The Goat again does greedily aspire
To have the trifoil Juice pass down her Throat.
Pan is also said to be the God of the Country. Clowns, because Men of this
condition lead lives more agreeable unto Nature, than those that live in the
Cities and Courts of Princes, where nature by too much Art is corrupted: So as
the saying of the Poet (though in the sense of Love) might be here verified:

Pars minima est ipsa puella sui. The Maid so trickt her self with Art,
That of her self she is least part:
He was held to be Lord President of the Mountains, because in the high
Mountains and Hills, Nature lays her self most open, and Men most apt to view
and contemplation.

Whereas Pan is said to be (next unto Mercury) the Messenger of the Gods, there
is in that a Divine Mystery contained, for next to the Word of God, the Image
of the world proclaims the Power and Wisdom Divine, as sings the Sacred Poet,
Psalm. xix. 1. Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, atque opera manuum ejus indicat
firmamentum* The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows
the Works of his Hands.

The Nymphs, that is, the Souls of living things take great delight in Pan. For
these Souls are the delights or minions of Nature, and the direction or conduct
of these Nymphs is with great reason attributed unto Pan, because the Souls of
all things living do follow their natural dispositions as their guides, and
with infinite variety every one of them after his own fashion, does leap, and
frisk and dance with incessant motions about her. The Satyrs and Sileni also,
to wit, Youth and Old Age, are some of Pan's followers: For of all natural
things, there is a lively, jocund, and (as I may say) a dancing age, and an age
again that is dull, bibling and reeling. The carriages and dispositions of both
which ages, to some such as Democritus was, (that would observe them duly,)
might peradventure seem as ridiculous and deformed, as the gambols of the
Satyrs, or the gestures of the Sileni.

Of those fears and terrors which Pan is said to be the Author, there may be
this wise construction made: Namely, that Nature has bred in every living
thing a kind of care and fear, tending to the preservation of its own life and
being, and to the repelling and shunning of all things hurtful. And yet Nature
knows not how to keep a mean, but always intermixes vain and empty fears with
such as are discreet and profitable: So that all things (if their insides might
be seen) would appear full of Panick frights: But men especially in hard,
fearful, and diverse times, are wonderfully infatuated with superstition, which
indeed is nothing else but a Panick terror.

Concerning the audacity of Pan in challenging Cupid at wrestling: The meaning
of it is, that Matter wants not inclination and desire to the relapsing and
dissolution of the World into the old Chaos, if her malice and violence were
not restrained and kept in order, by the prepotent unity and agreement of
things signified by Cupid, or the God of Love; and therefore it was ^ happy
turn for Men, and all things else, that in their conflict Pan was found too
weak, and overcome.

To the same effect may be interpreted his catching of Typhon in a Net: For
howsoever there may sometimes happen vast and unwonted Tumors (as the name of
Typhon imports) either in the Sea, or in the Air, or in the Earth, or
elsewhere; yet Nature does entangle it in an intricate toil, and curb and
restrain in, as it were with a Chain of Adamant, the excesses and insolences
of these kind of Bodies.

But forasmuch as it was Pan's good fortune to find out Ceres as he was
Hunting, and thought little of it, which none of the other Gods could do,
though they did nothing else but seek her, and that very seriously; it gives us
this true and grave admonition, That we expect not to receive things necessary
for life and manners from Philosophical Abstractions, as from the greater Gods;
albeit they applied themselves to no other study, but from Pan; that is, from
the discreet observation and experience, and the universal knowledge of the
things of this World; whereby (oftentimes even by chance, and as it were going
a Hunting) such Inventions are lighted upon.

The quarrel he made with Apollo about Music, and the event thereof contains a
wholesome instruction, which may serve to restrain men's Reasons and Judgments
with Reins of Sobriety, from boasting and glorying in their gifts. For there
seems to be a twofold Harmony, or Music; the one of Divine Providence, and the
other of Humane Judgment, the Administration of the World and Creatures
therein, and the more secret Judgments of God, sound very hard and harsh; which
folly, albeit it be well set out with Asses Ears; yet notwithstanding these
Ears are secret, and do no^ openly appear, neither is it perceived or noted as
a deformity by the vulgar.

Lastly, It is not to be wondered at, that there is nothing attributed unto Pan
concerning Loves, but only of his marriage with Echo: For the World or Nature
does enjoy it self, and in it self all things else. Now he that loves would
enjoy something, but where there is enough, there is no place left to desire.
Therefore there can be no wanting love in Pan, or the World, nor desire to
obtain any thing (seeing he is contented with himself) but only Speeches, which
(if plain) may be intimated by the Nymph Echo, or if more quaint by Syrinx. It
is an excellent invention that Pan, or the World is said to make choice of Echo
only (above all other Speeches or Voices) for his Wife: For that alone is true
Philosophy, which does faithfully render the very words of the World; and it is
written no otherwise than the World does dictate, it being nothing else but the
Image or reflection of it, not adding any thing of its own, but only iterates
and resounds. It belongs also to the sufficiency or perfection of the World,
that he begets no Issue; for the World does generate in respect of its parts,
but in respect of the whole, how can it generate, seeing without it there is no
Body? Notwithstanding all this, the Tale of that tatling Girl fathered upon
Pan, may in very deed, with great Reason, be added to this Fable: For by her
are represented those vain and Idle Paradoxes concerning the Nature of things
which have been frequent in all Ages, and have filled the World with Novelties;
Fruitless, if you respect the matter; Changlings if you respect the kind,
sometimes creating Pleasure, sometimes tediousness with their overmuch prattling.

PERSEVS, or War.
PERSEUS is said to have been employed by Pallas, for the destroying of Medusa,
who was very infestuous to the Western Parts of the World, and especially about
the utmost Coasts of Hiberia. A Monster so dire and horrid, that by her only
aspect she turned Men into Stones. This Medusa alone of all the Gorgons was
mortal, the rest not subject to Death. Perseus therefore preparing himself for
this noble enterprise, had Arms and Gifts bestowed on him by three of the Gods:
Mercury gave him Wings annexed to his Heels, Pluto a Helmet, Pallas a Shield
and a Looking-Glass. Notwithstanding (although he were thus furnished) he went
not directly to Medusa, but first to the Greae, which by the Mothers side were
Sisters to the Gorgons. These Greae from their Birth were Hoar-headed,
resembling old Women. They had but one only Eye, and one Tooth among them all;
both which, she that had occasion to go abroad, was wont to take with her, and
at her return to lay them down again. This Eye and Tooth they lent to Perseus;
and so finding himself thoroughly furnished for the effecting of his design,
hastens toward Medusa. He^ he found sleeping, and yet durst not present
himself with his Face toward her, lest she should awake; but turning his head
aside, beheld her in Pallas's Glass, and (by this means directing his blow) cut
off her head; from whose Blood gushing out, instantly came Pegasus, the
Plying-Horse. Her head thus smote off, Pers^^s bestows on Pallas her Shield,
which yet retained this virtue, that whatsoever looked upon it, should become
as stupid as a Stone, or like one Planet-strucken.

This Fable seems to direct the preparation and order, that is to be used in
making of War; for the more apt and considerate undertaking whereof, three
grave and wholesome Precepts (savouring of the wisdom of Pallas) are to be
observed.

First, That men do not much trouble themselves about the Conquest of Neighbor
Nations, seeing that private possessions and Empires are enlarged by different
means: For in the augmentation of private Revenues, the vicinity of men's
Territories is to be considered; but in the propagation of Public Dominions,
the occasion and facility of making War, and the Fruit to be expected ought to
be instead of vicinity. Certainly the Romans, what time their Conquests toward
the West scarce reached beyond Liguria, did yet in the East bring all the
Provinces as far as the Mountain Taurus within the compass of their Arms and
Command; and therefore Perseus, although he were bred and born in the East, did
not yet refuse to undertake an expedition even to the uttermost bounds of the
West.

Secondly, There must be a care had that the Motives of War be just and
honorable, for that begets an alacrity, as well in the Soldiers that fight, as
in the people that pay, it draws on and procures Aids, and brings many other
Commodities besides. But there is no pretense to take up Arms more pious, than
the suppressing of Tyranny; under which yoke, the people lose their courage,
and are cast down without heart and vigor, as in the sight of Medusa.

Thirdly, It is wise^y added, that seeing there were three Gorgons (by which
Wars are represented) Perseus undertook her only that was mortal; that is, he
made choice of such a kind of War as was likely to be effected and brought to a
period, not pursuing vast and endless hopes.

The furnishing of Perseus with necessaries was that which only advanced his
attempt, and drew Fortune to be of his side; for he had speed from Mercury,
concealing of his Counsels from Orcus, and Providence from Pallas.

Neither is it without an Allegory, and that full of matter too, that those
Wings of Celerity were fastened to Perseus his Heels, and not to his Ankles, to
his Feet, and not to his Shoulders; because speed and celerity is required, not
so much in the first preparations for War, as in those things which second and
yield aid to the first; for there is no Error in War more frequent, than that
Prosecutions and Subsidiary forces do fail to answer the alacrity of the first
onsets.

Now for that Helmet which Pluto gave him, powerful to make men invisible, the
Moral is plain; but that twofold gift of Providence (to wit, the Shield and
Looking Glass) is full of Morality; for that kind of Providence, which like a
Shield avoids the force of blows, is not alone needful, but that also by which
the strength and motions, and Counsels of the Enemy are descryed, as in the
Looking Glass of Pallas.

But Pers^us, albeit he were sufficiently furnished with aid and courage, yet
was he to do one thing of special importance before he entered the Lists with
this Monster, and that was to have some intelligence with the Greae. These
Greae are Treasons which may be termed the Sisters of War not descended of the
same stock, but far unlike in Nobility of Birth; for Wars are generous and
heroical, but Treasons are base and ignoble. Their description is elegant, for
they are said to be Gray Headed, and like old Women from their Birth; by reason
that Traitors are continually vexed with cares and trepidations. But all their
strength (before they break out into open Rebellions) consists either in an Eye
or in a Tooth; for every faction alienated from any State, contemplates and
bites. Besides, this Eye and Tooth is as it were common; for whatsoever they
can learn and know, is delivered and carried from one to another by the hands
of Faction. And as concerning the Tooth, they do all bite alike, and sing the
same song; so that hear one, and you hear all. Perseus therefore was to deal
with these Greae for the love of their Eye and Tooth. Their Eye to discover,
their Tooth to sow rumors and stir up envy, and to molest and trouble the Minds
of men. These things therefore being thus disposed and prepared, he addresses
himself to the Action of War, and sets upon Medusa as she slept; for a wise
Captain will ever assault his Enemy, when he is unprepared and most secure; and
then is there good use of Pallas her Glass: For most men, before it come to the
push, can acutely pry into and discern their Enemies estate; but the best use
of this Glass is in the very point of danger, that the manner of it may be so
considered, as that the terror may not discourage, which is signified by that
looking into this Glass with the face turned from Medusa.

The Monster's Head being cut off, there follow two effects. The first was, the
procreation and raising of Pegasus, by which may be evidently understood Fame,
that (flying thorough the World) proclaims Victory. The second is the bearing
of Medusa's Head in his Shield; to which there is no kind of defense for
excellency comparable; for the one famous and memorable act prosperously
effected and brought to pass, does restrain the Motions and Insolences of
Enemies, and makes Envy her self silent and amazed.

ENDYMION, or a Favorite.
IT is said, that Luna was in love with the Shepherd Endymion, and in a strange
and unwonted manner bewrayed her affection: For he lying in a Cave framed by
Nature under the Mountain Latmus, she oftentimes descended from her Sphere to
enjoy his company as he slept; and after she had kissed him, ascended up again.
Yet notwithstanding this his idleness, and sleepy security, did not any way
impair his Estate or Fortune; for Luna brought it so to pass, that he alone (of
all the rest of the Shepherds) had his Flock in best plight, and most fruitful.

This Fable may have reference to the nature and dispositions of Princes; for
they being full of doubts, and prone to jealousy, do not easily acquaint Men
of prying and curious Eyes, and as it were of vigilant and wakeful
dispositions, with the secret humors and manners of their life; but such
rather as are of quiet and observant Natures, suffering them to do what they
list without further scanting, making as if they were ignorant, and perceiving
nothing but of a stupid disposition, and possessed with sleep, yielding unto them
simple obedience, rather than sly complements; For it pleases Princes now and
then to descend from their Thrones or Majesty (like Luna from the superior Orb)
and laying aside their Robes of Dignity (which always to be cumbred with, would
seem a kind of burden) familiarly to converse with Men of this condition,
which they think may be done without danger; a quality chiefly noted in
Tiberius Caesar, who (of all others) was a Prince most severe; yet such only
were gracious in his favor, as being well acquainted with his disposition, did
yet constantly dissemble, as if they knew nothing. This was the Custom also of
Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, a cautious and wily Prince.

Neither is it without elegancy, that the cause of Endymion is mentioned in the
Fable, because that it is a thing usual with such as are the Favorites of
Princes, to have certain pleasant retiring places, whither to invite them for
recreation both of Body and Mind, and that without hurt or prejudice to their
Fortunes also. And indeed these kind of Favorites are Men commonly well to
pass; for Princes, although peradventure they promote them not ever to Places
of Honor, yet do they advance them sufficiently by their favor and
countenance: Neither do they affect them thus, only to serve their own turn;
but are wont to enrich them now and then with great Dignities, and Bounties.

The Sister of the GIANTS, or Fame.
IT is a Poetical Relation, that the Giants begotten of the Earth, made War
upon Jupiter, and the other Gods; and by the force of Lightning, they were
resisted and overthrown. Whereat the Earth being excitated to wrath, in revenge
of her Children brought forth Fame, the youngest Sister of the Giants.

Illam terra parens ira irritata Deorum,
Extremam (ut prohibent) Caeo Enceladoque sororem
Progenuit --
Provoked by wrathful Gods, the Mother Earth
Gives Fame, the Giants youngest Sister, Birth.
The meaning of the Fable seems to be thus: By the Earth, is signified the
Nature of the Vulgar, always swollen and malignant, and still broaching new
scandals against Superiors, and having gotten fit opportunity stirs up Rebels
and Seditious Persons, that with impious courage do molest Princes, and
endeavor to subvert their Estates; but being suppressed, the same natural
disposition of the People still leaning to the viler sort, (being impatient of
Peace and Tranquillity,) spread Rumors, raise malicious Slanders, repining
Whisperings, infamous Libels, and others of that kind, to the detraction of
them that are in Authority: So as Rebellious Actions, and Seditious Reports,
differ nothing in kind and Blood, but as it were in Sex only; the one sort
being Masculine, and the other Feminine.

ACTAEON and PENTHEVS, or a Curious Man.
THe curiosity of Men, in prying into secrets, and coveting with an undiscreet
desire to attain the knowledge of things forbidden, is set forth by the
Ancients in two other Examples: The one of Actaeon, the other of Pentheus.

Actaeon having unawares, and as it were by chance beheld Diana naked, was
turned into a Stag, and devoured by his own Dogs.

And Pentheus climbing up into a Tree, with a desire to be a spectator of the
hidden sacrifices of Bacchus, was stricken with such a kind of frenzy, as that
whatsoever he looked upon, he thought it always double, supposing (among other
things) he saw two Suns, and two Thebes; insomuch that running toward Thebes,
spying another Thebes, instantly turned back again, and so kept still running
forward and backward with perpetual unrest.

Eumenidum veluti demens vidit agmina Pentheu^,
Et Solemn geminum, duplices se ostendere Thebas.
Pentheus amazed, does troops of furies spy;
And Sun, and Thebes seem double to his Eye.
The first of the Fables pertains to the secrets of Princes, the second to
Divine Mysteries. For those that are near about Princes, and come to the
knowledge of more secrets than they would have them, do certainly incur great
hatred. And therefore, (suspecting that they are shot at, and opportunities
watched for their overthrow,) do lead their lives like Stags, fearful and full
of suspicion. And it happens oftentimes that their Servants, and those of their
Household, (to insinuate into the Prince's favor) do accuse them to their
destruction; for against whomsoever the Princes displeasure is known, look how
many servants that Man has, and you shall find them for the most part so many
Traitors unto him, that his end may prove to be like Actaeon's.

The other is the misery of Pentheus: For that by the height of Knowledge and
Nature in Philosophy, having climbed, as it were, into a Tree, do with rash
attempts (unmindful of their frailty) pry into the secrets of Divine Mysteries,
and are justly plagued with perpetual inconstancy, and with wavering and
perplexed conceits: For seeing the light of Nature is one thing, and of Grace
another; it happens so to them as if they saw two Suns. And seeing the Actions
of Life, and degrees of the Will to depend on the Understanding, it follows
that they doubt, are inconstant no less in Will than in Opinion; and so in like
manner they may be said to see two Thebes: For by Thebes (seeing there was the
habitation and refuge of Pentheus) is meant the end of Actions. Hence it comes
to pass that they know not whither they go, but as distracted and unresolved in
the scope of their intentions, are in all things carried about with sudden
Passions of the Mind.

ORPHEUS, or Philosophy.
THe tale of Orpheus, though common, had never the fortune to be fitly applied
in every point. It may seem to represent the Image of Philosophy: For the
Person of Orpheus (a Man admirable and divine, and so excellently skilled in
all kind of harmony, that with his sweet ravishing Music he did as it were
charm and allure all things to follow him) may carry a singular description of
Philosophy: For the labors of Orpheus do so far exceed the labors of Hercules
in dignity and efficacy* as the Works of Wisdom, excel the Works of Fortitude.

Orpheus for the love he bare to his Wife, snatched, as it were, from him by
untimely Death, resolved to go down to Hell with his Harp, to try if he might
obtain her of the infernal power. Neither were his hopes frustrated: For having
appeased them with the melodious sound of his voice and touch, prevailed at
length so far, as that they granted him leave to take her away with him; but on
this condition, that she should follow him, and he not to look back upon her,
till he came to the light of the upper World; which he (impatient of, out of
love and care, and thinking that he was in a manner past all danger)
nevertheless violated, insomuch that the Covenant is broken, and she forthwith
tumbles back again headlong into Hell. Orpheus falling into a deep melancholy,
became a contemner of Women kind, and bequeathed himself, to a solitary life in
the Deserts; where, by the same melody of his voice and Harp, he first drew all
manner of wild Beasts unto him, (who forgetful of their savage fierceness, and
casting off the precipitate provocations of lust and fury, not caring to
satiate their voracity by hunting after prey) as at a Theater in fawning and
reconciled amity one toward another, standing all at the gaze about him, and
attentively lend their Ears to his Music. Neither is this all; for so great
was the power and alluding force of this harmony, that he drew the Woods, and
moved the very Stones to come and place themselves in an orderly and decent
fashion about him. These things succeeding happily, and with great admiration
for a time; at length certain Thracian Women (possessed with the spirit of
Bacchus,) made such a horrid and strange noise with their Cornets, that the
sound of Orpheuss Harp could no more be heard, insomuch as that harmony, which
was the bond of that Order and Society being dissolved, all disorder began
again; and the Beasts (returning to their wonted Nature) pursued one another
unto Death as before: Neither did the Trees or Stones remain any longer in
their places: And Orpheus himself was by these Female furies torn in pieces,
and scattered all over the Desert. For whose cruel Death the River Helicon
(sacred to the Muses) in horrible indignation, hid his Head under ground, and
raised it again in another place.

The meaning of this Fable seems to be thus: Orpheus's Music is of two sorts,
the one appeasing the Infernal Powers, the other attracting Beasts and Trees,
The first may be fitly applied to Natural Philosophy, the second to Moral or
Civil Discipline.

The most noble work of Natural Philosophy, is the Restitution and Renovation
of things corruptible; the other (as a lesser degree of it) the Preservation of
Bodies in their Estates, detaining them from dissolution and putrefaction; and
if this gift may be in Mortals, certainly it can be done by no other means than
by the due and exquisite temper of Nature, as by the melody and delicate touch
of an Instrument. But seeing it is of all things most difficult, it is seldom
or never attained unto; and in all likelihood for no other reason, more than
through curious diligence and untimely impatience. And therefore Philosophy
hardly able to produce so excellent an effect in a pensive humor, (and that
without cause) busies her self about Humane Objects, and by Persuasion and
Eloquence, insinuating the love of Virtue, Equity, and Concord in the minds of
Men; draws multitudes of People to a Society, makes them subjects to Laws,
obedient to Government, and forgetful of their unbridled Affections, whil^st
they give ear to Precepts, and submit themselves to Discipline; whence follows
the building of Houses, erecting of Towns, planting of Fields and Orchards,
with Trees and the like, insomuch that it would not be amiss to say, That even
thereby Stones and Woods were called together and settled in order. And after
serious trial made and frustrated about the restoring of a body mortal; this
care of Civil affairs follows in his due place: because by a plain
demonstration of the unevitable necessity of death, Men's minds are moved to
seek Eternity by the fame and glory of their Merits. It is also wisely said in
the Fable, that Orpheus was averse from the love of Women and Marriage, because
the delights of Wedlock and the love of Children do for the most part hinder
Men from enterprising great and noble designs for the public good, holding
Posterity a sufficient step to Immortality without Actions.

Besides even the very works of Wisdom (although amongst all Humane things they
do most excel) do nevertheless meet with their periods. For it happens that
(after Kingdoms and Commonwealths have flourished for a time) even Tumults, and
Seditions, and Wars arise; in the midst of which hurly-burlies, first Laws are
silent, Men return to the pravity of their Natures; Fields and Towns are wasted
and depopulated; and then (if their fury continue) Learning and Philosophy must
needs be dis-membred; so that a few Fragments only, and in some places will be
found like the scattered Boards of Shipwreck, so as a barbarous Age must
follow; and the Streams of Hellicon being hid under the Earth, (until the
Vicissitude of things passing,) they break out again, and appear in some other
remote Nation, though not perhaps in the same Climate.

COELVM, or Beginnings.
WE have it from the Poets by Tradition, that Coelum was the Ancientest of the
Gods, and that his Members of Generation were cut off by his Son Saturn. Saturn
had many Children, but devoured them as soon as they were born; Jupiter only
escapt, who being come to Man's estate, thrust Saturn his Father into Hell, and
so usurped the Kingdom. Moreover he pared off his Father's Genitals with the
same Faulchion that Saturn dismembered Coelum, and cast them into the Sea; from
whence came Venus. Not long after this, (Jupiter being scarce settled and
confirmed in this Kingdom) was invaded by two memorable Wars. The first of the
Titans, in the suppressing of which Sol (who alone of all the Titans Favoring
Jupiter's side) took exceeding great pains. The second was of the Giants, whom
Jupiter himself destroyed with Thunderbolts: and so all Wars being ended, he
reigned secure.

This Fable seems enigmatically to show from whence all things took their
beginning, not much differing from that Opinion of Philosophers, which
Democritus afterward labored to maintain, attributing Eternity to the first
Matter, and not to the World. In which he comes somewhat near the truth of
Divine Writ, telling us of a huge deformed Mass, before the beginning of the
six days Work.

The meaning of the Fable is this: By Coelum may be understood that vast
concavity, or vaulted compass that comprehends all Matter: and by Saturn may be
meant the matter it self, which takes from his Parent all power of generating;
for the universality or whole Bulk of Matter always remains the same, neither
increasing or diminishing in respect of the quality of its Nature: But by the
Diverse agitations and motions of it, were first produced imperfect, and ill
agreeing compositions of things, making as it were certain Worlds for Proofs or
Essays, and so in process of time a perfect Fabric or Structure was framed,
which should still retain and keep his form. And therefore the Government of
the first Age was shadowed by the Kingdom of Saturn, who for the frequent
dissolutions and short continuances of things was aptly feigned to devour his
Children. The succeeding Government was decyphered by the Reign of Jupiter, who
confined those continual Mutations unto Tartarus, a place signifying
Perturbation. This place seems to be all that middle place between the lower
superficies of Heaven; and the Center of the Earth: in which all perturbations,
and fragility, and mortality or corruption are frequent. During the former
Generation of things in the time of Saturn's Reign, Venus was not born: for so
long as in the universality of Matter, Discord was better and more prevalent
than Concord, it was necessary that there should be total dissolution or
mutation, and that in the whole Fabric. And by this kind of Generation were
Creatures produced before Saturn was deprived of his Genitals. When this
ceased, that other which wrought by Venus, immediately came in, consisting in
settled and prevalent concord of things, so that Mutation should be only in
respect of the parts, the universal Fabric remaining whole and inviolate.

Saturn, they say, was deposed and cast down into Hell, but not destroyed and
utterly extinguished, because there was an Opinion that the World should relapse
into the old Chaos and interregnum again, which Lucretius prayed might not
happen in his time:

Quod procul a nobis flectat fortuna gubernans:
Et ratio potius quam res persuadeat ipsa.
Of guiding Providence be gracious,
That this Doomsday be far removed from us;
And grant, that by us it may be expected,
Rather than on us, in our times effected.
For afterward the World should subsist by its own quantity and power. Yet
from the beginning there was no rest: for in the Celestial Regions there first
followed notable Mutations, which by the power of the Sun (predominating over
superior Bodies) were so quieted, that the state of the World should be
conserved: and afterward (in inferior Bodies) by the suppressing and
dissipating of Inundations, Tempests, Winds, and general Earthquakes, a more
peaceable durable Agreement and Tranquillity of things followed. But of this
Fable it may convertibly be said, That the Fable contains Philosophy, and
Philosophy again the Fable: For we know by Faith, that all these things are
nothing else but the long since ceasing and failing Oracles of Sense, seeing
that both the Matter and Fabric of the World are most truly referred to a
Creator.

PROTEVS, or Matter.
THE Poets say that Proteus was Neptune's Herds-man, a grave Sire, and so
excellent a Prophet, that he might well be termed thrice excellent: for he knew
not only things to come, but even things past as well as present; so that
besides his skill in Divination, he was the Messenger and Interpreter of all
Antiquities and hidden Mysteries. The place of his abode was a huge vast Cave,
where his Custom was every day at noon to count his Flock of Sea-calves, and
then to go to sleep. Moreover he that desired his advice in any thing, could by
no other means obtain it, but by catching him in Manacles, and holding him fast
therewith; who nevertheless to be at liberty would turn himself into all manner
of Forms and Wonders of Nature; sometimes into Fire, sometimes into Water,
sometimes into the shape of Beasts, and the like; till at length he were
restored to his own Form again.

This Fable may seem to unfold the secrets of Nature and the properties of
Matter. For under the Person of Proteus, the first Matter (which next to God is
the Ancientest thing may be represented: For Matter dwells in the concavity of
Heaven, as in a Cave.

He is Neptune's bondman, because the Operations and Dispensations of Matter
are chiefly exercised in liquid ^odies.

His Flock or Herd seems to be nothing but the o^dinary Species of sensible
Creatures, Plants and Metals, in which Matter seems to diffuse and as it were
spend it self; so that after the forming and perfecting of these Kinds, (having
ended as it were her Task,) she seem^ to sleep and take her rest, not
attempting the composition of any more Species. And this may be the Moral of
Proteus his counting of his Flock, and of his sleeping.

Now this is said to be done, not in the morning, nor in the evening, but at
noon; to wit, at such time as is most fit and convenient for the perfecting and
bringing forth of Species out of Matter, duly prepared and predisposed, and in
the middle, as it were between their beginning and declinations, which we know
sufficiently (out of the Holy History) to be done about the time of the
Creation: for then by the power of that Divine Word (Producat.) Matter at the
Creator's command did congregate it self (not by ambages or turnings, but
instantly) to the production of its work into an Act and Constitution of
Species. And thus far have we the Narration of Proteus, (free and
unrestrained,) together with his Flock complete: for the universality of
things, with their ordinary Structures and Compositions of Species, bears the
face of matter, not limited and constrained, and of the Flock also of material
beings. Nevertheless if any expert Minister of Nature, shall encounter Matter
by main force, vexing and urging her with intent and purpose to reduce her to
nothing; she contrariwise (seeing annihilation and absolute destruction cannot
be effected by the Omnipotency of God) being thus caught in the straits of
necessity, does change and turn her self into diverse strange Forms and Shapes
of things, so that at length (by fetching a circuit as it were) she comes to a
period, and (if the force continue) betakes her self to her former being. The
reason of which constraint or binding, will be more facile and expedite, if
matter be laid hold on by Manacles, that is, Extremities.

Now whereas it is feigned that Proteus was a Prophet, well skilled in three
differences of Times, it has an excellent Agreement with the Nature of Matter:
for it is necessary that he that will know the Properties and Proceedings of
Matter, should comprehend in his Understanding the sum of all things, which
have been, which are, or which shall be, although no Knowledge can extend so
far as to singular, and individual Beings.

MEMNON, or a Youth too forward.
THe Poets say, that Memnon was the Son of Aurora, who (adorned with beautiful
Armor, and animated with popular Applause,) came to the Trojan War; where (in
rash Boldness, hasting unto, and thirsting after Glory,) he enters into single
Combat with Achilles, the valiantest of all the Graecians, by whose powerful
hand he was there slain. But Jupiter pitying his destruction, sent Birds to
modulate certain lamentable, and doleful Notes at the Solemnization of his
Funeral Obsequies. Whose Statue also (the Sun reflecting on it with his Morning
Beams) did usually, as is reported send forth a mournful Sound.

This Fable may be applied to the unfortunate destinies of hopeful young Men,
who like the Sons of Aurora, (puffed up with the glittering show of vanity, and
ostentation,) attempt actions above their strength, and provoke, and press the
most valiant Heroes to combat with them; so that (meeting with their
over-match) they are vanquished, and destroyed; whose untimely Death is often
accompanied with much pity and commiseration. For among all the Disasters that
can happen to Mortals, there is none so lamentable, and so powerful to move
compassion, as the flower of Virtue cropped with too sudden a Mischance. Neither
has it been often known that Men in their green years become so loathsome, and
odious, as that at their Deaths either Sorrow is stinted, or Commiseration
moderated; but that Lamentation and Mourning do not only flutter about their
Obsequies, like those Funeral Birds; but this pitiful Commiseration does
continue for a long space, and specially by Occasions, and new Motions, and
beginning of great Matters, as it were by the Morning-Rays of the Sun, their
Passions and Desires are renewed.

TITHONVS, or Satiety.
IT is elegantly feigned, that Tithonus was the Paramour of Aurora, who
(desirous to enjoy his Company) petitioned Jupiter that he might never die;
but, (through Womanish oversight) forgetting to insert this clause in her
Petition, that he might not withal grow old, and feeble; it followed that he
was only freed from the condition of Mortality; but for old Age, that came upon
him in a mavelous, and miserable fashion, agreeable to the state of those who
cannot die, yet every day grow weaker and weaker with Age: Insomuch that
Jupiter in commiseration of that his Misery,) did at length metamorphose him
into a Grass-hopper.

This Fable seems to be an ingenious Character, or Description of Pleasure,
which in the beginning, and as it were, in the morning, seems to be pleasant
and delightful, that Men desire they might enjoy, and monopolize it for ever
unto themselves, unmindful of that Satiety, and Loathing, which (like old age,)
will come upon them before they be aware. And so at last, (when the use of
Pleasure leaves Men, the Desire and Affection not yet yielding unto Death,) it
comes to pass that Men please themselves only by talking, and commemorating
those things which brought pleasure unto them in the flower of their Age, which
may be observed in libidinous Persons, and also in Men of Military Professions;
the one delighting in beastly Talk, the other boasting of their valorous Deeds,
like Grass-hoppers, whose Vigor consists only in their Voice.

JVNO'S SVI^OR, or Baseness.
THe Poets say, that Jupiter, to enjoy his lustful Delights, took upon him the
shape of sundry Creatures, as of a Bull, of an Eagle, of a Swan, and of a
Golden Shower; but being a Suitor to Juno, he came in a Form most ignoble and
base, an Object full of contempt and scorn, resembling indeed a miserable
Cuckoo, weather beaten with Rain and Tempest, numb^d, quaking, and half dead
with Cold.

This Fable is wise, and seems to be taken out of the Bowels of Morality; the
sense of it being this, That Men boast not too much of themselves, thinking by
ostentation of their own worth, to insinuate themselves into estimation and
favor with Men. The success of such intentions being for the most part
measured by the nature and disposition of those to whom Men sue for Grace; who,
if of themselves they be endowed with no gifts and Ornaments of Nature, but are
only of haughty and malignant Spirits, (intimated by the Person of Juno,) then
are Suitors to know that it is good policy to omit all kind of appearance that
may any way show their own least Praise or Worth; and that they much deceive
themselves in taking any other course. Neither is it enough to show deformity
in Obsequiousness, unless they also appear even abject and base in their very
Persons.

CUPID, or an Atom.
THat which the Poets say of Cupid, or Love, cannot properly be attributed to
one and the self same Person; and yet the difference is such, that* (by
rejecting the Confusion of Persons,) the Similitude may be received.

They say, that Love is the ancientest of all the Gods, and of all things else
except Chaos, which they hold to be a Contemporary with it. Now as touching
Chaos, that by the Ancients was never dignified with Divine Honor, or with the
Title of the God. And as for Love, they absolutely bring him in without a
Father; only some are of opinion, that he came of an Egg that was laid by Nox,
and that on Chaos he begat the God, and all things else. There are four things
attributed to him, perpetual Infancy, Blindness, Nakedness, and an Archery.
There was also another Love, which was the youngest of the Gods, and he, they
say, was the Son of Venus. On this also they bestow the Attributes of the elder
Love, as in some sort we'll apply unto him.

This Fable tends, and looks to the Cradle of Nature, Love seeming to be the
appetite or desire of the first Matter, or (to speak more plain) the natural
motion of the Atom, which is that Ancient and only Power that Forms and
Fashions all things out of Matter, of which there is no Parent, that is to say,
no Cause, seeing every Cause is as a Parent to its effect. Of this power or
virtue there can be no Cause in Nature (as for God, we always except him,) for
nothing was before it, and therefore no efficient Cause of it. Neither was
there any thing better known to Nature, and therefore neither Genus nor Form.
Wherefore whatsoever it is, positive it is, and but inexpressible. Moreover, if
the manner and proceeding of it were to be conceived, yet could it not be by
any Cause, seeing that (next unto God,) it is the Cause of Causes, it self only
without any Cause. And perchance there is no likelihood that the manner of it
may be contained or comprehended within the narrow compass of humane search.
Not without reason therefore it is feign^d to come of an Egg which was laid by
Nox. Certainly the Divine Philosopher grants so much.

Eccl. 3. 11. Cuncta fecit tempestatibus suis pulchra, and mundum tradidit
disputationibus eorum, ita tamen ut non inveniat homo opus, quod operatus est
Deus, principio ad finem. That is, he has made every thing beautiful in their
Seasons, also he has set the World in their Meditations; yet Man cannot find
the Work that God has wrought, from the beginning even to the end: For the
principal Law of Nature, or Power of this Desire, created (by God,) in these
parcels of things, for concurring and meeting together, (from whose Repetitions
and Multiplications all Variety of Creatures proceeded, and were composed,) may
dazzle the Eyes of Men's Understandings, and comprehended it can hardly be. The
Greek Philosophers are observed to be very acute and diligent in searching out
the material Principles of things; but in the beginnings of motion (wherein
consists all the efficacy of operation,) they are negligent and weak, and in
this that we handle, they seem to be altogether blind, and stammering; for the
Opinion of the Peripatericks concerning the appetite of Matter, caused by
privation, is in a manner nothing else but Words, which rather sound, than
signify any Reality. And those that refer it unto God, do very well; but then
they leap up, they ascend not by degrees; for doubtless there is one chief Law
subordinate to God, in which all natural things concur and meet, the same that
in the forecited Scripture is demonstrated in these Words, Opus quod operatus
est Deus a principio usque ad finem; the Work that God has wrought from the
beginning even to the end. But Democritus, which entered more deeply into the
consideration of this point, after he had conceived an Atom, with some small
dimension and form, he attributed unto it one only desire, or first motion,
simply, or absolutely, and another comparatively, or in respect; for he thought
that all things did properly tend to the Center of the World, whereof those
Bodies which were more material, descend with swifter motion, and those that
had less Matter, did, on the contrary, tend upward. But this Meditation was
very shallow, containing less than was expedient; for neither the turning of
the Celestial Bodies in a round, nor shutting and opening of things, may seem
to be reduced or applied to this beginning. And as for that opinion of
Epicurus, concerning the casual declination and agitation of the Atom, it is
but a mere Toy, and a plain evidence, that he was ignorant of that Point. It is
therefore more apparent (than we could wish,) that this Cupid, or Love, remains
as yet clouded under the shades of Night. Now as concerning his Attributes; He
is elegantly described with perpetual Infancy, or Childhood; because compound
Bodies they seem greater, and more stricken in years: Whereas the first Seeds
of things, or Atoms, they are little, and diminute, and also in their Infancy.

He is also well feigned to be naked, because all compound Bodies, to a Man
rightly judging, seem to be apparelled and clothed, and nothing to be properly
naked but the first Particles of things.

Concerning his Blindness, the Allegory is full of Wisdom; for this Love, or
Desire (whatsoever it be) seems to have but little Providence, as directing his
pace and motion by that which it perceives nearest; not unlike blind men that
go by feeling: More admirable then, must that chief divine Providence, be,
which (from things empty and destitute of Providence, and as it were, blind,)
by a constant and fatal Law, produces so excellent an Order and Beauty of
Things.

The last Thing which is attributed to Love, is Archery; by which is meant,
that his Virtue is such, as that it works upon a distant Object; because that
whatsoever operates afar off, seems to shoot, as it were, an Arrow. Wherefore
whosoever holds the Being both of Atoms and Vacuity, must needs infer, that the
Virtue of the Atom reaches to a distant Object; for if it were not so, there
could be no motion at all, by reason of the interposition of Vacuity; but all
things would stand stone still, and remain immovable.

Now as touching that other Cupid or Love, he may well be termed the youngest
of the Gods, because he could have no being before the constitution of Species.
And in his description the Allegory may be applied and traduced to manners:
Nevertheless he holds some kind of conformity with the Elder; for Venus does
generally stir up a desire of Conjunction and Procreation, and Cupid her Son
does apply this desire to some individual Nature; so that the general
disposition comes from Venus, the more exact sympathy from Cupid: the one
derived from Causes more near, the other from Beginnings more remote and fatal,
and as it were from the elder Cupid, of whom every exquisite sympathy does
depend.

DIOMEDES, or Zeal.
DIOMEDES flourishing with great Fame and Glory in the Trojan Wars, and in high
Favor with Pallas, was by her instigated (being indeed forwarder than he
should have been) not to forbear Venus a jot, if he encountered with her in
Fight; which very boldly he performed, wounding her in the right Arm. This
presumptuous Fact he carried clear for a while, and being honored and renowned
for his many heroic Deeds, at last returned into his own Country, where
finding himself hard bestead with domestic Troubles, fled into Italy, betaking
himself to the Protection of Foreigners where in the beginning he was fortunate
and royally entertained by King Daunus with sumptuous Gifts, raising many
Statues in honor of him throughout his Dominions. But upon the very first
Calamity that happened unto this Nation whereunto he was fled for Succor, King
Daunus enters into a conceit with himself that he had entertained a wicked
Guest into his Family, and a Man odious to the Goddess, and an Impugner of
their Divinity, that had dared, with his Sword, to assault and wound that
Goddess, who, in their Religion, they held it Sacrilege so much as to touch.
Therefore, that he might expiate his Countrey's Guilt, (nothing respecting the
Duties of Hospitality, when the Bonds of Religion tied him with a more reverend
regard) suddenly slew Diomedes, commanding withal that his Trophies and Statues
should be abolished and destroyed. Neither was it safe to lament this miserable
Destiny; but even his Companions in Arms, whilst they mourned at the Funeral of
their Captain, and filled all the places with Plaints and Lamentations, were
suddenly metamorphosed into Birds like unto Swans, who, when their Death
approaches, sing melodious and mournful Hymns.

This Fable has a most rare and singular Subject: For in any of the Poetical
Records, wherein the Heroes are mentioned, we find not that any one of them,
besides Diomedes, did ever with his Sword offer Violence to any of the Deities.
And indeed, the Fable seems in him to represent the nature and fortune of Man,
who of himself, does propound, and make this as the end of all his Actions, to
worship some Divine Power, or to follow some Sect of Religion, though never so
vain and superstitious, and with Force and Arms to defend the same: For
although those bloody Quarrels for Religion were unknown to Ancients, (the
Heathen Gods not having so much as a touch of that Jealousy, which is an
Attribute of the true God,) yet the Wisdom of the Ancient Times seems to be so
copious and full, as that, what was not known by Experience, was yet
comprehended by Meditations and Fictions. They then that endeavor to reform
and convince any Sect of Religion, (though vain, corrupt, and infamous,
shadowed by the Person of Venus,) not by the force of Argument and Doctrine,
and Holiness of Life, and by the weight of Examples and Authority, but labor
to extirpate and root it out by Fire and Sword, and Tortures, are encouraged,
it may be, thereunto by Pallas; that is, by the Acrity of Prudence, and
Severity of Judgment, by whose Vigor and Efficacy, they see into the Falsity
and Vanity of these Errors. And by this their hatred of Pravity, and good zeal
to Religion, they purchase to themselves great Glory, and by the Vulgar (to
whom nothing moderate can be grateful) are esteemed and honored as the only
Supporters of Truth and Religion, when others seem to be lukewarm and full of
Fear. Yet this Glory and Happiness does seldom endure to the end, seeing every
violent-Prosperity, if it prevent not alteration by an untimely Death grows to
be unprosperous at last: For if it happen that by a change of Government, this
banished and depressed Sect get strength, and so bear up again, then these
zealous Men, so fierce in opposition before, are condemned, their very Names
are hateful, and all their Glory ends in Obloquy.

In that Diomedes is said to be murdered by his Host, it gives us to
understand that the difference of Religion breeds Deceit and Treachery, even
among nearest Acquaintance.

Now in that Lamentation and Mourning was not tolerated but punished; it puts
us in mind, that let there be never so nefarious an Act done, yet there is some
place left for Commiseration and Pity, that even those that hate Offenses,
should yet in Humanity commiserate Offenders, and Pity their distress, it being
the Extremity of Evil when Mercy is not suffered to have commerce with Misery.
Yea, even in the cause as well of Religion as Impiety, many Men may be noted
and observed to have been compassionate. But on the contrary the complaints and
moans of Diomedes's Followers, that is, of Men of the same Sect and Opinion,
are wont to be shrill and loud, like Swans or the Birds of Diomedes. In whom
also that part of the Allegory is excellent to signify that the last Words of
those that suffer Death for Religion, like the Songs of dying Swans, do
wonderfully work upon the Minds of Men, and strike and remain a long time in
their Senses and Memories.

DAEDALVS, or Mechanic.
MEchanical Wisdom and Industry, and in it unlawful Science perverted to wrong
ends, is shadowed by the Ancients under the Person of Daedalus, a Man
ingenious, but execrable. This Daedalus (for murdering his fellow servants that
emulated him) being banished, was kindly entertained (during his Exile) in many
Cities and Princes Courts: For indeed he was the Raiser and Builder of many
goodly Structures, as well in honor of the Gods, as the Beauty and
Magnificence of Cities, and other public places, but for his Works of Mischief
he is most notorious. It is he that framed the Engine which Pasiphae used to
satisfy her Lust in company with a Bull; so that by his wretched Industry, and
pernicious Device, that Monster Minotaur (the destruction of so many hopeful
Youths) took his accursed and infamous beginning, and studying to cover and
increase one Mischief with another; for the security and preservation of this
Monster he invented and built a Labyrinth, a Work for intent and use most
nefarious and wicked, for Skill and Workmanship famous and excellent.
Afterward, that he might not be noted only for Works of Mischief, but be
sought after as well for Remedies, as for Instruments of Destruction, he was
the Author of that ingenious device concerning the Clew of Thread, by which the
Labyrinth was made passable without any let. This Daedalus was persecuted by
Minos with great Severity, Diligence, and Inquiry, but he always found the
means to avoid and escape his Tyranny. Lastly, he taught his Son Icarus to fly;
but the Novice, in Ostentation of this Art, soaring too high, fell into the Sea
and was drowned.

The Parable seems to be thus: In the beginning of it may be noted that kind of
Envy or Emulation that lodges, and wonderfully sways and domineers amongst
excellent Artificers, there being no kind of People more reciprocally tormented
with bitter and deadly Hatred than they.

The Banishment also of Daedalus (a punishment inslicted on him against the
Rules of Policy and Providence) is worth the noting: For Artificers have this
Prerogative to find entertainment and welcome in all Countries, so that Exile
to an excellent Workman can hardly be termed a punishment, whereas other
Conditions and States of Life can scarce live out of their own Country. The
admiration of Artificers is propagated and increased in foreign and strange
Nations, seeing it is a natural and unbred disposition of Men to value their
own Contrymen (in respect of Mechanical Works) less than Strangers.

Concerning the use of Mechanical Arts, that which follows is plain. The Life
of Man is much beholden to them, seeing many Things (conducing to the Orna^ent
of Religion, to the Grace of Civil Discipline, an^ to the beautifying of all
Humane Kind) are extracted out of their Treasuries: And yet notwithstanding
from the same Magazine or Storehouse are produced Instruments both of Lust and
Death; for to omit the Wiles of Bands, we will know how far exquisite Poisons,
Warlike Engines, and such like Mischiefs (the effects of Mechanical Inventions)
do exceed the Minotaur himself in Malignity and savage Cruelty.

Moreover that of the Labyrinth is an excellent Allegory, whereby is shadowed
the nature of Mechanical Sciences; for all such handicraft Works as are more
ingenious and accurate, may be compared to a Labyrinth in respect of Subtilty
and diverse intricate Passages, and in other plain resemblances, which by the
Eye of Judgment can hardly be guided and discerned, but only by the Line of
Experience.

Neither is it impertinently added, that he which invented the intricate Nooks
of the Labyrinth, did also show the Commodity of the Clew: For Mechanical Arts
are of ambiguous use, serving as well for hurt as for Remedy, and they have in
a manner Power both to loose and bind themselves.

Unlawful Trades, and so by consequence, Arts themselves are often persecuted
by Minos, that is by Laws, which do condemn them, and prohibit Men to use them.
Nevertheless they are hid and retained every where, finding lurking holes and
places of Receipt, which was well observed by Tacitus of the Mathematicians and
Figure-flingers of his time, in a thing not so much unlike; Genus Hominum quod
in Civitate nostra semper and retinebitur and vetabitur. There is a kind of Men
that will always abide in our City, though always forbidden. And yet
notwithstanding unlawful and curious Arts of what kind soever, in tract of
time, when they cannot perform what they promise, do fall from the good Opinion
that was held of them, (no otherwise than Icarus fell down from the Skies,)
they grow to be contemned and scorned, and so perish by too much Ostentation.
And to say the Truth, they are not so happily strairened by the Reins of Law,
as bewrayed by their own Vanity.

ERICTHONIVS, or Imposture.
THe Poets Fable that Vulcan solicited Minerva for her Virginity, and impatient
of denial, with an inflamed desire offered her violence, but in struggling his
Seed fell upon the Ground, whereof came Ericthonius, whose Body from the middle
upward, was of a comely and apt proportion, but his Thighs and Legs like the
tail of an Eel, small and deformed. To which Monstrosity he being conscious,
became the first inventor of the use of Chariots, whereby that part of his Body
which was well proportioned might be seen, and the other which was ugly and
uncomely might be hid.

This strange and prodigious Fiction may seem to show that Art which (for the
great use it has of Fire) is shadowed by Vulcan, although it labor by much
striving with corporeal substances to force Nature, and to make her subject to
it, (she being for her industrious Works rightly represented by Minerva;) yet
seldom or never attains the end it aims at, but with much ado and great pains
(wrestling as it were with her) comes short of its purpose, and produces
certain imperfect Births and lame Works, fair to the Eye, but weak and
defective in use, which many Impostors (with much subtilty and deceit) set to
view, and carry about, as it were in triumph, as may for the most part be noted
in Chemical productions, and other Mechanical subtilties and novelties,
especially when (rather persecuting their intent, than reclining their Errors)
they rather strive to overcome Nature by force, than sue for her Embracements
by due obsequiousness and observance.

DEVCALION, or Restitution.
THe Poets say, that (the People of the Old World being destroyed by a general
Deluge) Deucalion and Pyrrha were only left alive; who praying with fervent and
zealous devotion, that they might know by what means to repair Mankind, had
answer from an Oracle that they should obtain what they desired, if taking the
Bones of their Mother they cast them behind their Backs; which at first struck
them with great amazement and despair, seeing (all things being defaced by the
Flood) it would be an endless work to find their Mothers Sepulcher, but at
length they understood that by Bones the Stones of the Earth (seeing the Earth
was the Mother of all things) were signified by the Oracle.

This Fable seems to reveal a secret of Nature, and to correct an error
familiar to Men's conceits: For through want of knowledge Men think that things
may take renovation and restoration from their putrefaction and dregs, no
otherwise than the Phoenix from the Ashes, which in no case can be admitted
seeing such kind of Materials, when they have fulfille, their periods, are
unapt for the beginnings of such things: We must therefore look back to more
common Principles.

NEMESIS, or the Vicissitude of things.
NEMESIS is said to be a Goddess venerable unto all, but to be feared of none
but Potentates and Fortunes favorites. She is thought to be the Daughter of
Oceanus and Nox. She is pou^traicted with Wing^ on her Shoulders, and on her
Head a Corone^* bearing in her Right Hand a Javelin of Ash, and in her left a
Pitcher with the similitudes of Aethiopians engraven on it; and lastly, she is
described sitting on an Heart.

The Parable may be thus unfolded. Her name Nemesis does plainly signify
Revenge or Retribution, her office and administration being (like a Tribune of
the People) to hinder the constant and perpetual felicity of happy Men, and to
interpose her word, veto, I forbid the continuance of it; that is, not only to
chastise Insolency, but to intermix prosperity (though harmless and in a mean)
with the Vicissitudes of adversity, as if it were a custom, that no mortal Man
should be admitted to the Table of the Gods but for sport. Truly when I read
that Chapter, wherein Caius Plinius has collected his misfortunes and miseries
of Augustus Caesar, whom of all Men I thought the most happy, who had also a
kind of Art to use and enjoy his Fortune, and in whose mind might be noted
neither pride, nor lightness, nor niceness, nor disorder, nor melancholy, (as
that he had appointed a time to die of his own accord,) I then deemed this
Goddess to be great and powerful, to whose Altar so worthy a Sacrifice as this
was drawn.

The Parents of this Goddess were Oceanus and Nox, that is, the Vicissitude of
things and Divine Judgment obscure and secret: For the alteration of things are
aptly represented by the Sea, in respect of the continual Ebbing and Flowing of
it, and hidden Providence is well set forth by the Night: For even the
Nocturnal Nemesis (seeing Humane judgment differs much from Divine) was
seriously observed by the Heathen.

Virgil Aeneid. lib. 2. -- Cadit and Ripheus justissimus unus,
Qui fuit ex T^ucris, and servantissimus aequi.
Diis aliter visum --
That day, by Greekish force, was Ripheus slain
So just and strict observer of the Law,
As Troy within her Walls, did not contain
A better Man: Yet God then good it saw.
She is described with Wings, because the changes of things are so sudden, as
that they are seen before foreseen: For in the Records of all Ages, we find it
for the most part true, that great Potentates, and wise Men, have perished by
those misfortunes which they most contemned; as may be observed in Marcus
Cicero, who being admonished by Decius Brutus of Octavius Caesar's hypocritical
friendship and hollow-heartedness toward him, returns this answer, Te autem,
mi Brute, sicut debeo, amo, quod istud quicquid est nugarum me scire voluisti:
I must ever acknowledge my self (Dear Brutus) beholden to thee, in love, for
that thou have been so careful to acquaint me with that which I esteem but as a
needless trifle to be doubted.

Nemesis is also adorned with a Coronet, to show the envious and malignant
disposition of the vulgar, for when Fortunes Favorites and great Potentates
come to ruin, then do the common People rejoice, setting, as it were, a Crown
upon the head of Revenge.

The Javelin in her right hand points at those whom she actually strikes and
pierces through.

And before those, whom she destroys not in their calamity and misfortune, she
ever presents that black and dismal spectacle in her left hand: for
questionless to Men sitting as it were upon the Pinnacle of Prosperity, the
thoughts of Death and painfulness of sickness and misfortunes, perfidiousness
of Friends, treachery of Foes, change of Estate, and such like, seem as ugly to
the Eye of their Meditations, as those Aethiopians pictured in Nemesis her
Pitcher. Virgil in describing the Battle of Actium, speaks thus elegantly of
Cleopatra.

Regina in mediis patrio vocat agmina sistro
Nec dum etiam geminos ^ tergo respic^^ angues.
The Queen amid'st this hurly-burly stands,
And with her Country Timbrel calls her Bands;
Not spying yet, where crawled behind her Back,
Two deadly Snakes with Venom speckled black.
But not long after, which way soever she turned, Troops of Aethiopians were
still before her Eyes.

Lastly, It is wisely added, That Nemesis rides upon an Heart, because a Heart is
a most lively Creature. And albeit, it may be, that such as are cut off by
Death in their Youth prevent and shun the power of Nem^sis; yet doubtless such,
whole prosperity and power conti^^e long, are made subject unto her, and lie as
it were ^^dden under her Feet.

ACHELOVS, or, Battle.
IT is a Fable of Antiquity, that when Hercules and Achelous as Rivals
contended for the Marriage of ^^anira, the matter drew them to combat, wherein
^^helous took upon him many diverse shapes, for so was i^ in his power to do,
and amongst others, transforming himself into the likeness of a furious wild
Bull, a^^aults Hercules and provokes him to fight. But Hercul^^, for all this,
sticking to his old Humane Form, courageously encounters him, and so the Combat
goes roundly on. But this was the event, That Hercules ^ore away one of the
Bull's Horns, wherewith he being mightily daunted and grieved, to ransom his
Horn again, was contented to give Hercules, in exchange thereof, the Amalthean
Horn, or Cornu-Copia.

This Fable has relation unto the Expeditions of War, for the Preparations
thereof on the defensive part (which expressed in the Person of Achelous) is very
diverse and uncertain. But the invading Party is most commonly of one sort, and
that very single, consisting of an Army by Land, or perhaps of a Navy by S^^.
But for a King that in his own Territory, expect a^ Enemy, his occasions are
infinite. He fortifies Towns, he assembles Men out of the Countries and
Villages, he raises Citadels, he builds and breaks down Bridges he disposes
Garrisons, and places Troops of Soldiers on Passages of Rivers, on Ports, on
Mountains, and Ambushes in Woods, and is busied with a multitude of other
Directions, insomuch, that every day he prescribes new Forms and Orders; and
then at last having accommodated all things complete for defense, he the
rightly represents the form and manner of a fierce fighting Bull. On the other
side, the Invader his great^^ care is, the fear to be distressed for Victuals
in an Enemy-Country; and therefore affects chiefly to hasten on Battle: For if
it should happen, that after a Field-fight, he prove the Victor, and as it
were, break the Horn of the Enemy, then certainly this follows, that his Enemy
being stricken with Terror, and abased in his Reputation, presently bewrays his
weakness, and seeking to repair his loss, retires himself to some strong ho^d,
abandoning to the Conqueror the spoil and sac^ of his Country and Cities: which
may well be termed a Type of the Amalthean Horn.

DIONYSVS, or Passions.
THEY say that Se^^le, Jupiter's Sweetheart, (having bound her Paramour, by an
irrevocabl^ Oath, to grant her one Request which she would require) desired
that he would accompany her in the same form wherein he accompanied Juno: Which
he granting (as not able to deny) it came to pass, that the miserable Wench was
burnt with Lightning. But the Infant which she bare in her Womb, Jupiter, the
Father, took out, and kept it in a gash which he cut in his Thigh, till the
Months were complete that it should be born. This burden made Jupiter somewhat
to limp, whereupon the Child (because it was heavy and troublesome to its
Father while it lay in his Thigh) was called Dionysus. Being born, it was
committed to Proserpina for some years to be Nu^st, and being grown up, it had
such a Maiden face, as that a Man could hardly judge whether it were a Boy or
Girl. He was dead also, and buried for a time, but afterward revived: Being but
a Youth, he invented and taught ^he planting and dressing of Vines, the making
also, and use of Wine; for which, becoming famous and renowned, he subjugated
the World, even to the uttermost bounds of India. He rode in a chariot d^awn
with Tigers. There danced about him certain deformed Hobgoblins called Cohali,
Acratus, and others, yea, even the Muses also were some of his Followers. He
took to Wife Ariadne, forsaken and left by These^s. The Tree sacred unto him
was the Ivy. He was held the Inventor and Institutor of Sacrifices, and
Ceremonies, and full of Corruption and Cruelty. He had power to strike Men with
fury and madness; for it is reported, That at the celebration of his Orgies,
two famous Worthies, Pentheus and Orpheus, were torn in pieces by certain
frantic Women, the one because he got upon a Tree to behold their Ceremonies
in these Sacrifices; the other for making melody with his Harp: And for his
Gods, they are in a manner the same with Jupiter's.

There is such excellent morality coucht in this Fable, as that Moral
Philosophy affords not better; for under the Person of Bacchus is described the
nature of Affection, Passion, or Perturbation, the Mother of which (though
never so hurtful) is nothing else but the Object of apparent good in the Eyes
of Appetite. And it is always conceived in an unlawful desire, rashly
propounded and obtained, before well understood and considered; and when it
begins to grow, the Mother of it, which is the desire of apparent good by too
much servency, is destroyed and perishes. Nevertheless whilst yet it is an
imperfect Embrio) it is nourished and preserved in the Humane Soul, (which is
as it were a Father unto it, and represented by Jupiter,) but especially in the
inferior part thereof, as in a Thigh, where also it causes so much trouble and
vexation, as that good determinations and actions are much hindered and lamed
thereby; and when it comes to be confirmed by consent and habit, and breaks out
as it were into act, it remains yet a while with Proserpina, as with a Nurse,
that is, it seeks corners and secret places, and as it were, Caves under
Ground, until (the Reigns of Shame and Fear being laid aside in a pampered
audaciousness) it either takes the pretext of some Virtue, or becomes
altogether impudent and shameless. And it is most true, that every vehement
Passion is of a doubtful Sex, as being Masculine in the first Motion, but
Feminine in Prosecution.

It is an excellent Fiction that of Bacchus his reviving; for Passions do
sometimes seem to be in a dead sleep, and as it were utterly extinct, but we
should not think them to be so indeed, no, though they lay, as it were, in
their Grave; for let there be but matter and opportunity offered, and you shall
see them quickly to revive again.

The invention of Wine is wittily ascribed unto him; every affection being
ingenious and skilful in finding out that which brings nourishment unto it; and
indeed, of all things known to Men, Wine is most powerful and efficacious to
excite and kindle Passions of what kind soever, as being in a manner common
Nurse to themall.

Again, his conquering of Nations, and undertaking infinite Expeditions is an
elegant device; for Desire never rests content with what it has, but with an
infinite and unsatiable Appetite still covets and gapes after more.

His Chariot also is well said to be drawn by Tigers; for as soon as any
affection shall from going a foot, be advanced to ride in a Chariot, and shall
captivate reason, and lead her in a triumph, it grows cruel, untamed, and
fierce against whatsoever withstands or opposes it.

It is worth the noting also, that those ridiculous Hobgoblins are brought in
dancing about his Chariot; for every Passion does cause, in the Eyes, Face and
Gesture, certain undecent, and ill-seeming, apish, and deformed motions; so
that they who in any kind of Passion, as in anger, arrogance, or love, seem
glorious and brave in their own Eyes, do yet appear to others misshapen and
ridiculous.

In that the Muses are said to be of his company, it shows that there is no
affection almost which is not soothed by some Art, wherein the indulgence of
Wits does derogate from the glory of the Muses, who (when they ought to be the
Mistress of Life) are made the Waiting-maids, of affections.

Again, where Bacchus is said to have loved Ariadne, that was rejected by
Theseus; it is an Allegory of special observation; for it is most certain, that
Passions always covet and desire that which Experience forsakes; and they all
know (who have paid dear for serving and obeying their Lust) that whether it be
honor, or riches, or delight, or glory, or knowledge, or any thing else which
they seek after, yet are they but things cast off, and by diverse Men, in all
ages after experience had utterly rejected and loathed.

Neither is it without a Mystery, that the Ivy was sacred to Bacchus; for the
Ap^lication holds, First, in that the Ivy remains green in Winter. Secondly, In
that it sticks to, embraces, and overtoppeth so many diverse Bodies, as Trees,
Walls, and Edifices. Touching the first, every Passion does by resistance and
reluctation, and as it were by Antiperistasis (like the Ivy of the cold
Winter,) grow fresh and lusty. And as for the other, every predominate
Affection does again (like the Ivy) embrance and limit all Humane Act^ons and
Determinations, adhering and cleaving fast unto them.

Neither is it a wonder, that superstitious Rites and Ceremonies were
attributed unto Bacchus, seeing every giddy headed humor keeps in a manner
Revel-rout in false Religions; or that the cause of Madness should be ascribed
unto him, seeing every affection is by Nature a short fury, which (if it grow
vehement, and become habitual) concludes in madness.

Concerning the rending and dismembring of Pentheu^ and Orpheus, the Parable is
plain, for every prevalent affection is outrageous and severe, and against
curious inquiry, and wholesome and free admonition.

Lastly, That confusion of Jupiter and Bacchus, their Persons may be well
transferred to a Parable, seeing noble and famous Acts, and remarkable and
glorious Merits, do sometimes proceed from Virtue, and well ordered Reason and
Magnanimity, and sometimes from a secret Affection, and hidden Passion, which
are so dignified with the celebrity of Fame and Glory, that a Man can hardly
distinguish between the Acts of Bacchus, and the Gests of Jupiter.

ATALANTA, or Gain.
ATALANTA, who was reputed to excel in swiftness, would needs challenge
Hippomenes at a match in running. The conditions of the prize were these: That
if Hippomenes won the Race, he should espouse Atalanta; if he were outrun,
that then he should forfeit his Life. And in the Opinion of all, the ^ictory
was thought assured of Atalantas side, being ^^mous, as she was, for her
matchless and inconquera^^e speed, whereby she had been the bane of many.
^^^pomenes therefore bethinks him how to deceive her by a trick, and in that
regard provides three Golden Apples or Balls, which he purposely carried about
him. The Race is begun, and Atalanta gets a good start before him. He seeing
himself thus cast behind, being mindful of his device, throws one of his Golden
Balls before her, and yet not outright, but somewhat of the one side, both to
make her linger and also to draw her out of the right course: She, out of a
Womanish desire, (being thus enticed with the beauty of the Golden Apple)
leaving her direct Race, runs aside, and stoops to catch the Ball, Hippomenes
the while holds on his course, getting thereby a great start, and leaves her
behind him: But she by her own natural swiftness, recovers her lost time, and
gets before him again. But Hippomenes still continues his slight, and both the
second and third times cast out his Balls, those enticing delays; and so by
craft, and not by his activity, wins the Race and Victory.

This Fable seems Allegorically to demonstrate a notable conflict between Art
and Nature; for Art (signified by Atlanta) in its work (if it be not let and
hindered) is far more swift than Nature, more speedy in pace, and sooner attains
the end it aims at, which is manifest almost in every effect: As you may see it
in Fruit Trees, whereof those that grow of a Kernel are long e're they bear,
but such as are grafted on a Stock a great deal sooner. You may see it in Clay,
which in the generation of Stones, is long e^re it become hard; but in the
burning of Bricks, is very quickly affected. Also in Moral Passages you may
observe, that it is a long time e're (by the benefit of Nature) follow can be
assuaged, and comfort atta^^ed; whereas Philosophy (which is, as it were, (...)
Living) tarries not the leisure of time, but does it ^^^stantly, and out of
hand; and yet this Prerogat^^^ and singular agility of Art is hindered by
certain G^^den Apples to the infinite prejudice of Humane ^^^ceedings: For
there is not any one Art or (...) which constantly perseveres in a true and
lawful (...) it come to the proposed End or Mark; but ev^^ and anon makes stops
after good beginnings, leaves the Race, and turns aside to Profit and
Commodity, li^^ Atalanta.

Declinat cursus, aurumque volubile tollit. Who does her course forsake,
The Rolling Gold to take.
And therefore it is no wonder that Art and not the power to conquer Nature,
and by Pact or Law of Conquest, to kill and destroy her; but on the contrary it
falls out, that Art becomes subject to Nature, and yields the Obedience, as a
Wife the Husband.

PROMETHEVS, or the State of Man.
THe Ancients deliver, that Prometheus made a Man of Clay, mixed with certain
parcels taken from diverse Animals, who studying to maintain this his Work by
Art, (that he might not be accounted a founder only, but Propagator of Humane
kind) stole up to Heaven with a bundle of Twigs, which he kindled at the
Chariot of the Sun, came down again, and communicated it with Men: and yet they
say, (That notwithstanding this excellent work of his,) he was required with
Ingratitude, in a treacherous Conspiracy: For they accused both him and his
Invention to (...), which was not so taken as was meet it should, (...) the
Information was pleasing to Jupiter, and all (...) Gods. And therefore in a
merry Mood, granted (...) Men, not only the use of Fire, but perpetual (...)
also, a Boon most acceptable and desirable. They (...), as it were, over joyed,
did foolishly lay this ^ift of the Gods upon the back of an Ass, who being
wonderfully oppressed with Thirst, and near a ^ountain, was told by a Serpent
(which had the cu^tody thereof) that he should not drink, unless he would
promise to give him the Burden that was on his Back. The silly Ass accepted
the condition, and so the restoration of Youth (sold for a draught of Water)
past from Men to Serpents. But Prometheus (...) of Malice, being reconciled
unto Men, after they were frustrated of their Gift, but in a Chafe yet with
Jupiter, feared not to use deceit in Sacrifice: For having killed two Bulls,
and in one of their Hides wrapped up the Flesh and Fat of them both, and in the
other only the Bones, with a great show of Religious Devotion, gave Jupiter his
choice, who (detesting his Fraud and Hypocrisy, but taking an occasion of
Revenge) chose that which was stopped with Bones, and so turning to Revenge
(when he saw that the Insolency of Prometheus would not be repressed, but by
laying some grievous Affliction upon Mankind, in the forming of which, he so
much bragged and boasted) commanded Vulcan to frame a goodly beautiful Woman,
which being done, every one of the Gods bestowed a Gift on her; whereupon she
was called Pandora. To this Woman they gave, in her hand, a goodly Box full of
all Miseries and Calamities, only in the bottom of it they put Hope; with this
Box she comes first to Prometheus, thinking to catch him, if peradventure he
should accept it at her hands, and so open it: which he nevertheless, with good
Providence and Foresight refused. Whereupon she goes to Epimeth^us (who, though
Brother to Prometheus, yet was of a much differing Disposition) and offers this
Box unto him, (...) without delay took it, and rashly opened it; b^ when he saw
that all kind of Miseries came flutte^ing about his Ears, being wise too late,
with gre^^ speed and earnest endeavor clapped on the Cover, (...) so with much
ado retained Hope sitting alone in (...) bottom; at last Jupiter laying many
and grievo^^ Crimes to Prometheus his charge (as that he had sto^^ Fire from
Heaven, that in contempt of his Majesty, he sacrificed a Bull's Hide stuffed
with Bones, that ^^ scornfully rejected his Gift, and besides all this th^^ he
offered violence to Pallas) cast him into Chains, and doomed him to perpetual
Torment: and by Jupiter's Command, was brought to the Mountain Ca^casus, and
there bound fast to a Pillar that he could not stir; there came an Eagle also,
that every d^^sat tyring upon his Liver and wasted it, but as much as was eaten
in the day, grew again in the Night, that Matter for Torment to work upon might
never decay. But yet they say there was an end of this Punishment. For Hercules
crossing the Ocean in a Cup, which the Sun gave him, came to Caucasus, and set
Prometheus (...) liberty, by shooting the Eagle with an Arrow. Moreover in some
Nations there were instituted in the honor of Prometheus, certain Games of
Lamp-beare^^, in which they that strived for the Prize, were wo^ to carry
Torches lighted; which who so suffered to go out, yielded the Place and Victory
to those that followed, and so cast back themselves; so that whosoev^^ came
first to the Mark with his Torch burning, got the Prize.

This Fable demonstrates and presses many true and grave Speculations, wherein
some things have been heretofore well noted, others not so much as touched.

Prometheus does clearly and elegantly signify Providence: For in the
Universality of Nature, the Fabric and Constitution of Man only was by the
Ancients picked out and chosen, and attributed unto Providence, (...) a
peculiar Work. The reason of it seems to be, not only in that the Nature of Man
is capable of a mind and understanding, which is the Seat of Providence; and
therefore it would seem strange and incredible, that the reason and mind should
so proceed and flow ^^om dumb and deaf Principles, as that it should
necessarily be concluded, the Soul of Man to be endued with Providence, not
without the example, intention, and stemp of a greater Providence. But this
also is (...) propounded, that man is as it were the Center of the World, in
respect of final Causes, so that if ^an were not in Nature, all things would
seem to ^^ray and wander without purpose, and like scattered Branches (as they
say) without inclinations to their end: For all things attend on Man, and he
makes use o^, and gathers Fruit from all Creatures: For the re^olutions and
periods of Stars make both for the di^^^nctions of Times, and the distribution
of the World's ^ight. Meteors also are referred to presages of Tempests; and
Winds are ordained, as well for Navigation, as for turning of Mills, and other
Engines: And Plants, and Animals of what kind soever, are useful either for
Men's Houses, and places of shelter, or for Raiment, or for Food, or Medicine,
or for ease of Labor, or in a word, for delight and solace; so that all things
seem to work, not for themselves, but for Man.

Neither is it added without consideration that certain Particles were taken
from diverse living Creatures, and mixed and tempered with that clayey Mass,
because it is most true that of all things comprehended within the compass of
the Universe, Man is a thing most mixed and compounded, insomuch that he was
well termed by the Ancients, a little World; for although the Chymicks do, with
too much Curiosity, take and wrest the elegancy of this Word (Microccsm) to the
Letter, contending to find in Man all Minerals, all Vegetables and the rest, or
any thing that holds proportion with them; yet this proposition remains sound
and whole, that the Body of Man, of all material. Being (...) found to be most
compounded, and most organical whereby it is endued and furnished with most
admirable Virtues and Faculties. And as for simple Bodies, their Powers are not
many, though certain and violent, as e^sting without being weakened, diminished
or stinted by mixture; for the multiplicity and excellency of Operation have
their residence in mixture and composition, and yet nevertheless, Man in his
Originals seems to be a thing unarmed, and naked, and unable to help it self as
needing the aid of many things; therefore Promethe^^ made haste to find out
Fire, which suppeditates and yields comfort and help in a manner, to all humane
Wants and Necessities: so that if the Soul be the Form of Forms, and if the
Hand be the Instrument of Instruments; Fire deserves well to be called the
Succor of Succors, or the Help of Helps, which infinite ways affords aid and
assistance too all Labors and Mechanical Arts, and to the Sciences themselves.

The manner of stealing this fire is aptly described, even from the nature of
things: It was, they say, by a bundle of Twigs held to touch the Chariot of the
Sun: For twigs are used in giving blows or Stripes, to signify clearly, that
fire is engendered by the violent percussion and mutual colliffion of Bodies, by
which their material Substances are attenuated and set in Motion, and prepared
to receive the heat or influence of the Heavenly Bodies; and so in a
clandestine manner, and as it were by stealth, may be said to take and snatch
Fire from the Chariot of the Sun.

There follows next a remarkable part of the Parable, that Men instead of
Gratulation and Thanksgiving, were angry, and expostulated the Matter with
Prometheus, insomuch that they accused both him and his Invention unto Jupiter,
which was so acceptable to him, that he augmented their former Commodities with
a new Bounty. Seems it not strange, that Ingratitude toward the Author of a
Benefit (a Vice that in a man^^^ contains all other Vices) should find such
Approbation and Reward? No, it seems to be otherwise: For the meaning of the
Allegory is this, that Men's outcries upon the defects of Nature and Art,
proceed from an excellent disposition of the Mind, and turn to their good,
whereas the silencing of them is hateful to the Gods, and redounds not so much
to their Profit: For they that infinitely extol Humane Nature, or the knowledge
they possess, breaking out into a prodigal admiration of that they have and
enjoy adoring also those Sciences they profess, would have them be accounted
perfect; they do first of all show little Reverence to the divine Nature, by
equalizing, in a manner, their own Defects with God's Perfection: Again, they
are wonderfully injurious to Men, by imagining they have attained the highest
step of knowledge, (resting themselves contented) seek no further. On the
contrary, such as bring Nature and Art to the Bar with Accusations, and Bills
of Complaint against them, are indeed of more true and moderate Judgments. For
they are ever in Action, seeking always to find out new Inventions. Which makes
me much to wonder at the foolish and inconsiderate Dispositions of some Men,
who (making themselves Bondslaves to the Arrogance of a few) have the
Philosophy of the Peripateticks (containing only a Portion of Grecian Wisdom,
and that but a small one neither) in so great esteem, that they hold it, not
only an unprofitable, but a suspicious, and almost heinous thing, to lay any
imputation of Imperfection upon it. I approve rather of Empedocles his Opinion
who like a Madman, and of Democritus his Judgment, who with great moderation
complained how that all things were involved in a Mist) that we knew nothing,
that we discerned nothing, that Truth was drowned in the depths of Obscurity,
and that false things were wonderfully joined and intermixed with true (as for
the new Academy that exceeded all measure) than of the confident and
pronunciative School of Aristotle. Let (...) therefore be admonished, that by
acknowledging (...) Imperfection of Nature and Art, they are grateful to the
Gods, and shall thereby obtain new Benefits and greater Favors at their
bountiful Hands, and the A^cusation of Prometheus their Author and Master
(thoug^ bitter and vehement) will conduce more to their Profit, than to the
effuse in the congratulation of his Invention: For in a Word the opinion of
having enough, is to be accounted one of the greatest Causes of having too
little.

Now as touching the kind of Gift which Men are said to have received in reward
of their Accusation (to wit, an ever-fading Flower of Youth) it is to show,
that the Ancients seemed not to despair of attaining the skill by Means and
Medicines, to put off Old Age, and to prolong Life, but this to be numbered
rather among such things (having been once happ^^^ attained unto) are now
through Men's Negligence and Carelessness, utterly perished and lost; than among
such as have been always denied and never granted: For they signify and show,
that by affording the true use of Fire, and by a good and stern accusation and
conviction of the Errors of Art, the Divine Bounty (...) not wanting unto Men
in the obtaining of such Gifts but Men are wanting to themselves in laying this
Gi^^ of the Gods upon the back of a silly slow-paced Ass which may seem to be
Experience, a stupid thing, and full of Delay: From whose leisurely and Snail
like-pace, proceeds that complaint of Life's brevity, and Arts length. And to
say the Truth, I am of this opinion, that those two Faculties, Dogmatical and
Emperical, are not as yet well joined and coupled together, but as new Gifts of
the Gods imposed either upon Philosophical Abstractions, as upon a flying Bird,
or upon slow and dull Experience, as upon an Ass And yet methinks, I would not
entertain an ill conceit of this Ass, if it meet not for the accidents of
Travel and Thirst: For I am persuaded, that who so constantly goes on, by the
conduct of Experience as by a certain Rule and Method, and not covets to meet
^^th such Experiments by the way, as conduce either to gain or ostentation, (to
obtain which, he must be (...) to lay down, and sell this Burden) may prove no
unfit Porter to bear this new addition of divine Munificence.

Now, in that this Gift is said to pass from Men to Serpents, it may seem to be
added to the Fable for ornament-sake in a manner, unless it were inserted to
shame Men, that having the use of that Celestial Fire, and of so many Arts,
are not able to get unto themselves such things as Nature it self bestows upon
many other Creatures.

But that sudden reconciliation of Men to Prometheus, after they were
frustrated of their hopes, contains a profitable and wise Note, showing the
levity and temerity of Men in new Experiments; for if they have not present
Success, answerable to their expectation, with too sudden have desist from that
they began, and with precipitancy returning to their former experiments, are
reconciled to them again.

The state of Man, in respect of Arts, and such things as concern the
Intellect, being now described, the Parable passes to Religion: For after the
planting of Arts, follows the setting of Divine Principles, which Hypocrisy
has overspread and polluted. By that twofold Sacrifice therefore is
elegantly shadowed out the Persons of a true Religious Man, and an Hypocrite.
In the one is contained Fatness, which (by reason of the Inflammation and Fumes
thereof,) is called, The Portion of God; by which his Affection and Zeal,
(tending to Gods Glory, and ascending toward Heaven) is signified. In him also
are contained the Bowels of Charity, and in him is found that good and
wholesome Flesh. Whereas in the other, there is nothing but dry and naked
Bones; which nevertheless, do stuff up the Hide, and make it appear like a fair
and goodly Sacrifice: By this may be well meant those external and vain Rites,
and empty Ceremonies by which Men do oppress and fill up the sincere Worship of
God, things composed rather for ostentation, than any way conducing to true
Piety. Neither do they hold it sufficient to offer such mock-Sacrifices unto
God, except they also lay them before him, as if he had chosen and bespoke
them. Certainly the Prophet in the person of God, does thus expostulate
concerning this Choice, Isa. 58. 5. Number tandem hoc est illud Jejunium quod
ELEGI, ut homo animam suam in diem unum affligat, and caput instar junceti
demittat? Is it such a Fast, that I have chosen, that a Man should afflict his
Soul for a day, and to bow down his head like a Bulrush?

Having now touched the State of Religion, the Parable converts it self to the
Manners and Conditions of humane Life. And it is a common, but apt
interpretation, by Pandora to be meant pleasure and voluptuousness; which (when
the civil Life is pamperd with too much Art, and Culture, and Superfluity,) is
engendered, as it were, by the efficacy of Fire, and therefore the work of
Voluptuousness is attributed unto Vulcan, who also himself does represent Fire.
From this do infinite Miseries, together with too late repentance, proceed, and
overflow the Minds, and Bodies, and Fortunes of Men, and that not only in
respect of particular Estates, but even over Kingdoms and Commonwealths; for
from this Fountain have Wars, Tumults, and Tyrannies derived their Original.

But it would be worth the Labor to consider how elegantly and proportionably
this Fable does delineate two Conditions; or (as I may say) two Tables or
Examples of humane Life, under the Persons of Prometheus, or Epimetheus; for
they that are of Epimetheus his Sect, are improvident, not foreseeing what may
come to pass hereafter; esteeming that best which seems most sweet for the
present; whence it happens, that they are overtaken with many miseries,
difficulties, and calamities, and so lead their Lives almost in perpetual
affliction; but yet notwithstanding they please their Fancy, and out of
ignorance of the passages of things, do entertain many vain hopes in their
mind, whereby they sometimes (as with sweet Dreams) solace themselves, and
sweeten the Miseries of their Life. But they that are Prometheus his Scholars,
are Men endued with Prudence, foreseeing things to come, warily shunning, and
avoiding many Evils and Misfortunes. But to these their good Properties, they
have also annexed, that they deprive themselves, and defraud their Genius of
many lawful Pleasures, and diverse Recreations, and (which is worse,) they vex,
and torment themselves with cares and troubles, and intestine fears; for being
chained to the Pillar of Necessity, they are afflicted with innumerable
cogitations, (which, because they are very swift, may be fitly, compared to an
Eagle,) and those griping, and as it were, gnawing and devouring the Liver,
unless sometimes, as it were, by Night, it may be they get a little recreation,
and ease of Mind; but so, as that they are again suddenly assaulted with fresh
anxieties and fears.

Therefore this Benefit happens to but a very few of either condition, that
they should retain the Commodities of Providence, and free themselves from the
Miseries of Care and Perturbation; neither indeed can any attain unto it, but
by the assistance of Hercules, that is, Fortitude, and Constancy of Mind, which
is prepared for every Event and armed in all Fortunes, foreseeing without fear,
enjoying without loathing, and suffering without Impatience. It is worth the
noting also, that this Virtue was not natural to Prometheus, but adventitial,
and from the indulgence of another; for no inbred and natural Fortitude is
able to encounter with these Miseries. Moreover, this Virtue was received and
brought unto him from the remotest part of the Ocean, and from the Sun, that
is, from Wisdom, as from the Sun; and from the Meditation of Inconstancy, or of
the Waters of humane Life, as from the sailing upon the Ocean; which two Virgil
has well conjoined in these Verses;

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas:
Quique metus omnes, and inexorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque; Acherontis avari.
Happy is he that knows the causes of things:
And that with dauntless courage treads upon
All Fear and Fates, relentless Threatenings,
And greedy Throat of roaring Acheron.
Moreover, it is elegantly added for the consolation and confirmation of Men's
Minds, that this noble Hero crossed the Ocean in a Cup or Pan, lest
peradventure, they might too much fear that the straits and frailty of their
Nature will not be capable of this Fortitude and Constancy. Of which very thing
Seneca well conceived, when he said, Magnum est habere simul fragilitatem
hominis, and securitatem Dei. It is a great matter for Humane Frailty and
Divine Security to be one and the self-same time, in one and the self-same
Subject.

But now we are to step back a little again to that, which by premeditation
past over, lest a Breach should be made in those things that were so linked
together. That therefore which I could touch here, is that last Crime imputed
to Prometheus, about seeking to bereave Minerva of her Virginity: For
questionless, it was this heinous offense that brought that punishment of
devouring his Liver, upon him; which is nothing else but to show, that when we
are puffed up with too much Learning and Science, they go about oftentimes to
make even Divine Oracles subject to Sense and Reason; whence most certainly
follows a continual distraction, and restless griping of the Mind; we
musttherefore with a sober, and humble Judgment, distinguish between Humanity,
and Divinity, and between the Oracles of Sense, and the Mysteries of Faith
unless an Heretical Religion, and a commentitious Philosophy be pleasing unto
us.

Lastly, it remains that we say something of the Games of Prometheus, performed
with burning Torches, which again has reference to Arts and Sciences, as that
fire, in whose Memory, and Celebration, these Games were instituted, and it
contains in it a most wise admonition, that the perfection of Sciences to be
expected from Succession, not from the nimbleness and promptness of one only
Author; for they that are nimblest in Course, and strongest in Contention, yet
happily have not the luck to keep Fire still in their Torch; seeing it may be
as well extinguished by running too fast, as by going to slow. And this running
and contending with Lamps, seems long since to be intermitted, seeing all
Sciences seem even now to flourish most in their first Authors, Aristotle,
Galen, Euclid, and Ptolomy; Succession having neither effected, nor almost
attempted any great Matter. It were therefore to be wished, that these Games,
in honor of Prometheus, or Humane Nature, were again restored, and that
Matters should receive success by Combat and Emulation, and not hang upon any
one Man'ssparkling and shaking Torch. Men therefore are to be admonished to
rouse up their Spirits, and try their strengths and turns, and not refer all to
the Opinions and Brains of a few.

And thus have I delivered that which I thought good to observe out of this so
well known, and common Fable; and yet I will not deny, but that there may be
some things in it, which have an admirable consent with the Mysteries of
Christian Religion, and especially that Sailing of Hercules in a Cup, (to set
Prometheus at liberty,) seems to represent an Image of the Divine Word, coming
in Flesh, as in a frail Vessel, to redeem Man from the Slavery of Hell. But I
have interdicted my Pen all liberty in this kind, lest I should use strange
Fire at the Altar of the Lord.

SCYLLA and ICARVS, or the Middle-way.
MEDIOCRITY, or the Middle-way, is most commended in Moral Actions; in
Contemplative Sciences, not so celebrated; though no less profitable and
commodious; but in Political Employments, to be used with great heed and
jugdment. The Ancients by the way, prescribed by Icarus, noted the Mediocrity
of Manners; and by the way between Scylla and Charybdis (so famous for
difficulty and danger,) the Mediocrity of intellectual Operations.

Icarus being to cross the Sea by flight, was commanded by his Father, that he
should fly neither too high nor too low; for his Wings being joined with Wax,
if he should mount too high, it was to be feared lest the Wax would melt by the
heat of the Sun; and if too low, lest misty Vapors of the Sea would make it
less tenacious; but he in a youthful jollity soaring too high, fell down
headlong, and perished in the Water.

The Parable is easy and vulgar; for the way of Virtue lies in a direct path
between excess and defect. Neither is it a wonder that Icarus perished by
excess, seeing that excess for the most part, is the peculiar fault of Youth,
as defect is of Age, and yet of two evil and hurtful ways, Youth commonly makes
choice of the better, defect being always accounted worst; for whereas Excess
contains some Sparks of Magnanimity, and, like a Bird, claims Kindred of the
Heavens, Defect, only like a base Worm, crawls upon the Earth. Excellently
therefore said Heraclitus, Lumen siccum, optima Anima; a dry Light is the best
Soul; for if the Soul contract Moisture from the Earth is become degenerate
altogether. Again, on the other side, there must be moderation used, that this
Light be subtilizd by this laudable Siccity, and not destroyed by too much
servency. And thus much every Man for the most part knows.

Now they that would sail between Scylla and Charybdis must be furnished, as
well with the skill, as prosperous success in Navigation: for if their Ships
fall into Scylla they are Split on the Rocks: if into Charybdis they are
swallowed up of a Gulf.

The Moral of this Parable (which we will but briefly touch, although it
contain matter of infinite Contemplation) seems to be this: That in every Art
and Science, and so in their Rules and Axioms, there be a mean observed between
the Rocks of Distinctions, and the Gulfs of Universalities; which two are
famous for the Wrack both of Wits and Arts.

SPHYNX, or Science.
THEY say that Sphynx was a Monster of diverse forms, as having the Face and
Voice of a Virgin, the Wings of a Bird, and the Talons of a Gryphin. His abode
was in a Mountain near the City of Thebes, he kept also the Highways, and used
to lie in Ambush for Travelers, and so to surprise them: To whom (being in his
power) he propounded certain dark and intricate Riddles, which were thought to
have been given and received of the Muses. Now if these miserable Captives were
not able instantly to resolve and interpret them in the midst of their
difficulties and doubts, she would rend and tear them in pieces. The Country
groaning a long time under this Calamity, the Thebans at last propounded the
Kingdom as a reward unto him that could interpret the Riddles of Sphynx, there
being no other way to destroy her: Whereupon, Oedipus (a Man of piercing, and
deep Judgment, but Maimed and Lame, by reason of holes bored in his Feet,)
moved with the hope of so great a Reward, accepted the condition, and
determined to put it to the hazard; and so with an undaunted and bold Spirit,
presented himself before the Monster; who asked him what Creature that was,
which after his Birth, went first upon four Feet, next, upon two, then upon
three, and lastly, upon four Feet again; answered forthwith, that it was Man;
which in his Infancy, immediately after Birth, crawls upon all four, scarce
venturing to creep, and not long after, stands upright upon two Feet; then
growing old, he leans upon a Staff wherewith he Supports himself, so that he
may seem to have three Feet; and at last, in decrepid years, his strength
failing him, he falls grovelling again upon four, and lies bedridden. Having
therefore by this true Answer gotten the Victory, he instantly slew this
Sphynx, (and laying her Body upon an Ass,) leads it, as it were, in Triumph;
and so (according to the condition,) was created King of the Thebans.

This Fable contains in it no less wisdom than elegancy, and it seems to point
at Science, especially that which is joined with practice, for Science may not
absurdly be termed a Monster, as being by the ignorant and rude multitude
always held in admiration. It is diverse in shape and figure, by reason of the
infinite variety of Subjects, wherein it is conversant. A maiden Face and Voice
is attributed unto it for its gracious countenance and volubility of Tongue.
Wings are added, because Sciences and their Inventions do pass and fly from one
to another, as it were, in a moment, seeing that the communication of Science
is as the kindling of one light at another. Elegantly also it is feigned to
have sharp and hooked Talons, because the Axioms and Arguments of Science do so
fasten upon the mind, and so strongly apprehended and hold it, as that it stir
not or evade, which is noted also by the Divine Philosopher, Eccles. 12. 12.
Verba sapientum (says he) sunt tanquam aculei and veluti clavi in altum
defixi. The words of the wise are like Goads, and Nails driven far in.

Moreover, all Science seems to be placed in steep and high Mountains; as being
thought to be a lofty and high thing, looking down upon ignorance with a
scornful Eye. It may be observed and seen also a great way, and far in compass,
as things set on the tops of Mountains.

Furthermore, Science may well be feigned to beset the Highway, because which
way soever we turn in this Progress and Pilgrimage of Humane Life, we meet with
some matter or occasion offered for Contemplation.

Sphynx is said to have received from the Muses, diverse difficult Questions and
Riddles, and to propound them unto Men, which remaining with the Muses, are
free (it may be) from savage cruelty; for so long as there is no other end of
Study and Meditation, than to know, the Understanding is not racked and
imprisoned, but enjoys Freedom and Liberty, and even doubts and variety, find a
kind of pleasure and delectation: But when once these Aenigma's are delivered
by the Muses to Sphynx, that is, to practice, so that if it be solicited and
urged by Action, and Election, and Determination; then they begin to be
troublesome and raging; and unless they be resolved and expedited, they do
wonderfully torment and vex the minds of Men, distracting, and in a manner
rendrng them into sundry parts.

Moreover, there is always a twofold condition propounded with Sphynx her
Aenigmaes: To him that does not expound them, distraction of mind; and to him
that does, a Kingdom; for he that knows that which he sought to know, has
attained the end he aimed at, and every Artificer also commands over his work.

Of Sphynx her Riddles, they are generally two kinds; some concerning the
nature of things, others touching the nature of Man. So also there are two
kinds of Empires, as rewards to those that resolve them. The one over Nature,
the other over Men; for the proper and chief end of true Natural Philosophy is
to command and sway over Natural Beings; as Bodies, Medicines, Mechanical
Works, and infinite other things; although the School (being content with such
things as are offered, and priding it self with Speeches) does neglect
realities and works, treading them as it were under foot. But that Aenigma
propounded to Oedipus (by means of which he obtained the Theban Empire)
belonged to the Nature of Man: For whosoever does thoroughly consider the Nature
of Man, may be in a manner the contriver of his own Fortune, and is born to
command, which is well spoken of the Roman's Arts:

Tu regere imperio populos, Roman, mement^
Hae tibi erunt Arts --
Roman remember, that with Scepters awe
Thy Realms thou rule. These Arts let be thy Law.
It was therefore very apposite, that Augustus Caesar (whether by
Premeditation, or by a Chance) bare a Sphynx in his Signet: For he (if ever
any) was famous not only in Political Government, but in all the course of his
Life; he happily discovered many new Aenigmaes concerning the Nature of Man,
which if he had not done with dexterity and promptness, he had oftentimes fallen
into imminent Danger and Destruction.

Moreover, It is added in the Fable, that the Body of Sphinx, when she was
overcome, was laid upon an Ass, which indeed is an elegant Fiction, seeing
there is nothing so acute and abstruse, but (being well understood, and
divulged,) may be well apprehended by a slow capacity.

Neither is it to be omitted, that Sphynx was overcome by a Man lame in his
Feet; for when Men are too swift of Foot, and too speedy of Pace, in hasting to
Spbynx her Aenigma's, it comes to pass, that (she getting the upper hand) their
Wits and Minds are rather distracted by Disputations, than that ever they come
to command by Works and Effects.

PROSERPINA, or Spirit.
PLUTO, they say, being made King of the Infernal Dominions, (by that memorable
Division,) was in despair of ever attaining any one of the Superior Goddesses
in marriage, especially if he should venture to Court them, either with Words,
or with any amorous Behavior; so that of necessity he was to lay some Plot to
get one of them by Rapine: Taking therefore the Benefit of Opportunity, he
caught up Proserpina (the Daughter of Ceres, a beautiful Virgin,) as she was
gathering Narcissus-Flowers in the Meadows of Sicily, and carried her away with
him in his Coach to the Subterranean Dominions; where she was welcomed with
such Respect, as that she was styled the Lady of Dis. But Ceres, her Mother,
when, in no place she could find this her only beloved Daughter, in a sorrowful
Humor, and distracted beyond measure, went compassing the whole Earth, with a
burning Torch in her hand, to seek, and recover this her lost Child. But when
she saw that all was in vain, supposing peradventure, that she was carried to
Hell, she importuned Jupiter with many Tears and Lamentations, that she might
be restored unto her again; and at length, prevailed thus far, That if she had
tasted of nothing in Hell, she should have leave to bring her from thence.
Which Condition was as good as a Denial to her Petition, Proserpina having
already eaten three Grains of a Pomegranate: And yet, for all this, Ceres gave
not over her Suit, but fell to Prayers and Moans afresh: Wherefore, it was at
last granted, that (the Year being divided) Proserpina should by alternate
Courses, remain one six Months with her Husband, and other six Months with her
Mother. Not long after this, Theseus, and Perithous, in an over-hardy
Adventure, attempted to fetch her from Pluto's Bed; who, being weary with
Travel, and sitting down upon a Stone in Hell, to rest themselves, had not the
Power to rise again; but sat there for ever. Proserpina therefore remained
Queen of Hell, in whose Honor there was this great privilege granted, That
although it were enacted, that none that went down to Hell should have the
power ever to return from thence; yet was this singular exception annexed to
this Law, That if any presented Proserpina with a Golden Bough, it should be
lawful for him to go and come at his pleasure. Now there was but one only such
a Bough in a spacious and shady Grove, which was not a Plant neither of it
self, but budded from a Tree of another kind, like a Rope of Gum, which being
plucked off, another would instantly spring out.

This Fable seems to pertain to Nature, and to dive into that rich and
plentiful efficacy and variety of subalternal Creatures, from whom whatsoever
we have is derived, and to them does again return.

By Proserpina, the Ancients meant that Ethereal Spirit, which (being
separated from the upper Globe) is shut up and detained under the Earth
(represented by Pluto) which the Poet well expressed thus:

Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere, cognati retinebat semina coeli.
Whether the Youngling Tellus (that of late
Was from the high-rear'd Ether separate)
Did yet contain her Teeming Womb within
The living Seeds of Heaven, her nearest kin.
This Spirit is feigned to be rapted by the Earth, because nothing can
withold it, when it has time and leisure to escape. It is therefore caught
and staid by a sudden contraction, no otherwise than if a Man should go about
to mix Air with Water, which can be done by no means, but by a speedy and rapid
Agitation, as may be seen in Froth, wherein the Air is rapted by the Water.

Neither is it elegantly added, that Proserpina was rapt as she was gathering
Narcissus Flowers in the Valleys, because Narcissus has his Name from slowness
or stupidity: for indeed then is this Spirit most prepared and fitted to be
snatched by Terrestrial Matter, when it begins to be coagulated, and become as
it were flown.

Rightly is Proserpina honored more than any of the other God's Bed-fellows,
in being styled the Lady of Dis, because this Spirit does rule and sway all
things in those lower Regions, Pluto abiding stupid and ignorant.

This Spirit the power Celestial (shadowed by Ceres) strives, with infinite
sedulity, to recover and get again: For that Brand or burning Torch of Ether
(which Ceres carried in her hand) does doubtless signify the Sun, which
enlightneth the whole Circuit of the Earth, and would be of greatest moment to
recover Proserpina, if possible it might be.

But Proserpina abides still; the Reason of which is accurately, and
excellently propounded in the Conditions between Jupiter and Ceres: For, first,
it is most certain there are two Ways to keep Spirit in solid and terrestrial
Matter; the one by Constipation and Obstruction, which is mere Imprisonment and
Constraint; the other, by Administration, or proportionable Nutriment, which it
receives willingly, and of its own accord: For after that the included Spirit
begins to feed and nourish it self, it makes no haste to be gone; but is as it
were, linked to its Earth: And this is pointed at by Proserpina her eating of
Pomegranate; which if she had not done, she had long since been recovered by
Ceres with her Torch, compassing the Earth. Now as concerning that Spirit which
is in Metals and Minerals, it is chiefly perchance restrained by the solidity
of Mass: But that which is in Plants and Animals, inhabits a porous Body, and
has open Passage to be gone, in a manner, as it lists, were it not that it
willingly abides of its own accord, by reason of the Relish it finds in its
entertainment. The second Condition concerning the six Months Custom, it is no
other than an elegant Description of the Division of the Year; seeing this
Spirit mixed with Earth, appears above Ground in Vegetable Bodies During the
Summer-Months, and in the Winter sinks down again.

Now as concerning Theseus and Perithous, and their attempt to bring Proserpina
quite away, the meaning of it is, that it oftentimes comes to pass that some
more subtle Spirits descending with diverse Bodies to the Earth, never come to
suck of any subalternal Spirit, whereby to unite it unto them, and so to bring
it away. But on the contrary are coagulated themselves, and never rise more,
that Proserpina should be by that means augmented with Inhabitants and Dominion.

All that we can say concerning that Sprig of Gold is hardly able to defend us
from the violence of the Chymicks, if in this regard they set upon us, seeing
they promise by that their Elixir to effect Golden Mountains, and the restoring
of Natural Bodies, as it were, from the Portal of Hell. But concerning
Chemistry, and those perpetual Suitors for that Philosophical Elixir, we know
certainly that their Theory is without grounds, and we suspect that their
Practice is also without certain reward. And therefore (omitting these) of this
last part of the Parable, this is my Opinion, I am induced to believe by many
Figures of the Ancients, that the conservation and restoration of natural
Bodies, in some fort, was not esteemed by them as a thing impossible to be
attained, but as a thing abstruse and full of Difficulties, and so they seem to
intimate in this place, when they report that this one only Sprig was found
among infinite other Trees in a huge and thick Wood, which they feigned to be
of Gold, because Gold is the Badge of perpetuity, and to be artificially as it
were inserted, because this effect is to be rather hoped for from Art, than
from any Medicine, or simple or natural means.

METIS. or Counsel.
THE Ancient Poets report, that Jupiter took Metis to Wife, whose Name does
plainly signify Counsel, and that she by him conceived. Which when he found,
not tarrying the time of her deliverance, devours both her and that which she
went withal, by which means Jupiter himself became with Child, and was
delivered of a wondrous birth; for out of his head or brain came forth Pallas
Armed.

The Sense of this Fable (which at first apprehension may seem monstrous and
absurd) contains in it a secret of State, to wit, with what policy Kings are
wont to carry themselves toward their Counselors, whereby they may not only
preserve their Authority and Majesty free and entire, but also that it may be
the more extolled and dignified of the People: For Kings being as it were tied
and coupled in a Nuptial bond to their Counselors, do truly conceive that
communicating with them about the affairs of greatest importance, do yet
detract nothing from their own Majesty. But when any Matter comes to be
censured or decreed (which is a birth) there do they confine and restrain the
liberty of their Counselors; lest that which is done should seem to be hatched
by their Wisdom and Judgment. So as at last Kings (except it be in such matters
as are distastful and maligned, which they always will be sure to put off from
themselves) do assume the the honor and praise of all matters that are
ruminated in Council, and, as it were, formed in the Womb, whereby the
resolution and execution (which because it proceeds from power, and implies
necessity, is elegantly shadowed under the Figure of Pallas Armed) shall seem
to proceed wholly from themselves. Neither suffices it, that it is done by the
Authority of the King, by his mere will and free applause, except withal, this
be added and appropriated as to issue out of his own Head or Brain, intimating,
that out of his own Judgment, Wisdom, and Ordinance, it was only invented and
derived.

The SIRENS, or Pleasures.
THE Fable of the Sirens seems rightly to have been applied to the pernicious
allurements of Pleasure, but in a very vulgar and gross manner. And therefore
to me it appears, that the Wisdom of the Ancients have with a farther reach or
insight strained deeper Matter out of them, not unlike the Grapes ill pressed;
from which, though some Liquor were drawn, yet the best was left behind. These
Sirens are said to be the Daughters of Achelous and Terpsichore one of the
Muses, Who in their first being, were winged, but after rashly entering into
contention with the Muses, were by them vanquished, and deprived of their
Wings. Of whose plucked out Feathers the Muses made themselves Coronets, so as
ever since that time all the Muses have attired themselves with plumed heads,
except Terpsichore only, that was Mother to the Sirens. The Habitation of the
Sirens was in certain pleasant Islands, from whence as soon as out of their
Watchtower they discovered any Ships approaching, with their sweet Tunes they
would first entice and stay them, and having them in their Power would destroy
them. Neither was their Song plain and single, but consisting of such variety
of melodious Tunes so fitting and delighting the Ears that heard them, as that
it ravished and betrayed all Passengers. And so great were the mischiefs they
did, that these Isles of the Sirens, even as far off as Man can ken them,
appeared all over white with the Bones of unburied Carcasses. For the remedying
of this Misery a double means was at last found out; the one by Ulysses, the
other by Orpheus. Ulysses (to make experiment of his Device) caused all the
Ears of his Company to be stopped with Wax, and made himself to be bound to the
Main Mast, with special Commandment to his Mariners not to be loosed, albeit
himself should require them so to do. But Orpheus neglected and disdained to be
so bound, with a shrill and sweet Voice, singing Praises of the Gods to his
Harp, suppressed the Songs of they Sirens, and so freed himself from their
Danger.

This Fable has relation to Men's Manners, and contains in it a manifest and
most excellent Parable: For Pleasures do for the most proceed out of the
abundance and superfluity of all things, and also out of the delights and
jovial contentments of the Mind; the which are wont suddenly, as it were, with
winged Inticements to ravish and rap mortal Men: But Learning and Education
brings it so to pass, as that it restrains and bridles Man's Mind, making it so
to consider the ends and events of Things, as that it clips the Wings of
Pleasure. And this was greatly to the honor and renown of the Muses; for after
that by some Examples, it was made manifest, that by the power of Philosophy,
vain Pleasures might grow contemptible; it presently grew to great esteem, as a
thing that could raise, and elevate the Mind aloft, that seemed to be base, and
fixed to the Earth, make the cogitations of the Men (which do ever reside in
the Head, to be ethereal, and as it were winged. But that the Mother of the
Sirens was left to her Feet, and without Wings; that no doubt is no otherwise
meant, than of light and superficial Learning, appropriated and designed only
to Pleasures, as were those which Petronius devoted himself unto, after he had
received his fatal Sentence; and having his Foot, as it were, upon the
Threshold of Death, sought to give himself all delightful Contentments;
insomuch, as when he had caused Consolatory Letters to be sent him, he would
peruse none of them, (as Tacitus reports; that should give him Courage and
Constancy;) but only read fantastical Verses, such as these are; Vivamus, Mea
Lesbia, atque amemus,
Rumoresque Senum severiorum,
Omnes unius aestimemus Assis.
My Lesbia, let us live and love;
Though wayward Dotards us reprove,
Weigh their Words light for our behove.
And this also: Jura Senes norint, and quid sit fasque nefasque,
Inquirant tristes, Legumque examina servent.
Let doting Gransire know the Law,
And right and wrong observe with awe:
Let them in that strict Circle draw.


This kind of Doctrine would easily persuade to take these plumed Coronets from
the Muses, and to restore the Wings again to the Sirens. These Sirens are said
to dwell in remote Isles; for that pleasures Love Privacy, and retired Places,
shunning always too much Company of People. The Syren's Songs are so vulgarly
understood, together with the Deceits and Dan^^^ of them, as that they need no
exposition. But that of the Bones appearing like white Cliffs, and descried
afar off, has more Acuteness in it; for thereby is signified, that, albeit the
Examples of Afflictions be manifest, and eminent; yet do they not sufficiently
deter us from the Wicked Enticements of Pleasures.

As for the Remainder of this Parable, though it be not over-mystical, yet it
is very grave, and excellent: For in it are set out three Remedies for this
violent, enticing Mischief; to wit, Two from Philosophy, and One from Religion.
The first Means to shun these inordinate Pleasures is, to withstand, and resist
them in their beginnings, and seriously to shun all occasions that are offered,
to debaush and entice the Mind, which is signified in that stopping of the
Ears; and that Remedy is properly used by the meaner and baser sort of People,
as it were, Ulysses's Followers or Mariners; whereas more Heroic and Noble
Spirits may boldly converse even in the midst of these seducing Pleasures, if
with a resolved constancy they stand upon their Guard, and fortify their
Minds; and so take greater contentment in the trial and experience of this
their approved Virtue; learning rather thoroughly to understand the Follies and
Vanities of those Pleasures by Contemplation, than by Submission: Which Solomon
avouched of himself, when he reckoned up the multitude of those Solaces and
Pleasures wherein he Swam, does conclude with this Sentence,

Sapientia quoque perseverabat mecum. Wisdom also continued with me. Therefore
these Heroes, and Spirits of this excellent Temper, even in the midst of these
enticing Pleasures, can show themselves constant and invincible, and are able
to support their own virtuous Inclination, against all heady and forcible
persuasions whatsoever; as by the example of Ulysses, that so peremptorily
interdicted all pestilent Counsel, and Flatteries of his Companions, as the
most dangerous and pernicious Poisons to captivate the Mind. But of all other
Remedies in this case, that of Orpheus is most predominant: For they that
chaunt and resound the praises of the Gods, confound and dissipate the Voices
and Incantations of the Sirens; for Divine Meditations do not only in power
subdue all sensual pleasures; but also far exceed them in swiftness and delight.

FINIS.
THE CHARACTER OF Queen Elizabeth. Written by way of Essay.
By the Lord Verulam.
QUeen Elizabeth was one, whom Nature and Fortune had made the Wonder of her
Sex, and an Ornament to Crowned Heads. For the truth of this we need not appeal
to the Testimony of any Monk, or of any such like Solitary Recluse: For tho
these men write acutely, and have extraordinary Judgments; yet being wedded to,
and biased by their own Faction, they can never be faithful in transmitting a
thing of this nature to Posterity. But this is a Province that more properly
belongs to men of the first Rank, to such as have had the management of the
Government in their own hands, and have been acquainted with the Secret Springs
and motions of Civil Affairs. Every Age has looked upon a Female Government as
a Rarity; if prosperous as a Wonder; but if prosperous and long, almost as a
Miracle. Whereas tho she reigned full four and forty years, yet she outlived
not her happiness. Of the happiness of her Reign I design to say something,
without running out into high Encomiums. For Praise indeed is the Tribute of
Men, but Happiness the Gift of God.

I take this to be the first step to her happiness, that from a Private
condition she was raised to the Administration of the Regal Power. Forasmuch as
it is a standing Rule in the Morality and common Sense of Mankind, that those
things are to be looked upon as our greatest happiness, which come beyond our
hope and expectation. But this is not what I mean. That which I aim at is this,
that Princes, who are bred up in Courts as the undoubted Heirs of a Crown, are
so far debauched by a soft, indulgent and effeminate Education, that they
frequently become less capable of managing the State: Whereas those have proved
the best and most excellent Princes, who have been under the Discipline of both
Fortunes. We need not to go far for instances, Henry the Seventh in England,
and Lewis the Twelfth in France, within our own memory, and almost at the same
time, mounted the Throne, not only from a Private, but also from an Adverse and
harassed Fortune; and the one proved famous for his Prudence, the other for his
Justice. This was the Case of Q. Elizabeth; whose Fortune was as inconstant at
the first, as at last, when she came to the Crown, it proved Constant and Even.
For at her Birth she was declared Heiress to the Throne, afterward
disinherited, and at last despisd: during her Brother's Reign she enjoyed a
more serene and favorable Fortune, but whilst her Sister swayed the Scepter
the Clouds and Storms returned upon her again. Nor was she advanced on a sudden
from a Prison to a Throne, thereby to render her haughty after the Provocation
of her Sufferings: But being restored to her Liberty, and raised in her hopes,
she at last quietly and happily mounted the Throne, without any Opposition or
Competitor.

These things I have mentioned, to show how careful Divine Providence was of
this best of Princes, by preparing her for a Crown by such methods of
Discipline. Nor ought the misfortune of her Mother to Eclipse the glory of her
Birth: especially since it is abundantly evident, that Henry the Eighth was
engaged in a new love before he gave way to his Anger against Q. Ann: nor is
posterity a stranger to the nature of that King, which was so very prone to
Love and Jealousy, and prosecuted both even with the effusion of Blood. To
this we may add, that she was cut off by an Accusation grounded on slight
Conjectures, and on the improbable Testimony of a wicked Accuser: all which was
muttered privately at that very time; and Q. Ann herself with an undaunted
mind, and noble presence, protested her Innocence at the time of her Death. For
having (as she thought) got a faithful and generous Messenger, she just before
her execution dispatched him away with this Message to the King; That the King
had very well observed, and would still keep his promise good to her, that was
now going to be invested with new honors: since from a Private Person he raised
her at first to the dignity of a Marchioness, and then advanced her to be the
Partner of his Bed and Throne; and now, when he could raise her no higher on
Earth, designed to promote her an Innocent to the Crown of Martyrdom. But the
Messenger durst not tell this to the King, who was devoted to another Love, tho
Fame, the Asserter of Truth, has transmitted it to Posterity.

Another part of the Happiness of Q Elizabeth seems to consist in the Period
and Course of time wherein she reigned: Not only that it was Long, but because
it was such a Part of her Life, as was most fit for managing the Affairs of
State, and governing a Kingdom. For she was five and twenty years old when she
began her Reign (at which Age she was out of her Guardians Jurisdiction) and
she continu^d to Reign to the 70th year of her Age. So that she neither
experienced what it was to be a Minor, and under a Governors power; nor did she
labor under the Inconveniences of an extreme and miserable Old Age. An Age,
which even to Private men brings too many troubles along with it; but to Kings,
beside the ordinary Miseries of human Life, it comes attended with the Decay of
their States, and is backed with an inglorious Exit. For there has scarce been
a King, that has lived to an extreme and infirm old Age, but what lost much of
that Power and Esteem, which he formerly had. Of this we have a notable
Instance in Philip the Second, King of Spain, a Prince very potent, and one
very well skilled in the Art of Governing: who in his latter days, laboring
under the Impotency of old Age, deeply experienced the truth of what we
asserted. He quitted all his Conquests in France, made a Peace with that
Nation, and endeavour^d to do the same with others, that so he might leave all
things in quiet and composed to his Successors. On the other hand, Q.
Elizabeth's Fortune was so Constant and Vigorous, that no declension of Affairs
followed her lively, tho declining Age. Nay more, for a standing and most
certain monument of her happiness, she died not before a Victory in Ireland had
put an end to the Rebellion there, so shining and so uniform was her Glory in
all its Parts! Besides, I think it very material to reflect, over what sort of
People she bore the sway, for had her Government been over the Palmyrenians, or
any other soft and unmanly Nation of Asia, it had been a less wonder, since a
Female in the Throne would be suitable enough to an Esseminate People, but to
have all things move and be directed by a Woman's Nod in England, a Nation so
fierce and warlike; this, I say, justly raises our highest admiration.

But tho the Genius of her Subjects was so desirous of War, and so impatient of
Peace, yet this did not hinder her from maintaining it strictly all her Reign.
And this natural inclination of hers, joined with success, is what I reckon
redounds to her highest Commendation. For this conduced much to the Happiness
of her own Life, to the Honor of her Sex, and to the Peace and Quiet of her
Conscience. About the tenth year of her Reign, an Insurrection was indeed
attempted in the North, but it was soon hushed and suppressed. All the rest of
her time England enjoyed a secure and profound Peace. And I account it a most
glorious Peace, upon these two accounts; which tho they make nothing to the
Merit, yet contribute very much to the Glory of a Peace. The first is, that it
appeared the more Conspicuous and Shining by the Calamities of its Neighbors,
which were all in flames round about it. Another is, that even in the Blessings
of Peace there still remained so much martial Glory, as by its famous Actions
not only retained, but likewise increased the honor of the English Nation. For
the supplies sent into the Netherlands, France, and Scotland; the Voyages that
were made to the Indies, and round the whole World; the Fleets that were sent
to infest Portugal and the Coasts of Spain, and the Irish. Rebels so often
conquered and cut off, were all sufficient Testimonies, that England had
remitted and lost nothing of its Ancient Glory in the Field of War.

It was likewise an addition to her Glory and Deserts, that by her timely
supplies, the Neighboring Princes were maintained in their Thrones; and the
Suppliant States, who by a conduct unbecoming Princes, were exposed to the
Cruelty of their Ministers, to the sury of the Rabble, and to all manner of
Ravage and Slaughter, were at last relieved by her and placed in that posture
of Affairs, wherein they now are. Nor were her Counsels less beneficial than
her Supplies: witness her frequent admonitions to his Catholic Majesty, to
moderate the displeasure he had conceived against his Subjects in the
Netherlands, and to restore them to that mildness of Government which they
formerly enjoyed: and witness her earnest importunities with the Kings of
France, putting them often in mind of the Edicts wherein they had promised to
preserve the Peace. It must indeed be acknowledged that her advices proved
ineffectual. For the common interest of Europe opposed the first, lest the
Ambition of Spain, freed as it were from its confinement, should enlarge it
self (as affairs then stood) to the great prejudice of the Kingdoms and States
of the Christian World. And the Latter was prevented by the Massacre of so many
Innocent Persons, who with their Wives and Children were butchered in their own
Habitations by the barbarous Rabble, who like so many Beasts of prey seemed to
be Animated, Armed, and sent out by Public Authority: So that the Blood which
was shed cried aloud for Revenge, that the Kingdom, stained by so notorious a
Villainy, might be purged by mutual Slaughters and Bloodshed. However she
performed the Office of a Faithful, Prudent, and Generous Ally.

There is still another Reason, why we should admire the peaceful Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, namely, because the Peace which she enjoyed, was not owing to
the inclination which the age she lived in had to it, but wholly to her own
Prudence and wise Conduct. She struggled with an Inbred Faction at home, upon
the account of Religion; and the strength of the Kingdom, like the common
Bulwark of all Europe, seemed to oppose the growing Greatness of the Spaniard,
and his Ambition so formidable at that time; so that upon these accounts, there
was a sufficient Cause of War: but by her Forces and Policy she surmounted
these difficulties. This was demonstrated by one of the most memorable Events,
that ever happened in the whole course of Affairs of our age. For when the
Spanish Armada rode upon our Seas, to the terror of all Europe, with so much
noise, and so much assurance of success; it took not the least Fisher-boat, nor
burnt the least Cottage, nor so much as touched upon our Coast: but being
routed in an Engagement, was dispersed by a miserable flight, and with frequent
storms; and so left England and her Sea Coasts in an unmoved and undisturbed
Peace. Nor was she less fortunate in disappointing the secret Plots of her
private Foes, than in Conquering and Routing the Forces of an open Enemy: For
tho there were many Conspiracies laid against her Life, yet were they most
happily discovered and defeated. Nor was she upon that account more fearful or
anxious of the safety of her Person; her Guards were not increased, nor did she
confine her self in her Palace, without appearing abroad: But secure of her
self, and trusting to her Subjects, she remembered her Deliverance, but forgot
the Danger, and altered nothing of her usual Management and Behavior.

It is likewise worthy our Observation, to consider in what sort of times she
flourished. For some Ages are so Barbarous and Ignorant, that Men have been
Governed with as much ease, as a Shepherd drives and manages his Sheep: But
this Princess lived in a most Learned and Polite Age; wherein it required great
parts and a high degree of Virtue to be excellent. A Female Government is
likewise very often eclipsed by Marriage, and all the Praises and Conduct is
bestowed upon the Husband: whilst those who live unmarry^d, have no sharers or
partners in their Glory. And in this was our Queen the more to be commended, in
that her Throne stood upon no other Basis, than what she her self had erected.
She had no Brother, no Uncle, nor any other of the Royal Family, to partake of
her Cares, or share in her Government. But even those whom she did advance to
any places of Trust, were so managed and kept in such awe, that each of them
was solicitous how to please her; so that she was always Mistress of her self.
She was indeed Childless, and left no issue of her own Body to succeed her: But
this has been the case of the most fortunate Princes, of Alexander the Great,
of Julius Caesar, of Trajan, and several others: which has been variously
censured, and has always been a matter of Dispute. For some have looked upon it
as a Diminution of human Happiness, as if men could not be completely happy,
unless they were so both in their own persons, and in the propagation of their
Species: but others have esteemed it as the greater Happiness, because then it
seems to be complete, when it is not any longer subjected to the various turns
of Fortune: which it is impossible to secure, when a Posterity is left behind.

To all this we may add her Outward Embellishments; she was tall of stature,
well shaped in her Body, and had in her Face the mixture of Sweetness and
Majesty; and always enjoyed a very Sound Health. Beside all this, she was
strong and vigorous to the very last, never experienced the Changes of Fo^tune,
nor the miseries of old Age, and at last by an easy and gentle death she
obtained that Euthanasia, which Augustus Caesar was us^d so passionately to
desire. This also is Recorded of Antoninus Pius, one of the best of Emperors,
whose death seemed to be nothing else but a quiet and sweet slumber. Just so in
Q. Elizabeth's Distemper, there was nothing that was deadly, or ominous, or
unsuitable to humane nature. She was not desirous of Life, or impatient under
Sickness, nor disturbed with the tortures of any Pain: No direful, no
pestilential Symptom appeared, but every thing seemed rather to prognosticate
the decay of Nature, than either the corruption or disparagement of it. For
some few days before her Death, being weakened by the dryness of her
Constitution, and the cares of the Government, having not so much as drank any
Wine, or taken any moist diet, she was seized with a Dead Palsy, but yet (which
is not usual in that Distemper) she retained her Speech, her Sense, and her
Motion, tho not so brisk and lively as before. Nor was she long in this
condition, so that it did not seem to be the last Act of her Life, but rather
the first step to her Death. For tho it is esteemed a misery to live a long time
in the loss of the use of our faculties; yet to be prepared for Death, by a
gradual decay of our senses, is certainly a very sweet and pleasant Dissolution.

Another remarkable addition to her Happiness, is this, that she was not only
very happy in her own Person, but likewise in the Worthiness of her Ministers
of State. For she made choice of such men, as this Island perhaps was never so
happy in before. But God that favors Kings, raises them up Ministers and
adorns their Minds.

There remain two Posthumous Felicities, which seem to attend the more Noble
and August Passages of her Life: The One is that of her Successor, the Other,
that of her Memory. For she has got such a Successor, who, tho by his Masculine
Virtue, and Offspring, and late Accession to the Throne, he may excel and
eclipse her Glory; yet is so far a favourer of her Name and Esteem, and is so
willing to transmit her actions to posterity, that he has made little
alterations, either in the choice of Ministers, or in the method of Governing.
So that hardly any Father has been succeeded by his Son, with less noise,
disturbance or alteration. As for her Memory, it is so much in the mouths, and
so fresh in the minds of all men, that Death seems to have extinguished Envy,
and put her Fame in a clearer light, and now the Happiness of her Memory does
as it were strive to outvie that of her Life. For tho through men's love to any
Party, or upon the account of the difference of Religion, any factious report
may be spread abroad, yet it is such as seems to be fearful of it self, is not
sincere, and can never last long. And it is upon this account especially that I
have made this collection of things, that relate to her happiness, and are
marks of the Divine favor: that so no foul-mouthed Libeller might dare to
stain so great blessings of God, by the venom of his scandalous Tongue. If any
one should now say, as one did to Caesar, quae miremur, habemus; sed quae
laudemus, expectamus; we do indeed see cause to Admire, but none to Praise: to
this I answer, that I look upon Admiration as the superlative degree of Praise.
Nor could that Happiness we have been describing, be attained by any, but such
as are supported and highly indulged by the Divine favor; and such as in some
measure by their Morals and Virtue are the Establishers of their own Fortune.
However I thought fit to subjoin some few hints with respect to those Morals of
the Queen, which seem to have been most exposed to the lash of malevolent
Tongues.

In Religion, Q. Elizabeth was Pious and Moderate, Constant and Steady, and a
professed Enemy to Novelty. As for her Piety, tho the chief strokes of it
appeared in the Actions and Affairs of State; yet some signs of it were to be
seen in the course of her Life, and her ordinary Conversation. She was seldom
absent from Divine Service, either in her public or private Chapel. She
employed much of her time in reading the Scriptures and the Writings of the
Fathers, especially of S. Augustine. She composed some Prayers her self, upon
some occasions, and for some extraordinary purpose. Whenever she mentioned the
name of God, even in ordinary discourse, she generally added the title of
Creator; and showed some sort of humility and reverence in her looks and
countenance, which I my self have often observed. As for that which some have
reported, that she was so far from thinking of her Mortality, that she could
not endure to be told of Old Age or Death, it is absolutely false: since she
her self, several years before her Death, would frequently with much
facetiousness call her self the Old Woman: and would often discourse about the
Inscription, she had a mind should be upon her Tomb: She gave out, that she was
no lover of Glory and pompous Titles, but only desired her Memory might be
recorded in a line or two, which should very briefly express her Name, her
Virginity, the time of her Reign, the Reformation of Religion, and her
Preservation of the Peace. It Is true, in the flower of her Age before she was
past Childbearing, when she was importuned by some to declare her Successor,
she did make answer, that she could by no means endure to have a Shroud held
before her Eyes while she was living. However, some few years before her Death,
when she was more thoughtful, and meditated (as it is probable) on her
Mortality, as one of her bosom friends told her, that many and great Places and
Offices of Trust in the Commonwealth, would be too long vacant; she rose up,
and with more than ordinary concern said, that she was sure her place would not
long be Vacant.

As for her Moderation in Religion, perhaps in this her Character will seem
deficient, because of the severity of those Laws, which were made against her
Subjects of the Romish Religion; but we will produce such things, as are well
known to us, and carefully taken notice of by us. This is certain, that she was
always averse from laying any constraint on men's Consciences: but yet she could
not allow that the Government should be endangered under the pretense of
Conscience and Religion. Hence it was that she thought nothing but a certain
destruction would ensue, if she should at the first grant a liberty and
toleration of two Religions by public Authority to a fierce and headstrong
people, who would soon upon their private Animosities fall together by the
ears. Even in the beginning of her Reign, when all things looked with a
suspicious face, she kept some of the Prelates, which were of a more turbulent
and factious spirit, Prisoners at large, tho she had the Law on her side: and
to the rest of both Orders, she used not any sharp inquisition, but by a
generous Connivance kept them under her Protection. This was the posture of
affairs at first. Nor did she swerve much from this her Clemency, tho provoked
by the Bull of Excommunication, thundered against her by Pius the Fifth. This
indeed might have raised her indignation, and have been the occasion of new
modelling the State, but still she retained her own generous Temper. For this
Prudent and Courageous Woman was not much moved at the noise of such
Threatenings, being secure of the Fidelity and Affection of her Subjects, and
not fearing any harm from the Romish Faction, which was too weak to attempt any
thing unless seconded by a foreign. Enemy.

But about the three and twentieth year of her Reign, the face of Affairs was
quite changed. Nor is this Period of time, feigned to serve a turn only, but
mentioned in the Public Records, and engraven as it were in leaves of Brass.
Nor were her Subjects of the Romish Religion punished with any severity before
that year, tho several Laws had formerly been enacted against them. But at this
time it was by degrees discovered what vast and ambitious designs were laid by
Spain, to conquer this Kingdom A great part of this design was to raise a
faction in the very heart of the Nation, which being no friends to the
Government, and desirous of alteration, should join with the Enemy upon his
Invasion. This was hoped would be effected upon the difference there was in
Religion: whereupon they resolved to improve that breach, and Priests were sent
over from the young Seminaries, to raise and increase Men's Love for the Romish
Religion, to teach and enforce the Validity of the Popes Bull, which absolved
the Queens Subjects from their Allegiance, and to excite and prepare the Minds
of men for an Alteration in the Government.

Much about that time, Ireland was openly invaded, and the Name and Government
of Queen Elizabeth vilified by various and Scandalous Libels; and affairs were
in such a strange ferment, that they prognosticated a greater Commotion. Nor
indeed will I say, that every Priest knew of the design, or were conscious of
what was to be done, but certainly they were the wicked Instigators and
Promoters of the Villainy others were to commit. And this is certainly true, (as
appears by several Confessions) that almost all the Priests, who were sent into
England from the year abovementioned, to the thirtieth year of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign (wherein the Design of Spain and the Romanists was to be put
in Execution, by that memorable preparation of a Fleet and Landforces) I say
it is certain, that all, who were sent over within that time, among other things
had this likewise in their Orders, That they should insinuate, That Affairs
could not last long in the same posture; that they would put on a new Face
within some short time and that the Pope and the Catholic Princes would take
care of the English State, provided the English were not their own hinderance.
Nay, some of the Priests were manifestly engaged in the Plots and Contrivances
which were laid for the Subversion and Ruin of the Government: and which is
still more, the whole Train of this Design was discovered by Letters which were
intercepted from all parts: wherein it was written, That the Vigilance of the
Queen and her Council over the Catholics would be baffled: For she only seemed
concerned, that the Faction should not be headed by any Nobleman or Person of
Quality; whereas the Design they laid was such, as was carried on by Private
Men of no Note; who never met and conspired together in numbers, but ordered
and disposed all things in the private way of Confession. These were the
Artifices which were then used, and were so customary and familiar to those
Men, as might be seen in a fresh and parallel case.

In a time of so much danger, Queen Elizabeth was obliged by a kind of fatal
necessity to enact severe Laws, thereby to restrain those of her Subjects, who
being averse to her Government, and grown past the hopes of being cured, began
to grow rich by the private Life they led, being exempted from the charge and
burden of public Offices. The Original of this spreading Evil was charged upon
the Seminary Priests; who were bred up in foreign parts, and maintained by the
Charity and Benevolence of Foreign Princes the professed Enemies of the Realm:
who had lived in places, where the best Titles they could bestow on Queen
Elizabeth were those of, Heretic, Excommunicated, and Damnable Fury; who, tho
they themselves were not engaged in treasonable practices, yet were known to be
the intimate Friends of such as were guilty of those Villainies, and who, by
their Artifices and poisonous Methods had depraved the very Sacrifice of the
Mass, which before was a sweet and harmless thing; and had as it were infected
it with a new kind of Ferment and pernicious Malignity. Whereupon the only
Expedient to put a stop to this growing Evil was thought to be the prohibiting
these Men from coming into the Land upon pain of Death; which was accordingly
enacted in the seven and twentieth Year of her Reign. Nor did the Event itself,
when so great a Storm broke out upon, and threatened the Nation, in the least
take off from the Envy and Hatred of these Men, but rather increased it; so far
had they divested themselves of the Love they owed their Country. Afterward
when our fears of Spain (the true occasion of this severity) were over and
vanished; yet the Memory of the former times was so deeply fixed in the Minds and
Senses of most Men, and to have abrogated the Laws that were once made would
have argued so much Inconstancy, or to have slighted them would have been a
sign of so much Indifferency; that Queen Elizabeth as cases then stood, did not
think it safe for her self, that things should return to the same posture they
were in before the three and twentieth year of her Reign. To this may be added
the Industry of some to increase the Revenues of the Exchequer, and the Care of
those Ministers of Justice, who are used to mind no other Safety of their
Country than what is contained in the Laws: both which required and called
loudly for the Laws to be put in Execution. However, she (to the Glory of her
good Nature be it spoken) did so far blunt the edge of the Laws, that but very
few Priests suffered Death upon that account. Nor do we speak this by way of
defense, for these matters stand in need of none: since the whole Safety of the
Nation depended upon this Conduct, and the Method and Measure of all this
Severity was far from being bloody, and is a thing that no Christian need to be
ashamed of; for it proceeded more from the Arrogance and Wicked Practices of
others, than from any necessity the Nation lay under, and it stands for a
Monument of Disgrace to the Romanists. But not to forget what we first
asserted, we think we have abundantly demonstrated, that she was moderate in
points of Religion, and that the Alteration which did happen, was not owing to
her Nature, but to the Iniquity of the times.

Of her Constancy in Religion and the Worship thereof, the greatest proof is,
That with an undaunted Mind and little Assistance she extirpated and abrogated
the Romish Religion, as being disagreeable to the Word of God, the Primitive
Purity, and her own Conscience: notwithstanding in her Sister's Reign it was
established by Public Authority and a great deal of Care, and had taken deep
root, and was strengthened with the Consent and Approbation of all that were in
Authority and Places of Trust. Nor did she do this hastily or in a heat, but
cautiously and by degrees. The truth of which appears not only in her whole
Conduct of Affairs, but also in that Answer which she once made to a Courtier
upon the like occasion. For in the beginning of her Reign, when according to
the Custom the Prisoners were to be released, to grace and honor her first
Accession to the Throne; as she was going to Chapel she was accosted by a
certain Courtier, who took more than ordinary freedom, being of a pleasant and
facetious Nature. He, either prompted to it by his own private Inclination, or
set on by a Wiser Head, delivered a Petition into her hand, and in a full
Concourse of People with a loud Voice expressed himself thus, Tnat there were
still four or five kept Prisoners, and that for no reason at all: That he came
to petition for their Freedom, as well as for the rest: That they were the Four
Evangelists, and the Apostle S. Paul, who had been long confined in an unknown
tongue, as it were in a Prison, and were not suffered to appear abroad in the
World. The Queen gave him this very cautious Reply, That it was best to consult
them first, whether they were willing to have their Freedom yet, or no. And
thus she kept every thing within her own Power, by giving such a doubtful
Answer to so surprising a Demand. Nor did she carry on things fearfully, and by
fits and starts, but gravely, orderly, and maturely: A Conference first had
between the Parties, and a Parliament first called; and at last, within the
compass of a year, she so far ordered and established all things which
concerned Religion, that she did not suffer the least Tittle of them to be
altered, during all her Reign. And it was always her Public Admonition in
almost every Session of Parliament, that no Innovation should be made in the
Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church. Thus far of her Religion.

Now if any of the graver Sort should object these Levities: That she was
contented and desirous to be Admired, to be Courted, and upon the Account of
Love to be Praised and Extolled; and that she continued these Levities even to
an Age wherein they were unbecoming her. Yet if you take even these in a milder
sense, they are not without their due Admiration, since they are such things,
as often are to be found in the fubulous Narrations of Poets and others. Thus
it is recorded of a certain Queen in the Fortunate Islands, who in her Court and
Government entertained that soft thing called Love, and yet forbad Lust to
enter there. But if a harsher construction should be put upon them, yet they
are to be admired, and that very highly too, since these Softnesses cast but
little blemish on her Fame, and none at all upon her Grandeur; did no Injury to
her Government, and hindered not the Public Administration of Affairs. For
these sort of things are usually joined to the most Noted Fortune. But, to
conclude this Essay; she was certainly a good, moral Princess, and as such she
desired to appear: She was a hater of Vice, and studied to grow famous by
honorable Methods. And truly at the naming of her Manners, something comes into
my mind, which I will here declare. When she had ordered an Express to be
written to her Ambassador, concerning certain Instructions, which he was
privately to impart to the Queen Mother of France at Valois, and her Secretary
had incerted a certain Clause, that the Ambassador to ingratiate himself the
better should say, That they were two Female Princes, of whom, in the
Management of Affairs, and in the Art and Skill of Governing, as great things
were expected as from the best of Men; she could not endure the Comparison, but
ordered it to be struck out, and said, that she used quite different Arts and
Methods in the Administration of the Government. And she was extremely pleased,
when any one by chance dropped out such an Expression as this, That she would
have lived and excelled in the Eye of the World, tho she had spent her days in
a private and mean Station: So desirous was she that nothing of her Virtue and
Praise should be owing to the Grandeur of her Fortune. But if I should enter
upon her Praises, either Moral or Political, or should touch only upon her
Virtues, which would be a Disparagement to so great a Princess: or should I
endeavor to set them in their clear and proper light, I must run out into the
History of her Life, which requires more leisure, and a larger Genius, than I
can pretend to. For I have here given you her Character in short. But it must
after all be said, That only Time will bestow a true Encomium on this Excellent
Woman: since no Age since the Creation, could ever show her Equal in her own
Sex, that was so fit to manage the Affairs of a State.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
CAssandra, or Divination. Page 1 Typhon, or a Rebel. 18 The Cyclops, or the
Ministers of Terror. 20 Narcissus, or Self-Love. 21 Styx, or Leagues. 22 Pan,
or Nature. 24 Perseus, or War. 34 Endymion, or a Favorite. 37 The Sister of
the Giants, or Fame. 39 Acteon, and Pentheus, or a Curious Man. 40 Orpheus, or
Philosophy. 41 Coelum, or Beginnings. 44 Proteus, or Matter. 47 Memnon, or a
Youth too forward. 49 Tythonus, or Satiety. 50 Juno's Suitor, or Baseness. 51
Cupid, or an Atom. 52 Diomedes, or Zeal. 55 Daedalus, or Mechanic. 58
Ericthonius, or Imposture. 61 Deucalion, or Restitution. 62 Nemesis, or the
Vicissitude of Things. ibid. Achelous, or Battle. 65 Dionysus, or Passions. 66
Atalanta, or Gain. 70 Prometheus, or the Statue of Man. 72 Scylla and Icarus,
or the Middle-way. 84 Sphynx, or Science. 85 Proserpina, or Spirit. 89 Metis,
or Counsel. 93 The Sirens, or Pleasures. 94 The Character of Queen Elizabeth.
99

Some Books lately Printed for, and to be Sold by ABEL SWALL, and TIM. CHILD at
the Unicorn in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
CAmden's Britannia newly Translated into English, with large Additions and
Improvements, and Maps of every County according to the best and latest
Surveys. Published by Edmond Gibson of Queen's Coll. Oxon. Folio.

L. ELLIES du PIN's History of Ecclesiastical Writers containing an Abridgment
of the Writings of the Primitive Fathers, together with a History of their
Lives, and all Affairs transacted in the Church, from the time of our Savior
to the end of the Ninth Century Englished with Additions. Seven small Volumes
in Folio.

THEATRVM SCOTIAE. Descriptions of the Principal Cities, Towns, Castles and
Palaces in Scotland, with large Prospects of each Place very curiously Engraven
on Copper, and printed on broad sheets of Royal Paper. Published by Capt. J.
Sleezer. Fol.

P. VIRGILII Opera Notis and Interpretatione illustravit Carolus Ruaeus jussu
Regis in usum Delphini. Octavo. Newly Reprinted on a very fine Paper and
accurately Corrected.

P. OVIDI Metamorphoseon Interpretatione and Notis illustravit Daniel Cr^pinus
in usum Delphini. Recensuit Joh. Friend, Oxoniae, Octavo.

Romoe Antiquoe Notitia: or, The Antiquities of Rome, containing a short
History of the Rise, Progress, and Decay of the Commonwealth a Description of
the City, and an Account of their Religion, Government, Customs, Ceremonies,
etc. with Copper Cuts of the Principal Buildings, etc. By Basil Kennet of Oxon.
Dedicated to his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. Octavo.

The History of the Revolutions in Sweeden, occasioned by the change of
Religion and alteration of Government in that Kingdom. Written in French by the
Abbot Vertat, printed the last Year at Paris, and now Englished by J. Mitchel
M. D. Octavo.

J. CLERICI PHYSICA: sive de rebus Corporeis Libri quinque, in quibus
praemissis potissimis Corporearum naturarum Phoenomenis and proprietatibus,
veterum and racentiorum de eorum causis celeberrimae conjecturae traduntur.

The Evangelical History; or, the Life of our Savior Jesus Christ
comprehensively and plainly related, with practical Inferences and Discourses
thereupon. Adorned with Copper Cuts. Is Reprinting with Amendments.

The Evangelical History, Part Second; being the Lives and Acts of the Holy
Apostles, comprehensively and plainly related, according to the Holy Scriptures
and the Writings of the Primitive Fathers of most approved Authority.
Illustrated with the Effigies of the Apostles, and a Map of their Travels
fairly engraven on Copper, Octavo.

The Gentleman's Journal for the War, a Description of the principal
Fortifications in Europe, with Draughts engraven in Copper of each Place.
Quarto. Part 1, 2, 3.

The Gentleman's Journal for the War, Part 4th. containing Descriptions and
Draughts of the Fortifications of Dinant, Winoxberg, Calais, Tournay, and
Cambray.

The English Library; or, a short View and Character of most of the Writers now
extant, either in Print or Manuscript, which may be serviceable to the
Undertakers of a General History. Written by W. Nicholson, Archdeacon of
Carlisle.

Some Books now in the Press.
THE Antiquities of Greece, written by Mr. John Potter of Lincoln College in
Oxford. Octavo. SALLVSTIVS cum Interpretatione and Notis in usum Delphini.
Octavo.

Dr. Hen. HAMMOND's Paraphrase on the Psalms and Proverbs; Reprinting.

The Memoirs of the Count Harcourt. Written by Monsieur de St. Euvremont. Made
English. Oct.

Historical and Curious Relations of several Voyages, and Travels into Germany,
Holland, Switzerland, England, etc. By the famous Charles Patin. M. D. With
Cuts.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now in the Press, and will be Published in Michaelmas -Term,

THE Universal English Dictionary, explaining the Sense and Etymology of all
English Words; with Select Phrases showing the Force, Significancy,
Construction, and different Acceptations of every Word, the native and borrowed
Graces, and all the remarkable Peculiarities of the English Idiom. And in
particular containing an Explanatory account of all difficult and unusual
Words, whether such as are Obsolete, or not yet universally received; With a
full and distinct Interpretation of the Terms, Phrases, and Expressions used in
all Sciences and Arts. The whole digested into an Alphabetical, and most
natural Order, the Derivatives and Compounds being ranked after the Primitive;
and Enriched with many Thousands of Words that were never inserted in any other
Dictionary. Illustrated with Figures curiously Engraven on Copper Plates,
representing all the parts of a Humane Body, of a Horse, Ship, Fort, and
several other things that cannot be well understood without such a Help to the
Imagination, especially Geometrical Figures, etc. To all which is added a
Collection of the Words and Phrases that are peculiar to the several Counties
of England. Some of the Parts done, and the whole Revised by J. Mitchell, M. D.
A Larger and more particular Account of the Design and Method of this Great and
Useful Work, with a Specimen, may be had of the Undertaker Abel Swall at the
Unicorn in St. Paul's Church Yard.


