THE NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY OF WINDS, etc.

Written in Latin by the Right Honorable FRANCIS Lord Verulam, Viscount St
Alban.

Translated into English by R. G. Gent.



LONDON, Printed for Anne Moseley, and Tho. Basset at the George in
Fleet Street, 1671.

TO THE Most Illustrious, AND EXCELLENT PRINCE, CHARLES, Son and Heir to the
High and Mighty KING JAMES.
I Humbly present unto your Highness the first fruits of our Natural History; A
thing exceeding little in quantity, like a grain of Mustard Seed, but yet a
pledge of those things which God willing shall ensue. For we have bound our
selves, as by a vow, every Month that God shall of his goodness please (whose
glory it sets forth as it were in a new Canticle or Song) to prolong our life,
to set out one or more parts of it, according as their length and difficulty
shall prove more or less. Others may per adventure (moved by our example) be
moved to the like industry; especially when they shall clearly perceive what is
in hand. For in a Natural History which is good and well set out, are the Keys
both of Sciences and works. God preserve your Highness long in safety,

Your Highness humble and devoted Servant FRAN. St ALBAN.

THE NATURAL and EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY for the making up of Philosophy: Or
Experiments of the Universe: Which is the third part of the INSTAURATIO MAGNA.
MEn are to be entreated, advised and adjured even by their Fortunes, to submit
their minds, and seek for Knowledge in the greater World; and likewise to cast
away so much as the thought of Philosophy, or at least to hope but for slender
and small fruits thereof, until a diligent and approved Natural and
Experimental History be acquired and made up: For what would these shallow
brains of men, and these potent trifles have? There were among the Ancient
numerous Opinions of Philosophers, as of Pythagoras, Philolaus, Xenophanes,
Heraclitus, Empedocles, Parmenides, Anaxagoras, Leucippus, Democritus, Plato,
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Zeno, and others. All these made up Arguments of
Worlds, as of Fables, according to their own Fancies, and recited and published
those Fables; whereof some indeed were more handsome and probable, and some
again most harsh. But in our Ages, by means of Colleges and Schools
Disciplines, wits are somewhat more restrained; yet have they not quite
ceased:: Patricius, Telesius, Brunus, Severine the Dane, Gilbertus an
Englishman, and Campanella did set foot upon the Stage, and acted new Fables,
neither much applauded, nor of any Elegant Argument or Subject. But do we
wonder at these things? as though such Sects and Opinions, might not in an
infinite number arise in all ages? For neither is there, nor ever will be any
end or limit for these things. One snatches at one thing, another is pleased
with another; there is no dry nor clear sight of any thing, every one plays the
Philosopher out of the small Treasures of his own Fancy, as it were out of
Platos Cave; the more sublime wits more acutely, and with better success: the
duller with less success but equal obstinacy: and not long since by the
discipline of some learned (and as things go now excellent) men, Sciences are
bounded within the limits of some certain Authors which they have set down,
imposing them upon old men, and instilling them into young. So that now (as
Tullie cavilled upon Caesar's Consulship) the star Lyra or Harp rises by an
Edict, and Authority is taken for truth, not truth for Authority. Which kind of
order, and discipline is very convenient for our present use; but banisheth
those which are better. For we both suffer for, and emulate our first Parents
sin. They desired to be like unto God, and their posterity much more: for we
create new worlds, go before nature and command it. We must have all things to
be so as may agree with our folly, not to Divine wisdom, nor as they are found
to be in themselves: neither can I say which we rest most, our wits, or the
things themselves: but certainly we set the stamps and seals of our own Images
upon Gods Creatures, and works, and never carefully look upon and acknowledge
the Creators stamps. Therefore we do not without cause again strive for the
domination over the Creatures. For whereas even after the fall of man, he had
some kind of domination left him over reluctant Creatures, that he might tame
and subdue them by true and solid arts; we have for the most part lost that
also through our own insolency, because we will be like unto God, and follow
the dictates of our own reason. Wherefore if there be any humility toward the
Creator, any reverence, and magnifying of his works, any charity in men, or
care to release them out of their necessities and miseries, if there be any
love of truth in natural things, hatred of darkness, and a desire of purifying
the understanding, men are to be again and again desired, that casting off, or
at least laying aside for a while, these flying and preposterous Philosophies,
which have set the Theses before the Hypopheses, or suppositions before solid
grounds, have captivated experience, and triumphed over the works of God, they
would humbly and with a certain reverence draw near and turn over the great
Volume of the Creatures, stop and meditate upon it: and being cleansed and free
from opinions, handle them choicely and entirely. This is the speech and
language that went out into all the ends of the World, and suffered not in the
confusion of Babel. Let men learn this, and becoming children again and
Infants, not scorn to take A. B. C. thereof in hand, and in finding and
searching out the interpretation of it, let them spare no labor, but let them
persist and go on, and even die in the quest of it. Seeing therefore that in
our Instauration we have placed the Natural History (such as it is in order to
our ends) in the third part of the work: we have thought fit to prevent this
thing, and fall upon it immediately. For although in our Organon, there are
many things of especial consequence to be finished, yet we think it fitting
rather to promote or set forward the general work of Instauration in many
things, then to perfect it in a few, always desiring with extreme fervency
(such as we are confident God puts in the minds of men) to have that which was
never yet attempted, not to be now attempted in vain. Likewise there came this
thought into my mind, namely, that there are questionless in Europe many
capable, free, sublimed, subtle, solid, constant wits; and what if any one
endued with such a wit, do betake himself to the use and manner of our Organon,
and approve of it? yet has he nothing to do nor knows not how to address
himself to, or fit himself for Philosophy. If it were a thing which might be
effected by reading of Philosophy books, disputation, or meditation; that man
(whosoever it be) might sufficiently, and abundantly perform it: But if we
remit him (as indeed we do) to Natural History, and experiments of arts, he is
gravelled or sticks in the mire; it is not his intention, he has no time, nor
will not be at the charge: yet we must not desire to have men cast off old
things, before they have gotten new. But after a copious, and faithful History
of Nature and Arts is gathered and digested, and as it were set, and laid open
before men's eyes, there is no small hope that such great wits as we have before
spoken of (such as have been in ancient Philosophers, and are at this day
frequent enough) having been heretofore of such efficacy, that they could out
of cork or a little shell (namely by thin and frivilous experience) build
certain little boats for Philosophy, gallant enough for Art and structure; how
much more gallant and solid structures will they make, when they have found a
whole wood, and stuff enough: and that, though they had rather go on in the old
way, then make use of our Organons way which (in our opinion) is either the
only, or the best way. So that the case stands thus: our Organon (though
perfect) could not profit much without the Natural History; but our Natural
History without the Organon might much advance Instauration, or renewing of
Sciences. Wherefore we have thought it best and most advisedly to fall upon
this before any thing else. God the Maker, Preserver, and Renewer of the
Universe, guide and protect this Work, both in its ascent to his own glory, and
in its descent to the good of man, through his good will toward man, by his
only begotten Son God with us.

The Rule of this present History.
THough we have set down toward the end of that part of our Organon, which is
come forth, Precepts concerning the Natural and experimental History: yet we
have thought good to set down more exactly and brithly, the form and rule of
this History which we now take in hand. To the Titles comprehended in the
Catalogue, which belong to the Concretes, we have added the Titles of the
Abstract Natures; of which, as of a reserved History, we made mention in the
same place. These are the various Figurations of the matter, or forms of the
first Classis, simple Motions, sums of Motions, measures of Motions, and some
other things: of these we have made a new Alphabet, and placed it at the end of
this Volume. We have taken Titles (being no way able to take them all) not
according to order, but by choice: those namely, the Inquisition of which
either for use was most of weight, or for abundance of Experiments most
convenient, or for the obscurity of the thing most difficult and noble, or by
reason of the discrepancy of Titles among themselves, most open to examples. In
each Title, after a kind of an entrance or Preface, we presently propound
certain particular Topics or Articles of Inquisition, as well to give light to
the present Inquisition, as to encourage a future. For we are Masters of
Questions, but not of things; yet we do not in the History precisely observe
the order of Questions, least that which is for an aid and assistance should
prove a hinderance.

The Histories and Experiments always hold the first place; and if they set
forth any enumeration, and Series of particular things, they are made up in
Tables, or if other wise, they are taken up severally.

Seeing that Histories and Experiments do oftentimes fail us, especially those
which give light, and Instances of the Cross, by which the understanding may be
informed of the true causes of things, we give Precepts of new Experiments, as
far as we can see them fitting in our mind, for that as is to be enquired: and
these Precepts are designed like Histories. For what other means is left to us,
who are the first that come into this way? We unfold and make plain the manner
of some Experiments that are more quaint and subtle, that there may be no
error, and that we may stir up others to find out better and more exact ways.
We enterweave Monitions and Cautions of the Fallacies of things, and of such
Errors, and Scruples, as may be found in the Inquiry, that all Fancies, and as
it were Apparitions may be frighted away, as by an Exorcisme or spell.

We join thereunto our Observations upon History and experiments, that the
Interpretation of the Nature may be the readier.

We Interpose some Comments, or as it were Rudiments of the Interpretations of
Causes, sparingly, and rather supposing what may be, than positively defining
what is.

We prescribe and set down Rules, but moveable ones, and as it were inchoated
Axioms which offer themselves unto us as we enquire, not as we decisorily
pronounce, for they are profitable, though not altogether true.

Never forgetting the profit of mankind (though the light be more worthy than
those things which be shown by it) we offer to man's attention and practice
certain Essays of Practice, knowing that men's stupidity is such, and so
unhappy, that sometimes they see not, and pass over things which lie just in
their way.

We set down works and things impossible, or at least which are not yet found
out, as they fall under each Title: and withal those which are already found
out, and are in men's powers; and we added to those impossible, and not yet
found out things, such as are next to them, and have most affinity with them,
that we may stir up, and vvithall encourage humane industry.

It appears by the foresaid things, that this present History does not only
supply the place of the third part of the Instauration, but also is not
despicable preparation to the fourth, by reason of the Titles out of the
Alphabet and Topics, and to the sixth, by reason of the larger Observations,
Commentations, and Rules.

The Titles of the Histories and Inquisitions destined for the first six Months.
THe History of Winds. The History of Density, and Rarity; as likewise of
Coition and Expansion of matter by spaces. The History of Heavy and Light. The
History of the Sympathy, and Antipathy of things. The History of Sulphur,
Mercury, and Salt. The History of Life and Death.
In this Book are contained;
THe Natural and Experimental History of Winds. The Natural and Experimental
History of the form of Heat. Of the several kinds of Motion, or of the Active
virtue. The way to find out the causes of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.
The Entry into the History of Winds.
THe Winds gave Wings to men; for by their assistance men are carried up
through the Air and fly; not through the Air indeed, but upon the Sea; and a
wide door is laid open to commerce, and the World is made previous. They are
the besomes which sweep and make clean the earth, which is the seat and
habitation of mankind, and they cleanse both it and the air: But they make the
Sea huriful, which otherwise is harmless, neither are they some other ways
also, free from doing hurt: They are without help of man able to stir up great
and zehement motions, and like Hirelings serve both to sail and grind, and
would be useful for many other things, if humane care were not wanting, Their
Natures are reckoned amongst secret and bidden things. Neither is that to be
wondered at, seeing the Nature and Power of the Air is unknown, whom the Winds
do serve and flatter, as Eolus does Juno in the Poets. They are not primary
Creatures, nor any of the six days works, no more than the rest of the Meteors
actually, but after born, by the order of the Creation.

PARTICULAR TOPICS: OR, Articles of Inquisition Concerning the Winds.
The Names of Winds.
DEscribe or set down the Winds according to the Sea-mans industry; and give
them Names either new or old, so that you keep your self constant to them.

Winds are either general or precise, either peculiar, or free. I call them
general which always blow; precise, those which blow at certain times:
Attendants or Peculiar, those which blow most commonly: Free Winds, those which
blow indifferently, or at any time.

General Winds.
2. Whether there be any General Winds, which are the very self motion of the
Air; and if there be any such, in order to what motion, and in what places they
blow?

Precise, or fixed Winds.
3. What Winds are Aniversary or yearly winds, returning by turns; and in what
Countries? Whether there be any Wind so precisely fixed, that it returns
regularly at certain days and hours, like unto the flowing of the Sea?

Attending or Peculiar Winds.
4. What Winds are peculiar, and ordinary in Countries, which observe a certain
time in the same Countries; which are Spring winds, and which are Summer winds;
which Autumnal, which Brumal, which Equinoctial, which Solstitial; which are
belonging to the Morning, which to Noon, which to the Evening, and which to the
Night.

5. What winds are Sea winds, and what winds blow from the Continent? and mark
and set down the differences of the Sea and Land winds carefully, as well of
those which blow at Land and Sea, as of those which blow from Land and Sea.

Free Winds.
6. Whether winds do not blow from all parts of Heaven?

Winds do not vary much more in the parts of Heaven from which they blow, than
in their own qualities. Some are vehement, some mild, some constant, some
mutable; some hot, some cold; some moistning and dissolving; some drying and
astringent; some gather clouds and are rainy, and peradventure Stormy: some
disperse the clouds, and are clear.

Diverse qualities of Winds.
7. Enquire and give account, which are the winds of all the forenamed sorts or
kinds, and how they vary according to the regions and places.

There are three local beginnings of Winds, either they are thrown and cast
down from above, or they spring out of the Earth, or they are made up of the
very body of the Air.

Local beginnings of Winds.
8. According to these three beginnings enquire concerning winds: Namely, which
are thrown down, out of that which they call the middle Region of the Air;
which breath out of the concavities of the earth, whether they break out
together; or whether they breath out of the Earth imperceiveably, and
scattering, and afterward gather together, like rivolets into a River.
Finally, which are scatteringly engendered from the swellings and dilatations of
the neighboring Air?

Neither are the generations of the winds, original only, for some there are
also accidental, namely by the compressions or restraints of the Air, and by
the percussions and repercussions of it.

Accidental Generations, and Production of Winds.
9. Enquire concerning these accidental Generations of winds: They are not
properly generations of winds; for they rather increase and strengthen winds,
than produce and excite them.

Hitherto of the community of winds. There are also certain rare and prodigious
winds, such as are called tempests, whirle-winds, and storms: These are above
ground. There are likewise some that are subterraneal and under ground, whereof
some vaporous and Mercurial, they are perceiveable in Mines: Some are
sulphurous, they are sent out, geting an issue by Earthquakes, or do flame out
of fiery Mountains.

Extraordinary Winds, and sudden Blasts.
10. Enquire concerning such rare and prodigious winds, and of all miraculous
and wonderful things done by winds.

From the several sorts of winds let the Inquisition pass to those things which
contribute toward the winds, (for we will so express it, because the word
Efficient signifies more, and the word concomitant less than we mean) and to
those things which seem to raise, or to appease the winds.

Things contributing, or making for the Winds, and raising, and appeasing them.
11. Enquire sparingly concerning Astrological considerations of winds, neither
care thou for the overcurious Schemes of the heaven, only do not neglect the
more manifest Observations of winds rising, about the rising of some stars, or
about the Eclipses of the Luminaries, or Conjunctions of Planets; nor much less
on those which depend on the courses of the Sun and Moon.

12. What Meteors of several sorts do contribute or make for winds, what the
earthquakes, what rain, what the skirmishing of winds one with another? for
these things are linked together, and one draws on the other.

13. What the diversity of Vapors and exhalations contributes toward the
winds? and which of them do most engender winds; and how far the Nature of
winds does follow these its materials.

14. What those things which are here upon the earth, or are there done do
contribute toward the winds; what the hills and the dissolutions of Snow upon
them; what those masses of Ice which swim upon the Sea, and are carried to some
place; what the differences of soil and land (so it be of some large extent;)
what Ponds, Sands, Woods, and Champion ground; what those things which we men
do here, as burning of Heath, and the like, does contribute to the manuring of
Land, the firing of Towns in time of War, the drying up of Ponds and Lakes; the
continual shooting off of Guns, the ringing of many Bells together in great
Cities, and the like? These things and Acts of ours are but as small straws,
yet something they may do.

15. Enquire concerning all manner of raisings, or allayings of winds, but be
sparing in fabulous and superstitious causes.

From those things which make for the winds, let the Inquisition proceed to
enquire of the bounds of the winds, of their Height, Extention, and Continuance.

The bounds of Winds.
16. Enquire carefully of the Height, or elevation of winds, and whether there
be any tops of mountains to which the winds do not reach; or whether Clouds may
be seen sometimes to stand still, and not move, when the winds at the same time
blow strongly upon the earth.

17. Enquire diligently of the spaces or rooms which the winds take up at once,
and within what bounds they blew? As for example, if the south wind blew in
such a place, whether it be known certainly, that at the same time the North
wind blew ten miles off? And contrariwise into how narrow and straight bounds
the winds may be reduced, so that winds may pass as it were through Channels;
which seems to be done in some whirlwinds.

18. Enquire for how long time, very much, ordinary, or little time winds use
to continue, and then slack, and as it were expire and die. Likewise how the
rising and beginning of winds uses to be; what their languishing or cessation
is, whether suddenly, or by degrees, or how?

From the bounds of the winds let your Inquisition pass over to the successions
of winds, either amongst themselves, or in respect of rain and showrs; for when
they lead their rings it were pretty to know the order of their dancing.

Successions of Winds.
19. Whether there be any more certain rule or observation concerning the
successions of winds one to another, or whether it have any relation to the
motion of the Sun, or otherwise: if it have any, what manner of one it is?

20. Enquire concerning the succession and the alteration, or taking turns of
the winds, and rain, seeing it is ordinarily, and often seen, that rain lays
the wind, and the wind does disperse the rain.

21. Whether after a certain term and period of years, the succession of winds
begin anew; and if it be so, what that period is, and how long?

From the succession of the winds, let the Inquisition pass to their motions:
and the motions of winds are comprehended in seven Inquisitions; whereof three
are contained in the former Articles, four remain as yet untouched. For we have
enquired of the motion of winds divided into the several Regions of the Heaven;
also of the Motion upon three lines, upward, downward, and laterally: Likewise
of the accidental motion of compressions or Restraints. There remain the fourth
of Progressions or going forward: the fifth of Undulation, or waving: the sixth
of conflict or skirmish: the seventh in humane Instruments and Engines.

Diverse Motions of the Winds.
22. Seeing Progression is always from some certain place or bound; enquire
diligently, or as well as thou can concerning the place of the first
beginning, and as it were the spring of any wind. For winds seem to be like
unto Fame, for though they make a noise and run up and down, yet they hide
their heads amongst the Clouds: so is their Progress; as for example, if the
vehement Northern wind which blew at York such a day, do blow at London two
days after.

23. Omit not the Inquisition of Undulation of winds. We call Undulation of
winds that motion by which the wind in or for a little space of time rises and
abates, as the waves of the water; which Turns may easily be apprehended by the
hearing of them in houses: and you must so much the rather mark the differences
of Undulation, or of Furrowing between the water and the air, because in the
air and winds, there wants the Motion of gravity or weight, which is a great
part of the cause of the waves rising in the water.

24. Enquire carefully concerning the Conflict, and meeting of winds, which
blow at one and the same time: First, whether at the same time there blow
several Original winds? (for we do not speak of reverberated winds) which if it
comes to pass, what Windings they engender and bring forth in their motion, and
also what Condensations, and Alterations they produce in the body of the Air?

25. Whether one wind blow above at the same time, as another blows here below
with us? For it has been observed by some, that sometimes the Clouds are
carried one way, when the Weathercock upon a Steeple stands another. Also that
the Clouds have been driven by a strong gale, when we here below have had a
great calm.

26. Make an exact particular description of the motion of the winds, in
driving on Ships with their Sails.

27. Let there be a Description made of the motion of the winds in the sails of
Ships, and the sails of Wind-mills, in the flight of Hawks and Birds; also in
things that are ordinary, and for sport, as of displayed Colors, flying
Dragons, Duels with winds, etc.

From the motions of winds, let the Inquisition pass to the force and power of
them.

Of the power of Winds.
28. What winds do, or can do concerning Currents or Tides of waters, in their
keepings back, puttings forth, or inlets and overflowings.

29. What they do concerning Plants and Insects, bringing in of Locusts,
Blastings, and Mill-dews.

30. What they effect concerning Purging or Clearing, and infecting of the air,
in Plagues, Sicknesses, and Diseases of Beasts.

31. What they effect concerning the conveying to us things (which we call)
spiritual, as sounds, rays, and the like.

From the powers of winds let the Inquisition pass to the Prognostics of
winds, not only for the use of Predictions, but because they lead us on to the
causes: For Prognostics do either show us the preparations of things, before
they be brought into action; or the beginnings before they appear to the sense.

Prognostics of Winds.
32. Let all manner of good Prognostics of winds be carefully gathered
together (besides Astrological ones, of which we set down formerly, how far
they are to be enquired after) and let them either be taken out of Meteors, or
Waters, or instincts of Beasts, or any other way.

Lastly, close up the Inquisition, with enquiring after the imitations of
winds, either in Natural or Artificial things.

Imitations of Winds.
33. Enquire of the Imitations of winds in Natural things; such as breaths
enclosed within the bodies of living Creatures, and breaths within the
receptacles of distilling Vessels.

Enquire concerning made Gales, and Artificial winds, as Bellows,
Refrigeratories, or coolers in Parlours, or Dining rooms, etc.

Let the Heads or Articles be such: Neither is it unknown to me that it will be
impossible to answer to some of these according to the small quantity of
experience that we have: But as in civil causes, a good Lawyer knows what
Interrogatories the Cause requires to have witnesses examined upon; but what
the witnesses can answer he knows not. The same thing is incident to us in
Natural History. Let those who come after us endeavor for the rest.

THE HISTORY.
The Names of Winds.
To the first Article.
WE give Names to Winds, rather as they are numbered in their order and degrees,
than by their own Antiquity, this we do for memories and perspicuities sake.
But we add the old words also, because of the assenting voices or opinions of
old Authors, of which having taken (though with somewhat a doubtful judgment)
many things, they will hardly be known, but under such names as themselves have
used. Let the general division be this: Let Cardinal winds be those which blow
from Corners or Angles of the World: Semicardinal, those which blow in the
half-wards of those; and Median Winds those which blow between these
half-wards: Likewise of those which blow betwixt these half-wards, let those be
called Major Medians, which blow in a Quadrant or fourth part of these
divisions: the lesser Medians are all the rest. Now the particular division is
that which follows.

Cardinal.
North. North and by East.
Med. Maj.
North, North-East, or Aquilo. North East and by North, or Meses.
Semi-Card.
North East. North East and by East.
Med. Maj.
East North East, or Caecias. East and by North.
Cardinal.
East, or Subsolanus. East by South.
Med. Maj.
East South East, or Vulturnus. South East and by East.
Semi-Card.
South East. South East and by South.
Med. Maj.
South South East, or Phaenicias. South and by East.
Cardinal.
South. South and by West.
Med. Maj.
South South West, or Libonotus. South West and by South.
Semi Card.
South West, or Libs. South West and by West.
Med. Maj.
West South West, or Africus. West and by South.
Cardinal.
West, or Favonius. West and by North.
Med. Maj.
West North West, or Corus. North West and by West.
Semi Card.
North West. North West and by North, or Thrascias.
Med. Maj.
North North West, or Circius. North and by West.
There are also other Names of winds. Apeliotes the East wind, Argestes, the
South West, Olympias, the North West, Scyron, the South East, Hellespontius,
the East North East, for these we care not. Let it suffice, that we have given
constant and fixed names of winds, according to the order and disposition of
the regions of the Heavens: we do not set much by the Comments of Authors;
since the Authors themselves have little in them.

Free Winds.
To the sixth Article.
1 THere is not a Region of the Heaven from whence the wind does not blow. Yea,
if you divide the Heaven into as many Regions as there be degrees in the
Horizon, you shall find winds sometimes blowing from every one of them.

2. There are some whole Countries, where it never rains, or at least very
seldom; but there is no Country where the wind does not blow, and that
frequently.

General Winds.
To the second Article.
1. Concerning general winds Experiments are plain, and it is no marvel, seeing
that (especially within the Tropicks) we may find places condemned among the
Ancients.

It is certain, that to those who sail between the Tropicks, in a free and open
sea, there blows a constant and settled wind (which the seamen call a Breeze)
from East to West. This wind is not of so little force, but that partly by its
own blowing, and partly by its guiding the current of the Sea, it hinders
Seamen from coming back again the same way they went to Peru.

2. In our Seas in Europe, when it is fair dry weather, and no particular winds
stirring, there blows a soft kind of gale from the East, which follows the
Sun.

3. Our common Observations do admit that the higher Clouds are for the most
part carried from East to West; and that it is so likewise when here below upon
the earth either there is a great calm, or a contrary wind; and if they do not
so always, it is because sometimes particular winds blow aloft, which overwhelm
this general wind.

A Caution. If there be any such general wind, in order to the motion of the
Heaven, it is not so firm nor strong, but that it gives way to particular
winds. But it appears most plainly amongst the Tropicks, by reason of the
larger circles which it makes: And likewise it is so when it blows on high, for
the same cause, and by reason of its free course. Wherefore if you will take it
without the Tropicks, and near the earth, (where it blows most gently and
slowly) make trial of it in an open and free air, in an extreme calm, and in
high places, and in a body which is very moveable, and in the afternoon; for
at that time the particular Eastern wind blows more sparingly.

Injunction. Observe diligently the Vains and Weather-cocks upon the tops and
Towers of Churches, whether in extreme calms they stand continually toward the
West or not.

An Indirect Experiment.
4. It is certain, that here with us in Europe, the Eastern wind is drying and
sharp: the West wind contrariwise moist and nourishing. May not this be by
reason that (it being granted, that the Air moves from East to West) it must of
necessity be that the East wind, whose blast goes the same way, must needs
disperse and attenuate the Air, whereby the Air is made biting and dry; but the
western wind which blows the contrary way, turns the Airs back upon it self,
and thickens it, whereby it becomes more dull, and at length moist.

An Indirect Experiment.
5. Consider the Inquisition of the motion, and flowing of waters, whether they
move from East to West; for if the two extremes Heaven and Waters delight in
this Motion, the Air which is in the midst will go near to participate of the
same.

Caution. We call the two last Experiments indirect, because they do directly
show the thing which we aim at, but by consequence, which we also gladly admit
of when we want direct Experiments.

Injunction. That the Breeze blows plentifully between the Tropicks, is most
certain; the cause is very ambiguous. The cause may be, because the Air moves
according to the Heaven: But without the Tropicks almost unperceiveably, by
reason of the smaller Circles which it makes within the Tropicks manifestly,
because it makes bigger Circles. Another cause may be, because all kind of heat
dilates and extends the Air, and does not suffer it to be contained in its
former place; and by the dilation of the Air, there must needs be an impulsion
of the contiguous Air, which produces this Breeze, as the Sun goes forward:
and that is more evident within the Tropicks, where the Sun is more scorching,
without it is hardly perceived. And this seems to be an instance of the Cross,
or a decisory instance. To clear this doubt you may enquire, whether the Breeze
blow in the night or no; for the wheeling of the Air continues also in the
night, but the heat of the Sun does not.

6. But it is most certain that the Breeze does not blow in the night, but in
the morning, and when the morning is pretty well spent; yet that instance does
not determine the Question: whether the nightly condensation of the Air,
(especially in those Countries where the days and nights are not more equal in
their length than they are differing in their heat and cold) may dull and
confound that Natural Motion of the Air, which is but weak.

If the air participates of the motion of the Heaven, it does not only follow,
that the East wind concurs with the motion of the Air, and the West wind
strives against it; but also that the North wind blows as it were from above,
and the South wind as from below here in our Hemisphere, where the Antartick
Pole is under ground, and the Artick Pole is elevated; which has likewise been
observed by the Ancients, though staggeringly and obscurely: But it agrees very
well with our modern Experience; because the Breeze (which may be a motion of
the air) is not a full East, but a North-East wind.

Stayed or certain Winds.
To the third Article. Connection.
AS in the Inquisition of General winds, men have suffered and been in
darkness, so they have been troubled with a Vertigo or giddiness concerning
staid and certain Winds. Of the former they say nothing, of the latter, they
talk up and down and at random. This is the more pardonable, the thing being
various: for these stayed winds do change and alter according to the places
where they be: the same do not blow in Egypt, Greece, and Italy.

1. That there are stayed winds in some places, the very name that is given
them does declare it, as the other name of Etesiaes means Anniversary or yearly
winds.

2. The Ancients attributed the cause of the overflowing of Nilus to the
blowing of the Etesian (that is to say Northern) winds at that time of the year
which did hinder the River's running into the Sea, and turned the stream of it
back.

3. There are Currents in the Sea, which can neither be attributed to the
natural motion of the Ocean, nor to the running down from higher places, nor
the straightness of the opposite shoars, or to Promontories running out into
the Sea, but are merely guided and governed by these stayed winds.

4. Those who will not have Columbus to have conceived such a strong opinion
concerning the West Indies by the relation of a Spanish Pilot, and much less
believe that he might gather it out of some obscure footsteps of the Ancients
have this refuge; that he might conjecture there was some Continent in the West
by the certain and stayed winds which blew from them toward the shoars of
Lusitania, or Portugal. A doubtful, and not very probable thing; seeing that
the voyage of winds will hardly reach so large a distance. In the mean time
there is great honor due to this Inquisition, if the finding of this new world
be due to one of those Axioms or Observations, whereof it comprehends many.

5. Wheresoever are high and snowy Mountains, from thence blow stayed winds,
until that time as the snow be melted away.

6. I believe also that from great Pools which are full of water in the Winter,
there blows stayed winds in those seasons, when as they begin to dry up with
the heat of the Sun. But of this I have no certainty.

7. Wheresoever Vapors are engendered in abundance, and that at certain times,
be sure that stayed winds will blow there at the same times.

8. If stayed and certain winds blow any where, and the cause cannot be found
near at hand, assure your self that those certain winds are strangers, and come
from far.

9. It has been observed, that stayed winds do not blow in the night time, but
do rise about three hours after Sunrising. Surely such winds are tired as it
were with a long journey, that they can scarcely break through the thickness of
the night Air, but being stirred up again by the rising of the Sun, they go
forward by little and little.

10. All stayed winds (unless they blow from some neighboring places) are
weak, and yield unto sudden winds.

11. There are many stayed winds which are not perceivable, and which we do not
observe, by reason of their weakness, whereby they are overthrown by the
freewinds. Wherefore in the winter they are hardly taken notice of, when the
free winds wander most: but are more observeable in the Summer, when those
wandering winds grow weak.

12. In Europe these are the chief stayed winds, Northwinds from the Solstice,
and they are both forerunners and followers of the Dog Star. West-winds from
the Equinoctial in Autumn, Eastwinds from the Spring Equinoctial; as for the
winter Solstice, there is little heed to be taken of it, by reason of the
varieties.

13. The winds called Ornithii or Bird winds, had that name given them, because
they bring Birds out of cold Regions beyond the Sea, into warm Climates; and
they belong not to stayed winds, because they for the most part keep no
punctual time: and the Birds they for the convenience of them, whether they
come sooner or later: and many times when they have begun to blow a little, and
turn, the birds being forsaken by it, are drowned in the sea, and sometimes
fall into ships.

14. The returns of these certain or stayed winds are not so precise at a day
or an hour, as the flowing of the Sea is. Some Authors do set down a day, but
it is rather by conjecture than any constant observation.

Customary or Attending Winds.
Of the fourth and fifth Articles. Connection.
THe word of attending winds is ours, and we thought good to give it, that the
Observation concerning them be not lost, nor confounded. The meaning is this,
Divide the year if you please (in what Country soever you be) into three, four,
or five parts, and if any one certain wind blow, then two, three, or four of
those parts, and a contrary wind but one; we call that wind which blows most
frequently, The customary, or Attending wind of that Country, and likewise of
the times.

1. The South and Northwinds are attendants of the world, for they with those
which are within their Sections or Divisions, blow oftener over all the world,
than either the East or the West.

2. All free winds (not the customary) are more attendant in the winter than in
the summer; but most of all in the Autumn and Spring.

3. All free winds are attendants rather in the Countries without the Tropicks,
and about the Polar Circles, than within: for in frozen and in torrid Countries,
for the most part they blow more sparingly, in the middle Regions they are more
frequent.

4. Also all free winds, especially the strongest and most forcible of them, do
blow oftener and more strongly, morning and evening, than at noon and night.

5. Free winds blow frequently in hollow places, and where there be Caves, than
in solid and firm ground.

Injunction. Humane diligence has almost ceased and stood still in the
observation of attending winds in particular places, which notwithstanding
should not have been, that Observation being profitable for many things. I
remember I asked a certain Merchant, (a wise and discreet man) who had made a
Plantation in Greenland, and had wintred there, why that Country was so extreme
cold, seeing it stood in a reasonable temperate Climate. He said, it was not so
great as it was reported; but that the cause was twofold: One was, that the
masses and heaps of Ice, which came out of the Scithian sea were carried
thither. The other, (which he also thought to be the better reason) was,
because the West wind there blows many parts of the year, more than the East
wind; as also, (said he) it does with us; but there it blows from the
Continent, and cold, but with us from the Sea and warmish. And (said he) if the
East wind should blow here in England so often and constantly as the Westwind
does there, we should have far colder weather, even equal to that as is there.

6. The West-winds are attendants of the Pomeridian or afternoon hours: for
toward the declining of the Sun, the winds blow oftener from the East, then
from the West.

7. The South Wind is attendant on the night; for it rises and blows more
strongly in the night, and the North Wind in the day time.

8. But there are many and great differences between winds which are attendant
on the sea, and those which are attendant upon the land. That is one of the
chief which gave Columbus occasion to find out the new world; namely, that
Sea-winds are not stayed, but land winds are: for the Sea abounding in Vapors,
which are indifferently every where winds are also engendered indifferently
every where, and with great inconstancy are carried here and there, having no
certain beginnings nor sources. But the earth is much unlike for the the
begetting of winds: some places are more efficacious to engender and increase
winds, some less: wherefore they stand most from that part where they have
their nourishment, and take their rise from thence.

9. Acosta is unconstant in his own Position. He says that at Peru, and the
Sea coasts of the South Sea, South winds do blow almost the whole year: and he
says in another place, that upon those Coasts sea winds do blow chiefliest.
But the South wind to them is a land wind, as likewise the North and East wind
also, and the West-wind is their only sea wind: We must take that which he sets
down more certainly; namely, that the South Wind is an attending and familiar
wind of those Countries: unless peradventure in the name of the South Sea he
has corrupted his meaning, or his speech, meaning the West by the South, which
blows from the South Sea. But the Sea which they call the South Sea, is not
properly the South Sea; but as a second western Ocean, being-stretched out in
the like situation as the Atlantic sea is.

10. Sea winds are questionless more moist than land winds, but yet they are
more pure, and will easilier, and with more equality be incorporated with the
pure Air. For terrestrial winds are ill composed, and smoaky. Neither let any
one object, that they ought to be grosser by reason of the saltness of the Sea.
For the nature of terrestrial salt does not rise in vapors.

Sea winds are lukewarm or cold, by reason of the two foresaid qualities,
humidity and pureness. For by humidity they mitigate the colds (for dryness
increases both heat and cold) and with their pureness they cool. Therefore
without the Tropicks they are lukewarm, within the Tropicks they are cold.

12. I believe that sea winds are every where attendant upon particular
Countries, especially such as stand upon the Sea coasts: That is to say, winds
blow more frequently from that side where the sea is, by reason of the greater
plenty of matter which winds have in the sea, than in the land; unless there be
some firm wind blowing from the land, for some peculiar reason. But let no man
confound firm or stayed winds, with attendant winds: the attendants being
always more frequent; but the staid ones for the most part blowing more seldom:
But that is common to them both, namely, to blow from that place from which
they receive their nourishment.

13. Sea winds are commonly more vehement than land winds: yet when they cease,
the sea is calmer from the shoars than near unto them; insomuch, that Mariners
to avoid calms, will sometimes coast along the shore, rather than lanch into
the deep.

14. Winds which are called Tropei, that is to say, Retorted, namely, such as
when they have blown a little way, suddenly turn again, such winds I say blow
from the Sea toward the shore: but retorted winds, and whirlwinds are most
commonly in gulfs of Seas.

15. Some small Gales blow for the most part about all great waters, and they
are most felt in a morning; but more about Rivers than at Sea, because of the
difference which is between a land-gale, and a watergale.

16. In places which are near the sea trees bow and bend, as shunning the Sea
Air: but that comes not through any averseness in them: but sea winds by reason
of their humidity and thickness, are as it were more heavy and ponderous.

The Qualities and Powers of Winds.
To the 7, 28, 29, 30, 31 Articles. Connection:
COncerning the Qualities and Powers of winds men have made careless and
various Observations: we will cull out the most certain, and the rest, as too
light, we will leave to the winds themselves.

1. With us the south wind is rainy, and the northern wind clear and fair, the
one gathers together and nourishes the Clouds; the other scatters and casts
them off. Wherefore the Poets when they speak of the Deluge, feign the Northern
wind at that time to be shut up in prison, and the south wind to be sent out
with very large commission.

2. The West wind has with us been held to be the wind which blew in the
golden age, the companion of a perpetual Spring, and a cherisher of Flowers.

3. Paracelsus his Scholars, when they sought for a place for their three
Principles in Juno's Temple also, which is the Air, placed three, but found no
place for the East Wind.

They Mercury ascribe to the South-winds,
To the rich Western blasts the Sulphur Mines,
And rugged Boreas blasts the sad salt finds.
4. But with us in England the East wind is thought to be mischievous, so that
it goes for a Proverb, That when the wind is in the East, it is neither good for
man nor beast.

5. The south wind blows from the presence of the Sun, the North from the
absence in our Hemispere. The East wind in order to the motion of the air: the
West wind from the Sea, the East wind from the Continent most commonly in
Europe and the western parts of Asia. These are the most radical and essential
differences of winds; from which truly and really depend most of the Qualities
and Powers of the winds.

6. The south wind is not so Anniversary, or yearly, nor so stayed as the
Northern wind is, but more wandering and free: and when it is stayed, it is so
soft and mild that it can scarcely be perceived.

7. The south wind is lower, and more lateral and blowing of one side; the
Northern wind is higher and blows from above: we do not mean the Polar
elevation and depression of which we have spoken formerly; but because the
North wind for the most part has its beginnings higher, and the south wind for
the most part nearer to us.

8. The south wind to us is rain (as we said before) but in Africa it causes
clear weather, but bringing great heat along with it, and not cold, as some
have affirmed. In Africa it is pretty healthful, but to us, if the south wind
last long with fair weather, and without rain, it is very Pestilent.

9. The south winds and west winds do not engender vapors, but they blow from
those coasts where there is great store of them, by reason of the increase of
the Suns heat, which draws forth the vapors, and therefore they are rainy. But
if they blow from dry places, which have no Vapors in them, they are fair. But
notwithstanding sometimes they are pure, and sometimes turbulent.

10. The south and west wind here with us, seem to be confederate, and are warm
and moist, and on the other side the North and East winds, have some affinity
between them, being cold and dry.

11. The North and South winds (whereof we have also spoken before) do blow
oftener than the East and West winds, because there is a great inequality of
vapors in those parts, by reason of the absence and presence of the Sun, but
to the East and to the West the Sun is as it were indifferent.

12. The south wind is very healthful, when it comes from the Sea, but when it
blows from the Continent it is more unhealthful; and so contrariwise the North
wind is suspicious, blowing from the Sea, from the Continent it is healthful.
Likewise the south sea wind is very agreeable with Plants and Fruits, killing
their Cankers, or rusts and other hurtful annoiances.

13. A gentle south wind does assemble and gather together Clouds much,
especially if it continue but a short while: but if it blow too boisterously,
or long, it clouds the sky, and brings in rain. But especially when it ceases
or grows remiss, more than in its beginning, and when it is in its chiefest
vigor.

14. When the south wind either begins to blow, or ceases for the most there
are changes of weather, from fair to cloudy, and from hot to cold, and
contrariwise. The North wind many times rises and ceases, the former weather
remaining and continuing.

15. After hoary frosts and long continued snow, there scarcely blows any other
wind than a south wind, there being as it were a concoction, or digestion made
of cold, which then at last dissolves: neither does rain also follow; but this
likewise happens in changes, or intervals of fair weather.

16. The south wind rises oftener, and blows stronger in the night than in the
day, especially in winter nights. But the North wind if it rise in the night
(which is contrary to its custom) it does usually last above three days.

17. When the south wind blows the waves swell higher than when the north wind
blows, though it blow with an equal or lesser force.

18. The south wind blowing, the sea becomes blew, and more bright than when
the North wind blows, which causes it to look darker and blacker.

19. When the air becomes warmer on a sudden, it sometimes betokens rain: and
again at other times, when on a sudden it grows, colder it likewise betokens
rain. But this happens according to the Nature of the winds: for if the air
grow warm, whilst the south or east wind blows, there is rain at hand; and
likewise when it grows cold during the Northern or Western blasts.

20. The south wind blows for the most part entire, and alone. But the north
wind blowing, especially the East North-East, or the North-West often times
contrary and various, or diverse winds blow together, whereby they are broken
and disturbed.

21. Beware a Northern wind when you sow seed, neither would I wish any one to
inoculate or graft in a southern wind.

22. Leaves fall from trees soonest on the south side, but Vine sprouts or
stalks bud forth, and grow most that way.

23. In large Pasture shepherds must take care (as Pliny says) to bring their
Flocks to the North side, that they may feed against the South. For if they
feed toward the North, they grow lame and bleereyed, and distempered in their
bellies. The Northern wind also does so weaken their coupling, that if they
couple looking that way, they will for the most part bring forth Ewe-Lambs. But
Pliny does not stand very stiffly to this Opinion, having as it were but taken
it up upon trust, and borrowed it.

24. Winds are hurtful to Wheat and all manner of grain at three times: namely,
at the opening and at the falling of the flower, and when the grain it self is
ripe, for then they blow the Corn out of the Ear, and at the other two times
either they blast the flower, or blow it off.

25. While the south wind blows men's breath grow ranker, all creatures
appetites decay, pestilent diseases reign, men wax more slow and dull. But when
the wind is Northwardly, men are more lively, healthful, and greedy after food.
Yet the Northern wind is hurtful for them that are troubled with the Phthisick,
Cough, Gout, or any other sharp defluxions.

26. An East wind is dry, piercing, and mortifying. The West wind moist, meek
and nourishing.

27. If the East wind blow when the Spring is any thing forward, it is hurtful
to fruits, bringing in of Worms and Caterpillars, so that the leaves are hardly
spared: neither is it very good to grain. Contrariwise, the West wind is very
propitious and friendly to Herbs, Flowers, and all manner of vegitables. And so
is the East wind too about the Autumnal Equinoctial.

28. Western winds are more vehement than Eastern winds, and bow and bend Trees
more.

29. Rainy weather which begins when the East wind blows, does last longer than
that which begins when a West wind blows, and may peradventure hold out for a
whole day.

30. The East and North wind, when they once begin to blow, blow more
constantly; the South and West wind are more mutable.

31. In an Eastern wind all visible things do appear bigger; But in a Western
wind all audible things are heard further, as sounds of Bells, and the like.

32. The East, North-East wind draws Clouds to it. It is a Proverb amongst the
Greeks to compare it to Usurers, who by laying out money do swallow it up: It is
a vehement and large wind, which cannot remove Clouds so fast, as they will
turn back and press upon it. Which is likewise seen in great fires, which grow
stronger against the wind.

33. Cardinal or Semi-Cardinal winds are not so stormy as the Median.

34. Median winds from North to North-East are more fair, from North-East to
East more stormy. Likewise from East to South-East more fair, from South-East
to South more stormy. Likewise from South to South-West more fair, from
South-West to West more stormy. Likewise from West to North-west more fair;
from North-west to North more stormy. So that proceeding according to the order
of the heavens, the Median winds of the first half-ward are always disposed to
fair weather; those of the latter half-ward to storms and tempests.

35. Thunders and Lightnings, and storms, with falling of broken Clouds are,
when cold winds as participate of the North do blow, as the North-west, North,
North-west, North North-east, North-east, and East North-east. Wherefore those
thunders likely are accompanied with Hail.

36. Likewise snowy winds come from the North, but it is from those Median
winds which are not stormy, as the North-west, and North-east and by North.

37. Winds gain their Natures and Properties five ways only: Either by the
absence or presence of the Sun; or by agreeing or disagreeing with the natural
Motion of the Air; or by the diversity of the matter which feeds them, by
which they are engendered; as Sea, Snow, Marshes, or the like: Or by the
tincture of the Countries through which they pass: Or by their original local
beginnings: on high, under ground, in the middle; all which things the ensuing
Articles will better declare and explain.

38. All winds have a power to dry, yea more than the Sun it self, because the
Sun draws out the vapors; but if it be not very fervent, it does not disperse
them: but the wind both draws them out, and carries them away. But the south
wind does this least of any; and both timber and stones sweat more when the
South wind blows a little, than when it is calm and lies still.

39. March winds are far more drying than summer winds: insomuch that such as
make Musical Instruments will stay for March winds to dry their stuff they make
their Instruments of, to make it more porous, and better sounding.

40. All manner of winds purge the air, and cleanse it from all putrefaction,
so that such years as are most windy, are most healthful.

41. The Sun is like to Princes, who sometimes having appointed Deputies in
some remote Countries, the subjects there are more obsequious to those
Deputies, and yield them more respect than to the Prince himself. And so the
winds which have their power and origin from the Sun, do govern the
temperatures of the Countries, and the disposition of the air as much or more
than the Sun it self. Insomuch that Peru (which by reason of the nearness of
the Ocean, the vastness of Rivers, and exceeding great and high hills, has
abundance of winds and blasts blowing there) may contend with Europe for a
temperate and sweet air.

42. It is no wonder if the force and power of winds be so great, as it is
found to be; Vehement winds being as Inundations, Torrents, and Flowings of the
spacious air, Neither (if we attentively heed it) is their power any great
matter. They can throw down trees, which with their tops, like unto spread
sails, give them advantage to do it, and are a burden to themselves: Likewise
they can blow down weak buildings; strong and firm ones they cannot without
Earthquakes join with them. Sometimes they will blow all the snow off the tops
of hills, buryng the Valley that is below them with it; as it befell Soliman in
the Sultanian fields. They will also sometimes drive in waters, and cause great
Inundations.

43. Sometimes winds will dry up Rivers, and leave the Channels bare. For if
after a great drought a strong wind blows with the Current for many days, so
that it as it were sweeps away the water of the River into the sea, and keeps
the Sea water from coming in, the River will dry up in many places where it
does uot use to be so.

Monition. Turn the Poles, and withal turn the Observations as concerning the
North and South. For the presence and absence of the Sun being the cause, it
must vary according to the Poles. But this may be a constant thing, that there
is more sea toward the south, and more land toward the North, which does not
a little help the winds.

Monition. Winds are made, or engendered a thousand ways, as by the subsequent
Inquisition it will appear; so to fix that Observations in a thing so various
is not very easy. Yet those things which we have set down, are for the most
part, most certain.

Local beginnings of Winds.
To the eighth Article. Connection.
TO know the local beginnings of winds, is a thing which requires a deep search
and Inquisition, seeing that the Whence and Whither of winds, are things noted
even in Scripture to be abstruse and hidden. Neither do we now speak of the
Fountains or beginnings of particular winds, (of which more shall be said
hereafter) but of the matrixes of winds in general. Some fetch them from above,
some search for them in the deep: but in the middle (where they are for the
most part engendered) no body hardly looks for them: such is the custom of men
to enquire after things which are obscure, and omit those things which lie, as
it were, in their way. This is certain that winds are either inbred, or
strangers. For winds are as it were Merchants of vapors, which being by them
gathered into Clouds, they carry out, and bring in again into Countries, from
whence winds are again returned as it were by exchange. But let us now enquire
concerning Native winds, for those which coming from another place are
strangers, are in another place Natives. There are three local beginnings of
them; They either breath or spring out of the ground, or are cast down from
above, or are here made up in the body of the Air. Those which are cast down
from above, are of a double generation: for they are either cast down before
they be formed into Clouds, or afterward composed of rarefied and dispersed
Clouds. Let us now see what is the History of these things.

1. The Poets feigned Eolus his Kingdom to be placed under ground in Dens and
Caves, where the winds prison was, out of which they were at times let forth.

2. Some Philosophical Divines moved by those words of Scripture, He brings
forth the winds out of his Treasures, think that the winds come out of some
Treasuries; namely, places under ground amongst the Mines of Minerals. But this
is nothing: for the Scripture speaks likewise of the Treasures of Snow and
Hail, which doubtless are engendered above.

3. Questionless in subterraneal places there is great store of Air, which it
is very likely sometimes breaths out by little and little, and sometimes again
upon urgent causes, must needs come rushing forth together.

An Indirect Experiment.
In great droughts, and in the middle of Summer, when the ground is cleft and
chopped, there breaks out water many times in dry and sandy places. Which if
waters (being a gross body) do, though it be but seldom, it is probable that
the air (which is a subtle and tenuous body) may often do it.

4. If the Air breaths out of the earth by little and little, and scatteringly,
it is little perceived at the first; but when many of those small emanations or
comings out are come together, there is a wind produced, as a River out of
several Springs. And this seems to be so, because it has been observed by the
Ancients, that many winds in those places where they begin, do at first blow
but softly, which afterward grow stronger and increase in their progress like
unto Rivers.

5. There are some places in the Sea, and some Lakes also which swell extremely
when there is no wind stirring; which apparently proceeds from some
subterraneal wind.

6. There is great quantity of subterraneal spirit required to shake or cleave
the earth; less will serve turn for the raising of water. Wherefore earthquakes
come but seldom, risings and swellings of waters are more frequent.

7. Likewise it is every where taken notice of that waters do somewhat swell
and rise before Tempests.

8. The weak subterraneal spirit which is breathed out scatteringly, is not
perceived upon the earth, until it be gathered into wind, by reason the earth
is full of pores; but when it issues from under the water, it is presently
perceived (by reason of the waters continuity) by some manner swelling.

9. We resolved before that in Cavernous and Denny places there were attendant
winds; insomuch that those winds seem to have their local beginnings out of the
earth.

10. In great and rocky Hills winds are found to breath sooner, (namely before
they be perceived in the Valleys) and more frequently, (namely when it is calm
weather in the valleys,) But all mountains and rocks are cavernous and hollow.

11. In Wales, in the County of Denbigh, a mountainous and rocky Country, out
of certain Caves (as Gilbertus relates) are such vehement eruptions of wind,
that clothes or linen laid out there upon any occasion, are blown up, and
carried a great way up into the air.

12. In Aber Barry near Severn in Wales in a rocky cliff, are certain holes, to
which if you lay your ear, you shall hear diverse sounds and murmurs of winds
under ground.

An Indirect Experiment.
Acosta has observed that the Towns of Plata and Potosa, in Peru are not far
distant one from the other, and both situated upon a high and hilly ground, so
that they differ not in that. And yet Potosa has a cold and winter-like air;
and Plata has a mild and spring-like temperature; which difference it seems
may be attributed to the silver Mines which are near Potosa: Which shows that
there are breathing places of the earth, as in relation to hot and cold.

13. If the earth be the first cold thing, according to Parmenides, (whose
opinion is not contemptible, seeing cold and density are knit together by a
strict knot) it is no less probable that there are hotter breaths sent out from
the Central cold of the earth, than are cast down from the cold of the higher
air.

14. There are certain Wells in Dalmatia, and the Country of Cyrene (as some of
the Ancients record) into which if you cast a stone, there will presently arise
tempests, as if the stone had broken some covering of a place, in which the
force of the winds was enclosed.

An Indirect Experiment.
Aetna, and diverse other Mountains cast out fire: therefore it is likely that
air may likewise break forth, especially being dilatated and set into motion,
by heat in subterraneal places.

15. It has been noted, that both before and after Earthquakes, there has
blown certain noxious and foreign winds: as there are certain little smothers
usually before and after great firings and burnings.

Monition. The Air shut up in the earth is forced to break out for several
causes, sometimes a mass of earth, ill joined together, falls into a hollow
place of the earth; sometimes waters do ingulf themselves; sometimes the Air is
extended by subterraneal heats, and seeks for more room: sometimes the earth
which before was solid and vaulted, being by fires turned into ashes, no longer
able to bear it self up, falls. And many such like causes.

And so these Inquisitions have been made concerning the first local beginning
of winds. Now follows the second origin, or beginning from above, namely
from that which they call the middle Region of the air.

Monition. But let no man understand what has been spoken, so far amiss; as if
we should deny the rest of the winds also are brought forth of the earth by
vapors. But this first kind was of winds which come forth of the earth, being
already perfectly framed winds.

16. It has been observed, that there is a murmuring of woods before we do
plainly perceive the winds, whereby it is conjectured, that the wind descends
from a higher place: which is likewise observed in Hills, (as we said before)
but the cause is more ambiguous, by reason of the concavity and hollowness of
the hills.

17. Wind follows darted, or (as we call them) shooting stars, and it come that
way as the star has shot; whereby it appears, that the air has been moved
above, before the motion comes to us.

18. The opening of the Firmament, and dispersion of Clouds, are Prognostics
of winds, before they blow here on earth, which also shows that the winds begin
above.

19. Small stars are not seen before the rising of winds, though the night be
clear and fair. Because (it should seem) the Air grows thick, and is less
transparent, by reason of that matter which afterward is turned into wind.

20. There appears Circles about the body of the Moon, the Sun looks sometimes
blood red at its setting, the Moon rises red at her fourth rising; and there
are many more Prognostics of winds on high (whereof we will speak in its
proper place) which shows that the matter of the winds is there begun and
prepared.

21. In these Experiments you must note, that difference we spoke of; namely of
the twofold generation of winds on high: that is to say, before the gathering
together of vapors into a Cloud, and after. For the Prognostics of Circles
about, and colors of the Sun and Moon, have something of the Cloud: but that
darting, and occultation of the lesser stars, is in fair and clear weather.

22. When the wind comes out of a Cloud ready formed, either the Cloud is
totally dispersed, and turned into wind; or it is torn and rent in sunder, and
the wind breaks out, as in a storm.

23. There are many Indirect Experiments in the world, concerning the
repercussion by cold. So that it being certain, that there are most extreme
colds in the middle region of the Air: it is likewise plain, that vapors for
the most part cannot break through that place without being joined and gathered
together, or darted according to the opinion of the Ancients, which in this
particular is true and sound.

The third local beginning of winds, is of those which are engendered here in
the lower part of the air, which we also call swellings or overburthenings of
the Air. A thing very familiar and frequent, yet passed over with silence.

A Commentation. The generation of those winds which are made up in this lower
part of the Air, is a thing no more obscure than this: namely, that the Air
newly composed and made up of water, and attenuated and resolved vapors,
joined with the first Air, cannot be contained within the same bounds as it was
before, but grows out and is turned, and takes up further room. Yet there are
in this two things to be granted. First, that one drop of water turned into air
(whatsoever they fabulously speak of the tenth proportion of the Elements)
requires, at least a hundred times more room than it had before. Secondly, that
a little new air, and moved, added to the old air, shakes the whole, and sets
it into motion: as we may perceive by a little wind that comes forth of a pair
of Bellows, or in at a little crevise of a window or wall; that will set all
the air which is in a room in motion, as appears by the blazing of the lights
which are in the same room.

24. As Dews and Mists are engendered here in the lower air, never coming to be
Clouds, nor penetrating to the middle region of the Air: in the like manner are
also many winds.

25. A continual gale blows about the sea, and other waters, which is nothing
but a small wind newly made up.

26. The Rainbow, which is as it were the lowest of Meteors, and nearest to
us, when it does not appear whole, but curtailed, and as it were only some
pieces of the horns of it, is dissolved into winds, as often, or rather oftener
than into rain.

27. It has been observed, that there are some winds in Countries which are
divided and separated by hills; which ordinarily blow on the one side of the
hills, and do not reach to the other. Whereby it manifestly appears that they
are engendered below the height of the said hills.

28. There are an infinite sort of winds that blow in fair and clear days; and
also in Countries where it never rains; which are engendered where they blow, and
never were Clouds, nor did ever ascend into the middle region of the air.

Indirect Experiments.
Whosoever shall know how easily a Vapor is dissolved into air, and how great
a quantity of vapors there are; and how much room a drop of water turned into
air takes up more than it did before (as we said already) and how little the
air will endure to be thrust up together, will questionless affirm, that of
necessity winds must be every where engendered, from the very superficies of the
earth, even to the highest parts of the air. For it cannot be, that a great
abundance of vapors, when they begin to be dilatated and expanded, can be
lifted up to the middle region of the air, without an over-burthening of the
air, and making a noise by the way.

Accidental generations of Winds.
To the Ninth Article. Connection.
WE call those Accidental generations of winds, which do not make or beget the
impulsive motion of winds, but with compression do sharpen it, by repercussion
turn it, by sinuation or winding do agitate and tumble it: which is done by
extrinsecal causes, and the posture of the adjoining bodies.

1. In places where there are hills which are not very high, bordering upon
Valleys, and beyond them again higher hills, there is a greater agitation of
the air, and sense of winds, than there is in mountainous, or plain places.

2. In Cities, if there be any place somewhat broader than ordinary and narrow
goings out, as Portals, or Porches, and Cross streets, winds and fresh Gales
are there to be perceived.

3. In houses cool rooms are made by winds, or happen to be so, where the Air
blows through, and comes in on the one side, and goes out at the other: But
much more if the Air comes in several ways and meets in the corners, and has
one common passage from thence: the vaulting likewise and roundness does
contribute much to coolness, because the air being moved, is beaten back in
every line, Also the winding of Porches is better than if they were built
straight out. For a direct blast, though it be not shut up, but has a free
egress, does not make the air so unequal, and voluminous, and waving, as the
meeting at Angles, and hollow places, and windings round, and the like.

4. After great tempests at Sea, an Accidental wind continues for a time, after
the original is laid; which wind is made by the collision and percussion of the
air, through the curling of the waves.

5. In gardens commonly there is a repercussion of wind, from the walls, and
banks, so that one would imagine the wind to come the contrary way from that
whence it really comes.

6. If Hills enclose a Country on the one side, and the wind blows for some
space of time from the plain against the Hill, by the very repercussion of the
Hill, either the wind is turned into rain, if it be a moist wind, or into a
contrary wind, which will last but a little while.

7. In the turnings of Promontory, Mariners do often find changes and
alterations of winds.

Extraordinary Winds, and sudden Blasts.
To the tenth Article. Connection.
SOme men discourse of extraordinary winds, and derive the causes of them; of
Clouds breaking, or storms, Vortice, Typhone, Prestere; Or in English,
Whirl-winds. But they do not relate the thing it self, which must be taken out
of Chronicles and several Histories.

1. Sudden blasts never come in clear weather, but always when the sky is
cloudy, and the weather rainy. That it may justly be thought that there is a
certain eruption made; The blast driven out, and the waters shaken.

2. Storms which come with a Mist and a Fog, and are called Belluae, and bear
up themselves like a Column, are very vehement, and dreadful to those who are
at sea.

3. The greater Typhones, who will take up at some large distance, and sup
them, as it were upward, do happen but seldom, but small whirl-winds come often.

4. All storms and Typhones, and great Whirlwinds, have a manifest precipitous
motion, or darting downwards, more than other winds; so as they seem to fall
like Torrents, and run as it were in Channels, and be afterward reverberated by
the earth.

5. In Meadows, Haycocks, are sometimes carried on high, and spread abroad
there like Canopies: Likewise in Fields, Cocks of Pease, reaped Wheat, and
clothes laid out to drying, are carried up by Whirl-winds as high as tops of
Trees and Houses, and these things are done without any extraordinary force, or
great vehemence of wind.

6. Also sometimes there are very small whirl-winds, and within a narrow
compass, which happen also in fair clear weather; so that one that rides may
see the dust, or straws taken up, and turned close by him, yet he himself not
feel the wind much; which things are done questionless near unto us, by
contrary blasts driving one another back, and causing a circulation of the air
by concussion.

7. It is certain, that some winds do leave manifest signs of burning and
scortching in Plants. But Presterem, which is a kind of dark Lightning, and hot
air without any flame, we will put off to the Inquisition of Lightning.

Helps to Winds; namely, to Original Winds: for of accidental ones we have
enquired before.
To the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 Articles. Connection.
THose things which have been spoken by the Ancients, concerning Winds and
their causes, are merely confused and uncertain, and for the most part untrue:
and it is no marvel, if they see not clear that look not near. They speak as if
wind were somewhat else, or a thing several from moved air; and as if
exhalations did generate and make up the whole body of the winds; and as if the
matter of winds were only a dry and hot exhalation; and as if the beginning of
the motion of winds were but only a casting down and percussion by the cold of
the middle Region, all fantastical and arbitrary opinions: yet out of such
threads they weave long pieces, namely, Cobwebs. But all impulsion of the Air is
wind; and Exhalations mixed with the air contribute more to the motion than to
the matter: and moist vapors, by a proportionate heat, are easilier dissolved
into wind than dry Exhalations, and many winds are engendered in the lowest
Region of the Air, and breath out of the earth, besides those which are thrown
down and beaten back.

1. The Natural wheeling of the air (as we said in the Article of General
Winds) without any other external cause brings forth winds preceptible within
the Tropicks, where the Conversion is ingreater Circles.

2. Next to the Natural Motion of the Air, before we enquire of the Sun (who is
the chief begetter of winds) let us see whether any thing ought to be
attributed to the Moon, and other Asters by clear experience.

3. There arise many great and strong winds some hours before the Eclipse of
the Moon; so that if the Moon be Eclipsed in the middle of the night, the winds
blow the precedent evening: if the Moon be Eclipsed toward the morning, then
the winds blow in the middle of the precedent night.

4. In Peru, which is a very windy Country, Acosta observes that winds blow
most when the Moon is at the full.

Injunction. It were certainly a thing worthy to be observed, what power the
Ages and Motions of the Moon have upon the winds, seeing they have some power
over the waters. As for example, whether the winds be not in a greater
commotion in full and new Moons, than in her first and last Quarters, as we
find it to be in the flowings of waters: For though some do conveniently feign
the command of the Moon to be over the waters, as the Sun and Planets over the
air, yet it is certain, that the water and the air are very Homogeneal bodies,
and that the Moon next to the Sun has most power over all things here below.

5. It has been observed by men, that about the Conjunctions of Planets
greater winds do blow.

6. At the rising of Orion there rise commonly diverse winds and storms. But we
must advise whether this be not because Orion rises in such a season of the
year as is most effectual for the generation of winds; so that it is rather a
concomitant than causing thing. Which may also very well be questioned
concerning rain at the rising of the Hyades and the Pleiades, and concerning
storms at the rising of Arcturus. And so much concerning the Moon and Stars.

7. The Sun is questionless the primary efficient of many winds, working by its
heat on a twofold matter, namely, the body of the air, and likewise vapors and
exhalations.

8. When the Sun is most powerful, dilatates and extends the air, though it be
pure and without any commixion one third part, which is no small matter; so
that by mere dilatation there must needs arise some small wind in the Suns
ways; and that rather two or three hours after its rising, than at his first
rise.

9. In Europe the nights are hotter, in Peru three hours in the morning, and
all for one cause, namely, by reason of winds and gales ceasing and lying still
at those hours.

10. In a Vitro Calendari, dilatated or extended air beats down the water as it
were with a breath: but in a Vitro Pileato, which is filled only with air, the
dilatated air swells the Bladder, as a manifest and apparent wind.

11. We have made trial of such a kind of wind in a round Tower, every way
closed up. For we have placed a hearth or fireplace in the midst of it,
laying a fire of Charcoal thoroughly kindled upon it, that there might be the
less smoke, and on the side of the hearth, at a small distance, has been a
thread hung up with a cross of Feathers, to the end that it might easily be
moved. So after a little stay the heat increasing, and the Air dilatating, the
thread and the Feather cross which hung upon it waved up and down in a various
motion: and having made a hole in the window of the Tower, there came out a hot
breath, which was not continual, but with intermission and waving.

12. Also the reception of Air by cold, after dilatation begets such a wind,
but weaker, by reason of the lesser force of cold. So that in Peru under every
little shadow we find not only more coolness than here with us (by
Antiperistasis) but a manifest kind of gale through the reception of air when
it comes into the shade. And so much concerning wind occasioned by mere
dilatation or reception of Air.

13. Winds proceeding from the mere motion of the air without any commixion of
vapors, are but gentle and soft. Let us see what may be said concerning
Vaporary winds, (we mean such as are engendered by vapors) which may be so much
more vehement than the other, as a dilatation of a drop of water turned into
air, exceeds any dilatation of Air already made: which it does by many degrees,
as we showed before.

14. The efficient cause of vapourary winds, (which are they that commonly
blow) is the Sun, and its proportionate heat: the matter is Vapors and
Exhalations which are turned and resolved into Air. I say Air (and not any
thing but Air) yet at the first not very pure.

15. A small heat of the Sun does not raise Vapors, and consequently causes no
wind.

16. A mean, or middle heat of the Sun raises and excites vapors, but does
not presently dissipate them. Therefore if there be any great store of them,
they gather together into rain, either simply of it self, or joined with wind:
if there be but small store of them, they turn only to wind.

17. The Suns heat in its increase, inclines more to the generation of winds,
in its decrease of rains.

18. The great and continued heat of the Sun, attenuates and disperses vapors
and sublimes them, and withal equally mixes and incorporates them with the Air,
whereby the Air becomes calm and serene.

19. The more equal and continuate heat of the Sun is less apt for the
generation of winds: that which is more unequal and intermitted, is more apt.
Wherefore in sailing into Russia they are less troubled with winds than in the
British Sea, because of the length of the days: but in Peru under the
Equinoctial are frequent winds, by reason of the great inequality of heat,
taking turns night and day.

20. In Vapors is to be considered both the quantity and quality. A small
quantity engenders weak winds, a mean or middle store stronger; great store
engenders rain, either calm, or accompanied with wind.

21. Vapors out of the Sea and Rivers, and over-flown Marshes, engender far
greater quantity of winds than the exhalations of the earth. But those winds
which are engendered on the land, and dry places are more obstinate and last
longer, and are for the most part such as are cast down from above. So that the
opinion of the Ancients in this is not altogether unprofitable: but only that
it pleased them, as in a manner dividing the inheritance, to assign rain to
Vapors, and to winds, exhalations only, which things sound handsomely, but are
vain in effect and substance.

22. Winds brought forth out of the resolutions of Snow lying upon Hills, are
of a mean condition between Water and Land winds; but they incline more to
water; yet they are more sharp and moveable.

23. The dissolution of Snow on Snowy Hills, (as we observed before) always
brings constant winds from that part.

24. Also yearly Northern winds about the rising of the Dog Star, are held to
come from the frozen Ocean, and those parts about the Artick Circle, where the
Dissolutions of Snow and Ice come late when the Summer is far spent.

25. Those masses or mountains of Ice which are carried toward Canada and
Greenland, do rather breed cold Gales, than moveable winds.

26. Winds which arise from chalky and sandy grounds are few and dry, and in
hotter Countries they are soultry, smoaky, and scorching.

27. Winds made of Sea vapors, do easilier turn back into rain, the water
re-demanding and claiming its right: and if this be not granted them, they
presently mix with Air, and so are quiet. But terrestrial, smoaky and unctuous
vapors, are both hardlier dissolved, and ascend higher, and are more provoked
in their motion, and oftentimes penetrate the middle Region of the Air, and
some of them are matter of fiery Meteors.

28. It is reported here in England, that in those days that Gascoine was under
our jurisdiction, there was a Petition offered to the King by his subjects of
Bordeaux, and the Confines thereof, desiring him to forbid the burning of heath
in the Counties of Sussex and Southampton, which bred a wind toward the end of
April which killed their Vines.

29. The meeting of winds, if they be strong, bring forth vehement and whirling
winds: if they be soft and moist, they produce rain, and lay the wind.

30. Winds are allayed and restrained five ways. When the Air over-burthened,
and troubled, is freed by the vapors contracting themselves into rain: Or when
vapors are dispersed, and subtilized, whereby they are mixed with the air, and
agree fairly with it, and they live quietly: Or when vapors or Fogs are
exalted and carried upon high, so that they cause no disturbance, until they be
thrown down from the middle Region of the Air, or do penetrate it. Or when
vapors gathered into Clouds, are carried away into other Countries, by other
winds blowing on high; so that for them there is peace in those Countries which
they fly beyond: Or lastly, when the winds blowing from their nurseries,
languish through a long voyage, finding no new matter to feed on, and so their
vehemence forsakes them, and they do as it were expire and dye.

31. Rain for the most part allayeth winds, especially those which are stormy:
as winds contrariwise oftentimes keep off rain.

32. Winds do contract themselves into rain, (which is the first of the five,
and the chiefest means of allaying them) either being burdened by the burden
it self, when the vapors are copious, or by the contrary motions of winds, so
they be calm and mild; or by the opposition of mountains and Promontories which
stop the violence of the winds, and by little and little turn them against
themselves; or by extreme colds, whereby they are condensed and thickened.

33. Smaller and lighter winds do commonly rise in the morning, and go down
with the Sun, the condensation of the night Air being sufficient to receive
them: for Air will endure some kind of compression without stirring or tumult.

34. It is thought that the sound of Bells will disperse Lightning and Thunder:
in winds it has not been observed.

Monition. Take advice from the place in Prognostics of winds; for there is
some connection of causes and signs.

35. Pliny relates, that the vehemence of a Whirlwind may be allayed by
sprinkling of Vinegar in the encounter of it.

The Bounds of Winds.
To the 16, 17, 18. Articles.
1. IT is reported of Mount Athos, and likewise of Olimpus, that the Priests
would write in the ashes of the Sacrifices which lay upon the Altars, built on
the tops of those hills, and when they returned the year following, (for the
Offerings were Annual) they found the same letters undisturbed, and
uncancelled; though those Altars stood not in any Temple, but in the open Air.
Whereby it was manifest, that in such a height there had neither fallen rain,
nor wind blown.

2. They say that on the top of the Peak of Teneriff, and on the Audes, betwixt
Peru, and Chile, snow lies upon the borders, and sides of the hills; but that
on the tops of them there is nothing but a quiet and still Air, hardly
breathable by reason of its tenuity, which also with a kind of Acrimony pricks
the eyes and orifice of the stomach, begetting in some a desire to vomit, and
in others a flushing and redness.

3. Vaporary winds seem not in any great height, though it be probable that
some of them ascend higher than most clouds. Hitherto of the height, now we
must consider of the Latitude.

4. It is certain, that those spaces which winds take up, are very various,
sometimes they are very large, sometimes little and narrow: winds have been
known to have taken up an hundred miles space with a few hours difference.

5. Spacious winds (if they be of the free kind) are for the most part vehement
and not soft, and more lasting; for they will last almost four and twenty
hours. They are likewise not so much inclined to rain. Straight or narrow winds
contrariwise, are either soft or stormy, and always short.

6. Fixed and stayed winds are itinerary or traveling, and take up very large
spaces.

7. Stormy winds do not extend themselves into any large spaces, though they
always go beyond the bounds of the storm it self.

8. Sea winds always blow within narrower spaces than earth winds, as may
sometimes be seen at sea, namely, a pretty fresh gale in some part of the water
(which may be easily perceived by the crisping of it) when there is a calm, as
smooth as Glass, every where else.

9. Small whirlwinds (as we said before) will sometimes play before men as they
are riding, almost like wind out of a pair of bellows. So much of the Latitude;
now we must see concerning the lastingness.

10. The vehement winds will last longer at Sea, by reason of the sufficient
quantity of vapors: at land they will hardly last above a day and an half.

11. Very soft winds will not blow constantly, neither at sea, nor upon the
land above three days.

12. The south wind is not only more lasting than the west, (which we set down
in another place) but likewise what wind soever it be that begins to blow in
the morning, uses to be more durable and lasting than that which begins to
blow at night.

13. It is certain that winds do rise, and increase by degrees, (unless they be
mere storms) but they allay sooner, sometimes as it were in an instant.

Successions of Winds.
To the 19, 20, 21 Articles.
1. IF the Wind does change according to the motion of the Sun, that is from
East to South, from South to West, from West to North, from the North to the
East, it does not return often, or if it does, it does it but for a short time.
But if it go contrary to the motion of the Sun, that is from the East to the
North, from the North to the West, from the West to the South, and from the
South to the East, for the most part it is restored to its first quarter, at
least before it has gone round its whole compass and circuit.

2. If rain begin first, and the wind begins to blow afterward, that wind will
outlast the rain: but if the wind blow first, and then is allayed by the rain,
the wind for the most part will not rise again; and if it does, there ensues a
new rain.

3. If winds do blow variously for a few hours, and as it were to make a trial,
and afterward begin to blow constantly, that wind shall continue for many days.

4. If the South wind begin to blow two or three days; sometimes the North wind
will blow presently after it. But if the North wind blows as many days, the
south wind will not blow, until the wind have blown a little from the East.

5. When the year is declining, and Winter begins after Autumn is past, if the
Southwind blows in the beginning of winter, and after it comes the North Wind,
it will be a frosty winter: But if the North Wind blow in the beginning of
winter, and the South Wind come after, it will be a mild and warm winter.

6. Pliny quotes Eudoxus, to show that the order of winds returns after every
four years, which seems not to be true, for revolutions are not so quick. This
indeed has been by some men's diligence observed, that greatest and most
notable seasons (for heat, snow frost, warm winters, and old summers) for the
most part return after the revolution of five and thirty years.

The Motion of the Winds.
To the 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 Articles. Connection.
MEn talk as if the wind were some body of it self, and by its own force did
drive and agitate the air. Also when the wind changes its place, they talk as
if it did transport it self into another place. This is the vulgars opinion;
yet the Philosophers themselves apply no remedy thereunto, but they likewise
stammer at it, and do not any way contradict and oppose these errors.

1. We must therefore enquire concerning the raising of the motion of the
winds, and of the Direction of it, having already enquired of the local
beginnings. And of those winds which have their beginning of motion in their
first impulsion, as in those which are cast down from above, or blow out of the
earth, the raising of their motion is manifest: others descend below their own
beginnings; others ascend, and being resisted by the Air, become voluminous,
especially near the Angles of their violence. But of those which are engendered
every where in this inferior Air, (which are the frequentest of all the winds)
the Inquisition seems to be somewhat obscure, although it be a vulgar thing, as
we have set down in the Commentation under the eighth Article.

2. We found likewise an image or representation of this in that close Tower
which we spoke of before. For we varied that trial three ways. The first was
that which we spoke of before; namely, a fire of clear burning coals. The
second was a Kettle of seething water, the fire being set away, and then the
motion of the cross of Feathers was more slow and dull. The third was with both
fire and Kettle; and then the agitation of the Cross of Feathers was very
vehement, so that sometimes it would whirle up and down, as if it had been in a
petty whirlwind, the water yielding store of vapors, and the fire which stood
by it dissipating and dispersing them.

3. So that the chief cause of exciting motion in the winds is the overcharging
of the air, by a new addition of air engendered by vapors. Now we must see
concerning the direction of the motion, and of the whirling, which is a chang
of the direction.

4. The Nurseries and food of the winds does govern their progressive motion:
which nurseries and feedings are like unto the springs of rivers; namely, the
places where there are great store of vapors, for there is the native Country
of the winds. Then when they have found a Current, where the air makes no
resistance, (as water when it finds a falling way) then whatsoever semblable
matter they find by the way, they take into their fellowship, and mix it with
their Currents even as Rivers do. So that the winds blow always from that side
where their Nurseries are which feed them.

5. Where there are no notable Nurseries in any certain place, the winds stray
very much, and do easily change their Current, as in the middle of the sea, and
large spacious fields.

6. Where there are great nurseries of the winds in one place, but in the way
of its progress it has but small additions, there the winds blow strongly in
their beginnings, and by little and little they allay. And contrariwise, where
they find good store of matter to feed on by the way, they are weak in the
beginning, but gather strength by the way.

7. There are moveable nurseries for the winds, namely, in the Clouds, which
many times are carried far away from the Nurseries of vapors, of which those
Clouds were made, by winds blowing high: then the Nursery of the wind begins to
be in that place where the Clouds do begin to be dissolved into wind.

8. But the whirling of winds does not happen, because the wind which blows at
first transports it self; but because either that is allayed and spent, or
brought into order by another wind: And all this business depends on the
various placings of the Nurseries of winds, and variety of times, when vapors
issuing out of these Nurseries are dissolved.

9. If there be Nurseries of winds on contrary parts, as one Nursery on the
South, another on the North-side, the strongest wind will prevail; neither will
there be contrary winds, but the stronger wind will blow continually, though it
be somewhat dulled and tamed by the weaker wind: as it is in Rivers, when the
flowing of the sea comes in; for the Sea's motion prevails, and is the only
one, but it is somewhat curbed by the motion of the river. And if it so happen,
that one of those contrary winds, namely, that which was the strongest be
allayed, then presently the contrary will blow, from that side where it blew
before, but lay hidden under the force and power of the greater.

10. As for example, if the Nursery be at the North-East, the North-East wind
will blow. But if there be two Nurseries of winds, namely, another in the
North, those winds for some tract of way will blow severally; but after the
angle of confluence where they come together, they will blow to the North-East,
or with some inclination, according as the other Nursery shall prove stronger.

11. If there be a Nursery of wind on the North-side, which may be distant from
some Country twenty miles, and is the stronger; another on the East Side, which
is distant some ten miles, and is weaker: Yet the East Wind shall blow for some
hours, and a while after (namely, when its journey is ended) the North wind.

12. If the Northern wind blow, and some Hill stands in the way of it on the
West side, a little while after the North-East wind will blow, compounded by
the original, and that which is beaten back again.

13. If there be a Nursery of winds in the earth on the Northern side, and the
breath thereof be carried directly upward, and it find a cold Cloud on the West
side which turns it off the contrary way, there will blow a North-East wind.

14. Monition. Nurseries of winds in Sea and Land are constant, so that the
spring and beginning of them may be the better perceived: But the Nurseries of
winds in the Clouds are moveable, so that in one place there is matter
furnished for the winds, and they are formed in another: which makes the
direction of motion in winds, to be more confused and uncertain.

Those things we have produced for examples sake, the like are after the like
manner: And hitherto of the direction of the motion of winds: Now we must see
concerning the Longitude, and as it were the Itinerary or journey of the winds,
though it may seem we have already enquired of this under the notion of the
Latitude of winds: For Latitude may by unlearned men also be taken for
Longitude, if winds take up more space Laterally than they go forward in
Longitude.

14. If it be true that Columbus could upon the Coasts of Portugal, judge of
the Continent of America by the constant winds from the West, truly the winds
can travel a long journey.

15. If it be true that the dissolution of Snows about the frozen seas and
Scandia, do excite and raise Northerly winds in Italy, and Greece, etc. in the
Dog days; surely these are long journeys.

16. It has not yet been observed how much sooner a storm does arrive,
according to the way it comes, (as for example, if it be an Eastern wind) how
much sooner it comes from the East, and how much later from the West. And so
much concerning the motion of winds in their progression or going forward: now
we must see concerning the Undulation or swelling of winds.

17. The Undulation or swelling of winds is done in a few moments: So that a
wind will (though it be strong) rise and fall by turns, at the least a hundred
times in an hour. Whereby it appears that the violence of winds is unequal; for
neither Rivers, though swift, nor Currents in the Sea, though strong, do rise
in waves, unless the blowing of wind be joined thereunto: Neither has the
swelling of winds any equality in it self. For like unto the pulse of ones
hand, sometimes it beats, and sometimes it intermits.

The Undulation or swelling of the air, differs from the swelling of waters
into waves in this, that in waters after the waves are risen on high, they of
themselves, and their own accord, do again fall to the place of them; whence it
comes that (whatsoever Poets say when they aggravate tempests, namely, that the
waves are raised up to heaven, and again sink down to hell) the descent of the
waves do not precipitate much below the plane and superficies of the water. But
in the swelling of the air, where the motion of gravity or weight is wanting,
the air is thrust down and raised almost in an equal manner. And thus much of
Undulation; Now we must enquire of the motion of Conflict or Striving.

19. The Conflicts of winds, and compounded Conflicts we have partly enquired
already. It is plain that winds are Ubiquitary, especially the mildest of them.
Which is likewise manifest by this, that there are few days and hours wherein
some gales do not blow in free places, and that inconstantly and variously
enough. For winds which do not proceed from greater Nurseries are vagabond and
voluble, as it were playing one with the other; sometimes driving forward, and
sometimes flying back.

20. It has been seen sometimes at Sea, that winds have come from contrary
parts together, which was plainly to be perceived by the perturbation of the
water on both sides, and the calmness in the middle between them: but after
those contrary winds have met, either there has followed a general calm of the
water every where, namely, when the winds have broken and quelled one another
equally; or the perturbation of the water has continued, namely, when the
stronger Wind has prevailed.

21. It is certain, that in the mountains of Peru it has often chanced that
the winds at one time have blown on the tops of the Hills one way and in the
Valleys the clean contrary way.

22. It is likewise certain here with us, that the Clouds are carried one way,
when the wind near us has blown the contrary way.

23. That is likewise certain, that sometimes the higher Clouds will out-flie
the lower Clouds, so that they will go diverse, yea, and contrary ways, as it
were in contrary Currents.

24. It is likewise certain, that sometimes in the higher part of the air winds
have been neither distracted, nor moved forward; when here below they have been
driven forward with a mad kind of violence, for the space of half a mile.

25. And it is likewise certain, that contrariwise, that here below the air
has been very still, when above the Clouds have been carried with a fresh and
merry gale: But that happens more seldom.

An Indirect Experiment.
Likewise in waves sometimes the upper water is swifter, sometimes the lower;
and sometimes there are (but that is seldom) several Currents of water, of that
which is uppermost, and that which lies beneath.

26. Nor are Virgils testimonies altogether to be rejected, he being not
utterly unskilful in Natural Philosophy. Together rush the East and South-East
wind,
Nor does wave calling South-West stay behind.
And again, I all the winds have seen their battles join.


We have considered of the Motions of winds, in the nature of things: we must
now consider their Motions in humane Engines; and first of all in the Sails of
Ships.

The Motion of Winds in the Sails of Ships.
1. IN our greatest Britain Ships (for we have chosen those for our pattern)
there are four Masts, and sometimes five, set up one behind the other, in a
direct line drawn through the middle of the ship. Which Masts we will name thus;

2. The main Mast, which stands in the middle of the ship: the Foremast, the
Mizon-Mast, (which is sometimes double) and the Sprit Mast.

3. Each Mast consists of several pieces, which may be lifted up, and fashioned
with several knots and joints, or taken away; some have three of them, some
only two.

4. The Sprit-sail Mast from the lower joint lies bending over the Sea, from
that it stands upright; all the other Masts stand upright.

5. Upon these Masts hang ten Sails, and when there be two Mizon-Masts twelve:
the Mainmast and Foremast have three tires of sails, which we will call the
Main-sail, the top sail, and the Main top sail: The rest have but two, wanting
the main top sail.

6. The sails are stretched out a cross, near the top of every joint of the
Mast, by certain beams which we call Yards, to which the upper parts of the
sails are fastened, the lower parts are fastened with Ropes at each corner; the
main sails to the sides of the ship, top and main top sails to the Yards which
are next below them.

7. The Yard of every Mast hangs a cross, only the Yards of the Mizon-Masts
hang sloping, one end up and the other down, in the rest they hang straight
across the Masts like unto the Letter T.

8. The Main sails of the Mainmast, Foremast, and boar-Sprit, are of a
Quadrangular Parallelogram form; the top, and main top sails somewhat sharp,
and growing narrow at the top; but the top Mizon sails are sharp, the lower or
main sails triangular.

9. In a ship of eleven hundred Tun, and was one hundred and twelve foot long
in the Keel, and forty in breadth in the Hold: the main sail of the main Mast
wast two and forty foot deep, and eighty seven foot broad.

10. The top sail of the same Mast was fifty foot deep, and eighty four foot
broad at the bottom, and forty two at the top.

11. The main top sail was seven and twenty foot deep, and two and forty broad
at the bottom, and one and twenty at the top.

12. The Foremast main sail was forty foot and a half deep, and seventy two
foot broad.

13. The top sail was six and forty foot and a half deep, and sixty nine foot
broad at the bottom, and six and thirty at the top.

14. The main top sail was four and twenty foot deep, six and thirty foot broad
at the bottom, and eighteen foot at the top.

15. The Mizon main sail was on the upper part of the Yard one and fifty foot
broad, in that part which was joined to the Yard seventy two foot, the rest
ending in a sharp point.

16. The top sail was thirty foot deep, fifty seven foot broad at the bottom,
and thirty foot at the top.

17. If there be two Mizon-Masts, the hindermost sails are less than the
foremost about the fifth part.

18. The main sail of the Boar-Spirit was eight and twenty foot deep and a
half, and sixty foot broad.

19. The top sail five and twenty foot and a half deep, and sixty foot broad at
the bottom, and thirty at the top.

20. The proportions of Masts and sails do vary, not only according to the
bigness of Ships, but also according to the several uses for which they are
built: Some for fighting, some for Merchandise, some for swiftness, etc. But
the proportion of the dimension of sails is no way proportioned to the number
of Tuns whereof the Ships consist, seeing a Ship of five hundred Tuns or
thereabout, may bear almost as large a sail as the other we spoke of, which was
almost as big again. Whence it proceeds that lesser ships are far swifter and
speedier than great ones, not only by reason of their lightness, but also by
reason of the largeness of their sails, in respect of the body of the ship: for
to continue that proportion in bigger ships would be too vast, and impossible a
thing.

21. Each sail being stretched out at the top, and only tied by the corners at
the bottom, the wind must needs cause it to swell, especially about the bottom
where it is slacker.

22. The swelling if far greater in the lower sails than in the upper, because
they are not only Parrallelograms, and the other more pointed at the top, but
also because the extent of the Yard does so far exceed the breadth of the ship
sides to which they are fastened, that of necessity, because of the looseness,
there must be a great receipt for the wind; so that in the great which we
proposed for an example, the swelling of the sail in a direct wind may be nine
or ten foot inward.

23. By the same reason it also happens, that all sails which are swelled by
the wind, do gather themselves into a kind of Arch or bow, so that of necessity
much wind must slip through: insomuch, that in such a ship as we made mention
of, that Arch may be as high as a man.

24. But in the triangular sail of the Mizon Mast, there must of necessity be a
lesser swelling than in the quadrangular; as well because that figure is less
capable, as also because that in the quadrangular three sides are slack and
loose, but in the triangular only two, so that the wind is more sparingly
received.

25. The motion of the wind in sails, the nearer it comes to the Beak of the
ship, the stronger it is, and sets the ship more forward; partly because it is
in a place, where because of the sharpness of the Beak head the waves are
easilier cut in sunder; but chiefly, because the motion at the Beak draws on
the ship, the motion from the Stern and back part of the ship does but drive it.

26. The motion of the winds in the Sails of the upper tire, advances more than
that in the lower tire, because a violent motion is most violent when it is
farthest removed from resistance, as in the Wings and Sails of Windmills; but
there is danger of drowning or over-turning the ship: wherefore those Sails are
made narrower at the top, that they should not take in too much wind, and are
chiefly made use of when there is not much wind.

27. Sails being placed in a direct line, one behind the other, of necessity
those sails which stand behind must steal the wind from the foremost, when the
wind blows fore-right; wherefore if they be all spread out at once, the force
of the wind has scarce any power but in the main Mast sails, with little help
of the lower sails of the Boar Sprit.

28. The best and most convenient ordering of sails in a direct wind, is, to
have the two lower sails of the Foremast hoised up: for there (as we said
before) the motion is most effectual, let also the top sail of the main Mast be
hoised up: for there will be so much room left under it, that there may be wind
sufficient for the fore sails, without any notable stealing of the wind from
them.

29. By reason of the hinder sails stealing of the wind away from the fore
sails, we sail swifter with a side wind than with a fore wind. For with a side
wind all the sails may be made use of, for they turn their sides to one
another, and so hinder nor rob not one another.

30. Likewise when a side wind blows, the sails are stiflier stretched out
against the wind, which somewhat restrains the wind, and sends it that way as
it should blow, whereby it gains some strength. But that wind is most
advantageous which blows cornerly between a fore wind, and a side wind.

31. The lower Boar sprit sail can hardly ever be unuseful, for it cannot be
robbed from gathering the wind which way soever it does blow, either about the
ship sides, or under the rest of the sails.

32. There is considerable in the motion of winds in ships, both the impulsion
and direction of them: For that direction which is made by the Helm does not
much belong to the present Inquisition but only as it has a Connection, with
the motion of the winds in the sails.

Connection. As the motion of Impulsion or driving forward is in force at the
Beak, so is the motion of Direction in the Poop; therefore for that the lower
Mizon-Mast sail is of greatest concernment, for it is as it were an assistant
to the Helm.

33. Seeing the Compass is divided into two and thirty Points, so that the
Semicircles of it are sixteen points, there may be be a progressive sailing
(without any casting aboard, which is used when the wind is clean contrary)
though of the sixteen parts there be but six favorable, and the other ten
contrary. But that kind of sailing depends much upon the lower sail, of the
Mizon-Mast. For whilst the advese parts of the wind being more powerful and not
to be opposed by the Helm alone, would turn the other sails, and the ship it
self against its intended course, that sail being stiflly stretched, favoring
the Helm, and strengthening its motion, turns the Beak into the way of its
course.

34. All manner of wind in the sails does somewhat burden and depress the ship,
and so much the more, when it blows most from above. So that in greatest
storms, first they lower their yards, and take away the upper sails, and if
need be all the rest, cut down the Masts, cast their goods into the Sea, and
their Ordinance, etc. to lighten the ship and make it swim, and give way to the
waves.

35. By this motion of the winds in the sails of ships, (if it be a merry and
prosperous gale) a Merchants ship may sail sixscore Italian miles in four and
twenty hours; for there are certain Packet Boats which are built a purpose for
swiftness, (that are called Caravels) which will go further. But when the wind
is clean contrary, they fly to this last refuge, and a very weak one, to go on
their course; namely to proceed side-way, as the wind will suffer them, out of
their course, then turn their way again toward their course, and so proceed in
an Angular way. By which progression (which is less than creeping, for Serpents
creep on by crooked turnings, but they make angles) they may in four and twenty
hours go fifteen miles journey.

Greater Observations.
1. THis Motion of winds in sails of ships has three chief Heads and Fountains
of its Impulsion or driving forward, from whence it flows and derives; whence
also Precepts may be taken to increase and strengthen it.

2. The first spring comes from the quantity of the wind which is received: For
questionless more wind helps more than less: wherefore the quantity of wind
must be carefully procured; which will be done, if like wise house-holders, we
be good husbands, and take care nothing be stolen from us. Wherefore we must be
very careful that no wind may be lost.

3. The wind blows either above the ships, or below them, to the very
superficies and surface of the Sea: And as provident men use to look most after
the least-things, (for the greater no man can choose but look after) so we will
first look after these lower winds, which questionless cannot perform so much
as the higher.

4. As concerning the winds which blow chiefly about the sides of the ships,
and under their sails, it is the office of the main Boar sprit sail, which lies
low and sloping, to gather them into it, that there may be no waste nor loss of
wind: and this of it self does good, and hinders not the wind which fills the
other sails: And about this I do not see what can be done more by the industry
of man, unless they should perchance fix such low sails out of the middle of
the ship, like wings, or feathers, two on each side when the wind blows right.

5. But concerning the bewaring of being robbed, which happens when the hinder
sails (in a fore-right wind) steal the wind away from the fore-sails, (for in a
side-wind all the sails are set a work) I know not what can be added to the
care man has already taken to prevent it, unless where there is a fore-wind,
there may be made a kind of stairs or scale of sails that the hindermost sails
of the Mizon-Mast may be the lowest, the middle ones at the Mainmast a little
higher, the foremast, at the Foremast, highest of all, that one sail may not
hinder, but rather help the other, delivering and passing over the wind from
one to another. And let so much be observed of the first Fountain of Impulsion.

6. The second Fountain of Impulsion consists in the manner of striking the
sail with the wind, which if through the contraction of the wind it be acute
and swift, will move more, if obtuse and languishing, less.

7. As concerning this, it is of great moment, and much to the purpose, to let
the sails have a reasonable extension and swelling: for if they be stretched
out stiff, they will like a wall beat back the wind; if they be too loose,
there will be a weak Impulsion.

8. Touching this, humane Industry has behaved it self well in some things,
though it was more by chance than out of any good judgment. For in a side wind,
they gather up that part of the sail as much as they can which is opposite
against the wind: and by that means they set in the wind into that part where
it should blow. And this they do and intend. But in the mean season this
follows, (which peradventure they do not perceive) that the wind is more
contracted, and strikes more sharply.

9. What may be added to humane industry in this, I cannot perceive, unless the
figure of the sails be changed, and some sails be made which shall not swell
round; but like a Spur or a Triangle, with a mast or piece of timber in that
corner of the top, that they may contract the wind more sharply, and cut the
outward air more powerfully. And that angle (as we suppose) must not be
altogether sharp, but like a short obtuse triangle, that it may have some
breadth. Neither do we know what good it would do, if there were as it were a
sail made in a sail; if there were in the middle of a greater sail, there were
a kind of a Purse, not altogether loose, of Canvas, but with ribs of wood,
which should take up the wind in the middle of the sail, and bring it into a
sharpness.

10. The third Fountain or Original of Impulsion, is in the place where the
wind hits; and that is twofold: for from the fore-side of the ship, the
Impulsion is easier and stronger than on the hinder part; and from the upper
part of the Mast, and sail, than from the lower part.

11. Neither seems the Industry of man to have been ignorant of this, when in a
fore-wind their greatest hopes have been in their fore-Masts, and in calms,
they have not been careless in hoysing up of their top sails. Neither for the
present do we find what may be added to humane Industry in this point; unless
concerning the first, we should set up two or three fore-Masts (the first
upright, and the rest sloping) whose sails shall hang downward: and as for the
second, that the fore-sails should be enlarged at the top, and made less sharp
than they usually are: But in both we must take heed of the inconvenience of
danger, in sinking the ship too much.

The Motion of Winds in other Engines of Man's Invention.
1. THe Motion of wind-mills has no subtilty at all in it: and yet usually it
is not well explained nor demonstrated. The sails are set right and direct
opposite against the wind which blows. One side of the sail lies to the wind,
the other side by little and little bends it self, and gets it self away from
the wind. But the turning and continuance of the Motion is always caused by the
lower part, namely, that which is farthest from the wind. But the wind
over-casting it self against the Engine, is contracted and restrained by the
four sails, and is constrained to take its way in four spaces. The wind does
not well endure that compression; wherefore of necessity it must as it were
with its elbow hit the sides of the sails, and so turn them, even as little
Whirligigs that Children play withal are turned with the fingers.

2. If the sails were extended even and equally, it would be doubtful which way
the inclination would be, as in the fall of a staff; but when the nearer side
which meets with the wind, casts the violence of it upon the lower side, and
from thence into distances, so that when the lower side receives the wind, like
the palm of the hand, or the sail of a ships Boat, presently there is a turning
on that side. But this is to be observed, that the beginning of the motion
proceeds not from the first Impulsion, which is direct, and a breast; but from
the lateral Impulsion, which is after the compression or straightning of the
wind.

3. We made some proofs and trials about this, for the increasing of this
motion, as well to be assured we had found the cause, as also for use; feigning
an imitation of this Motion, with Paper Sails, and the wind of a pair of
Bellows. We therefore added to the side of the lower sail, a fold turned in
from the wind, that the wind being become a side wind, might have somewhat more
to beat upon; which did no good, that fold not so much assisting the percussion
of the wind, as in consequence hindering the cutting of the air. We placed
behind the sails at some distance, certain obstacles, as broad as the Diameter
of all the sails, that the wind being more compressed, might hit the stronger:
but this did rather hurt than good, the repercussion dulling the primary
motion. Then we made the sails of a double breadth, that the wind might be the
more restrained, and there might be a stronger lateral percussion; which at
last proved very well: so that the Conversion was caused by a far milder gale,
and did turn a great deal more swiftly.

Mandate. Peradventure this increase of motion might more conveniently be made
by eight sails, than by four, doubling the breadth, unless too much weight did
over-burthen the motion: Which must have trial made of it.

Mandate. Likewise the length of sails does much conduce to the Motion. For in
wheelings, a slight violence about the circumference, is equivalent to a far
greater about the Center. But then this inconvenience follows, that the longer
the sails are, the more distant they are at the top, and the wind is so much
the less straightned. Peradventure the business would go well, if the sails
were a little longer and broader toward the top, like the outermost end of an
Oar. But this we are not sure of.

Monition. If these Experiments be made trial of in Wind-mills; care must be
taken of the Windmill posts, and the foundations of it: for the more the wind
is restrained, the more it shakes (though it swiftens the motion of the sails)
the whole frame of the Mill.

4. It is reported, that in some Countries there are Coaches and Wagons which
move with the wind; but this must be more diligently looked after.

Mandate. Chariots moving by virtue of the wind, can be of no use, unless it be
in open places and plains: Besides, what will be done if the wind allays. It
had been better to have thought of easing the Motion of Wagons and Coaches by
sails, which might be set up and taken down, to ease the Oxen or Horses which
draw them, rather than to make a Motion by wind alone.

Prognostics of Winds.
To the two and thirtieth Article. Connection.
THe more Divination uses to be polluted by vanity and superstition, so much
more is the purer part of it to be received and honored. But Natural
Divination is sometimes more certain, sometimes more slippery and deceitful,
according to the subject with which it has to do; for if it be of a constant
and regular nature, it causes a certain prediction. If it be of a variable and
irregular nature, it may make a casual and deceitful one: Yet in a various
subject the Prediction will hold true if it be diligently regulated,
peradventure it may not hint upon the very moments, but in the thing it self it
will not err much. Likewise for the times of the event and complement, some
Predictions will hit right enough, namely, those which are not gathered from
the causes, but from the thing it self already inchoated, but sooner appearing,
in an apt and fitly disposed matter than in another, as we said before in the
Topics concerning this two and thirtieth Article. We will now therefore set
forth the Prognostics of winds, of necessity intermixing some of rain, and
fair weather, which could not conveniently be separated, remitting the full
enquiry of them to their proper titles.

1. If the Sun appears hollow at its rising, it will the very same day yield
wind or rain; if it appears as it were a little hollow, it signifies wind; if
deeply hollow, rain.

2. If the Sun rises pale, or (as we call it) waterish, it betokens rain, if it
set so, it betokens wind.

3. If the body of the Sun it self appears at its setting of the color of
blood, it foretokens great winds, for many days.

4. If at Sun rising its beams appear rather red than yellow, it sign fies wind
rather than rain, and the like if they appear so at its setting.

5. If at Sun rising or setting, its rays appear contracted or shortened, and do
not shine out bright, though the weather be not cloudy, it signifies rain
rather than wind.

6. If before Sun rising there appear some rays as forerunners, it signifies
both wind and rain.

7. If the Sun at its rising diffuses its rays through the Clouds, the middle
of the Sun remaining still under Clouds, it shall signify rain, especially if
those beams break out downwards, that the Sun appears as it were with a Beard.
But if the rays break forth out of the middle, or dispersed, and its exterior
body, or the out-parts of it be covered with clouds, it fore-shewes great
tempests both of wind and rain.

8. If the Sun, when it rises, be encompassed with a Circle, let wind be
expected from that side on which the Circle opens. But if the Circle fall off
all at one time, it will be fair weather.

9. If at the setting of the Sun there appears a white Circle about it, it
signifies some small storm the same night: if black or darkness, much wind the
day following.

10. If the Clouds look red at Sunrising, they are Prognostics of wind: if at
Sunsetting, of a fair ensuing day.

11. If about the rising of the Sun, Clouds do gather themselves about it, they
foreshew rough storms that day; but if they be driven back from the rising
toward the setting of the Sun, they signify fair weather.

12. If at Sunrising the Clouds be dispersed from the sides of the Sun, some
Southward, and some Northward, though the sky be clear about the Sun, it
fore-shews wind.

13. If the Sun goes down in a Cloud, it fore-shewes rain the next day: but if
it rains at Sunsetting, it is a token of wind rather. But if the Clouds seem
to be as it were drawn toward the Sun, it signifies both wind and storms.

14. If Clouds at the rising of the Sun seem not to encompass it, but to lie
over it, as if they were about to Eclipse it, they fore-shew the rising of
winds, on that side as the Clouds incline. And if they do this about noon, they
signify both wind and rain.

15. If the Clouds have encompassed the Sun, the less light they leave it, and
the lesser the Orb of the Sun appears, so much the more raging shall the
tempest be; but if there appear a double or treble Orb, as though there were
two or three Suns, the Tempest will be so much the more violent for many days.

16. New Moons presage the dispositions of the Air: but especially the fourth
rising of it, as if it were a confirmed New Moon. The full Moons likewise do
presage more than the days which come after.

17. By long observation, the fifth day of the Moon, is feared by Mariners for
stormy.

18. If the New Moon do not appear before the fourth day, it fore-shews a
troubled air for the whole Month.

19. If the New Moon at her first appearance, or within a few days after, have
its lower horn obscure, or dusky, or any way blemished, it signifies stormy and
tempestuous days before the Full Moon; if it be ill colored in the middle,
Tempests will come about the Full of the Moon: if it be so about the upper part
of the horn, they will be about the decreasing of the Moon.

20. If at the fourth rising the Moon appear bright, with sharp horns, not
lying flat, nor standing upright, but in a middle kind of posture between both,
it promises fair weather for the most part, until the next New Moon.

21. If at the same rising it be red, it portends winds; if dusky or black,
rain; but howsoever it signifies nothing beyond the Full Moon.

22. An upright Moon is almost always threatening, and hurtful, but it chiefly
portends winds: But if it have blunt horns, and as it were cut off short, it
rather signifies rain.

23. If one horn of the Moon be sharp, and the other blunt, it signifies wind;
if both be blunt, rain.

24. If a Circle, or Halo appear about the Moon, it signifies rain rather than
wind, unless the Moon stands directly within that Circle, for then it signifies
both.

25. Circles about the Moon always foreshew winds on that side where they
break; also a notable shining in some part of the Circle, signifies winds from
that part where the shining is.

26. If the Circles about the Moon be double or treble, they fore-shew horrible
and rough Tempests, and especially if those Circles be not whole, but spotted
and divided.

27. Full Moons, as concerning the Colors and Circles, do in a manner foreshew
the same things, as the fourth rising, but more present, and not so long
delayed.

28. Full Moons use to be more clear than the other ages of the Moon, and in
winter use to be far colder.

29. The Moon appearing larger at the going down of the Sun, if it be splendent
and not dusky, betokens fair weather for many days.

30. Winds almost continually follow the Eclipses of the Moon; and fair weather
the Eclipses of the Sun; rain comes after neither.

31. From the Conjunctions of any of the Planets, but only the Sun, you may
expect winds both before and after, from their conjunctions with the Sun, fair
weather.

32. At the rising of the Pleiades, and Hyades, come showers of rain, but calm
ones; after the rising of Arcturus and Orion, tempests.

33. Returning and shooting stars (as we call them) signify winds to come from
that place whence they run, or are shot; but if they fly from several, or
contrary parts, it is a sign of great approaching storms of wind and rain.

34. When such little stars as those which are called Aselli, are not seen
generally all over the sky, it foreshews great tempests and rain within some
few days. But if they be seen in some places, and not in other some, it
foreshews winds only, and that suddenly.

35. The sky when it is all over bright, in a New Mood, or at the fourth rising
of it, portends fair weather for many days; if it be all over dark, it
foreshews rain, if partly dark, and partly fair, it portends wind of that side
where the darkness is seen. But if it grow dark on a sudden, without either
Cloud or Mist to dimn the brightness of the Stars, there are great and rough
tempests a breeding.

36. If an entire Circle incloseth a Planet, or any of the greater stars, it
foreshews wind; if it be a broken Circle, wind from those parts where the
Circle is deficient.

37. When the Thunder is more than the Lightnings, there will be great winds;
but if the Lightnings be thick amidst the thundering, it fore-shews thick
showers, with great drops.

38. Morning Thunders signify wind, midday Thunders rain.

39. Bellowing Thunders which do as it were pass along, presage winds, and
those which make a sharp and unequal noise, presage storms both of wind and
rain.

40. When it lightens in a clear sky, winds are at hand, and rain from that
part where it lightens: But if it lightens in diverse parts, there will follow
cruel and horrid tempests.

41. If it lightens in the cold quarters of the Heavens, namely, the East and
North, Hail will follow; if in the warmer; namely, South and West, we shall
have rain and a warm sky.

42. Great heats after the Summer Soistice, and commonly with Thunder and
Lightning, and if those come not, there will be wind and rain for many days.

43. The Globe of Flame, which the Ancient called Castor, which is seen by
Mariners, and Seafaring men at Sea, if there be but one, presages a cruel
tempest, (Castor is the dead brother) and much more if it stick not close to
the Mast, but dances up and down. But if they be twins, (and Pollux the living
brother be present) and that when the tempest is high, it is a good presage:
But if there be three (namely, if Helen, the Plague of all things come in) it
will be a more cruel tempest: so that one seems to show the indigested matter
of the storm, Two a digested and ripe matter; Three or more an abundance that
will hardly be dispersed.

44. If we see the Clouds drive very fast when it is a clear sky, we must look
for winds from that way from which the Clouds are driven: But if they wheel and
tumble up together, when the Sun draws near to that part in which they are
tumbled up together, they will begin to scatter and sever; and if they part
most toward the North, it betokens wind, if toward the South, rain.

45. If at Sunsetting there arise black and dark Clouds, they presage rain: If
against the Sun, namely, in the East, the same night, if near the Sun in the
West the next day, with winds.

46. The clearing of a Cloudy sky, if it begins against the wind which then
blows, signifies clear fair weather; with the wind it betokens nothing, but the
thing remains uncertain.

47. There are sometimes seen several as it were Chambers or joined Stories of
Clouds one above the other, (so as Gilbertus affirms, he has seen five of them
together) and always the blackest are lowermost, though sometimes it appears
otherwise, because the whitest do more allure the sight. A double Conjunction
of stories, if it be thick shows approaching rain (especially if the lower
Cloud seem as it were big with Child) more Conjunctions presage continuance of
rain.

48. If Clouds spread abroad like Fleeces of wool here and there, they foreshew
Tempests: but if they lie one a top of another, like skales or tiles, they
presage drought and clear weather.

49. Feathered Clouds, like to the boughs of a Palm tree, or the flowers of a
Rainbow, are Prognostics of present rain, or immediately to follow.

50. When Hills and Hillocks looks as though they wore Caps by reason of the
Clouds lying upon them, and encompassing them, it presages imminent Tempests.

51. Amber, or Gold Color Clouds before Sunsetting, that have as it were
gilded Helms or borders, after the Sun begins to be quite down, foreshew fair
clear weather.

52. Grayish, and as it were Clay-coloured Clouds, show that rain with wind are
drawing on.

53. Some petty Cloud showing it self suddenly, having not been seen before,
and all the sky clear about it, especially if it be in the West, and about
Noon, shows there is a storm a coming.

54. Clouds and Mists ascending, and going upward, presage rain, and that this
be done suddenly, so that they be as it were sucked up, they presage rain: but
if they fall and reside in the Valleys, they presage fair weather.

55. A big Cloud growing white, which the Ancients called a white Tempest, in
Summer is a forerunner of small hail, like Comfits, in Winter snow.

56. A fair and clear Autumn presages a windy winter; a windy winter, a rainy
spring: a rainy spring a clear summer; a clear summer a windy Autumn. So that
the year (as the Proverb goes) is seldom its own debtor, and the same order of
seasons will scarce happen two years together.

Fires upon the Hearth when they look paler than they are accustomed, and make
a murmuring noise within themselves, do presage tempests. And if the flame
rises bending and turning, it signifies wind chiefly: and when the snuffs of
Lamps and Candles grow like Mushromes with broad heads, it is a sign of rainy
weather.

58. Coals shining bright, and sparkling overmuch, signify wind

59. When the superficies of the Sea is calm and smooth in the Harbor, and yet
murmures within it self, though it does not swell, signifies wind.

60. The shoars resounding in a calm, and the sound of the Sea it self, with a
clear noise, and a certain Echo, heard plainer and further than ordinary,
presages winds.

61. If in a calm and smooth sea, we epsy froth here and there, or white
Circles or Bubbles of water, they are Prognostics of winds; and if these
Presages be very apparent, they foreshew rough tempests.

62. If in a rough sea there appear a shining froth (which they call sealungs)
it foreshews a lasting tempest for many days.

63. If the sea swell silently, and rises higher than ordinary within the
Harbor, or the Tide come in sooner than it uses to do, it foretells wind.

64. Sound from the Hills, and the murmr of woods growing louder, and a noise
in open Champion fields, portends wind. Also a prodigiius murmuring of the
Element, without Thunder; for the most part presages winds.

65. Leaves and straws playing on the ground, without any breath of wind that
can be felt, and the Down of Plants flying about, Feathers swimming and playing
upon the water, signify that wind is near at hand.

66. Water Fowls flying at one another, and flying together in flocks,
especially sea-Mews and Gulls, flying from the sea and lakes, and hastening to
the banks and shoars, especially if they make a noise and play upon dry land,
they are Prognostics of winds, especially if they do so in the morning.

67. But contrariwise, sea fowls going to the water, and beating with their
wings, chattering and bathing themselves, especially the Crow, are all presages
of storms.

68. Duckers and Ducks cleanse their feathers with their Bills against wind:
but Geese with their importunate crying call for rain.

69. A Hern flying high, so that it sometimes flies over a low Cloud, signifies
wind: But Kites when they fly high, foreshew fairweather.

70. Crows as it were barking after a sobbing manner, if they continue in it,
do presage winds, but if they catchingly swallow up their voice again, or croak
a long time together, it signifies that we shall have some showrs.

71. A chattering Owl was thought by the Ancients to fore-tel change of
weather; if it were fair, rain; if Cloudy, fair weather: But with us the Owl
making a clear and free noise, for the most part signifies fair weather,
especial in winter.

72. Birds pearching in trees, if they fly to their nests, and give over
feeding betimes, it presages tempest: But the Hearn standing as it were sad and
melancholy upon the sand; or a Crow walking up and down, do presage wind only.

73. Dolphins playing in a calm sea, are thought to presage wind from that way
they come: and if they play and throw up water when the Sea is rough, they
presage fair weather. And most kinds of fishes swimming on the top of the
water, and sometimes leaping, do prognosticate wind.

74. Upon the approach of wind, Swine will be so terrified and disturbed, and
use such strange actions, that Country people say that Creature only can see
the wind, and perceive the horridness of it.

75. A little before the wind spiders work and spin carefully, as if they
prudently forestalled the time, knowing that in windy weather they cannot work.

76. Before rain, the sound of Bells is heard further off; but before wind it is
heard more unequally, drawing near and going further off, as it does when the
wind blows really.

77. Pliny affirms for a certain, that three leaved grass creeps together, and
raises its leaves against a storm.

78. He says likewise, that vessels which food is put into, will leave a kind
of sweat in Cupboards, which presage cruel storms.

Monition. Seeing rain and wind, have almost a common matter, and seeing
always before rain, there is a certain condensation of the air, caused by the
new air received into the old, as it appears by the sounding of the shoars, and
the high flight of Hearns, and other things; and seeing the wind likewise
thickens, (but afterward in rain the air is more drawn together, and in winds
contrariwise it is enlarged) of necessity winds must have many Prognostics
common with the rain. Whereof advise with the Prognostics of rain, under their
own title.

Imitations of Winds.
To the three and thirtieth Article. Connection.
IF men could be persuaded not to fix their contemplations overmuch upon a
propounded subject, and reject others as it it were by the bye; and that they
would not subtilize about that subject in infinitum, and for the most part
unprofitably, they would not be seized with such a stupor as they are; but
transferring their thoughts, and discoursing, would find many things at a
distance, which near at hand are hidden. So that as in the Civil Law, so we
must likewise in the Law of Nature, we must carefully proceed to semblable
things, and such as have a conformity between them.

1. Bellows with men are Aeolus his Bags, out of which one may take as much as
he needs. And likewise spaces between, and openings of Hills, and crooks of
buildings, are but as it were large bellows. Bellows are most useful either to
kindle fire, or for Musical Organs: The manner of the working of Bellows is by
sucking in of the air, to shun vacuity, (as they say) and to send it out by
compression.

2. We also use Hand Fans to make a wind, and to cool, only by driving forward
of the air softly.

3. The cooling of Summer rooms, we spoke of in Answer to the ninth Article.
There may other more curious means be found, especially if the air be drawn in
somewhere after the manner of bellows, and let out at another place; But those
which are now in use have relation only to mere compression.

4. The breath in man's Microcosmos, and in other Animals, do very well agree
with the winds in the greater world: For they are engendered by humors, and
alter with moisture as wind and rain does, and are dispersed and blow freer by
a greater heat. And from them that observation is to be transferred to the
winds, namely, that breaths are engendered of matter that yields a tenacious
vapor, not easy to be dissolved; as Beans, Pulse, and Fruits; which is so
likewise in greater winds.

5. In the distilling of Vitriol and other Minerals which are most windy, they
must have great and large receptacles, otherwise they will break.

6. Wind composed of Niter and Gunpowder, breaking out and swelling, the flame
does not only imitate, but also exceed winds, which blow abroad in the world,
unless they be such as are made by thunder.

7. But the forces of it are pressed in, as in humane Engines, as Guns, Mines,
and Powder-houses set on fire. But it has not yet been tried whether in open
air, a great heap of Gunpowder set on fire would raise a wind for certain
hours, by the commotion of the air.

8. There lies hidden a flatuous and expansive spirit in Quicksilver, so that
it does, (in some men's opinions) imitate Gunpowder, and a little of it mixed
with Gunpowder, will make the Powder stronger. Likewise the Chemists speak the
same of gold that being prepared some way, it will break out dangerously, like
to Thunder; but these things I never tried.

A greater Observation.
THe Motion of winds is for most things, seen as it were in a Lookingglass, in
the motion of waters.

Great winds are Inundations of the air, as we see Inundations of waters, both
through the augmentation of the quantity. As waters either descend from above,
or spring out of the earth, so some winds are cast down, and some rise up. As
sometimes in Rivers there are contrary motions, one of the flowing of the Sea,
the other of the Current of the River, yet both become one motion, by the
prevailing of the flood; so when contrary winds blow, the greater subdues the
lesser. As in the Currents of the sea, and of some rivers, it sometimes falls
out, that the waves above go contrary to the waves below: So in the air, when
contrary winds blow together, one flies over the other. As there are Cataracts
of Rain within a narrow space, so there are Whirlwinds. As waters, however they
go forward, yet if they be troubled, swell up into waves, sometimes ascending,
grow up into heaps, sometimes descending, are as it were furrowed: so the winds
do the same, but only want the Motion of Gravity. There are also other
similitudes which may be observed and gathered out of those things which have
already been enquired about.

Moveable Rules concerning Winds.
Connection.
RUles are either particular or general, both with us are moveable; for as yet
we have not affirmed any thing positively. Particular Rules may be taken and
gathered almost out of every Article. We will cull out some general ones, and
those but a few, and add thereunto.

1. Wind is no other thing but moved air; but the air it self moved either by a
simple impulsion, or by commixion of vapors.

2. Winds by a simple Impulsion are caused four ways, either by the natural
Motion of the air, or by expansion of the air, in the Suns ways; or by
reception of air through a sudden cold; or by the compression of the air by
external bodies.

There may be also a fifth way, by the agitation and concussion of the air by
stars. But let these things be a while silent, or be given ear unto with a
sparing belief.

3. Of winds which are made by immixion of vapors, the chief cause is the
over-burthening of the air, by air newly made out of vapors, whereby the mass
of the air grows bigger, and seeks new room.

4. A small quantity of air added, causes a great tumor of the air round about
it: so that new air out of the resolution of vapors does confer more to motion
than to matter. But the great body of wind consists in the former air, neither
does the new air drive the old air before it, as if they were several bodies;
but being both commixt, they desire larger room.

5. When any other beginning of Motion concurs, besides the over-burthening of
the air, it is an accessory which strengthens and increases that Principal,
which is the reason that great and violent winds do seldom rise, by the simple
over-burthening of the air.

6. Four things are accessory to the over-burthening of the air: The breathing
out of subterraneal places; the casting down out of (as it is called) the
middle region of the air, Dissipation made out of a Cloud, and the Mobility and
Acrimony of the Exhalation it self.

7. The Motion of the wind is for the most part lateral: But that which is made
by mere over-burthening, is so from the beginning, that which is made by the
expiration of the earth, or repercussion from above, a little while after,
unless the Eruption, or Precipitation, or Reverberation be exceeding violent.

8. Air will endure some compression, before it be over-burthened, and begins
to thrust away the adjoining air, by reason whereof all winds are a little
thicker than quiet and calm air.

9. Winds are allayed five ways, either by the conjunction of vapors, or by
their sublimation, or by transporting them, or by their being spent.

10. Vapors are conjoined, and so the Air it self becomes water, four ways,
either by abundance aggravating, or by colds condensing, or by contrary winds
compelling, or by obstacles reverberating.

11. Both Vapors and Exhalations, but wind very frequently from vapors. But
there is this difference, that winds which are made of Vapors, do more easily
incorporate them selves into pure air, are sooner allayed, and are not so
obstinate as those winds which are engendered of Exhalations.

12. The manner and several conditions of heat have no less power in the
generation of winds, than the abundance or conditions of the matter.

13. The heat of the Sun ought to be so proportioned in the generation of
winds, that it may raise them, but not in such abundance as that they gather
into rain, nor in so small a quantity, that they may be quite shaken off and
dispersed.

14. Winds blow from their Nurseries, and the Nurseries being disposed several
ways, diverse winds for the most part blow together, but the strongest either
quite overthrows, or turns into its current the weakest.

15. Winds are engendered every where, from the very Superficies of the earth,
up into the middle Region of the air, the more frequent below, but the stronger
above.

16. The Countries which have retaining or trade-winds, if they be warm, have
them warmer that according to the measure of their Climate: if they be cold,
they have them colder.

A Humane Map, or Optatives, with such things as are next to them concerning
Winds.
Optatives.
1. TO frame and dispose sails of ships in such a manner, that with less wind
they might go a greater journey; a thing very useful to shorten journeys by
sea, and save charges.

Next. The next invention precisely in practice I have not as yet found; yet
concerning that, look upon our greater observations upon the six and twentieth
Article.

2. Optative. That we could make Wind-mills, and their sails in such manner
that they may grind more with less wind. A thing very useful for gain.

Next. Look concerning this upon our Experiments in the answer to the seven and
twentieth Article, where the thing seems to be as it were done.

Optative. To foreknow when winds will rise and allay: A thing useful for
Navigation and for Husbandy, especially for the choosing of times for Sea Fights.

Next. To this belong many of those things which are observed in the
Inquisition, and especially in the Answer to the two and thirtieth Article. But
a more careful observation hereafter (if any shall apply their mind to it) will
give far more exact Prognostics, the cause of the winds being already laid
open.

4. Optative. To give judgment, and make Prognostics by winds, of other
things, as first, whether they be Continents or Islands in the Sea in any
place: or rather a free open sea; a thing very useful for new and unknown
voyages.

Next. The next is the observation concerning constant and trade-winds: that
which Columbus seemed to make use of.

5. Optative. Likewise of the plenty or scarcity of corn every year. A thing
useful for gain, and buying beforehand, and fore-stalling, as it is reported
of Thales, concerning a Monopoly of Olives.

Next. To this belong some things specified in the Inquisition of winds, gither
hurtful, or shaking winds, and the times when they do hurt; to the nine and
twentieth Article.

6. Optative. Likewise concerning Diseases and Plagues every year. A thing
useful for the credit of Physicians, if they can fore-tel them also for the
causes and cures of Diseases, and some other civil considerations.

Next. To this likewise belong some things set down in the Inquisition to the
thirtieth Article.

Monition. Of Predictions by wind concerning corn, fruits, and diseases, look
upon Histories of Husbandry and Physic.

Optative. 7. How to raise winds and to allay them.

Next. Concerning these things there are some superstitious opinions, which do
not seem worthy to be inserted into a serious and severe Natural History: Nor
can I think of any thing that is near in this kind. The design may be this, to
look thoroughly into, and enquire about the Nature of the air; whether any thing
may be found, whereof a small quantity put into air, may raise and multiply the
motion to dilatation, or contraction in the body of the air. For out of this
(if it might be done) would follow the raisings and allayings of winds. Such as
that Experiment of Pliny is concerning Vinegar thrown against the Whirlwinds,
if it were true. Another design might be, by letting forth of winds out of
subterraneal places; if so be they should gather together any where in great
abundance, as it is a common and approved opinion of the Well in Dalmatia: but
to know such places of prisons, is very hard and difficult.

8. Optative. To work many fine, pleasant, and wonderful conceits by the motion
of winds.

Next. We have not leisure to enter into consideration touching these things:
Next to it is that common report of the Duels of winds. Questionless many such
pleasant things might very well be found out, both for Motions and Sounds of
Winds.

An Entrance to the Titles appointed for the next five Months.
The History of Density and Rarity. The Entrance.
IT is no marvail if nature be indebted to Philosophy and the Sciences, seeing
it was never yet called upon to give an account, for there never was any
diligent and dispensatory Inquisition made of the quantity of the matter, and
how that had been distributed into bodies (in some copiously, in others
sparingly) according to the true, or at least truest accounts that has been
truly received and approved of, that nothing is taken away and lost, or added
unto the universal sum. Likewise that place has been treated upon by some,
namely how it can be loosened or contracted without intermixion or vacuity,
according to more or less: But the Natures of Density and Rarity, some have
referred to the abundance or scarcity of the matter, another has laughed at
the same; the greatest part following their Author, do discuss and compose the
whole matter by that cold and weak distinction of act, and power. Those also
who attribute them to the reasons of matter (which is the true opinion) do
neither quite deprive the Materia prima, or primary matter of its Quantum, or
quantity, though for other forms they will have it equal, but here do terminate
and end the matter, and seek no further, nor do not perceive what follows
thereby; and either do not touch at all, or at least do not urge home that
which has a regard to infinites, and is as it were the Basis and ground of
Natural Philosophy.

First therefore that which is rightly set down must not be moved nor altered;
namely, that there is no transaction made in any transmutation of bodies,
either from nothing, or to nothing: but that they are works of the same
omnipotence, to create out of nothing, and to reduce unto nothing, and that by
course of Nature this can never be done. Therefore the sum of the total
matter stands still whole, nothing is added, nothing is diminished: yet that
this sum is divided by portions amongst the bodies, is unquestionable, for
there can no man be so much beside himself through any subtle abstractions as
to think that there is as much matter in one vessel of water as in ten vessels
of water, nor likewise in one vessel of air, as much as in ten vessels of air.
But in the same body there is no question but that the abundance of matter is
multiplied according to the measure of the body, in diverse bodies it is
questionable. And if it be demonstrated that one vessel of water turned into
air, will yield ten vessels of air, (for we take this computation for a
received opinion, though that of a hundred fold be the truer) it is well; for
now they are no more diverse bodies, water and air, but the same body of air in
ten vessels: But one vessel of air (as it was but now granted) is but only the
tenth part often vessels. Therefore it cannot be contradicted, but that in one
vessel of Water, there is ten times more matter than in one vessel of air:
Therefore if one should affirm, that one whole vessel of water could be
converted into one vessel of air, it were as much as if one should assirme that
something could be reduced to nothing: for as much as one tenth part of water
would suffice to do it, and the other nine parts must of necessity be reduced
to nothing: And contrariwise, if one should affirm that one vessel of air could
be turned into a vessel of water, it would be as much as if he should say, that
something could be created our of nothing: for one vessel of air can attain and
reach but unto the tenth part of a Vessel of water, and the other nine parts
must needs proceed from nothing. In the mean time we will plainly acknowledge
and confess, that to understand the true means of the reasons and calculations,
of the how much part of the Quantum, or how much of the matter which is in
diverse bodies, and by what industry and sagacity one may be truly informed
thereof, is a high matter to be enquired; but such as the great and largely
extended profit which will accrue thereby will largely recompense. For to know
the Densities and Rarities of the body, and much more how to procure, and
effect the Condensations and Rarefactions, is of great importance and moment
both to contemplative, and to the Practick. Seeing then it is a thing (if any
there be at all) merely fundamental and universal; we must go carefully, and
prepared about it, seeing that all Philosophy without it is loose and
disjointed.

The History of Heavy and Light. The Entrance.
THe Motion of Gravity and Lightness, the Ancients did illustrate with the name
of Natural Motion: For they saw no external efficient, nor no apparent
resistance; yea the motion seemed swifter in its progress. This contemplation,
or rather speech, they seasoned with that Mathematical Fantasy of the staying
or stopping of heavy things at the center of the earth (although the earth
should be bored quite through) and that Scholastical Invention of the motion of
bodies to their several places. Having laid or set down these things, supposing
they had done their parts, they looked no further, but only that which some of
them more carefully enquired after, namely, of the Center of Gravity in diverse
figures, and of such things as are carried by water. Neither did any of the
Modern Authors do any thing worth speaking of concerning this, only by adding
some few Mechanical things which they had also wrested with their
Demonstrations: But laying many words aside, it is most certain, that a body
cannot suffer but by a body: Neither can there be any Local Motion made, unless
it be solicited or set forward, either by the parts of the body it self which
is moved, or by the adjacent bodies, which either touch it, or are near unto
it, or are at least within the Orb of its Activity. So that Gilbertus did not
unknowingly introduce Magnecick powers, he also becoming a Loadstone, namely,
drawing more things by those powers than he should have done, and building a
Ship as it were of a round piece of wood.

The History of the Sympathy and Antipathy of things. The Entrance.
STrife and amity in Nature are the eggers on of motions, and the Keys of
works. Hence proceeds the union and dissension of bodies; hence the mixion and
separation of bodies; hence the high and intimate impressions of virtues, and
that which they call joining of actives with passives: finally they are the
great and wonderful works of nature. But this part of Philosophy, namely of the
Sympathy and Antipathy of things is most impure, which also they call Natural
Magic: and (which always likely comes to pass) where diligence and care has
wanted, there has hope remained: But the operation thereof in men is merely
like unto certain Soporiferous Medicines which cast one asleep, and do moreover
send and infuse into him merry and pleasant Dreams. For first it casts man's
understanding into a sleep, representing unto him specifical Properties, and
hidden Virtues, whereby men awake no more, nor look after the finding and
searching out of true causes; but acquiesce and lie still in these idle ways.
Then it insinuates an innumerable company of fictions like unto Dreams; And
vain men hope to know the Nature by the outward shape and show, and by
extrinsecal similitudes to discover inward Properties. Their Practice also is
very like unto their Enquiry: For the Precepts of Natural Magic are such, as
if men should be confident that they could subdue the earth, and eat their
bread without the sweat of their Brow, and to have power over things by idle
and easy applications of bodies; and still they have in their mouths, and like
undertakers or Sureties, they call upon the Loadstone, and the consent which is
between Gold and Quicksilver; and some few things of this kind they allege,
for to prove other things, which are not bound by any such like contract. But
God has appointed the best of things to be enquired out and be wrought by
labors and endeavors. We will be a little more careful in searching out the
law of Nature, and the mutual Contracts of things, neither favoring Miracles,
nor making too lowly and straightned an Inquisition.

The History of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt. The Entrance.
THis triple of Principles has been introduced by the Chemists, and as
concerning Speculatives is of them which they bring the best Invention. The
most subtle and acute of these, and those who are most Philosophical, will
have the Elements to be Earth, Water, Air, and the sky. And those they will
not have to be the Matter of things, but the Matrixes in which the Specifical
seeds of things do engender in the nature of a Matrix. But for the Materia
prima, or primary matter, (which Scholars do lay down as it were naked, and
indifferent) they substitute those three, Sulphur Mercury and Salt; out of
whith all bodies are gathered together and mixed. We do accept of their words,
but their opinions are not very sound. Yet that does not ill agree with their
opinion, namely, that we hold two of them, to wit, Sulphur and Mercury (taken
according to our sense) to be very first and prime natures, and most inward
figurations of matter, and almost chief amongst the forms of the first Classis.
But we may vary the words of Sulphur and Mercury, and name them otherwise Oily,
Waterish, Fat, Crude, Inflamable, not Inflamable, or the like. For these seem
to be two very great things of the three, and which possess and penetrate the
Universe, for amongst subterraneal things, they are Sulphur and Mercury, as
they are called; in the Vegetable and Animal kind, they are Oil and Water; in
the inferior spiritual things, they are Air and Flame; in the heavenly, the
body of a Star, and the pure sky; but of this last Duality we yet say nothing,
though it seem to be a probable decyphering: For if they mean by Salt, the
fixed part of the body, which is not resolved either into flame or smoke, this
belongs to the Inquisition of fluid, and determinate things. But if we take
Salt according to the Letter without any Parabolical meaning, Salt is no third
thing from Sulphur and Mercury, but mixed of both, connexed into one, by an
acrimonious and sharp spirit. For all manner of Salt has inflamable parts; and
other parts also, which not only will not take fire, but do also abhor it and
fly from it: Yet the Inquisition of Salt, being somewhat allied to the
Inquisition of the other two, and exceeding useful, as being a tie and band of
both Natures, Sulphurous and Salt, and the very Rudiment of life it self, we
have thought fitting to comprehend it also within this History and Inquisition.
But in the mean time we give you notice, that those spiritual things, Air,
Water, Stars, and Sky, we do (as they very well deserve it) reserve them for
proper and peculiar Inquisitions, and here in this place to set down the
History only, of tangible, that is to say, Mineral or Vegetable Sulphur and
Mercury.

The History of Life and Death. The Entrance.
THere is an old complaint of the shortness of life, and tediousness of Art.
Therefore it seems very fitting to us, who strive to the uttermost of our
powers to make Arts perfect, to take care also of prolonging the Life of man,
the Author of Life and Truth assisting us therein. For although men's lives be
nothing else, but an increase and accumulation of sins and miseries; and that
life is but of small advantage to those who aspire to Eternity: Yet we who are
Christians should not contemn or despise a continuation of works of Charity.
And the beloved Disciple lived longer than any of the rest; and many of the
Fathers, especially the holy Monks, and Hermites, were long lived. And there
was less taken away from this blessing, (so often made mention of in the old
Law) than from any other earthly blessing, after the coming of our Savior. But
it is plain and manifest enough, that this is held for a great good: but how to
attain thereunto, is a high and mysterious question; and so much the more,
because it has been abused both by false opinions and false Praeconiums. For
those things which are commonly spoken of by the Rabble of Physicians,
concerning the Radical Humor, and Natural Heat, are deceitful. And the
immoderate praises of Chemical Medicines, first swell men up with hopes, and
then forsake them, and leave them in the mire. Neither is our Inquisition now
of that death which proceeds from suffocation, putrefaction, and diverse other
Diseases; for that belongs to a Physical or Medicinal History; but of that
Death only which comes by the Resolution and consumption of old age. Yet to
enquire of the last passage or step to death, and the very extinction or
putting out of life, which may be done by many, both internal and external ways
(which notwithstanding have as it were one and the self same place of
habitation, before we come unto the very pangs of death.) I believe has some
affinity with our present Inquisition, but we will set that in the last place.
That which may be repaired by degrees and without destruction, the primary
entire thing, that in potentia is eternal as the Vestal fire. Wherefore when
the Philosophers and Physicians saw, that creatures were nourished, and that
their bodies were repaired and made up again; yet that it could not last long,
but that a while after they grew old, and dyed, they sought for death in some
thing, which properly could not be repaired, thinking that some Radical and
first engendered Humor is not totally repaired, but that there is even from the
infancy some degenerate addition, and not a precise, solid and just reparation,
which by degrees is depraved with age, and at last brings that which is
depraved to nothing. These unskilful and erroneous opinions they hold. For all
things in youth and young age are fully and wholly repaired, and for a time
increase in quantity, and are bettered in quality: so that the matter of
Reparation might in a manner be eternal, if the means of Reparation did not
fall away. But indeed in a declining age, there is but a very unequal
Reparation made. In some parts Reparation proceeds happily, and other parts
grow worse and worse; and from that time men begin to endure that torment which
Mezentius did use to inflict, namely to kill living men with the embraces of
dead ones; and those things, which might easily be repaired do fail by being
joined to those things which can hardly be repaired. For even after that men do
begin to decline through age, their Spirit, Blood, flesh and Fat may easily be
repaired; but those parts which are more Porous, all Membranes and Tunicles,
Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Bones, Cartilages, most part of the Inwards, and
finally almost all the Organical parts, are difficultly, and with great loss
repaired. And those parts being to assist the reparation of those Reparable
parts which are actually to be repaired, losing their activity and strength,
can no longer perform their function. And from thence a while after proceeds
the falling to ruin of all together; and those very same parts, which in their
own Nature are very Reparable, the Organs of Reparations failing, cannot be
well repaired, but decrease, and at last totally fail. And the cause of the
Period, is because the spirit preying always like a still and gentle Flame,
the external air (which also sucks and dries up the bodies) conspiring with it,
at the last ruins the frame of the body, and its Organs, and makes them unable
to perform the act of Reparation: And these are the true ways of Natural
Death, which are carefully to be revolved in man's mind. For he that knows not
the ways of Nature, how can he obviate and turn them? Therefore there ought to
be a double Inquisition: one of the Consumption, or Depredation of the body of
man; and the other of the Reparation or Refection of the same. And with this
proviso or Caveat that the one may be inhibited and restrained, and the other
promoted and comforted as much as may be: and the first of these belongs
chiefly to the spirits and external air, by which the Depredation and waste is
made; the second to the whole process of alimentation, which causes the
Restitution. And as for the first part of the Inquisition, which is of the
Consumption, that is for a great part common to inanimate bodies: For those
things which the inbred spirit (which is in all Tangible things be they living
or dead) and the encompassing Air do operate upon inanimate things, the same
they do also attempt upon those things which are animate: though the Vital
which is added unto them, partly breaks and quels those operations, and partly
does most powerfully increase and augment them. For it is most manifest, that
many inanimate things can last a long time without any Reparation; whereas
animate things do presently fall and are extinguished without Aliment or
Reparation, as the fire also. Therefore there ought to be a double Inquisition:
First, Contemplating man's body, as Inanimate, and without Aliment: Then as it
is Animate and Alimented. And having spoken thus much by way of Preface, let us
now proceed to the Topics of the Inquisition; concerning which you must read
the History of Life and Death.

FINIS.
THE NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY OF THE FORM of HOT THINGS.
The Inquisition of Forms proceeds thus.
The first Aphorism.
UPon the proposed Nature, first there must be an appearance made before the
understanding of all the known Instances which agree in the same Nature, though
the matters be very unlike: And this Collection is to be made Historically,
without any overhasty Contemplation, or any transcendent subtilty: as for
example in the Form of Hot Things.

Convenient Instances in the Nature of Hot Things.
1. The Beams of the Sun, especially in Summer, and at Noon time.

2. The Sum beams reflected, and kept up close and drawn together, as among
Hills, or by Walls, and especially in Burning-glasses.

3. Fiery Meteors.

4. Burning Lightnings.

5. The breaking out of fire, out of the hollow parts of Hills, etc.

6. All manner of Flame.

7. Solid things set on fire:

8. Natural hot Baths.

9. Liquid things boiling or heated.

10. Hot smoaks and vapors, and the Air it self, which takes a strong and
fierce heat if it be shut in, especially in Reverberatories.

11. Certain soultry hot times by the mere Constitution of the air, without any
regard of the season, or time of the year.

12. A subterraneal Air, enclosed in certain Caves, especially in winter time.

13. All woolly or hairy things, as Beasts Skins, or Hides, and Feathers, have
a kind of warmness in them.

14. All manner of bodies, as well solid as liquid, as well thick as thin (such
as the air it self is) being for a time brought near the fire.

15. Sparkles out of a Flint-stone, or out of Iron or Steel, caused by
hand-striking.

16. Any kind of body strongly rubbed together, as stone, wood, cloth, etc. so
that sometimes Axel-trees, and Naves of Wheels are set on fire: and the way of
kindling of fire amongst the West Indians is by Attrition.

17. Green and moist herbs packt and thrust up together, as Roses, and
Peasecods, and Hay being laid up moist will many times take fire.

18. Unslackt quick Lime having water thrown upon it.

19. Fire when it is first dissolved by strong waters, or Aqua Fortis in a
Glass, without setting any fire to it; and so likewise Pewter, etc. but not in
such a high degree.

20. Living creatures, especially (and that continually) their Entrails; though
in the Insects the heat be not so palpably perceived by the sense of feeling,
by reason of the smalness of their bodies.

21. Horse-dung, and the like Excrements of beasts being newly made.

22. Strong oil of Sulphur and Vitriol, show the effects of heat in burning of
linen.

23. Oil of Origanum and the like, show their effects of heat also in burning
of the teeth.

24. A strong spirit of Wine rightly made up, will show the effects of its heat
in such manner, that if you put the white of an egg into it, it will grow
together and be white, almost like that of a boiled egg, and a piece of bread
being thrown into it, will heat and be like unto a piece of toasted bread.

25. Spices and hot herbs, as Dragon, and old Cresses, etc. though they be not
hot in the handling (neither whole nor yet the powder of them) yet being a
little chewed, they are hot, and in a manner burning upon the tongue and the
Palate of the mouth.

26. Strong Vinegar, and all sharp sour things laid upon any part where there
is no upper skin, as in the eye, or upon the tongue, or any other part when it
is wounded or galled, do cause a kind of smart, like unto that which is
produced by heat.

27. Also sharp and violent cold produces a kind of tingling, like unto
burning.

The Northern winds sharp penetrating cold burns, etc.

28. Other things also which I omit for brevity.

This we use to call the Table of Essence and presence.

The second Aphorism.
SEcondly, there is manifestation to be made to the understanding of instances
which are deprived of their nature which was first given them. For the Form
(as we said before) ought as well to be absent where the primary Nature is
absent, as be present where it is present: But this would be infinite in all
things. Wherefore Negatives are to be added to the Affirmatives, and Privations
are only to be looked upon in those subjects, which are nearly allied to those
others in which the Primary Nature is, and appears. And this we use to call the
Table of Declination or Absence in proximo, or the next degree. The nearest
Instances which are deprived of the Nature of Heat.
A Negative, or Subjunctive Instance to the first Affirmative Instance.


The Moon and the stars and the Comets Beams are not found hot by the sense of
feeling, yea one may observe extreme cold seasons at full Moons. But the
greater fixed Stars when the Sun comes under them, or nigh unto them, are
thought to increase and exasperate the heat of the Sun, as it is when the Sun
is in Leo, and in the Dog Days.

Six Negatives to the second Instance.
1. The Sunbeams give not any heat in that which they call the middle Region
of the air; for which is commonly given a tolerable reason. For that Region or
part of the air is neither near unto the body of the Sun, from which issue the
beams, nor yet unto the earth, by which the said beams are reflected. And this
appears by the tops of those Hills which are of a great height, where the Snow
lies continually. But on the contrary, it has been noted by some, that on the
top of the Peak of Tenariff, and also of some Hills of Peru, the tops of the
hills have no snow upon them, the snow lying lower upon the ascent of the Hill:
and besides, the air is not cold upon the tops of those Hills, but very piercing
and sharp; so that upon those hills of Peru, it pricks and hurts the eyes with
its too much acrimony, and pricks the Orifice of the Ventricle, and causes
vomiting. And it was noted by the Ancients, that on the top of Olympus there
was such a tenuity of air, that they who ascended thither were fain to carry
with them spunges steeped in Water and Vinegar, and hold them to their mouths
and nostrils, lest the tenuity or subtilness of the Air should hinder their
breathing. Upon the top of which montain it was also said the air was so clear
and free from Winds and Rain, that if the Priests had written upon the Ashes
which remained upon Jupiters Altar after the Sacrifices had been there offered
unto him, the Letters would remain there and not be blown away or blotted out,
until the next year. And to this hour those which ascend to the top of
Tenariff, which they do by night, and not by day, are called upon and hastened
to descend presently after Sunrising. For fear (as it should seem) lest the
tenuity of the air should dissolve their spirits, and suffocate them.

2. The reflection of the Sunbeams in those Countries which are nigh unto the
Polar Circles, is very weak and ineffectual in its heat: so that the Dutch who
wintred in Nova Zembla, when they expected their ship should be freed from the
great heaps and mountains of Ice which were grown about it in the beginning of
the Month of July, were frustrated of their hopes, and forced to come away in
their ship boat: So that the Beams of the Sun seem to be of small strength when
they are direct, even upon plain ground: nor yet when they are reflected,
unless they be multiplied and united, which happens when the Sun grows to be
more perpendicular; for the incidence of the beams makes more acute Angles, so
that the lines of the beams are more near; whereas contrariwise in great
obliquities of the Sun, the Angles are very obtuse, and consequently, the lines
of the beams more distant. But in the mean time we must note that there may be
many operations of the Sunbeams, and in the nature of heat, which are not
proportioned to our touch, or feeling; so that in respect of us they do not
operate so far as calefaction or heating, but in respect of some other bodies,
they may execute the Operations and Functions of heat.

3. Let us try such an experiment as this. Let there be a Glass made and framed
of a contrary quality to a burning-Glass, and let this glass be held between
the Sun and our hand, and let us observe whether that will diminish the heat of
the Sun as a burning-Glass does increase it. For it is manifest in the Optic
beams, that as the Glass is of an unequal thickness in the middle and on the
sides, so the things which are seen through them, are either more diffused, or
more contracted. So the same should be in the matter of heat.

4. Let it be carefully tried, whether the strongest and best made
Burning-Glasses can gather up the beams of the Moon in such sort as the least
degree of warmness or tepidity may proceed from them. And if that degree of
tepidity should be too weak and subtle to be perceived by the sense of
feeling, let recourse be had to those kinds of Weather-Glasses that show the
Constitution of the air, whether it be hot or cold, and let the Moon-beams fall
through a burning-Glass into the Orifice of this Weather-Glass, and observe
whether the tepidity do cause any fall or abatement of the water that is in the
said Weather-Glass.

5. Let the Burning-Glass be used over some hot thing that is not radious, or
luminous; as a hot Iron or stone, which is not red or fire hot, or boiling
water, or the like: and let it be observed whether there be any increase or
augmentation of heat, as there is in the Sunbeams.

6. Let a Burning-Glass also be tried with a common flame.

One Negative to the third Affirmative Instance.
There is no manifest or constant effect found in Comets, (if so be they also
may be reckoned amongst Meteors) for the increasing the heat of the Weather
according to the season of the year; though drought have commonly been observed
to follow. Also bright beams and columns, openings of the Element, and the
like, are more commonly seen in Winter than in Summer, especially in extreme
cold weather, so it be joined with Drought. But Thunders and flashes of
Lightning do seldom happen in Winter, but only in time of great heat. But
those (which we call) falling or shooting stars, are commonly thought to
consist rather of some bright visions or slimie matter, set on fire, than of
any stronger fiery Nature. But of this we will enquire further.

To the fourth one.
There are some Coruscations which yield light, but do not burn: And those are
always without Thunder.

To the fifth one.
Eructations, and breakings out of flames happen in cold Countries as well as
in hot, in Island and Greenland: as also trees growing in cold Countries are
sometimes more apt to take fire, and have more Pitch and Rozen in them than
those which grow in hot Countries, as Fir and Pinetrees, and the like. But in
what situation and nature of soil such breakings out use to be, that we might
add a Negative to the Affirmative, is not yet sufficiently enquired.

To the sixth one.
All manner of flame is perpetually hot, either more or less, neither can there
any Negative be added. And yet it is reported, that which they call Ignis
Fatuus, which also sometimes hits against a wall, has not much heat in it;
peradventure like the flame of spirit of Wine, or Aqua-vitae, which is not
fierce or scorching. Yet that seems to be yet a milder flame which we read of
in some grave and credible Histories, that has been seen to appear about the
heads and hair of young boys, and maidens, which fire no way burned their hair,
but softly seemed to flame and play about it. And it is certain, that in a
night horses have been seen, when they swet with travail, to have a certain
kind of lightning flashes upon them, without any manifest scorching heat. And
not many years since was seen, and held for a kind of Miracle, a child's Apron,
which being a little stirred and rubbed, flashed out with fire, and sparkles
flew out of it, which might happen peradventure, by reason of the Salt or Allom
wherewith the Apron was Dyed, which might stick upon the Apron in Scales, which
with violent rubbing might be broken. And it is most certain that all manner of
Sugar, either Candid or otherwise (so it be hard) broken or scraped in the dark
will shine and sparkle. Likewise seawater violently stirred up with Oars, will
give a light, and seem to burn, which kind of burning or light the Spaniards
call the Sea-lungs. But what kind of heat that fire or flame yields which
seamen in ancient times were wont to call Castor and Pollux, and now in our
days is called St. Anthonies fire, is not yet certainly found out.

To the seventh one.
Whatsoever is fiery, and turned into red heat, though it be without flame, yet
it is perpetually hot; neither can there be any negative added to this
affirmative. Yet there are some things which seem to be somewhat near
thereunto: as rotten wood which shines in the night, and yet does not feel hot:
and the scales of rotten fish, which also glister in the dark, yet seem not
hot, if you feel them; neither can there be any heat perceived in handling a
Glowworm which shines so bright in the dark.

To the eighth one.
It is not yet thoroughly enquired concerning hot Baths, in what situation and
kind of Soil they spring out; therefore there is no Negative added.

To the ninth one.
To liquid boiling or hot things is added a Negative of the liquid thing it
self in its own Nature. For there is not any tangible liquid thing, which in
its own nature is, and constantly endures and remains hot: but heat is only
caused in it, as an additional, and acquired nature; and those things which in
power and operation are very hot, as the spirits of Wine, Chemical Aromatic
Oils, Oils of Vitriol and Sulphur, and the like; which after a little
continuance will burn, yet at the first touching they are cold. The Water of
hot Natural Baths taken up in Vessels and severed from its springs will grow
cold as well as water heated at the fire. Oily bodies indeed are not altogether
so cold to be touched as watery bodies are, and silk is not so cold as linen.
But these things belong to the Table of Degrees of cold.

To the Tenth one.
1. To a hot or fervent vapor, is added the Negative of the Nature of the
Vapor it self, such as we find it. For Exnalations out of Oily things though
they be easily inflamed, yet they are not found to be hot, unless they be newly
exhaled from a hot body.

2. Likewise to a hot fervent Air is added a Negative of the Nature of the Air
it self. For we do not find any air to be hot, unless it be shut up, or chafed,
or palpably heated by the Sun, or by fire, or some other hot body.

To the eleventh one.
There is a Negative added of weather, which is colder than it should be at
that season of the year, which happens upon a South-East or North-East winds
blowing; as also contrary weathers happen, when a South or West South-West wind
blows. There is likewise an inclination to rain (especially in Winter) when
it is mild weather, and to frost in sharp cold weather.

To the Twelfth one.
There is a Negative added concerning Air enclosed in Caves in the summer time;
But there must be a more diligent Inquisition made of enclosed Air. For first
it is a Question (and that not without cause) what the Nature of the Air is of
it self, concerng in heat and cold. For the Air does manifestly receive heat
from Celestial Impressions, and cold, peradventure, by the expiration of the
earth; and again, in that which is called the middle Region of the Air, from
cold vapors and snow: so that no judgment can be given of the Nature of the
Air, by that air which lies open and abroad; but a truer judgment may be given
by that which is enclosed and shut up. And again, that air should be enclosed
and shut up in such a vessel or substance, which may not of it self qualify
the air, either with heat or cold; nor easily admit the force of the air which
is without it. Let trial therefore be made with an earthen Pitcher, covered all
over with double Leather to safeguard it from the outward air; keeping in the
included air in such a vessel well closed for the space of three or four days;
and the trial thereof after the opening of the vessel may be made, either by
the feeling it with the hand, or by a Glass of Degrees, called a Weather glass,
well and orderly applied.

To the thirteenth one.
It is likewise a Question, whether tepidity, or lukewarmness in wool, skins,
feathers, and the like, be by reason of some small inherent heat, because they
are taken off from living creatures; or by reason of a certain fitness, and
oiliness, which is of a Nature agreeing with tepidity; or merely by reason of
the conclusion and fraction of the Air, as was spoken in the precedent Article;
for all Air which is cut off from the continuation of the outward air, seems to
have some tepidity or lukewarm ness in it. Let therefore trial of this be made
in thready Stuffs which are made of Linen, and not of Feathers, Wool or Silk,
which are taken from living Creatures. It is also to be noted, that all manner
of Dusts, or Pulverized things (in which Air is manifestly included) are less
cold than the bodies of them: as we also hold all manner of scum or froth, (by
reason that it contains air) to be less cold than the liquor it self.

To the fourteenth one.
To this there is no Negative added: For there is not any thing either Tangible
or Spirital, but will heat if it be set to the fire: Yet there is this
difference, that some things will heat sooner, as Air, Oil, and Water; and some
will be longer a heating, as Stone and Metals. But this belongs to the table of
Degrees.

To the fifteenth one.
To this Instance there is no other Negative added, but that it is carefully to
be observed, that no sparkles can be drawn out of a Flint, or out of Steel, or
any other hard substance; but there are some parcels of the substance it self
beaten off, either of the stone or Metal; and that the attrition of the air
it self can never produce or engender any sparkles, as it is commonly believed.
And those very sparkles, by reason of the weight of the fired body, do tend
downward rather than upward, and at their going out do turn to a kind of bodily
soot.

To the sixteenth one.
We hold there can be no Negative added to this instance: For there is not any
Tangible body to be found that will not manifestly heat with attrition or
violent rubbing. So that the Ancients did dream that there was no other heating
power or virtue in heavenly things, but by reason of the attrition or chasing
of the air through a violent wheeling about. But concerning this, or in this
kind, we must enquire further, whether such bodies or substances as are shot
out of Engines (as Bullets out of Guns) do not receive some degree of heat from
the percussion or blow it self, so that we find them somewhat hot after they
fall. But the air being moved rather cools than heats: as we find in winds, and
in a pair of Bellows, and the breath of a man's mouth drawn up together. But
this motion is not so violent as to excite heat: and it must be done without
intermission and not by parcels, so that it is no marvail, if it does not cause
any heat.

To the seventeenth one.
There must be a more diligent Inquiry made about this Instance; for green and
moist Herbs and Vegetables seem to have some occult or hidden heat within them.
But that heat is so small and weak, that it cannot be felt in each several one;
but being laid and shut up together, so that their spirit cannot breath out
into air, but feeds and nourishes each others; then there arises a manifest
heat, and sometimes a flame, when the matter is fitting for it.

To the eighteenth one.
Also concerning this Instance there must be a more diligent Enquiry made. For
quick or unslackt Lime seems to take heat by having water thrown upon it,
either by the union of the heat which before was distracted, (as we said before
of Herbs laid up close together) or by the irritation and exasperation of the
fiery spirit by the Water, there being some conflict and antiperistasis between
them. Now which of those two things may be the cause will more easily appear,
if there be Oil thrown on instead of water: For the Oil will serve as well for
the uniting of the enclosed spirit, though not for the irritation or provoking
of it. Also there must be a larger experiment or trial made as well in ashes
and lines of diverse bodies, as by the putting in of diverse sorts of liquors.

To the nineteenth one.
To this Instance is added the Negative of other Metals, which are more soft
and fluid: For thin leaves of gold dissolved into liquor with the Royal water,
yield no palpable heat in their dissolving; nor Lead in Aquafortis; nor yet
Quicksilver, (as far as I can remember) but silver does excite a little heat,
and Copper, as I remember, but Pewter does it more manifestly, and most Iron
and Steel, which in their dissolution cause not only a strong heat, but also a
violent kind of boiling: So that the heat seems to be caused by the conflict
when the strong waters do pierce and rent in sunder the parts of the body. But
where there is less resistance in the bodies, and that they easilier yield,
there is hardly any heat excited.

To the twentieth one.
There is no Negative to be added to the heat of creatures, unless it be of
Insects, by reason of the smalness of their bodies: For in Fishes compared with
earthly Creatures, there is rather to be noted a degree of heat, than a
privation. In Vegitables and Plants there is no degree of heat to be perceived
in the feeling of them, nor in their gums, nor in their very Marrows being
opened. But in Animal Creatures there is a great diversity of heat to be found,
as well in their parts, (for one is the heat about the heart, another in the
brain, another about the external parts) as in their accidents, as in their
vehement exercitation, and Fevers.

To the one and twentieth one.
To this Instance there is scarce any Negative to be added: For the Excrements
of Beasts, even after they are old and long ejected, manifestly have some
potential heat in them, as may be perceived by their fattening of the ground.

To the two and twentieth one.
All manner of liquors which have a great and strong acrimony in them (be they
either Waters or Oils) do execute the operations of heat in the rending in
sunder or divulsion of bodies, and the adustion or burning of them after some
continuance; yet at the first touching of them there can be no heat perceived.
And they operate according to the analogy and pores of the body to which they
are applied. Aqua Regis dissolves Gold, but not Silver: And contrariwise Aqua
fortis dissolves Silver, but not Gold, and neither of both these waters will
dissolve Glass: and so of others.

To the four and twentieth one.
Let there be a trial of the spirit of Wine, made in wood, or Butter, Wax, or
Pitch, and see if it will any way melt any of them with its heat. For the four
and twentieth Instance shows an imitative power of heat in it in
incrustations or hardnings. So let there trial be made also in Liquefactions or
Meltings. Let there also be a trial made, or Experience tried by a Glass of
Degrees, or a Weather-glass, and let it have an outward hollow place at the
top, and put spirit of Wine well rectified into that outward hollow place, and
let the hollow place be covered, that it may the better contain the heat; and
let it be observed whether by its heat it will cause the water to descend.

To the five and twentieth one.
Drugs and Herbs which are sharp and biting upon the Palate, much more being
taken inward, are perceived to be hot: Let us therefore see upon what other
Materials they do execute the works and operations of heat. Seamen do report,
that when heaps and great masses of Drugs or Spices which have been long shut
and heaped up together, are opened on a sudden; they who turn them or take
them out first, are in great danger of Fevers and Inflammations of their
spirits. Likewise there may be trial made, whether the Powders of such Drugs or
Herbs will dry Lard, or other flesh hanged over them, as the smoke of fire will.

To the six and twentieth one.
Acrimony or Penetration is as well in cold things, as Vinegar, and Oil of
Vitriol, as in hot things, as Oil of Origanum, or the like. And so likewise in
Animate things they cause pain and smart, and in inanimate things they pull in
sunder the parts and consume them: neither is there any Negative added to this
Instance: And in animate or living things, there is never any pain, but is
accompanied with some kind of heat.

To the seven and twentieth one.
Many are the actions and operations which are common both to heat and cold,
though in a diverse way. For Snow seems a while after the handling of it, to
burn childrens hands: and cold keeps flesh from put refaction as well as fire;
and heat contracts bodies and makes them less, and so does cold. But it is
better to leave these and the like things till we come to enquire of cold.

The third Aphorism.
THirdly, there is appearance to be made before understanding of Instances, in
which Nature (of which Inquiry is made) is according to more or less, either
making comparison of the increase and decrease in the same subject, or making
comparison the one with the other in diverse subjects. For the form of a thing,
being the very thing it self, and the thing not differing from the form
otherwise than Apparancy and Existency, or Outward, and Inward do differ, as
well in order to man, as to the Universe; It therefore necessarily follows,
that no Nature must be taken for a true form, unless it continually decrease
when Nature it self decreaseth: and likewise continually increases when Nature
it self is increased. And this Table we commonly call the Table of Degrees or
Table of Comparative.

The Table of Degrees or Comparatives in Heat.
WE will first speak of those things in which there is no Degree at all of
Heat, but seem only to have a kind of a Potential heat, or a disposition or
preparation to heat. Then we will descend to those things which are indeed
actually and palpably hot to the touch, and of their strength and degrees.

1. In solid and tangible bodies there is not any thing that of its own Nature
is originally hot: For there is no stone, no metal, no sulphur, nothing that
may be dug up; no wood, no water, no carcass of a beast that is hot. And the
hot waters of Baths seem to gain their heat by some chance or accident, either
by some fire or flame within the earth, such as we see is cast out of Mount
Aetna, and other hills; or by the conflict and strife of bodies, as we see a
certain heat excited in the dissolving of Iron, and Pewter, so that there is no
degree at all of heat in things inanimate which can be felt by man: yet they
differ in degrees of coldness, for wood is not so cold as Metal. But this
belongs to the Table of degrees in coldness.

2. Yet many inanimate things are very much disposed to Potential heats, and
preparations to flame, as Sulphur, Marle, and Salt Peter.

3. Those things which before were hot, as Horse-dung or Lime, or peradventure
Ashes, or Soot, do retain certain hidden Relics of their first heat, so that
certain distillations and separations may be caused in some things by burying
them in Horse-dung; and heat is excited in Lime by casting water upon it, as we
said before.

4. Amongst Vegetables there is not any Plant, or part thereof (as the Gum or
Marrow) that seems hot being touched; But (as we said before) green Herbs laid
up close together do heat. And so the inward feeling, as that of the Palate,
and Stomach; yea, and to the outward feeling also after they have been applied
for a while (as in Plasters and ointments) some Vegetables are hot, and some
cold.

5. There is no part of any Beast after it is dead, or severed from the rest of
the body, wherein man can feel any heat: For horse-dung it self retains no heat
in it, unless it be close laid up or buried. Yet all manner of dung seems to
have a Potential kind of heat, as appears by its fattening and enriching of
soil. And likewise the carcasses of living things have such a kind of hidden
and Potential heat: So that in Churchyards, where people are buried daily, the
earth gathers a kind of occulted and hidden heat, which will sooner consume a
body that is laid in it, than another pure earth. And amongst the Indians (as
it is reported) they have a certain kind of thin and soft web made of Birds
Feathers, which has a kind of inbred force, by which it will dissolve and
melt Butter that is wrapped up in it.

6. All things that are of force to fatten and enrich soil, as Dung of all
sorts, Chalk, Sea-sand, Salt, and the like, have a kind of disposition to heat.

7. Every Putrefaction has in it self the beginnings or grounds of some small
heat, though it cannot be perceived by the sense of feeling: For even those
things which putrified turn to Maggots, as Flesh and Cheese, seem not hot when
you touch them; neither does that rotten wood which shines and glistereth in
the dark, feel hot. But there is a kind of heat in putrified things, which some
time betrays it self by the smell.

8. Therefore the first degree of heat, which by the sense of feeling is
perceived to be hot, seems to be the heat of living things, which has a great
extent of degrees: for the lowest degree which is in Insects, is scarce to be
felt, and the highest degree will hardly reach to that degree of heat which is
in the Sunbeams, in hottest Countries and seasons: neither is it so sharp and
vehement, but that you may endure your hand on it. And yet it is reported of
Constantius, and some others, who were of an exceeding dry constitution of
body, that being taken with a burning Fever, they were so hot that you could
not endure to hold your hand upon them.

9. Living Creatures have their heat increased in them, by Motion and exercise,
by Wine and high food, venery, burning Fevers, and pain.

10. Living Creatures in Fevers which have intermission, in the beginning of
their fits are taken with a chilliness and cold; and a while after they grow
extreme hot, which they likewise do in burning Agues and Pestilent Fevers.

11. Let further Enquiry be made of the Comparative heat in diverse Creatures,
as Fishes, four-footed Beasts, Serpents, Birds, and likewise according to their
several and special kinds, as in a Lion, a Kite, a Man. For according to the
common opinion, the Inwards of Fishes are not very hot, but the Entrails of
Birds are extreme hot, as Pigeons, Hawks, and Estridges.

12. Let there also further enquiry be made of the Comparative heat in the same
Creature, according to the diversity of its parts and members. For Milk, Blood,
Seed, Eggs, are found in a mean degree lukewarm, and less hot than the outward
flesh of a Creature, when it moves or is driven. But what degree of Heat is in
the brain, stomach, heart, and the rest, has not likewise been enquired of.

13. All manner of Creatures, in winter, and cold weather are outwardly cold,
but their inward parts are thought to be the hotter thereby.

14. The Heat of the Heaven of Element, in the hottest Countries and seasons is
not so in high a degree as to burn dry wood, or straw, or light tinder which is
made of Linen, unless it be corroborated by the help of a burning-glass; and
yet it may draw up vapors out of moist things.

15. According to the relation of Astronomers, there are some stars hotter than
other some. And amongst the Planets, next to Sol, Mars is the hottest, then
Jupiter, and then Venus. Luna is cold, and Saturn coldest of all. Amongst the
fixed stars, the hottest is that called Sirius, then the Lions heart, or
Regulus, then the Dog Star, etc.

16. The Sun casts most heat when it grows nearest its perpendicular or
Zenith; which is likewise so in other Planets, according to their portion of
heat. As for example, Jupiter heats us more when he is in Cancer, or Leo, than
when he is in Capricornius or Aquarius.

17. The Sun and the rest of the Planets do heat more when they are in their
Perigaeons, by reason of their nearness to the earth, than in their Apogaeons.
And if it happen at any time the Sun to be in his Perigaeon, and withal near
his Perpendicularity, it must needs heat more than when it is in its Perigaeon,
but more in obliquity. So that the Comparison of the Exaltation of the Planets
ought to be noted whether it participate more of Obliquity or Perpendicularity;
according to the variety of Regions.

18. Sol, and likewise the rest of the Planets, are thought to yield a greater
heat when they are nearest to the greatest fixed stars: as when Sol is in Leo,
it is nearer Cor Leonis, Cauda Leonis, and Spica Virginis, and and Sirius, and
Canicula, than when it is in Cancer, where notwithstanding it is nearest its
Perpendicularity. And it is credible that the parts of the Heavens do infuse
the greater heat, (htough it be not perceptible to the feeling) the more they
are adorned with stars, especially of the biggest kind.

19. The Heat of the Heavens is therefore increased three ways. By the
Perpendicularity, the Propinquity or Perigaeon, and by the Conjunction or
Consorting of Stars.

20. Howsoever there is a great difference between the heat of living
Creatures, of Celestial beams (as they come to us) and flame, though it be
never so weak, and all things heated with fire, and liquid things, or the air
it self being much heated by fire. For the flame of spirit of Wine, especially
if it be rarefied, and not thrust up together; yet is of force to burn straw,
or linen, or paper, which the heat of a Creature can never do, nor yet the
heat of the Sun, without the help of a burning-Glass.

21. Besides, in flames, and fired things there are many degrees in the
violence or weakness of heat. But of these there has been no diligent
Inquisition: so that we must of necessity lightly run them over. Of flames
therefore that of the spirit of wine seems to be the softest, unless that which
they call Ignis satuus, and those flashes which are caused by the sweat of
beasts be softer. Next is the flame of porous Vegitables; as straw, rushes,
dry leaves, from which the flame of hair, or feathers does not much differ.
Next unto this is the flame of wood, especially such wood as has not much
rozen or pitch in it, and the flame of small wood (such as commonly is made up
in Faggots) is softer than that of great logs, and timber, and roots of trees:
a trial whereof may be made in Iron Furnaces, in which Faggots made of boughs
of trees, are no way useful: Next to this (as we conceive) is the flame of Oil,
Tallow and Wax, and such Oily and fat things which have not much acrimony in
them; but the strongest heat is in Pitch and Rozen; and more fervent in Sulphur
and Camphire, and Marle, and Saltpeter, and Salts, (after the crude or raw
matter is broken out) and in the compounds of these, as Gunpowder and
Greek-fire, (which is commonly called Wildfire) and several kinds of it, which
have such an obstinate heat, that water will hardly put it out.

22. We also hold the flame which proceeds out of some imperfect Metals to be
very strong and sharp: But of all these things we must enquire further.

23. But the flame of fierce and strong Lightnings seems to exceed all these:
For it has sometimes melted perfect Iron into drops, which none of those other
flames could do.

24. In fired things also there are diverse degrees of heat, of which also there
has been no diligent Inquisition made. We hold a most weak heat to be in
burned Linen, such as we use to kindle fire with, and likewise that of spungy
wood, or dried Match, such as is used to fire Guns withal. Next unto these
comes a burning wood-coal, or Charcoal, and fiery hot bricks, and the like. But
of all fired things we hold fiery Metals to be the most vehement hot, as Iron
and Copper, etc. But of these there must be further Inquisition made.

25. There are some fired things far better than some flames. For fired or red
hot Iron is far hotter and more burning than the flame of the spirit of wine.

26. There are also some things which are not fired, but only heated with fire
and air shut up in Reverberatories. Some do much exceed in heat does flames and
fired things.

27. Motion increases heat, as we may find by experience in bellows and
blowing: so that some of the hardest kind of Metals will not dissolve or melt
with a dead fire, without it be blown up.

28. Let trial be made by burning glasses, with which, as I remember, this may
be done. As for example, if the Glass be set at the distance of a span from the
combustible object, it will not light nor burn so well as if it be set (as for
example) at the distance of half a span length, and so softly and by degrees be
drawn to the distance of a whole span length: yet the Angles and union of the
beams is the same, but the Motion it self increases the operation of the heat.

29. It is that those burnings which happen when it is a strong wind do proceed
further when they are against the wind than with the wind, namely, because the
flame beats back with a quicker motion when the wind sends it back, than when
the wind drives it forward.

30. Flame does not break out, or engender, unless there be some Concavity in
which the flame may move and play, unless it be in flatuous and windy flames of
Gunpowder and the like, where the compression and imprisoning of the flame
increases the fury of it.

31. An Anvil is much heated by the hammer; so that if the Anvil were of a thin
plate, we believe it might be heated by strong and continual blows of the
Hammer, so far as to be red hot, as if it had been put in the fire. But this
may be made trial of.

32. But in such fired things which are porous, and give space and way for the
exercising of the Motion of the fire, if that Motion be hindered by a strong
compression, the fire is presently put out, as when tinder, or a burning snuff
of a Candle or Lamp is pressed or trodden out, presently the operations of the
fire do cease.

33. The approaching or setting near of a thing to a hot body, increases the
heat, according to the degree of approaching; and the same effect is in light.
For the nearer the object is set to the light, the more visible it is.

34. The union of diverse heats increases the heat. For a great fire and a
little fire in the same place, do somewhat one with the other increase the
heat: But lukewarm water put into boiling water cools it.

35. The remaining or long staying in a place of a hot body increases the
heat. For the heat continually proceeding and issuing out, is mixed with the
heat which was there before; so that it multiplyeth the heat. For a fire will
not heat a Chamber so much in half an hour as it will do in a whole hour. But
it is not so in light; for a Lamp or a Candle set in a place, will give no more
light after a long stay, than it did at the very first.

36. An irritation or exasperation by the coldness which is round about,
increases the heat, as we find by fire in frosty weather: which we believe to
be done, not only by the keeping in, and contracting of the heat, which is a
kind of uniting it; but also by exasperation: as when Air, or a stick is
violently drawn together, it does not fly out again punctually into its proper
place, but goes further the contrary way. So let there be a diligent trial
made, by a stick, or some such thing thrust into the flame, whether it does not
burn sooner thrust on the one side of the flame, than if it be thrust into the
middle of it.

37. The degrees of taking in, or receiving of heat are many. And first of all
you must note how small and little a heat will alter, and in some measure heat
even such things as are least sit to take heat. For a Bullet of Lead, or any
other metal will be somewhat heated by holding it for some time in a man's hand;
so easily is heat excited, and transmitted into any thing, the body being no
way apparently changed.

38. Of all bodies air does most easily take, and send back heat, which may be
easiliest perceived in the Weatherglasses. They are made in this kind: Take a
glass with a hollow belly, and a long and small neck; let this glass be turned
topsie turvie, the mouth downward, and the belly upward, and so let it be put
into another glass where there is water: touching the bottom of the
receiving-glasse, with the mouth of the glass which is put in. And let the neck
of the glass which is put, lean a little upon the mouth of the receiving-glass,
which that it may the better do, let a little wax be laid about the mouth of
the lower glass; but the Mouth must not be quite stopped, for fear lest for
want of succeeding Air, the Motion which we shall presently speak, be hindered,
which is very delicate and easy. But the glass which is put in must first have
the top of it, which is the belly, warmed. Then after the glass is placed, as
we have said, the Air will retreat and draw it self up together, (which before
was dilated, and spread abroad by heating) after a sufficient pause, to quench
that acquired heat to such an extent and dimension as the air at that time
shall be when the glass is put in, and the water shall be drawn up to such a
measure: And there must be a long and narrow paper hanged about it, and marked
out with as many degrees as you shall think fitting. And you shall see as the
time of the day grows hot or cold, that the Air will contract it self into the
less compass by reason of cold, and extend and dilate it self by reason of
heat, which shall be perceived by the water ascending when the Air closes up
together, and descending when the air dilates or spreads it self abroad. And
the sense of the air concerning heat and cold is so subtle and exquisite, that
it goes far beyond the faculty of man's feeling: so that a Sun beam, or the heat
of ones breath, and much more the heat of ones hand, it being laid a top of the
glass will manifestly cause the water to descend. But we believe that the
spirit of Beasts has yet a more exquisite feeling of heat and cold, if it were
not hindered and dulled by the mass of the body.

39. Next to the Air we believe those bodies to be most sensible of heat, which
are most immediately changed and altered from cold, as snow and Ice; for they
begin to melt and be dissolved with the least heat and luke-warmness. Next to
them peradventure is Quick silver. Next unto it are your fat bodies, or
substances, as Oil, Butter, and the like; then Wood, then Water, and last of
all Stons and Metals, which do not easily grow hot, especially inwardly, But
these being once hot, do retain their heat for a long time; so that a Brick or
a stone, or a hot Iron being put into a tub of water for a quarter of an hours
space, more or less, will hold and keep their heat, so that you shall hardly be
able to touch them.

40. The lesser the mass of the body is, the sooner it heats, a hot body being
laid near to it; which shewetht that all manner of heat with us, is in some
manner adverse and contrary to any tangible body.

41. Heat, as concerning the humane sense of feeling, is a various and
respective thing: so that if we put our hand when it is cold into lukewarm
water, the water will seem hot; if our hand be hot, the same water will seem
cold.

The fourth Aphorism.
HOw poor we are in History every one may easily perceive, by that in the
precedent Tables: We have been forced not only to insert Traditions and
relations instead of History, making some question and doubt of the Truth and
Authority of them; but we have also oftentimes been constrained to make use of
these or the like words: Let trial be made; or, let it be further enquired.

The fifth Aphorism.
ANd we use to call the work and office of these three Tables, the appearance
of the Instances to the understanding: and the appearance being made, the
Induction it self is to be set a work. For upon the appearances of all and
every Instance, such a Nature as may always be present or absent, may increase
or decrease with the Nature which is proposed; and shall be, as we said before,
a limitation of common Nature. This if the mind do at first and from the
beginning attempt to do affirmatively (which being left to it self it always
uses to do) we shall find ill determined notionals, phantasms, and imaginary
things, and Axioms daily to be amended; unless we will (according to the
custom of the Schools) fight for falsehoods. And yet they will questionless be
either better or worse according to the faculty and strength of the
understanding which operates. To God (who is the giver and Maker of forms) or
peradventure to Angels, and Understandings it may belong to know Forms
immediately by way of affirmation, and in the beginning of Contemplation: But
it is a thing indeed beyond man's capacity, who can at first proceed only by
Negatives, and at the last end with Affirmatives, after all manner of exclusion.

The sixth Aphorism.
THere must therefore a solution and separation of Nature be made; not by Fire,
but by the Mind, as by a divine fire. Therefore the first work of a true
Induction is (as concerning finding out of Forms) a Rejection or Exclusion of
all, and singular such Natures which are not found in any Instance where the
supposed Nature is present; or that are found in any Instance where the
supposed Nature is absent; or that are found to increase in any Instance when
the supposed Nature decreaseth, or to decrease when the supposed Nature
increases. And then after the Rejection and Exclusion is rightly and duly
made, in the second place (as in the bottom) will remain (all volatile opinions
flying up into smoke) the solid, true, and well terminated Affirmative Form.
And this is brief and easy to be spoken; but we must attain to it by many
windings and circumstances: And peradventure we shall not omit any thing that
shall make to this purpose.

The seventh Aphorism.
BUt we must continually take heed and beware, lest while we seem to attribute
so many parts to Forms, the things we speak be wrested to those Forms to which
men's thoughts and contemplations have hitherto been accustomed. For in the
first place we do not now speak of copulated Forms, which are (as we said
before) the marriages or conjunctions of simple Natures by the common course of
the Universe, as of the Lion, Eagle, Rose, Gold, and the like. For it will be
time to treat of them when we shall come to the hidden Progressions, and hidden
Figurations, and the finding out of them, as they are to be found in substances
(as they call them) or concrete Natures. And again, those things which we speak
must not be understood, (also as concerning simple Natures) of abstracted Forms
and Ideas, either not dermined or ill determined in the matter. For when we
speak of Forms, we mean nothing else but those Laws and determinations of a
pure act which do order and constitute some simple Nature, as heat, light,
weight in any susceptible matter and subject: So that the Form of Heat, or the
Form of Light, is the same thing as the Law of heat, or the Law of Light:
neither do we ever withdraw our selves, or recede from the things themselves,
and the operative part. Therefore when we say (as for example) in the
Inquisition of the Form of heat; Reject tenuity, or tenuity is not of the Form
of Heat, it is as much as if we said, a man may bring in heat upon a condensed
or solid body; or contrariwise, a man may take, or put away heat from a thin
and tenuous body. And if to any one it seems that our Forms also have something
of the Abstract because they mix and join together Heterogeneals; (for the heat
of heavenly things and fire seem to be very Heterogeneal, the redness which is
fixed in the rose or the like, and that redness which is the Rainbow, or the
luster of an Opall, or a Diamond; Death by drowning, Burning, by a prick of a
Sword, by an Apoplexy, and by Consumption, and these do agree in the Nature of
Heat, Redness, Death,) let him know that he has an understanding captivated
and kept in by custom, integrality of things, and by opinions. For it is most
certain, that these things, though they be Heterogeneal and Alien, yet they
agree in the Form, or Law, which ordains Heat, Redness, or Death. And that
humane power cannot be emancipated and freed from the common course of Nature,
and be enlarged and exalted to new Efficients, and new ways and means of
operating, but only by revealing and inventing of such Forms. And yet after
this union of Nature, which is the most principal thing, we will afterward, in
its proper place, speak of the divisions and veins of Nature, as well ordinary,
as those which are internal, and most true.

The eighth Aphorism.
NOw we must propose an Example of the Exclusion or Rejection of Natures, which
by the Tables of Appearance are found to be not of the Form of Heat; Giving you
in the mean time to understand, that not only each Table is sufficient for the
Rejection of any Nature, but also each several Instance contained in them. For
it appears plainly by what has been said, that every contradictory Instance
does destroy what may be thought of the Form: yet notwithstanding, for
perspicuities sake, and to demonstrate the use of the Tables more plainly, we
double or repeat the Exclusive.

An Example of the Exclusive, or Rejection of natures from the Form of Heat.
1. BY the Beams of the Sun, Reject the Elementary Nature.

2. By common fire, especially fires under ground (which are most remote and
secluded from the Celestial beams) Reject the Celestial Nature.

3. By all manner of Calefactions of bodies, (namely Minerals, Vegitables,
exterior parts of Animals, or living Creatures, Water, Oil, Air, and the like)
only by putting them near to the fire, or any other hot body, Reject all manner
of Variety, or more subtle texture or composure of bodies.

4. By Iron and other metals made red hot, which heat other bodies, and yet are
no ways diminished in their weight or substance; Reject the infusion or mixture
of the substance of another hot thing.

5. By hot Water, and Air, and also by Metals and other solid things heated,
but not to that degree to be fiery, or red hot; Reject Light.

6. By the Rays of the Moon and other Stars, (the Sun only excepted,) Reject
also Light.

7. By the Comparison of Red hot Iron, and the flame of the Spirit of Wine (of
which the Red hot Iron has more heat, and less light, and the Spirit of Wine
more light and less heat) Reject Light also.

8. By Gold and other Red hot Metals, which are generally of a most thick body;
Reject Tenuity or Thinness.

9. By air, which for the most part is cold, and yet remains tenuous and thin.
Reject also thinness or tenuity.

10 By Red hot Iron, which does not swell in the mass, but remains still within
the same visible dimension; Reject Local or Expansive Motion in general.

11. By the dilatation of air in Weather-glasses, and the like, which moves
manifestly, locally, and expansively, and yet receives no manifest increase of
heat; Reject also Local and Expansive Motion in general.

12. By the easy Tepefaction or making Lukewarm of all manner of bodies
without any destruction, or notable alteration; Reject the destructive Nature,
or violent infusion of any new Nature.

13. By the consent and conformity of like operations done by Heat and Cold:
Reject both Expansive, and Contractive cold in general.

14. By the kindling of heat by Attrition or violent rubbing together of
bodies; Reject the Principal Nature. We call that Principal Nature which is
found positive in Nature, and is not caused by precedent Nature: There are also
other Natures, for we do not make up perfect Tables, but only set down
Examples. All and singular the former Natures are not of the Form of heat. And
man is free of all the foresaid Natures, in his operation upon heat.

The Ninth Aphorism.
IN the Exclusive are laid the grounds and foundations of the true Induction,
which notwithstanding is not perfected until it be settled in the Affirmative.
Neither is the Exclusive any way perfect, nor cannot be so in the beginnings.
For the Exclusive is (as it plainly appears) a Rejection of simple Natures: and
if we yet have not good and true notions of simple natures, how can the
Exclusive be rectified? But some of those which we have spoken of (as the
notion of the Elementary nature, the notion of the Celestial nature, the notion
of Tenuity) are wandering notions, that are not well terminated. We therefore
who both know and remember what a great work we undertake (namely to make the
understanding of Man equal to things, and to nature) will no way give over with
that which we have already spoken; but will carry the matter on further, and
are framing and distibuting stronger helps for the use of the understanding,
which we will now add. And truly for the interpreting of nature, the mind is
to be so prepared and framed, that it may hold it self up in the true degrees
of Certitude; and yet think (especially in the beginnings) that those things
which are present, do much depend upon them which after.

The tenth Aphorism.
YEt because truth is sooner gotten out of error than out of confusion, we
think it were fitting to suffer the the understanding after it has studied and
pondered upon the three Tables of the first Appearance (such as we have laid
them down) to prepare it self and attempt the work of the Interpretation of
nature in the Affirmative, as well out of the Instances of the Table, as of
those things which shall otherwise present themselves unto him. Which kind of
Trial we use to call a Permission of the understanding; or a begun
Interpretation, or first.

The first Vindemiation of the Form of Heat.
WE must note, that the Form of the thing is (as it plainly appears by what we
have spoken before) in all and each of those Instances, in which the thing it
self is, otherwise it would not be a Form: So that there can be no
contradictorie Instance given. Yet the Form is found far more conspicuous and
evident in some Instances then in othersome: namely, in such where the nature
of Form is less restrained, hindered and reduced into order by other Natures:
And such Instances are called Enlightnings, or Ostensive Instances. We must
therefore proceed to the first Vindemiation of the Form of Heat. In all and
singular Instances Nature whose limitation is heat, seems to be a motion, which
is most plainly shown in Flame, which always moves, and in boiling or seething
Liquors, which do continally move. And it likewise appears, in the hastening and
increase of heat made by Motion, as in Bellows and Winds, whereof see Instance
29. Table 3. And likewise in other kinds of Motion, whereof see Instance 28.
and 31. Table 3. Again it is shown in the extinction of fire and heat by a
strong compression, which stays and causes Motion to cease: whereof see
Instance 30. and 32. Table 3. It is also made manifest in this, that any kind
of body is destroyed, or at least notably altered by any kind of fire, and
strong and vehement heat. Whereby it plainly appears, that Heat does cause a
tumult and perturbation, and a sharp Motion in the inward parts of the body,
which by little and little inclines to a dissolution. Let that which we have
said of Motion, (namely that it is in place of a Genus to heat) not that heat
ingenders Motion, or that Motion ingenders heat (though these be true in some
thing) but that the very self-heat, or the quiddity it self of heat is Motion
and nothing else, but limited by differences, which we will prepresently add,
after we have set down some Cautions to avoid the Equivocation. A thing hot to
the sense is a respective thing, and in order to man, and not to the universal,
and it is rightly laid as an effect of heat only in the Animal spirit. And in
it self also it is a different thing, seeing the same body (according as the
sense is predisposed) brings in the perceivance both of heat and cold, as
appears by the Instance 41. Table 3. Neither must the communication of heat or
its Transitive Nature, by which one body laid to another body that is hot, does
also grow hot, be confounded with the form of heat. For heat is one thing, and
Calefactive or causing of heat is another. For by the Motion of Attrition heat
is brought in, without any preceding heat: whereby the Calefactive or causer of
heat is excluded from the Form of heat. And likewise when heat is made by the
approximation or drawing near of heat, this is not done out of the Form of
heat, but wholly depends upon a higher and more common Nature, namely the
Nature of Assimilation or Multiplication of it self; whereof must be a several
Inquisition made. But the notion of fire is vulgar, and nothing worth; for it
is composed of the concourse or meeting of heat and brightness in some one
body, as in ordinary flame, and bodies heated to the height of being red hot.

Laying therefore all Equivocals aside, we must at last come to the true
Differences, which limit the Motion, and bring it into the Form of Heat.

THe first Difference therefore is, that Heat is an Expansive Motion, by which
the body strives to dilate and spread abroad it self, to grow into a greater
sphere or dimension than it held at first. And this Difference shows it self
most manifestly in the flame where the smoke or fat breath does manifestly open
and dilate it self into flame.

It appears also in all boiling liquor, which manifestly swells, rises, and
bubbles, and forces a way of extending it self, till it turns into a body of
greater extent, and more dilatated than the liquor it self: namely, into
vapor, or smoke, or Air.

It shows it self also in all manner of wood, or combustible thing; wherein
sometimes there is a sweating, and always an evaporation.

It shows it self also in the melting of Metals, which (being of a most
compacted body) do not easily swell nor dilatate themselves, and yet their
spirit after it is dilatated within it self, and consequently desires a greater
dilatation, it thrusts and plainly drives the thicker parts into the liquid.
And if the Heat be increased, and made more violent, it resolves and turns much
of it into volatile.

It shows it self also in Iron or Stones, which though they do not melt and
run, yet they grow soft: which appears also in wooden rods or sticks, which
being heated in hot Embers, become flexible.

But this Motion is best discerned in the Air, which by a little heat presently
and manifestly dilatates it self, as by Instance 38. Table 3.

It shows it self also in the contrary Nature, namely of cold. For cold does
contract and shrink up all bodies; so that in extreme cold weather nails will
fall out of walls, Brass will crack, and Glass also being heated and presently
laid in the cold will crack and break. The Air also with every slight cold will
contract it self, as Instance 38. Table 3. But of these things we will speak
more at large in the Inquisition of cold.

Neither is it to be wondered at, though heat and cold do work many common
effects, (whereof see Instance 32. Table 2.) seeing there are two of the
following Differences (which we will presently speak of) which belong unto both
Natures: though in this Difference (whereof we now speak) the actions be
diametrically opposite. For heat gives at Expansive and Dilatating Motion; And
cold gives a Contracting and Shrinking Motion.

THe second Difference is a Modification of the first, namely this; That heat
is an Expansive Motion, or a Motion toward the circumference, but with this
limitation, that the body must withal be carried upwards. For questionless
there are many mixed Motions: as for example, an Arrow or a Dart in going
forward wheels about, and wheeling about it goes forward: So likewise the
Motion of heat is both expansive and bearing upward.

This Difference plainly appears by putting of a fork or Iron Bar into the
fire; for if it be put into the fire perpendicularly, and hold your hand upon
it, it will quickly burn your hand, which it will not do so suddenly if it be
put in side-way or lower.

It also appears by distillations in a Descending Still, such as are used for
the tenderest kind of Flowers, the smell whereof easily vanishes away: Wherein
Industry has invented this way to place the fire upon, and not under the
Still, to the end that it may scortch less; for not only flame, but all manner
of heat naturally tends upward.

Let a Trial or Experiment of this be made in the contrary nature of cold,
namely, whether cold does not contract the body descending downward, as heat
does dilatate it ascending upward. Take two Iron rods, or two glass Trunks,
both of one bigness and proportion, and let them be made somewhat hot, and lay
a sponge dipped in cold water, or some snow under one, and upon the other; And
we believe that will sooner be cold all over which has the snow above it, than
that which has the snow beneath it: Contrary to the effect which is wrought by
heat.

THe third Difference is, that heat is a motion not uniformly Expansive in all
parts, but in some lesser parts of the body; and withal restrained, repelled,
and reverberated, so that it turns to an alternative, trying, and striving
motion, chafed by the repercussion, whence the raging of heat and fire takes it
beginning.

And this difference is most of all perceived in flame and boiling liquors;
which always quake, and swell up in small parcels, and then sink again.

It is shown also in those bodies which are so hardly compacted together, that
being heated or fired, they do not swell nor increase their bulk or mass; as
red hot Iron, in which is a most sharp heat.

This appears also in that, that fire scorcheth most in cold weather.

Likewise it appears by this, that when Air is extended in a Weather-glass,
without any let or repulsion, that is to say, uniformly and equally, the heat
is not perceived. Likewise in winds which are enclosed and shut up, though they
break out with a mighty force, yet there is no notable heat perceived; because
the Motion is of the whole, and not alternative by parcels. And for this let
trial be made, whether flame does not burn more sharply toward the sides than
in the middle.

It appears also in this, that all manner of burning is performed through small
pores of the body which is burned; so that burning does undermine, penetrate,
dig, and prick, as if there were an infinite sort of needles. And thence it
comes that all strong waters (if they be proportioned to the body upon which
they operate) do work and operate like fire, through their corroding and
piercing Nature.

And this Difference, whereof we now speak, is common to the Nature of cold, in
which the contractive Motion is restrained by the renitency or opposition of
expansion: As in heat the expansive motion is restrained by the retinency or
hanging back of contraction.

So that whether the parts of the body do penetrate inwardly, or outwardly, the
reason is alike; though the strength or force be very unequal and different;
for we have not here with us upon the superficies of the earth any thing that
is cold in an Extreme degree. See Instance 27. Table 9.

THe fourth Difference is a modification of the first; Namely this, that the
motion of pricking or penetration, must be somewhat swift, and not slow and
dull; and that it must be done by parcels, though small ones: yet not extreme
small, but of a mean bigness.

This Difference appears in comparing of the operations done by fire with those
which are performed by time or age. For age or time dries up, consumes, ruins,
and turns to ashes as well as fire, or rather more subtily. But because such a
kind of motion is very slow, and is wrought upon very small parcels, the heat
is not perceived.

It appears also in comparing the dissolvings of Iron and Gold; for Gold is
dissolved without raising any heat, but Iron with a most vehement stirring up
of heat, though for the time, it be almost in the same quantity. Because that
in Gold the ingress or entrance of the water of separation is mild, and
insinuates it self subtily, and the parts of the Gold do yield easily: But in
Iron the ingress is harsh, and with some conflict, and the parts of the Iron
show more obstinacy.

It appears also in some Gangrenes, and Mortifications of the flesh; which do
not cause any great heat or pain, by reason of the subtilness of the
Putrefaction.

And let this be the first Vindemiation or inchoated interpretation of the Form
of heat, made by the permission of the understanding.

And by this first Vindemiation the Form or true Definition of heat, (namely of
that heat which in respect of the Universal, not only relative to the sense) is
in few words this. Heat is an Expansive Motion, cohibited, and striving by the
lesser parts: and Expansion is modified, that expanding or spreading it self
out in circuit, it must notwithstanding incline somewhat upward; and that
striving by parts is likewise modified, that it ought not to be altogether
slow, but somewhat swift, and with some violence.

And concerning what belongs to the Operative it is the same thing; for the
Designation or Description is this: If in any natural body you can excite a
Motion to dilatate and spread out it self, and can stay back that motion, and
so turn it against it self, that dilatation may not proceed equally, but partly
proceed, and partly be beaten back, you will questionless engender a heat: not
any way regarding whether it be an Elementary body, (as they call it) or
imbrued by the Celestial; whether luminous or dark; whether thin or thick;
whether locally spread abroad, or contained within the enclosures of the first
dimension; whether tending to dissolution, or remaining in the same state,
whether Animal or Vegitable; whether Mineral or Water; whether Oil or Air, or
any other substance whatsoever, so it be susceptible of the foresaid motion. A
hot thing to the sense is the same, but with such an Analogy as is fitting for
the sense.

The Division of Heat.
IT seems to be a customary and authentical division, that there are three
kinds of heat; Namely, the heat of Celestial things, the heat of Animals, or
living creatures, and the heat of fire; and that these heats, (especially one
of them compared to the other two) are in their essence and kind, or their
specifical Nature, merely different, and altogether heterogeneal. For the heat
of heavenly and animal things ingenders and cherishes; whereas contrarariwise
the heat of the fire corrupts and destroys. There is therefore an Instance of
contract, and that is a common trial when we take a branch of a Vine into a
room where there is ordinarily a fire, by it Grapes will ripen sooner than they
will abroad, by a month. So that the ripening of fruit even when it hangs upon
the tree, may be effected by fire, which seems to be a proper work of the Sun.
So that from this beginning the understanding easily raises it self, rejecting
the essential Heterogeneosity, to enquire what, or which are those differences
which are really and truly found between the heat of the Sun, and that of the
fire, from which it proceeds that their operations are so diverse and
different, though they themselves participate in a common nature: which
differences we shall find to be four. The first that the Heat of the Sun, in
respect of the heat of the Fire, is in degree much softer and milder. Secondly,
that it is (especially as it is conveyed to us through the Air) of a much more
moist quality. Thirdly, (which is the very chiefest of the business) that it is
extremely unequal, and drawing near and increased, and then receding or going
back and diminished, which is of no small moment or improvement in the
generation of bodies. For Aristotle did most truly affirm, that the principle
cause of generations and corruptions which are here with us upon the
superficies of the earth, is the oblique way of the Sun through the Zodiac:
whereby the heat of the Sun, partly through the vicissitudes of day and night:
partly by the successive seasons of winter and summer, proves wonderfully
unequal: Neither does this man end there, but presently spoils and makes bad
that which he had rightly found out. For as an Arbi trator of Nature, (which is
his common practice) he Magistrate-like assigns the cause of Generation to the
approach of the Sun, and the cause of corruption to the receding and going away
of it: When both (namely, the access, or recess of the Sun) not respectively,
but in a manner indifferently, yield cause as well for Generation as
Corruption: forasmuch as the inequality serves only to the Generation and
Corruption of things, and equality to the preservation of them. There is also a
fourth Difference between the heat of the Sun, and the heat of the fire, which
is of great moment: namely, that the Sun insinuates its Operations in long
spaces of time: whereas the Operations of Fire (Men's impatiencies forcing it
thereunto) do bring things to an issue in a shorter time. For if any man shall
carefully attempt, to temper the heat of the Fire, and reduce it to a more
moderate and mild Degree (which may be done many ways) and sprinkle it, and mix
it with some moistness, especially if he imitate the heat of the Sun in its
inequality; and lastly, tolerate or suffer delay patiently (not such a delay as
shall be proportionable to the operations of the Sun, but more than that which
men use to have in the operations of the Fire) he will quickly lay aside that
Heterogeneositie of heat; and either he will, or equal, or in some things even
exceed the operations of the Sun, by the heat of the Fire. The same Instance of
Covenant is, the reviving of Butter-flies stupefied and as it were dead through
Cold, with a little luke-warmness of fire: Whereby you may easily discern, that
the Fire may as well vivisie living things, as ripen Vegitables.

Also that famous Invention of FRACASTORIUS, of a Frying-panne strongly heated,
which Physicians hold about the Heads of those who are sallen into a desperate
Apoplexy, which manifestly dilatates and extends the Animal Spirits contracted
and pressed together, and almost extinguished by Humors and Obstructions of
the Brain, and excites them to Motion even as Fire does Water or Air, and
consequently vivifieth. Likewise Eggs are sometimes hatched by the Heat of
Fire, and many such like things are done; whereby no man can question, or make
a doubt, but that the Heat of fire in many subjects may be Modified to the
Image of Celestial and animal Heat.

The Lord FRANCIS BACON of Verulam of the several kinds of Motion. OR Of the
active Virtue.
Of Diverse Kinds of Motion.
LET the first Motion be of the Antitype of matter which is in each parcel and
portion thereof, whereby it will not be quite annihilated and brought to
nothing: so that no burning, no weight or depression, no weight nor no
violence, nor any age or length of time can reduce any the smallest portion of
matter to nothing; but it must still be something, and take up some place, and
free it self, (into what necessity soever it be brought) either by changing
form or place, or (if it can do no otherwise) subsist as it is. Neither does it
ever come to that pass, either to be nothing, or no where. Which Motion the
Schools (which almost always name and define things rather by effects and
discommodities, than by Internal causes) either points at by that Axiom, That
two bodies cannot be in one place; or calls it a Motion, that there may be no
penetration of dimensions. Neither is it fitting to propose any examples of
this Motion; for it is in every manner of body.

Let the second Motion be the Motion which we call of Connection by which bodies
will not suffer themselves in any part to be severed from the touching of
another body, as rejoicing in that mutual connection and touching. Which Motion
the Schools call the Motion of their being no vacuity; as when water is drawn
up by sucking, or by Pipes; the flesh by Ventoses or Cupping-glasses; or when
water stands still and remains in Pitchers with holes in them, unless the
Pitcher be opened, and the Air let in; and many things of this kind.

Let the third Motion be that Motion which we call of Liberty, by which bodies
seek to free themselves from a preternatural pressure or stretching, and
restore themselves into a dimension fitting for their bodies. Of which Motion
there are likewise innumerable examples, (as concerning the freeing from
Pressure) of water in swimming, of air in flying, of the Water in rowing, of
the Air in the waving of winds: Neither does the Motion of the Air thrust up
together, show it self very absurdly in Guns, which Children play with, and are
commonly called Pot-guns, which are made of a piece of Elder made hollow, into
which they thrust a piece of some juycie root or the like at both the ends:
then with a Scowrer they thrust this root up at one end toward the other root
which is at the other end, which flies out with a sound before the lowermost
root or the scourer touches it. As for the freeing from tensure or stretching,
this Motion shows it self in an Egg-shel after the Egg is sucked up, in
Strings, and Leather, and Cloth, which will shrink up again after they are
stretched, unless they have quite altered their dimensions by standing too long
a time stretched, etc. And this Motion the Schools call the Motion out of the
Form of the Element; and that ignorantly enough, seeing that this Motion
belongs not only to air, water, and flame, but to every diversity of
consistencie; as of Wood, Iron, Lead, Cloth, Parchment, etc. In which each
several bodies have a model or prefixed extent of their dimensions, and from
thence are hardly drawn to any notable space. But this Motion of Liberty being
most obvious and belonging to infinites, it will be advisedly done to
distinguish it plainly and well; for many do most carelessly confound this
Motion with the other two of Antitype and connection. Namely, the Motion from
Pressure, with the Motion of antitypie, and that of extension with the Motion
of connection. Therefore if the compressed bodies did yield or extend themselves
that there might not follow a Penetration of dimensions, the bodies extended
would grow back and contract themselves that Vacuity might not follow: But if
compressed air would recover and turn it self into the thickness or density of
Water, or Wood into the density of a stone, penetration of dimensions would be
needless; and yet there might be a far greater Compression than they can any
way admit of. And in the same manner, if Water could dilatate it self into the
rarity of air, or a Stone into the rarity of Wood, there would be no need of
vacuity; and yet there might be a far greater extension of them, than they can
any way suffer. Therefore the thing is not reduced to Penetration of
dimensions, and vacuity; but only in latter ends of Condensation and
Rarefaction; when notwithstanding, these Motions stay and stop a long way on
this side of them, and nothing else but desires of the bodies to preserve
themselves in their own Consistencies, (or if they had rather, in their own
Forms) and not to recede from them suddenly, unless they be altered by mild
means, and by consent. But it is far more necessary (because it draws many
things after it) to have it intimated unto men, that a Violent Motion (which we
call Mechanical; and Democritus, who in expediting of his first Motions may be
accounted less than the meanest of Philosophers, calls the Motion of the Coast)
is nothing else but the Motion of Liberty, namely from compression to
Relaxation. For in every simple Protrusion and thrusting forward, or flying in
the air, there is no summotion or local carriage, before the parts of the body
do preternaturally, or beyond nature suffer, and be compressed by the driver;
and then the Parts successively thrusting one another, the whole is carried,
not only going forward, but withal wheeling: that by this means the Parts may
free themselves, or suffer more than is just. And so much for this Motion.

Let the fourth Motion be that which we have termed Motion of Hyles; which
Motion is in a manner contrary to that Motion which we have spoken of, namely,
the Motion of Liberty. For in the Motion of Liberty, the bodies do utterly
abhor, reject and shun a new Dimension, or new Sphere, or new Dilatation or
Contraction, (for this variety of words express all one thing) and strive with
all their might to recover, and return to their old Consistency. But
contrariwise in this motion of Hyles, the bodies do desire a new Sphere or
Dimension, and do willingly, and withal their might (as in Gunpowder) hasten
toward it. But the most powerful, and most frequent, if not the only
instruments of this motion, are Heat and Cold. As for example, if air be
dilatated by Tensure or stretching out, as by sucking of Glass-Eggs, it has a
longing desire to be restored: But if you apply Heat to it, it will
contrariwise desire to be dilatated, and to be in a new Sphere, and passes into
it willingly as into a new Form, as they call it. Neither after it is
dilatated does it care for returning, unless it be invited to it by application
of some cold thing, which is not properly a return, but a repeated
Transmutation. And in the like manner, water, if it be restrained within
narrower bounds by compression, it spurns against it, and desires to be again
what it was, namely, larger. But if there comes a strong and continued cold, it
changes willingly and of its own accord, and is condensed into Ice: and if the
cold continue, and is not interrupted by warm weather, (as it is oftentimes in
deep Caves and Grots) it turns to Crystal, or some such like matter, and is
never restored to its primitive being.

Let the fifth motion be the motion of Continuation; we do not mean the simple
and primary continuation with some other body or substance (for that is the
motion of Connection) but of Continuation of it self in a certain body. For it
is most certain, that all bodies do abhor the dissolution of Continuity, some
more, some less, but all in some measure. For as in hard bodies, (as steel or
glass) the reluctance against Discontinuation is very strong; so in Liquors,
where this kind of motion seems to cease, or at the least languish, yet there
is not an absolute pivation of it, but it plainly remains in them, as in the
lowest degree, and shows it selfin, and by many experiences, as in Bubbles, and
the roundness of drops, in the smallest threads of running Gutters, and in the
holding together, and drawing out as it were in threads of glutinous bodies,
and the like. But this desire is most plainly apparent, if we attempt a
discontinuation by lesser fractions. For in Morters after Contusion is made to
a certain degree the Pestel operates no more: Water will not get in at the
smallest chinks or crevises: and Air it self notwithstanding the subtileness of
its body, cannot suddenly pass through the pores of solid Vessels, but by a long
insinuation.

Let the sixth Motion be the motion which we call a Motion to Lucre or Gain: Or
the motion of Indigency or Want. Which is that by which bodies when they
converse amongst others, which are merely Heterogeneal, and as it were enemies;
if they can but get a convenience or means to avoid those Heterogeneals, and
apply themselves to such as have more affinity with them, (though even they do
not thoroughly agree with them) they presently embrace them, and make choice of
them, and seem to make some gain thereby; from whence we have taken the word,
as being in want and Indigency of such bodies. As for example, Gold or any
other metal beaten out to leaf, delights not in having Air about it; therefore
if it can come at some thick and tangible body, (as a finger, paper, or the
like) it sticks presently, and can hardly be gotten off. Likewise Paper, and
Cloth, and the like, do not well agree with the air which is inserted and
commixed in their Pores; wherefore they willingly drink in water, and drive out
the Air. Likewise Sugar or a Spung put into Water or Wine, though part of them
stand up, and be far above the Water or Wine, yet by little and little, and by
degrees they draw the Water or Wine upwards. From whence is taken an excellent
rule for the opening and solution of bodies for laying aside Corrosives, and
strong waters, which open a way for themselves, if there might be found a
proportionate and more agreeing and consenting solid body, than that wherewith
it is (as it were through necessity) mixed, presently the body slacks, and
opens it self, and receives the other within it, excluding and putting away the
first. Neither does this Motion to Lucre only operate, or has power upon the
feeling: For the Operation of Amber, (of which Gilbertus and others since him
have raised such Fables) is no other but the Appetite of the body raised and
excited by some light frication or rubbing, which does not very well tolerate
the Air, but had rather have some other tangible thing, if so be there be any
near unto it.

Let the seventh Motion be the Motion (which we call) of greater Congregation;
by which bodies are carried to the masses of the Connaturals, as ponderous
things to the Globe of the earth, light things toward the circumference of the
heavens. This the Schools upon slight contemplation have specified by the name
of Natural Motion: Because there was nothing of ab extra, or externally to be
seen which should cause that Motion, (therefore they thought inbred and placed
firmly in it:) Or peradventure because it does not cease: Which is no marvail,
for the heaven and the earth are always ready and at hand; whereas
contrariwise, the causes and beginnings of most of the other Motions are
sometimes absent sometimes present. Therefore because this does intermit, but
always meets the other when they intermit, they made this perpetual and proper,
and the rest as it were but acquired. But this Motion is indeed weak and dull
enough, as succumbing and yielding (unless there be a greater mass of body) to
other Motions as long as they are in operation. And though this Motion has so
filled men's thoughts, that it has almost hidden all other Motions, yet it is
but little that men know of it, but are plunged in many errors about it.

Let the eight Motion be the Motion of the lesser Congregation, by which the
Homogeneal parts in any body separate themselves from the Heterogeneal, and
come together amongst themselves: by which also whole bodies, through
similitude of substance, embrace and nourish one another, and sometimes are
congregated and drawn together from some distance; as when the cream, after
some pause of time, swims upon the top of the Milk, the Lees and Tartar settle
at the bottom of the Wine. For these things are not done by the motion of
Gravity and Levity, that some parts swim at the top, and others go to the
bottom, but through the desire of the Homogeneals of coming together, and
uniting themselves. And this motion differs from the motion of Indigency in two
things. The first, that in the Motion of Indigency there is a greater
provocation of the Malignant and contrary nature: but in this motion (if there
be no obstacles or ties) the parts are united by friendship, though the Alien
Nature be absent, which moves strife. The second thing wherein they differ,
is, that the union is more strict, and as it were with more delight: For in the
other, so that the adverse body be shunned, those bodies which have no great
affinity one with the other, do notwithstanding concur: But in this substances
come together, which are knit one to another as it were by a twin-like
substance, and are in a manner made up into one. And this motion is in all
compounded bodies, and would easily be seen in each one of them, if it were not
tied up and restrained by other appetites and necessities of bodies, which
disturb this Coition and going together. And this motion is most commonly tied
and bound up three ways; By the numness of bodies; The curb of the predominant
body; And the external motion. As for the numness of Bodies, it is most
certain, that there is in all Tangible bodies a kind of sloth, either more or
less, and a kind of aversion from local Motion, so that unless they be excited
and stirred up thereunto, they had rather remain in that state wherein they
are, than seek after a better. And this Numness, or Dullness, or Sloth, is to be
shaken off by a threefold help: Either by heat, or by an eminent Virtue of some
allied body, or by a lively and powerful motion. And first as concerning the
assistance of heat, from thence it proceeds that heat is defined to be that
separates Heterogeneals, and brings Homogeneals together. Which definition of
the Peripateticks, Gilbertus did most deservingly deride, saying that it is as
if a man should define a man to be it which sows Corn, and planteth
Vineyards, which is but only a Definition by effects, and those also particular
ones. And this Definition is yet further to be blamed: For those effects
(whatsoever they be) proceed not from the propriety of heat, but only by mere
accident (for cold will do the same, as we shall show hereafter) namely, by the
desire which Homogeneal parts have to come together: Heat only helping to
shake off the dullness, which before had bound up the desire. Secondly, as
concerning the Assistance of the virtue of the allied body that does
wonderfully appear in an armed Lodestone. For the Nature of an armed
Lodestone is such, that it a certain distance it will not draw nor attract
Iron stronger than a Lodestone which is not armed: but if the Iron be brought
so near to it, that the armed Loadstone touch it, it will take up a greater
quantity of Iron than a plain and unarmed Loadstone, by reason of the
similitude of the substance of Iron to Iron. Thirdly, as concerning the
assistance of Motion, it may be perceived in Arrows which are made all of wood
and are not headed with Iron, of which it is reported, that being shot out of a
Piece of Ordnance will penetrate further into any wooden substance (as the
sides of ships or the like) than those which are headed with Iron, by reason of
the substances similitude wood to wood, though this virtue lay hidden in the
wood, the numness of the wood being shaken off by the celerity of the Motion.
But the binding of the Motion of the minor Congregation, which is by the curb
of the Dominating or commanding body; it appears in the dissolving of blood and
urine by means of cold: For as long as those bodies are replenished with an
active spirit, which as Master of the whole orders, and keeps in each singular
part, so long the Heterogeneal cannot come together, by reason of the curb: But
when that spirit is once evaporated or suffocated by cold, then the parts freed
from the courb come together according to their own natural desire. And thence
it proceeds that all substances which contain a sharp spirit, (as Salt and the
like) last and do not dissolve by reason of the lasting and permanent curb of
the commanding and imperious spirit. The binding of the motion of the Minor
Congregation, which is done by an external motion is especially perceived in
the Agitations of Bodies, by which Putrefaction is hindered. For all manner of
Putrefaction is grounded upon the Congregation or gathering together of
Homogeneals, whereby by little and little is caused the Corruption (as they
call it) of the first form, and the generation of another new one. For the
dissolution of the old form goes before Putrefaction, which prepares the way to
the Generation of the new form, which is the Coition it self to Homogenia, and
that if it be not hindered becomes a simple solution; but if there come diverse
things in the way to hinder it, then Putrefactions follow, which are rudiments
or beginnings of a new Generation. And if (which is the thing we have now in
hand) there be a frequent agitation by an external motion, then this motion of
Coition (which is delicate and tender, and desires rest outwardly) is disturbed
and cease, as we see in an innumerable company of things: As when a daily
agitation or running water expels Putrefaction, Winds drive a way the
Pestilence of the Air, Corn in Garners of the Air, or Storehouses turned and
tossed up and down continue pure, and finally all things that are agitated
outwardly, do not easily putrify inwardly. We must not at last omit that
Coition or going together of Parts of the body, which chiefly causes
Induration, or Desiccation. For after the spirit, or some humidity turned into
spirit is fled out of some porous body (as in Wood, a Bone, a Parchment, and
the like) then the thickest parts are contracted and grow up together with
greater vehemence, whereupon grows Exsiccetion, or Induration, which we believe
to be done, not so much by the motion of Connection, that there may be no
vacuity as by this motion of Amity and Union. As concerning the Coition at
distance, that is very unfrequent and rare, and yet it is in more things than
is observed. The representations of these are one bubble dissolving another.
Medicaments draw humors out of the similitude of substance; one string moves
another string in a several instrument to an Unison and the like. I conceive
this kind of motion likewise to be in the spirits of living or animal things,
but this is as yet unknown. But certainly it is eminent in the Lodestone and
Iron raised up. Now when we speak of the motions of the Lodestone, they must
be plainly distinguished: for there are four virtues or operations in the
Lodestone which ought not to be confounded but separated, though the
admiration and stupidity of men has mixed them, the one is the Coition or
coming together of the Lodestone with the Lodestone, or of Iron with the
Lodestone, or of Iron with Iron touched therewith. The second is of its
turning North and South, and also of its Declination: the third is of its
penetrating through Gold, Glass, Stone, or any thing: The fourth is of the
Communication of its virtue from the stone into Iron, and from Iron into Iron,
without any communication of the substance: but in this place we speak only of
its first virtue; namely, of its Coition or coming together. That is also a
notable Coition of Quicksilver and Gold, so that Gold will attract Quicksilver,
though it be made up in Unguents, and those who work amongst the vapors of
Quicksilver, use to hold a piece of Gold in their mouths, to gather together
the emissions of the Quicksilver, which would otherwise invade and penetrate
their craniums and bones, and causes the gold so held in their mouths to turn
white. And thus much shall suffice to be spoken of the motion of the lesser
Congregation.

Let the ninth Motion be the Magnetic Motion, which though it be of the same
kind, as the Motion of the Lesser Congregation; yet if it operate at great
distances, and upon great masses of things, it deserves a several Inquisition:
especially if it do not begin with touching, nor does not bring the action to
the touch, as all Congregating Motions do; but only elevates the bodies, or
causes them to swell, and no more. For if the Moon raises the waters, or
causes moist things to swell up; or the starry sky draws their Planets toward
their Apogea; or the Sun binds together the stars of Venus and Mercury, that
they can go no further from his body then to such a certain distance. These
Motions seem cannot be well placed neither under the Major nor Minor
Congregation, but are as it were middle or imperfect Congregatives, and must
have a proper species or kind to themselves.

Let the tenth Motion be the Motion of Flight or Shunning: Namely, a Motion
contrary to that of the Minor Congregation: by which bodies through Antipathy
fly from such bodies as are enemies to them, separate themselves from them,
and refuse to mix with them. For though in some things this Motion seem to be
only an accidental Motion, or by consequence, in respect of the motion of the
lesser Congregation, because Homogeneals cannot come together, but the
Heterogeneals must be excluded and removed. Yet this motion must be placed by
it self, and be made one several kind or species, because in many things the
desire of Flight is less principal than the appetite or desire of Coition or
coming together. And this Motion is most eminent in the Excrements of living
Creatures, and likewise in the hateful objects of some senses, especially those
of smelling and tasting. For a stinking smell is so hateful to the sense of
smelling, that it brings the motion of expulsion into the Orifice of the
stomach by consent: a bitter and horrid savor is so rejected by the Palate or
the throat, that it causes a shaking and horror of the head by consent. But
this Motion does likewise take place in other things, for it may be perceived
in some Antiperistases; as in the middle Region of the Air, whose coldness
seems to be the rejection of Natural coldness from the heavenly confines; as
likewise those great heats and Inflammations which are found in subterraneal
places, are rejections of the hot Nature from the Bowels of the Earth: for heat
and cold, if they be in a Minor or lesser quantity, do destroy each other; but
if they be in greater Masses, and as it were in equal Armies, they thrust one
another out of place. It is reported also, that Cinnamon, and other fragrant and
odoriferous Plants being set by Privies and stinking places, will retain their
own fragrancy the longer, as refusing to come forth and mix themselves with the
stinking smells. And truly Quicksilver, which would otherwise reunite it self
into an entire body, is hindered from it by man's spittle or Barrowsgrease, or
Turpentine, and the like, and cannot gather its parts together, by reason of
their dissent with such bodies, from which being circumfused round about them,
they withdraw themselves. So that their flight from these interjacent things is
of more force than the desire of reuniting themselves with those parts which
are of the same kind; and this is called mortifying or killing of Quicksilver.
Also that Oil will not mix with water, is not only by reason of the difference
of levity or lightness, but by reason of their evil agreement, for the spirit
of Wine which is lighter than Oil will mix with water. But this motion of
Flight is most notable in Niter, and such like crude bodies which do abhor
fire, as Gunne-powder, Quicksilver, Gold, and the like. But the Flight of Iron
from the other Magnetic Pole is by Gilbertus very well observed to be not
properly a Flight, but a Conformity and Coition to a more convenient situation.

Let the eleventh Motion be the Motion of Assembling, or Multiplying of its
self, or of simple Generation. And we call simple Generation not of whole or
Integral bodies, as in Plants and living things, but of simular or like bodies;
That is to say, that by this Motion bodies which are alike do turn other bodies
which have some affinity with them, or at least are well disposed or prepared,
into their own substance or Nature: As flame which multiplies it self upon
breaths and oily things, and ingenders a new Flame: Air, which upon water and
watery things multiplyes it self and ingenders a new Air: The Vegitable spirit
which multiplies it self in its nourishments upon the most subtle and thin
parts, as well of watery as oily things, and ingenders a new spirit, the solid
parts of Plants, and living Creatures, as Leaves, Flowers, Flesh, Bone, and the
like, each of which out of the juyces of nourishments do assimilate and
engender a successive substance and excretion. For we would not have any man
dote with Paracelsus, who (blinded with his Distillations) would have Nutrition
made by separation only; and that in bread or food there lies hidden the Eye,
Nose, Brain, Liver, etc. in the moisture of the earth, the Root, the Leaf, the
Flower. For as a Carver or Sculpter out of a rude Mass of wood or stone will
bring forth a Leaf, a Flower, an Eye, a Nose, a Hand, a Foot, or the like, by
separating and putting away what is superfluous: so that chief internal workman
(says he) will by separation and rejection out of food bring forth several
members and parts. But laying such trifles and toys aside, it is most certain,
that each several parts, as well Similar as Organical, in Vegitables and
Animals, do first with some delight attract, then assimilate and turn into
their own Nature, the juyces of their several foods almost common, or at least
not much unlike. Neither is this assimilation or simple Generation in animate
bodies only, but the Inanimate also participate thereof, as we have said of
Flame and Air. And also the dead spirit which is contained in every tangible
animate thing, does always work, to digest and turn the thicker parts into
spirit, which may afterward go forth: whence comes the diminution of weight,
and the drying up, as we said elsewhere: Neither is that accretion, or growing
together, which they commonly reject in alimentation be rejected in
assimilation, as when Mud grows together amongst small stones, and is turned
into a stony substance: Scales about the Teeth turn into a substance as hard as
the Teeth themselves, etc. For we are of that opinion that there is in all
bodies a desire of assimilation or making alike, as great as that of
Homogeneals to come together; but this virtue is bound up as well as the other,
but not by the same means: But we must with our greatest care inquire out those
means, and the way of getting loose from them; because they belong to the
comforting of old age. Lastly, it is worthy to be noted, that in nine of those
motions whereof we have spoken, bodies do only desire their own preservation,
but in this eleventh they desire to have it propagated.

Let the twelfth Motion be the motion of Excitation, which motion seems to be
of the same kind as assimilation, and sometimes it is so by us promiscuously
called: For it is a Diffusive, Communicative, Transitive, and multiplicative
motion, as well as the other; and they agree for the most part in their
effects, though they differ in the manner and subject of effecting. For the
motion of assimilation proceeds as it were with command and power; for it
commands and constrains the assimilated thing to turn and chang it self into
the assimilant. But the motion of Excitation proceeds as it were with Art and
Insituation, and by stealth; for it does only invite and dispose the thing
excited to the nature of the exciting thing: also the motion of assimilation
does multiply and transform bodies and substances; as for example, there is
more flame, more air, more spirit, more flesh made: But in the Motion of
Excitation the virtues only are multiplied and transported, and there is made
more heat, more Magnetic power, more rottenness. And this Motion is most
eminent in heat and cold: For heat does not diffuse it self in heating, by the
communication of the first heat, but only by Excitation of the parts of the
body to that Motion, which is the form of heat, of which we spoke in the first
Vindemiation of heat; so that heat is far more slowly and difficulty excited in
a stone or Metal, than it is in Air, by reason of the Inability and unreadiness
of those bodies to that Motion: so that it is likely that there may be such
matters within the Bowels of the earth, as do utterly refuse to be heated, by
reason that through their greater condensation they are destitute of that
spirit, from which this Motion of Excitation first begins. So the Lodestone
does endure Iron with a new disposition of parts, yet it loses nothing of its
virtue: so the Leaven of Bread, the Flower or Yeast of Drink, and the runnet
which coagulates milk; and likewise some poisons do excite and invite Motion in
a quantity of Meal, or Beer, or Cheese, successively and continuately, not so
much by the power of the excitor, as by the predisposition and easy yielding
of the excited.

Let the thirteenth Motion be the Motion of Impression; which motion is
likewise of the same kind as the motion of assimilation, and is the most
subtle of all Diffusive motions. Yet we thought good to place it in a proper
species, because of the notable difference which is between it and the former
two: For the plain and simple Motion of assimilation does transform the bodies
themselves: so that if you take away the first mover, it nothing concerns those
which follow; for the first kindling into Flame, or the first turning into air,
does nothing concern the flame or the air which succeeds in Generation.
Likewise the Motion of Excitation remains for a very long time, the first mover
being taken away; as in a heated body, the first heater being laid away: in
Iron excited, the Lodestone being taken away; in the heap of Meal, the Leaven
being laid aside. But the motion of Impression, though it be Diffusive and
Transitive, yet it seems to depend upon the first mover: so that it ever being
taken away or ceasing, it presently fails or perishes; so that it is ended in a
moment, or in a very little time. Wherefore we useto call those motions of
Assimilation and Excitation, the motion of Jupiters Generation, because the
Generation remains; and this motion of Impression the motion of the Generation
of Saturn, because that as soon as it is born it is devoured and swallowed up.
And this motion manifests it self in three things; in the beams or glimpses of
light, in the stroke of sounds, and magnetic forces, as concerning
communication. For the light being taken away, the colors presently perish,
together with the other Images of it. The first stroke and shaking of the body
caused thereby being ended, presently after the sound perishes. For sounds are
tossed up and down by Winds, as it were by Waters; yet you must more diligently
observe, that the sound does not last so long as there is a resounding: For the
Bell being Rung, the sound seems to continue for a long time; whereby a man may
easily fall into an error if he think or imagine that sound does stick, or as
it were swim in the air all that while, which is most false. For that
resounding is not the same sound in Number, but is only renewed: and this is
made manifest by the stopping or cohibition of the stricken or smitten body;
for if the Bell be strongly stayed or withheld and kept immovable, presently
the sound perishes, and it sounds no more, as in strings, if after the first
stroke the string be touched with the finger, as in the Harp, or with the
quill, as in Virginals, presently the resounding cease. The Lodestone being
taken away, the Iron presently falls: But the Moon cannot be removed from the
Sea, nor the earth from any thing that is ponderous when it falls; therefore
there can be no trial made of them, but howsoever the reason is alike.

Let the fourteenth Motion be the motion of Configuration, or Situation, by
which bodies seem to desire not any Coition, nor separation, but a Situation,
Collocation, and Configuration with others. But this is a most abstruse and
hidden motion, neither has it been well enquired about; and in some things it
seems as it were to be incausable, though indeed (as we believe) it be not so.
For if one should ask why the heaven turns and wheeleth from East to West,
rather than from West to East; or why it turns about those Poles which are set
about the Ursas or Bears, rather than about Orion, or any other part of the
Heaven: This Question seems to be as it were some Extasis, seeing that such
things should rather through experience be received as positive: and there are
indeed in Nature some ultimate and incausable things, but this is none of them.
For we hold this to be done by a certain harmony and consent of the world,
which is not yet come into observation: but if the Motion of the earth be
admitted to be from West to East, the same Questions do remain; for it also
moves upon some Poles, and why at last should these Poles be placed where they
are rather than any where else. Also the verticity and direction, and
Declination of the Loadstone are referred to this motion. Likewise there are
found as well in Natural as Artificial bodies, especially those which are
consistent, and not fluid; a certain collocation and posture of parts, and as
it were wool and threads, which must be diligently searched out and enquired
after, as being such that without the finding of them, those bodies cannot be
easily touched nor guided; but those Circulations in liquid things, by which,
they while they are pressed before they can free themselves, do relieve each
other, that they may bear that compression equally, we do more truly assign to
the motion of Liberty.

Let the fifteenth Motion be the motion of Pertransition, or the motion
according to the issues or holes by which the virtues of bodies are more or
less hindered or forwarded by their mediums or means, according to the Nature of
the operating bodies or virtues, and also of the means: For one medium or means
is convenient for the light, another for the sound, another for heat and cold,
another for magnetic Virtues, and for other things respectively.

Let the sixteenth motion be the Regal or Politic motion, for so we call it.
By which the predominant and commanding parts do bridle, tame, subdue and order
the rest of the parts, and force them to be gathered together, and separated,
to stop, move, and be placed, not according to their own desires, but as it is
in order, and expedient for the well being of that commanding part: so that it
is as it were a kind of Government, and Policy which the ruling part exercises
over the subjected parts. And this Motion is most eminent in the spirits of
living things, which Motion does temper together all the Motions of the rest of
the parts, as long as it self is in vigor and force. It is likewise to be found
in other bodies in a certain inferior degree, as has been said of blood and
urines, which are not dissolved, till the spirit which restrained and mixed
their parts was let forth, or suffocated. Neither is this Motion altogether
proper to Spirits, though Spirits are predominant in most bodies, by reason of
their quick and penetrating Motion. But in bodies which are more condensed, and
are not filled with a lively and vigorous spirit, such as is in Quicksilver
and Vitriol, the thicker parts are predominant; so that unless this curb and
yoke be some way shaken off, we must not hope for any new transformation of
such bodies.

Let the seventeenth Motion be the Spontaneal or Willing Motion of Rotation or
wheeling: by which bodies that delight in Motion, and are well placed, do enjoy
themselves, and follow one another, and not any thing else, seeking (as it
were) their own embraces. For bodies seem either to move without any term, or
to stand quite still, or to be carried to that term, where through their own
Nature they must either wheel or stand still: And those things that are well
placed, if they enjoy Motion, do move circularly, namely with an Eternal an
Infinite motion. Those things which are well placed, and are averse from
motion, do stand quite still: Those which are not well placed do move in a
direct line, (as by the shortest path) to the company of their connaturals. And
this motion of Rotation or wheeling, admits of seven differences: The first of
its Center about which the bodies move: The second of their Poles upon which
they move: The third of its circumference or compass, according as they are
distant from the Center: The fourth of their Incitation, according as they move
either more slowly, or more swiftly: The fifth of the consecution of their
Motion, as from East to West, or from West to East: The sixth of the Declination
from the perfect Circle by threads or lines nearer to, or further from the
Center: The seventh of its declination from the perfect circle by the Lines
nearer to, or further from their Poles: The eighth of the further or nearer
distance of their Lines one from the other: The ninth and last of the
variations of the Poles themselves, if they be moveable; the which does not
belong to Rotation or wheeling, unless it be done circularly; And this Motion
by the common and inveterate opinion is held to be the proper Motion of the
Heavens: Yet there is a great Question amongst some as well ancient as modern
concerning that Motion, who have attributed this Rotation or wheeling to the
earth. But it would be a far more just question or controversy (if the thing
be not without question) namely, whether this Motion (granted that the Earth
does stand still) be contained within the bounds of the heaven, or rather
descends and communicates it self to the Air and to the Waters. But the motion
of Rotation in darted things, as in Arrows, Darts, Bullets for Guns, and the
like, we remit altogether to the motion of Liberty.

Let the eighteenth motion be the motion of Trepidation, to which (as it is
understood by Astronomers) we give no great credit. But to us who seriously
seek out every where the Appetites and Desires of Natural bodies, this motion
comes in our way, and seems it ought to be placed in specie, as of a several
kind. And this motion is as it were of a certain perpetual captivity or
bondage: namely, in which bodies being not altogether well placed according to
their Nature, nor yet finding themselves altogether ill, do trepidate or
agitate continually, taking no rest, as not contented with the state they are
in, nor yet daring to proceed any further. And such a motion is found in the
heart and pulses of living Creatures, and must of necessity be in all bodies
which are in an anxious and doubtful case between commodities and
discommodities that being distracted do try to free themselves, and still
receive a repulse, yet still go on trying.

Let the nineteenth and last motion be that to which the name of motion scarce
belongs, and yet is a mere motion. Which motion we may call the motion of
lying down, or the motion of abhorring of motion. By this motion the earth
stands in its own frame, the extremes of it moving themselves into the middle,
not to the imaginative Center, but to Union. By this appetite also all things
which are condensed or grown thick in a high degree do abhor motion, and all
their appetite is, not to move: and though they be provoked infinitely to move,
yet (as far as they can) they preserve their own Nature. And if they be forced
to motion, yet they seem always to endeavor to recover their own estate and
rest, to move no more. And indeed about this they are active enough, and do
strive swiftly and speedily enough, as being impatient of any delay. But the
Image of this appetite can but partly be discerned, because with us by the
subagitation and concoction of the Celestials, every tangible thing is not only
not condensed to the height, but is also mixed with some spirit. We have
therefore now proposed the species, or simple Elements of Motions, Appetites,
and Active Virtues which are most universal in Nature: neither is there a small
part of Natural Knowledge shadowed under these. Yet we do not deny, but that
other species may peradventure be added, and that these very Divisions may be
transported according to the truer veins of things, and be reduced into a
smaller number: Yet we do not mean this of any abstracted Divisions; As who
should say, that bodies desire either the Preservation or Exaltation, or
Propagation, or Fruition of their own Nature; or as if one should say, that the
motions of things do tend to the Preservation and good either of the Universal,
as Antitypie, or Connection, or of great Universalities as the motion of the
greater Congregation, or of Rotation and wheeling, or of the abhorring of
motion, or of special Forms, as the rest of motions. For though these things be
true, yet unless they be terminated in Matter and Fabric, according to the
true lines, they are speculative and less profitable. In the mean time they
will be sufficient, and of good use to weigh the Predominances of Virtues, and
enquire out the Instances of strife. For of these motions whereof we have
spoken, some are altogether invincible, some are stronger, and bind, curb and
dispose them. Some do shoot out and dart further: some do prevent others in
time and swiftness: some do nourish, strengthen, enlarge, and hasten the other.

The Motion of Antitypie is altogether Adamantive and Invincible. But whether
the Motion of Connection be so or no, we yet doubt of. For we will not for a
certainty affirm whether there be a Vacuity, or Coacervation and heaping up, or
a Permixion. But this we are sure of, that the reason which Lucippus and
Democritus give to bring in a vacuity (namely because without it the same
bodies could not fill up and contain greater and lesser spaces) is false. For
certainly it is the fold of the matter doubling and redoubling it self by
spaces within certain bounds, without interposition of Vacuity. Neither is
there in air two thousand times more (for so much it must be) of Vacuity than
there is in Gold, which is sufficiently known to us by the most powerful
virtues of Pneumatick or windy bodies, (which otherwise would swim in Vacuity
like small dust) and many other Demonstrations. And the rest of the Motions do
govern, and are governed one by another according to the Vigor, Quantity,
Incitation, Ejaculation, and according to the helps and hindrances which do
happen. As for example, some Lodestone armed will draw up and hold Iron which
shall weigh threescore times as much as it self: so far the Motion of the
lesser Congregation does predominate above the Motion of the greater
Congregation; And if there be any greater weight it yields. A Beam will bear
some weight of timber: So far does the Motion of Liberty predominate upon the
motion of the greater Congregation: But if the weight be more it will yield.
Leather stretched out to such an extent will not tear: So far the Motion of
Continuation predominates upon the Motion of Extension; But if it be stretched
any further, the Leather tears, and the Motion of Continuation does yield.
Water runs out at a crevise of such a bigness, so far the Motion of the greater
Congregation predominates over the Motion of Continuation: and if the crevise
be lesser it yields, and the Motion of Continuation overcomes. The powder of
Sulphur alone put into a Gun with a Bullet and fired does not drive out the
Bullet; In that the Motion of the greater Congregation overcomes the motion of
Hyles: but gunpowder being put in, overcomes the motion of Hyles in the
Brimstone, being helped by the Motions of Hyles, and of Flight in the Niter,
and so of the rest. For the instances of strife (which show the predominancy of
virtues, and according to what means and degrees they predominate and yield) is
to be sought out by a sharp and diligent Inquisition. Likewise the means and
ways of the succumbency and yielding of Motions are carefully to be looked
into: Namely, whether they cease altogether, or whether they only strive so to
do, and are withheld. For in bodies here with us there is no true rest, neither
in the whole, nor in the parts, but only in appearance and seemingness. And
this seeming Quietness or rest, is caused either by the Counterpoise, or the
predominancy of Motions: By counterpoise, as in Scales which stand even if the
weights be equal; By predominancy, as in pitchers which have holes in them,
where the water lies still, and is kept from falling by the predominancy of
the motion of Connection: Yet we must observe (as we said before) how far those
yielding Motions do strive. For if any one through striving be kept down
stretched out upon the earth, with his arms and legs bound, or otherwise held,
and yet he with all his force strive to get up, his striving is nothing the
less, though it does not avail. But the condition of this thing, (namely,
whether the yielding motion be as it were annihilated by the predominancy, or
whether the strife continue, though it is not perceived) which lies hidden in
Conflicts, will peradventure appear in concurrencies. Let the trial be made in
Guns; whether a Gun will shoot a bullet furthest in a direct line, which we
call point blank, or shooting upwards where the only force carries the Bullet,
or downwards, where the Motion of Gravity concurs with the force of the blow.
Also the Rules of Predominancies which come in the way are to be gathered
together: As the commoner the good is which is desired, the stronger it is; As
the motion of Connection, which looks upon the communion of the Universal, is
stronger than the Motion of Gravity or weight, which looks only upon the
communion of dense and solid things. Also that the desires of a private good,
most commonly do not prevail against the desires which are for a more Public
good, but in some small quantities. Which would God we might obtain in Civil
Affairs.

The way how to find out the Causes of the Ebbing and flowing of the Sea.
THis motion must of necessity be brought to pass, either by the Progress, and
Regresse of waters, like unto water tossed up and down in a Tub, which when it
washes one side of the Tub, forsakes the other side: or by the rising and
falling of the waters from the bottom, like unto water that boiles up and
falls again. Now which of these two causes must be the cause of Ebbing and
Flowing is the question. If the first assertion be admitted of, then of
necessity when the flowing of the sea is one way, the sea must at the same time
in one place or other be Ebbing: and this is the thing which we enquired. Acost
a with some others (after diligent inquiry) have observed, that on the shoars
of Florida and the opposite shoars of Spain and Africa, the Ebbings and
Flowings of the Sea are at the same time, and not contrariwise, when it flows
at the shoars of Florida, it ebbs on the shoars of Spain and Africa. But if one
give more attention, and take better heed, the rising motion is not confirmed,
nor the motion by Progress denied. For it may be that the motion of waters in
Progress may be, and yet it may flow upon the opposite banks of the same
Channel, at the same time; namely, if the waters be forced and driven in from
another place, as it is in Rivers which ebb and flow on both their banks on
each side at the same time, this motion notwithstanding being a mere motion in
Progress, namely, of waters coming in at the mouths of the Rivers out of the
Sea: so in the same manner waters coming in great abundance out of the Indian
Eastern Ocean, may be be driven and thrust into the Channel of the Atlantic
Sea, and therefore may overflow both banks at one time. Therefore we must
enquire whether there be ever another Channel by which the waters may ebb, and
so diminish at the same time: And behold here is the south sea at hand, which
is no lesser than the Atlantic sea, but large and extended sufficiently for
this purpose. So now at last we are come to the Instance of the Cross
concerning this subject: which word is taken from Crosses, which are set up in
cross ways, and point out the separations of them. And these we use to call
Decisory and Judicial Instances, and in some cases Instance of Oracle and
mandate: The manner of them is this; When in the Inquisition of some Nature,
the understanding is suspended and uncertain, to which of the two or more
natures the Cause of the enquired Nature ought to be attributed and assigned,
by reason of the frequent and ordinary concourse of diverse Natures; the
instances of the Cross do show the faithful and indissoluble agreement
(concerning the Nature which is enquired of) of one of the Natures, and the
variable and separable agreement of the other, whereby the question is
determined, and the former Nature is received for the cause, the other being
rejected and laid aside: And that is such a one, if we find of a certainty,
that when it flows on the opposite shoars as well of Florida and Spain in the
Atlantic sea, it flows also upon the shoars of Peru, and the backside of
China in the south sea: then by this Decisorie Instance this Assertion must be
confirmed, that the ebbing and flowing of the sea which we enquire after, must
be done by a Progressive Motion: For there is no other sea or other place left
where there can be a Regress or ebb made at the same time: And this may most
easily be known, if one could enquire of the Inhabitants of Panama and Lima
(where the Atlantic and Southern Ocean are severed only by a small Isthmus)
whether the ebbing and flowing be at the same time on both sides of the Isthmus
or no. But this Decision seems to be certain, if it be granted that the Earth
stand immovable. For if the Earth turns round, it may be that by unequal
turning of it, (as touching the celerity and swiftness of it) and of the water
of the sea, there may be a violent driving of waters up into a heap, which may
be the flowing, and a Re-laxation of the same, (when they can be heaped up no
more) which may be the ebbing. But of this there must be an Inquisition
severally. But this being also supposed, that still remains steadfast, that
there must be somewhere an ebbing of waters when there is a flowing in other
places. Likewise let the latter motion of those two which we supposed, be the
enquired Nature: namely, the motion of the Sea raising it self, and sinking
down again; if it so happen that (after the matter is diligently examined) the
other Progressive motion which we have spoken of, be rejected: Then there will
be such a threefold way concerning this Nature; and of Necessity this motion by
which waters in ebbings and flowings rise and fall again, without any addition
of waters coming to them, must be one of these three ways: Either that this
abundance of waters comes out of the Entrails of the earth, and returns again
into them: Or that there be no greater mass of waters, but that the same
waters, (without any increasing of Quantity) are extended, or rarefied, so that
they spread themselves into a larger dimension, and take up more room, and then
restrain and contract themselves again: Or that there is neither more quantity,
nor larger extension, but that the same waters (as they are both in Quantity or
Rarity and Density) do raise themselves, and so fall again by and through some
Magnetic power drawing them from above, and so by consent rise and fall again.
So now (if you please) let the Inquisition be reduced (laying aside the two
first Motions) to this last, and let us enquire whether there be any such
sublation or raising made by consent, or Magnetic power. But in the first
place it is manifest that all the whole waters as they are laid in the hollow
or concave place of the Sea, cannot be raised altogether, for then there would
want some thing to succeed and be in the bottom: so that if there were any
such appetite or desire in the waters of raising themselves, yet that would be
broken and cohibited by the connection of things, or (as they commonly call it)
by the Nonentity or not being of any vacuity. It remains therefore that the
waters must rise on the one side, or part, and thereby diminish and fall on the
other. For again, it will of necessity follow, that the Magnetic power, seeing
it cannot operate upon the whole, must needs operate most strongly about the
middle, so that raising the water in the middle, it must needs successively
abandon and forsake the shoars. So thus at last this subject is come to the
Instance of the Cross, which is this: That if it be found that in the ebbings
of the sea, the superficies of the waters in the sea is more arched and round,
namely, the waters rising in the middle of the sea, and failing about the
sides, which are the shoars; and in the Floods or Flowings the same superficies
is more plain and even, by reason of the waters returning to their first
posture: Then truly by this Decisory Instance the raising by Magnetic power
may be admitted of, otherwise it must be absolutely rejected. But this may
easily be tried in Arms of the sea, by sea lines, namely, whether in ebbs
toward the middle of the sea, the sea be not deeper than in floods. But we
must note, that if this be so, waters do (contrary to what is commonly
believed) rise in their ebbings, and fall only in flowings, whereby they fill
and overflow the banks.

An Index of the most remarkable things contained in this Book.
ABer Barry, a rockie cliff in Wales, wherein is heard a continual murmr of
Winds. Page 18 Accidental generations of Winds. 20 Acosta reprehended. 11 His
observation touching Plata and Potosa 18 Acrimonius liquors operate hotly in
the divulsion of bodies. 61 Aetna and other hills, cast out flames. 18 Aeolus
his Kingdom. 17 Air in hooded glasses swells the bladder, 23. enclosed in caves
in summer 58. is forced to break out 18. being moved, it cools rather then
heats. 60 Andes betwixt Peru and Chile 26. some hills there. 55 Animals inwards
hot, 60, dead ones have no warm part in them. 63 Anniversary winds, 57. those
that are Northerly about the beginning of dog days are thought to come from the
frozen Sea. 24 St Anthonies fire. 57 Anvils heat with hammering upon them. 65
Approaching to hot things causes heat. 66 Aqua regis dissolves gold. 61 Aqua
fortis silver. ibid. Arcturus his rising followed with tempests. 23 Aselli,
certain stars. 39 Athos. 26 Attending winds, 58. are not the same at Sea as at
Land, 11. ought not to be confounded with stayed winds. 12 Attrition of bodies
heats them. 59
B.
BEllows, Aeolus his bags. 42 Bells are heard furthest against wind. 42. their
sound is thought to disperse thunder. 25 Belluae, what they are. 21 Binding of
the major and minor congregation in motion. 79, 80 Bird Winds. 10 Birds
perching, what they presage. 41 Bounds of Winds. 3 Breath in the Microcosmos
parallel to Winds which blow, 43 Breze a wind, 7. blows plentifully between the
Tropicks, 8. without them it is hardly perceiveable, ibid. it is not a full
East, but a Northwest wind. 8 Burdelois Petition to the King of England. 25
Butterflies revived by heat. 15
C.
CAlmness at sea. 12 Castor, Pollux, and Hellen, what they presage to Mariners,
40. how hot, and what manner of heat they have. 57 Cardinal Winds. 6 Caravels,
what manner of ships they are. 34 Chemists principles. 49 Circles about the
Planets or Stars, presage winds, 39. about the Moon likewise on that side where
they break. 19. 38 Clear weather in Summer, presages a windy Autumn, 41. and a
clear Autumn, a windy winter. 41 Clouds presages concerning winds, 40. the
higher ones sometimes outfly the lower, 30. and are for the most part carried
from East to West. 7 Coals shining bright and sparkling, presage wind. 41
Coaches moving with the wind. 61 Colder weather then the season requires. 58
Columbus judged, there was a continent toward America, by the certain and
stayed winds, which blew from thence toward the shores of Portugal. 9. 29 Cold
causes a kind of burning. 54. 62 Comets effects for increasing heat are not
perceivable. 56 Convenient instances, in the nature of hot things. 53
Conjunctions of Planets, are followed by winds, 39. and great ones. 23
Conflicts of winds, 4. 30. 33. being strong do produce vehement and whirling
winds. 25 Constantius his excessive heat. 63 Contributing toward winds, and
raising and appearing of them. 3 Cooling of summer rooms, 42. artificially done
by induction of Winds. 21 Coruscations give light, but do not burn. 56
Coruscations about a sweating horse. 57 Crows presage Winds. 41 Currents in the
sea. 9
D.
DIssolution of snow, about the frozen sea, raises Northern Winds in Italy and
Greece. 29 Diverse Motions of Winds. 4 Diverse qualities of Winds. 2 Duckers and
Ducks, against Wind, cleanse their feathers with their bills. 41 Dung or
whatever else fattens soil, is of a hot nature. 63
E.
EArth the first cold thing. 18 Earthquakes bring in noxious and foreign
Winds, 18. they happen but seldom. 17 East Wind, dry and piercing, 14. in
England surmised to be mischievous, 12. in Europe generally drying. 8 East
North-East Wind draws the clouds to it, 15. and is compared to Usurers. 15
Ebbings and flowings of the sea, 90. Acosta's observation concerning them. 90
Eclipses of the Moon preceded, and followed by Winds, and the Suns with fair
weather. 22, 39 Eggs sometimes hatched with the heat of fire. 75 Enlightnings
or ostensive instances, what they are. 71 Exciting of Motions in winds. 28
Excrements of Beasts, newly made, are hot. 54 Experiment of Wind in a close
Tower. 23, 27 Experiment of the Suns heat on a glass. 56 Extraordinary Winds. 2
F.
FEathers swimming upon the water, presage Wind. 41 Feathers what kind of heat
they cause. 63 Fervent vapor. 34 Fervent heats in the Solstice, end with
Thunder. 39 Fire how kindled amongst the Indians, 54. upon a hearth, how it
presageth winds. 40 Fired things that look red, are perpetually hot, 57. and
have diverse degrees of heat. 65 Fiery Meteors appear more in winter then in
summer. 57 Fishes entrails not very hot, 63. when they stink their scales
shine, 58. there is in them a degree, rather then a privation of heat. 60
Firmament opening, betokens Winds. 19 Flames have many degrees of violence, 64.
sometimes seen blazing about childrens heads, yet not burn the hair. 57 Flints
by percussion, yield sparkles. 59 Form of a thing, is the thing it self, 62. it
ought to be absent, where the primary nature is absent, and present, where it
is present, 54. what our Author means by form. 68 Fracastorius his invention
with a drying pan. 75 Free winds, 1. are least attendant in summer. 10 Froth
upon a calm sea presages wind. 41 Full Moon touching circles and colors, gives
the same presages, as it does at four days old. 39 Furrowing winds. 4
G.
GAles blow continually, about the sea. 20 Generation simple, what it is. 83
Generations accidental of Winds. 2 Generations and corruptions principal
causes. 75 General Winds. 1, 7 Gilbertus his electrick operation 80. he is
reprehended. 49 Glowworms. 58 Great English ship have some four, some five
masts. 31 Green herbs laid up together, will fire. 54 Great Winds are
inundations of the air. 43 In great storms what is to be done. 33, 34
Groenland. 10. 56 Gunpowder. 43
H.
HAy cocks, blown up in the Air. 22 Hand fans. 42 Heat is an expansive motion,
by which the body strives to dilatate it self, 71. ascending upward, 71. by the
lesser parts of the body, 73. somewhat swift, 73, 74. that of celestial things,
is increased there ways, 64. it will not burn any dry thing, 64. how it is in
the brain, 63. in what things it is strongest, 64 Heats definition, 74. is a
Peripatetical one, 57. its division, 75. its first tactible degree, seems to be
in animate things, 63. in vegetables it is not tangible, 63. what bodies are
most subject to it, next to Air. 67 Helps to winds. 22 Hernes flying high,
presage Winds, 41. Kites fair weather. 41 Hills capped with clouds presage
tempests. 24 History of heavy and light. 48 History concerning a child's apron.
57 History of Density and Rarity. 47 History of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt. 49
History of the Simpathy and Antipathy of things. 49 History of life and death.
50 Hoary frosts and Snow, cause South Winds. 14 Hot and heating, two different
things. 71 Hot Baths. 57, 58 Horse dung. 62 Hyades and Pleiades, their power
concerning Winds, 23. at their rising they cause rain. 39
I.
IGnis Fatuus, has not much heat in it. 75 Ignis grecus. 65 Indians have a web
made of feathers, which will melt butter. 63 Imitations of Winds. 5. 42
Indirect experiments, what they are. 8 Inductious first work. 68 Inquisition of
Forms, how it proceeds. 53 Instance of the cross, what it is. 90 Instances
convenient in the nature of hot things. 53 Iron dissolved with strong waters is
hot. 54 Irritation by cold increases heat. 66 Island. 57
L.
LEaves fall off the trees, soonest on the South side, 14. they and straws
playing in a calm, presage Winds. 41 Lesser ships, far swifter then great
ones, 30. how far one of them may sail in a day. 34 Lightnings what they
presage concerning Winds, 39. they seldom happen in Winter. 56, 57 Lime, 62.
being unslackt, water being cast upon it, gathers heat. 57 Liquid hot things.
56 Local beginning of Winds, 2, 64. hard to be known, ib. they are three. 17
Longitude of Winds. 29
M.
MArch Winds dry more then any summer winds. 16 Masts, how many in a ship. 31
Median Winds, 6. major and lesser, ibid. which of them fairest, and which
fowlest. 15 Mezentius his torment. 51 Moons presages touching winds, 38. its,
and the Comets, and stars beams cast no sensible heat, 55. next to the Sun, it
is most operative. 22 its fifth day terrible to mariners, 38. an upright one is
always threatening and hurtful, 38. being red the fourth day it presages winds.
16 Motion of Liberty according to Democritus, is called Motion of the coast. 78
Motion of the wind in sails, 31. has three chief heads of impulsion, 34. the
first ibid. the second 34. the third 35. in which motion is considerable both
impulsion, and direction, 33. the nearer it comes to the beak, the stronger it
is. 32 Motion of Windmils, 35. their sails. 32 Motions of the Winds diverse, 4.
28. in engines of man's invention. 35 Motion of winds and direction to be
enquired of, 28. the first is motion of the antitypie of the matter, 77. the
second of Connection, 77. the third of liberty, 77. the fourth of Hyles, 78. the
fifth of continuation, 79. the sixth is the motion to gain, or of indigency,
79. the seventh of the greater congregation, 80. the eight of the lesser, 80.
the ninth the Magnetic, 82. the tenth of flight, 83. the eleventh of
assembling, 83. the twelfth of excitation, 84. the thirteenth of impression,
84. the fourteenth of configuration or situation, 85. the fifteenth of
pertransition, 86. the sixteenth the regal motion, 86. the seventeenth the
spontaneal motion of rotation, 87. the eighteenth of trepidation, 87. the
nineteenth of Exhorrency on abhorring. 88 Murmr in the hills and Element
belongs to winds, and is prodigious, 41. murmr in wood before winds. 19
N.
NAmes of winds. 1, 6 Natural Magic. 49 Natural motion according to the
ancients. 41 New Moons foreshew the disposition of the air. 5 Nights hotter in
Europe. 23 North Wind high, and blows from above, 13. is the days attendant,
11. suspicious blowing from the Sea, but from the Land healthful, 13. noxious
to Physical people, 14. it rises oftentimes, while a North-East, or North-West
Winds are blowing, 14. it alters not the Weather, 13. if it rise in the night,
it lasts not above three days. 14 Nova Zembla. 55 Nurseries of Winds are where
vapors abound. 28
O.
Oil of Origanum, Sulphur, and Vitriol, execute the operations of heat. 54, 61
Olimpus the Mountain, 26, 55. what strange things hap on the top of it. ib.
Orions rising is accompanied with Winds. 23, 39 Overburthening of the Air. 19
Owls presage change of weather, 41. with us when they chatter in Winter, it is
a sign of fair Weather. 41, 42
P.
PAracelsus confuted, 83. his school found no place for the East wind. 16
Particular Winds matrixes. 16 Peake of Penariffe. 26. 55 Permission of the
understanding, what it is. 71 In Peru, Winds blow most at a full Moon. 22
Physicians dreams, touching radical humors. 21 Pliny reprehended. 57 Poets
feign, that in the deluge, Boreas was kept in prison, and the South Wind let
out. 12, 13 Power of Winds. 5 Praestar, a dark lightning. 22 Prognostics of
Winds. 16. 36. 39 Promontories, turnings an windings, cause alterations of
Winds. 21 Proportions of masts and sails vary. 63 Putrefaction has heat in it.
28
Q.
QUicksilver killed, 83, 84. has a flatuous and expansive spirit. 12 Qualities
and powers of winds. 43
R.
RAdical differences of Winds, 13. their accidental generations, 2. and
imitations. 5 Rainy springs presage clear summers. 40 Rains engendring. 14
Rainbows when they are not entire, do commonly dissolve into Wind. 20
Repercussions of Winds in Gardens. 21 Returns of Winds. 10 Rocky hills are full
of Wind, 17. Icy hills engender cold gales, rather then Winds. 24 Rotten wood
gives a luster in the night. 57
S.
SAils how to be spread, 34. with a side wind they must be stretched out stiff,
33. ten belong to a ship, 31. in a forewind, how they must be trimmed, 33.
length of sails in Wind-mills, conduces much to motion, 34. the lower Sails
swell more then the rest. 32 A Scripture place expounded. 17 Seawater violently
stirred, gives alight. 57 Sea looks bluish in a South wind, 14. in a Northern
Wind it looks darker, 14. when it presages Winds, 41. some places of it swell
without Winds, 17. European Seas have sometime soft gales, and no Wind. 7 Sea
Winds moister then Land Winds, 11. and more vehement, 12. and either lukewarm
or cold. 11 Sea lungs. 57 Sea compass divided into two and thirty points. 33
Semicardinal Winds, 6. are not so stormy as the median. 15 Silver dissolved
excites a little heat. 60 Shepherds should feed their flocks against the South.
14 Shores, how they presage Winds. 40 Small whirlewinds happen often, 21. and
sometimes in clear weather, 22. great ones come but seldom. ib. Snowy Winds,
come from the North. 15 Snow blown down whole from tops of hills, has choked
up the valleys. 16 Sounds do last longer then resoundings. 85 Sudden blasts,
are always in cloudy weather. 21 South nor West Winds engender no vapors. 13.
South Wind for the most part blows alone, 14. rises oftener and blows stronger
in the night, 14. when it begins or ceases, there is change of weather, 13.
when it blows softly it is clear weather, ib. from the sea it is most
healthful, 13. from the continent not so, ib. in England it is unhealthful, 13.
in Africa clear and healthful, ib. wandering and free, low and lateral. ib.
Sour things laid on a place where there is no upper skin, cause smarting. 54
Spices and hot herbs chewed, burn and bite the tongue. 54. 61 Spiders work hard
before winds. 42 Spirit of wine hot in operation, 54. 61. what kind of flame it
makes. 64 Stars some hotter then other, 64. shooting stars of a slimy
substance, 56. they presage Winds, 19. small Stars are not perceiveable before
rising of Winds. 19 Stayed Winds what, 1. 8. in Europe, 10. they do not blow in
the night, 9. they blow where high and snowie Mountains are, 9. they are
itinerary, 26. and weak in winter, they are scarce noted. 10 Stormy Winds go
not far. 26 Storms with what winds they come. 15 Storms with fogs ominous to
seamen. 21 Subterraneal places full of air. 17 Successions of Winds. 4. 26
Sugar broken or scraped in the dark shines. 57 Sun begetter of Winds, 22.
setting red presages Winds, 19. is like a prince, 16. its heat varies, 64. in
the generation of Winds its heat must be proportionable, 45. its small heat
does not excite vapors, 24. prognosticates winds, 37, and seq. Suns beams of
small force in the middle region of the air, 55. and their reflection weak
about the Polar circles. 55 Swellings of water frequent. 17 Swine terrified at
the approach of winds. 41
T.
TEpidity in wool skins and feathers, whence it comes, 59. and in all woolly
things. 54 Thales, his monopoly of Olives. 45 Three leaved grasses prognostic
of Winds. 42 Thunders and lightnings, in what winds most frequent, 15. what
they presage touching Winds. 39 Trees growing in cold countries, are most apt
to fire. 57 Tropaei Winds. 12 True ways of a natural death. 51
U.
VAcuity why introduced by Leucippus and Democritus. 89 Vanes of Steeples and
Weather-Cocks in calm weather likely stand continually West. 7 Vaporary winds,
24. their efficient cause, ibid. their height. 26 Vapors quantity and quality
to be considered. 24 Vaulting of rooms, adds much coolness to them. 21
Ubiquitary winds. 30 Vegetables feel not hot. 61, 62, 63 Vehement winds, are
inundations of the air. 16 Vessels we eat in, may presage wind. 42 Vinegar
thrown against a whirlwind by Pliny. 46 Vine stalks sprout most toward the
South, 14. they will ripen sooner within doors then without. 75 Virgil skilful
in Philosophy. 30, 31 Undulation and furrowing of winds. 4 Undulation of the
air differing from that of the water. 30
W.
WAter and air, are very homogeneal. 23 Water in Baths, heats accidentally, 62.
taken out it cools. 58 Water-fouls when they presage wind, 41. and when
land-fouls. 41 Water sometimes break out in dry places. 17 Weather glasses, 61.
how they are made. Wels in Dalmatia and Cyrena, with winds enclosed in them.
18. 47 West wind a continual companion of the spring, 12. in Europ it is a
moist wind, 7. attendant on Pomeridian hours. 11 West, North-west wind, set
down by the ancients, for a cause of Nilus his overflowing. 9 Whirlwinds play
sometimes before men as they ride. 21 White tempests. 40 Winds blow every
where. 7 Windy winters, presage wet springs. 40 Wind is nothing but air moved,
44. how it comes out of a cloud. 19 Winds made by mixture of vapors. 44 Winds
sometimes dry up rivers. 16 Winds of all kinds purg the air, 16. how they are
engendered in the lower air, 20. they are engendered a thousand ways, 16. they
are merchants of vapors, 17. they gain their natures five ways, 15. winds
composed of Niter, 43. brought forth of the resolutions of snow, 24. hurt corn
at three seasons, 14. they are allayed five ways, 25. 44. they blow from their
nurseries, 4. in their beginning they blow softly, 17. then gain strength,
ibid. those which are composed of Sea vapors easiliest turn to rain. 24.
Y.
Yards of Ships. 31
FINIS.
A BRIEF DISCOURSE TOUCHING THE OFFICE OF Lord Chancellor OF ENGLAND.

WRITTEN BY The Learned John Seldom of the Inner Temple, Esquire and Dedicated by
him to Sir Francis Bacon Knight, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND.

Transcribed from a true Copy thereof, found amongst the Collections of that
Judicious Antiquary St. Lo Kniveton, late of Grayes Inn Esquire

TOGETHER WITH A True Catalogue of Lord Chancellors, and Keepers of the Great
Seal of England, from the Norman Conquest, until this present Year, 1671.

BY WILLIAM DVGDALE, Esquire, NORROY King of Arms.

LONDON, Printed for William Lee at the Turks Head in Fleetstreet, over against
Fetter-lane end, 1671.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England.
MY LORD,
THE Times obvious discourse, whereby that All which truly loves Nobless or
Learning congratulates your highly deserved Honor, caused me collect these,
taken out of no obvious Monuments, touching the auncientest mention,
conjunction, and division of those two Great Offices of State which your
Lordship really bears, though styled but by the name of one: they are short,
yet give large testimony of the former times. They conclude with an Act made
about 320. years since, of like tenor in substance with that later under Queen
Eliz. which was as proper to your name, whence these also were the fitter to
offer you: Enough, other particulars touching both these Great Offices might
have been added, but these were chosen for the usual Question of the present,
and thus are given (not yet seen by any other eye) as a taste of my humble
Observance. My Lord, they are only yours, as their Author would be,

J. Seldom.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE TOUCHING THE OFFICE OF Lord Chancellor of England, etc.
The Name and Office, of Lord Chancellor of England under the Saxons.
THE eldest mention, in good authority of the name of Chancellor of this
Kingdom, is in Edward the elders time, about the year Temp. Edw. senioris and
sequentium Regum. Ingulphus.
DCCCCXX. he made Turketill Abbot of Croyland his Chancellor. Cancellarium suum
eum constituit, ut quaecunque negotia temporalia vel spiritualia, Regis
Judicium expectabant illius consilio and decreto (nam tantae fidei et tam
profundi ingenij tenebatur) omnia tractarentur, and tractata irrefragabilem
sententiam sortirentur. This Abbot held the Office under Athelstan, Edmund and
Edred succeeding Kings.

King Ethelred afterward divided the Chancellorship between Temp. Ethelredi.
the Abbots of Ely, and St. Augustine in Canterbury, and of Glastenbury, who
were to exercise it by turn. The words of an Old Monk of Ely are, Statuit atque
concessit quatenus Ecclesia de Ely extunc and semper in Regis Curia,
Cancellarii ageret dignitatem quod and aliis, Sancti viz. Augustini and
Glasconiae Ecclesiis constituit, ut Abbates istorum Coenobiorum vicissim
assignatis succedendo temporibus annum trifarie dividerint, cum Sanctuarii and
caeteris ornatibus Altaris ministrando: So as the Abbot of Ely, or some Monk by
him appointed, exercised the Office from Candlemas four months yearly, and the
other two of Glastenbury and S. Augustines made up the twelve.

But there occurres not any subscription in Charters by that name, till the
Confessor, in his Patent to the Church of Westminister; after the King,
Bishops, Abbots, and others, comes Ego Rembaldus Cancellarius subscripsi.

Yet in the ancientest Monument of a Grant by any King extant here, I doubt not
but the Chancellor subscribed, though under another name.

The first Christian King of the Saxons founded and endowed Temp. Ethelberti.
Canterbury Church, and in his Charter amongst the Earls, occurrs Ego
Augemandus Referendarius subscripsi; where Referendarius may well stand for
Cancellarius, the Office of both (as the words applied to the Court are used in
the Code, Novells, and Story of the declining Empire) signifying an Officer
that received Petitions and Supplications to the King, and made out his Writs
and Mandates, as a Custos Legis: And though there were diverse Referendarii, as
14. then 8. then more again, and so diverse Chancellors in the Empire; Yet one
especially here, exercising an Office of the nature of these many, might well
be styled by either of the names. These are testimonies of that time without
exception, though Polydore begin the Name and Office at the Norman Conquest.

II. Whether the Keeping of a Seal, were in the Chancellorship under the Saxons.
FOR that Principal part of the Office, or that other Office joined with the
Chancellorship, the Keeping of the Seal; If the common Opinion were clear, that
under the Saxon State no Seals were here used, then were it vain to think of it
as of that time. But there is yet remaining an Old Saxon Charter of King Edgar,
beginning, A Orthodoxorum Edgar.
vigoris Ecclesiastici monitu creberrime instruimur, etc. to the Abbey of
Persore, wherein diverse Lands are given, and there remains in the Parchment
plain signs of three Labells by the places cut for their being hanged on: and
of the selfsame Charter a testimony also as ancient, that the Seals were, one
of King Edgar, the second of St. Dunstan, and the third of Alfer Ducis
Merciorum. That testimony is in a Letter from Godfrie Archdeacon of Worcester
to Pope Alexander III. writing of that Charter, and the Authority of it:
Noverit, says he, Sanctitas vestra, verum esse, quod conscripti hujus scriptum
originale in virtute Sanctae Trinitatis sigilla tria, trium personarum
autenticarum, ad veritatem, triplici confirmatione commendat; Est autem
Sigillum primum illustris Regis Edgari; secundum Sancti Dunstani Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopi; tertium Alferi Ducis Merciorum; sicut ex diligenti literarum
impressarum inspectione evidenter accepi. And it is reported by those which have
searched the Records of St. Denis Church in France, there remain two Charters,
the one of one Offa, the other of one Edgar, with Seals annexed; the one of
which I have seen cast off in Lead, and is about the breadth of a Shilling
thick, and having a face on the one side. Likewise amongst the Chartae
Antiquae, diverse being reckoned cum Sigillo, others sine Sigillo; one is cum
Sigillo of King Cnout, neither is there any color of doubt but that the
Confessor had his Seal, for the Print yet remains in part to be seen. But
notwithstanding these singular examples of Kings Sealing in the Saxons times,
it is most certain it was not a thing common then; neither could any in the
Chancellorship be denominated from Keeping the Seal, nor in any other Office.
Curiosity in some particular occasion swayed more in it, than any Custom;
Although we admit those before mentioned for In the Register of Croyland it
appears that the Normans brought in the use of Seals to Charters.
true, which may well be doubted, in regard of the frequent fraud and ignorance
in committing it, which in the elder times possessed the Churchmen. But for
the Confessor's Seal, that was without scruple certain, and thence may we
confidently derive the Great Seal of England.

III. Testimonies of the Chancellorship and Keepership joined, in times near
after the Norman Invasion.
AS in the Monuments of the Confessor Rembald is named Chancellor; so under the
first William, Maurice Will. 1.
Bishop of London, and in the succeeding times others. Old Stories of the Monks
sufficiently mention them. But little appears of the Office till the time of H.
2. under whom, one writing the life of Thomas Beckett that was Lord Chancellor,
has this most ancient testimony of it, and of Keeping the Seal also;
Cancellarii dignitas est, ut secundus a Rege in regno habeatur; ut altera part
Sigilli regii, quod and ad ejus pertinet custodiam, propria signet mandata, ut
Capella Regia in illius sit dispositione et cura, ut vacantes Archiepiscopatus,
Episcopatus, Abbatias and Baronias cadentes in manum Regis ipse suscipiat and
conservet; ut omnibus Regis assit consiliis, etiam non vocatus, accedat; ut
omnia Sigilliferi Clerici regii sua manu signentur: Item ut suffragantibus, ex
Dei gratia vitae meritis, non moriatur, nisi Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus si
voluerit: Inde est quod Cancellaria non emenda est. And another of the same
time, Cancellarius sicut in Curia, sic and ad Scaccarium magnus est; adeo ut
sine ipsius consensu vel consilio nihil magnum fiat vel fieri debeat: verum hoc
habet officium dum residet ad Scaccarium: Ad ipsum pertinet custodia Sigilli
regii, quod est in Thesauro; Sed inde non recedit nisi cum Praecepto
Justiciarii, (that is Chief Justice of England that was a Viceroy) ab inferiore
ad superius Scaccarium, a Thesaurario vel Camerario defertur ad explenda solum
negotia Scaccarii; quibus peractis in loculum mittitur, and loculus a
Cancellario consignatur, and sic Thesaurario traditur custodiendus. Item cum
necesse fuerit, signatus sub omnium oculis Cancellario offertur, nunquam ab
ipso vel ab alio alias offerendus. Item ad ipsum pertinet rotuli, qui est de
Cancellaria, custodia per suppositam personam. Another about the time of Edw.
1. Officium Cancellariae viro provido and discreto ut Episcopo vel Clerico
magnae dignitatis debet committi, simul cum cura majoris Sigilli regni, cujus
substituti sunt Cancellarii omnes in Anglia, Hibernia, Wallia and Scotia.
Omnesque sigilli regii custodes praeter Custodem Sigilli privati.

IV. Of the Division and Conjunction of Lord Chancellor and Lord Keeper, till
an Old Act made that they Cart. 14 Joh. dorso. Walt. de Gray Cancellar. and
alii missi ad Othonem Imp. nepotem Regis Johannis.
should be One.
BUT for that of Cancellaria emenda non est, an example not long after was, not
only in truth to the contrary, but entered also in Public Records; For Walter
de Gray of the Family of the Greyes of Rotherfeld in Oxfordshire, In dorso fin.
7 Joh. Pat. 14 Joh. m. 5. Carta Regis W. de Carrio de domo sua de Carrio etc.
Test Will. de Briwer apud Westminster. 21. Maii. Carta Regis Joh. facta Mauricio de
Gant de Manerio de Barewe, Test or Dat. per manum Radulphi de Nevill apud
Buttevill 28 Julii an. 16. Pat. p. 2. m. 8. Et ibid. m. 4. Ric. de Mariscis
Cancellarius.
in 7th. of King John, Dat. Domino Regi quinque millia Marcarum pro habenda
Cancellaria Domini Regis tota vita sua; and pro habenda inde Charta Domini
Regis. So are the words of the Roll, and the days of Payment are set down
also; and in the Rolls of the same year occurrs, Hic recepit W. Gray
Cancellaria. Yet had he not always the Custody of the Seal, for in the Charter
Roll of that Year after the taking his Chancellorship there is but one Patent
or Charter dated by him, as the fashion then was, with Dat. per manum W. de G.
Cancellarii nostri, or the like.

Those that both follow and precede, are Dat. per manum Pat. 17 Joh. m. 2. R.
de Mariscis Cancellar. 28 Apr. Et ib. in dors. idem Cancellarius missus Romans.
Cart. 18 Joh. Rex dedit Baldwino de Guisne Manerium de Benefeld etc. Dat. per
manum Magistri Ric. de Mariscis Cancellarii nostri apud Nare as 30 Maii. Pat.
15 Joh. p. 1. m. 8. Et fin. m. 5. Walt, de Gray Cancellar. Ib. m. 5. Idem
factus fuit Episc. Wigor. Pat. 18 Joh. m. 5. Ric. de Marisco Cancellar. 14
Julii. Cart. 17 Joh. m. 3. Ric. de Mariscis Cancellarius.
Hugonis de Wells Archidiaconi Wellensis, who, it seems, kept the Seal: and
therefore he is expressly called the King's Chancellor in some Monks that writ
of that time, as others are for the same cause: Neither was it ever heard of
them to have the Chancellorship granted, yet the Seal still to Remain in
another hand. For also while this W. de Gray was Chancellor, Richard de Marisco
whom Matthew Paris calls Chancellor too, and others misreckon him for one had
the keeping of the Seal, the Roll is nono die Octobris anno regni Domini Regis
15. Liberavit Magister Richardus de Marisco Archidiaconus Richmond. and
Northumbr. Domino Regi Sigillum apud Ospring; and then on the 22. of December.
following, apud Windlesores liberatum fuit Sigillum Domino R. de Nevill,
deferendum sub Domino P. Wintoniensi Episcopo, that was Peter de Roches or de
Rupibus Chief Justice of England. But this here out of the infallible testimony
of Records touching W. de Gray, differs not a little in time from the relation
of the Monk, notwithstanding the Seal thus committed to Ralf de Nevill who had
it also under H. 3. in the beginning of his Reign, totius Regni ordinante
consensu and consilio; yet the Patent and other Charters and close Letters of
the time, are, for the most part, Per Rectorem Regni, or Test P. Wintoniensi
Episcopo, or T. H. de Burgo Chief Justice of England under H. 3. Per eundem; or
Per P. Wintoniensem Episcopum, or the like. And yet also in Rolls of that time,
where Nevill never at all makes the Test, or has his name added, mention is
of him for other uses as belonging to the Office of Chancellorship, as the
delivery of the Counterbriefs to him and Fines, etc. mittend' in Scaccarium,
according to the use of that age. But although both Records and Story thus make
R. de Nevill Lord Keeper from King John unto H. 3. yet had not he any Patent of
either Chancellorship or Keepership till: 1 H. 3. where both a Patent of Cart.
11 H. 3 p. 1. m. 28.
the Keeping of the Seal for life, either by himself or Deputy, and another of
the Chancellorship of England toto tempore vitae suae, were made to him, both
bearing the same Date.

Yet after this also, through diverse oppositions in State An. 13 H. 3. The King
granted to R. Bishop of Chichester the Chancellorship for life, 16 Nov. And
likewise to the fame R. the same office, An. 16 H. 3. 14 Julis. And by another
Charter of the same date the Custody of the Seal for life also, to exercise
that Keepership in person, or by an affignee. Vide etiam Cart. 17 H. 3. pro
codem Episcopo de eisdem Officiis pro termino vitae suae.
against the goodness and Noble Carriage of this Ralf de Nevill, the Seal was
after unjustly taken from him, and restored again as his former right. And in
20 H. 3. the King would have had it from him, Sed idem Cancellarius (says the
Monk) hoc facere renuit, videns impetum Regis modestiae fines excedentem;
dixitque se nulla ratione hoc facere posse, cum illud communi consilio Regni
suscepisset. Quapropter nec illud similiter sine communi assensu Regni alicui
resignaret: Yet in 22 H. 3. the King violently took it from him, and committed
it to one Godfrey a Templar, and John of Lexinton; Emolumentis tamen (so says
the Story) ad Cancellarium spectantibus, Episcopo quasi Cancellario, redditis
and assignatis. Afterward one Simon Norman a Lawyer had it: and from him it was
taken, and committed to Richard Abbot of Evesham, who kept it three years, and
then resigned it in 26 H. 3. The Chancellor and Keeper (of right) Nevill was
afterward reconciled to the King, and dyed 28 H. 3.

In the Acts of Parliament of which year, one is, That the Keeper of the Seal
should be always the Chancellor, and that all things sealed otherwise should
be void. The words are, Si aliqua interveniente occasion Dominus Rex
abstulerit Sigillum suum a Cancellario, quicquid fuerit interim sigillatum,
irritum habeatur and inane, Deinde Cancellario fiat restitutio. And it appears
otherwise that they always took it unjustly done, if the Chancellorship and
Keepership were not in one: By Reason whereof, before that, in a Charter of
King John's yet extant in some hands, of the Moderation of the Fees of the
Seal, no person is spoken of but the Chancellor and his under Officers; as if
it could not have been but that who ever had the Seal, the same should only be
Chancellor.

According to that the Chancellorship and Keepership were joined in all the
Chancellors under Henry the 3. and Edward the 1. most of which being made
Bishops, resigned their Seal and Office, although afterward under the
succeeding Kings sometimes the Seal was committed to others hands upon some
requiring occasions; and some Lord Keepers were created in later times before
Sir Nicholas Bacon, in whose time that Statute of 5 Eliz. was made.

A true CATALOGUE of the Lord Chancellors and Keepers of the Great Seal of
England, from the Norman Conquest, until this present Year 1671.
An. D. 1067. 1 Will. Conq. MAurice (afterward Bishop of London.) Will.
Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif. lib. 2. f. 134. b. Osmund (afterward Bishop of
Salisbury) Godw. de Praesul. p. 389. Anno 1073. 6 W. Conq. Arfastus (Bishop of
Helmham) Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 1. m. 3. per Inspex. Baldric; Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m. 1.
per Inspex. Herman Bishop of Shireburne. Will. Wilson (Chaplain to the King)
Chron. Rob. de Monte. Will. Giffard (Bishop of Winchester) Cart. 51 H. 3. m. 1.
per Inspex. Will. Rufus. Robert Bloet (afterward Bishop of Lincoln) R. Hoved.
f. 265 b. n. 30. Henr. 1. Will. Giffard (Bishop of Winchester) Text. Roff. cap.
6. Roger (afterward Bishop of Salisbury) W. Malm. f. 91. a. l. 2. Geffrey
Ruffus (afterward Bishop of Durham) H. Hunt. f. 220 b. 10. Randulph, H. Hunt.
f. 218 b. n. 40. Geffrey (Bishop of Durham) Regist. Eccl. Elien. in Bibl.
Cotton. f. 29 a. Steph. Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, Will. Neubrigensis lib. 1.
cap. 6. Roger Pauper. Ord. Vit. p. 319 C. D. Anno 1153. 18 Steph. Philip,
Regist. Eccl. Elien. in Bibl. Cotton. f. 32 a. Anno 1157. 3 H. 2. Thomas
Archdeacon of Canterbury, R. Hoved. 281 b. n. 20. (afterward Archbishop) To.
Hoved. 282 a. n. 20. Anno 1173. 20 H. 2. Raphe de Warnevill (Sacrist of Roan,
and Treasurer of York) Matthew. Paris. in anno 1173. Anno 1181. 26 H. 2.
Geffrey, natural Son to King Henry the 2d, R. Hoved. f. 349. n. 10. Chancellor.
Walter de Bidun, Lel. col. Vol. 1. p. 38. Anno 1189. 1 R. 1. Will. de Longcamp
(afterward Bishop of Ely) R. Hoved. f. 375 a. n. 40. Anno 1198. 7 R. 1.
Eustace Bishop of Ely, R. Hoved. f. 449 a. n. 40. Anno 1199. 1 Johan. Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, R. Hoved. f. 451 a. n. 40. Chancellor. Anno 1204. 6
Joh. Hugh Archdeacon of Wells (afterward Bishop of Lincoln) M. Paris. in anno
1205. Chancellor. Anno 1205. 7 Joh. Walter de Gray, Cart. antiq. BB. n. 22.
(afterward Bishop of Worcester) Chancellor. Anno 1212. 14 Joh. Richard de
Marisco, Mat. Westminster. in eodem anno. Chancellor. Anno 1213. 15 Joh. Raphe de
Nevill, Keeper of the Seal under Peter de Roche Bishop of Winchester, Pat. 15
Joh. p. 1. m. 6. Anno 1223. 8 H. 3. Richard de Marisco (Bishop of Durham) Cl. 8
H. 3. m. 25. Chancellor. Anno 1226. Raphe Nevill (Bishop of Chichester) 12
Febr. Cart. 12 H. 3. m. 28. Chancellor. Anno 1230. The same Raphe constituted
Keeper of the Seal 14 Junii, Cart. 15 H. 3. m. 8. Anno 1238. 22 H. 3. Geffrey a
Templar, and John de Lexinton, made Keepers of the Seal, M. Paris. in eodem
anno. Anno 1239. 23 H. 3. Simon Norman, from whom the Seal was taken, and
delivered to Richard Abbot of Evesham, M. Paris. in eodem anno. Anno 1246 30 H.
3. Ranulph Briton, Mat. Paris. in eodem anno, Chancellor. Anno 1247. 31 H. 3.
Mr. Silvester, a Clerk of the Kings, executed the Office of the Chancellor, M.
Paris. in eodem anno. John de Lexinton had the Custody of the Seal, 18 Sept.
Rot. Fin. 31 H. 3. m. 2. John Mansell Chancellor of the Cathedral of St. Paul
in London, had the Custody of the Seal, to execute the Office of Chancellor, M.
Paris. in eodem an. and Pat. 31 H. 3. m. 2. Anno 1249. 33 H. 3. The same John
Mansell Provost of Beverley had the Custody of the Seal until the Feast of St.
Mary this year, Pat. 12 H. 3. m. 3. Anno 1250. 34 H. 3. Peter de Rievaulx, and
Mr. Will. de Kilkenny, had the Custody of the Seal, Claus. 34 H. 3. m. 15. Anno
1253. 37 H. 3. P. Chaceport, and John de Lexinton had the Custody of the Seal,
by reason that Mr. W. (de Kilkenny) was sick 15 Maii, Rot. Fin. 37 H. 3. m. 9.
XXII. Junii the Queen had the Custody thereof, the King then going into
Gascoign, Pat. 37 H. 3. m. Anno 1254. 38 H. 3. Mr. Will. de Kilkenny, the Kings
Clerk, supplied the Office of Chancellor, M. Paris. in eodem anno. Anno 1255.
39 H. 3. H. de Wengham Clerk, had the Custody of the Seal, M. Paris. in eodem
anno. Anno 1258. 42 H. 3. VI. Maii, W. de Merton had the Custody of the Seal,
by reason that Henry de Wengham was sick, Pat. 42 H. 3. m. 29. Anno 1260. 44 H.
3. Mr. N. Archdeacon of Ely had the Custody of the Seal, M. Westminster. in eodem
anno. Anno 1261. 45 H. 3 Walter de Merton made Chancellor without the advice of
the Barons, M. Westminster. in eodem anno, and Pat. 45 H. 3. m. 18, and 19 Anno 1263.
47 H. 3. Mr. Nicholas Archdeacon of Ely had the Custody of the Seal, whilst the
King was beyond Sea, Pat. 47 H. 3. m. 1. Anno 1265. 49 H. 3. Mr. John Chishull
Archdeacon of London had the Custody of the Seal, Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 9. On
Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Peter in Cathedra the Seal was delivered
to Mr. Thomas de Cantilupe, Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 9. who was constituted
Chancellor 16 Martii, Pat. 49 H. 3. m. 18. W. Bishop of Bathe and Wells made
Chancellor 20 Aug. Liberate de anno 49 H. 3. m. 2. Anno 1267. 51 H. 3. Mr.
Godfrey Giffard (afterward Bishop of Worcester) had the Custody of the Seal,
Claus. 52 H. 3. m. 7. and m. 16. Anno 1269. 53 H. 3. John Chishull Dean of
London had the Custody of the Seal on Tuesday next after the Feast of the
Apostles Simon and Jude, Pat. 53 H. 3. m. 29. Richard de Middilton made Keeper
of the Seal on Monday next before the Feast of St. Peter ad vincula, Pat. 53 H.
3. m. 6. Anno 1272. 56 H. 3. John de Kirkeby made Keeper of the Seal (upon the
death of Rich. de Middilton Chancellor) which John did thereupon associate to
himself in that trust P. de Winton Keeper of the Kings Wardrobe, Pat. 56 H. 3.
m. 6. Anno 1274. 1 E. 1. Walter de Merton, Clause 1 Edw. 1. m. 10. Robert
Burnell Archdeacon of York, (afterward Bishop of Bathe and Wells) made Keeper
of the Seal upon St. Matthew the Apostles day, Pat. 2 Edw. 1. m. 8. Anno 1284.
12 E. 1. This Robert going from Aberconwey to Acton-Burnell, delivered the Seal
unto Hugh de Kendall and Walter de Odyham, Pat. 12 E. 1. m. 7. Anno 1286. 14 E.
1. He attended the King into France, being his Chancellor, and took the Great
Seal with him, on Monday next preceding the Feast of St. Dunstan, Pat. 14 E. 1.
m. 9. Anno 1289. 17 E. 1. On Friday next preceding the Assumption of our Lady
he returned with the King out of France, and the Seal, Pat. 17 E. 1. m. 13.
Anno 1292. 20 E. 1. Walter de Langton Keeper of the Kings Wardrobe, made Keeper
of the Seal at Berwick, on Saturday preceding the Feast of the Apostles Simon
and Jude, Pat. 20 E. 1. m. 2. Anno 1293. 21 E. 1. John de Langton made
Chancellor, Pat. 21 E. 1. m. 23. afterward Elect Bishop of Ely, Pat. 26 E. 1.
m. 10. Anno 1302. 30 E. 1. Mr. Will. de Grenefeld Dean of Chichester, made
Chancellor on Sunday being the morrow after the Feast of St. Michael, Claus. 30
E. 1. m. 5. Anno 1303. 31 E. 1. The Great Seal delivered unto him on Tuesday
before the Feast of St. Lucie the Virgin, Claus. 31 E. 1. in dorso m. 18. Anno
1305. 33 E. 1. Will. de Hamelton, Dean of York, made Chancellor, had the Great
Seal delivered unto him 16 Jan. Pat. 33 E. 1. p. 1. m. 21. Anno 1307. 35 E. 1.
Rauf de Baudale Bishop of London made Chancellor, and Keeper of the Seal, Rot.
Fin. 35 E. 1. m. 1. Anno 1308. 1 E. 2. John de Langton Bishop of Chichester
made Chancellor, etc. Rot. Fin. 1 E. 2. m. 9. Anno 1311. 4 E. 2. Walt.
(Reginald) Bishop of Worcester had the Custody of the Seal 6 Julii, Claus. 4 E.
2 m. 6. in dorso. Anno 1312. 5 E. 2. He was the Kings Chancellor, Claus. 5 E.
2. in dorso. Anno 1315. 8 E. 2. John de Sandale (afterward Bishop of
Winchester) the King's Chancellor, Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m. 2. Anno 1318. 11 E. 2.
John Hothum Bishop of Ely, Pat. 11 E. 2. p. 2. m. 8. Anno 1320. 13 E. 2. John
(Salmon) Bishop of Norwich, named Chancellor by the King in full Parliament,
received the Seal, Claus. 13 E. 2. in dorso, m. 9. Anno 1323. 16 E. 2. Will. de
Ayrmin (Mr. of the Rolls in Chancery) had the Custody of the Great Seal, John
Bishop of Norwich being then sick, Claus. 14 E. 2. m. Anno 1324. 17 E. 2.
Robert de Baldok Archdeacon of Middlesex made Chancellor 20 Aug. Claus. 17 E.
2. m. Anno 1328. 1 E. 3. John de Hothum Bishop of Ely had the Custody of the
Great Seal 28 Jan. and to do therewith what belonged to the Chancellor, Claus.
1 Edw. 3. p. 1. in dorso m. 25. Anno 1329. 2 E. 3. Henry de Clyff Mr. of the
Rolls in Chancery, and Will. de Herlaston Clerk of the Chancery, made Keepers
of the Seal 1 Martii, Claus. 2 E. 3. in dorso. m. 33. Henry de Burghersh
Chancellor of England, Pat. 2 E. 3. p. 2. m. 34. to whom the King committed the
Custody of the Great Seal 12 Maii, Claus. 2 E. 3. in dorso m. 26. Anno 1331. 4
E. 3. John de Stratford Bishop of Winchester made Keeper of the Great Seal 28
Nov. Claus. 4 E. 3. in dorso m. 16. Anno 1333. 6 E. 3. Mr. Robert de Stratford,
brother to John Bishop of Winchester, had the Custody of the Seal, whilst his
brother was employed upon the Kings business 23 Junii, Claus. 6 E. 3. in dorso
m. 22. Anno 1334. 7 E. 3. Will. Archbishop of York Keeper of the Great Seal, by
the Kings command delivered it to Henry de Ednestowe, Thomas de Baunburgh, and
John de St. Paul, upon Thursday the Epiphany of our Lord, Claus. 7 E. 3. p. 2.
m. 4. in dorso. Anno 1335. 8 E. 3. John de Stratford elect Archbishop of
Canterbury confirmed Chancellor the 6th. of Apr. delivered the Great Seal unto
Mr. Rob. de Stratford his brother to be kept, Claus. 8 E. 3. m. 27. in dorso.
Richard Bishop of Durham being made Chancellor had the Great Seal delivered to
him 28 Sept. Ibid. in dors. m. 10. Anno 1336. 9 E. 3. John Archbishop of
Canterbury made Chancellor had the Great Seal delivered to him 6 Junii, Claus.
9 Edw. 3. m. 23. Anno 1338. 11 E. 3. Mr. Rob. de Stratford Archdeacon of
Canterbury, and elect Bishop of Chichester, made Chancellor and Keeper of the
Great Seal 23 Oct. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 3. m. 11. Anno 1339. 12 E. 3. Mr. Richard
de Bynteworth elect Bishop of London made Chancellor and Keeper of the Seal 6
Julii, Cl. 22 E. 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 23. Anno 1340. 13 E. 3. Upon the death of
this Richard the great Seal was committed to the Custody of John de St. Paul
Master of the Rolls in Chancery, Mich. de Wath and Thomas de Baunburgh 8 Dec.
Claus. 13 E. 3. p. 3. in dorso m. 11. Anno 1341. 14 E. 3. John de St. Paul
solely constituted Keeper of the Great Seal 13 Febr. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m.
42. in dorso. John Archbishop of Cant. made Chancellor and Keeper of the Great
Seal 28 Apr. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. in dorso. Robert Bishop of Chichester
the Kings Chancellor delivered up the Great Seal to the King upon Thursday
being the Feast day of St. Andrew the Apostle, Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m. 12.
Anno 1341. 14 E. 3. Sir Robert Burgchier Knight being made Chancellor on
Thursday next following St. Lucie the Virgin, had the Great Seal then delivered
to him by the King, Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 20. Anno 1342. 15 E. 3.
Robert Parnyng the Kings Chancellor had the Great Seal delivered to him by the
King 27 Oct. Cl. 15 E. 3. p. 3. in dorso m. 13. Anno 1344. 17 E. 3. Robert de
Sadington made Chancellor had the Great Seal delivered to him upon Michaelmasse
day, Claus. 17 E. 3. p. 2. m. 20. in dorso. Anno 1346. 19 E. 3. Mr. John de
Offord made Chancellor, had the Great Seal delivered to him upon the 26 of
October. Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 2. m. 7. Anno 1347. 20 E. 3. John de Thoresby had the
Great Seal delivered to him 2 Julii, John de Offord the Kings Chancellor then
going beyond Sea, Claus. 20 E. 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 26. Anno 1350. 23 E. 3.
John Bishop of St. David's made Chancellor, had the Great Seal delivered to him
16 Junii, Claus. 23 E. 3. p. 1. in dorso m. 8. Anno 1357. 30 E. 3. Will. de
Edington Bishop of Winchester made Chancellor, had the Great Seal delivered to
him 19 Febr. Claus. 30 E. 3. in dorso m. 4. Anno 1363. 36 E. 3. Simon de
Langham Bishop of Ely had the Great Seal delivered to him by the King 19 Febr.
Cl. 30 E. 3. in dorso m. 39. Anno 1368. 41 E. 3. Will. de Wickham Bishop of
Winchester made Chancellor 17 Sept. Cart. 41 E. 3. Anno 1372. 45 E. 3. Sir
Robert de Thorpe Knight made Chancellor 26 Martii, had the Great Seal then
delivered to him by the King, Claus. 45 E. 3. in dorso m. 35. Anno 1373. 46 E.
3. John Knyvet made Chancellor and Keeper of the Great Seal, Claus. 46 E. 3. in
dorso m. 12. Anno 1377. 50 E. 3. Adam de Houghton Bishop of St. David's made
Chancellor 11 Jan. On which day the Great Seal was delivered to him, Claus. 50
E. 3. in dorso. p. 2. m. 7. Anno 1379. 2 R. 2. Sir Richard le Scrope Knight
made Chancellor, had the Great Seal delivered to him, Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 1. m. 24.
Anno 1380. 3 R. 2. Simon de Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury made Chancellor
and Keeper of the Great Seal on Monday next after the Conversion of St. Paul,
Claus. 3 R. 2. in dorso m. 22. Anno 1381. 4 R. 2. Will. de Courtney Bishop of
London made Chancellor on Saturday being the Feast of St. Laurence, Claus. 5 R.
2. in dorso m. 35. Anno 1382. 5 R. 2. Sir Richard Scrope Knight made Chancellor
and Keeper of the Great Seal on Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Andrew
the Apostle, Pat. 5 R. 2. p. 1. m. 1. Anno 1383. 6 R. 2. Robert de Braybroke
Bishop of London made Chancellor, had the Great Seal delivered to him on
Saturday being the Eve of St. Matthew the Apostle, Claus. 6 R. 2. p. 1. in
dorso m. 24. Sir Michael de la Pole Knight made Chancellor, and Keeper of the
Great Seal 13 Martii, Claus. 6 R. 2. p. 2. in dorso, m. 12. Anno 1387. 10 R. 2.
Thomas de Arundell Bishop of Ely made Chancellor, and Keeper of the Great Seal
24 Oct. Claus. 20 R. 2. m. 35. Anno 1389. 12 R. 2. Will. de Wickham Bishop of
Winchester again made Chancellor, had the Great Seal delivered unto him 4 Maii,
Pat. 12 R. 2. p. 2. m. 7. Anno 1392. 15 R. 2. Thomas de Arundell Archbishop of
Canterb. made Chancellor 7 Sept. had the Great Seal delivered to him, Pat. 15
R. 2. p. 1. m. 19. Anno 1397. 20 R. 2. Edmund de Stafford Bishop of Exeter made
Keeper of the Great Seal 23 Nov. Claus. 20 R. 2. p. 1. in dorso m. 22. Anno
1400. 1 H. 4. John de Scarle Master of the Rolls in Chancery made Chancellor
and Keeper of the Great Seal 15 Nov. Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 3. m. 27. Anno 1401. 2 H.
4. Edmund Bishop of Exeter made Chancellor and Keeper of the Great Seal 9
Martii, Claus. 2 H. 4. p. 2. in dorso m. 3. Anno 1404. 5 H. 4. Henry Beaufort
Bishop of Lincoln Chancellor Pat. 5 H. 4. p. 2. m. 28. Anno 1405. 6 H. 4.
Thomas Langley Bishop of Durham Chancellor, Godw. de Praesul. Anno 1407. 8 H.
4. Thomas Archbishop of Canterb. made Chancellor and Keeper of the Great Seal
30 Jan. Claus. 8 H. 4. in dorso m. 23. Anno 1410. 11 H. 4. John Wakering Clerk,
Master of the Rolls in Chancery, had the Custody of the Great Seal 19 Jan.
Claus. 11 H. 4. in dorso m. 8 Sir Thomas Beaufort Knight made Chancellor, had
the Great Seal delivered to him 31 Jan. Claus. 11 H. 4. in dorso m. 8. Anno
1414. 1 H. 5. Henry de Beaufort Bishop of Winchester made Chancellor and Keeper
of the Great Seal, Claus. 1 H. 5. Anno 1417. 4 H. 5. Simon Garnstede Clerk,
Master of the Rolls in Chancery, had the Custody of the Great Seal from 4.
Sept. until the 12th. of Oct. Claus. 4 H. 5. in dorso m. 13. Henry Bishop of
Winchester had the Great Seal delivered to him 12 October. Claus. 4 H. 5. in
dorso m. 13. Anno 1418. 5 H. 5. Thomas de Langley Bishop of Durham had the
Great Seal delivered to him by the King 23 Junii, Claus. 5 H. 5. in dorso m.
15. Anno 1423. 1 H. 6. Thomas Bishop of Durham made Chancellor by the advice
and consent of all the Council in Parliament, Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 4. m. 19. Anno
1424. 2 H. 6. Henry Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, made Chancellor, had the
Great Seal delivered to him 16 Julii, Clauss. 2 H. 6. in dorso m. 2. Anno 1426.
4 H. 6. John Kempe Bishop of London made Chancellor, etc.... Martii, Claus. 4
H. 6. in dorso, m. 8. Anno 1432. 10 H. 6. John Stafford Bishop of Bathe made
Chancellor etc. 28 Febr. Claus. 10 H: 6. in dorso m. 8. Anno 1433. 11 H. 6.
John Hank Clerk, Master of the Rolls in Chancery, received from John Stopyngton
Clerk on the behalf of the Lord Chancellor of England the Great Seal to use and
exercise 22 Apr. Claus. 11 H. 6. in dorso m. 12. Anno 1450. 28 H. 6. John
Archbishop of York, and Cardinal, made Chancellor 31 Jan. Claus. 28 H. 6. in
dorso m. 7. Anno 1454. 32 H. 6. Richard Earl of Salisbury made Chancellor 2
Apr. Claus. 32 H. 6. in dorso m. 8. Anno 1455. 33 H. 6. Thomas Bourchier
Archbishop of Canterbury made Chancellor 7 Martii, Claus. 33 H. 6. in dorso m.
9. Anno 1557. Will. Wickham Bishop of Winchester made Chancellor 11 Oct. Claus.
35 H. 6. m. 10. in dorso. Anno 1460. 38 H. 6. George Nevill Bishop of Exeter
made Chancellor 25 Julii, Claus. 38 H. 6. in dorso m. 7. Anno 1468. 7 E. 4.
Robert Stillington Bishop of Bathe and Wells made Chancellor 8 Junii, Claus. 7
E. 4. m. 12. in dorso. Anno 1473. 12 E. 4. John Alcock Bishop of Rochester made
Keeper of the Great Seal 20 Sept. Claus. 12 E. 4. m. 16. in dorso. Anno 1474.
13 E. 4. Laurence Bishop of Durham made Chancellor etc. 5 Junii, Claus. 13 E.
4. m. 3. Anno 1475. 14 E. 4. Thomas Rotheram Bishop of Lincoln made Chancellor,
Godw. de Praesul. Anno 1484. 1 R. 3. John Russell Bishop of Lincoln made
Chancellor 26 Nov. Claus. 1 R. 3. in dorso. Anno 1485. 3 R. 3. Thomas Barow,
Master of the Rolls, made Keeper of the Great Seal 1 Aug. Claus. 3 R. 3. Anno
1486. 1 H. 7. John Alcock Bishop of Ely made Chancellor upon Monday 6 Martii,
Cl. 1 H. 7. in dorso. Anno 1487. 2 H. 7. John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury
made Chancellor 8 Aug. Pat. 2 H. 7. p. 2. Anno 1501. 16 H. 7. Henry Deane
Bishop of Salisbury (upon the death of John Morton) had the Great Seal
delivered to him 13 October. Claus. 26 H. 7. in dorso. Anno 1502. 17 H. 7. Will.
Warham Bishop of London, elect of Canterb. had the Great Seal delivered to him
11 Aug. and was made Chancellor 1 Jan. following. Claus. 17 H. 7. in dorso.
Anno 1516. 7 H. 8. Thomas Wolsey Lord Cardinal and Archbishop of York, had the
Great Seal delivered to him 7 Decembr. and was made Chancellor, Claus. 7 H. 8.
in dorso. Anno 1530. 21 H. 8. Sir Thomas More Knight made Lord Changellor, had
the Great Seal delivered to him on Monday 25 October. Claus. 21 H. 8. in dorso.
Anno 1533. 24 H. 8. Thomas Audley had the Great Seal delivered unto him on
Monday 20 Maii, and then Knighted, Claus. 24 H. 8. in dorso. A New Seal made
and delivered to him upon the 6th. of Sept. following, Ibid. He was made
Chancellor the 26th. of Jan. ensuing, Ibid. Anno 1545. 36 H. 8. Thomas Lord
Wriothesley Lord Chancellor of England had the Great Seal delivered to him 3
Maii, Claus. 36 H. 8. p. 1. Anno 1547. 1 E. 6. Sir Will. Paulet Knight, Lord
St. John of Basing, had the Great Seal delivered to him 29 Junii, Pat. 1 E. 6.
p. 4. Sir Richard Rich Knight made Chancellor of England 30 Nov. Pat. 1 E. 6.
p 3. m. 14. Anno 1551. 5 E. 6. Thomas Goodricke Bishop of Ely made Chancellor
of England 19 Jan. Cl. 5 E. 6. p. 5. Anno 1553. 1 Mar. Steph. Gardner Bishop of
Winchester made Chancellor of England 21 Sept. Pat. 1 M. p. 8. Anno 1555. 3 M.
Nicholas Heath Archbishop of York made Chancellor of England on Wednesday 1
Jan. Claus. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. in dorso part 11. Anno 1559. 1 Eliz. Sir
Nicholas Bacon Knight, Attorney of the Court of Wards, made Keeper of the Great
Seal 22 December. Annal. Camd. and Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 3. Anno 1579. 21 Eliz. Thomas
Bromley, the Queens Solicitor General, made Chancellor of England, 25 Apr.
Claus. 21 Eliz. p. 4. in dorso. Anno 1587. 29 Eliz. Sir Christopher Hatton
Knight made Lord Chancellor of England 29 Apr. Claus. 29 Eliz. p. 24. in dorso.
Anno 1592. 34 Eliz. Sir John Puckering Knight, Sergeant at Law, had the Great
Seal delivered to him 28 Maii, Claus. 34 Eliz. p. 14. in dorso. Anno 1596. 38
Eliz. Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, Master of the Rolls in Chancery, had the Great
Seal delivered to him 26 Maii, Claus. 38 Eliz. p. 14. in dorso. Anno 1603. 1
Jac. Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, had the same Great Seal delivered to him by
appointment of King James 5 Apr. Claus. 1 Jac. p. 12. in dorso. Upon the 29th.
of June following that Great Seal was broke, and the New Seal of King James
delivered to him, Ibid. And on the 24th of July being advanced to the dignity
of Lord Ellesmere, he was made Lord Chancellor of England, Ibid. Anno 1616. 14
Jac. Sir Francis Bacon Knight, the King's Attorney General, had the Great Seal
committed to his Custody 7 Martii, Claus. 16 Jac. in dorso part 15. Anno 1617.
15 Jac. The same Sir Francis (then Lord Verulam) made Lord Chancellor of
England 4 Jan. Claus. 16 Jac. in dorso p. 15. Anno 1620. 18 Jac. Henry Vicount
Mandevill Lord President of the Council, Lodowike Duke of Richmund, William,
Earl of Pembroke, and Sir Julius Caesar Knight, Master of the Rolls, had the
Great Seal committed to their Custody in Lent. Anno 1621. 19 Jac. John
Williams, Doctor in Divinity, and Dean of Westminster, (afterward Bishop of
Lincoln) had the Great Seal committed to his Custody 10 Julii, Claus. 19 Jac.
p. 13. in dorso. Anno 1625. 1 Car. 1. Sir Thomas Coventre Knight, Attorney
General to the King, made Keeper of the Great Seal 1 Nov. Anno 1639. 15 Car 1.
Sir John Finche Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, had
the Great Seal of England committed to his Custody 23 Jan. Anno 1640. 16 Car.
1. Sir Edward Littleton Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas, had the Great Seal of England committed to his Custody 23 Jan. Anno
1645. 21 Car. 1. Sir Richard Lane Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
had the Great Seal of England commmitted to his Custody 30 Aug. Anno 1657. 9
Car. 2. Sir Edward Hide Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer to King Charles the
First, had the Great Seal of England committed to his Custody 13 Jan. And was
made Lord Chancellor of England at Bruges in Flanders 29 Jan. following. Anno
1667. 19 Car. 2. Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas, had the Great Seal of England committed to his
Custody 30 Aug.

FINIS.

