A TREATISE CONCERNING Election and Reprobation, AND The things appertaining
thereunto. Am I moved of the Lord, to Write for the Satisfaction of all who
desire to know the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and the Confusion of that
abominable Principle, viz. That God has Reprobated some Men from all Eternity;
and therefore it is that they cannot be otherwise.

Written in the fear, and at the Movings of the Lord, By his Servant Geo.
Bishop.

For whom he did fore know, he also did Predestinate to be conformed to the
Image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many Brethren.
Moreover, whom he did Predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also Justified; and whom he Justified, them he also Glorified, Romans 8.
29, 30.

Say unto them, As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and Live: Turn ye, Turn ye
from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Therefore thou Son
of Man, Say unto the children of thy People, The Righteousness of the Righteous
shall not deliver him in the day of his Transgression; as for the wickedness of
the Wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his
wickedness; neither shall the Righteous be able to live for his Righteousness
in the day that he sins, Ezekiel. 33. 11, 12, 13. O Israel! Thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thy help, Hos. 13. 9.

Printed in the Year, 1663.

A TREATISE Concerning Election and Reprobation, etc.
COncerning those two great Points, viz. Election and Reprobation, for the
confusion of that abominable Principle, viz. That God has Reprobated some men
from all Eternity, and therefore it is that they cannot be otherwise: And the
satisfaction of all such as desire to know the Truth, as it is Jesus, this I
have to say from the Lord, and as moved of him, and in his fear do I write.

The Lord made not Man to destory him, neither has he concluded any man from
all Eternity to Destruction; That were to think most abominable of God, who
has no pleasure in the death of a Sinner, but that the Wicked turn from his
way and Live; and to overthrow the end of his Coming into the World, whom the
Father has sent to redeem Man, and to bring him back again unto God, Ezekiel. 33.
11. Hos. 13. 14. Tit. 2. 14. As is the Opinion of those who hold Reprobation
from all Eternity; Whether they be called by the Name of Presbyters, or
Calvinists, or Fathers of the Church, or Doctors, or Ministers of the Gospel,
or Lay Elders, or People, or Offieers, whether in England, Scotland, or
Ireland, or any other parts of the World; to all such I am moved of the Lord to
write, even to all those whosoever they be, or wheresoever they are, and this I
have to say unto you from the Lord.

You are mistaken in this whole Matter, not knowing the Lord, nor the Power of
his working, who does unto every man according to the pleasure of his Will; and
who has resisted his Will? and this is his Will, yea, he has sworn it, that
he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but that the Wicked turn from his
way and Live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die O
house of Israel? So said the Lord by the Prophet, Say unto them, as I live
says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye die O house of Israel? And says he further, and it is to be minded
what he says, Therefore thou Son of Man, Say unto the children of thy People,
The Righteousness of the Righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his
Transgression; as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby
in the day that he turns from his wickedness; neither shall the Righteous be
able to live for his Righteousness in the day that he sins. When I shall say
to the Righteous that he shall surely live; if he trust to his own
Righteousness and commit iniquity, all his Righteousness shall not be
remembered; but for his iniquity which he has committed, he shall die for it.
Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die; If he turn from his
sin and do that which is lawful and right; if the wicked restore the Pledge,
give again that, that he has robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without
committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die; none of his sins
that he has committed, shall be mentioned unto him; he has done that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live: Yet the children of thy people say, The
way of the Lord is not equal; but as for them their way is not equal; When the
Righteous turns from his Righteousness, and commits iniquity, he shall
even die thereby; but if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall live thereby. Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is
not equal; O ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.
And the ground of what the Lord so speaks, is in the words before, and it is
the very same with you in this matter, which they had then to say against the
Lord as you have now; upon which account the Lord pleaded with them then (who
said, The way of the Lord is not equal) as he does with you now; for so your
conclusion speaks (as I shall show by and by) though you will not speak so
openly in words. Therefore (says he) O thou Son of Man, speak unto the house
of Israel, thus ye speak saying, If our transgressions, and our sins be upon
us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? Say unto them, As I live
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked man turn from his way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways,
for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Therefore thou Son of Man, Say unto the
children of thy People, etc. as aforesaid, Ezekiel. 33. 10. and so forwards; Read
the Chapter.

Now if the Lord has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye die, O house of Israel? and you see he has Sworn it; and if the
Righteousness of the Righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his
transgression; and if as for the wickedness of the Wicked, he shall not fall
thereby in the day that he turns from his wickedness; and if the Righteous
shall not be able to live for his Righteousness in the day that he sins, and
you see the Lord has spoken it; and that if the Lord say to the Righteous that
he shall surely live; if he trust to his own Righteousness, and commit
iniquity, all his Righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his iniquity
that he has committed, he shall surely die for it; and if he say to the wicked
thou shall surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and
right, none of the sins that he has committed shall be mentioned to him; he
has done that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live; and that the
Lord will judge every one after his ways; Then it follows that there is no
such thing as the Decreeing some men to Destruction, or the Reprobating of some
from all Eternity; for if it were so then indeed, their transgressions and
their sins would lie upon them, and they would pine away in them, and should
surely die; as they spoke in that day (as aforesaid) and that the way of the
Lord was not equal; as your conclusion speaks now; for if Men are decreed to
destruction from the beginning, and if they are Reprobated from God, from all
Eternity for ever; how can they choose but be so? how can they turn and live?
how can they live? for then there would be a necessity, an Omnipotent necessity
(if I may so say) or a necessity laid upon them of an Omnipotent decree, or the
absolute determination of an Omnipotent God upon them to the contrary, and what
creature can work it off? Nay, how can God (if with Reverence as a Man I may so
speak) do otherwise then conclude them so for ever; when he has so determined
them, how can he reverse it, when the word is so gone forth of his mouth in
Righteousness, unto whom every knee must bow, and tongue confess; who is a God
of faithfulness, and truth, blessed are all they that wait upon him?

This, indeed, were most abominable to think of God, and to judge the Way of
the Lord unequal, and to lay a necessity from the Lord upon Man to destruction;
which let me go further and say, is the highest blasphemy, and the most gross
abuse of God as is Immaginable. For, (if it were lawful to think (for still I
am in dread of the thought of this Opinion) that God should say to Men, Turn
and live, I have no pleasure in your death; Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye
die? And if the wicked man turn so; and if the Righteous man do so, so; and yet
has so before concluded them, and laid the Necessity of his Decree and Counsel
so upon them, that they can neither be so, nor so, and such a necessity must
needs be upon them, if they be so concluded, what a mock would it be (if it
were lawful in a manner so to speak it; and I abhor even the very thoughts
thereof, otherwise then to express what such a conclusion does speak) in God to
Man his Creature (who made not himself, who cannot make himself, much less
alter the Decree of him that made him) to bid him turn, and live, and if he
turn, he shall live; when he has concluded him otherwise, and resolved him to
die by a Decree Irreversible, by an Omnipotent necessity (as I have said) of
Death upon him; which he can never come from under.

Now know ye all who are of this Opinion, whose conclusion so speaks; The Lord
has laid, no necessity upon his Creature; (nor did he at first lay any) to
turn from him who made him after his own Image; there was nothing of the Lord
either of his Counsel, or Decree, or in order to the bringing about of his work
of Salvation, or the making of his Arm glorious in the Salvation of Man; I say
again, there was nothing of the Lord or any necessity as of him, in the fall of
Man (no not the least withdrawing of the Lord from man, then it must of
necessity have been, for man could not preserve himself) or his turning from
him; I must clear the Lord from this before all the World, and to all men; the
Lord withdrew not that from man in which man was made, which made man, in which
he was safe, in which he was secure had he abided in, had he not gone out from
that; But man turned from that in which he was made, which made him, which gave
him his being, in which he might have been preserved, in which he was, where he
was safe, and so went to another thing; The Lord made man upright (that in
which he was made, which made him would have kept him so, had he abided with
him, had he kept in him) but man has found out many Inventions (so it was not
of God, no influence of his, no withdrawing of his Power, no letting fall (if I
may so express my self after the manner of, and unto man) of any thing that he
had set to support him) and here came man's fall, the destruction of Israel of
himself. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help, Hos. 13.
9.

So then, the destruction of Israel is of himself, not of the Lord, but in the
Lord is his help; and his help being in the Lord, and his destruction of
himself, there is nothing of the Lord as to his destruction, and there being
nothing of the Lord as to his destruction, then there is no influence of his
either as to the bringing about of any of his Counsels, or the making of his
Arm more glorious in accomplishing a Restoration, or the withdrawing from man
his Power, or the letting that fall in which man was made, and by which he was
preserved; Or in any other thing of Determination or Decree, which of necessity
must be, if from all Eternity he has Reprobated some, and so sealed them under
a condition, or state ^f destruction, never to be redeemed, never to be
delivered. The Lord then would seem to be a very hard Master to enjoin a man to
things which without him he was not able to do, and yet to withdraw his Power
by which he must be enabled to do them if ever they were done by him; Yea, to
resolve that man should never do them, and this as to that which is Eternal, as
to his well being for ever and ever, to bid a man turn, and live; And yet in
his Counsel to have decreed him never to return, but to be destroyed for ever.
No, no, the Lord is no such hard Master, he has put no man so; When he speaks,
his heart is the same; When he swears, it is by his own Life, which is sure and
certain, and as certain and sure it is that the thing is so, as it is that he
has Life by which he swears, who lives for ever. For men verily (says the
Apostle) swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is [to them] an end
of all strife, wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two
Immutable things in which it was impossible for God to ly; We might have strong
Consolation who have fled for refuge to the hope set before us, which hope we
have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into
that within the Vail; Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made
an high Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchesidec, Heb. 6. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20.

Now he has sworn that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live; (as has been said) and he having
sworn it; Impossible it is for him to lie, it is Immutable, but possible it is
for him to lie, and he must be Mutable, and Vary, (With whom there is no
Variableness, nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. For I am the Lord, I change
not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3. 6.) If he has
concluded man to destruction from all Eternity, and then says unto them turn
and live; If he has determined some to Reprobation, and yet swears he has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and
live; Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of
Israel, and O Israel thy destruction is of thy self, but thy help is in me,
with whom is no Variableness, nor Shadow of turning; For I am the Lord, I
change not, therefore ye Sons of Jaeob are not consumed, as aforesaid.

So, Friends, all you who are here, take heed how ye impose upon the Lord in
things of this Nature; Or take upon ye to meddle with his Decrees, who
understand not the Lord, nor the Counsel of his Decree whose way is in the
Deep, and his Footsteps in the Mighty waters, least he dash you to pieces; For
who are you that you should place such a thing upon the Lord, which among men
is the most horrid, and Abominable, much more as to the Lord (if one can say
more) who is far above man, as the Heavens are above the Earth, whom man cannot
reach; He has given something of himself to you, and placed it within you by
which you may know him, and understand his counsel to you-wards, and his
thoughts of old even from the beginning which have been good to you; which is
that which Invites you, that which draws you, that which inclines you to God;
which shows you evil, and is with you to resist it, which watches evil, and
shows you the very approach of it, and the appearance of evil, and is near to
deliver you, which judges evil and reproves it in you, and you for evil when
you have joined to it; This testifies for the Lord that he has no pleasure in
your death; This is a living witness that he has not concluded you to
destruction from all Eternity, but that he seeks you, that he desires your
welfare, that he would not have you die, but live; and is a living testimony
even in you, against this Opinion which you hold; and such your conclusion as
aforesaid, who know not the Lord, nor the way of his working; who impose upon
him, and place that on the Lord which never was in his heart, and this of him
in you, as I have said, that seeks to gather you, that makes your heart tender
to God, and to fear before him, is in and to you, and all men a living witness;
Therefore lay down such your Opinions, and come to that of himself in you; and
believe in that which shows you, which makes manifest, which reproves, that you
may find his counsels of good to you that have been of old, even from the
beginning, which seeks to gather you.

And if you say, He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth, Romans 9. 18. And, who has resisted his Will? v. 19. And so, Why does
he yet find fault? And even for this same purpose have I raised thee up
(speaking of Pharaoh) that I might show my Power in thee, and that my Name
might be declared throughout all the Earth: and so he shows mercy on whom he
will show mercy, and whom he will he hardneth. And, Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated; and, the children being not yet born, neither having done
any good, or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand,
not of works, but of him that calls; It was said unto her (unto Rebecca) the
Elder shall serve the Younger; as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated, v. 11, 12. 13, 17, 18. And, so it is not of him that wills, nor
of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, v. 16. and so, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. As he said to Moses, v. 15. and as the Scripture says unto
Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my
Power in thee, etc. as aforesaid.

I answer, The Lord has shut up no man in Unbelief, that he might have mercy
on no man, but he has concluded all in Unbelief, that he might have mercy on
all, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11. 32. that is to say, he has concluded no
man to Damnation; that he should be Damned irreversible, but he finding all men
in the fall, in the state of Unbelief, in the state of Damnation, in the state
of Reprobation; he concluded all men in Unbelief in that state. What? that he
might Damn them, that they might be Reprobated for ever, that they might be
destroyed, that they might be damned. No, but that he might have mercy on all;
that is to say, that they might come to life, whom death was over. How is that
you may say? Why thus, the state of all men in the fall, is the state of
Reprobation, in this state there is no being, no believing in God; the state is
concluded in Unbelief, and all that are in it, their eyes are darkened that they
cannot see, their ears are stopped that they cannot hear; God has given them the
Spirit of slumber, Eyes that they should not see, Ears that they should not
hear unto this day (says the Apostle of Israel, that abided not in the
Election) Israel (says he) has not obtained that which he seeks for, but
the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded; according (says he)
as it is written, God has given them the Spirit of slumber, Eyes that they
should not see, and Ears that they should not hear unto this day, and David
says, Let their Table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, and
a recompense unto them; Let their eyes be darkened that they may not see, and
bow down their back always, Romans 11. 7, 8, 9, 10.

So then, the state of Reprobation being a state of Unbelief; and the state of
Unbelief being a state of Reprobation; the Lord has concluded all, in the
state of Unbelief, in the state of Reprobation, that he might have mercy upon
all; that is to say, that their Eyes being darkened in that state that they may
not see, and their Ears being stopped that they may not hear, and their Backs
being bowed down always, that which shows them mercy, that opens their Eyes,
and causes them to see, which that state closes; that unstops their Ears, that
boareth them, and makes them to hear; that which takes of the burden from the
shoulder, which bowed them down, may appear to be of the Lord; for in that
state there is no hearing, no seeing, no standing upright. God has given them
the Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they should not see, as aforesaid. And David
(the Seed) prays, Let their Table be made a snare, and a trap, and a
stumbling block, and a recompense to them; Let their eyes be darkened that they
may not see, and bow down their backs always. So how can they arise, how can
they hear, how can they see in this state which the Seed has prayed may not
see, and that their back may be bowed down always, and whom the Lord has
given the Spirit of Slumber, eyes that they should not see, ears that they
should not hear? Now that which gives eyes to see, ears to hear, that takes off
the burden, that lifts up, that awakes out of the slumber, is another thing;
the Election, the Seed, the Election which obtains, where the rest are blinded,
who continue, or are in the state of Reprobation, of Unbelief, though Israel
once the chosen of the Lord: Israel has not obtained that which he seeks
for, but the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. So that
which gives to see, and to hear, that awakens unto God, is another thing, the
Election which shows mercy unto whom he will show mercy, and whom he will he
hardens; that is to say, Opens the eyes of those whom it wills to open, and
whom it wills it shuts; that is to say, Concludes in Unbelief, that it may have
mercy upon them; Concludes never to see, never to hear, never to go upright in
that state, but in another, he has concluded all in unbelief, that he may have
mercy upon all, not that he may destroy all, that he may bring them to see the
wellspring of Life which is near them; which has damned up the Way to Life by
any other way then Christ the Life that which witnesses in them; who is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, I am, says he, and there is no other way to life!
the state of Reprobation, of Unbelief, cannot show it, it is incapable of it,
it cannot comprehend it, cannot see it; even the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirt of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 3. 14. So that which
gives to see is another thing, that which gives to receive is from another
state; the hearing ear, the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them,
says the wise man, Prove. 20. 12. but he made not Reprobation, he made not
unbelief, or the state thereof, that is to say, He is not the cause of its
being; Man ^an into that, man brought that. O Israel thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy help; the hearing ear, the seeing eye, the Lord has
made even both of them, and he has closed the eye, and shut the ear of the
other; that there is no seeing there, no hearing unto life in that state. It
can never see God, nor hear his voice, it has neither seen him nor known him;
Whosoever sins, has neither seen him, neither known him, 1 John 3. 6. It is
in another state, the seeing, and knowing of God. In the state which is
immortal, that never dies nor changes, which is that which witnesses; and
here is the seeing, and here is the hearing, and no where else, it is the Word of
the Lord, and this you will find in the day that he will render unto every man
according to his deeds, wherein every tongue shall be silent, and every mouth
shall be stopped; and all shall confess that his judgments are just, and there
will be no covering for man, nothing to hide him; but he shall be naked, and
bare before him with whom he has to do, and shall see himself so to be in the
day wherein the books shall be opened; all that which witnessed shall be
remembered, and man shall be judged according to what is written in the books.
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works, Rev. 20. 12. All that which witnesses speaks is written in a book,
and this book shall be opened, not a book of Ink and Paper, but of Conscience,
written with the Spirit of the living God, that which speaks in Conscience, and
every man shall be judged out of that, and by that which in Conscience
witnesses, which gives to receive the things of God, and nothing else.

So the Lord has shut up, has concluded the state of the one in unbelief,
given them the Spirit of Slumber, eyes that they should not see, ears that they
should not hear, that he might have mercy in the other, that gives the eye to
see, and the ear to hear; Here Is the two seeds, here is Election and
Reprobation; here is the seeing eye, and the hearing ear which God has made
even both of them; here is the eye that they should not see, the ear that they
should not hear, which God has given; here is the conclusion of all in
unbelief, he has concluded all in unbelief; here is the end of it; that he may
have mercy upon all, not that he may condemn all, and so I have opened this
Particular.

Then as to that, Even for this cause have I raised thee up, that I may show my
power in thee, and that my Name may be declared throughout all the earth, which
is spoken of Pharaoh.

I answer, This is meant of states; So is that (viz.) Jacob have I loved, and
Esau have I hated, as it is written, and the Elder shall serve the younger, as
it was said unto her (unto Rebecca) before the children were born, neither
having done any good, or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls; It was said unto her, the
Elder shall serve the Younger, as aforesaid. The Elder Esau, which was first in
the tran gression, that state that was brought forth first after the fall, the
state of Wrath, the state of Reprobation, the state of Unbelief, in which all
are concluded; And were by Nature the children of Wrath, even as others, says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 3. The first born Esau have I hated, but Jacob have I
loved, before the children were born, neither having done any good, or evil,
the Elder shall serve the Younger; that the purpose of God according to
Election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls.

So then of him that calls it is where the purpose of God as to Election
stands, of him that witnesses, that moves to Godward in man; not of that which
goes another way, not of that which works. All the endeavors of man from
that, or that is not of that which calls in man the Election, will not avail;
the purpose of God is not there Esau the Hunter, has not the blessing, the
first state Prospers not, it cannot inherit, it must serve the younger to whom
the blessing is. Pharaoh the hard-hearted, which will not let Israel go, when
God calls him the Election, is hated of God, is for Destruction, and all that
are in it; the purpose of God is as to the Other, the Election, the Power of
God is shown here, and it is raised up for that purpose, even that his Name may
be declared throughout the earth. Vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction, all
that are in it; all in whom it is, whom he has endured with much
long-suffering. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction, v. 22.

So man has a day, and God calls upon man to turn and live, and man hears
not so as to turn, and live, and the Lord endures with much long suffering
whilst he calls, whilst he speaks; And man's day is over, and long suffering is
at an end, and God calls no more, and waits no longer, and the Election is
withdrawn; Christ, the Seed of the Promise, that which calls, that which seeks,
that which waits, that which bears, that which endures with much long
suffering; Those whom wrath fills; whom the first Exercises, the State in the
Fall, in the Transgression, the state of Unbelief, the state of Reprobation,
the Lord makes known his Power; God shows his wrath, after long-suffering has
an end; On the Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; Those in whom
destruction has had its course, and will now end; Even for this cause have I
raised thee up* that I might show my Power in thee, and that my Name might be
declared in all the Earth.

So God is not unrighteous; What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness
with God? God forbid; For he says to Moses, I will have mercy, on whom I will
have mercy; and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion, as the
Apostle says in the same case, Romans 9. 15. He found all men in the fall; He
found all men in the state of wrath, in the state of Reprobation, in the state
of Unbelief; He concluded all in Unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all;
and herein is his mercy manifest in that he calls man in this state who seeks
not after God, in that he waits on Man, in that he seeks him who is lost; In
that there is something of himself in man, that stands at the Corners of the
Streets in the chief place of Concourse, in the openings of the Gate, and
calls upon him ^o Return, the Voice of Wisdom; Now if man will not come
hither, if he will not be drawn here, if he will not return, but go on in his
own way, and follow after the counsel of his own heart, and not the Lords, his
destruction is of himself, the Lord is clear, if he give over calling after
him; If he let him alone; If he seek after him no more, and shut up his day
upon him; The day of his Visitation, the Lord is clear, and that which called
upon man in man, which man would not hear, that of him in man which sought man,
and man would not return, would not be gathered will witness for God in the day
that he will render unto every man according to his deeds.

So Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, the Elder shall serve the
Younger, the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good, nor
evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of works,
but of him that calls, for this purpose have I raised thee up that I may show
my power in thee, and that my Name may be declared throughout all the Earth;
The Vessels of Wrath fitted for destruction, the Vessels of Mercy before
prepared unto Glory, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 22, 23. Are the two
Seeds, the two States, and those that stand in them according as they stand in
them, according as they are found in them, are they determined to Life, or
Death, to Salvation, or Destruction; to the one, that the purpose of God
according to Election might stand to the other, that he might show his power in
them, and that his Name may be declared throughout all the Earth, even for this
same purpose have I raised thee up; Therefore has he mercy, on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth; Whom he will he inclines the Ear to
hear that which calls, and they are gathered into it, the Election, that the
Purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that
calls; Whom he wills, their day is shut up, and he calls no more, who has
been long rejected, and these are hardened as was Pharaohs, who refused to let
Israel go; and the more the wonders of the Lord were shown, and he called upon
by Moses to let the people go, the more he hardened his heart, till he bad Moses
see his face no more, for in the day that he did it he should surely die (look
to this all ye who resist the Motions of the Spirit, the movings of the good
Spirit of the Lord in you, that which calls on you in you, to return, and
live; And do not against it, but be led by it, least you come to hate it; and
though Wonders have been shown to the Dead, that which is in the state of Death
in you, and lies in the Grave by reason of Transgression, be reached, and it
hear the Voice of the Son of God, that which calls in you, and you know it;
You come yet to rebel against the Lord; and that which calls on you be an
abomination unto you. Will thou show Wonders to the Dead, shall the dead arise
and praise thee? Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the Grave, and thy
Faithfulness in destruction? Shall thy Wonders be known in the dark? And thy
Righteousness in the Land of Forgetfulness? but unto thee have I cried, O Lord!
Psalm. 88. 10, 11, 12, 13. Then is your day like to be at an end, and your
evening is at hand, when you come to hate him that reproves in the Gate; and
that which calls on you must no more come near you least it die; Moses, that
which works the Wonders, which shows them to the Dead; which calls upon you,
and you hear its Voice; For then your first born is like to be slain, and
Israel shall come out of Egypt, that which suffered in you, and you made to
serve, with an Outstretched Arm, and be delivered in your destruction, it is
the Word of the Lord. He that has an Ear, let him hear, what it speaks.
Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my Hand* and no man
regarded, but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my
Reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear
comes, when your fear comes as Desolation; and your Destruction comes as a
Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you, then shall they call on
me (says Wisdom who cries without, and utters her Voice in the Streets, she
cries in the chief places of Concourse, in the openings of the Gates, in the
City she utters her Voice, saying, how long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity, and the Scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
Knowledge? Turn ye at my Reproof, behold I will pour out my Spirit upon you, I
will make known my Words unto you, then shall they call on me says Wisdom) But
I will not answer; They shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; For
that they hated Knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord; they would
none of my Counsel, they despised all my Reproof; therefore shall they eat of
their own way, and be filled with their own devices, for the turning away (see
you here) of the Simple shall slay them, and the Prosperity of Fools shall
destroy them; But whosoever hearkneth unto Me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from the fear of evil, Prove. 1. 20. to the end.

So the Vessels of Wrath, and the Vessels of Mercy are hear; Those who stand in
the one, (...) are found in the other, which is the Election and Reprobation,
according to the purpose of him that calls; And even for this same purpose
have I raised thee up; Both his purpose, they who are found in either, his
purpose is according to the state of either, in which they are found, Vessels
of Wrath, Vessels of Mercy. What if God be willing to show his Wrath, and to
make his Power known, endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath
fitted to destruction (he does not say ordained to destruction and all
Eternity, but fitted to destruction, which Iniquity does, and destruction is
the end when it has finished its course, sin when it is finished brings for
Death, Jam. 1. 15. Destruction is the end when Iniquity finishes its course)
and that he might make known the riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy
which he had before prepared unto Glory? Even us whom he has called, not of the
Jews only, but also of Gentiles, Romans 9. 22, 23, 24.

So fitted for destruction, vessels of wrath, iniquity fits to destruction (as
I have said) the creature in that state, the state of the fall, the state of
Reprobation, vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction; on whom he will he makes
his power known, after he has endured with much long-suffering (see you here)
after he has waited, after he has called, after he has sought, after he has
endured with much long-suffering, and man will not hear, man will not turn; If
he turn not, he will whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready:
he has also prepared for him the Instruments of death; he ordains his Arrows
against the Persecutors, Psalm. 7. 12, 13. God is willing, what if God willing
to show his Wrath, to make his Power known (even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I may show my Power in thee) endured with much
long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath (whom Reprobation, Iniquity, Unbelief, has
filled up, whom it has contained, in whom it has long lodged, who would not
be emptied, would not have it cast out, on which the wrath of God abides,
Vessels of Wrath) fitted to destruction, made ready for that purpose by
Iniquity; Iniquity fits to destruction, that is all the profit of it (if so be
it may be called so) to fit to destruction, for God to show his wrath, to make
known his power upon, after he has endured with much long-suffering the
Vessels of Wrath. (And the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before prepared unto
Glory; Here Is both (as I have said) Vessels of Wrath, Vessels of Mercy: Vessels
of Wrath, fitted to destruction; Vessels of Mercy, before, prepared unto Glory;
That which receives, that which calls, which shows mercy; I will show mercy, on
whom I will show mercy; That the Purpose of God according to Election might
stand, not of Works, but of him that calls, Vessels of Mercy, they receive
mercy, contain mercy, retain that which calls, the Purpose of God according
to Election; Even as they did not like to [Retain] God in their Knowledge, God
gave them over to a Reprebate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient: being filled with all unrighteousness, etc, Romans 1. 28, 29. I will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy, before prepared unto Glory. Mercy that
which calls, the Purpose of God according to Election, not of Works, but of
him that calls, prepares unto Glory where it is received (that which calls)
Mercy before prepared unto Glory; As Iniquity that which hardens the heart,
shuts the ear, makes to refuse mercy, not to retain that which calls, the
Purpose of God according to Election, fits to destruction; Vessels of Wrath
fitted to destruction; Vessels of Mercy before prepared unto Glory. What if God
be willing to show his wrath, and to make his Power known? And that he might
make known the Riches of his Glory.

So God is not Unrighteous, he made not man to destroy him; Neither has he
concluded any man from all Eternity to destruction; But he made man Upright,
and after his own Image, and therein man was kept as he kept therein; but man
turning from that in which he was made, to another thing, Death came over all,
because all (in Adam) had sinned; and in the state of Death every man stood,
and was concluded, because in Adam every man had sinned, and fallen short of
the glory of God. Now in this state (as I have said) the Lord finding every
man, his compassion wrought to man, and his bowels earned toward him, whom he
had made in his Image, which now man had lost, and was fallen from, and Death
was come over; therefore as he concluded all in this state, because all had
sinned and come short of his glory; so he had mercy upon all, he concluded all
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all; and this is his mercy that
there is something of himself in man, which shows him where he is, and what he
does (as he hearkens to it, believes in it, and obeys it) and his enemy, and
sin, and transgression, by reason of which death came over, and judges it, and
calls upon man to return to the Lord, that he may be redeemed from Death, and
ransomed from the power of the Grave, and see Life. Now this is mercy, and the
Lord might have chosen whether he would have done this to his creature whom he
made upright, but had turned from him, for he was not bound to his Creature,
and have let him remain in that state for ever: Nevertheless herein the love of
God was made manifest to Man, that he gave him something of himself that had
never sinned, nor consented to sin, and placed it in him, to call upon him to
turn unto the Lord; and that whilst we were yet sinners (says the Apostle)
Christ died for the Ungodly; and herein the greatness of his love is shown,
that he continues this in man, which waits upon man, and calls upon him, and
seeks him, and entreats him to turn unto the Lord. Now man resisting this, and
disobeying this, and not believing in this, which suffers, which bears, which
waits, which seeks, and the day of his visitation, this suffering, this
waiting, this seeking, this bearing coming to an end; Man comes to be
unredeemed to God, to be a vessel of wrath, a vessel of dishonor fitted to
destruction, and so his destruction is of himself; but man coming to heed this,
to retain this that calls, to believe in it, to be guided by it, he comes to
be redeemed unto God out of the hands of him, who had him in captivity, to be a
vessel of mercy, a vessel of honor prepared unto Glory, and so his help is in
God.

So, he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth?
Nay, but O man, who art thou that replyest against God? Shall the thing formed,
say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter
power over the Clay of the same lump, to make one vessel unto Honor, and
another unto Dishonor? Man cannot plead with God in this case, for (as I have
said) he is not bound unto his Creature, he might make it as he pleased; even
of the same lump, one vessel to Honor, another to Dishonor; he has power
over man, as the Potter has over the Clay; so man may not plead, man may not
reason with God in this Particular, stood the Case only here, had he been made
so at first, the Lord would have been clear, and who durst to have opened his
mouth, seeing the Lord had power over man to have made him as he pleased; But
the Case stands not here, it lies further; the Lord made not man so, he did not
so form him, nor with an intent that he should be so did the Lord make Man;
but he formed him a vessel of Honor, He planted him a noble Vine, wholly a
right Seed: He made of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on the face of
the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of
their Habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, though he be not far from any of us, for in him we live, and move,
and have our being, as certain of your own Poets have said; for we are his
offspring, said the Apostle to the Athenians, Acts 17. 26, 27, 28. Jer. 2. 21.
He made him upright, after the Image of God made he man, but man (as I have
said) found out many Inventions, and having turned aside, and proved the
degenerate Plant of a strange Vine; even a vessel o^ Dishonor, bearing the
image of the Devil, who was made after the Image of God; It was the loving
kindness of God to visit man again, and to call upon him to turn unto him, to
place something of him-thing of himself in him to call upon him; to show him
where he is, and what he has been doing, and to turn unto the Lord. Now he
that will not hear this Prophet, which the Lord has raised up like unto me
(said Moses, who gave the Law without, which was the Similitude of the Law
within, Christ Jesus, the fear in the Inward parts, that which calls, that
which makes manifest, that which reproves, that which judges, that which makes
the heart tender to God, and to fear before him) shall be destroyed from among
the people, Acts 3. 22, 23. For, if the word spoken by the Angels was steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward;
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at first began to
be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him,
Hebrews 2. 2, 3.

So he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, he visits whom he will, and he
waits on whom he will, and he calls on whom he will; and he suffers as he will,
and as long, and whilst he will; and whom he will he hardens; he suffers
iniquity to go over, which the more it turns from God, the more it hardens man
against him, on whom he calls long, and they will not turn unto the Lord; and
so the more he calls, the more they turn from him, and the more they turn from
him, the more they are hardened against him, and the movings of his Spirit; and
the more they are hardened against him, and the movings of his Spirit, the less
his Spirit strives with them, and therefore it is said, O Lord! why have thou
made us to err from thy ways, and heardned our hearts from thy fear? Return
for thy Servants sake, the Tribes of thy Inheritance, Isa. 63. 17. The Lord was
withdrawn, that of him ceased to call, which they had transgressed against;
they grew cold to the Lord whilst that strove not with them, that made their
hearts tender to him; they began to grow hard as that turned from them that
turned them to him; they began to go astray, as that removed which led them to
him. O Lord! why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
hearts from thy fear? Return (here was the matter, the Lord was withdrawn, the
Lord was removed, that of him turned from them as they had turned from it, that
was the cause, and of this they grew sensible; Return ^ay they) for thy
Servants sake, the Tribes of thy Inheritance.

So, whom he will he hardens, as they withdraw from that of him which calls on
them to turn to him, he withdraws that in them of him, which turns unto him, as
they let not in that of him in them that calls upon them to turn unto the Lord,
which makes them tender, they grow hard. So Pharaoh, the more he withstood
Moses that called upon him to let Israel go, the more hard Pharaoh was, and
even for the same purpose have I raised thee up, that I may show my power in
thee, and that my Name may be declared throughout all the earth.

So when the Lord calls, and man will not hear; when he stretches out his arms
long, and man will not come when he strives, and yet man will not be gathered,
who is turned from God. It Is just with God to withdraw from man, to turn that
of him that turns man to God, from man, to withdraw that which sought to gather
him, to remove that which was near to him which strove with him to bring him
back again to God, and so to let him err from his ways, and to hearden his
heart from his fear; Which in a sense may be called, a making man err from his
ways, and a hardening of his heart from his fear, because that is withdrawn from
man; that is removed that led man in his ways, and caused man to fear before
him; Man still turning from that which would have turned him to God, and
withdrawing from that which would have made his heart tender to him. And so I
have done with this Particular.

Lastly, And to that, why does he yet find fault? For who has resisted his
will?

I answer, That is spoken as to the Omnipotent Power of God, by which he is
able to subdue all things unto himself, which makes the Devils tremble, though
they love him not, and to obey him, though they fear not before him; But there
is a difference between the consideration of this Omnipotent Power of God,
which can make every thing bow as he pleases* and that Power which he has
placed in man (which yet is Omnipotent too) to bring him to God. For, in the
One, the Lord deals as a Dread Sovereign, who at his beck lays all things at
his see; In the Other, as a Father, as a Redeemer, as a Woer, as an Intreater,
as a Beseecher, for man to be reconciled to God. Now as to this Latter, it is
the Gospel of Reconciliation, the Ministry of Reconciliation, is that which he
sends forth to turn man unto God. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us
the Ministry of Reconciliation; And all things are of God, who has reconciled
us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the Ministry of
Reconciliation. And, now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God; For
he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21.

As to the other, it is the Ministry of Wrath, or of Condemnation. The Savor
of Death unto Death, and of Life unto Life; For we are unto God a sweet savor
of Christ in them that are saved, and to them that perish; To the one, we are
the savor of death unto death, and to the other, the savor of life unto life,
2 Cor. 2. 15. 16. And, To YOU that are troubled rest with Us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire,
taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction; From the
presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his Power, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because
our Testymony among you was believed) in that day, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.

So, here is the difference; The Ministry of Reconciliation, is the Power of
God; Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, that beseeches, that
prays, that that woes, that entreats man to be reconciled to God; who has made
him sin for us, who knew no sin (and so the burden of sin is upon him, and the
suffering, who takes it on him, and bears, and suffers the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us all to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18.) that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him; And this is Gentle, it works with the
understanding of man, it opens the understanding of man, the Eyes of his
understanding. The Eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his Power to
usward, who believe according to the working of his mighty Power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand in the Heavenly places, far above all Principalities, and Power, and
Might, and Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but
also in that which is to come, and has put all things under his feet; and gave
him to be the head over all things to the Church; which is his Body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 18. to the end. And this is
that which waits on man to reconcile him to God, and bears the sins; So that
those who receive him, in whom God is reconciling the World unto himself, he
imputes not their trespasses unto them, so makes him sin, who knew no sin; He
bears it, he suffers it, the just for the unjust; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, that he might bring us all to God; And this is his
Will, and this is resisted, Ye have condemned and kiled the just, and he does
not resist you, Jam. 5. 6. this is gain said. They perished in the gainsaying
of Core, Jud. 11. This is evil entreated, and scoffed, There shall come in the
last day scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the
promise of his coming 2 Pet. 3. 4, 5. And. the remnant took his servants, and
entreated them spitefully, and slew them; Those whom the King sent to invite to
the Wedding, Mat. 22. 6. This is mocked and spit upon, struck and blindfolded,
crowned with Thorns, and scourged, this is put to death, when it has cried
out, My God, my God, why have uhou forsaken me, Mat. 27. 28, 29, 30, 31. For
the same that was done without to him, in that day; is done to the measure of
him within, in this; who is the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World,
Rev. 13. 8. Whose witnesses John saw should prophecy a thousand two hundred
and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth, Rev. 11. 3. Against whom, when
they shall have finished their testimony, John saw also that the beast that
ascended out of the bottomless pit, should make war against them, and should
overcome them, and kill them, and that their dead bodies should lie in the
streets of the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom, where also our
Lord was crucified; and that they of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and
Nations, should see their dead bodies three days and a half, and should not
suffer their dead bodies to be put in Graves, and that they that dwell on the
Earth, should rejoice over them, and should make merry, and send gifts one to
another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt upon the Earth,
Rev. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. And, as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before
her shearers is dumb, so he was brought, so he opens not his mouth, says
Isaiah of him, he was Oppressed, and he was Afflicted (read this every one in
his own particular, who afflict the just in you, and cause it to suffer, to be
pressed under you as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves; And so cause
the Lord to cry. Ah! I will ease me* of mine enemies, and avenge of mine
adversaries, Isa. 1. 24. Amos 2. 13. 5. 12.) Yet he opened not his mouth (read
this ye that make hight of that which witnesses in you, which ye cause to
suffer, which resists you not, which opens not its mouth) which as a Lamb is
in you: when it is brought to the slaughter, when you suffer the unjust to slay
and murder it, that which moves in you unto God, and against evil, and waits
to bring you unto God; You little think what you are a doing, and whom you
suffer to be put to death (so far as the motion of that comes to be
extinguished, and so may be said to be slain) even the Lord of Glory. Whom none
of the Princes of this World knew, for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory, that which witnessed in them unto God; there they
slew him first; behold the Kingdom of God is within you (said he to the
Pharisees, who demanded of him when the Kingdom of God should come, they looked
for it without, and a King and a Kingdom without, but he answered them and
said, The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation; neither shall they say,
lo here, or lo there* for behold the Kingdom of God is within you, as Luke
sa^es, Chap. 17. v. 20, 21.) and then put him to death without, that which
slays the witness within, will kill him that bears it withort, as it has
opportunity; Cain slew his brother in his heart, and then with his hand; he
that oppresses it within, will oppress that which testifies to it without; he
that afflicts it within, will afflict it without. First, the thing in
themselves, then the same in another, for that which slayes in the particular,
carries forth that particular to slay as it can the same in all others; the
murderer is on top whose itch is at all those in whom the same Spirit lives,
which he has slain in the particular; And here all Persecutors may see their
face, and what is in them, and how it is with them, and what it is that makes
them cause the just to suffer, even that which has slain the just in their
particulars, and what it is that they slay, and is slain, that they persecute
and is persecuted, but the Lord of Glory; even them that bear it, in whom it
lives unto God and brings forth fruit to him, what ever they may think even in
themselves and others, as Saul did; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, and he
said, who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest,
it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, Acts 9. 4, 5. Whom none of the
Princes of this World knew (whom Saul knew not) for had they known it (had Saul
known it, and after he knew it he did it not) after the light had shone about
him, and he was struck down; and he heard the voice, that which called, the
voice behind him, when he turned to the right hand, and to the left, when he
persecuted, for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory. It Is that which suffers in the flesh, that is meek, and lowly; that seeks
to bring unto God. Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Sion, shout O Daughter of
Jerusalem. Behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having Salvation,
lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the Foal of an Ass, Zach. 9. 9.
Learn of me for I am meek and lowly, Mat. 11. 29. So take heed of this all ye
that persecute the just in your selves, or others, and cause it to suffer, for
it will not resist you, you may resist his will in this Particular, in such a
sense as this, that which is meek and lowly in you, that speaks in you, and
seeks to bring you to God.

But as to the other, which is not in the long-suffering, in the waiting, which
rules over all in Heaven and earth, which does whatsoever he will in Heaven and
in earth; and who shall say unto him, what do thou? who is Lord of all, who
made the Heavens and the earth, and all that is therein; that holds the
waters of the deep in his fist, and comprehends the dust of the earth in a
measure; the Lord of Hosts is his Name, who removes the mountains, and they
know not who overturneth them in his anger; who shakes the earth out of her
place, and the Pillars thereof tremble; who commands the Sun, and it rises
not; and seals up the Stars, who alone spreads out the Heavens, and
treads upon the Waves of the Sea; who makes Oriturus, Orion, and Pleiades,
and the Chambers of the South; who does great things, yea, and past finding
out; who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and meeted out
Heaven with the Span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance; who has directed
his Spirit, or being, his Counselor has taught him? With whom took he
Counsel, and who Instructed him, and taught him in the Path of Judgment, and
taught him Knowledge, and showed to him the way of Understanding? Behold the
Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the
balance: behold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing, and Lebanon is
not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient fort a
burnt-offering. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to
him less then nothing and vanity. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength,
who has hardened his heart against him and prospered? Who has resisted his
Will? for he forms the breath of man, and shows man his thoughts; he
brings Summer and Winter, and Seed time, and Harvest, and Creates the Grass
of the Field; He makes Night and Day, and withdraws the Wind into his
Cloisters; He spreads forth the light of the morning as a sheet, and causes
darkness to cover the face of the earth. He is Great in Wisdom, Wonderful in
Counsel, his Way is past finding out: No man went after him, nor shall any man
come to him in the knowledge of this his understanding which is unsearchable.

So here all men must be at a stop, there is no finding of him out; there is no
resisting of him, who beats the mountains like dust, and rends the Rocks to
pieces; all men must bow before him, and the most up right among men make their
supplication to their Judge; for he breaks and, and carries away, and there
is no resisting of him who has resisted his Will?

And yet in his dealings with man, in his long-suffering to man, in his seeking
man who is lost, in his gathering man who is scatered; he is far otherwise, he
woes, entreats, prays, beseeches (as I have said) he waits to be gracious: The
Gospel the Power of God, Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God
that seeks man, that calls man is (as I have said) the Gospel of
Reconciliation; His Ministers are the Ministers of Reconciliation. God was in
Christ Reconciling the world unto himself (not rending from himself) and has
committed to us the Ministry of Reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you; We pray you in Christ stead be
reconciled unto God, as aforesaid. And here is the Will, and here is the Power,
and here is that which can be resisted; and this is that which man resists,
which waits upon man, which seeks man; and here the Lord, and his Will, and
his Power is to be understood, and no otherwise.

So all are to be silent, and every mouth is to be stopped before the Lord; for
who can complain of him, who has placed something of himself in man, Christ
Jesus, the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, a measure of him in every man,
to gather him to the Lord, and to bring him again to him who is gone from him,
which is that which witnesses, which shows, which judges, which reproves, which
makes manifest; and this waits on man after that man has turned from him; the
Seed of the woman, which he promised man after he was fallen, should bruise the
Serpents Head, which bruises the Serpents head in all who are gathered to it,
believe in it, and are guided by it. Now they who are gathered unto this
receive mercy, become vessels of Honor fit for the Masters use; vessels of
mercy before prepared unto Glory, from him who has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and compassion on whom he will have compassion, as he said to Moses, who
has concluded all in unbelief that he might have mercy upon all, and holds
forth this unto all, and has placed this in all. For as in Adam all die, so
[in] Christ all are made alive; the Plaster is as broad as the Sore, the
Medicine as comprehensive as the Disease; Those who are not gathered to it,
reject the Counsel of God against themselves, as it was said of the Pharisees,
and Lawyers who came not to the Baptism of John, being not baptized of him,
Luke 7 30. and so become vessels of dishonor, vessels in whom there is no
pleasure, unfit for the Masters use by reason of sin, and that which defiles,
which he can have no fellowship with, nor can it come near him, vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction.

And so all men are left without excuse, and will be found so in the day of the
Lord, wherein he will render unto every man according to his Deeds; for this of
him which he has placed in every man, which calls upon every man, which seeks
every man, that in every man which witnesses does it, which reproves, which
judges, which shows man what he should do, which makes manifest, will then
witness for God in every man, and how the Lord has sought every man, and
waited for him, and all its sufferings, and being rejected, and its sighings,
and oppressions, and afflictions, and heavy loadings, and groanings, whilst the
long-suffering of God waited, will it bring up fresh in man, which shall judge
man, and leave him without excuse.

You will not be able then to battle it against the Lord; your reasonings will
be stopped; your great Arguments will be at an end; No trifling it then as now,
wherein man is bold by reason of the Instigation of the Devil, and the
Ignorance that is in him, and reasons with the Lord, as if he were stronger
then the Lord; as if the Lord needed man, as if he always would wait on man.
No, no, before your Judge you will be silent, and you shall confess to the
Lord, that his judgment is just.

So, Friends, ye all who are here; heed whilst ye have time, take heed of
pleading with your Maker, and reasoning it out with him, Has not the Potter
power over the Clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor? and yet he made not you so, nor no man so, he made all
Nations on the earth of one blood, and appointed the bounds of their
habitations, if happily they might seek after God; So he has concluded no
Nation under reprobation, from all eternity; He Created man after his own
Image; In the Image of God created he them, Male and Female, and so he made
none to Dishonor, none to Reprobation; He might have made man otherwise, and
who could have said to him, what do thou? for he has Power, as the Potter
over the Clay, and yet when he has made no man so; why does man complain, for
who has resisted his Will? why does he find fault? It is sufficient, and
riches of mercy, that he has had compassion on man, and visited him again with
the day spring from on high, who sat in darkness, and in the Region of the
shadow of death; which is the light which shows him whatsoever he does; Is not
this the Christ? if Man will not be gathered to this if he will neglect so
great Salvation; if he will trifle out his precious time, and do despite unto
the Spirit of Truth, and trample under foot, the blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, and reject mercy, and loving kindness, and that which waits upon him,
and has compassion on him, and his day have an end; and so he be hardened, and
that which called withdraws, and that which strove ceases, and so he errs from
his ways, and his heart is hardened from his fear, and the Lord show his Power
in him; that which he refused, and did reject, which is the Power of God unto
Salvation, and declare his Name throughout all the earth in his destruction;
Man has nothing then to reason with the Lord, and all men will find it so, it
is the Word of the Lord.

And whereas the Apostle says, What if God willing to show his wrath, and to
make his Power known, endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath
fitted to Destruction, that he might make known the riches of his Glory, on the
Vessels of Mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory? He does but put the
Question. If he were willing to do so, and if he had done so; what, has man to
do to complain. Nay, but O man! who art thou that reply against God? Shall
the thing formed, say unto him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? If
the matter were only there, it stood well against man, but the Lord has done
otherwise, (as I have showed) he made man otherwise; and the Lord has
otherwise done by man since he marred himself, as has been declared, so the
Lord is true, and every man (here) a liar, Romans 3. 4. and his mouth must be
stopped, and he must make supplication to his Judge, whom though I were righteous
(says Job) yet would I not answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge,
Job. 9. 15. And this becomes man, and not to argue it with the Lord, and to
wrangle with him; as if God were unrighteous, as if his Ways were not equal;
Who measures the Lord? by his shallow understanding, who cannot be searched
out. O the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom, and the Knowledge of God,
how unsearchable are his Judgments and his Ways, past finding out; for who
has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his Counselor? Or, who has
first given unto him, and it shall be given unto him again? For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to whom be Glory for ever, Amen. Romans
9. 33, 34, 35. 36.

So, every man's mouth here must be stopped, and before his Judge he must be
silent (as I have said) and not lay unrighteousness on God, or charge him that
his Ways are not equal; For man himself shall conclude it otherwise, in the
day wherein the Lord will render unto him according to his deeds; and therefore
it is in vain to stand it out with the Lord. It is but the artifice of the
Enemy, that works this in you, he knows you will otherwise say when it is too
late therefore be not deceived by him, least when it is too late you blame your
folly. Moved of the Lord I am to write this to you in bowels of love, that you
may see your state, and how this matter stands, and that ye may be delivered.

And if ye yet say; The Children being not yet born, neither having yet done
any good, or evil; that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand,
not of Works, but of him that calls; It was said unto her, the Elder shall
serve the Younger, as it is written; Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

I answer, as I did before, this is spoken of the two Seeds, the Seed of the
Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, of which these two were Figures, in which
as the Knowledge of the Lord foresaw they would be, so he loved, so he hated;
For he loves, and hates no man, but as they are in these; and it was after
the fall that this was spoken; both the promise that the Seed of the Woman
should bruise the Serpents head; and the Elder shall serve the Younger. Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated. For before there is nothing spoken of
this, for all stood well, and as the same in the first Adam, whilst he stood,
and there was no need of the Promise, nor was there two (as to man) the one
whereof was the Object of Love, and the other of Hatred, the Elder serving the
Younger; but man was one spirit from the Root Eternal, and in the Root Eternal,
which God has blessed; And the two, or that which made two, the seed of the
Serpent, which entered into man came out afterward. For man receiving the
Serpent, and obeying his voice, after he was made, against the Command of God,
there came to be two things in man, two Roots; two which strugled, the Seed of
the Woman, the seed of Promise, and the seed of the Serpent, the seed of the
Curse, as the Promise came to take place, and that seed came to move in man, to
bring him back to God, which the Lord has promised as the Children strove in
Rebecca's womb, when she came to be delivered; so do these as the time comes
wherein (as I have said) the promise of God comes to be fulfilled; The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are
contrary the one unto the other, So that ye cannot do the things that ye would;
As the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5. 17. And which the Apostle found in himself, when
the Promise came to be fulfilled in him. I see (says he) another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into Captivity ^o
the law of sin, which is in my members; And he cries out there (as Rebecca did
concerning the Children; If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of
the Lord, Genesis 25. 22.) O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this Death, Romans 7. 23, 24.

So the Children strugled in the Womb of Rebecca, which was the Figure. Two
Nations are in thy Womb; and two manner of People shall be separated from thy
bowels; and theone people shall be stronger then the other people, and the
Elder shall serve the Younger; (said the Lord unto her, of whom she went to
enquire, when it was so with her (as aforesaid) And when her days to be
delivered were to be fulfilled, behold there were Twins in her womb, and the
first came out Red all over like an hary Garment, and they called his Name
Esau; and after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's
heel, and his Name was called Jacob, ^. 24, 25, 26. So, the Law of the Spirit
of Life which was in Christ Jesus, strugled with the law of Sin, and of Death.
In Paul, which, though the law of sin and of death, the law in his members
strugled with, and came out first; When I would do good, (the law of his mind)
evil is present with me, (the law in his members) the good that I would I do
not, the evil which I would not, that do I; Yet it took hold of its heel, and
supplanted it as the Name of Jacob the true Seed, siignifies; Is he not (said
Esau) rightly named Jacob? For he has supplanted me these two times; he took
away my birthright, and behold now he has taken away my blessing, and Esau
hated Jacob, because of the blessing wherewith his Father blessed him; And Esau
said in his heart, the days of mourn-for my Father are at hand, then will I
slay my brother Jacob, Genesis 27. 36, 37. 41. It came after, and supplanted,
overthrew the other. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord* the Law of the
Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin
and Death; For what the Law could not do, for that it is weak through the
flesh; God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for they
that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are
after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit, for to be carnally minded is death,
but to be spiritually minded is life, and peace, verse. 21. chap. 8. 2, 3, 4, 5,
6.

So there is the first, and the second; the first man Adam, and the second; the
Law of Sin and Death, and the Law of the Spirit of Life; the Law of the Mind,
and the Law in the Members; the Flesh and the Spirit; the Son of God in the
likeness of sinful flesh, condemning sin in the flesh, and the body of sin and
death. Two Nations, two manner of People, the one stronger then the other; the
strong man armed, the stronger then he. The Elder as to man in the state of the
fall, that came out first, the Younger, which was before the Elder, though it
came out in the World after; This is he (said John) of whom I said, after me
comes a Man, which is preferred before me, for he was before me, John 1. 30.
The Younger who comes after the fall, the seed of the Woman to redeem out of
the fall, to bruise the Serpents head, which the Elder must serve; which takes
hold of the heel of the Elder, and supplants it, and makes it to serve; the
Elder shall serve the Younger.

And so the Apostle speaks; They are not all Israel who are of Israel;
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all Children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called; That is, they that are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the Promise are
counted for the seed; For this is the word of Promise, at this time will I
come, and Sara shall have a son; And not only this, but when Rebecca also had
conceived by one, even by our Father Isaac, (for the children being not yet
born, neither having done any good, or evil, that the purpose of God according
to Election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls.) It was said
unto her, the Elder shall serve the Younger, as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated (as aforesaid) Romans 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

And here is the whole matter as it lies together, and as the Scriptures
testify, and are the Explanation of one another in the Spirit of the Lord from
whom I have written, and who has shown me these things, that I might write
them unto you, that your understandings might be opened* and that ye might come
to see the Truth as it is in Jesus, and be brought to the Knowledge of the
Truth; And so I have finished this particular. The Lord God Eternal open your
eyes, that in this your day you may know the things that belong unto your
Peace. And so I shall proceed.

As the Lord made not man to destroy him, and as he has not concluded any man
from all Eternity to destruction. So, neither has he so made man, as that it
is impossible for him to fall from the state in the which he was made, or to
miscarry so as to fall from life for ever and ever.

That were to put man in another state then that in the which he was made, who
was made in a Dependence on God for his being, and Subsistence in the state in
the which he was made, and to render him as God, knowing both good and evil,
that is to set him, as do he good, or do he evil; he shall never be finally
removed from the state in the which he was made, that is from Life, but shall
remain as God. The Judgment of the Ranters whom the Serpent has taken with
that which was his first bait, with which he took Eve at first, and with which
they are taken at this day; who hold. That do they what they will, they shall
never be finally ^emoved from the state in the which they were made; that is,
from Life --

Ye shall not surely die, for God knows that in the day that ye eat thereof,
then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil,
Genesis 3. 4, 5.

This the Serpent laid before Eve, viz. a state beyond that in the which she
was made. Ye shall not surely die (a state at the pleasure of him that made
you, and at his Commandmen who gave you your being) Yea, has God said, ye
shall not eat of every Tree in the garden? v. 1. (has he put you, are ye under
such a dependency on him, and at his command? Nay) ye shall not surely die (it
is not so) ye shall be as Gods (a state beyond that in which ye were made; ye
shall not need to stand in such awe, and dread; Ye are not necessitated to such
a dependency upon God, as that doing contrary to his Command, ye shall die;
your state shall be changed, nay, your state shall not be so changed, but
eating of the Tree, doing of that which he has said ye shall not do, which
signifies a Subjection, and Subordination, a Creature state of Variation, and
Change at the Will of Him that made you; Nay, the doing of this will enter you
into another state, that is more high, more fixed, more certain; a state wherein
God is, who changes not, nor is moved, nor does alter or vary from that
wherein he is, and this God knows) for God does known (this is the Reason
that God has set you under such a command, in such dread, in such awe as of
death; a loosing of the state in the which ye are, and a coming into a quite
contrary, or another, this he knows, and therefore has laid this Command upon
ye, to keep ye from this; to prevent your attaining unto this, to be as he is,
settled, and unchangeable do ye what ye will, ye shall not surely die; Nay, it
shall enter you into that state wherein there is no such thing as death, but
only a death unto that in which ye are as you are passing to it, as through
death to life; ye shall not need thus to be put to it, ye shall be as Gods,
without change, without alteration, without fear, or dread, or a necessary
dependence upon another to keep you in the state in the which ye are; Ye shall
not need thus to be put to it at every turn, to be under this Rod, under this
reproof, under this check; under such a manifestation as this, and who would be
so when he may be otherwise? This God knows, therefore has he laid this Bar
upon you, this Precept, this Bond to keep ye under) that in the day that ye eat
thereof (ye do otherwise then he has ordained you, and so put your selves out
of a state of dependence upon him, or of being Creatures, so to be disposed of,
and ordered by him; so taking your selves into your own Power, your own
disposal, as he does himself, and you whilst it is thus with you, that you dare
do nothing but what he requires you; and that ye dare not do that which he
forbids you, which is a Creature state of alteration, and change, of
Subjection, and Subordination, you will be as he is, you will be as Gods,
unalterable, unchangeable, insubjectible, insubordinate; and this God knows
that in the day that ye eat thereof, that ye so put your selves, that ye so
take your selves into your own order, and not stand under his Order, and Rule,
who has so said unto you, Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree
in the Garden? Yea, is it so? We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees of the
Garden (said the Woman, who was first in the Transgression; Adam was not
deceived, (the first man Adam was made a living Soul, 1 Cor. 15. 45. that was
not deceived; which was made a living Soul, after the Image of God) being the
Image of God, or, the Image of God in man; Christ Jesus the Son of God, the new
man, And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image
of him that created him, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision,
nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythi^n, bond, nor free; but Christ is all, and
in all, Col. 3. 10, 11. Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the first born
of every Creature, Col. 1. 15. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power
(in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God; All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that
was made, 1 John 1. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 3. For a man indeed, ought not to cover his
head; forasmuch as he is the Image and Glory of God; but the woman is the glory
of the man: For the man i^ not of the woman, but the woman of the man; Neither
was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man (he that reads,
let him understand) for this cause ought the woman to have Power over her head,
because of the Angels. Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman,
neither the woman without the man in the Lord; for as the woman is of the man,
even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7. to
the 13. And as we have borne the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the
Image of the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 49. and this is Christ) but the woman being
deceived, was in the transgression (the woman, that man wa^ not Created for,
but the woman for the man; the woman by whom also the man is, as the woman is
of the man; the woman without whom neither is the man, neither the man without
the woman in the Lord, being deceived was in the Transgression, the Creature
that was made, not the Soul of the Creature, the living Soul; that of God, the
Image of God, in which the Creature was made; God breathed into man the Breath
of Life, and man became a living Soul; the first man Adam was made a living
Soul: I say the Creature that was made in the Image of God, the living Soul,
that man became after God had breathed into man the Breath of Life, and man
became a living Soul; the first man Adam, the Creature, that was so made, the
woman, not Adam, the living Soul, which by this came into death, and death came
over it, and there he remains till the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, the
Lord from Heaven, raise it up, and de^iver it) being deceived (mistaking the
thing) was in the Transgression; went from the Commandment, in the which Adam
was not deceived, for that testified in the woman; that which was taken out of
man, which proceeded from man, for which the man was not Created, but that for
man, without which the man is not, nor that without the man in the Lord; We may
eat of the Trees of the Garden, (said the woman to the Serpent, whilst she
stood in the man; the Image of God, the living Soul, the first man Adam, into
whom God breathed the Breath of Life, and man became a living Soul, this said
she) but of the Fruit of the Tree which is in the midst of the Garden, (the
Eternal state of which the Creature is, and by which it is preserved, from a
dependency on which the Creature cannot be, that is to say, to be as it is,
without dependancie, change, or alteration; which the Lord alone only is, and
the Creature can be never, viz. in a state of Independency on God, on another,
nor shall be ever, no eating, no touching of this fruit of this Tree that
grows in the midst of the Garden; no coming to this state by man for ever; no
coming at it though the Serpent climbing up to it mist, and so keeping not his
first state, drew man thither to fall also) God has said, ye shall not eat of
it, neither shall ye touch it least ye die, v. 2, 3.

Thus said the woman, whilst she stood in the man, in that in which she was
made, out of which she was took from, which she proceeded; thus she answered,
the living Soul, that was not yet under, that death was not yet over, for she
had not yet let it in, the first man Adam, into whom God breathed the Breath of
Life, and man became a living Soul; the Image of God, Righteousness, and true
holiness, the new man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him
that Created him, as aforesaid; Christ Jesus the Lord from Heaven, the
quickening Spirit, who quickens the dead, and calls those things which be
not, as if they were; the amen the true and faithful Witness, the beginning of
the Creation of God, that was dead, and is alive, and behold I am a live for
ever more, Amen. And have the Keys of Hell, he that is Holy, he that is true,
he that has the Key of David, he that opens, and no man shuts, and
shuts and no man opens; the first, and the last, the beginning and the
ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty. Behold he comes in Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also which piereed him, and all Kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of
him, even so, Amen, Romans 4. 17. Rev. 1. 7, 8, 18. Rev. 2. 14. Rev. 3. 7. He was
not yet slain, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. So
she was not yet deceived. He yet spoke in her, as aforesaid. Adam who was not
deceived, who was not in the Transgression, but showed the Transgression, who
said in her, God has said, and she spoke after him, God has said (said she)
etc. Now she spoke right, now she was not deceived, whilst she spoke after him
in her who witnessed, who was the Son of Adam, who was the Son of God, Luke 3.
38. The Seed of the Woman which God said should bruise the Serpents head, Genesis
3. 15. who lives for Ever, the Root and Offspring of David; whilst she heard
him speaking in her, and kept there she said; God has said, Ye shall not eat
thereof, neither shall ye touch it, least ye die.

Yea, (said the Serpent) has God said ye shall not eat of every Tree in the
Garden? There Is somewhat in the matter, i will tell you a secret; tush, there is a
state beyond that in the which you are, into which he would not have you come;
that is his own, he would not have you, as himself, as he is, and therefore he
forbids you, he tells you of death to skare, and fright you, least by eating of
the Fruit of that Tree, etc. touching it, you should be as it is with him, and
have no secret hid from you. True it is, you will by eating of it die to the
state in which you are, viz. a Creaturely dependency upon him; a capability of
changing, but then you will live to another, which is more high, which changes
not, which God does not, and this is that which he would keep ye from. Yea,
has God said ye shall not eat of every Tree in the Garden? And the woman said
unto the Serpent, We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees of the Garden, but of
the Fruit of the Tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, Ye
shall not eat of it, neither shall ye toutch it, least ye die. And the Serpent
said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die, for God does know that in the day
that ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened (ye shall come to see this
sec^et; and it was a mischievous seeing indeed, which is not off her Posterity
to this day) and ye shall be as Gods, knowing both good and evil.

Here was the eating of the forbidden fruit, the temptation of the Serpent, and
the great encounter the woman had, by which she fell; she reached at this, the
Serpent was too hard for her, whilst she was from her Life, from that in the
which she was made, which witnessed in her, he entered her; and so his Spirit
lead, and guided her to do that which was contrary to the Lord, as he had done,
and not the good Spirit of the Lord, and so she steered another course, as she
saw with another eye, and came to be deceived. And when the woman saw that the
Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be
desired to make one wise; she took of the Fruit thereof and did eat, and gave
also unto her Husband with her, and he did eat, and the eyes of them both were
opened (a sore opening indeed; see how she was deceived, but how were they
opened, and what did they see? Did they see as Gods? Came they to a more
permanent state, to a state that changed not, to be as Gods to have no secret
hid from them? as the Serpent suggested, and by such temptations as these had
drawn them to eat? nay) and they knew that they were naked (stripped off their
covering; Innocence was lost in them, a sad condition they were now in; and
they knew it, their eves were opened, and they saw this, a most unhappy sight)
which (as I have said) is not off their Posterity to this day; this was that
the Serpent lead them to in the end, and this they came to see, and their eyes
were opened to see this, to know this, to know that they were naked) and they
sewed Fig leaves together (a miserable shift, who were clothed with the Spirit
of God, with his Image, in the which they were made, which now they had lost,
which now they had slain, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world (as
has been said) and see what a garment they had got, what a covering; in what a
pitiful condition they were in, who had Rule over the Creation, and Dominion
was given them over it, they take of the poorest of the Creation, a company of
fig leaves, poor, thin, inconsiderable things indeed for a covering, who were
clothed with the Lord; and whom he spread over, and filled, and replenished,
of whom he was the Root) and made themselves Aprons. And thus Adam was not
deceived, the man that was first formed, into whom God breathed the Breath of
Life, and man became a living Soul, the first man Adam was made a living Soul,
but the woman that was took out of man, that proceeded from man, that the man
was not Created for, the woman, that is of the man, as the man is by the woman,
being deceived was in the Transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 13, 14. He that reads (as
I have said) let him understand.

And thus the Serpent beguiled Eve, as the Apostle speaks; But I fear (said ho)
least by any means (this was to them whom he had espoused to one Husband, that
he might present them as a chaste Virgin to Christ, of which he speaks in the
verse before) as the Serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3.

And this was his temptation, and this was that which the Woman caught after,
who was made in the Image of God, viz. A pretended state beyond that in which
she was made; and this was the end, and this came of it, which (as I have said)
her Posterity is not clear off to this day; and this is the particular thing of
the Ranters, and the temptation wherewith they are carried; Who hold, that
there is no such thing as evil in it self, or devil, but to man's apprehension,
and that the sense of evil, is but the weakness of man, and that they are at a
distance from God who are under fear, and that all things are Gods. And that,
this is but a slavish spirit to stand in fear, and dread, and that all things
are good; and that to fear and dread, is on this side Perfection; and that to
do the greatest evil with the least remorse, is to be nearest Perfection. Which
is to know good and evil? Which is to touch, and to eat of the Tree of the
Knowledge of good and evil that is in the midst of the Garden, which God has
forbidden to be tasted of, or touched, which Eve eating and touching, came
thereby to fall, and her Posterity to this day, which in plain English, is to
be out of command, out of subjection, out of the state of the Creature, and to
be as God, out of a true dependency on God, out of a possibility of change, for
if there be no state of obedience, there is no state of a dependency, do they
what they will, they shall never be otherwise, and so be reaching at that which
they can never come to; by reaching after which they come to fall, as did Eve
who thus reached, but fell, and it is not yet recovered; and as did the Devil
himself, and is fallen for ever, and there endeavors to bring and keep man
even in a disobedient state of rebellion against God, as that which is most
suitable to man, in which God is himself; That is to say without Law to
himself, or from any other; Whether the Devil (as I have said) climbed himself,
but fell, and would bring man thither.

And this is the sum of this matter, the state of the Ranters, which the Lord
has thus opened in me for their sakes to let them understand, and to open
their eyes, that they may see, and be saved, and come unto the Knowledge of the
Truth; For the Lord has not pleasure in their death, but would have them turn,
and live* For which cause I have written, because the time is nere, wherein the
Door will be shut, and then it will be too late, and the place of Repentance
will not be found. When, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, shall be said to the Goats on the left hand, by the
King, when he shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, and
shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and all Nations shall be gathered
before him, and he shall divide between them. as a Shepherd does his Sheep. And
so I have done with this Particular, and am clear of their blood, in this day
of the Lord, wherein he is coming to render unto every man according to his
deeds.

But to proceed.

Neither has the Lord so chosen man since the fall, as that he can never be
removed from the state unto which he is chosen; That were to render the Blood
of Christ of none effect, and to make void the Everlasting Covenant the Law
writ in the heart, and the fear put in the inward parts, the Word of Life, the
Power of God by which we are kept. Who are kept (said Peter writing to the
Saints) by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

And this is the Doctrine of them who hold Free Grace, or that are called by
the name of Antinomians; that is to say, those who hold, that he that is once
chosen, cannot fall from that state; Having loved his own which were in the
World, he loved them to the end, John 13. 1. Say they, and though they are
sinners, yet they are justified by Christ, and have Redemption by his Blood,
even the Remission of sins; and this is imputed to them, though not inherent in
them (as they speak) and they hope to be saved by him because they are sinners,
and yet are justified by him though they are sinners. And with such thin
Garments, as these they seek to cover themselves, and to rest satisfied; whilst
they are ignorant of, and know not him who saves from their sins, all they who
put their trust in him: Who having loved his own (but they are his own which he
loved, and none else) he loved them to the end, (he went thorough the work
which was appointed him for them to do, and flinched not, which was to lay down
his life for them; For this was spoken of his suffering, John 13. 1. As the
Scriptures testify, and that of John in Particular, and the Scripture cannot
be broken, which thus speaks. Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus
knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this World, unto the
Father; Having loved his own (said John) which were in the World, he loved them
unto the end. And supper being ended (the Devil having now put into the heart
of Judas Iscariot, Simons son to betray him) Jesus knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to
God; He rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garments, and took a Towel, and
girded himself; after that, he pours Water into a Basin, and began to wash
his Disciples feet, and to wipe them with the Towel with which he was girded.
Then comes he to Simon Peter, and Simon says unto him; Lord, do thou wash
my feet? Jesus answered and said unto him, what I do thou know not now, but
thou shall hereafter; Peter answers, and says unto him, Thou shall never
wash my feet, Jesus answered, if I wash thee not, thou have no part with me, v.
2. to the 9. Simon Peter says unto him, not my feet only, but my hands and my
head; Jesus says unto him, he that is washed needs not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit; and ye are clean but not all, for he knew who
should betray him; Therefore said he, ye are not all clean, v. 9, 10, 11. This
said Christ Jesus.

So it is his own that he having once loved, he loved them to the end; And they
were such whom he washed; If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me; So,
not to be washed is to have no part with Christ, and this was said to Peter a
Disciple. And said he unto the Disciples, them whom he had chosen, ye are
clean, but not all, for he knew who should betray him, and yet he was chosen.
Have not I chosen you Twelve, and yet one of you is a Devil? John 6. 70.

The plain English, or sum of the Matter is this; Men must be born again of
Water, and of the Spirit, or they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; as he
said to Nicodemus, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of
Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 5. They
must be regenerated; Old things must pass away, all things must become New, if
they are in Christ Jesus the New Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness, and true Holiness; and they that are not so, in vain do they
talk of Christ; they have no part with him, for he is Holy, and every one that
is in him, is as he is; As he is so are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17. And be
ye holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. And Holiness becomes thy House for ever,
Psalm. 93. 5. And, an high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
the way of Holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, Isa. 35. 8. And,
there shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles neither,
whatsoever works Abomination, or makes a lie, but they that are written in
the Lambs book of Life, Rev. 21. last. Otherwise to say is to dishoner Christ,
and to blasphem him, to make him such a one as such are as live in
Transgression, and sin; who came to redeem from sin, and to deliver from
Iniquity, and to purify unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, that we might be to his Praise and Honor. Now sin is a reproach to any
people, Righteousness it is that exalts a Nation, Prove. 14. 34. And for any
to say they are in him, and yet are found sinners, they reproach, and blasphem
him, as if he were so, that Iniquity had fellowship with him, or that Iniquity
would be in him, or have part with him; Can the Throne of Iniquity have
fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by a Law, Psalm. 49. 20. Thou art
of purer Eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on Iniquity, Hab. 1. 13.
For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee, Psalm. 5. 4. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we
our selves also are found sinners; is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God
forbid; For if I build again the things that I have destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor, Gal. 2. 17, 18, For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be conformable to the Image of his Son, that he might be the
first born of many brethren; Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also
called, and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them
he also glorified, Romans 8. 29, 30.

So then there is no Predestination, where there is not first a Foreknowledge;
and this Predestination is to be conformed to the Image of his Son, and his
Image is Righteousness and true Holiness, and where Righteousness and true
Holiness are not, there is not the Image of his Son, and where the Image of his
Son is not, there is no Conformity to the Image of his Son, and where there is
no conformity to the Image of his Son, there is no Predestination; And where
sin is, there is no Conformity to the Image of his Son; And so no
Predestination, no Calling that abides, no Justification, no Glorification, no
Foreknowledge to Life Eternal; Whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called;
and whom he also called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he
also Glorified; and whom he foreknew, he also did predestinate to be conformed
to the Image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many Brethren,
Romans 8. 27.

And here is the sum of the whole matter; No foreknowledge to life Eternal, no
predestination, no calling that abides, no justification, no glorification, but
in conformity, and to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he may be the
first born of many brethren. The Brethren of whom he is the first born, are
such as are conformed to his Image, which is Righteousness, and true Holiness;
and he has predestined none but to this, nor fore-known any to
predestination, but to this; and where this is not, there is no foreknowledge,
no predestination to life Eternal; none of the Brotherhood of which he is the
first born, for whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to what? to be
conformed unto what? to the Image of his Son. So where conformity is not to the
Image of his Son, there is no predestination; there is no calling that abides
(as I have said) and the Scripture speaks it plain, For the Gifts and calling
of God are without Repentance, says the Apostle, as to Election; and that of
the Jews, who (says he) as concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your
sakes, but as touching the Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake, for
the gifts and calling of God are without Repentance, Romans 11. 28, 29. And the
gifts and calling of God that are without Repentance, are unto Eternal Life,
and Eternal Life is in his Son, John 5. 11. and he that is in Christ Jesus, is
a new Creature; Old things are passed away, behold all things are made new, 2
Cor. 5. 17. And (says he) have put on the new man, which is renewed in
Knowledge after the Image of him that created him, where there is neither
Greek, nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond* nor
free, but Christ is all, and in all. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God)
bowels of Mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering;
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man has a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Col. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13.
And where there is no calling (which is unto Holiness) there is no
justification, For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto Holiness,
1 These. 4. 7. and Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, for ever, Psalm. 93. 5.
And who has saved us, and called us with an Holy calling, not according to our
Works, but according to his own purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began, but is now made manifest by the appearing of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life, and
immortality to light, thorough the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And the eyes of
your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his
calling; and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; and
what is the exceeding greatness of his Power to usward, who believe according
to the working of his Mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised
him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, in the Heavenly places,
far above all Principality and Power, and Might and Dominion, and every Name
that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, and
has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to
the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1. 18. to the end. And there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as you
are called in one hope of your calling. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. One
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all,
Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. And, we pray always for you, that our God would count you
worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of Faith with Power, that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the Grace of our God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 11, 12. And, you see your calling, brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called; but God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things
which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised
has God chosen, yea, and things which are not to bring to naught the things
that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence. But, of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption. That according as it is written, He that
gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 26. to the end. And, I count not
my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I
press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3. 14, 15. And, Holy brethren, partakers of the Heavenly calling,
consider the Apostle, and high Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus, who was
faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his
house. For this man was counted worthy of more glory then Moses, inasmuch as he
that has builded the house, has more honor then the house. For every house
is builded by some man, but he that built all things is God. And Moses verily
was faithful in all his house, as a Servant, for a testimony of those things
which were to be spoken after; but Christ as a Son over his own house, whose
house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope
firm unto the end, Heb. 3. 1. to the 8. And, make your calling, and election
sure, for if ye do these things, ye shall never fail, for so an entrance shall
be administered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 9, 10.

Thus says the Scriptures, I say where there is no calling (and what that
calling is I have signified) it is unto Holiness, there is no justification,
and where there is, no justification, there is no glorification; and this is in
Christ Jesus. And, if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but
the Spirit is Life because of Righteousness. But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.
Therefore brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh to live after the flesh;
for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. For ye have not received the Spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we
are the Children of God; and if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified together, Romans 8. 10. to the 18. And if ye call on the Father, who
without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time
of your sojourning here in fear; forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation,
received by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot; who verily was foreordained
before the foundation of the world, but was manifested in these last times for
you, who by him do believe in God who raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory, that your faith and hope might be in God. Seeing that you have purified
your souls in the obeying of the Truth, through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love
of the brethren. See that ye love one another with a pure heart, fervently,
being borne again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the word
of God which lives and abides for ever. For all flesh is grass, and all the
glory of man, as the flower of grass; the grass withers, and the flower
thereof fades away; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is
the Word which by the Gospel is Preached unto you, 1 Pet. 1. 17. to the end.

So this is the calling, and this is the word, and this is the hope, and this
is the Predestination; and this is the foreknowledge, and this is the
Justification, and this is the Glorification, viz. Christ Jesus, and as men are
for him, and are found in him, not having their own Righteousness, which is
through the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9. And where men are not here,
they are mistaken to talk of these things, or to think them theirs; They
appertain to another state then Transgression, which delivers out of it, and
makes men indeed the Sons of God, and so are Heirs of the Blessing that came
on Abraham, who believed, and it was counted to him for Righteousness, of whom
God says, I know him that he will command his Children, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do justice, and judgment,
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him, Genesis 18.
19. And, who raised up the Righteous man from the East, called him to his foot,
gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings? He gave them as dust
to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow, Isa. 41. 2. And, art not thou
our God, who did drive out the Inhabitants of this Land before thy People
Israel* and gave it to the Seed of Abraham thy friend for ever, 2 Chronicles. 20.
7. And, if ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the Works of Abraham; but now
ye seek to kill me, a man that has told ye the truth, which I have heard of
God, this did not Abraham. you do the deeds of your Father; Then said they to
him, we be not born of Fornication, we have one Father, even God; Jesus said
unto them, if God were your Father, you would love me, for I proceeded forth,
and came from God, neither came I of my self, but he sent me; Why do ye not
understand my speech? Even because ye cannot hear my Word. Ye are of your
father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; He was a murderer
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in
him, when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar, and the
father of it, John. 8. 39. to the 45. v.

So here is an end to all this matter; Those that the Father has chosen unto
himself, it is unto good works, which he has before ordained, that they should
walk in them. We are his work manship created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them, says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 2. 10. And, show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my
faith by my works. Faith without works is dead, Jam. 2. 18. 20. And, the Grace
of God which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men teaching us that
denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously,
and Godly in this present World, looking for that blessed Hope, and the
glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from [all] Iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. 11. to the end. And,
those that are not redeemed from all Iniquity, he has not given himself to
save; And those that are not zealous of good Works, he has not purified unto
himself a peculiar people; And those that deny not Ungodliness, and Worldly
lusts, and live not soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present World,
are not such as look for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; And those that have not works, their
faith is dead; and they that walk not in good works, (and such as sin walk not
in good works) are not his Workmanship, and those that are not his workmanship
(which is unto good works the fruit of Faith, which is not dead but living, by
which those of old though dead, yet speak, the Virtue in them which brought
forth the works the fruit unto Holiness, unto Eternal life) are not created in
Christ Jesus.

So, see your state all you that are here, and be no longer deceived; It is the
Word of the Lord, and so I have done with this Particular, which for the sake
of you, I am moved to write to open their understandings because the time is
near wherein these things will be made manifest, that they are so; and the Door
will be shut, and then it will be too late to say, Lord, Lord, open unto us;
For he will say, depart from me, I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity, for
when once the Master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the Door, and
ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us; And he shall answer and say unto you, I know ye not whence ye are.
Then shall ye begin to say, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets; but he shall say, I tell you I know ye not whence
ye are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out; And they shall
come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South,
and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God, and behold, there are last, which
shall be first, and there are first which shall be last, Luke 13. 25. to the 31.

And so I am clear of your blood, whether ye will hear, or whether you will
forbear; The Word of the Lord has been often to you, and his tender bowels
through me, and he would not have you die but live, and it is the third time
that I have particularly wrote to you in the movings of the Lord, and my
travail, and my sufferings (I speak of that which is not of this world) have
been great for you, that your eyes might be opened, and that ye might see where
you are, ere it be too late. For the Lord has known you, and you have known
something in you that has given you the sense of his presence, which is Christ
Jesus, the measure of him in you; which reproves, which makes manifest, that
draws ye to Godward, though ye have not believed that it is he, and therefore
have risen against the Corner Stone, which ye builders have refused, which is
made Head of the Corner, but there is no other way to God but by him, Christ
the Light; God that quickneth the dead, and calls things that are not as if
they were, for that is not natural, that shows Nature in the transgression, and
that is not of the evil one that shows evil, and that is not of man (in whom it
is not to direct his way) that leads unto God, but it is of God; the love of
God that sent his Son into the world to redeem man, and to bring him back again
unto God; And his work it is to deliver, to set free the Captive that which is
bound under sin (and he that sins is bound to sin) and to purify and to
cleanse, and to make white, and to break down the Partition, that which is
gotten between by reason of Transgression, and to bring to God, that so man may
feel his Maker again, and be joined to him, with whom nothing that is defiled
can have any fellowship, and sin desiles; For our God is a consuming fire, Heb.
13. last.

Now to hold that a man being chosen, can never be removed from that state unto
which he is chosen; and that a man is justified when he is found a sinner, and
that he is in Christ when he is not a new Creature (and he is not a new
Creature whilst he is in sin, old things are not past away, the old man is
there remaining with his lusts and deeds, whose lust and deeds are sin) all
things are not become new) and that a man is in God, when he is not purged,
when he is not made clean (and he is not made clean, he is not purged that
sins, whilst he sins (whosoever sins, has neither seen him, neither
known him, John 3. 6.) whilst he knows not, nor believes in, nor is joined
to the Word of Life, which dwells in the Saints, which witnessed to God, the
Word that endures for ever; The Word which by the Spirit is Preached unto you,
the Word that purifies, 1 Pet. 1. last. the Word that endures for ever, (and ye
have not his Word abiding in you) For, whom he has sent, him ye believe not,
John 5. 38. The Word nigh in the mouth, and in the heart, which is the Word of
Faith which we preach, Romans 10. 8. For the Righteousness which is of Faith
speaks on this wise. Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend, etc. But what
says it, the Word is nigh thee, etc. verse. 6. 7. So, that is the Word, the
Word of Faith, the living Word that endures for ever, that cleanses, that
purifies, which is that which witnesses to God which abides, Now are ye clean
through the Word.) And, now are ye clean through the Word which I have spoken
unto you, abide in me (ye have not his Word abiding in you, said he to the
Pharisees) and I in you, as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me (in him that witnesses
the Word of Life) John 15. 3, 4. And, says the Prophet, he shall sit as a
Refiner, and Purifier of Silver, and he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and
purge them as Gold, and Silver, that they may offer unto him an offering in
Righteousness then shall the offerings of Judah, and Jerusalem, be pleasant
unto the Lord as in the days of old, and as in the former years, and I will
come near to you in Judgment, and I will be a swift witness (here is the
Messenger that prepares his Way before him, the Messenger of the Covenant that
he says he will send, whom he says they delighted in; behold, he shall come
says the Lord of Hosts; But who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall
stand when he appears? For he shall be as Refiners fire, and as Fullers soap,
I will be a swift Witness (this is he who is the Judge of all that comes nere
to Judgment, that witnesses, that says, I will be a swift witness, I will
come near to you to Judgment) against the Sorcerers, and against the
Adulterers, and against false Swearers, and against those that oppress the
Hireling in his wages, the Widow and the Fatherless, and that turn aside the
Stranger (I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in, says he that witnesses,
the Faithful and True Witness, who is come, whose right it is to Rule, who
witnesses to God; who is turned aside from his right, when he is not suffered
to rule) from his right; And fear not me says the Lord of Hosts, for I am the
Lord, I change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3. 1. to
the 7th.) For a man to say that he is chosen, when he is not in holiness, and
that he is sanctified in Christ Jesus, when he is unholy; this is to overthrow
the work of him who came to Redeem, to Purify, to Cleanse man, and so to bring
him back again unto God; And is the highest blasphemy that can be Imagined, and
the greatest deceit. For it is to make God as such a one is, and to render the
blood of the Covenant by which those which are Sanctified are cleansed, of none
effect (and where is the effect if it purges not? And where is the purging where
the sin remains? And does it not remain where yet it is? And is it not yet
where it abides to death? And are such redeemed? Are such washed? Are such
sanctified? Are such justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God, as were they of whom the Apostle speaks. But such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified; So washed,
sanctified (being otherwise then they were when in sin; and such were some of
you, but ye are washed in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God; There Is the matter) And as an unholy thing. For, He that is joined to an
Harlot, is one body, for two (says he) shall be one flesh; but he that is
joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 16.

So Friends, all ye that are here, take heed of being mistaken, take heed of a
mistaken state, take heed of abiding in a state that is mistaken; for this will
not hold, you will find it so in the end, and I desire it may not be when it is
too late; and so I am clear of you also, for whose sake, or the Seed's sake in
you which is Immortal, in the movings of the Lord, I have written; for the day
is near wherein you will find this to be so. It is the Word of the Lord, and
therefore has he moved me to write that you may see it in time, before it be
too late, before your day is over, which is very short however ye may account
it, or value what I have said; the thing is so, and (as I have said) you will
find it; and then ye will remember that ye were told of it before, that ye
might not trust on a mistaken thing, which will prove as a broaken Reed to you,
in the day of Trial, and the time of need; for the Lord is drawing near to
judgment, and he will be a swift Witness, (as has been said) and then woe will
be to all them in whom that which witnessed to life, and was not heard, will
arise, and witness to Eternal Condemnation, and be a Worm that will never die,
and a Fire that shall never go out; and this will be the state of all them that
have not obeyed unto life, that have not hearkened to, nor believed that which
witnessed in them, against whom then it will witness a judgment that is
eternal, for ever and ever.

For there is no mocking in things of this nature, no jesting, no trifling; To
day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation;
the day of temptation in the Wilderness; Obey his witness, believe in it, heed
it, least time be no more, and ye be concluded with the God whom ye serve. For
except ye believe that I am he (said Christ to the Pharisees) ye shall die in
your sins; and except ye believe that that which witnesses for God in you,
which came from God, which whatsoever it sees the Father do, it does, and
speaks what it hears him say, unto whom the Father bears witness; and of
whom the Scriptures testify, John 5. 36, 37, 38, 39. Christ the Light, ye
shall die in your sins. It is the Word of the Lord, I am the light of the world
(says he) he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of ltfe, Joh. 8. 12. That was the true light which lights every man
that comes into the world (that which reproves, that which makes manifest)
that shines in darkness, though the darkness comprehends it not; Thou art my
Lamp, O Lord, thou will lighten my darkness; Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my Path (the Word which endures for ever) For ever, O Lord,
thy Word is settled in Heaven. Thy faithfulness unto all Generations, said
David, Psalm. 119. 89. to 10. 5. 2 Samuel 22. 29. John 1. 5. 9.

So Friends, all that are here, take heed hereunto, least the day be cloased
into night; and ere ye be aware, the shadow of death, close up the hour of your
Visitation, and it be too late; for to you has the Lord often spoken (as I
have said, and do now say it again in, and by the same Spirit of the Lord) and
he has often sought you, and that by me. I am Witness for the Lord for ever,
how his Bowels have yearned toward you; and how he would have gathered you, as
a Hen does her Chicken under her Wings; and he indeed yet seeks you; hearken to
his Voice, withstand not him that calls in you, that calls to you, that
seeks to gather you, least your day have an end, and there be no more. You will
remember me in that day, but I would you did it sooner before it be too late.
The bowels of the Lord move in me to you, he would not have you perish, he
would have you hear that your souls may live; he would have ye convinced, and
turned to the truth; he would have you in the truth, that the truth may make
you free; I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, said Christ the Son, he that
witnesses; If the Son make ye free (says he again) then are you free indeed,
John 8. 36. 14. 6.

And so farewell, I have finished what I have to say to you from the Lord. Look
ye to it, I am clear: Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause darkness,
and before your feet stumble on the dark Mountains, and and while ye look for
light, he turn into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness, Jer. 13.
16. And this hour is near. The Lord God Eternal open your eyes, that in this
your day (which is now near to an end) you may know the things that belong to
your Peace, least they be hid from your eyes; The Lord will not always wait on
you, his Spirit will not always strive with you: It has waited long, it has
striven long, be gathered to him ere darkness come over you, and the night
cover you, which shall never have end. If ye shall never be gathered; (which I
hope will not be (as to some of you at least) for the Lord has a Seed among
you which he will gather, and lead into his rest; And therefore am I moved of
the Lord to write, and these my Travails shall have an end, and I shall see of
the Travel of my soul in this particular; and the time is near, the Lord has
spoken it, and therefore speak I unto you because the time is near; think you
what ye will) yet my reward shall be with the Lord, and my Prayer shall return
into mine own bosom, and he will testify for me that I have sought you, this
his Testimony I am, that you he has sought; And as sometime the Prophet said,
so say I in the same Spirit, Though Israel be not gathered, yet I shall be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength, Isa. 49. 5.
And, this shall be my peace in the day of your trouble who shall not hear, who
shall not be gathered to that which convinces the World of sin (that which
reproves, that which makes manifest, the Comforter) that I have stood in the
will of God, and in his Counsel, have done whatsoever he has required at my
hands as to you, whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear; and
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, you shall know that a
Prophet has been amongst ye; Or, one that has spoken to you from the Lord.

So, be not stiff-necked, nor uncircumcised in heart and ear, for I am pressed
in spirit to speak unto you, because the hour is near; Yea, very near, wherein
this you shall witness; For the Master of the house is near rising up, and will
shut to the Door, and then it will be too late when ye shall begin to stand
without (without your hour, [without] your day, your day, your hour being
passed over wherein he will show, he will tender mercy, wherein he will strive
with you, wherein he will wait on you, to be gracious, wherein he will stretch
out his Arms to gather you, wherein he will open his bosom to you, I say your
hour and day being over; The day and hour of your Visitation, wherein ye may
know the things that concern your Peace; and they are not hid from your eyes,
when ye shall begin to stand without) and to knock at the door, and to say,
Lord, Lord, open unto us; He will answer and say unto you (as I have said) I
know you not whence ye are; Depart from me, all ye workers of Iniquity.

So, be not deceived, nor mistaken, for this hour is near, and this you shall
see in the day when the Son of Man shall come in hts Glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, and shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory; And before him
shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as
a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on his
right hand, and the Goats on his left; and the King shall say unto them on his
right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from the Foundation of the World; And to them on his left hand, depart from me
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; And
these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into life
Eternal.

So, I am clear of your blood, and the Lord God Eternal laid this upon me to
speak unto you, because the time is very near wherein this will be, wherein you
will see this to be; therefore I say again unto you. In this your day, know the
things that belong unto your peace. There is somewhat in all this, that I am
thus moved to Ingiminate, to Press upon you; the Lord is coming, behold the
Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly among them (and this will be a sore
convictment indeed, when he shall rise in them as Lord and King, and kindle in
them the fire that shall never go out, and raise in them the Worm that shall
never die) whom they have refused, whom they have rejected, whom they have
despised, whom they have spoken against, whom they have done against.) Of all
their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him,; As Enoch also, the
seventh from Adam prophesied of these, and this time is near.

So, consider, and bethink your selves, whilst you have a very little time,
whilst the door is yet open (and it is open yet I testify it to you in the Name
of the Lord) whilst he waits to be gracious, that so an entrance may be
administered unto you, into the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be
glory, and power, and dominion everlasting, who comes in Clouds, and every eye
shall see him, and they also which pierced him, and all Kindreds of the Earth
shall wait because of him, even so. Amen.

And so the Lord open your understandings in all things, and give you to see
these things and what I have spoken. that it may never rise up in Judgment
against you, which certainly it will, if you heed it not, and the day is near;
It is the Word of the Lord, and so I have finished what I have to say unto you,
in the Name of the Lord.

Thus far as to those who hold Free Grace, or a Justification in Christ, though
they are found sinners, and being once chosen, such as are so, can never be
removed from that state, who are called Antenomians. Have not I chosen you
Twelve, and one of you is a Devil? He spoke of Judas Iscariot the Son of Simon,
for he it was that should betray him, being one of the Twelve, John 6. 70, 71.
And, whilst I was with them in the World, I kept them in thy Name, those that
thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son of
Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, John 17. 12. And, they went
out from us, for they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us, but they went out that they might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us, 1 John 2. 19. And, there must be
heresies, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among you, 1 Cor.
11. 19. And so much for this particular.

Now as to those who hold General Redemption, or are so understood; I have
something also to say unto you in the Name of the Lord.

As the Lord has not made man to destroy him, neither concluded any man from
all Eternity to Destruction; as he has not so made man, as that it is
impossible for him to fall from the state in the which he was made: And as he
has not so chosen man since the fall, as that he can never be removed from the
state unto which he was chosen; so, neither does he so will the salvation of
all, as that all are saved: This were to put by the work of Redemption; for if
he so willed them all should be saved, for who has resisted his Will? And what
need is there of such a work of Redemption, if all by such a willing as this
(and such of such a willing as this m^st be the consequence) are effectually
saved? For (as I have said) in his will there is Power, and who has resisted
his Will? And if his Will be not to be resisted, what need is there of a work,
of such a work as Redemption is, which cost the Blood of the Son of God, and
the Travail of his Soul, and which cost the sufferings of the Seed, the Seed
which is Christ: Christ in you the hope of Glory. My little children, of whom I
travail in birth again till Christ be formed in you, Galath. 4. 13. And, I am
crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, is by faith in the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 19.) and the Travail thereof ere
it be accomplished.

Now, what says Christ Jesus, [All] things are delivered me of my Father, and
no man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Matthew. 11. 25. And [All]
things that the Father has are mine, John 16. 15. And as the Father raises up
the Dead, and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom [he] will, Joh. 5.
21. And this is the Fathers will that has sent me, that of [all] that he has
given me, I should lose [nothing,] but should raise it up again at the last
day: And this is the [will] of [him] that sent me, that every one that [seeth]
the Son, and [believeth] on [him] may have [everlasting] Life; and [I] will
raise [him] up at the last day, John 6. 39, 40.

Where then is that thing of Salvation to all, or that all are saved, or that
God wills the Salvation of all? This God wills that all men come to the
Son, (that which reproves, that which makes manifest in them) that they may
have life; that all men honor the Son, as they honor the Father; that they
(and no others) that see the Son, and believe on him, should have everlasting
life; and that he should raise up such at the last day; and that he should
loose nothing of all that the Father has given him, but should raise it up
again at the last day; that he should quicken whom he will, unto whom all
things are delivered him of his Father, whose are all things that are the
Fathers; whom no man knows but the Father, neither knows any man the Father
but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will Reveal him.

Now here stands the case of all men in this particular, they must come to the
Son (as I have said) if they will be saved. Ye will not come to me (said he to
the Pharisees) that ye might have life, John 5. 39. All that the Father gives
me, shall come unto me; and he that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out,
John 6. 37. And he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

So to him must all come that are saved, to that in men which shows them where
they are, the thoughts and intents of their hearts, and judges them. Come see a
man which told me all things that ever I did, is not this the Christ? John 4.
29. This is the way to God, and no other; neither is their salvation in any
other; for there is none other Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved, Acts 4. 11. And they that are in him are new creatures; Old
things are passed away, behold all things are become new (as before) 2 Cor. 5.
17. And he is the Savior of the body, the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. Who loved the
Church; (the Church which is in God, 1 These. 1. 1.) and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word,
(the Word which endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 25.) that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy, and without blemish, Verse. 25. 26, 27.

So as through sin and transgression, and by reason thereof all men come to be
defiled (for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23.
And, all we like sheep have gone astray* we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all, Isa. 53. 6.) so must
all men come to Christ Jesus (that which reproves sin, that makes manifest
transgression in them the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then
that of Abel, Heb. 12. 24.) to have their Conscience purged from dead works, to
serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14.) I say, to have their Conscience purged from
dead works, (works that are not from the living Root, that are not from Faith;
for she that lives in pleasure is dead whilst she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. And sin
is pleasure, Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment, because he wil^ngly
walked after the commandment, Hos. 5. 11) and he that sins is carried away
from that which manifests it. And you has he quickened who were dead in
Trespases and sins, wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of
this world, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that
now works in the Children of Disobedience. Among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh; fulfilling the desires of
the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of Wrath even as
others; but God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by
grace ye are saved) and has raised us up togather, and made us sit togather in
Heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, that in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus.
For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves it is the
gift of God. Not of works, least any man should boast, for we are his
workman-ship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them. Wherefore remember that ye being in time
passed Gentiles in the flesh; who are called uncircumcisiion by that which is
called the circumcision in the flesh made by hands, that at that time ye were
without Christ, being Aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World.
But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, for he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken
down the middle wall of Partition between us, having abolished in his flesh the
enmity, even the law of Commandments contained in Ordinances for to make [in]
himself of twain one new man so making peace, and that he might reconcile both
unto God in one body by the Cross, having [slain] the enmity thereby; and came
and proached peace unto you which were a far off, and to them* which were nigh,
for through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father. Now
therefore ye are no more strangers, and Forreyners, but fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone,
[in] whom all the building fitly framed togather, grows unto an holy Temple
in the Lord. [In] whom ye also are builded togather for an habitation of God
[through] the Spirit, Ephesians 2.

So then here is the Matter, all must come to that in them which witnesses to
God, to the Son, to be Purged, to be Purified, to be Washed, to be cleansed,
that they may be joined to God again, from whom they are are gone through
transgression, and through transgression are defiled; and this is the Will of
God, and none are saved, but who come here, neither wills God the Salvation
of any, but of such as come here; who come to the Son, to that which reproves,
to that which makes manifest in them; the measure of him in every one, that
which cleanses, that which purifies; that they may be fit vessels for the
Masters use, and be found to praise, and honor; and be Temples for the Holy
Ghost to dwell in. Know ye not that ye are the Temples of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defile the Temple of God him shall
God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3. 16,
17. And what agremeent has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple
of God, as God has says; I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People. Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you, and will be a Father unto you; and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18.

So a coming out there must be a being separate, or a separation; a Not
touching of the unclean thing (that which defiles there must be a separation
from: a coming out of it must not be touched, and all sin defiles, it must be
come out of; separated from, not touched the unclean thing, sin must not be
touck't) ere the Lord says. I will receive you, and be a Father unto you, and
ye shall be my Sons, and Daughters; A coming out from among them, there must be
a separation from such, a Not touching of that which defiles, that which is
unclean; sin, the unclean thing, ere any becomes the Temple of God; for the
Temple of God is Holy (says he to the Saints who were washed, who were
cleansed; who once were as others, and such were some of you, says he, but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of Our Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of Our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.) whose Temple are ye, and if
any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for ye are the Temple
of God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. And, what agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? as aforesaid. So no Temple of God, that is to say; No walking
of God in any, no dwelling of God in any, no being the People of God; No being
of God unto a People; no agreement. (Shall the Throne of Iniquity have
fellowship with thee, which imagines mischief by a Law? For thou art not a God
that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee: And, thou
art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on Iniquity) with
Idols. Its the Word of the Lord.

And this is the Will of God, That every one come to the Son, to that in them
which shows them evil, and obey it, and believe in it, that they may be
purified, that they may feel the Power that sanctifies, which is the Power of
God to Salvation Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, the
Gospel. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God
unto Salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek; for therein the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, as
it is Written, The Just shall live by Faith, Romans 1. 16. And, of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption, that according as it is written, he that
glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31.

So to the Power every one must come in them, to that which purifies, to that
which cleanses, to that which Sanctifies, the blood of sprinkling which
speaks better things then that of Abel; Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and
the Power of God; who of God is made unto Us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption, (says the Apostle as aforesaid) that he that
glories may glory in the Lord. So he to whom Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God,
and the Power of God, is made Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Redemption, he is
made Sanctification, and they who of God are in him; he is made so unto them,
and they that are not so, that are not made so of him, are not in him, it is
the Word of the Lord; For they that are in him, are new Creatures (as I have
often said, and do now again speak by the Spirit of the Lord) Old things are
passed away, behold, all things are become New. Now behold all things [are]
made new; And this is the state of Regeneration of a man in Christ Jesus. And
this is the Work of Christ in the World, to make all things new: Renewed in
Knowledge after the Image of him that created him, him that is the New man,
that makes new; Created in him unto good works, as he has before ordained
that we should walk in them (said the Apostle as aforesaid) and so we are his
Workmanship; And this is his work to make all things new. And so it was with
the Collossians, they had put off the Old man (seeing that ye have put off the
Old man (says he to them, Col. 3. 10. with his deeds) and had put on the New
man, Which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him (as
has been said) v. 11.

So, People must be created again, must be renewed; must be put into another
temper, into another mould, into another stock, into another nature, who are in
the Transgression, they must be born again or they can never enter into the
Kingdom of God. The Old must be marred, must be broken down, must be done away,
must be put off; The Old man with his deeds, and the New man must be put on,
ere Salvation can be witnessed by Christ Jesus, The Old building must be thrown
down, and the New must be raised. Ye also as lively Stones are built up a
Spiritual House, an holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual sacrifices acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye are God Husbandry, ye are Gods
building. According to the Grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
Master builder I have laid the Foundation, and another builds thereon; but
let every man take heed how he builds thereupon, for other foundation can no
man lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon
this Foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble, every man's
work shall be made manifest; For the Day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is; If
any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward;
If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be
saved, yet so as by fire. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that
the Spirit of God dwells in you; If any man defile the Temple of God, him
shall God de^troy, for the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are, 1 Cor.
3. 9. to the 18. And, rooted, and built up in him, and stablished in the Faith,
as ye have been taught, abounding therein with Thanksgiving, Col. 2. 17. In
whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the
Lord, in whom ye are builded together for an Habitation of God through the
Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22.

Now the Temple of God is holy (as has been said) whose Temple ye are (said
the Apostle to the Saints) and Holiness becomes thy House for ever; and without
are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore Mongers, and Murders, and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves, and makes a lie, Rev. 22. 15. And, there shall in no wise
enter into it (the holy City) any thing that defiles neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are written in the Lambs
book of life, Rev. 21. 27.

And these things he testifies, who is faithful and true, who is the Root and
Offspring of David, and the bright and morning Star. And, the Spirit and the
Bride say come; and let him that hears say come, and let him that is a thirst
come, and whosoever will, let him take the Water of life freely. For this I
testify unto every man that hears the Words of the Prophecy of this book,
if any man shall add unto these things, God shall take his part out of the book
of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things which are written in
this book. He that testifies these thing, says, surely I come quickly, Amen,
even so come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22. 17, 18, 19, 20.

And so unto all this I speak in the Name of the Lord, and in the Power of God,
that the hour is very nigh, wherein these things shall be proved so to be in
the hearts of all, even of them that oppose themselves; And then they will see
that these things are so, and that they have been mistaken otherwise to think,
and that the Enemy was in it to deceive them, when they came to this great
thing Christ Jesus, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, that which
reproved them, that which made manifest, which is in them, in which they should
have believed that so they might have felt his Power which redeems, which
cleanses, which purifies, which brings back to God again, which Moulds, which
Forms, which I eavens all into its own lump, which works up all into himself;
and makes holy as he is holy, and builds up all that so believe, and abide, and
obey into an holy habitation of God through the Spirit, and so saves, which is
the Will of God; This is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye
should abstain from Fornication, says the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 3. And, by the
which Will ye are Sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all, Heb. 10. 10. And, by one offering, he has for ever perfected them
that are Sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. And, both he that sanctifies, and they that
are sanctified, are of one, therefore he is not ashamed to call them Brethren,
Heb. 2. 11. And, being Sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 16. And, to them
that are Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2.

Now, the Enemy has turned people another way, and they have suffered it to
be so, viz. To believe that they shall be saved, because the Lord desires not
the death of a sinner; And so be they what they will, the Lord looks not to
that, he is a free Agent, the Lord wills it, and they shall be saved; For in
his will there is Power. And so people are deceived by Satan, the old deceiver,
which deceives the whole World, whose time is near, wherein he must be cast
out; therefore works he as he can to save himself from being cast out, and in
some after this sort, and in others after that, according as he can prevail
with the understandings of any, and deceiving them, there lead them aside. And
so I have done with you also; For this is the Will of the Lord as to me in this
thing, that I should clear up this thing to the understandings of all, that all
might have a living savor of these things in themselves, and come out of that
in which they have been led Captive, and the Enemy has deceived them, that
they may be his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, as he
has before ordained, that we should live in them who are the first fruits of
his Spirit; who he is coming to try, and to suffer the Enemy to come forth to
try, that ye may have a living sense (I say) of these things in your selves
(as many as to whom these things shall reach) and be drawn unto God, when you
shall see us lifted up, and our constant abiding in our Testimony, and
sufferings, shall let y^u see that God is with us, and draw you to us. And, so
(as I have said) I have finished what I have to say unto you.

And lastly, Neither has he redeemed all since the fall, that were to give the
lie; to what Christ says; Strive to enter into the strait Gate, for many I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able; Enter ye in at the
strait Gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads unto
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; because strait is the Gate,
and narrow is the Way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it,
Luke 13. 14. And, fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. And, they are not all Israel, which are of
Israel; Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children,
for in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; That is, they which are the children of
the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the children of the Promise
are accounted for the seed; For this is the word of Promise. At this time will
I come, and Sara shall have a Son, and not only this, but when Rebecca also had
conceived, by one, even our Father Isaac, (for the children being not yet born,
neither having yet done any good or evil; that the purpose of God according to
Election might stand not of works, but of him that calls) it was said unto
her, the Elder shall serve the Younger, as it is written; Jacob have I loved,
but E^au have I hated, Romans 9. 6. to the 14. And, though thy people Israel be
as the sand of the Sea, yet a Remnant of them shall return, Isa. 10. 22. And,
when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his sheep from the goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his
right hand, but the Goats on his left, Mat. 25. 21, 22, 23. And, without are
Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore-mongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves, and makes a lie, Rev. 22. 15. And, there shall in no wise
enter into it, any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination,
or makes a lie* but they which are written in the Lambs book of Life, Rev. 21.
last. And, come hither, and I will show unto thee the Judgment of the great
Whore that sits on many waters, with whom the Kings of the Earth have
committed fornication, and the Inhabitants of the Earth, have been made drunk
with the Wine of her Fornication, Rev. 17. 12. And, the beast that thou saw,
was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit, and go into
Perdition; And they that dwell on the Earth, shall wonder (whose Names are not
written in the book of life, from the Foundation of the World) when they behold
the beast which was, and is not, and yet is, v. 8. And, I saw the dead small
and great, stand before God, and the books were opened, and another book was
opened, which is the book of Life; and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books, according to their works, Rev. 20. 12. And,
who will render to every man according to his deeds, to them who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal
Life; but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon every
soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, for
there is no respect of persons with God; For as many as have sinned without
law, shall also perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the Law,
shall be judged by the Law, for not the hearers of the Law, shall be justified
before God, but the doers of the Law, but the doers of the Law, shall be
justified, Romans 2. 6. to the 14. And, to you who are troubled, rest with us;
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his Mighty Angels in
flaming fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his Power, when he
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and be admired in all them that
believe, (because our Testimony among you was received) in that day; Wherefore
also, we pray always for you, that our God will count you worthy of this
calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
Faith with Power, that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in
you, and ye in him, to the grace of our God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These.
1. 7. to the end. And, receiving the end of your Faith, is even the salvation
of your Souls, 1 Pet. 1 7. And* it is God that works in you to will and to
do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And, work out your Salvation with fear
and trembling, v. 12. And, unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus,
sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities,
Acts 3. last. And, the Lord is my Portion, says my soul, Lam. 3. 25. And, upon
the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and a horrible tempest;
this shall be the portiou of their cup, Psalm. 11. 6. And, these shall go into
everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal, Mat. 25. 46. And
the grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching
us that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present world; Looking for that blessed Hope,
and the glorious appearing of that great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify
unto himself a Peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. And,
ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar
People, that ye should show forth the Praises of him who has called you out of
darkness to his marlous light, which in times past were not a people, but are
now the People of God, which had not obtained Mercy, but now have obtained
Mercy. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers, and Pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lu^^s, which war against the Soul; having your Conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may
by your good woorks which they shall behold; glorify God in the day of
Visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. And, their Consciences also bearing
witness, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 15, 16. And, because he has appointed a day,
in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he has
Ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men in that he has raised
him from the dead, Acts 17. 31. And, who shall judge the quick and the dead at
his appearing, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. And, who shall give an account to
him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead; who only has Immortality,
dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen or
can see; to whom be Honor, and Power everlasting, Amen, 2 Pet. 3. 5. 1 Timothy 6.
17. Who is, The Judge of all, Heb. 12. 23. The Mediator of the New Covenant, v.
24. of a better Covenant, Heb. 6. which was established on better promises, for
if that first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been
sought for the second, but finding fault with the first, he says, Behold the
day is come, (says the Lord) when I will make a New Covenant with the House of
Israel, and the House of Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with
their father in the day that I took them by the Hand, to lead them out of the
land of Egypt, etc. But this is the Covenant, etc. that I will put my Laws
into their minds, and write them in their hearts, etc. He that speaks from
Heaven, v. 29. The Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 26. The blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things then that of Abel, whose voice then shook the
earth, but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake not the earth
only, but also Heaven, and this Word yet once more signifies the removing of
those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things
that cannot be shaken, may remain; wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that cannot
be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with
reverence, and Godly fear: For our God is a consuming fire, verse. 26, 27, 28,
29.

So then the Way that leads to Life being strait and narrow, and few there
being that find it, or walk therein; and his Flock being a little flock, to
whom it is the Fathers pleasure to give the Kingdom; And those of Israel that
shall return, being but a Remnant; and seeing that without are the Dogs, and
Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves, and makes a lie; and, these shall go into everlasting punishment, but
the Righteous into Life eternal; it follows, that all are not redeemed, for
though his life be given a ransom for all, that whosoever comes unto him may
have Life, and ye will not come unto me that ye may have Life, yet all are not
redeemed, all are not Ransomed, all enter not into Life, all are not saved; and
the Reason is plain, because all come not to him who is the Ordinance of God to
Salvati^n, which is Christ in them the Hope of glory, the Mystery hid from ages
and generations, but now made manifest to his Saints, the Wisdom of God, and
the Power of God, that which witnesses, that which reproves, that which makes
manifest in them; and so they are not saved, they are not redeemed, they are
not ransomed, they are not delivered; for how can it be that they should be
delivered, ransomed, redeemed, saved, who come not to him, though he be in them
(a measure of him in every one that which reproves, that whick makes manifest;
that which shows a man all that ever he has done, that searches the heart,
that tries the reins, is not this the Christ?) nor believe in him, and so lay
not hold of him to deliver them from death, to ransom them from the Power of
the grave, to redeem them from destruction, to save them from wrath to come?
Nor obey him, who shows them wrath, and destruction, and the grave, and death?
For he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obeyed him, Heb.
5. 9. And, as many as received him to them, gave he Power to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe in his Name, John 1. 12. And, Fight the good
fight of Faith, lay hold on Eeernal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. And, ye will not come
to me that ye might have Life, said he to the Pharisees, as aforesaid, John 5.
40.

Now if people believe not on him (that of him in them that witness to God) if
they obey him not; if they do not receive him (who stands at the door and
knocks (that which witnesses, that which moves to God, the Voice of Wisdom
which cries without, which utters her voice in the streets, which cries in
the chief places of concourse, in the opening of the gates, which utters her
words in the City) saying, How long ye simple Ones will ye love simplicity, and
the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my
reproof, behold I will pour out my Spirit upon you, I will make known my words
unto you) because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand,
and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none
of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear
comes, when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as comes a
whirl wind, when distress and anguish comes upon you; then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me, for that they hated knowledge, and did not chose the fear of the Lord,
they would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof, therefore shall
they eat of the Fruit of their way, and be filled with their own devices, for
the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the properity of Fools
shall destroy them, but who so hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall
be quiet from the fear of evil, Prove. 1. 20. to the end,) If they lay not hold
on him; if they come not to him; how can they know his power? how can he be to
them the Author of eternal Salvation? and this is manifest.

Now if any man say in the words of the Apostle, as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. And, who gave himself a ranson
for all to be testified in due season, 1 Timothy 2. 6. And, God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life; for God sent not his Son into the
world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved,
John 3. 16, 17.

I Answer, that was not the end of the Lord in sending of his Son into the
world to condemn the world (as I have showed at large before) but that the
world through him might be saved; as are the words of Christ, as aforesaid, but
it is [through] him; so that if people come not to him, nor believe on him, nor
receive him, nor are in him, how can they [through] him be saved? for that
which comes through, must come to, and be in, or it can never come through;
there is no Salvation but through Christ Jesus; and as in Adam all die, even so
[in] Christ shall all be made alive; but it is [in] Christ, and that which
believes not on him, is not in him; and that which is not [in] him, cannot be
made alive by him, and he gave himself a ransom for all; but if all will not
come to him who ransometh; he does not become a ransom for all. And so I have
finished what I have also to say unto you in the Name of the Lord, whose word
it is; of whom I am moved to write unto you also, that you may see (who are
here) how the case stands with you, for I bear you Record there is a zeal in
many of you as to God, but you are mistaken as to the main thing on which
Salvation depends; and by which you must come (if ever it be so) to be saved:
For, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, (said he to the
Pharisees) John 8. 24. and if ye belive not in that which witnesses unto God in
you; which reproves you, which checks you for evil; which judges it, If ye
believe not that this is he, the measure of him in you, he who is the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, you will die in your sins; all your Notions will
not save you, how strong so ever in your Imaginations; they will come short of
the Power, which is the Power of God to Salvation; and this you will find in
the day of the Lord, wherein this shall be witnessed, and you shall witness
unto me in that day (as many as so abide) that my testimony is true. For, the
Lord has spoken to me, and his Word is in my mouth; and he has said unto me
what I shall say, and I have spoken what he has said. If you believe not that
that is he which witnesses to God, which reproves, which judges, which makes
manifest evil in you, you shall die in your sins; It is the Word of the Lord.

Therefore dream not of any other Jesus to save from wrath to come, to deliver
you, then he in you (who also is without you) that shows you when you do amiss,
that reproves you, that judges you for evil, for this is the Judge of all, the
Man Christ Jesus.

And so I am clear of you also in the presence of the Lord, who has moved me
to write thus to you, and to take the stumbling blocks out of your way also
that you may see, and be saved, for the day is near wherein you also will be
concluded with the God whom you serve; for the Lord is no respecter of Persons,
but in every Nation, and among every people, he that fears God, and works
righteousness is accepted of him, and the proud he beholds a far off; and
it is not saying, Lord, Lord, Open to us; have we not prayed, have we not
prophesied, and in thy Name cast out Devils? have we not eat, and drank in thy
presence, and have thou not taught in our streets? will suffice when he shall
say, Depart from me, I know ye not ye workers of Iniquity.

So deceive not your selves; God is not mocked, as men sow, so shall they reap;
if you sow unto the flesh, of the flesh ye shall reap corruption, and if you
sow unto the Spirit, of the Spirit you will reap Life; and take heed how you be
mistaken in a thing of this nature, which has that weight, least ye perish for
ever. The Lord is not willing you should die, but rather that you turn unto
that in you which is of him, which is near you in your mouth, and your heart;
and obey it, and believe in it, that ye may know his virtue who redeems; and
that so ye may be redeemed, least whilst ye hold forth a Notion to all of the
Redemption of all you come short of it in your own Particulars, and so be cast
out with the fearful, and the unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers,
and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars into the Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone which is the second death.

The Bowels of the Lord are to you, because the fear of him has been before
many of you, and there is that in you that truly desires after him, though you
yet know him not; therefore has he moved me to write that you may know him
after whom you desire, that Salvation may be the Portion, of your Cup and your
Lot for ever. If you hear it will be well for you, if you will not; the stone
that is refused of the Builders, is made the Head of the Corner, and a Rock of
Offense it will be, and a Stone of stumbling, till you be broken to pieces, and
your days be cut off from the earth, and in darkness which is everlasting you
languish for ever.

For the Lord will not always wait on man, nor his Spirit strive. A day of
conclusion there will be, as there has been a day of beginning, and the hour
of your visitation being over in what case are you, when no offering can be
accepted for you, who have refused him, who speaks from Heaven, and rejected
the Son of God, made manifest in your mortal flesh to redeem you to God, and so
farewell; I have done with you also; in the movings of the Lord; and to those
who remain, I must yet proceed to speak, because time is short; and this lay
upon me to write to you all, that all may be warned, and that the stumbling
blocks may be taken out of the way of all, and that all may be left without
excuse, because the Day is nere wherein all must witness what I have said,
either to their everlasting woe, or to Life eternal, and however you may think
of these things, yet so it will be, and the time is near. Our God shall come,
and shall not keep silence; A fire shall devour before him, and it shall be
very tempestuous round about him; he shall call to the heavens from above, and
to the earth, that he may judge his People; and the Heavens shall declare his
righteousness, for God is Judge himself. Selah, Psalm. 50. 3, 4, 6.

So let all be warned, that all may be left without excuse; for there is a day
(as I have said, and it still presses upon me to speak the same thing from the
Spirit of the Lord; and to repeat it often, that so you may hear ere it be too
late) I say, there is a day very near, wherein you will witness this to be true
to whom this shall come, and because the day is very near; therefore has the
Lord laid it upon me, to speak ^t often, that you may hear ere it be too late,
for hours of visitation have been, and to many people long, and to you it has
been so, but it is near an end, and O it is but a very little time, and you will
find it so who shall not be gathered to the Lord, after all his seeking you,
wherein you shall be concluded with the God whom you serve, and this unto you
all is the Word of the Lord, who has long sought to gather you, who yet seeks
you; who will not seek you always, who are not gathered to him, who will be
glorified in what he shall do unto you who are not gathered unto him in the day
wherein he shall render unto every man according to his deeds.

And this is no jesting matter you will find it so who yet shall be hardened,
who yet shall refuse to hear; who yet are disobedient, who yet are rebellously,
who yet will not hear, who yet harden your hearts, who yet set your faces as a
flint, who will not return, who are proud, and high minded, and disobedient,
and unthank-ful, and unholy; and who smite your fellow Servants, and do eat and
drink with the drunken, and say your Lord delays his coming. The Lord will
come upon you in a day that you think not of it, and in an hour of which you
are not aware, and cut you assunder, and give you your portion with Hypocr^tes
and Sinners. It is the Word of the Lord, there will be no dallying, you will
find it so when your day is over, no jesting, no sporting, no living in
pleasures, no having to morrow as to day, and much more abundant, as your
thoughts of pleasures leads you to imagine; those things will have an end, when
your day is over, and when he that has sought you, comes to be your Judge,
even that which witnesses in you, which is privy to all your actions, the
thoughts, and intents of your hearts, who has lain down with you, and rose
with you, and has suffered, and knows all the bowels of the Lord to you, and
his seeking of you, and is witness how you have neglected, and slighted, and
chose his and your enemy, and how you have had a name that you were alive, and
others have thought you to be so, and you have said so of your selves, but yet
are dead. The bowels of the Lord God Eternal yet move in me to you, who would
not have you die, but rather that ye may return, and live, and be gathered with
his chosen into his everlasting rest, where is fullness of joy, and pleasure for
evermore. And so I have done with you also in the Word of the Lord, and so I
shall proceed.

Neither is it so in the will of man, that if he will he shall be saved, and if
he will, he shall be damned. That were to overturn the Foundation of God, which
stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who are his; but in a great
^ouse, there are not only Vessels of Gold, and of Silver, but also of Wood, and
of Earth, and some to Honor, and some to Dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And, my
Sheep hear my Voice and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them
Eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand; my Father that gave them me is greater then all, and no man is able
to pluck them out of my hand; I, and my Father are one, John. 27. 29, 30. And,
those that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son
of Perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfiled, John 17. 12. And, Not that
we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. And, so then it is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; For the Scriptures
says unto Pharaoh, even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I
might show my Power in thee; and that my Name might be declared throughout all
the Earth, therefore has he mercy, on whom he will have mercy; and whom he
will he hardens, Romans 9. 16, 17, 18. And, the Lord knows the thoughts of
the Wise, that they are Vanity, Psalm. 9. 4. 11. And, O Lord, I know the way of
man is not in himself, it is not in him that walks, to direct his steps, Jer.
10. 33. And, God saw that the wickedness of man was very great in the Earth;
and that the Imagination of the thought of his heart was only evil, and that
continually, Genesis 6. 5. And, can the Ethiopean change his skin, or the Leopard
his spot? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed do evil, Jer. 13. 23.
And, work out your own salvation, with Fear and Trembling; For it is God that
works in you, to will, and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12.

So Friends, ye who are called by the name of Free-willers, you see how the
matter lies, and how Inconsistant to the Scriptures of Truth, and of the Life
which gave it forth; Your Position is, who think to fathom God with your own
Line, and reach to him who is Immortal with that which perishes; and because
you cannot make it out, or understand in your dark, and narrow thoughts how it
can be otherwise, you limit the Lord, and make him such a one as your selves,
or as your narrow, dark, and Shalow thoughts can apprehend of him, who is
unfathomable: whose way is in the Sea, and his footsteps in the mighty Waters;
who declares unto man his thought, and therefore the thought of man, or that
which proceeds from the will of man cannot comprehend God nor know what he
is, or how he works, or the reason of his working, who is unsearchable. How
unsearchful are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out? O the depth of
the riches, both of the Wisdom, and the Knowledge of God! For who has known
the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Councellor? Or who has first given
to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? For of him, and through him,
and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen; said the Apostle,
Romans 11. 33, 34, 35, 36.

Now, because you cannot reach the depth of his Counsel, nor find him out, and
the reason of his working, who is unsearchable, who are in the fall; You think
that your will in the fall, is the ground of his working, who being in the
fall, can think of nothing higher then your selves; For though God is above,
and you think, and speak of God as you think, yet you understand God no more in
the mind that is in the fall, then the fall can understand him; Whom even the
natural man cannot know, nor the things of him, for they are foolishness to
him, nor can he know them, for they are spiritually descerned, as the Apostle
testifies, 1 Cor. 3. 14.

And think not this strange that I say unto you; For a man can see no further,
nor otherwise then is the principle in which he is, and by which he sees. All
wisemen (I suppose) will grant me this; Now you being in the fall, and your
principle being that which rules in the fall, which is the principle of
darkness, which never knew him, nor saw him, nor can comprehend him, who is
Light; and the light shined in the darkness (here is the two Principles) and the
darkness comprehended it not, says John, Chap. 1. 5.) How can you comprehend
him? How can ye think of him above, or further, or otherwise then that in which
you are, which knows him not, nor has seen him; and so see how you are
befooled in the point, by the Prince of darkness, who leads you to lay your
dark, unstable, tottering wills, which are very vanity, led about by the Prince
of the Air, who works mightily in the children of disobedience; and such were
some of you, (said the Apostle to the Saints, 1 Cor. 6. 11* But ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God) as the ground of his Foundation, which remains sure as aforesaid, but
yours in the dust, and as a thing of naught; For who shall say unto him, what
do thou? And yet if you will so, it shall be so, and if you will not so, it
shall not be so, says your Opinion, who think of God, as your selves, who
think him such a one as your selves; Nay, you place your broken wills, higher
then his, and as the foundation of his; for if your will say, you shall be
damned, and so to liberty you go, and take your swinge as you please; where is
the Will of God (I speak as to men, and after the manner of men; and with
Reverence unto God as the thing speaks) which the Apostle says to the Saints,
is your sanctification. This is the Will of God even your sanctification, that
you should abstain from Fornication, 1 These. 4. 3. Nay, says your Opinion, we
will be unholy; we will be profane, we will be unclean; If we shall be saved,
we shall be saved, and if we shall be damned, we shall be damned; We have time
enough, and if we will turn to the Lord, we shall turn, and it will be well
enough, as if the matter lay there, and the whole stress of the Salvation of
man, and his Reprobation stood in the will of man.

But, Friends, you must consider, that though the Lord has given man an
understanding to know him who is true, and this understanding is that of him in
you, which gives you to know him who is true, and which leads into him, who is
true, this is true God, and Eternal Life; Yet if you are not turned to this, if
you are not guided by this, if by this you are not led, you cannot turn to God;
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spot? Then may ye also do
good, that are accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13. 23. as aforesaid. So, this must
draw you, this must lead you, to the voice of this you must hearken where the
Power of God is, which is the Power of God; whose very voice is Power, which
shakes the Wilderness, the Wilderness of Kadesh (the voice of the Lord, that
which calls on you to return, does it,) It makes the Hinds to calve, and
discovers the Forests, and divides the flames of fire, and breaks the
Cedars of Lebanon, and makes them to skip like a Calf, Lebanon and Shirion
like a Young Unicorn, which is powerful, and full of Majesty, Ps. 29. That so
you may be turned unto God.

So then, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy; whose kindness it is that has placed something of himself
in you, to call upon you, to show you your Enemy, to lead you unto himself,
which is of such power that it speaks through the strength of darkness, and
you hear it; that which reproves you, that which judges you for evil, that
which shows you the very appearance of evil, and tells you what you should do,
which all the strength of darkness cannot hinder, if it could, you should never
hear it speak, which judges darkness. Now this is the Visitation of the Lord,
this is his long-suffering, this is that which seeks to gather, this is that
which would have the death of none of you, this desires not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he may return and live; And in this is Power (as I have
said) it is the Power of God, Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the the Power
of God, which is that which must turn you, if ever you be turned to God, which
calls upon you to turn, which God has placed in you to call upon you, and to
turn you unto God; So it is not in him that wills, (as I have said) nor in
him that runs, but it is God that shows mercy; and this is the Visitation
of his love (as has been said) that you may be gathered, that you may be
saved, that you may be turned; He never put it otherwise, not in your wills,
nor never laid he the stress there, but that you should hearken to that of him
in you, which knows, and speaks, and does his will, which lies in his bosom,
which is the Son of his bosom, in whom he has ordained Eternal life, and to
all that come to, believe on, and abide in him.

So here is the thing at which you have stumbled so long, which you would know,
but have not known it, because you have not known, nor come to, nor believed in
that by which you might know it, which is that which witnessess, and so have
not known the Power of God, which delivers, which saves, in which is the Way to
Life, which is the Way to Life, in whom the Lord is well pleased; that in you,
that calls upon you to turn, not your Wills to turn, is the Power of God, and
the Way to Life; We Preach no such Doctrine, but we lead every man to the Power
of God, that which calls on man to turn and live, that so he may turn and live;
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; Renew our days as of
old, Lam. 5. 21. So then it is not in the will of man, but in the good will of
him that speaks in man, in which is the power to turn him to God, as he joins
to this, as he comes to this, as he is governed by this; and this unto you all
is the Word of the Lord.

For though the destruction of Israel is of himself, yet in the Lord is his
help; here is the help, the help laid on him that is Mighty, the Power of God in
you, which is that which witnesses; not in the Will of man, there is the
mistake; for man cannot Will to God in the state in the fall, We are not
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, said the Apostle as aforesaid; and were it not that the
Lord first touched man, that of him in him which lies in death, and by reason
of the fall is buried in the Grave; so that it cannot move to God; man never
would look after God, nor know the state in the which he is; for the enemy
having him, and holding him, and compassing him about, would never suffer him
so to see, nor so to understand; Now herein is the love of God manifest, and
his great loving kindness; that when man whom he made upright, and in his
Image, and breathed into him the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul,
turned away from the Lord, and from that in which he was made, (which kept, and
would have preserved him, had he kept to it) and let in the enemy, and so death
came over him in the Transgression, over that in which he was made, that it
moved not, but lay as dead; Free among the dead like the slain that lie in the
grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and they are cut off from thy hand, Psalm.
88. 6. I say that the Lord should then visit man, and reach to that of himself
in man which lay in the grave, free among the dead, like the slain that lie in
the grave, and so give man to see the state in the which he is, and his enemy,
and to cause a moving after God, a Will to God, this is the Lords great loving
kindness, and his free mercy; and this the Apostle reckoned when he cast up the
sum, and minded the great love of God to man in this state. In this (says he
as has been said) was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him;
Herein is the love [not] that [we] [loved] God, but that [he] loved us, and
sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 9, 10. And, when we
were yet without strength in due time, Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 5. 6.

So then man cannot move to God, unless God reach him, that of him in him that
lies in death by reason of Transgression, and quicken him; then it moves to God
again, not that we loved God; see in what state the will of man is in the fall,
where all men are found, when God comes to them; when God visits them, when he
speaks to them, when his voice reaches them that shakes the Wilderness; when
that moves in them which shows them sin and evil, and judges it; not that we
loved God (says he) before whilst we were in this state, the state in the fall
we loved not God; before God reached to that of himself in us that lay in
death. Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more (says he also as aforesaid) but he loved us, and sent his
Son (that of himself in us) to be a propitiation (an atonement) for our sin;
and herein is love, and in this was manifested the love of God toward us, that
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
We, who were dead in trespasses, and sins, who were without sense or feeling of
God, over whom death was gotten, who had no mind, nor will to God, nor moving
to him; who could never have moved to him, nor minded nor willed him in the
state in which we were in the fall, in the Transgression, when we were from
that of him, which gives the sense and feeling of him, and willing to and
moving after him, because of death, which was got between us, and that of him
in which we were made, from which we fell, which came under by reason of Death,
by reason of the fall; and so were at that time without Christ; Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of Promise, having no
hope, and without God in the World, that we who were in this state might live
through him, through that which speaks in us, which in us moves to God.

So that it is not in the will of man in the fall (for so man as to this
particular, is to be considered, for that which restores him, and brings him to
God is another thing, and being brought to God is another state, of which I
speak not now; but of the state in which man is before he is brought thither) I
say, it is not in the Will of man; considered in the fall, to will to God, or
to move to him (that which moves him to God, and makes him will to God is
another thing, as I have showed) and there being no will in man as to God in
this state wherein every man is found, when God comes to him (as has been
instanced) where then is free will; or the freedom of his will to God? for
where there is no such thing as a thing, there cannot be said to be the freedom
of such a thing; because there is a non entity; (as I may so speak, if so be it
be proper so to speak, and yet how shall I otherwise speak to give a
demonstration of the thing of which I speak) there is no such thing in being,
of which the freedom, or the freedom of which is pretended; there is no such
thing in being, therefore there cannot be said to be the freedom of such a
thing. For (again) of his [own] will, begat he us, with the Word of Truth, that
we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures, says the Apostle, Jam.
1. 18. Of his own will, then it is not of man's will that man is begotten to
God; that he is delivered for two wills cannot consist in this Particular, no
more can it consist, then two Fathers in the Generation of man, or for a man to
beget himself, which is incongruous to Nature to say, as it is to reason to
think it, and it being not of man's will, then man has no freedom of will to be
begotten to beget himself to God.

And this is manifest, for it is by the Word, or with the Word of Truth too,
that he is begotten to God. So man has nothing to do in the matter of his own
will, With the Word of Truth has he begotten us; the Word of Truth, the Word
nigh in the mouth, and in the heart, the Word of Faith which we preach; (said
the Apostle.) The Word of the Lord which endures for ever, and this is the Word
which by the Gospel is Preached unto you, says Peter, 1 Epist. 1. 25. The Word
which is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged Sword, piercing
even to the dividing assunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow,
and is a discerner of the Thoughts and intents of the heart; neither is there
any Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked, and
opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 12, 13. So it is
by this Word, the Word of Truth, the Word of God, the Word nigh in the mouth,
and in the heart, that calls upon man, that speaks to man to turn unto the
Lord, that we are begotten of his own will, and with the Word of Truth; this is
first, that which calls on man to turn unto the Lord, is that which begets; and
that which begets (you know) is first, and if it begets, (you know in Nature)
it is another thing, a seed of its own, each Body its own Seed, the Seed of
God; that is his Seed that is of him, which begets his own will, something of
himself, with the Word of Truth, that which calls on man, which is not man, nor
of the will of man, but of God, which were born not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the Will of man, but of God, John 1. 13. And the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory of the only
begotten of the Father full of Grace, and Truth, v. 14. And so man has nothing
to do in this thing; the first moving, and rise, and step to this thing, is the
Will of God with the Word of Truth; that which witnesses, something that is
not of man, nor the will of man, nor of the flesh, though it be in man that
begets to God; This reaches to it is own, that lies in death by reason of
Transgression, that is got between, and quickens it to God; then that moving in
man turns him to God. So the first, and the last, the beginning and the ending,
the whole of the work of Regeneration, of begetting man to God, is the Lord;
his Will his Word of Truth, his Power, his Arm, that of him in man, being
reached by his Omnipotent Power, which lies in death by reason of the fall,
that in which man was made, being reached again thorough death, moves to God;
and as this is abided in, and kept to, it works out the old man, the old
nature; and brings forth the Image of God in man again, that which man was made
in at first, and causes it to reign over all for ever.

And here is the Redemption, and here is the Restoration, the bringing man back
again to God from whence he is gone, the beginning, and the finishing; Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will
perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6. He that begins, he
performs it; Here'^ no second, here is not another, here is not man in the
beginning, and God in the end; man willing, and then God working, but God
working both to will, and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. Looking unto
Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 2. Looking to Jesus, Jesus
the Author, Jesus the Finisher; looking to him, who is the Author, who is the
Finisher, where is room then for the will of man; Jesus begins, the Word of
Truth, that which speaks, that which witnesses, that which calls, this begets,
the beginning; the ending this as it is heeded, and abided in, finishes; he
that begins, his own will with the Word of Truth, performs, forms through,
finishes. The Alpha, and Omega, the beginning, and ending, I am says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. The
Alpha, the Omega; he that first made remakes, he that made man in his Image,
renews man into his Image, or renews his Image in man; he from whom man is
gone, brings man to God again; he that made him at first in his Image, ^eaching
to his Image (that of him in man in which man was made from which man is
fallen, which witnesses to God) raises it up; and this begets man unto God, or
a will in man to turn unto the Lord; or, is the will, or the mind that turns
unto the Lord; Of his own will begat he us with the Word of Truth, as
aforesaid; and this performs, this finishes, as it is abided in, and no other.

So that were it not for his Seed, for that in which man was made; the Breath
of Life which God breathed into man, and man became a living Soul; which
suffers and lies under by reason of Transgression which is over man in the
fall, and has the possession of him, were it not that God visits or reaches
to this his Seed in man, in which man was made which so lies under, and suffers
in man by reason of Transgression, and so causes it to spring through man
again, man would never think of God, or move to him, which Seed the Lord
reaching, and visiting in man with the day spring from on high, shows man where
he is, and what has him in possession, and where he has been, and so begets
it is own Mind, and Will, and Image in man, and brings him to the Lord. Turn ye
unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted, Isa. 31. 6. and
man heeding it, is turned unto the Lord, and abiding in it, is preserved unto
God. Here Is the beginning, and the ending, and the whole sum of this matter,
and the ground of the mistake that is in men concerning it, which I have opened
for the satisfaction of the simple in the movings of the Lord, because the time
is nere wherein these things will be seen as they are, when it will be too
late, and men will be concluded with the God whom they serve.

So the bowels of the Lord have moved in me to you wards, that your eyes may be
open, and that you may see this great mystery, which has been hid from ages
and generations, but is now made manifest to his Saints, which is Christ in you
the Hope of glory, and that you may not place the will of man to be it, and so
mistake in this thing of weight unto all eternity. And so I am clear of you
also in the sight of the Lord, who has moved me to write, and which I have
written in his Counsel, and as I have received of him whose word it is; and
which shall be fulfilled, and your eyes shall see it, and in that day I shall
be witnessed in you (to whom this shall come) by that which witnesses to God
for ever, and ever, and your judgment will be just; you that do not hear, who
will not obey, who will not see, who will not hear, who stop your ears as the
the deaf Adder, refusing to hear the voice of the Charmer charm, he never so
wisely. The day (I say) is near wherein these things you will see, and witness
wherein it will be too late. Therefore you also, Give glory to the Lord your
God before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble on the dark
mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death,
and make it gross darkness, Jer. 13. 16. My Bowels are turned within me for
you, that so you may not be mistaken, and undone for ever.

For this know that the Lord's Spirit will not always strive with you, nor
will he always have mercy, for if he still call, and you refuse, and the day
of your visitation pass over, you will also be concluded with the God whom you
serve. Then shall I be a good savor unto the Lord, and my reward shall be with
him when he shall render unto you according to your deeds.

And so I shall proceed to what I have further to say in this weighty matter,
as I am moved of the Lord.

I say as before, God made not man to destroy him, neither has he concluded
any man from all eternity to destruction; neither has he so made man, as that
it is impossible for him to fall from the state in the which he was made;
neither has he so chosen man since the fall, as that he can never be removed
from the state unto which he was chosen. Neither does he so will the Salvation
of all, as that all are saved; neither has he redeemed all since the fall;
neither is it so in the will of man, that if he will he shall be saved, and if
he will he shall be damned; that were to do as has been said, and proved at
large, as to the Particular of each in their Place and Order; but this the Lord
has done; He made man upright (as has been said) after the Image of God made
he man in Righteousness, and true Holiness; but man has found out many
Inventions, and has let in the enemy, and is wrought into his Image, who has
sought to destroy him, and is gone astray from him who made him, who made him
not to destroy him (as has been again, and again said) and has not been
guided by his Counsel, and would have none of his reproof, who found him out
after he had sinned, and showed him what he had done, neither would he turn,
and live, but turned to his own way, and followed the direction of his own
Path's, and his way turned unto Hell, and his Path's unto destruction; so that
there is none (in this state) that does good, no not one; They [all] are gone
aside, they are altogether become filthy, their foolish heart was darkened,
destruction, and misery is in their ways, and the Way of Peace they have not
known; and according to the Prince of this world have they walked, after the
course of this World, according to the power of the Prince of the Air, the
Spirit that now works in the children of disobedince, which is the Spirit of
Reprobation, which has no sense or feeling of God, which God has shut out, or
Reprobated from his Presence to all eternity, which has neither seen him, nor
known him, nor shall ever come to feel his Life, nor shall any that are joined
to him whilst they are in that state and witness not Redemption from the Lord.

For whilst men are upon this Root which God has cursed, and are found in him
whom he has reprobated, who is without any true sense of God, or his life,
those who are so found, and do so stand are as he is; and as it is said of the
other Seed, the Seed of God, they that are in it, and are born of it, viz. As
he is so are we in this world, -- (that is) in the true Sense of God, and his
life; as the Seed is which God has blessed; so is it with them, and so may it
be said of them that are found on this Root which God has cursed. As he is, so
are they in this world, that is to say, without any true sense of God (whilst
they grow on that Root) or of his life.

And therefore is it said, That at that time ye (speaking to the Saints, who
once were in, but were then delivered from that state, and this was the state,
which at that time, of which he speaks, they were in out of which they then
were delivered, viz. the state of Reprobation) at that time (says the Apostle)
ye were [without] Christ, being Aliens from the Common Wealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and [without] God in
the World (without the true sense and feeling of God which quickens and
refreshes them that feel him, and are in him, and he in them, and are made
partakers of his life, which quickens, and refreshes, and makes alive to God,
and delivers from tresp^sses and sins, where is death, and the alienation* and
the estrangement, and the being without God in the World, without the sense and
quickening presence God, for he othe^^ise (...) all things; Whether shall I go
from thy Presence? etc. and so may be said to be in them. He that descended is
the same also that asc^nded up far above all Heavens that he might fill all
things, Ephesians. 4. 10. And, has put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be the Head over all things to the Church which is his body, the fullness of him
that fills all in all; far above all Principallities, Powers, and Might, and
Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world but in that
which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23.

And says the same Apostle of them, whose day is over, and who are found in
this state of Reprobation in that day. Who shall be punished (says he) with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his Power, when he shall be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that
believe, 2 These. 1. 9, 10. And, Reprobate silver (says the Prophet, silver
that is without a true touch, the virtue is gone) shall men call them, because
the Lord has rejected them, Jer. 6. 30. And, to every good work Reprobate,
Tit. 1. 16. And, Reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. And, even as they
liked not to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a Reprobate
mind, Romans 1. 28. A mind without a proof (as the Latin word Reprobate,
compounded of re and probo (is) to prove backwards, or to be without a proof,
without a sense, a feeling of God, of that which witnesses, which gives the
feeling of God) signifies. And says the Apostle, Examine your selves whether
ye be in the Faith (this he spoke to the Corinthians, the Church that was in
God, which were washed, which were sanctified, which were justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; Who had a Proof, a Sense, a
Feeling of him in them; Examine your selves, says he to them, whether ye be in
the Faith) prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. But I trust (says he
in the next verse.) that we are not Reprobates. And says he further; Now I pray
to God that ye do no evil, not that we should appear approved, but that ye
should do that which is honest, though we be as Reprobates, verse. 7. And, he
that believes on the Son (on him who witnesses, the faithful and true witness.
These things says the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, writes John to the
Laodeceans, who were grown neither hot, nor cold, and therefore he would spue
them out of his mouth. I know thy works that thou art neither cold, nor hot,
(neither quite dead, nor quite alive, neither being without sense, nor having
much) I would thou were cold, or hot; So then because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth, Rev. 3. 15, 16. (A sore
word, to be cast out as salt that has lost its savor, and is good for
nothing, but to be cast to the Dunghill. If the salt has lost its savor, where
with shall it be salted? It is henceforth good for nothing but to be cast out,
and to be trodden under foot of men, says Christ, Mat. 5. 13.) And, shameful
spueing shall be on thy Glory, Hab. 2. 16. And, Moab also shall wallow in his
Vomit, Jer. 48. 16. And, it is happened unto them according to the true
Proverb. The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed
to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22. This is the condition of all that
are in this state, whom the Lord spues out) I say, He that beleiveth on the
Son, has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 36.

And here is the state of all men by nature (the nature that is in the fall, in
the Transgression) they are without God, the sense of God, the life of God, the
Son of God, without God in the World, without Christ the Son of God, Aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the covenants of Promise,
having no hope (as aforesaid) and the reason is, because they believe not on
the Son (on that which witnesses to God in them. Which Judges, and reproves
them when they do evil, and shows them what they should do; Is not this the
Christ, John 4. 21. That which tells them all that ever they have done, that
searches their hearts, and tries their Reigns; and knows the compass and
end of all their Actions, and sits down with them, and risieth up with them,
and follows them wheresoever they go; They drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. Which speaks to them in
secret, and convinces them of evil, which they know they should not go
against, which is the Grace of God that brings Salvation, that has appeared
to all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should
live Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly in this present World, of which the
Apostle speaks, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The Comforter which reproves the World of
Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, of Sin, because they believe not in
me, says Christ, John 1. 6. 8, 9. of Righteousness, because I go to my Father,
and ye see me no more; Of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged,
verse. 10, 11. So, that which reproves, and judges, is the Spirit, the Spirit of
the Son, the Comforter, that which reproves, gives comfort, and hope to
Godward, that he will show mercy; It is his Arm that opens to gather; It is his
Crook by which he brings back. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; How often would I have
gathered thy children together, as a Hen gathers her chicken under her wings,
and ye would not, Mat. 23. 27. Now that which gathers, is that which brings
together, that which is astray, that is out of its place, out of its way; and
that which so gathers, corrects, or it is a correction, or a reproof to that
which is astray; and the voice of that which gathers, is a reproof to that
which is astray, the very calling to come together, reproves that which was not
so. Now this comforts, this is the Comforter that calls to man, who is out of
the way, to turn him, to bring him out of the wrong, to the right way, and that
which tells a man that he is in the wrong way, judges the wrong way, reproves
it; And that which reproves the wrong, gives comfort to a man as he receives
it, and lets it judge the wrong in him, that he is regarded, and shall be
brought into the right. And so thy Rod, and thy Staff they comfort me, Psalm.
23. 3. It gives a man to see that its like to be well with him; As a man that
is traveling hard, and he has a long way to go, and night will come, and he
fears least having mist his way he shall come short of home, and then great
perils will attend him, and he happily may miscarry, and be undone for ever; If
any man meet him, and tell him how he is out of his way, and that the other is
his way, and if he will go with him, he will bring him in safety to his
journeys end, and deliver him from all his enemies, and the sad event of a
miscarriage; this will revive the heart of the man, that is in sense of his
condition, and instead of repining at, or resisting, or slighting his friend,
or persisting in the wrong way, in which he was, or rising against his friend,
and his admonition, and reproof, he will gladly go with him, and accept the
offer; and he will say, pray let me go with thee, and I am glad I have met with
thee, and what a thing is it that I have met with thee, that I should meet with
thee; and what a providence was it, and his heart will be light, and rejoice
that he has met with the right; and be comforted that now he shall come home
and miss his dangers, and be out of fear of miscarriage. So, his trouble is
gone, and all the way along he will be talking to his friend and telling him,
what a thing it was that he met with him.

Even so it is as to that which is Eternal, man that is out of his way, and
comes to be in sense by that which calls upon him, and tells him he is out of
the way, lying is out of the way, swearing is out of the way, deceit is out of
the way; the form of godliness without the Power, is out of the way; Profession
without the prossession of that which is professed, a Name that one lives, and
yet is dead as to the life of God; a circumcision without, when there is no
circumcision within, a walking as to the Law blameless, and yet without law to
Christ; a Jew without, and no Jew within; a cover of Righteousness without, and
yet within a rotten Sepulcher, full of dead men's bones, (an open Sepulcher) a
man that comes to be in the sense of this through that which calls upon him,
and thereby to be awakned to see the danger in which he was, and so to be
apprehensive of his deliverance, will rejoice at this, and be comforted in
this, that so reproved him in the wrong way, and showed him the right; and with
gladness of heart, walks on with his Friend, who so showed him, who so judged
him; and his heart is now easy, and his fears are over, and he cares not at
what pains he is, or what it costs him, or what he looses, or parts with, to
walk along with his friend, and to keep to his foot, step by step with him,
because he will-bring him to his journeys end.

Friends, and People all, who are not yet come hither, who yet are not turned
at the voice of your friend, at that which calls on you, which reproves, which
judges, the way you are in; Resist no longer, but be gathered unto it, that so
into the sense of your state you may come, and be led along, and keep company
with that which followed after you, and called upon you for many years as you
were traveling to destruction, that you might turn and live; which now will go
before you, as you turn to it, and keep with it, and lead you to rest. O who
would not be here, who is in any sense of the Eternal state which he must pass
through to, and which he must abide for ever! who would reject the tender love
of so dear a friend? Who would not be at ease, at hearts ease (as we use to
say, when any ones burden is taken off) in a matter of this weight as to that
which is Eternal, that it is well with one, as to that which is Eternal; here
the heart is at rest, and all that is within a man is at peace, and his
thoughts of his going to his long home is secure, when he is in the certainty
of this, and who would not be in the certainty of this, that his heart might be
at ease, and his soul at rest, at hearts ease, at true rest, which never is at
true ease, nor rest till it come hither, till it be at this, and that it may
come hither, is the end of the Lord in that which gathers, which opens, which
seeks, which would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn
and live.

So people all the Bowels of the Lords love are to you in this, in that which
gathers, in that which seeks, in that which calls, in that which witnesses, in
that which follows after you, in that which judges you, in that which reproves
your goings astray, in that which shows you are out of the way, the Rod, and
the Staff, this comforts, this is a comfort. Before I was afflicted, I went
astray, but now have I kept thy Word, Psalm. 119. 67. And, blessed is the man
whom thou chastnests, O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law, Psalm. 94. 12.
And, I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness, have afflicted me, Psalm. 119. 75. And, it is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes, the law of thy mouth is
better to me, then thousands of Gold and Silver, ver. 71. 72. And, if you are
without chastisement, of which all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not
sons, Heb. 12. 12. If ye endure chasming, God deals with you as with sons,
for what son is he whom the Father chastneth not, ver. 7. Furthermore, we have
had Fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall
we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? For,
they verily for a few days, chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness, verse. 8, 9.

So that which chastens, that which corrects, that which reproves, that which
judges, that which seeks, that which gathers, that which calls, that which
woes, that which entreats, that which follows, the voice behind which says,
This is the right way walk in it, when you turn to the right hand, or to the
left (the Promise which the Lord made of old, in the time of the Law, which was
without, to lead to that which was within, which was blotted out by reason of
Transgression, for which cause the Law was added (some thing that was not
before) by reason of Transgression, to lead to that within, which Transgression
was got over, the Word nigh, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart) this Word of
Faith which we preach (said the Apostle) the righteousness of Faith, which
says on this wise, says he, Romans 10. 6. And, thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee, saying, this is the Way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right
hand, and when ye turn unto the left, Isa. 20. 21.) This comforts, this is of a
comforting nature, this shows the Lords regard, this seeks to gather, this
seeks to save; be ye gathered unto it, to that which reproves, to that which
judges, to that which calls, to that which follows, to that which speaks
behind, to that which witnesses, the Word behind ye when ye are turned to the
right hand, or to the left, which calls on you, which judges your being out of
the way, which you are before, when you are turned to the right hand, or to the
left; which goes not before you to evil, which shows you evil, the evil which
leads you out of the way, which follows after you, when you are led away to
evil; which says, this is the way, (that which shows ye are gone to the right
hand, or to the left) walk ye in it; this is the Promise, this the Lord has
fulfiled; this your ears have heard; this you know, walk ye in it, be gathered
to it. There Is no cloak now left, you know now it is so, the times of this
ignorance God winked at, now he commands men every where to repent, because
they know this, and that they should be guided by this, and not go against
this, but turn at the voice of this, the Word behind, that when they turn to
the right hand, or the left; saing, This is the way, walk in it, because he
has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the World in Righteousness, by
this, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given asurance unto
all men, in that he has raised him from the dead; That, that lives, that shows
men evil, this shall judge the world in Righteousness, by this he will judge
the world in Righteousness; This he has raised from the dead, to that it
witnesses, that he may judge the world in Righteousness, and this is the
asurance that he will so judge the World in Righteousness, in that he has
raised this up from the dead, in that this witnesses; and as certainly as it
witnesses, shall it judge, will he Judge the world in Righteousness.

So People all, take heed what you do in running against this, in opposing
this, in not being gathered unto this, it is the way to God, it is the way to
Life, and there is no other; It is that which shall judge you, it is that which
must save you, if ever, ye be saved, it is the Word of the Lord.

Now, in the Son there is Life; He has life in himself, and he quickens whom
he will. For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them, even so
the Son quickens whom he will. The Father judges no man, but has committed
all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that
has sent him. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to Life. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live; for as the Father has life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have life in himself; and has given him authority
to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of man, John 5. 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

And he is the wel-spring of Life. Understanding is a wel-spring of Life to him
that has it; but the instruction of fools is folly, says the wise man, Prove.
26. 22. And, whence then comes wisdom, and where is the place of
understanding, seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept from the
fouls of the Air? Behold the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil that is understanding, Job 28. 20, 21. And, I wisdom dwell with
prudence, and find out knowledge of witty Inventions; The fear of the Lord is
to hate Evil, Pride, and Arrogance, and the evil way, and the froward mouth do
I hate; Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom, [I] am [understanding] I have
strength. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; Be me Princes Rule,
and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. I love them that love me, and
those that seek me early, shall find me; Riches and Honor are with me, yea
dureable Riches, and Righteousness; My fruit is better then gold, yea then fine
gold, and my revenue then choice silver; I lead in the way of Righteousness, in
the midst of the Paths of Judgment, that I may cause those that love me to
inherit substance, and I will fill their Treasures; The Lord possessed me in
the beginning of his way, before his works of old; I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, ere ever the earth was; when there was no
depths, I was brought forth when there was no fountain abounding with water,
before the Mountains were stetled, before the Hills was I brought forth;
whils't as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the Fields, nor the highest part
of the dust of the World; when he prepared the Heavens, I was there; when he
set a compass on the face of the depth; when he established the Clouds above,
when he strengthened the Fountains of the deep; when he gave to the Sea his
degree that the Waters should not pass his commdements; When he appointed the
foundation of the earth, then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, Rejoicing in the
habitable part of his Earth; and my delights were with the Sons of Men. Now,
therefore hearken unto me O ye Children, for blessed are they that keep my
ways; Hear in^truction, and be wise, and refuse it not; Blessed is the man
that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the posts of my door:
For who so finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord; but
he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul; all they that hate me love
death, Prove. 8. 13. to the end. And the fear of the Lord, is the beginning of
Wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do his Commandments; his
praise endures for ever, Psalm. 111. 10. And, the fear of the Lord is Wisdom,
and the Knowledge of the Holy is understanding, Proverbs 9. 10.

And, this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
those days says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their mind, and write them in
their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People,
and they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least unto the greatest;
for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and their
Iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 8 10, 11, 12. And this shall be the
Covenant which I will make with the house of Israel; after those days says
the Lord, I will put my Law in their Inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People, and they shall
teach no more every one his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know
the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of
them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their Iniquities, and I will remember
their sins no more, Jer. 31. 33, 34.

And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, and I will not turn away
from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts; and they
shall not depart from me; yea I will rejoice over them to do them good; and I
will plant them in this Land assuredly with my whole heart, and with my whole
soul, Jer. 32. 40, 41.

And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth; and to every Nation, and
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, crying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give
glory to him, for the hour of his judgments is come; and worship him that made
Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters, Rev. 14. 6, 7. And
except the God of my Fathers, the God of Abraham, and the [fear] of Isaac had
been with me, thou had sent me away now empty; God has seen my affliction,
and the labor of my hand, and rebuked thee yester-night, Genesis 31. 42. And
Laban said to Jacob, behold this heap, and behold this Pillar which I cast up
between me, and the, this Heap, and this Pillar be witness that I not pass
over this Heap to thee, and thou shall not pass over this Heap, and this Pillar
unto me for harm; the God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and their Father
Judge between us; and Jacob swear by the [fear] of his Father Isaac, v. 51,
52, 53. Thus says the Scripture, and the Scripture cannot be broken, John 10.
35.

And in him was life, and the life was the light of men, that was the true
light which lights every man that comes into the World, John 1. 3. 9. And
this is the condemnation that light is come into the World, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil, for every one that
does evil, hates the light; neither comes he to the light least his deeds
should be reproved, but he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, John 3. 19, 20, 21. And, he
that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed on the
Name of the only begotten Son of God, John 3. 18. And, God sent not his Son
into the World to condemn the World, but that the world through him might be
saved; for God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And,
as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man
be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
eternal life, v. 14, 15, 16, 17. And, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of Life,
John 8. 12.

I say, they that are in the state of nature which is in the fall in the
Transgression, are without the sense of God, or of his life, or of his Son who
is Life. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; No man (says he) comes unto
the Father, but by me; if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also;
and hence forth ye know him, and have seen him: Philip says unto him, Lord
show us the Father, and it suffices. Jesus says unto him, have I been so long
time with you, and yet have thou not known me? Philip, be that has seen me,
has seen my Father; and how say thou then, show us the Father? belie^est
thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I speak
unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in me, he does
the Works. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; Or,
believe me for the very work sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
believes me, the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works then
these shall he do, because I go to my Father, and whatsoever ye shall ask in my
Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son; If ye ask
any thing in my Name, I will do it. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, and I
will pray (...) Father, and he shall give you another Comforther, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for he
dwells in you, and shall be with you, John 14. 6. to the eighteenth.

And being without the sense of God, and his Life, and his Son who is life,
they are in a state of Reprobation, in the state of the Devil, who is without
any thing of this, any thing of any true sense of God, or of his Life, or of
the Son of God who is Life; For verily he took not upon him the nature of
Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. And they that are
in this state, can never see God, (whilst they are in this state) nor know him,
nor his Son in the knowledge of whom is life eternal, John 17. 3. and there is
no coming out of this state, without the knowledge of him who is Life eternal;
and there can be no knowledge of him who is Life eternal, but in his Light. In
thy Light shall we see Light, Psalm. 36. 9. And God who commanded the Light to
shine out darkness, has shined in our Hearts to give the light of knowledge of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. And this is the
(...) that which reproves, that which makes manifest, as the Apostle says. But
all things (says he) that are reproved, are made manifest by the Ligtt; for
whatsoever does make manife^t is light; wherefore he says, Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give the Light, Ephesians. 5.
13, 14. And, I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thy
Hand, and will keep thee, and will give thee for a Covenant of the People, for
a light of the Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. And, to give light to them that sit in
darkness, and the shadow of death, to guide our feet in the way of peace, Luke
1. 78. And, in his Name shall the Gentiles trust, Mat. 12. 21. And, the light
shined in darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not; That is the true
Light, that lights every man that comes into the World, John 1. 5. 9.

Now how can darkness show it self? And how can darkness reprove darkness? And
how can he that is in darkness, see the light, by the darkness? And how can he
that sees not the light come out of darkness? And how can the light guide a
man, whilst darkness covers him? And how can it be but that darkness should
cover a man whilst he is in the state of darkness? And how can a man come out
of darkness, but by the light? Therefore is he called light, because he
shows darkness, and brings out of darkness as many as are led by him, whose
darkness he lightneth (Thou will light my Candle, the Lord my God will
enlighten my darkness, Psalm. 18. 28.) that they may see the light of Life.

So that the light, it is that shows darkness, and darkness is comprehended
by the light, but darkness cannot comprehend the light; Therefore every one
must heed the light, that shines in him in the darkness (that which reproves,
that which makes manifest the darkness) that he may come to the light of Life.
Yet a little while is the light with you, walk while ye have the light, least
darkness come upon you, for he that walks in darkness, knows not whither
he goes; While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be
children of the light, John 12. 35, 36.

For, if darkness cannot comprehend the light, it cannot show the light; but
the light it is that makes manifest the darkness (that which reproves, that
which makes manifest) and shows it; and if the darkness cannot comprehend the
light though it shine in it, nor make manifest, nor show it self; in what state
then are all they who abide in darkness, and know not the light, nor are
guided by it? Which way can they come out of darkness, who abide in darkness?
And how can they be delivered without the help of another thing, without the
light, which shows them their state, which shows them darkness, which makes it
manifest, which shines in darkness, though the darkness comprehends it not?
And this light is Christ (as has been often instanced) who is the light of
Life; who is the Savior of all those who believe in him, and to him must all
come, to the light in them (that which reproves, that which makes manifest) to
Christ the light, and all must believe in him who is the true light, that
lights every man that comes into the World, and abide in him who is light,
or they shall never see life, they can never be delivered; and this is truth.

Now this is the state in the which man is in the fall, in the transgression,
he sees not God, nor has seen him, nor can see him in that state, nor know
him. The state is without a proof, a witness, a feeling of God, and being
without a proof, a witness, a feeling of God in him; How can he come to him
whom he neither sees nor feels, nor knows, nor of him has a proof or witness?
For, Ignoti nulla Cupido, as the Axiom is; A man has no desire to that which
he knows not. And a man knows not that which he does not feel, and a man feels
not that which he does not witness; and a man cannot witness that which he has
not, and a man has not that which he does not witness; that is to say, in his
sense, in his understanding, though it may be in him.

And the reason is this, because he being in a state which is void of that
which gives the feeling, the sense, the witness, the proof, of God in him; He
in that state, can have no proof of God, nor witness, nor sense, nor feeling
more then of wrath, and eternal condemnation, none of life, nor of Salvation,
or that leads to it; for Wrath, and Eternal condemnation is the portion of that
state, and of all that are in it, whilst they are in it; And though the light
be in man (that which reproves, that which makes manifest) and God has placed
it there, a measure of himself in every man, to bring him back again to God,
which calls on him to turn unto the Lord; from whom he is gone, that it may be
well with him; and man knows it, and it often appears, and shows, and makes
manifest, and reproves, and judges, which is the love of God, and his kindness
unto man, who seeks to gather him, and therefore has he placed this of himself
in him, to bring him to God; yet the Spirit of Reprobation, the Spirit which is
without the living sense, and feeling of God, or proof, or witness of him, or
the state of Reprobation; or the Reprobated state or condition, being that
which has man, and holds him, being that in which man is, it keeps him from
believing in that which reproves, which makes manifest, which shows, which
judges, which witnesses to God, and answers to him, and so as this has power
over him, he obeys it not.

Now, being made perfect, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation, to as
many as obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And man obeying it not, he does not receive it, he
does not retain it; Iniquity comes (which he obeys) and blots it out; and so it
is to him, as if he had it not, it is made of none effect to him, he becomes
not the Atho^r of Eternal Salvation to such; Iniquity races it out as it were,
comes over it, covers it, and so man feels not the Power and Virtue of that
which calls upon him, so as to deliver him, because he receives it not, he does
not obey it, and therefore it is that he is not delivered that to him, he
becomes not the Author of Eternal Salvation who is it, though it is Virtue,
and Power above the strength of darkness, that shows it, else it should never
show darkness, and make manifest what darkness is. Nor has that man any other
advantage by it, then to know his Condemnation, which is the state of the
Devil, the state of Reprobation, the state of the Reprobates, the Reprobated
state; who though they know God, yea, and though they also believe, and
tremble, yet it is in a sense of Wrath, and Judgment; For he is over them, and
they know him to be Lord over all Principalities and Powers, who is Head of the
body the Church; yet they obey him not, nor receive him, nor can they, the
state they are in, and he is contradistinct, and so their knowledge to him is
but to Judgment; What have I to do with thee Jesus (and yet the Pharisees would
not confe^s him so to be) thou Son of the most high God, I adjure thee by God,
that thou torment me not; cried the unclean spirit, whose name was Legion, when
Jesus said unto him, come out of the man thou unclean spirit, Mark 5* 8. And,
thou believe there is one God, thou do well, the Devils also believe, and
tremble, said James to the vain man, concerning the Faith which was without
works, which he said was dead; which obeyed not, which received not his Virtue,
therefore it wrought not; For, as many as received him, to them gave he power
to be called the Sons of God, even to them which believe in his Name, which
were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God; Who was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World
knew him not, who came unto his own, but his own received him not; Was not
Abraham our Father (said James) justified by works, when he had offered Isaac
his Son upon the Altar? See thou how Faith wrought with his works, and by
works, was Faith made perfect? And the Scripture was fulfiled, which says,
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness, and he was
called the Friend of God. You see then (says he) how that by works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only; Likewise, also was not Rahab the Harlot
justified by works, when she had received the Messengers, and had sent them out
another way. For, as the body without the spirit, is dead, so Faith without
works, is dead also; This testified James and John also, Jam. 2. 19. to the
end, John 1. 10, 11, 12, 13.

And the reason is this, because (as has been hinted) that spirit having man,
and possessing him, man comes to be as that spirit is, and that spirit being
so, man comes to be like it; and man being like it, or coming to be formed into
the image of the Devil, who was made after the Image of God, he comes to be
concluded with him; and this is the state of the fall; the state of
Reprobation, the state of him who is reprobated from God; of the Reprobates,
they are such as are in him in the Devil, he is their Root, their Ground, their
Source, and their Spring, who is reprobated from God, who feels him not, who is
without any thing of him in him, that is the principle of him, who does not
know him; and therefore it is that they are called Reprobates.

And here I must end as to this Particular, having spoken that which I have
received of the Lord, to communicate that all may see, and understand this
great mystery, viz. how the Lord made not man to destroy him, and that he has
concluded no man from all eternity to destruction, but man comes to be
destroyed, and to suffer as he is found in the state of Reprobation, the state
of Destruction, the state of which he is chief, who is the Devil, who (as I
have showed) is Reprobated from God for ever and ever, and so shall be all
those who are found in him when their day is over, who shall partake of his
plagues, as they are found in him, and he in them working as their Head, and
King. And so I have finished what I have to say in this Particular.

Now in this state the Lord finding man, whom he had made after his Image, even
in Righteousness, and True Holiness, thus lost, thus degenerated, thus formed
into the Image of the Devil; whom he had planted a Noble Vine, wholly a Right
Seed; and Created in his Image; the Lord finding man in this state of
Reprobation, in this state of Destruction, in this state of Alienation from
God, without Christ; and God in the World, and having no hope; The Bowels of
his compassion yearned toward him whom he had so made, and in a capacity to
know him who is true, and to be in him who is True; this is true God, and
Eternal Life, and to have fellowship with him, and to live in him for ever and
ever, whom now another thing had taken up and possessed, whom the Lord at first
had taken up and possessed as he said, Thou art he that took me out of the
Womb; thou did make me hope when I was upon my mothers breasts; by thee have
I been holden up from the Womb; Thou art he that took me out of my Mothers
bowels; Thou have possessed my Reins; Thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb;
I am fearfully, and Wonderfully made; Marvelous are thy works, and that my Soul
knows right well: My substance was not hid from thee when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lower part of the earth; Thine eyes did
see my substance, yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my Members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there were none of
them, Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15. I say, the Lord finding man in this state, and the
bowels of his compassion yearning toward him whom be had made, as aforesaid,
and seeing it impossible that ever he should he recovered again to the state in
the which he was made, without being delivered from the state in the which now
he was, and that he could not be delivered from the state in the which now he
was, unless he were delivered from the hands of him who had him in this state,
and that he could not be delivered from the hands of him who had him in this
state, and possessed him, unless the eyes of man came to be opened to see the
state in the which now he was, and him who thus had man in possession, and that
he could never come to have his eyes opened to see the state in the which now
he was, and who it was that had him in possession; but by a power which was
greater then that which had now possessed man, and taken him up, which it was
not in the power of that which had taken up man, and possessed him to hinder
(that power which was greater) from showing unto man the state in the which now
he was, and who had possessed him; he placed something of this power, of
himself, in man to open the eyes of man's understanding, and to show him all
this, to the end that every man having something, a measure of this power in
him, (Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God) which is greater
then that which is of this World, which had now possessed man and taken him up;
every man might have in himself though not of himself or of flesh and blood,
or, of the will of man, or this world, a direction, or something in him which
might show him in the Particular where he was, and who it was that had him in
possession, and taken him up, and so might be delivered.

And this Power is Christ, Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
God. The Gospel of the Power of God unto Salvation. The stronger ^^en the
strong man armed that held the Possession. The Prince of Peace, the Redeemer.
The Captain of our Salvation. The Head of Principalities, and Powers, and of
the body of the Church, and of every man. The Name then, the which there is no
other Name given under Heaven among men, whereby we must be saved. The Seed.
The Seed of the Kingdom. The Son of God. The Prince of Life, who only has
immortality, and Eternal Life; to whom be Honor, and Power everlasting, Amen.

And here is the Election; Christ, the Seed, the Seed which the Lord has
blessed, but the Seed of evil doers shall never be renewed; in whom, or in the
which as man is found, Christ the Election, the Seed; and as it grows up in
him, and he in it, so is he accounted of by the Lord, and is acceptable in his
sight. Let the words of my Mouth, and the Meditation of my Heart be acceptable
in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer, Psalm. 19. 14. I say, here
is the acceptance, here is the welbeloved; the well beloved Son, in whom he is
well pleased, and with every one as they are found in him, as they are found
answering to that of him in them, the measure of him that which shows, thae
which makes manifest, that which reproves, that which judges, and abiding in
it. Abide in me, and I in you, as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self
except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye except ye abide in me, John 15. 4.
I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing; if a man
abide not in me he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather
them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. If ye abide in me, and
my word*s abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
you, v. 5, 6, 7. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye
in my love; if ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I
have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love, v. 9, 10. These
things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your
joy might be full. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another as I have
loved you; greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends; Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I
call you not Servants, for the Servant knows not what his Lord does, but I
have called you Friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have
made known unto you; You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain, that whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he may give
it you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own, but because ye
are not of the world, but I have chosen ye out of the World, therefore the
World hates you, v. 11, 12. 13, 14, 15, 16, 19.

So, here is the Election (as I have said) Christ the Seed, which God has
blessed, but the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned; and as every man
is found in him as he is accepted of the Lord, in that which witnesses to God,
which shows, which makes manifest, which judges, which reproves in man; Every
man as he is found in him, in this, is accepted of the Lord; This is my well
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, says the Lord; Who has accepted us in
the beloved, says the Apostle. This is he by whom we have access unto the
Throne of Grace; Who is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world. The Mediator (if any man would know who he
is, and what that is that witnesses, that searches the heart, that tries the
Reins, the Candle of the Lord, that searches all the inwards parts of the
belly, that reproves, that makes manifest, that shows a man what he should do)
between God and man, that comes between, to stop his wrath, that it break not
forth as a flood, and then who can quench it, and wooes man to turn unto the
Lord, whilst his wrath is not broke forth, and the fire of his wrath is not
kindled, which will burn to the lowest Hell. Its ever and anon between the
Enemy and man, showing man his enemy, and what man should do; near with his
power to help man, and deliver him. Its always between the Fathers wrath and
man; for the movings of this is the Visitation of the Lord, and his
long-suffering, for he waits whilst this is, whilst this strives with man,
whilst this tries (if I may so say, and I speak after the manner of men) what
it can do; So, this stops all whilst its time of working is, whilst its a
Trying, a seeing whether man will be reconciled to God: This will not let God
alone (let me alone that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under
Heaven, as the Lord said to Moses, Deuteronomy. 9. 14.) Whilst its day of working is,
to spare his people, but steps between, and shows, and makes manifest, and
tries, and judges, and speaks to the Lord; and says, Lord let it alone this
year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it, and if it bear fruit well,
and if not, then after thou shall cut it down; when the Lord says, behold
these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig tree, and find none, cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground; As the Parable of the Man, and his Vinyard,
and his Vinedresser has it, which was spoken by the Lord; by him, who is it?
That which digs about, and dungs, that waits, that speaks, that calls, that is
ready to remove iniquity, to open the heart to Godwards, to visit the Plant, of
the Lord that lies in death, that it may spring, and bring forth fruit, that
man may not be cut down, in whom it is, and made to cease to cumber the ground;
That is ready with every good Motion, with every good Thought, with every good
Opportunity to incline man to the Lord, to bring him to rest, to bring him to
God; that watches all approaches of evil, that shows the appearance of it,
encounters with it, is ready to assist man against it, and to overcome it,
which has turned man from God, and the Lord from man; if man would let God
arise that his enemies might be scattered, and thus follows after man from year
to year, and interceeds, and mediates, and comes between; whilst (as I have
said) the day of long-suffering is, of man's visitation, which is the day of
man's visitation. Therefore to day whilst it is called to day, harden not your
hearts, as in the Provocation, in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness, as
the Apostle expresses it, Heb. 3. 7, 8.

Me thinks every man should hear what I have, I said in himself, and turning
his eye within should see this, and inclining his ear should hear all this, and
all the wooing and entreatings, and the seekings of him to turn man unto the
Lord, and waitings, and bearings, and sufferings for that purpose; every man
that does but this, must needs hear it, and see it, and be sensible of it; and
this as he lets it work, will affect his heart, and break him to pieces, that
ever he has resisted it, that he has been an enemy to his own peace; Me
thinks I hear such bemoaning themselves. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the
Lord my God; Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was
instructed I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea even confunded, because I
did bear the reproach of my youth; and see what follows hereupon, and how the
bowels of the Lord turn to that which thus turns to him, and see how ready the
Lord is to receive such, and his tenderness unto such, and bow as it were, if I
may so speak after the manner of men, and I have too, the Scripture for it,
which will bear me out in what I say, the Lord is in an Agony for such, and in
a distress of love. Is Ephraim my dear Son? (what can be more breaking and
near?) Is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy on him says the Lord, Jer. 31. 20. See the Heart of the Father to
the Prodigal that returns; whom he goes forth to meet, and runs, and even while
he is yet a great way off, sees, and has compassion on him, and falls upon his
neck and kisseth him, and puteth on him the best robe, (the covering of his
Son) and a Ring on his Hand (the band of Love) and Shoes on his Feet (the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, for this is the way to it, coming to that
which witnesses in him, that gives him to see his state; and where he is, that
brings to himself, and when he came to himself (see what it is that brings a
man to himself, that which shows him his state, that gives him a sense of his
condition, that is it; and how a man is from himself, in an ecstasy (as it
were) out of his wits, in a sown, from the sense of his understanding, as a man
from that which should guide him as one in another world, as they use to say,
when he is from this, when he came to himself) he came to sense, to
understanding, to the right thing that he should have been guided by, which was
in him, but he went from it, he went forth, and spent his Portion on Harlots,
and wasted his substance on riotous living, minded not how he dealt with that
which should have kept him; when he came to this he said, How many hired
Servants of my Fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with
hunger; I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants, Luke 15. 13. to the 24.

So he is the Mediator (that which witnesses is, that which shows, that Judges,
that makes manifest) between God, and man as the Apostle says. For there is
one God (says he) and one Mediator between God, and man the Man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a Ransom for all to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
And to him must every man come, to this of him in every man must every knee
bow, and tongue confess, that he is, it is Lord of all; whether of things in
Heaven, or things in Earth, or things, under the earth, to the glory of God the
Father, Phil. 2. 10, 11. for being in the form of God he thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, but took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in
the likeness of man, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; therefore God has
highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of
Jesus every knee should bow, etc. as a foresaid, v. 6, 7, 8, 9.

So here is the sum of all; this same Jesus (that which shows which reproves,
which judges, which makes manifest in man) is the wel-beloved Son, he whom the
Father is welpleased; the beloved, in whom we are accepted, by whom we have
access by faith unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the
Glory of God; Who is (as I have said) the propitiation, for our sins, and not
for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World. The Mediator between God
and man. The Intercedor, who makes intercession for us; the spirit it self
makes intercercession for us, with groanings (see what it is that is weighed,
that is oppressed, that is heavy laden in man, that sighs often in man, and
groans to God) which cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26. And, he that searches the
hearts (see the thing) knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God. And, we know
that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are
called according to his purpose, verse. 27. 28. Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
(that which reproves, that which judges in man, that which shows him what he
should do ever lives) to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25. It interceeds,
it comes between, it speaks to God for man, that which does it Judges, that
reproves evil in man, and would bring him to God, that which searches the
Hearts, that shows a man the end, and compass of all his actions, that tries
the Reins, and knows the mind of the Spirit, makes intercession, comes
between, prays, entreats, wooes, beseeches, keeps off the wrath, waits, long
suffers to bring man to God; and he ever lives that does so, that makes
intercession, that is able to save to the uttermost, those that come to God by
him, that which searches, that which tries, that which judges, that which
reproves. And so he is the Judge of all, that saves all that come to God by
him, that is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him, by him
that judges; the Lawgiver, there is one Lawgiver who is able to save, and to
destroy, Jam. 4. 12. And, ye are come to God the Judge of all, Heb. 12. 22, 23.

So that which judges, interceeds, and that which interceeds, searches, and
that which searches, saves, and that which saves, destroys, and that which
destroys, shows, and this is the Lawgiver, the one Lawgiver, the one
Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, who is able to save to the
uttermost all that come to God by him, who searches the Heart, and knows the
mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to
the Will of God; who ever lives to make intercession for them; the Spirit it
self which makes intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered;
This is that which Witnesses, which shows, which judges, which makes manifest.

And unto this must all come; To whom coming (says the Apostle) as unto a
living stone, disallowed indeed of man, but chosen of God, and Precious, ye
also as lively stones are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. Wherefore it
is contained in the Scripture; Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner Stone,
Elect, Precious, and he that believes on him, shall not be confounded; Unto
you therefore, who believe he is precious, but unto them which be disobedient,
the Stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the Head of the
Corner, and a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense, even unto them which
stumble at the Word, being disobedient, unto which also they were appointed.
But ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar
People, that you should show forth the praises of him which has called you out
of darkness, to his marvelous Light; which in time past were not a people, but
are now the people of God, which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained
mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 4. to the 11.

So (I say) to this must all come, unto this must all be subject; who is Lord
of all; the Foundation of the Prophets, and the Apostles, as the Apostle also
says. And are built (says he to the Saints) upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone,
Ephesians. 2. 20. The Foundation other then which can no man lay; For, other
Foundation (says he again) can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Upon which, if any man build Gold, Silver, Precious
Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is, verse. 12, 13. If any man's work abide which
he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward; If any man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, yet he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire,
verse. 14, 15.

And upon this must all be built, upon him who is the Corner Stone, the tried
Stone, the sure Foundation, the Foundation of many Generations, the Restorer of
Paths to dwell in, the Builder of the old waste Places, the Repairer of the
breach. And, they that shall be of thee, shall build the old waste Places, thou
shall raise up the Foundation of many Generations, and thou shall be called the
Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of Paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 11. The
Reconciler. The Maker of Atonement. The Offering. The Sacrifice. The Altar. The
Sanctuary. The maker of Twain, one New man, so making peace. The Blotter out of
the hand writing of Ordinances, which was against us, which was contrary to us.
The Taker of it out of the Way. The Nailer of it to his Cross. The Spoiler of
Principalities and Powers. The maker of a show of them openly. The Triumpher
over them in it. The maker of both, one who is our Peace. The breaker down of
the Middle wall of Partition between us. The Abolisher of the enmity in his
flesh, even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances. The Preacher of
Peace to them that were afar off, and to them that were nigh, through whom we
both (Jew, and Gentile) have an access by one Spirit unto the Futher. The
Savior of the body, the Church. The Savior of all men, especially of them
that believe. The Savior of the World, whom God has sent into the World so to
be. The destroyer of the works of the Devil. The Atonement. The New Covenant.
The Law written in the heart. The fear put into the inward parts. The Word nigh
in the mouth, and in the heart. The Word of Faith, which the Apostles preached.
The Light of the World. The true Light, that lights every man that comes
into the World, who was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the
world knew him not. Who came unto his own, and his own received him not. Who,
as many as received him, to them gave he power to be called the Sons of God,
even to them who believe in his Name, which were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. The Light in whom
whosoever believes, shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of
Life. The Condemnation of all that believe not in the light. In whom whosoever
believes, shall not be condemned. The Judge of all. The Judge of the quick and
the dead. Who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and coming.
The King Immortal. The second Adam. The Lord from Heaven. The quickening Spirit.
The Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in the time of trouble. The man
Christ Jesus, is he that witnesses, that shows, that judges, that reproves,
that makes manifest, it is the Word of the Lord.

Into him, into this Seed which is Christ, the Election (that which reproves,
that which makes manifest, that which shows, that which judges) must all come,
and grow up therein who are redeemed unto God; And the Word of the Lord unto
every man, whether he will hear, or whether he will forbear. The measure of him
in every man, which he has placed in every man, the manifestation of the
Spirit, which is given to every man to profit withal, that in every man it may
grow; and that every man growing up in it, and abideing, may be blessed of the
Lord, the Seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring with them. That
they may be of the Root that is holy, of the true Olive, in which being
ingrafted, though a wild Olive contrary to Nature, the fatness of the true
Olive, he may come to be a partaker of, which brings forth fruit unto God, unto
Holiness, unto Life Eternal.

And this unto all is the Word of the Lord, of whom I am moved to write, that
all may know the Root that is in them, what it is, that brings forth fruit unto
God, unto Life, which the Lord has blessed; unto which being ^ joined; and in
which continuing, a grow^^g up will be witnessed in that which is Eternal,
which never fades away, but endures for ever.

And so I have cleared this Matter, as I have received it of the Lord, whether
men will hear, or whether they will forbear, they all shall witness it in the
day of the Lord, which is near, wherein he will render unto every man according
to his deeds. It is the Word of the Lord. And so I have finished this Matter,
even the Word of the Lord in me, to this Generation; To whom I am known, by the
Name of,

G. Bishop.
Bristol. the 20th. of the 6th. Month. 1663.
Printed, In the beginning of the Second Month. 1664.

THE END.

