A MODEST CHECK To part of a Scandalous LIBELL Entitled the Case of Col.
Kyrle, Capt. Pury Junior, and Captain Phillips concerning WOOD etc. Wherein
the false and unworthy Aspertions cast upon the Gentlemen of BRISTOLL, and some
others, late Commissioners, for the enquiring into, and preventing the Wastes of
the Forest of Deane are wiped off, their Integrity vindicated, and other
things occasionally touched at.
By Captain George Bishope, a Citizen of Bristoll, and a Joint Commissioner.
HAD not the high provocation of a scurrilous Libell, Entitled, The Case of
Colonel Kyrle, etc. Exceedingly pressed me, I had at this time been altogether
silent, being grieved to the heart, that England should bear such unworthy
spirits, who have not only made (in these times of danger) such horrid
destructions of shipping-Timber (the very Bulwark of the Nation) but with a
hardened brow dare to justify their unparalleld offenses, with scandalous
recriminating of those Gentlemen, who by Authority of Parliament, and out of
their deep sense of the mischiefs thereof, have made an impartial inquisition
into, and as faithful a return of those spoils lately committed, and other
Arbitrary, and insolent actions: whose uprightness, industry, and timeous
calling upon the Parliament to stop the procreds of such growing mischiefs
(which to their praise they have heartily considered) not only this, but
after-ages, will have cause, in a due sense of goatitude, to acknowledge.

And indeed I was onee to resolved not to honor such a pack of untruths and
scandalls with any correction, the Parliament by their seasonable Votes
(notwithstanding their Clamours and aspersions) having justified our
proceedings: But finding a strenuous Endeavor in the Libeller, to insinuate
into the world a belief of their Innocence and merits, though with the
blemish^ng of the Parliaments Justice, and the wounding of the reputation of
the Commissioners, and the City of Bristoll; I could no longer permit such a
daring Adversary to bid defiance to so much truth and justice, without an
encounter.

And ^ere I intend not to refute the several branches of the case exactly,
that being an after-intended work, fitter for a Volume then a sheet, and which
happily will be in positive proofs, not in It may bees, and conjecturall
conceits. Yet before I leave this, because the substance of the case is the
pretension of Authority, where it will serve their ends, their innocence,
merits, and the abuses and breaches of Authority when it serves not their
Advantage; let the Read^r please to cnosider with me these particulars, a
little to unvaile that mystery, and so procced.

2. For the pretension of Authority, consider.

1. That many of the Country-Committee are the Creatures of some that bear the
names mentioned. who when they confessed that some things depending before the
Committee were just, yet dare not to own them, where those Gentlemen resolve
the contrary, least he that put in their names should return them into their
pristine condition (as some of them have ingeniously acknowledged) and it is
not unknown, that when any Spirit of Justice has appeared, that will nor bow
to the Arbitrary and unlimitted will of some men present, the Committee (for
that time) has suffered a dissolution, and at a ba^k door, those have
returned again, and sat, which would serve that end, whereby they are able to
color their unjust actions, with the very orders and forms of Authority.

2. The Justices of the Country must be of the same Complexion, who when they
have according to their Oaths, done just actions, are threatened out of them
with a remove to the Committee of Indempnitie; who because they are loath to
take such a Journey, or be put out of power, (as one of them ingeniously
confessed) sound a retreat to their just orders; and such as stand to them, are
expungd the Commission.

3. The Officers of the Forest of Deane are such, as they themselves have
made; those formerly in office, that would not be conjured into Connivances,
and breaches of Trust, suffered a dismiss, and forbid to walk the Forest, to
discover the abuses.

4. Then if it be considered with the former, that some of the Gentlemen named,
were in a Commission to make Sale, and dispose of the Wood in the Forest, and
upon pretenses of Sale of underwood, dead, and dry wood, etc. and least the
Country should make spoil, gain Contracts from the Committee of the Revennue
(for which one of them is a Receiver.) Any ingenious and impartial man will
easily see, into what a fair way these Gentlemen have got, to commit what
destructions they please, and that under the shadow of Authority.

And yet those very contracts, to whose coverts they fly, allow no cutting
down of Timber Trees, no commanding the Coards of wood to be made above the
standard of the Forest, no taking away of Coards without delivery, No putting
timber, and the best wood amongst Root wood to pass at 12. d. the Coard; No
disobedience and contempt of orders of Parliament, Council of State, Lord
General, Committees, Commissioners authorized by Parliament, no enconraging
the Cutters to do contrary to order, though it cost a thousand pounds, no
forcible taking away of other men's proprieties, all which crimes, with many
more are deposed in the return of our Commission; upon those Gentlemen, whom
the Libeller would vindicate; Let me give you one or two Instances of the
truth, of what the Libeller asserts, by which his Credit in the rest, with the
Innocence of the Gentlemen may be judged.

The Libeller page 3. says, that Mr. Purie charged the workmen not to cut
down any trees, but such as are appointed by the Preservators, and that when
the three hundred trees were cut down together, it was by order of the
Preservators; and that he caused the stay of their cutting into Coards till the
Preservators viewed them; That none of them were found to be timber trees, and
very little timber in the rest.

Whereas the Preservators, and others have deposed that Mr. Purie was served
with the Order of restraint, March 17. 1648. forbidding the cutting of any more
trees, and that notwithstanding four hundred Oaks were cut down by his
^ulters, and others in the space of four or five days in Easter-weake last,
and forty shortly after that, and that when the Preservators refused the
deliverie of the proceeds of those trees, because contrary to Order of
Parliament; Captain Purie told them passionately, that if they would not
deliver them, they would take them themselves; and another has deposed that
they were mast timber trees: Nay, when one of his own workmen told him of the
Order of Parliament, not to cut any, he notwithstanding commanded him to cut,
coal, etc. and that from that time, ten horses a day carry coal to his
works. The like the Cutters depose of his commanding them to make the Coards
above the assize, it being almost 4000 l. loss in 10000 l. as will be proved;
and his contending with Oldfield the Survei^r, because he would not deliver him
coards of wood, as Root wood, and Stub wood, which was much of them the best
sort of wood; and five thousand Coard taken by him, and the other Iron Masters
contrary to Order, and the coaling of near four thousand Coards by them,
since the Commissioners prohibition. Insomuch, that the Coarders depose, that
they must make the Coards above assize, or they shall have no worke^ and the
Officers, that they are enforced to deliver Coards above assize, and contrary
to order, least otherwise those take them, and give no account thereof to the
State. I could also give pregnant Instances, how Captain Philips, encouraged
the Cutters to cut contrary to the Order of Parliament, though it cost a
thousand pound, and when forbid by Order, said, he would cut, though one who is
a Member of the Council of State were on the tree, with many other gross
abuses and destruction of timber by him, and others; but this I hope, is a
sufficient, taste of the Innocence of these Gentlemen, and the credit of the
Libellers vindication: which with many other particulars, being under the
consideration of the Honorable Barons of the Exchequer, I shall leave to their
Judgments.

I shall pass by the merits of those Gentlemen, who being so much in their
own commendation, seem to dwell far from good Neighbors, whose Eagle-eyes
have not yet perceived their brave achievements, nor could I ever hear (till
now) of their performances, unless of betraying Trusts, and revolting from the
Parliament to the King, and writing scandalous books against them.

Nor shall I speak of their righteousness, which the return of our
Commission will more fully declare, even in the running of that Gallant
Forest, and the sad cries of the Country, by reason of Tyrannical and
forcible taking away of their Furnaces, Forges, water Courses, destruction of
their woods, k^agring and thirsting after their Estates, under pretense of
advancing the Public treasury, contemning and disobeying Orders of
Parliament, calling them hedge orders, and the Commission under the new Great
Seal, a hedge Commission, braggi^g that they could make men swear and
unsweare what they pleased, with many other Outrages of a more gross nature,
which my heart does tremble to think of, and my pen to write. I fear ere long
will show to the world: but because this is somewhat large; and intended to be
produced after another manner suddenly. I forbear at the present to nominate
them.

The Libeller, having thus far proceeded in the State of the case, goes on next
to the condition of the Commissioners, whom he styles Prosecutors, and with
unparaleld defamations endeavors to ravish the chaste Judgments of upright
Patriots into a belief of their own Innocence, and to lessen the reputation
of the Commissioners and their service to the Commonwealth.

But why Prosecutors? do they any more then their duty etc. then what it
behooves them as to the return of their Commission, in giving account of it to
them whom it concerns, is the return of a Commission a Prosecution? I thought
the Libeller had understod more Law and reason.

And yet, why not Prosecutors? when the matter they are upon, is of so much
concernment to the very being of England; and which no true bred Son of hers,
but ought to prosecute, and to bring the Authors of such mischeifes to
Exemplary punishment: If so be, the destruction of above fifty thousand Trees
of Oak and Beech: the best part of which were Timber, some of them an Elle and
a half square, and some worth 2^ l. a Tree, in the space of seven years in
one Forest, much of which contrary to Orders of all Authority, the contemning
and abusing those Orders and Commissions, by some that sit within those walls;
the taking that for 3sh 2 s. 8 d. and 1 sh. which is worth 30 s. the forcible
taking wood without delivery, and that proprieties of other men, who groan
under their oppressions, but dare not seek for releife, either at Law, or by
Petition, with diverse things of this nature, and the preservation of Timber
(which by Sequestrations, Bishops, Deane, and Chapter, Crown Lands, and Iron
works, is threatened suddenly to ^e destroyed) but no matter of prosecution what
is?

Besides, why are we Prosecutors, more then the Parliament, who set in on work?
Methinks the Libeller should have been more wise, then ^o strike through ours
into their sides, whose commands we have followed, and highly to charge the
Parliament with Injustice Page 6. (for whom else can it mean) for proceeding
against them as Malefactors without hearing of them; or calling them to Answer,
or notice of the charge against them, who have made no proceedings upon them
but general Votes concerning the preservation of Timber, and their particular
offenses, not being as yet brought into charge against them, but may be in due
season.

The Prosecutors (says the Libeller) are such persons, and of such
conditions, as are expressed; who as is conceived procured themselves to be in
the Commission.

And here by his Emphasis; he would make the world suppose them to be the very
Extract of Goales and Prisons, and a compositum of Debauchery, Irreligion,
Drunkenness, and other wickednesses, when as the Country so well knows their
birth, breeding, manner of life, honesty, faithfulness and activity, for the
Parliaments service, that the very children are able to give the lie to these
scandalls, and indeed deserves no Answer, for if, Parliamentary Authority, is
not freed from their darts, and Gentlemen of Honor and Gallantry called fools
and asses, we must not look for any better: A bad Tree cannot bring forth good
fruit: Surely the Libeller is conscious of so many miscariages, that he thinks
all are of his complexion, or at least like those whom he endeavors to
vindicate. But suppose those, whom he calls Prosecutors were guilty of all
those offenses, will that justify the crimes of the named Gentlemen or
Enervate the validity of those that have deposed their transegressions? if
Infirmities shall invaliditate testimonies, whose assertions shall stand good?
The Question is not what the Commissioners are, but what are the offenses they
present? will you be angry; if bad men produce good things? Surely I think that
a good action performed by a bad man, deserves as much commendation, as an
evil one, from him that says he is good does punishment. Certainly the
Commissioners had not fallen under the Libellers lash, had not they detested to
serve his lusts and humors.

-- He says, ( as may be conceived, procured themselves in the Commission.
Well shot at an adventure, It may be --. See the ground of These bold
calumnies, it rests upon a tottering probability, will the Libeller think it
honest dealing to be set out to the world under the deepest Tincture of
offenses with It may Be?

But why, procure themselves in the Commission? will any rational man think,
that the Gentlemen are so indiscreet, as to leave the prosecution of their
Merchandise, and other necessary employments, to make many journeys into the
Country with their servants, there to stay several days at a time, have 200.
people attending their business, and dieted at their own charge, take the
depositions of many hundred persons, which five and twenty skins of Parchment
will hardly contain, attend a hundred miles distance at London from day to
day, for five weeks together, being at near 200. l. change, and proceed upon
all this, without so much as any promise for the reinbursing them again, what
they have laid out (though they conceive so Honorably of the Parliament, as
that they will make them satisfaction) I say, will any rational man conceive
them in their wits, to procure themselves into so much charge and trouble to
attend it, had not the d^epe sense of the concernment of the business, and
their more then ordinary zeal to promote such a public service set them on
work?

How many such services has the Libeller and his vindicates undergone? should
they not rather have given them thanks, then such abuses? But some of the
named Gentlemen know, who endeavored to be in a former Commission, 1645: that
thereby they might have opportunity to serve themselves in the public ruins
of that gallant Forest, and therefore they are displeased that the course of
their gain on the States loss, is stopped, and do think that others are like
themselves. Nay, had we procured our selves to be in the Commission, it had
been the more commendable, though for my own part, I seriously profess, I
knew not of my putting in; nor do I believe did the other Gentlemen, whose
names are (because he is pleased not to name them) Ald. Aldworth, Ald. Hodges,
Members of Parliament, Ald. Vickris, Ald. Jackeson, Ald. Brown.

The Libeller now goes on to particulars, where his pen railes at Col.
Bromwich, and Col. B^rrow, who no doubt but will give a good account of
themselves to his shame. I shall leave them to their own vindication, only in
the General shall say and affi^me, That in all the presecution of this
business, I found as much reality, uprightness, and love to public Justice,
and as much freedom from Debauchery, Drunkenness, Peevishness, Irreligion,
Scandalousnesse, Disaffection to Government, Treason, destruction of woods,
unworthiness, as any I have of late met withal, Gentlemen of estates, and
reputation in the Country, and men to whom this State ow^s much for for^mer,
and these latter services, which I should not now write, but that the venom of
their aspersions in these Gentlemen's reputation so much constrains me.

I could wish, and it would be well; if those named in the front of the Libell
were free from those, and greater offenses, with which they charge these
Genntlemen, which my pen blusheth to write, the thought thereof astonishing my
spirits. It may be some that think themselves unseen in this business, cannot
throw the stone against Drunkenness (I write not to excuse it in any.) and I
could wish they had as much conscience to God and man, as they have to their
own Interest; for which it may be feared they make Religion a cloak, which
God will in time discover, for there is nothing hid that shall not be revealed
and I wish them as honest to the public Interest, as those Gentlemen they so
much scandalize. It may be they could not follow the Luxuriant Exorbitancies of
some men, who would be as the fishes in the Sea, the greater to devou^e the
lesser, and it may be like Christians, and tender hearted men have stepped in to
save some poor Families, from their unsatiable hatred and Avarice, and because
of this, have been supposed troublers of Committees; when (as I said before)
they only endure such to sit, as will serve their ends, and privately Iuncto
them together, when the other think, they are departed, and in this close
chamber, Mr. ^romwich is not desired.

As for their Loyalty to the State, let the world judge, which are more lovers
of the Commonwealth, either they that out of their great sense of the
destruction of Timber, and therein of the strength of the Nation, and of
private men's Tirannizing over the estates, and the proprieties of their
Brethren, which is in order to the ruin of the Nation; own a Commission,
under the new great Seal of England, wherein they undergo abundance of charge
and trouble, and the neglect of all that is dear to them, to redress those
evils; Or, those who have made those destructions, disobedyed the Orders of
the State, made to prevent those distructions, commanding men to break them;
called them hedge orders, and the Commission under the new great Seal a hedge
Commission, openly contemning it, Revolters, writers of scurrilous books
against the Parliament; that have boasted that they have cut down four
hundred trees contrary to an Order of Parliament; and notoriously abuse and
scandalize those that through abundance of Toil have brought those spoils to
light, and earnestly solicited for the future redress of them, which if not
remedied, (it being now blessed be God in a good progress) had exposed us to
the cruelty and scorn of our Enemies. I am sure I have heard Colonel Burrow
say, that though it was his own Brother, yet if he abused the Authority, by
which he was protected, he would not bear it; and it is very likely that Master
Pury Junior knows, who blessed God, that his father and he had no hand in that
-- Action of killing the King, and who stood a while secluded, as one
disaffected to this change of Government, for the rest I leave it to those
Gentlemen whom it concerns to assert their own Innocence.

The next in order are the Citizens of Bristoll, whom he honour^ not so much as
with a name, but tells you -- that some of the Aldermen there did join before,
or at the beginning of this Parliament, joined in a bargain for the
destruction of the wood; some Aldermen of Bristoll, -- what is that to the
Gentlemen scandalized? because Combs is a robber, therefore Mr. Pury is, will
he take this for good Logic?

And before, or at the beginning of this Parliament, what is that to 1649. Its
possible that some of those named Gentlemen's blood ran in their veins, or
else were men spighted by them; because they could have no Interest in the
advantage, which since they have prosecuted with vigor proportionable to the
edge of their affections so long whetted, and to the opportunity, that none
might gleane after them; But can he name any more then Alderman Tailor, and
Alderman Gunning? were not Sir Baynnem Throgmorton, and Sir Sacvile Crow, the
chief designers? yet I will not become their Advocate, the Judgment of one of
them is ere this passed in another world, I wish the Judgment of these may be
only in this, to amendment of life, and repentance for their offenses.

And these things (says he) were not complained of -- if they had not been
could we help it? it is well that we now see it and complain; Are you offended
because we are so far from following the steps of our Predecessors, that we
complains of those that do alike transgress? yet if the Libeller would but a
little inform himself, he would find that a worthy Gentleman. Alderman
Barkar deceased (whose memory is prec^ous) did so far contend about it, that
it was the breaking of his heart, that he could not remedy it.

But the Libeller tells us that some of the Citizens of Bristoll are the
greatest Ironmasters and Ironmongers in the west of England; and have great
quantities of Iron, and are adventurers for Swedish and Spanish Iron, etc.

The greatest Ironmongers in the west of England, surely the Libeller was never
choked with a small bone: is he such a stranger to the Forest Ironmasters?
and for the Iron that is in Bristoll, is it not from the Forest? If it be an
offense to sell it, it is a greater to make it. But what is this to the purpose?
are any of Commissioners that are of Bristoll Ironmasters, and Ironmongers? If
not what design can they have in the business?

But says he, they are adventures to Swetheland, etc.

It Is tr^^, they named Swethland and Spain in their Petition as an expedient to
serve the Nation, in case of demolishing the Iron-works here, that are so
destructive, but for adventures they are very little, if any at all: But why
may they not, as for Wine, etc. since that this is of public advantage, and
running the hazard of the Sea, why should they not have a recompense?

It Is (says the Libeller) to raise the price of their own Iron, which this
last year is fallen from 19. l. a tun, to 15.

Did they do so, yet they are but quit with those Gentlemen, who being asked
why they sold their Iron, two or three pounds in a tun cheaper then others, and
how they could afford it, one said, he had wood for nothing,; the other for a
groat a Cord Col. Kerls, and Captain Brain can tell you, who it means: and
herein be thine own Judge Libeller, whether it is not thine envying at another
man's prosperity, not the public advantage of the Nation; that thou art so
much troubled.

And do thou be judge O Reader, how much the Libeller makes conscience of what
he asserts, whereas not one single man of the Commissioners of Bristol, or
those Gentlemen in the Petition from thence had ever any thing to do with the
Iron works, or any thing that belongs to it, nor have they 20. tun of Iron
lying by them of Foreign or Domestic whatsoever, we also add our desire that
he that has any self ends in this business, may hve the vizard of his
Hypocrisy plucked off, himself placed upon Paul's steeple for a wonder to the
world.

All which appears (says he) by the mannagement of their commission, for it
is well known, that in the Woodwardship of Avan Hall there were 10000. Trees
cut down, and at least 10000. more in other places etc. It seems the Libeller
is a good Accountant, and has taken some pains in the Survey of the Forest,
it had been well, if he had manifested so much Ingenuity as to have told the
rest; and saved the State and us, so much charge and labor: But he might have
forborne his censure, till he had seen our return, and then he would have
found, that the forbid Oaks of an Ell and half square, some of them worth 20
l. a Tree, soune, and not so much as shrouded, and some thousands more (If I
mistake not) proved upon the Iron Masters out of that Woodwardship: If he had
not a full account of all things, we may thank Capt. Purie with the others in
the Vindicative, who with their abusing of the Authority of Parliament, and
other Tyrannical actions; made the Country in a great measure to desert us, he
might also have told us of 4000. Trees cut down in a year in Ruardeane by
Captain Purie and others, wherein were many Timber Trees, and not above two of
those marked now standing, also 8000 Timber Trees cut by the Vindicates in

And no mention made (says the Libeller) in their Petition of the spoils by
^he Inhabitants etc.

What he means by the Inhabitants, I cannot well tell, doubtless the
Cabo^ners who serve their furnaces, were the chief, for others, the
Officerkeept them bare enough, even of the very Privileges due to them of
Plough-boot, House boot, etc. yet have we in our return set down as many,
as we could possible hear of, without respect of persons, though they
neither mentioned the one, nor other in their Petition: It seems it greives
them that any water runs besides their Mill. Nay so Exact were we, that what
ever we cold hear of against any of Bristoll, or against Col Berrow a
Commissioner, we have returned, though we found that what Colonel Berrow
was charged with, was either his by the grant of Ed. 1. as Woodward, or what
the very Officers that presented him, have cleared; which will appear when it
comes to trial.

But they petition that the Iron works may be presently razed, though set up by
Authority of Parliament to enrich themselves etc.

And well may they, and such Persons also as notorious Malefactors that make no
conscience to ruin the Nation for their advantage, and that become advocates
for such Offenders; whom I cannot conceive but to be worse Members of the
Commonwealth, then the Papists and Malignants, they challenge some to protect.

It Is true, the Parliament might permit then setting them up for Good ends, and
they can, upon better Accounts, pluck them down without your leave Sir, when
they appear (as by the vindicates management) so distructive; and you too
also, who ever you are, if you be discovered and found to be a burden, an
Achan to the Commonwealth, of which I wish you to beware, and look to, for the
hour of Temptation, The day of the Lord is at hand, he is as a refiners fire
and will thoroughly purge his floor, and take heed least you say, that day is
terrible, and who can endure it? And all to enrich themselves etc.

This is never out of the Libellers mouth, Enrich, Enrich, there is the Plague,
should not now write; but that the venom of their aspersions in these
Gentlemen's reputation so much constraines me.

To conclude, Reader, I am assured that no selfish end drew these Gentlemen of
Bristoll to this difficult undertaking, nor the Magistrates or Merchants of
Bristoll in their Petition, but a deep sense of a growing mischief, to which
they were nearly seated, and as nearly concerned, for which they receive this
recompense of scandal. But I will tell thee, what is the reason of the throwing
of all this dirt, (viz.) Because they would not be courted by sugared
Expressions, nor entertain the Civil offer of 2000. l. advantage in Cann.
wood, which was tendered at Lidney, to one of the Aldermen, Sept. 12. 1649. by
one of their Creatures as fit for the Merchants of Bristol.

I say because none of these things would prevail with them to be false to
their Trust, not by the telling them the Forest was destroyed, and not be
remained worth our labor, and what was lef^ the Parliament was resolved to
sell, for the Soldiers Arrears, to neglect their duty, therefore they have
discharged their malice against them in black Calumnies, and intolerable
reproaches, of which we hope the Parliament will be so sensible, that we who
freely have undergone so much trouble, charge, and reproach in the management
of a business of so high concernment, shall be justified from these great
abuses, and Capt. Pury and the rest he called to a strict account for abusing
and disobeying their Orders, Commissions, and Commands, lest such presidents
remaining unpunished, both our selves and others be thereby concluded under all
discouragements to ex^^^^ ^^ny of their Commissions, or complain of any
grievances for ihe future: And that provision man be made for the effectual
preservation of Timber through our all England, (in which they have made a
happy progress) and which we desire God to bless them in, and in all other
good things for the prosperity of this Commonwealth.

FINIS.

