A Letter from a Christian Friend in the Country to another in the City.
WE had lately sent down into the Country Declarations from the Protector (so
called) and his Council, holding forth the grounds and reasons of their
proceedings (as they pretend) for securing the peace of the Common wealth, a
thing very plausible to palliate their assumed Power over us and our Posterity.

We may wonder in the first place, at their Nick-naming us a Commonwealth, we
being as under the yoke of an Arbitrary power, no better then ear board Russian
Slaves, they having by a seeming necessity absolutely overthrown the honor,
interest, and Freedom of the people of England, by the abolishing of
Parliaments; frustrating our Fundamental laws, Usurping a Lawmaking power,
leavying of money and Forces, Commanding War and Peace by Land and Sea, and
making themselves the only determiners of guilt or innocence, of life or
death, of law or liberty; as in the Case of the Caveleers Sequestration, to a
Tenth and Fifteenth part of Rents and Goods, their Hellish rule of proceeding
does very much dissatisfie the Country, notwithstanding all their small Reasons
urged; in order to a pretended securing the peace of the Common wealth (as they
most miserably miscall us) upon occusion of the late Insurrection and Rebellion
against themselves, the greatest Rebels, and most lawless Usurpers, that as
yet any History, ancient or modern, ever made mention of; whereby they are
become odious to us, notable and abominable all Europe over, and I wish it were
as affectually convincing as accusing in their own Consciences; that they have
crucified the Cause of God and their Country, bet wixt these two State Thieves,
Usurpation and Oppression.

But our Lot (dear Sir) is fallen into that Age and part of the world, wherein
the mystery of Iniquity is working spiritually, 2 Thessalonians. 28, 9, 10 He is now
revealed, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all powers and
signs and lying wonders, and withal deceivablenesse of unrightenesse, etc. If
we do but take a serious view of Antichrist, either as he is the whole body, or
as he is this or that part, we shall find him in no other garb then the form
of a glorious Saint, not only deceiving the blind and ignorant world, but as
far as is possible even many of the very Elect themselves, that which is the
fore runner, or rather occasion, as I may so say, (respecting the concurrences
of Gods permissive providence) is men's not receiving the love of the Truth (not
the profession) for how many have professed fairly upon a civil and Gospel
account. How many like Jehu have marched furiously, that are now fallen off,
and have with Demas embraced the world? How many have declared for Liberty,
against Tyranny, who are now become as great Usurpers and oppressors as any?
How many seeming self deniers, are become incomparable self-seekers? How have
they in a Saint-like simplicity seemed to slight the glory and greatness of
the world, who cannot now be contented with less then Principalities and
Powers: Nay even with the very Attributes of God himself? what specious
pretenders were they for the kingdom of Christ, who are now become the
Imprsoners and Persecutors of the Professors of it, and diverse other true and
faithful Patriots, I mean, Mr. Feak, Mr. Rogers, Lt. Genesis Ludlow, M. G.
Harrison, M. G. Overton, Col. Rich, Mr. Carry, Quart. M. Genesis Courtney, Coll.
Allured, etc. and others, who by their means have been laid, or laid themselves
aside, as Colonel Okey, Coll. Sanders, Major Wiggam, etc. Do they not in their
Declaration declare, one a designer, the other designed; indeed the Moderation
of the words was designed is remarkable, it being disproportionable to the
policy they steer by, so tenderly to touch their reputations, whose ruins they
reach at, their malice being sufficient to have proved them such offenders, if
they could; but the service and sufferings of these men, are Arguments
invincible of their innocence, until by a fair and legal Trial, we be
convinced of the contrary; in the interim, words will not make the world
believe what was not, neither will their reputation by such means be so soon
blasted; especially, when they confess in their Declaration, they only think
them offenders.

But suppose those Englishmen had designed some endeavors for the making good
their engagements, and calling off the yoke of Tyranny, suppose they had
invoked or invited the Army (backslidden from the Cause of God and their
Country) to return to their obedience, for the confirmation of our just
Fundamental laws and Liberties, for the right placing of the Sovereign power of
the People, in a lawful Representative, for relieving the oppressed and
imprisoned, who groan for deliverance, from the bondage of these most
merciless Taskmasters, had they not hereby approved themselves brave and
public spirited Patriots; will not such one day be received, with a well
done, good and faithful servants, where their and our, Oppressors shall stand
with pale-faces, and accusing Consciences, before that God, who will render to
every man according to his works, who will appear as witness against the
swearer and forswearer, who will make Inquisition for blood; who will call the
Apostates and Hypocrites to account for all their perjuries and oppressions,
has not this Ell shaddy the most high God ever signally appeared against the
proud and tyrannical Nebuchadnezzars of the world, with all their projectors
and Parasites.

In the interim, dear Friend, we may behold as in a glass our present
deplorable condition under a Government (as they call it) where the Will and
interest of a State Junto is both law and evidence. At this rate, who may not
be a designer and offender, and accordingly declared and punished; who would
have believed about eight or ten years since, we should have seen such lawless
and imparrallel'd Impious proceedings? who would have imagined that such
public spirits as the persons prementioned, should so causelessly be kept
prisoners, by their fellow servants, who pretended themselves promoters, but
have proved perverters of piety and public liberty, persons of the same spirit
with Strafford, Canterbury, etc. Nay, far worse, who would have imagined, that
our Assertors of Law and Liberty would without Baise or Mainprize, not only
incarserate the Bodies of our asoresaid Friends, but also deny some of them the
comfort of their nearest and dearest relations; a sad requital for their
several faithful services and sufferings, they may in policy pretend what they
please; but are not these things most abominable in the eyes of a righteous
God, who although he has an absolute sovereignty over the world, punishes
none before they have sinned, contrary to the laws of the Land, and the very
practice of Heathens, who allowed Paul (whom they accounted more dangerous and
seditious, then our Friends enemies can say they are) the enjoyment of his
friends, 24 Act. 23. And he commanded a Centurian to keep Paul and to let him
have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance (much less
wise and children) to minister or come unto him; yea, further says Festus, the
25. chap. 27. v. For it seems to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not
withal to signify the crime laid against him. If we must after this manner
exchange our just fundamental laws for their fundamental reason, I believe
when it is too late we may take up the Lamentation of the Prophet Isai. 59. 14,
15. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off: For
truth is fallen in the street; etc. yea, truth fails, and he that departs
from evil makes himself a prey. But let us comfort our selves in this, that
our God will cause the pride of the arrogant to cease, lay low the haughtiness
of the terrible, and cut off all that watch for iniquity, that make a man an
offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and
turn aside the just for a thing of naught but say our friends adversaries.
These men are seditious, fastious fellows, Railers, and Levellers, etc. so are
all who will not sell and sacrifice themselves to work wickedness: Let a man
be of what principle or opinion he please, he is too high or too low, if he
cannot play the parasite; if he be sincere, he is a Sectary, if a lover of
liberty upon a public account, he is a Leveller. But was not the (Protector
(so called) and many honest men more in the Army and Nation such, when the Army
refused to disband at New Market: I cannot I profess, but admire that the
Protector (so called) his Council or Officers can without blushing make the
least mention of levelling, when they themselves are the most monstrous
levellers, that ever yet bore the name of Englishmen: Have they not levelled
Church and State, King and Parliament, Proprietics, Laws, Liberties, nay, what
not? Do they not level and lay low whatsoever stands in the way of their
Arbitary interest, have they not made the most honorable Army in Europe, a
crew of mercenary Cut-throsts, or Janizarics, have they not under pretense of
preserving the public Peace, cantoniz'd the Countries, appointing so many
Major Generals (as they call them) to play Empson and Dudleys part, to run in
the same path of Opprestion, until perhaps they arrive at their reward. Now
for those men to call Levelling a crime, brings them under the condemnation of
Paul, Romans 2. 1. and 3. verses: Therefore thou art inexcusable o man, whosover
thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy
self, for thou that judge do the same things: And think thou o man that
judge them which do such things, and do the same; that thou shall escape
the judgment of God. Thou hypocrite, first cast the Beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Moat out of thy Brothers eye.
Mat. 7. 5. But the Protectors (so called) great Plea for all his nefarious
practices is Necessity, but I suppose this Cloak is worn so thrid-bare upon all
procedures, that even those who are but half-sighted may see through it, how
vertuall their necessity has been since the purging of the old Parliament: let
us a little consider, First for dissolving of that Parliament they derive their
necessity, as they say, from the Parliaments designing to perpetuate
themselves, whereas the truth is, they dissolved them, because they were
passing a Bill for a New Representative; as some Members our Countrymen do to
this day affirm. The Necessity for dissolving the Little Parliament was,
because they would have regulated the Law, or framed a new Model, more
proportionable to the genius of a Commonwealth, and consistent with the
interest of Christ, and done many other good things, for which the Officers of
the Army had both Petitioned the former Parliament, and railed against them all
the Nation over, because they neglected the doing of them, how truly have they
hereby manifested their necessity to be but hypocrisy: Nay is it not plain
from the consequence, that these changes were only designed to ushel in a
greater; did they not by the reproaches they cast upon the old Parliament, and
by their electing men of contrary principles in the other, endeavor to
insinuate a necessity for discarding that form of Government.

But suppose we should grant a necessity for dissolving the Parliament, yet
what necessity is there upon the Nations account to perpetuate an Arbitrary,
unlimited power in a Protector, to inslave three Nations by a standing Army of
above 60000. men and an ignoble Militia of 10000. Horse in England; does not
true necessity arise from the peoples safety; but how is that made good, when
they have no other security for their Lives, Liberties and Properties, then the
will of single Person, flancked and fortified with a mercenary Army, and who
either is or may be a Tyrant.

Again, what other necessity have they to keep down all Parliaments, but to
keep up their boundless ambition, what necessity was there when the Nation was
almost exhausted by Taxations, to spend 18 or 19. hundred thousand pounds in a
fruitless expedition to Hispaniola, which they are again attempting
notwithstanding the Arm of the Lord has of late been apparently made bare
against them in that business? Or what necessity is there to imprison and
continue imprisoned without trial (contrary to the Laws of God and this Nation
their own voluntary Oaths and engagements) the faithful servants of God and
their Country? May we not hence plainly perceive they make their necessity as
boundless as their Ambition, as destractive as their desire of Domination?
What necessity is there to multiply unparaleld Taxes and Impositions, save in
pursuance of their private plots and projects, to pick our pockets and purses,
that they may the more easily oppress us? we are constrained say some, by
oppression and poverty to bind the people unto peace and union, but is not
poverty too poor a plant for such fair fruit, as love and union to grow upon;
does not war rather then peace spring from want, which like an armed man is the
Herald or Forerunner of Innovations, surely they that will keep a people
peaceable must not make them poor by oppression; we are apt with others wounds
to salve our own; plenty stuns men in secure reposes, but oppression makes a
wise man mad: Cataline would never have contrived his Countries ruin, but to
prevent his own; oh that there were no such Catelines in our new Court, or
rather that we had neither Court nor Cateline, nor any of that spirit, for
which the last Parliament so called was pretendedly dissolved, viz. For that
they had an aching 100th against the godly party.

The Cries and complaints of the oppressed in this Nation I perceive grown
great according to that of the wiseman, Prove. 29. 2. When the righteous are in
Authority the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule the people
mourn, men of all rancks and capacityes (Army Officers and Courtiers excepted)
make this addition to their prayers. How long Lord, holy and true will it be
ere thou aveng, etc. Amongst other causes of this complaint, to speak in the
words of Solomon 30. Prove. 22. it is because of a servant when he reigntch.

Your trading I hear in the City is become and likely to continue so dead,
that men who have not good stocks are ready to shut up shop. But your Condition
in the City I believe is made better then ours in the Country, in respect both
of Landlord and Tenent, the one can scarcely get any rent because the other
cannot raise it, Farmers prosesse they must give up their Farms, because the
profit will not ballast the charge of tillage and Taxes: It was the vain brag
of Cajus Marius that he sat in the ruins of Carthage, and is it not the
disgrace of our grandees that they are grown great by the ruins of their
Country, he was a Heathen and died mad, they are either Christians or
hypocrites, and may be more miserable. How does that heathen Roman Cato shame
and outstrip our pretended Christian Patriots? he was as Anxious for the
safety and freedom of Rome as they are solicitous for themselves; he was as
real a refuge for afflicted virtue as they are oppressors of it. They engaged
their lives and souls to get gain, but he laid down his life for liberty,
choosing rather to be his Countries Sacrifice then Caesar's Slave.

Dear Friend, were all our Courtiers either Christians or Cato's, they would
rather Conquer for their Country then for themselves; but oh, for what he dyed
to preserve, they live to spoil, and prey upon the blood of a whole War; the
price of Widows prayers, and Orphants tears proclaims their game to be their
godliness; oh, these are sad fruits of our fourteen years fighting! poverty
and oppression are very uncomfortable fruits of Reformation, but dominion
impiously got, must be impiously kept; one sin must maintain another; yet let
us with comfort, consider, that Jehovah is greater then the king of feirce
countenance and understanding dark sentences, although he may for a time (which
we hope is near an end) by policy cause craft to prosper in his hand, and think
to change Times and Laws, yet his Dominion shall be taken away, etc. Did not
our Lord in mercy cast the late Kings yoke from off our necks. After that
darkness was dispelled did not the light of liberty dawne, until tempestuous
clouds arising from the filthy fogs of falsehood and treachery, impostumated in
the Brains and Bosoms of some few instruments, in the work of Liberty? we
were environed with a more Egyptian darkness then ever, has not their
treachery and our ingratitude urged God to repent of his favors? he sent us
light, but we loving darkness rather than light, shut our eyes against the
Sunbeams that we might with more modesty sin in secret; He began to restore
liberty, but we rather chose servitude: why should we then complain, that we
are enslaved in unlimitted Monarchy, whilst by a shameful kind of villenage,
we bow our servile necks under the basest yoke, and pay our Homage to the most
matchlosse monsters of mankind, that ever any noble Nation truckled under? Yet
dear friend, fear not, freedom will yet fall upon its sect, in the interim
pious and public spirits may be foiled, but not defeated; great and good
designs are carried on by orderly additions, but sudden elevations soon
decline like aboutive Embrions; believe it our Lord will blast their base
enslaving designs, and nipt their Mushrom honors in the bud, Hypocrisy may a
little longer act vices part in virtues apparel, but shall at last fall head
long from its greatest height: A tyrants Conscience knows no night of rest,
blood in despite of Poppy breaks his sleep, the fears and fury of his fantacy
fix deaths unerring symptoms in his face; despair not, a Tyrants death is the
people Antidote, in his own good time, our God will cure the Courtiers itch and
avarice, let greatness held by force fear a fall; height and preciptance stand
tottering, and know no Mediums in their Declinations. Whosoever observes the
Orthodoxall maxims of our days need not marvel, that our Marshalists have
ravished Astrea and pulled justice down; but Christ Jesus will come quickly,
and bring his reward with him; the Saints shall sit and see his righteous
judgments: Nay, Mr. Feak, Mr. Rogers, etc. shall judge their Oppressors and
Persecutors; but I doubt our State professors, who have set themselves over us,
do no more believe this truth then Pilate when he was judging Christ did
believe he was Condemning his judge, or the Jews when they were whipping,
persecuting and imprisoning the Apostles, did think to see them sit on twelve
Throns, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: do you not know says Paul, That
the Saints shall judge the world: 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. Oh that our careless
Courtiers and Army men (who with wings impt with the plumes of Oppression and
Perjury, soar over us like Eagles of a true Ayrie, whilst indeed they are
Birds of prey not of Paradise) would be now of the same mind, as they will be
when they shall see the heavens pass away with a noise, and the Elements melt
with fervent heat etc. But when all is said, The wicked will do wickedly, but
the wise shall understand and the prudent shall keep silence: Dear Friend
farewell, and let us hold fast till our Lord come, Amen.

Yours, co-expectant in the deliverance of Syon, To. Bl.
November. 24. 1655.

