THE BLACK BOX of ROOM opened.

From whence are revealed, the Damnable Bloody Plots, Practices, and behavior
of Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and other Recusants in general: Against
Christian Princes, Estates and the people in those places where they have
lived, etc.



Printed in the Year. 1641

THE IESVITES BLASPHEMOVS CONIVRATIONS TO ENCOVrage their Proselytes to
King-killing treacheries:
SVch is the most bloody, and most blasphemous impudency of these Romish
Incendiaries, that when they put on a devilish and desperate resolution, to
murder any Emperor, King, or Prince, whom they have once pronounced to be an
Heretic, and excommunicate person, and thereupon intend to murder him by
some Raviliack, whom they make choice of for the execution of the said Treason,
that after such an unfortunate and wretched person, is once allured and entered
into their place of consultation, or chamber of (Philonicall) prayers
(forsooth) as they call them: These infernal firebrands kneel all down, who
in their prayers observe their ^ime; and put before the intended Traitor, a
knife folded up in a scarf; shut up in a little Box, covered with an Agnus
Dei, written about with black letters of perfumes, odorifirous Characters: and
when they draw it out themselves, they cast or sprinckle some drops of holy
water upon it, and which done, they hang at the hafte of the said knife, five
or six grains of Corrall, which are blessed by them, who blasphemously they
give him to understand, and make him believe that so many blows, as shall be
given by him with the said knife; so many souls be released out of Purgatory.

Afterward, putting the knife into the intended Murderers hand, they
pronounce these words saying:

Go now like Iephte, with the Sword of Sampson in thy hand, the sword with
which David did cut off Goliahs head, the Sword of Gedion; yea, the Sword with
which Judith did cut off Holophernes head, the sword of the valiant Machabees,
and the same with which Saint Peter did cut off Malcas his ear, yea I say, the
sword of Pope Julius the second, with the which (breaking the forces of
oppugning Princes) he took out of their hands with great effusion of blood,
the Cities of Sezza, Imola, Fayance, Bologna, and many other Cities: go thus I
say, thou magnanimous Champion of the chair of Rome, and be valiant and God
strengthen thine arm for the great work now intended by thee. After which
this infernal kennell of Romish bloodhounds kneel all down, and the most
wretchedly renowned and cursedly quallified amongst them, with a cauterized
conscience and immarbled heart, pronounces the bloody Conjuration, impiously
and impudently, saying as follows;

Come Cherabims, come Seraphins, and highest Thrones that rule, come blessed
Angels: yea, blessed Angels of charity, come and fill this holy Vessel with
glory and eternity, and bring him presently the Crown of the Virgin Mary, of
the Patriarchs, and of the Martyrs, for he belongs no longer to us, but to
you.

And thou oh dreadful and terrible God, who have revealed to him in these our
prayers and meditations; that he ought to murder a Tyrant, and confound a
Heretic, and to give the Crown to a Catholic King. And being by us disposed
to this meritorious Murder, vouchsafe to fortify his senses, and increase his
forces: to the end that he may accomplish this thy great will; and vouchsafe to
arm and furnish him with the Harness of thy powerful providence, that he may
valiantly perform the worthy work he has piously undertaken, and may happily
escape from those, who would apprehend him: give him Eagles wings, that the
spite and malice of those Barbarians whom he goes against, may not once touch
his sanctified members, extend also the beams of thy joy and celestial
felicity upon his sacred soul, to the end that by the blessed influence
thereof, the parts and members of his body also; may be encouraged and enabled
to this great work, and that it may cheerfully dispose it self to this holy
Combat without fear or shrinking pusillanimity.

This accursed Conjuration being thus audaciously and gracelessely uttered,
they carry the thus enchanted bloody Regicide, and set him before an Altar,
where they show him a Picture wherein the angels are seen and shown to have
lifted up and elevated long since James Clement, a bloody Iacobine Friar, and
represented him (as it were) before the Throne of God, saying;

Lord behold thy Pupil, behold thy well instructed Champion, and the
accomplisher of thy justice: Whereupon all the Saints rise out of their seats
to make him room, and give him place among them. And when all these things are
thus done and finished, there are no more but four Jesuits only left with
him, who when they come near him; hey with diabolical impudency and lying
flattery, say unto him: that they seem to perceive that there is some Deity
infused into him, and that they are so astonished with the radiant
light-shining and glistering in him, that they hold it their honor to kiss
his hands and feet; and make him madly to believe that they account him not a
meare man any longer; but that they esteem themselves (as it were) as they
say, half unworthy of the happiness and glory which he has already obtained
by his Catholic resolution, and sighing deeply before him: they say unto him;
we would that God had chosen us, and called us to your estate: fince we should
be truly assured, that we should go really, and directly into Paradise without
coming at Purgatory. And thus having intoxicated and bewitched the miserable
wretch, they thus leave him to his intended bloody design,

The end of the Conjuration.

But it is no wonder since they have so good correspondence with Jews, Turks,
and Infidels, and as Mahomet did in times past; so do these propogate their
Sect with fire and Sword and all manner of violence; for let us look upon
their first founder; he was a cruel and proud Hypocrite. Paul the 3. who
confirmed this order was both a carnal and a bloody man* the one in having
many whores and bastards, the other in persecuting innocent Christians in the
Wars in Germany.

They profess obedience but practice Sedition and Rebellion, Claudius Matthew
a Jesuit, and R. Henry the 3. of France his Confessor was the most principal
author and agent in the league of Papists against him.

Parsons and Campion were sent into England to make a faction for the Papists.

James Gordon, Creighton and Haies Jesuits, laid a plot not only for a
rebellion in Scotland, but also for the invasion of England.

Neither has their been any war raised of late in any part of Christendom,
wherein they have not borne a principal part.

They talk much of Chastity, but how chaste they are, let the Bona Robas of
Rome and Padua witness.

They profess poverty, but dwell in sumptuous palace, the furniture of which
is most gorgious and princely, their Arms are placed above the arms of
Princes, they pretend to beg for the English that are distressed beyond the
Seas, but indeed give them a small pittance and keep all the rest to
themselves. In Venice they painted the Virgin Mary like a Lady whom some of
them loved.

The like they did at Shertogen-Bosch in Brabant at my being there, by the Lady
of Piroy, Melanders wife, which was Secretary unto Grave Maurice, and set her
up with a child in her arms in St. John's Church.

Pius Quintus cast an Agnus Dei into a River, whither it was to draw the Fish
to the place, or to allay the violence of the waves, I cannot say.

Nay, they administer the Sacrament to those who go about to murder Princes,
as Walpoole did to Squire, who poisoned the pommell of Queen Elizabeth's Saddle
when she was to ride abroad.

Moreover, they pervert Scriptures, and corrupt the ancient Fathers, which
power Gregory the 13. in a Bull bearing date 1575, seems to have given them.
But to proceed in their practices.

Benedict Palmio, and Anniball Codret, two famous Jesuits did not only teach
William Parrie, that it was lawful to kill the Queen of England, but also
that it was an act very meritorious, Varade a Jesuit of Lion, in confession
did absolve Peter Barrien that went about to murder that Prince of famous
memory Henry the fourth, late King of France, assuing him that it was a most
noble and a Christian Act, for which he should obtain Celestial glory. In
Paris the Jesuits not only resolved that it was lawful to kill King Henry the
third, but by their persuasions did induce James Clement to effect the same.

Richard Williams, Edmund York, Patrick Ocollen, John Savage, and dives
others, who have been at sundry times executed for attempting to kill Queen
Elizabeth, confessed that they were set on by Holt and other Jesuits, and were
made believe it was a most meritorious Act.

Peter Pan at his execution at Leyden, confessed that he was hired by the
Jesuits to kill Count Maurice.

The Rebels of Paris that held out against their King, were principally
directed and encouraged by Comolet and other Jesuits.

Nay when money and victuals grew scarce in Paris, yet would not the Jesuits
suffer the Rebels to give over, but came into the Trenches and brought them
relief both of meat and money. And by the practices of this seditious Sect,
the cities of Perigueux, Again, Tholofe, Verdun, and diverse took arms against
the King.

They persuaded the Duke of Bavaria to go on foot to visit the Relics of
some Saint or other, while these gallants rode in Wagons.

I know not whose device it was, except some of theirs, that made young wenches
and married wives believe if they could stride over at one stride, St. Rombauts
breeches at Mechlin, they should assuredly have a Child within the year.

The Princess of Tyrole not many years ago, built the Jesuits an house hard
by her own, but they like Foxes beat the Princess out of her own Burrow, her
sumptuous house, and thrust her into their own mean house. The like they did
to the Bishop of Wirtzburg, who excluded him out of a Church which he had built
for them. Herbipois.


They advance themselves and despise others, those that confess themselves to
other Priests, they account little better then Atheistes: in Millan they only
bear the sway in hearing women's confessions, and did the like in Venice,
until they were forbidden.

By means of their confessions, they have drawn unto themselves infinite
riches, empoverishing many rich houses, leaving little to the Widows and
Orphans:

Maldonate a Jesuit of Paris, caused the president Monbrun, St. Andrew,
through his persuasion in confession to give the Jesuits all his movables and
half his revenues.

The president Goudran of Dijon making his Testament by their practices, gave
only half a crown to his sister, and to the College of Jesuits, seven
thousand pounds French money in rent.

In Bordeaux they ruined the whole house of Bollans, and impaired the state of
the house of Targebaston.

In the Country of the Grisons, they persuaded a silly old man called
Lambertin, to sell all that he had, and to take their Habit, who gathering
20000. Ducats, meant to give them all from his only daughter.

So cruel they are that they spare none, who is repugnant to their purposes;
Masteus complains that the elder Jesuits managed all things absolutely, they
brought Harbort and Glisell, two famous preachers in Vienna, in danger, only
envying their excellency. One Lupus a Franciscane in Millan, calling them false
Prophets, hardly escaped with his life. Cardinal Borrhomaus restrayning their
encroachments, was by them accused before the Pope.

John Chastell was so won and overcome by the Jesuits, that at his death he
denied that the Jesuits had any end in the business; but his examination
before the whole Court of Paris, affirms flat contrary, but only by them
plotted, wherefore it was ordered, that they should depart out of Paris within
three days, and out of France within fifteen days, after notice to them
given, as corrupters of youth, perturbers of public peace, and enemies of the
King and State. John Chastell himself also confessed, that Garet a Jesuit did
teach him these lessons, which made him resolve to kill the King.

It is not, nor I hope shall never be forgotten, deserving to be engraven in
Letters of brass, the most hellish and damnable plot of the powder Treason, in
the days of our late Sovereign of blessed memory King JAMES, plotted only by
the Jesuits whereof Garnet was one of the principals, who formerly had been a
Corrector to a Printers press here in London, and I shall never forget what
that Reverend Bishop of Norwich Doctor Overall told me sitting at his house in
Norwich, what Garnet confessed unto him at the time of his execution, he being
at that time Deane of Paul's, (Master Garnet quoth he) your time is very short
in this world, tell me I pray you as you will answer before GOD, what just
fault can you find with our Liturgy, or Common prayer, the Book which we use
in the Church of England? (truly (quoth Mr. Garnet) none at all, it is very
agreeable to the word of God, and to the practice of the primitive Church, and
truly Mr. Deane you are very happy in your Book of Common Prayer, afterward
this Garnet was made a Saint, and By his fellows, his Face and square, say
they, was evidently to be seen in a wheat or barley ear of corn, Credat
Iudeus Apella non ego. Now you must understand that our Jesuits keep three
several stations, some follow the Camp and armies in the field, as they did in
France, and not long since Spinola's army in Cleve and Gutick being the
greatest incendiaries or Boutefeux in the world, setting Princes against
people, and people against their Prince, others follow the Court, and can come
with God-morrow Madame into a Ladies Chamber before she be stirring, others
like the Nether Millstone remain settled in their Cloister without Motion, yet
help they the other to grind their Grist, for these entice young youths and
great heirs into their Colleges and societies, which are like Hell, vnde
nulla redemption

What plots end designs were undertook by Parsons (alias Cowbuck) the Jesuit
against our late Mirror of Princes Queen Elizabeth, one Cecill a Priest,
complayneth against Chreighton a Scottish Jesuit, that his practices made many
Widows and Orphans in Scotland. It would require a whole volume to write
their practices; plots, and damnable Treasons, which they have set on foot in
most Kingdoms of Europe, nay God knows what they are now plotting at this
present, J doubt not but that their Engines are set on work, and that they
have many seconders and partakers here at home amongst us, and listen as Cats
at a Mouse-hole what is every day, determined in Parliament. Is it not an
exceeding blemish to our Nation and Country, which lying in so cold a climate,
should breed and feed such swarmes-of traiterous Serpents and Vipers. When
Spain a great deal hoter hardly affords a Traitor against his King and
Country in an hundred years, here if Tobias his Dog do but wag his tail, he
shall be fed with the best from a Ladies trencher, and nothing thought too
dear for him. Then let us now or never take a course with Lesuites and
Priests, upon whom, like Pharoa's Frogs for their plenty, we are like to
tread upon in every street, let no other Nations accuse us of remissenes or
stupidity, in giving them so large a liberty. Let us consider if they get the
upper hand, what will become of us, our Prince, Country, wives, Children,
Friends, we have trial more then enough of their good-wills toward us, and
are like to have more daily; if the heads of these Brats be not dashed against
the stones. It was the Motto of old William Cecill, Lord Burleigh, and
Treasurer of England, Vnum Cor, vna via, one heart one way, which while we
observe no foreign force in the world shall be able to wrong us, if we divide
our selves, as Silurus Sons did their Arrows, we are presently broken, and
made a prey to strangers.

We all know, God appointed Kings and Princes to be Nursing Fathers, and
Nursing Mothers to his Church, therefore they ought not to see God dishonored
by false Religion and Idolatry, or true Christians oppressed with force and
Treachery. They carry not the sword for nothing, and God requires the
maintenance of his truth at their hands, therefore these Wolves that walk in
sheeps clothing, are not to be winked at or tolerated, or in any wise to be
endured, the world is so fraught with their practices in all places, yea some
so abominable and unchristian, that I will call them the Devils Acts of
Parliament, and some whereof out of the Popes Rentall. I report them only as
John Chassanion has left them recorded in French, therefore Lector, en tibi
Leonem ex ungue, and let me begin with the Popes traffic and Merchandise, to
which there is not the like in the whole world; for it has neither brinke nor
bottom, fear or shame, Religion nor common honesty, but rather blasphemous,
most wicked and ungodly ordinances, wherefore out of the monstrous heap,
accept of these few, and let thy Conscience tell thee, how tolerable they are.

For Marriage contracted in the third degree of Consanguinity or affinity, the
tax or payment to the Popes Exchequer, is in France, Italy, and other places
14 Tournois, 3 Ducats, 4 Carlines, yet there is a greater sum to be paid out
of the Dowry.

A Jew is allowed to have a Synagogue in his own house for 30. Tournois, 7
Ducats, and 6. Carlines, to erect a new Synagogue publicly, is 60. Tournois,
15. Ducats.

A parricide, or he that has killed his own Father, is quitted and absolved
for four Tournois, one Duckat, 8 Carlines.

Note by the way, the Pope makes better markets of Murders committed on the
persons of Fathers and Mothers, then for the beating only of a Clark or Priest.

For he that beats a Priest or Clarke must pay 6. Turnois, 2 Ducats.

He or she that kills any Infant, shall pay 4 Turnois, 2. Ducats, 9. carlines.

The woman who has taken a potion (a fearful thing to relate) to destroy the
fruit of her womb, or the child within her, shall be absolved and forgiven for 4
Turnois, 2 Ducats, 8 carlines.

A notorious witch must pay for her absolution 6 Turnois, and 2 Ducats.

Absolution for Heresy is granted before it be abjured for 36. Turnois and 9,
Ducats.

For Sacrilege, Theft, for firing of houses, ravishing of women, or
Maiden-children, and withal perjury, for your absolution you must pay 36.
Tournois, 9. Ducats, for every one of them several.

For absolution, for whoredom committed by a Priest or Clergy man, though it
be with a Nun, or any woman of his own kindred, is but to pay for his
absolution and free pardon 36. Turnois; and 3. Ducats.

I with such whoredom and incest, one demand beside absolution, for Sodomy, be
it either with Mankind or Beast ( which is horrible to relate) he shall be
dispensed withal and come to his orders again, and enjoy his benefices for
36. Turnois, 9. Ducats.

The absolution of a Nun, having played the whore, either with one, or
twenty, may be made capable of her Cloister and of the dignities thereof,
though it were to be made besse for 36. Tournois 9. Ducats; these few for a
taste, but they have a bitter relish. I will now come to some merry passages an
absolutions of an easier nature: there was one a lusty Friar had gotten 3
Nuns, and two citizens daughters near to Beneventum in Italy with child, the
Archbishop after some sharp rebuke caused him only for his penance, to say
the Lords Prayer five times over, which done, he received for absolution.

A merry companion having committed many foul offenses, came to his Confessor
the parish Priest where he dwelt, who after he had laid open all his offenses,
the Priest told him his sins were so many and so heinous, that he could not
absolve him without a great sum of money; the fellow told him he had no
money, but he would give him an hare, well I am content quoth the Priest, where
is she, Sir, J have her not here, but you shall receive her when my Dog can
catch her.

There was a Priest in England of late years, that confessed how he had
shrived few women, but he lay with them, and yet our simple Recusants neither
have a sense of their own shame, nor privide a Remedy for for it. Besides of
all others are apt to be drawn into disloyal practices, as by the example of
Arden, Somervile, Babington, and many other in Quee Elizabeth's time, of Watson
Cateby, Digby, Rookwood, and the rest in King James his days.

The Rebellion in the North parts of this Realm was raised by Nicholas Morton
and other Priests, when as yet there was almost neither act nor law made
against Papists. And when they could not prevail in England what broiles made
they in Ireland.

Philip the second King of Spain, at the instance of English Recusants and
Priests, determined to invade this land both by Sea and Land.

By procurement of Priests and Recusants, the Duke of Guise and Don John of
Austria in the Queens time, became our enemies.

All plots either against Prince or State were contrived and determined to be
executed by Papists, as in the Queens days by W. Parry, Somervile, Ocollen,
Squire with many others, and by whom else o^ late days, and I cannot tell what
their intentions may be in these days, for I am sure the Strand,
Convent-garden, Drury Lane, St. Giles, and Holborne, are so replenished with
Priests and their people, that they openly call one another to go to Mass (in
other places) or to Somerset house, as familiarly as one neighbor will call
another to go to one of our Churches. And as they are impudent in their own
Justification, so are they marvailous confident in their strength, multitude,
power, and greatness of their friends, who they are may be guessed. The manner
of these is to temporize till matters be grown ripe, nay they will not stick
to profess and protest deeply, for so did (sometimes) Parry, Lopez, the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland.

They will say and swear they are as good Subjects to his Majesty and the
State, as any protest^nt whatsoever, but with a mental reserv^^ion o^ Father
Campions old distinction Rebus Sic Stantibus, when they cannot help it, or
time fits not their purposes, but for fear of the worst our present parliament
and State in general will have an eye unto them and their actions, I wish not
their punishments aggravated, yet I say it is a great weakness in us, either
to suffer their insolency, or not to secure our selves against their hatred and
Tyranny, I need not to stir up those whom it concerns to vigilance, they see
these things, and I doubt not, but will see them shortly amended, in the mean
time let every true patriot and lover of his Country not end ure to see the
bowels of his dear Mother Country to be gnawne out by these Vipers, but as
much as in him lies, discover, and oppose all such traitor-hearted
adversaries, and maintain love and unity among our selves ready to our
uttermost to defend as well our gracious King as Country, so shall we have peace
in our days and our posterity (imitating our example,) remain blessed here on
earth, unto the end of the World.

FINIS.

