A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE TIMES. BEING A Tract concerning the Original and Rise
of Truth, and the Original and Rise of Antichrist. SHOWING By pregnant
instances of Scripture, History, and other Writings, That the Principles and
Practices of the People called Quakers, in this day, and their Sufferings, are
the same as were the Principles and Practices of Christ and his Apostles, and
their sufferings in that, and of the Holy Men of God since, and the Martyrs of
Jesus, who have Prophesied in Sackcloth: And that the Apostasy has held all
other Professions since the days of the Apostles. In a constant Series out of
the Ecclesiastical History, by way of Chronology, for near the first 600.
years, and other Fathers (so accounted) and learned Men both of the former Day,
and This. That Men may once see, and be advised in the words of the Principles
of their own Professions, and of others whom they esteem. That the Truth held
and practiced by the People called Quakers, is no other than what themselves,
or such as they approve of, have held forth in Word, or have practiced. By
GEORGE BISHOPE.

DEUTERONOMY. 32. 7. Remember the days of Old, consider the years of many
Generations: Ask thy Father and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will
tell thee.

London, Printed in the Year, 1668.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 38. for here, read herein. p. 6. l. 30. r. or worship. p. 7. l.
49. f. men, r. man. p. 8. l. 25. f. or, r. and. l. 28. f. Presbyters, r.
Presbyteries. p. 11. l. 24. f. a far, r. as far. f. to God, r. from God. p. 13.
l. 10. f. he, r. so. and l. 22. r. or not. and l. 28. f. Evarius, r. Evagrius.
p. 16. l. 46. f. lay, r. have. p. 17. l. 10. f. This, r. Thus, and l. 39. f.
at, r. of. p. 20. l. 15. r. have first. and l. 16. f. where, r. when. p. 21. l.
14. r. Egypt and Judah. and l. 46. r. first fierce. p. 24. l. 41. f.
understood, r. underwent. p. 25. l. 7. f. yielding, r. yielded. p. 26. l. 32.
f. Cresseus, r. Cressens. p. 31. l. 40. f. Booths, r. Baths. and l. 49. r.
other crimes. p. 35. l. 35. f. Phais, r. Rhais. p. 36. l. 19. f. Marcinus, r.
Macrinus. p. 38. l. 18. f. divided, r. derided. and l. 41. r. and after he. p.
39. l. 27. f. cry, r. burst. p. 40. l. 19. f. excede, r. Expede. p. 41. l. 3.
r. as Adversaries. and l. 6. f. resisted, r. resisting. and l. 22. f.
Valevianus, r. Valerianus. and l. 42. r. and taking further. p. 42. l. 19. f.
profession, r. promotion. p. 43. l. 13, 14. f. camping, r. cramping. and l. 24.
f. Thorianus, r. Florianus. and l. 33. f. there, r. therein. and l. 46. f.
Dysties. r. Dystres. p. 44. l. 8. f. tired, r. tried. and l. 18. f. Sacrifices,
r. Sacrificers. and l. 29. f. Veterus, r. Veterius. p. 45. l. 32. f. Anthemus,
r. Anthimus. p. 46. l. 21. f. Bears, r. Boars. and l. 26. f. drawing, r. draw
nigh. and l. 29. blot out of. p. 48. l. 12. f. Philorenus, r. Philoromus. and
l. 47. f. in, r. as. p. 52. l. 28, 29. f. Constantinus, r. Constantius. p. 53.
l. 18. r. Valerius, Constantine. p. 54. l. 37. f. Vecturius, r. Veterius. p.
55. l. 22. f. Lucinnius, r. Lycinnius. and l. 33. r. after another, then they
came to do the same things one to another. p. 62. l. 25. r. were in a manner.
p. 66. l. 13. f. disposition, r. deposition. and l. 42. r. his Edict. p. 67. l.
4. f. other, r. one. and l. 35. f. all, r. him at. p. 69. l. 3. f. exhorted, r.
exhorts. and l. 33. f. Theogius, r. Theognis. p. 70. l. 35. r. himself able.
p. 73. l. 40. f. then, r. when. p. 74. l. 40. f. Theogius, r. Theognis, and
Maris, f. Maros. p. 75. l. 35. r. taken his leave. p. 77. l. 41. r. at one of.
p. 78. l. 37. f. grains, r. grain. p. 82. l. 34. f. bread, r. beard. p. 85. l.
17. r. or rather. p. 86. l. 16. f. scorched, r. scourged. p. 89. l. 23. r.
obedience is. p. 94. l. 23. after wide, put out and. l. 50. put out not. p. 97.
l. 43. f. Pyhlagonia, r. Paphlagonia. p. 98. l. 35. blot out No. p. 99. l. 24,
25. f. departed, r. deposed. and l. 37. f. Theontius, r. Leontius. p. 100. l.
21. f. Consults, r. Consuls. p. 101. l. 18. f. Herachius, r. Heraclius. and 21.
f. disordited, r. discredited. and l. 42. f. abhorred, r. abhorring. p. 103. l.
3. r. witness as to this particular. p. 104. l. 6. f. wanderings, r. bandyings.
l. 8. r. is not (or they have lost) the thing. and l. 13. f. Ethnicks, r.
Ethics. p. 106. l. 27. f. no, r. or. p. 108. l. 2. f. this, r. his. p. 109. l.
25. f. sentere, r. sincere. p. 115. l. 41. f. of Nicia, r. at Nicea. p. 118. l.
23. f. Persecutors, r. Persecutions, and l. 24. f. pertencious, r. portentious.
p. 123. l. 31. f. disease, r. decease. p. 127. l. 25. f. decrease, r. decease.
p. 129. l. 29. f. own their, r. to their own. l. 45. f. communicate, r.
communicated. p. 133. l. 17. r. for no open show. p. 134. l. 16. f. trained, r.
retained. p. 137. l. 13. f. which those, r. with, those. p. 139. l. 35. f.
Illiricum, r. Illirium. p. 140. l. 38. f. The Readers, r. Whether the Readers.
p. 141. l. 19. f. Cyrus, r. Cyprus. p. 142. l. 1. f. Confusions, r.
Confessions. p. 143. l. 26. after Eunomotheophrani, r. and those with
Eutichius, Eunomitichians. p. 144. l. 3. blot out then. and l. 4. f. Galatia,
r. Galitia. p. 153. l. 33. f. Chaldon, r. Chalcedon. p. 155. l. 4. f. which, r.
with. and l. 23. f. Illiricum, r. Illirium. p. 171. l. 21. f. this, r. his. p.
181. l. 41. r. a secret favourer. p. 202. l. 1. r. page 36. and l. 14. blot out
the Greek. p. 210. l. 5. blot out in. and l. 16. after not, r. not in the
oldness. p. 213. l. 10. f. these, r. those. and l. 48. f. motions, r. notions.
p. 214. l. ^. f. these, r. those. and l. 32. in the Marg. f. est, r. et. and l.
35. f. debit, r. dedit. and l. 32. f. decree, r. degree. p. 216. l. 10. blot
out and. p. 217. l. 26. f. these are, r. they are. p. 218. l. 2. f. one, r.
our. and l. 15. f. or it must be, r. or it will be. and l. 41. r. it concerns
us. p. 219. l. 45. f. desired, r. defined. and l 49. r. these will. p. 226. l.
1. r. which is in it self. and (h) marg l. 4. f. congruus, r. congrua. marg.
(k) l. 2. f. meus, r. men's. p. 227. marg. (m) l. 5. f. costos, r. custos. and
f. procul, r. prout. marg. (q) l. 3. f. siquamur, r. sequamur. and marg. (a) l.
4. f. siquuntur, r. sequuntur. and. l 40. f. Velcurior, r. Velcurio. and marg.
(f) l. 9 f. Patrie, r. Patriae p. 228. marg. (h) l 1. f. justio, r. initio. and
l. 3. f liberii, r. liberi. and l. 5. f. Uno ci^ca, r. quocirca. and l. 8. f.
eam, r. eum. p. 231. l. 10. f. by Arrians, r. from Arrius. and l. 31. f.
Treatises, r. Treatise p. 234. l. 31. f. father, r. further.

A Looking-Glass for the TIMES, etc.
THE Everlasting God, which sets the bounds to the Nations, and declares to
man his thoughts, is not circumscribed to time or place; but in every Nation,
he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him: This said
Peter of old, who once thought (as did the Samaritans) that all Religion was
impaled to the Jews, who had the Circumcision, to whom pertained the Adoption,
and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law and the Service of
God, and the Promises, whose were the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the
flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Therefore he,
thought it much, in the Vision that was shown him, to -- Arise, slay and eat,
-- Not so Lord, (said he) for I Acts 10. 13, 14, 15.
have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean. But, said the Voice the
second time, -- What God has cleansed, that call not thou common, in the Case
of the Centurion, unto whom he was sent, being a Gentile, to turn unto the
Faith.

And said Christ Jesus to the Woman of Samaria, who said, Our Fathers
worshipped in this Mountain; and ye say, That in Jerusalem is the place where
men ought to worship. Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither
in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. Ye worship ye know
not what; We know what we worship, for Salvation is of the Jews; But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth,
John 4. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

And said the Apostle, -- Who has also made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives Life: but if the ministration of the Letter, written and
engraven in stones, was glorious; so that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which
glory was to be done away; How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be
rather glorious? for if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more
does the ministration of Righteousness exceed in glory: for even that which was
made glorious, had no glory, in this respect, by reason of the glory that
excels; for if that which was done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 6, to the 12.

The intent and substance of all which, is as much as to say, That there is no
Religion under the Sun, or no prescription that ought to be, as to any thing
that relates to the Worship of God, or that is ground of Worship, since Christ
came in the flesh, and was offered up, but what is within, in Spirit and in
Truth; which is in opposition to all outward Forms, which proceed not from the
Spirit.

For Israel of old, during the State under which they stood, of an outward
Administration, had no further reference than to themselves, who had the
Circumcision, or outward Administration, the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, which Law was added because of transgression till the Seed should
come, which is Christ, who being come, put an end to Circumcision, and that
outward Administration, which with the Jew ended, who was of the Stock of Sem,
which related not to the Gentile.

So that whole Administration, with the particularity of the Jew in the flesh,
had an end, and has no more ground of enforcement, wherefore the Gentiles
should be obliged to a form, or that form of Worship, or outward
Administration, then if the Jew in the flesh had not been, or that outward
Administration, for it related to time and persons, and not to the body of the
World, or the universality of days; which time being out, or expired, and
those persons or Nations at an end, as to that for which they were taken into a
particular consideration, the thing has also an end with them, and cannot
admit of a force upon themselves, or those that are yet left of the Jewish
Nation; much less upon those who are not Jews but Gentiles, whom the Lord never
so took in, nor dealt with, as to any outward Administration.

So that to enforce, or to endeavor so to do, from what was once the
Administration of God in the flesh to the Jews, on them who are not Jews but
Gentiles, what the Scriptures hold forth to be the outward administration of
the Jews, or to seek to ground from thence a bottom, why all Nations, or the
Nations of the Gentiles should be in an outward administration of Worship, and
should be bounded in, or denominated by any particular form, is to put force
upon the Scriptures, and to hold forth that which neither does the Scripture,
nor is the intent of the Spirit, and which Christ Jesus ended in the Jew, and
the Apostles testified unto, so to be ended, as aforesaid.

For in the first place; Where there is no ground or bottom for such a thing,
no such thing from such a thing can be concluded: But no such bottom or ground
is there for any such thing, as from the Judaical Policy, to enforce a legal
Administration, or outward form of Worship, as has been declared, since Christ
was offered up, and an end put thereby to that Administration. Therefore to
enforce any such thing now, that he is offered up, and that Administration
ended, is to enforce such a thing without a ground or bottom.

In the next place; The Lord Jesus when he was offered up, and ascended, gave
gifts unto men, (not outward Administrations, as to Times, Places, and
Nations,) Some Evangelists, (says the Apostle) some Prophets, some Pastors,
some Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come (says he) in the
unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12,
13.

Thirdly, The Administration of the Spirit, or of Righteousness, is that which
excels in glory, (as has been said); and even that which was made glorious,
had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels, 2 Cor. 3.
9, 10.

Fourthly, All outward Administrations had a time to end as well as to begin,
and they had a signification, which the thing signified being come, vanished,
and came to nothing; So all that which was the Administration to the Jews, had
its beginning and end, its time to come to nothing, and to vanish, as it had to
begin; which was when the thing signified, the end and intent of that
Administration, was come, which was Christ; the morning being come, the shadows
fly away; that which was before transgression being come, that comes to be
removed which was added because of transgression.

Fifthly, The Spirit it was, that led the Disciples into all Truth; not the
Letter, for that kills, as the Apostle says, as aforesaid.

Sixthly, And the Worship which Christ, who was the end of the Letter, set up
for all to walk by, whether Samaritan, or the Inhabitant of Jerusalem, Jew or
Gentile, bond or free, Barbarian or Scythian, Male or Female, the public
Worship which he would have all to be exercised in, and which he says, The
Father chooses to worship him; the true Worshippers, which are not at this
Mountain, nor at Jerusalem, that in which he said the true Worshippers should
worship; and that the time was to come, or comes, Yea, it now is, (says he)
Is the Spirit, John 4. as aforesaid.

So that the Glory that excels, the Administration of the Spirit which
exceeds in Glory, the Spirit which gives Life; the Gift, not the outward
Administration; the thing that is come, not that which is done away; the
substance, not the shadow; the Institution of the Son, which abides in the
House for ever, not the Administration of the Servant, which is not to abide in
the House for ever; the universality, or largeness, where the partitian Wall is
taken down, not the particularity, or narrowness, where the partitian Wall
stands, is that which in this day, since Christ was offered up, and ascended,
is to be looked to and heeded, as that which is pleasing to the Lord, and which
he accepts.

For I would demand, Wherein, or upon what bottom can any ground a contrary
Assertion? Is Christ come, or not? Is he offered up, or not? Is he ascended, or
not? Fills he all things, or not? If he be so, why then is that enforced or
sought so to be, or placed, which was before he came, which was to end in him?
Either he is come, or he is not come; if he is not come, then let such say so
in open words, who do the things that were to be, or had their being before he
came; if he be come, how dare any to enforce that, or seek so to do, which was
before he came, or that which by his coming is done away?

The Matter is brought, or lies in a narrow compass, and there is no trifling
in the Matter; the things are of the highest consequence, and mortals must take
heed of giving Law to their Maker; and the Potsherds of the Earth must beware
of clashing against him that formed them; and they who are in the condition or
state of destruction, must heed how they ascend, or seek so to do, in his
Throne who lives for ever, who came to redeem, on whose shoulders the
Government lies, who is the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Wonderful,
Counselor, the Head of his Church, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only
has Immortality and eternal Life; to whom be Glory, and Power, and Dominion
everlasting.

Away then with all outside Religion, (that is to say) all that which proceeds
not from Spirit and Truth; away with all Forms that come not from the power of
Godliness; away with all Jewish and outward Worship, Forms, Constitutions,
Canons, Orders, Decrees, Directories, Catechisms, Confessions of Faith, all
forcing of Religion, all persecution because of Religion, all Injunctions,
Synods, Councils, Prescriptions, Ordinances of Men, all outward, fleshly,
carnal Commandments, Traditions; all imitations of Christ and his Apostles, and
doing things by example of them, or because of what they did, or were led into,
where the same Spirit of Jesus is not the Leader, as it was in them, is not the
ground and bottom, root and source, as it was theirs. Away with all private
Religions, and Worships, and Precepts of Men; all National Worships, and
Religions; all forcings such Religions and Worships; Christ the Substance is
come; Christ the true Jew inwardly is come; Christ the Phil. 3. 3.
Circumcision in the Spirit, whose praise is not of men, but of God, that has
no confidence in the flesh, is come; Christ the public Worship in the Spirit
and Truth is come; he is dead and risen again, and ascended, Romans 6. 9.
No more has death dominion over him; He is Col. 3. 13.
Head of his Church; He is Gal. 4. 1.
Lord of all; He is Romans 9. 5.
God over all, blessed for ever, the 1 Timothy 6. 15.
only Potentate, and King of the Princes of the Earth, he lives for ever.

For you must make him something or nothing, if he be come, and if he has put
an end to those, and if he so spoke, as aforesaid; and if that be the Worship,
and those the Worshippers, the Father seeks, which is, and who worship, in
Spirit and in Truth; then the Worship at this Mountain, and at Jerusalem is to
be no more; no more the fear of God to be taught by the precepts of men, (which
was complained of in that day, when the Isa. 29. 13.
Administration was outward) the teaching for Doctrine the Commandments Mat.
15. 9.
of men, which he then reproved; no more clutter or ado among men, as to
Religion, and the settlement, and the enforcing thereof; If these things be,
and as of right, and what ought to be, then he is not come, dead, risen,
ascended into Glory. How long halt ye between two Opinions, either subscribe to
these things, and that he is the Head of the Church, which is in God, or deny
him, as your actions speak, who enforce these things, and require them.

Now because it may be thought that I am here too dogmatical, and that I have
stamped things according to mine own Image and understanding; and that I take
upon me to judge all the Worlds Professions and Religions, that have been since
Christ and his Apostles; and that I seem to intend to set up instead of, or in
the room of the other, something that my self fancies, or some few that are
called Quakers, who were but of yesterday, (as some may say); I shall to what I
have indefinitely already concluded, according to Truth and the Spirit, and
demonstration and proof thereof, and of the Scriptures, proceed further to show:

First, The Original and Rise of the Truth, from the days of Christ and his
Apostles, throughout the Apostasy to this day, or that the Truth, which we who
are called Quakers now pretend to, is the same that was in the days of Christ
and his Apostles, which has had more or less in this thing or in that, a
testimony throughout the Apostasy unto this day; that is to say, that some,
because of such testimony, have suffered as well as testified, since the days
of the Apostles.

Secondly, The Original and Rise of Antichrist, from Christ's and his Apostles
days unto this; showing in all by instances of Scripture, and History, that
the Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers, in this day, are the
same as were the Principles and Practices of Christ and his Apostles in that,
and of the Holy-men of God since, and the Martyrs of Jesus who have prophesied
in Sackcloth; and that the Apostasy has held all other professions ever since
the days of Christ and his Apostles: in which I shall of necessity be somewhat
large, because the nature of the thing requires it, but with what brevity I
can, I shall reduce them to what I have laid down and determined.

And because I may not seem too prolix and tedious, I shall comprehend much of
what I have to say under these four heads, or the following four heads, are the
things in which I shall comprehend much of what I have to say.

First, National Worship, how it came in, when it ended, and what testimonies
the Scriptures and History afford against it, since it was at an end. Secondly,
Swearing, and what appertains to that, when, and how it arose, and when it had
an end, and since it was at an end what testimonies are against it. Thirdly,
Bearing of Arms when, and how that was, and wherefore it is, that now it is
declined by us, and what may be said as to that during the Apostasy. Fourthly,
The changeable Priesthood, its rise, date, time, and end, and of what concerns
it, and of what has been said, and suffered in opposition thereunto, since it
had its end.
Of these things I intend to treat, and begin in their order. First General
Head concerning National Worship.


First, With National Worship.

National Worship had its institution under the Jews, or the Jewish was the
only Nation which the Scriptures mention to have had a Worship that was
National ordained of God, who as a Figure or Representation of what was to be
Universal, in reference to those throughout the World, whom the Lord would
gather to be Kings and Priests unto God, a Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People.

This Nation of the Jews had their Laws and Ordinances, their Kings and
Governors, their Religion and Worship all outward, though they had their inward
signification, which was Christ, the Messiah, the Prophet which was to come,
who according to the flesh, was of theirs who were of the Seed of Abraham,
whose Seed in the Spirit, the Seed of Abraham, are the Elect, the Children of
Abraham, whom to redeem he came in the flesh; so the whole constitution of the
Jewish Kingdom, whether as to the Civil Policy, or Ecclesiastical, had its face
looking hitherward, which it signified, which it represented.

Now in the fullness of time, he coming, whom these things did hold forth, and
typifie, and which in his flesh, the last of all was accomplished, the things
themselves ceased, and he whiles he was not yet offered up, and all things yet
were not accomplished, began to end them, as the morning does the night as the
day approaches: And he said unto the Pharisees, The Kingdom of God is within
you, it comes not by observation; Luke 17. 21.
or it is not outward (that is to say) such as your Kingdom is, an
Administration which is to be seen with the outward eye, but it is of an inward
and intrinsecal nature, seen by another eye, that sees not as man sees, but
beholds things as they are, which gives Law to wickedness, reproves, judges it,
as your outward Administration represents, which shows you how God will be
worshipped, and when and what you are to do; which your outward Government, in
all the particulars thereof, had reference unto; which because of transgression
which came over, and had blotted out the other, the Law written in the heart,
and the fear put in the Heb. 8. 10. Gal. 3. 6.
inward part; the Seed, which is Christ, the High Priest of his People, was
added, or given, which was not at first, to wit, the Law written in Tables of
Stone; but, in the fleshly Table of the Heart, and which was promised should be
again, and which now came to be fulfilled.

So the Partition Wall came to be removed, and that which was general to the
Jews in the Figure, who were singled from all the Nations in particular, came
to be general to the Jew in the Spirit throughout all Nations, and to be no
more particular to the Jew; and this was that which Peter aforesaid came to be
informed of, when in the Vision he was sent to the Centurion, and which made
him speak, having been so informed, as aforesaid; I perceive, of a truth, that
God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears God, and
works Righteousness, is accepted of him.

So the thing being come, Christ Jesus, the Universal Head of the Church, which
the Priesthood signified to the Nation of the Jews, the Partition, (that is to
say) the Nation of the Jews, or the Laws, Ordinances, and Administrations of
Moses, which were outward, came to be taken away, and the Vail to be rent, and
no more was the National Church-Worship to be minded, which that constitution
held forth, but the Worship which was to be Universal: Now through the offering
of him up, and the Law in the Heart, and the fear in the inward parts* Christ
the Seed, was that which every one was to know, and worship by, as it was in
the beginning before transgression was, and as before the Law was given by the
Prophets, and holy men of God, Abraham (who saw his day and rejoiced; who said,
Before Abraham was I am) Noah, Enoch, etc. The Law came by Moses, but Grace and
Truth by Jesus Christ.

Hence it came to pass, that upon the first encounter, when after he was risen
from the dead and ascended, and the Holy Ghost was given, the Comforter, which
he said he would send to them, which should abide with them for ever, the
Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, which he said, should
receive of his, and give unto them the Latitude, or rather Narrowness, was no
longer to the Nation of the Jews, but its extent was to the end of the World;
How hear we every man in his own tongue wherein he was born? Parthians, and
Medes, and Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and in
Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia, in Egypt, and in the
parts of Lybia, about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes,
Creets and Arabians; We do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful Works
of God: And there were added the same day unto them about three thousand Souls.
Peter, a Jew according to the flesh, preaching to them who were Gentiles and
Jews, now promiscuously together; and to the Gentiles, The promise is to you,
and to your Children, and to those that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call, Acts 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 39, 41.

So that the limits of the Church was now no longer restrained to the People or
Nation of the Jews, nor the Worship, but to all Nations of the Earth, to the
Gentiles, the Church of God amongst them, which to gather* or to draw into one,
was the Gospel sent and preached; and the Worship now was no longer National,
nor was it the National Worship of the Jews, which also was commanded of God,
and accompanied with his presence, while the end of it was not come, or
accomplished; But it was every where, Spirit and Truth, not Form and Letter,
fearing of God, working of Righteousness is accepted of him; the true
Worshippers, the Worshippers whom the Father seeks to worship him: All the
others were dashed in pieces, the end was accomplished, it stood not in meats
and drinks, the Kingdom of God, but in Righteousness and Peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost; not in killing of Sheep, and slaying of Oxen, but in an humble and
contrite heart, and that trembled at his Word, the Sacrifices of God which even
under the Law were entitled, and said to be his, through all which he looked
for, and accepted; which the Sacrifices, and the blood of Goats and Bulls
signified; Circumcision, and all the Ordinances of the Jews, which Moses
commanded, and which it was death not to observe, comes now to be called
beggarly Rudiments, the Handwriting of Ordinances, the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, the enmity which he destroyed on the Cross, and
blotted out, which the Apostle says, was against them, and which neither they
nor their Fathers were able to bear; And he says, Touch not, taste not, handle
Gal. 5. 2. Phil. 3. 2, 3.
not, which all (says he) perish in the using: And if you be circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing: I wish them cut off that trouble you. And
beware of Dogs, and beware of evil workers, beware (says he) of the Concision;
for we are the Circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

And the Apostles now, as any were gathered into the Church, they gathered them
out of all the Jewish Observations, and Heathenish worshipping of Idols, into
one God, and Name of the Lord Jesus, who was the great Shepherd and Bishop of
the Soul; Not into the Name of the Church of the Jews, or the Temple, or of
this Region and that, but into the Name of Christ Jesus; The Churches of what?
Of the Jews, etc. Nay, the Churches of Christ, Christ the Head of the Church,
which are in 1 These. 1. 1.
Judea, etc. The Church which is in God: Paul and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto
the Church of the Thessalonians which is in God. Not in this man, or that, not
in this profession, and that barely, but in God.

And so it was during the Apostles times, of which the Scripture makes mention,
and their business was to open the eyes, to turn men from darkness to the
light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they might receive
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are sanctified by
Faith, which is in me; As Paul says of his Commission which he received of the
Lord, Acts 26. 18. And he styles himself an Apostle, not of men, neither by
men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father which raised him from the dead.
And he says, The Righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise, Say
not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down
from above) Or who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ
again from the dead.) But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart; that is the Word of Faith which we preach, Romans 10. 6,
7, 8. And the Apostle to the Hebrews says, But finding fault with them, (that
is, the first Covenant, and the things therein, of which he had been speaking
in the former words) he says, Behold, the days come (says the Lord) when I
will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of Judah: Not
according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers in the day that I
took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord: For this
is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their
hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People; And they
shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying,
Know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least unto the greatest; For I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their iniquities will I remember
no more, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Now here is nothing of Churchship, of an outward Administration and Worship,
of a delegation of Power to any to constitute and appoint Worships, or how God
should be worshipped, or what Discipline should be used in the Church, or what
Power the Church should have, as to visible things, and who should be the
Governors or Rulers thereof, that should direct or order, as to that throughout
all Ages; but a turning to a Principle, wherein God is to be known, and whereby
he is to be worshipped; Not to Man, Kings, Princes, Governors, States,
Emperors; no not to Presbyters, Councils, Fathers, Pastors, Officers, Synods:
Be ye followers 1 Cor. 11. 1.
of me, as I also am of Christ, says Paul; But to the Light, the Light of the
Son of God, who is Light: God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; the
Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, the Light of the World, the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the World; that which shows man that is
in the Transgression, that he is in the dark, that turns him from the darkness
to the Light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

The Lord never sent to turn man unto man, nor did he ever give power to man to
order man, as to the Worships of him, no not in the Mosaical Administration;
all the World have been in mistakes about these things; but he always reserved
the power in himself; and by the guidance and order of him, man was to be
directed, and God to be worshipped; for from the Lord Moses received in the
mount what was that Administration; and hitherto, to the Law of Moses, when the
Israelites were gone astray, and had transgressed, were all things to be
reduced, and the reformation to be made, the Law of Moses, which was a figure
of that which came by Jesus Christ, unto which all things after he was come, to
which Moses his Administration, or the Law which was given by Moses, was to
have reference, as it was to spring from it; And the coming of him was the time
of Reformation of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 9. 10. Which stood (says he,
speaking of that Ministration which in the verse before he calls a Figure) only
in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and Carnal Ordinances imposed on
them, until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10.

Moses his time, or the duration of the standing of the Law, or the outward
Administration, or Jewish National Worship, was not to remain for ever, the
first Covenant, but it was to pass away, and to have an end, as not being able
to make the comers thereunto perfect, Heb. 10. 1. though it was commanded of
the Lord: So there was to be a time of Reformation, when that which could not
make the comers thereunto perfect, was to be removed; when that which was the
shadow of good things to come, but not the very Image of the things, (as the
same place has it) was to have an end, which was in the coming of him who was
perfect, who perfects for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. which the
other lead unto; For by one Offering (says the Apostle in the verse aforesaid)
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and this was called the
time of Reformation, when he came who put an end to all that was outward, and
had a visible, or an outward Administration, which could not make the comers
thereunto perfect, nor was appointed for that end and purpose, but to lead unto
another thing which should put an end thereunto, and which was its end.

Now, I say, if the very outward Mosaical Jewish Administration, National
Worship, the first Covenant, which was all the outward Government which was
commanded of God in the World, was not of man, but from the Lord; which yet had
reference to another thing, which was Christ, the new Covenant, the Law put
into the mind, and wrote in the heart, which was the Prophet, which Moses said
unto the Jews, the Lord their God should raise unto them of their Brethren like
unto him, whom they should hear in all things, whatsoever he should say unto
them; and that it should come to pass that every Soul (he does not say Body)
that will not hear that Prophet, should be destroyed from among the people,
Acts 2. 23. How much more now that the thing is come, which those
Administrations had reference unto, (the great Reformer) ought all things now
in relation unto Worship have reference unto him; and how ought all things of
this nature thither to be directed?

For, as I said, he sent not to turn from man to man, from the darkness to man,
but to the Light, to the Principle of God, that which is of God in man, the
Seed, which is Christ, the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations now made
manifest, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1. 26, 27. that men may know who they
worship, and when, and how thy may worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: Spirit, that is,
something that is Spirit, that is of the Nature that God is, that is Spirit and
Truth, that is as as he is, Spirit; they that worship him, must worship him not
in the Letter, not in the Injunctions of men, not in an outward or fleshly
Principle; not in man, or the spirit of man, but of God, which is in opposition
to all that is of man, or comes from man, that is not from the Spirit or
Principle of God.

So men must first come to learn, or be turned to the Light, to the Principle
of God, to that which is Spirit, by which they may come to know him that dwells
in the Light that is inaccessible, as to all that is mannish or mortal from the
darkness, all that is from man, or of him, who is mortal; then something may be
said to them as to the Worship of God; then they are somewhere, and know
something which God accepts, and in which he is well pleased; such Worshippers
the Father seeks to worship him: All other Worships are not available, nor are
they to any purpose, nor does God seek them, though men may think thereby that
they seek after God: The time of Reformation svveeps them away to the Moles
and to the Bats, to go into the Clefts of the Rocks, all the Idols of Silver
and of Gold, which are made each one for himself to worship; and into the tops
of the ragged Rocks, for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his Majesty, when
he arises to shake terribly the Earth. Cease from man, whose breath is in his
Nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2. 20, 21. The great
Reformer gives them no standing; every one must worship him from his Temple,
whose Temple ye are, says the Apostle to the Saints; Know ye not that ye are
the Temple of God, (says he) and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 1
Cor. 3. 16. In his Temple does Psalm. 26. 9.
every one speak of his glory.

Now man coming to be the Temple of God, and the Spirit of the Lord dwelling
in man, and the Principle of God in man being known, 1 Cor. 3. 16.
here the Worship comes to be known, which is in the Spirit, and in Truth;
and this is that which the Father seeks.

So away with all inventions of men in the Worship of God; away with all
Imitations and Likenesses; away with the shadovvs even of good things to
come: Now the thing it self, Christ Jesus, is come; the Principle, the Measure
of him is known, the Incense or Odor with Rev. 8. 3.
which the Prayers of all Saints are offered upon the Golden Altar, which is
before the Throne, which God accepts. The Principle of God is to lead, the
Spirit of the Lord to offer; as this moves, the Lord accepts; in this he is
well pleased; the living Root must be known, something that is holy, that
never sinned, to guide and direct; something that is as he is, who is holy,
and no iniquity can come near his dwelling, Hab. 1. 13.
then the Worship is accepted of the Lord.

Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into Heuven? (that is to bring down
Christ from above); Say not, Who shall descend into the deep? (that Romans 10. 6,
7, 8.
is to bring up Christ again from the dead). You need not go so far, you need
not look without you to Forms, Constitutions, Ordinances of Men, Laws and
Imitations, the thing is within you, the Lord has brought it nigh to you, he
has not put you to another: You must account for your selves, and joy, or be
undone for your selves; every man is an Individual, he is made so by God: An
Individual signifies a being by it self that can never be mixed, that can never
be made two, something wherein a man is determined for ever, which the Lord
should guide, of whom the Lord will require an account; the Lord has not put
you to seek here and look there. Lo here, and lo there; it is not in Heaven,
that thou should say, who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it unto us,
that we may hear it, and do it? Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou
should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us that we
may hear it and do it? (said Moses) even of that which he gave as an outward
Commandment, which was near in Christ, which the outward signified; which being
blotted out, by reason of Transgression, that which was within, but blotted out
by reason death was come over, was given without. But the Word is very nigh
unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it, Deuteronomy. 30.
13, 14. The Word is nigh unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that
is the Word of Faith which we Preach, says Paul, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. there is no
need of going afar off. As he has made man individual, so he requires every
individual man to worship him; and he has put something of himself, a measure
of Christ Jesus into every individual man, whereby and wherein every individual
man may worship him: this is General, this is Universal, this is Public, this
is Catholic; he has not left man to seek out of himself, to form, to shape,
to liken, nor to depend one man upon another, how or wherein he should be
worshipped; he has not put him to that hazard, neither has laid upon him that
which is a heavy burden, or too hard for him to bear, or at too great a
distance, or at any distance at all; but as he has required man, so he is near
man, or he has put into man that which will enable him to do as he requires.
So the Lord is no hard Master, nor does require impossibilities; nor has he
left man to wander up and down, but he is near him to take him by the hand, and
to lead him to all that he requires; he is in him to tell him what he should
do, and he is with him to enable him to do what he would have him; the same
that does the one, does the other: Herein is the loving kindness of God seen,
and his justice, that he requires no more than he enables to do, and that he
gives to enable to do what he requires; and to another man has not the Lord
left man to be directed, but the thing is in himself, which all the World is
mad at, because the Devil is in all the World; and he would persuade man that
God is afar from him, as the Devil is to God, and gets his eye abroad to look
at a distance where God is not to be found.

That which is to be known of God, is manifest in man, for God has shown it
unto him; but the work of the one my has been to draw man from this; The
invisible things of him are clearly seen from the Creation of the World, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, so
that they are without excuse, says the Apostle, Romans 2. 19, 20. Yet because
that when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful,
but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened;
professing themselves wise, they became fools, and changed the Glory of the
incorruptible God into an Image made like corruptible man, and to Birds and
four-footed Beasts, and creeping things; wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves, who changed the Truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator, who is God blessed
for ever, Amen. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, for even
their Women did change their natural use into that which is against Nature; and
likewise also the men leaving the natural use of the Women, burned in their
lust one toward another, men with men working that which is unseemly, and
receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet. And even
as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient, etc. verse. 21, to
the end.

So here is the reason why men are so far off God, and are strangers unto him,
and become abominable, and to every good work reprobate; it is not that God is
not near them, or that that of God which is to be known is not manifest in
them, even his eternal Power and Godhead; but because they like not to retain
him in their knowledge, because when they know God, they glorify him not as
God, neither are thankful, but become vain in their imaginations; so they come
to change the Glory of the incorruptible God into an Image like unto
corruptible man; men come to form God like unto themselves, and make him like
as they imagine him to be, therefore God gives them up, who change the Truth of
God into a lie, into imaginations of things without them, their foolish heart
being darkened, and to worship the Creature more than the Creator, who is God
blessed for ever.

Here Is the reason of all the false Worship in the World, all worshipping of
God at a distance, all inventions of men, and their meddling and having to do
with Worship, and to order that, all outward Constitutions, and Persecution for
not observing the same. Men are gone far from God, their foolish heart is
darkened, they are become vain in their imaginations, they are alienated from
God by wicked works, they have not liked to retain God in their knowledge, nor
have been thankful, that that of God which is to be known was manifest [in]
them; therefore have they put God afar off, and looked upon him at a distance;
and so have made Images and Representations, and taken upon them to form him as
they please, and a Worship for him as they please; and they that will not fall
down to it, into the fiery Furnace they must be thrown, and into the Lions Den
he must be cast, that will make a Petition to any other Godd, that will not
worship God after that manner of Worship, and as those their Laws have
prescribed: First, They are gone from that which is of him in them, by which
they might know him that they have not liked to retain in their knowledge, nor
glorified God as God when they knew God, will not own that which is to be known
of God, which is manifested in them, as it is; then they think of God without
them, as he is not, then they frame Worships according to their own minds,
after this manner, and after that, shaping God as they please, and a Worship
for him whom they have so shaped, who have neither heard his Voice at any time,
nor seen his shape outwardly; then they compel all to serve this God so shapen,
and to worship him as they have shaped and formed his Worship, some after this
manner, some after that, and those that will not, Fines, Imprisonments,
Suspensions from Places and Dignities, casting out, and Excommunications,
Whippings, losing of Ears, burnings in the Body, selling for Bondmen and
Bond-women, Banishment upon pain of Death, and Death it self; after the most
exquisite and various manners that can be thought of, as Ages and Generations
have proved; of which I am by and by to speak and give witness.

And the reason has bin, because being gone from that of God in them, by and
in which they should worship him, and every one in their own particulars,
which is near, whose Injunction as it is in Spirit, so is the Worship, and
the Punishment of not so worshipping: they are in nothing but what is outvvard
themselves, and know no more of God than what themselves think, which being
indeed nothing at all (that is, so far, and as they are gone from that, or
worship or compel thereunto, otherwise than that) their Worship is like their
Godd, which is as themselves; These things thou have done, and I kept silence:
Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such ^ one as thy self, but I will
reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this ye
that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver,
(Psalm. 50. 21, 22.) and being as themselves, their punishment is as themselves,
which is outward, corporeal, as man is not in the Spirit.

So every one that makes a Worship, makes a Godd; and every one that worships
not God in Spirit and in Truth, makes a Worship; and confounded be all they
that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols; worship him all ye
Godds, Psalm. 97. 7.

And the Enemy is in all this, who (as I have said) being far from God himself,
endeavors to put man as far as himself; he removes him from having respect to,
and minding that of God in him, to look afar off, well knowing that if he can
but once do that, he shall never know God; and then he can easily persuade man
to be as God, and to give Laws how he, indeed as God, may be worshipped, and to
torture and torment the Bodies of those who worship God as he will be
worshipped, or who cannot worship God as man would have him worshipped.

For he that would drive a man from the Measure of God in himself, to worship
God as he pleases, drives a man from God, and instead of God sets himself up
to be worshipped, and himself being set up, or he having set up himself to be
worshipped, he takes revenge, and punishes those who will not worship what
himself sets up, and so falls into the predicament of Nebuchadnezzar, and of
all those, who because of Worships, not conforming to their Laws of Worship,
have caused men to suffer, as the Histories now to be made mention of give
instance.

And here, lest I should seem too prolix, and fill a Volumn with that which a
lesser space may serve to give evidence to what I have in hand, I shall
principally confine my self to what Eusebius, Pamphilius, Socrates,
Scholasticus, and Evarius Scholasticus, in their Ecclesiastical History, have
set down, and touched at, for near the first six hundred years after the death
of him who is Lord and King, and lives for ever. And here I shall be as short
as well I may, that in a thing of this consequence, I may convince what I have
here asserted to this and the Ages that shall succeed, to the end that (as the
wise man said) it may appear, that as to God and his Worship, and Worshippers,
and what they have received, who have worshipped him in Spirit and in Truth,
from them who have held up the Ecles. 1. 9.
Form without, and not knowing, and not from the Power of God, there is no new
thing under the Sun; but as they did of old, so in this day, the same they
receive from such as are in the Form, who know, and are in the Power of God,
and how that which has held up the Form, and has prescribed Laws and
Constitutions, Creeds and Governments, by which God should be worshipped, have
stained the Earth with blood, and with the most horrible torments and
sufferings most exquisite, have wrung out of every Age this confession, That
destruction and violence is in their Paths, and the way of Peace they have not
known: And this one thing has proved, that man was in all this (or rather the
Devil in man) who having set up himself as God, destroys, as he can, all those
who will not fall down and worship him, which is not the Religion of God, the
Wisdom which is from Above, which is first pure, then peaceable, Jam. 3. 17.
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy; nor the Worship of him, who says, He came
not to Luke 9. 3^*
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

And here I shall take upon me no affected Style, nor strain any thing beyond
what they speak in themselves; but as the Spirit of the Lord, of whom I am
moved this to undertake, shall lead and give me; to whom be the glory of his
own working, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

Eusebius in his first Book of Ecclesiastical History, Chapter the first, Eus.
lib. 1. c. 1.
taking upon him to speak of the Divinity and Humanity of Christ the Lord, and
treating of the Antiquity of the Christian Religion, and the Name of Christ,
which the Heathen in that day thought a very Novelism, who worshipped Images
and Idols, such things which they made to themselves, who sacrificed to Devils,
not to God, as it was said of Jeroboam, -- He ordained him Priests for the high
Places, for the Devils, and 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. Deuteronomy. 32. 17.
for the Calves which he had made. -- And by Moses, They sacrificed unto
Devils, not to God; to Godds whom they knew not, to new Godds, who came newly
up, whom your Fathers knew not; and which he forbad to Israel, when he said, --
They shall no more offer their Sacrifices unto Devils, after whom they are gone
a whoring: This shall be a Statute unto them (said the Lord by Levit. 1. 17. 7.
Moses) throughout their Generations. -- I say, he speaking of the Divinity,
and the Humanity of Christ, and treating of the Antiquity of the Christian
Religion, and the Name of Christ, which the Heathen in that day counted a
Novelism, brings him in thus, -- This [Light] (says he) going before the
World, and all the Worlds, the Intellectual and Essential Wisdom, and the
living Word of God, being in the beginning with the Father, who but the Father
alone has rightly known? -- Implying that they took upon them that which they
did not understand, who did undertake to speak of him and his descent and
beginning of days, who is from everlasting; also of his Religion, and the Age
and Antiquity thereof, who knew him not, much less his Religion.

This was the ground of all the most cruel and Heathenish persecutions of the
Christians, and of the then called Christians one of another, of which he (and
the aforementioned) treat; they knew not Christ the Light, which (he says)
went (or was) before the World, and all Worlds, the Intellectual and Essential
Wisdom, and the living Word of God, who was in the beginning with the Father;
therefore they thought him a thing (or some Imposter) in time, about that time,
or but then brought forth, or appearing, or known in the World, when those who
pretended to him were nicknamed, Christians (that is to say) in such a year of
the Reign of such a Roman Emperor, who is without beginning of days, or end of
Life, as has been declared: Also they who were called Christians, and yet
persecuted one another, were from the Light, Christ the Light, which was before
the World, and (so far, or whilst as such (that is to say) persecuting one
another) knew not that, or were not in it, which was before the World; So they
placed things in time, the Heathen, their gods, before him whose Name was
Christ, and that which one, called Christian, persecuted another for before
that, for holding of which, or not holding, Persecution of the Christians.
one, called Christian, persecuted another.

And here (as I said before) was the ground of both, and of all those who
since, and at this day, persecute others upon account of Religion, or the
Worship of God, their not knowing, or not abiding in the knowledge of him,
who is the Light of the World, the true Light that lights every man that
comes into the World, which was (or went) before the World was; Who but the
Father alone has (as has been said) rightly known.

For all such judging of things relating unto him in time, and thinking of him,
as they think of themselves, think grossly, and so put the determination of
Truth, according to the measure of themselves, who a beginning have, and must
come to an end, which is wholly out of the verge of Truth, which neither has
beginning nor end: So these gross apprehensions, both in the Heathen, and such
as were called Christians, is the reason or ground wherefore they call Truth
Novelism, and so persecute one another because of Truth; they are absolutely
from that which was before time was, by which the World was made, in that which
is in time, which knows not that by which time was, and in which time was made,
which has a beginning, and must end, which never could nor can judge of Truth,
which has no end, as it never had a beginning. Lord, thou have been our
dwelling place in all Generations, before the Moun^ains were brought forth, or
ever thou had formed the World, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God, Psalm. 90. 12.

The Heathens accounted the Christian Religion, or Christ and his The ground of
the Heathen Persecution, and of the Christians; and of the Christians
persecuting one another.
Worship, an upstart thing; the Christians (so called) that persecuted,
accounted what they persecuted, a thing that was an upstart; they laid their
Force, they put their Penalties, their Laws, their Death; Why? they were in
that which stood in time, that knew not the Light which was before the World
was, which is the Intellectual and Essential Wisdom, the living Word of God,
which was in the beginning with the Father, who alone the Father has rightly
known: All things are delivered me of my Father, and no man knows the Son but
the Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27.

And these persecuted one another about Worship; Why? Because they saw not the
Light, they saw not that Light by which all things were made, but being in that
which is made, and seeing with that eye, or the eye which is made, and not with
the Light which was before the World, the Principle of God; they quarrelled
about Religion, and the Worship of God, and for that shed blood, which came not
to destroy men's lives, but to save them, as has been declared; who will have
no bloody Sacrifices, since he was offered up, who by one offering for ever
perfected those that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.

So that the reason of all lies here, Men not coming to that which was before
the World was, not knowing, or not believing or abiding in that by which all
things were made, which was before all things, and taking upon them to judge of
that which was before the World was; judge like themselves, and prosecute their
Judgments with things like themselves, and make that which they prosecute like
to themselves, which is perishing and transitory, which they cut off and
destroy; they count Truth new, an upstart, Christ Jesus this thing, that
Novelism, they persecute, cut off, and seek to do it, because they see not the
Ancient of days, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion
that which shall never have an end; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion,
which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
Dan. 7. 14.

Eusebius adds, -- Which is before every Creature, and workmanship, Eusebius.
further account of Christ the Light,
both of visible and invisible things, the first, and only Son of God, chief
Captain of the Celestial, Rational, and Immortal Host, the Angel of the great
Counsel, and Executor of the great Will of the Father, Maker, and worker of all
things together with the Father; which after the Father, is the cause and
Author of all things which are created, the true and only begotten Son of God,
Lord God, and King of all things which are created, receiving Dominion and Rule
of the Father by the said Divinity, Power, and Glory.

All this he calls the Light (as aforesaid) and withal says, His Generation
And his Generation.
who shall be able to declare? For the Father no man has known but the Son,
neither at any time have any known the Son but the Father alone which begat
him, in the words aforegoing.

So that here he lays the bottom of his History, which he calls
Ecclesiastical, The bottom of his History, and of the Truth.
or relating to the Church, or the Worship of God, which is the Antiquity, unto
which he pretends, against that which rose up against the Christians in that
day, both by the Jews and Heathens, as a thing but of yesterday, of young date,
and not everlasting; the same unt^ which answers now in this, that which
pretends now to Truth, as a new thing never heard of before, no Antiquity
before a few years late past, which is everlasting, Christ the Light, which was
before the World was; by whom all things were made which was made, without whom
nothing was made which was made; which was with God, which was God, in whom was
Life, and the Life was the Light of men, which is the true Light that lights
every man that comes into the World, John 1. 2, 3, 4, 9. Here Is the Antiquity,
here is the Ancient of days, here is the Original, the Principle of them that
pretend to the Light in this day; hitherto pretended he that wrote in that day;
the reason of the wrong Judgment of the youngness of Truth then, is the same,
of the same censure of it now; the ground has been declared, and the bottom,
which I thought convenient to take notice of in the entrance of what I have to
say, as he did in the beginning of what he spoke; the same being then as it is
now, and the answer the same with that upon which he grounded that which he
said, (as aforesaid) which I have inserted in order as his History began, of
which he lays this as the ground and bottom; and which I quote, that such men
may see, that that which they lay as the ground of their own Principles, is no
other but the same on which we are grounded, who pretend to the Truth; and that
so they may not be offended with their own Principle, when they come to see it
in the hand of another, or others professing, and coming to that which
themselves pretend to, yet come not at, but run on those that both come to, and
pretend it; as is the case of the People called Quakers at this day, who are
run upon, as bringing up some strange and uncouth Doctrine, which is no other
then what was in the beginning, the ground of which was before the World, and
which when they will lay a bottom for their own work, they must come to, or no
bottom they can lay; also, that the Controversies may cease, and that in this
particular it may appear we are not diverse from Christ nor his Apostles, nor
the holy men of God, nor the Principle on which they pretend to build their own
Profession, which they not holding to, come to persecute those who hold it, as
it was in the beginning, The Son of the Bondwoman, the Son of the Freewoman;
for (as the Gal. 4 29.
Scripture says) as it was then, so it is now: Also that in this work I may
proceed methodically, and as it ought, taking away all ground of Objections,
and representing every thing as it is: And so I come to that for which I
chiefly quoted these Authors, and shall in order go as I find the History,
which by that time I have finished, I hope no reasonable or sober man (when he
has read and considered all in the Spirit of Truth) will have cause to say,
that either the things are needless, or that he misspent his time in taking
notice of what lies here now to be spoken to, or discoursed of.

This then concerning National Worships, and the sufferers by, or because The
ground of National Worship, and the sufferings by them.
of the not complying with them, and how it came that there were such Worships
after the decease of the Apostles, and so how they came in, and on what steps
they have stood, and do stand at this day (that is to say) the sufferings by
reason of them, as I have showed their Original, as to the Jews, on the foot of
which no National Worship can have Warranty or Ground, though upon that foot
they have seemed to place their Ground and Warranty, as has been declared. --
National Worship, how it came in, and what it was, as to the Jews, and how and
when it had its end, I have already manifested. Spirit, and Truth, the Law of
the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus, the newness of the Spirit, not
the oldness of the Letter, the Spirit of Truth which leads into all Truth,
after his Resurrection and Ascension put it out, that which was in the letter
in the outward Administration, in Carnal Rites, and Ordinances, and
Commandments; which were (in the Jew) the shadows of good things to come, but
not the very things themselves, came to have an end, when this promise was
fulfilled: So the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ testified, of which
the Scriptures bear Record, and for this they suffered ^^^m the Jew that stood
in the outward Commandment, Worship and ^^ministration, the shadow that once
was of that good thing, which whiles the shadow continued, was to come, but
being come, the shadow had an end: So the Jew in the flesh persecuted the Jew
in the Spirit; the Circumcision made with hands, the Circumcision made without
hands; and here began the dispute in that day, which has continued unto this,
which is the thing I have hitherto treated of, and now shall proceed further,
to demonstrate according to the Histories, of the things that have been done
since the decease of the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus, and what they went
through, as it is mentioned in the Scriptures.

And here the Heathens give me the first occasion of drawing the Sufferings by
the Heat^ens on the foot of National Worship, during the days of the Apostles,
bloody Roll of Sufferings, at which these Histories at large do make mention:
At Acts 6. 5.
Antioch it was that the Disciples of Jesus were first called Christians, a
Nickname, or term of slander, no doubt, given, or cast upon such by way of
reproach, or derision, or marking out for mischief, as the consequence both
from the one and the other, gives at large to understand: The Gentiles or
Heathen, had their Worships, they sacrificed to Devils, not to God, they were
mad upon their Idols; Spirit Je^. 5. 38.
and Truth that was risen from the dead, came to root them up, as it did put an
end to the Administration of the Jew, or his National Worship, it turned the
World upside down, which had put it down, and crucified it Acts 17. 6.
in Jesus, and changed the Laws and Customs, and said, That they were Acts 19
26. 17 6.
no gods that were made with bands; and overturned the Decrees of Caesar, as
even in the Apostles days, they spoke of the Disciples, of which the
Scriptures makes mention; Spirit and Truth overturned it. The Devil had his
false Worships, as he has had ever since he entered into man, he made still
ado in the World about his Worship; he stirred up Cain to kill his Brother
Abel about his Worship; he raised up the chief Priests 1 John 3. 12.
and Pharisees to put him to death who came to overturn his Worship; he set
them on against his Disciples when they preached the Resurrection of the dead,
that risen again that came to put it under. And the Devil (said John by the
Spirit of Prophecy in the Revelation) shall cast some of you into Prison! Man
thinks he should worship God; something calls Rev. 2. 10.
after man (though he is fallen) to return to God and worship him, who gave him
his being. The Devil being entered, by reason of transgression, seeks to deceive
man, and being in man, sets man upon making of Worships, and then to destroy
all that will not observe what he has set up as his Worship, or would have to
be set up as the Worship of God. God is from everlasting, his Worship is as he
is, they which stand in his Worship, and which Worship from him, are gentle,
and meek, easy to be Jam. 3. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 25.
entreated; with meekness instructing them that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them the knowledge of the Truth: It is Spiritual, and
the Weapons thereof are not Carnal, but mighty through the Spirit: But that 2
Cor. 10. 4.
which stands in the Worship of man, or of the Devil, or of the Worship of the
Devil, or man, is otherwise: It is like that, from whence it came, which is
Carnal, and outward, and fierce, and implacable, and destructive in the
consequence to those that bow not thereunto, which is a demonstration of that
from whence it came, as pertaking of its nature, and being like thereunto.

This I write to give a little taste of the difference of either, that as I go
along all may see what things have ruled in the World, and what has been the
ground of the troubles that have been therein concerning Religion, and that
they may know what that Religion is that ends in death, and other sufferings,
and may be convinced how far it is from that which came not to bring death, but
to deliver from it, which seeks the destruction of the spirit that leads aside
from God, not the man, but to redeem and deliver him. And here, as in a Glass,
these things may be seen and discovered, and with great perspicuity and
plainness, if men shut not their eyes on purpose, and refuse to see, though the
daylight break in never so bright upon them, whose eyes the god of this World
has blinded, even the minds of them, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who 2 Cor. 4. 4.
is the Image of God, should shine unto them; As the Apostle spoke in his day,
of those to whom his Gospel was hid, even to them that were lost; it was so
plain, it was so perspicuous; If our Gospel be hid, it is to them that are
lost, in whom the God of this World has blinded their minds, etc. as
aforesaid, 2 Cor. 4. 3.
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

So there I leave this matter, and shall proceed to show what happened, or came
to pass after the time of which the Scriptures give testimony, being the thing
of which I have declared to treat, though thus much was necessary to say, to
bring things down from the beginning to their due order and place, and so I
shall proceed. Sufferings by the Heathen, after the days of the Apostles.


The Roman Emperors were worshippers of Images of Godds; their Jurisdictions
were large, and their Worships they made as large as their Jurisdictions;
nothing was more against that which was not God, than the Name of that, or of
him, which came to redeem from dumb Idols to the Service of the living God, and
this was Christ Jesus; he gave a great start to the Godds made with hands, the
Inventions of men, who had eyes, and saw not; ears, and heard not; neither did
they understand. The Psalm. 115. 5.
Power in which he stood, and the Miracles which he wrought were such, that
drew to him great admiration throughout the World. The Romans had jurisdiction
over Judea in those days, and the Regions thereabouts; they were an
inquisitive and understanding People, as men, though ignorant of God; their
Lievtenants, Prefects, and Governors usually gave them account, who had the
chief rule of what considerably passed in their Provinces, and was most
remarkable; the mighty things which Jesus did, and how he was put to death, and
rose again, went not without its observation and report: Pilate, under and by
whom he suffered Pilates account
at the instigation of the Jews, being then Governor of Jerusalem, who washed
his hands, and said, He would have nothing to do in the death of that just
Person; though he afterward delivered Jesus to their wills, notwithstanding
that he knew that through very envy Jesus was delivered to him, having a sense
upon him of what Jesus was, and of the mighty things he had wrought, signified
the matter so unto Tiberius, who was Anno. 18. to Tiberius Emperor, of Jesus,
occasioned
then Emperor, that he had him in great Reverence, and his Doctrine, and
declared to the Senate, That it pleased him right-well; and so would have had
him put among the number of their Godds, but they received it not, because of
the decree that was amongst them, That no Godd should be consecrated by the
Emperor, unless it were first agreed upon by the Senate, as Eusebius quotes
Tertullians words; who nevertheless (viz.) Tiberius Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 2.
gave not over, but persevered in his Opinion of Jesus, and his Doctrine,
^hreatning them with death that would accuse the Christians. The Se^ate the
liberty of the profession of
(says Eusebius of Tertullians words) rejected it, because they had not
allowed the same, but he persevered in his Opinion, threatening them death that
would accuse the Christians. -- And this makes for us, (says Eusebius of
Tertullian, in his Apology for the Christians) that the Deity is weighed
amongst you after man's will and judgment; unless God please man, he is not made
God; so that (says Tertullian) by the Decree, man must be favorable Tertul in
Apolog. advers. Gentes. cap. 3.
and gracious unto God: This was the wisdom (says Eusebius of Tiberius, his
retaining of the sense of Christ and his Doctrine) of the Divine Providence
[lightning] his mind, that the preaching of the Gospel should pass Christian
Religion,
at the beginning throughout the World.

So I have given the ground or occasion (as to men) how the fame of Jesus had
its liberty to go through the World; which (as Eusebius has observed) no doubt
was through the Wisdom of God, and his mighty Hand, that the report, of what he
was and did, from Pilate, should bear that weight with Tiberius, as to allow a
propagation thereof throughout his Dominions, which extended very far, by
reason of which it so came to pass, that multitudes were turned from their
Idols, and worshipped the God which made Heaven and Earth, through his Son
Jesus Christ.

Thus got the Name Christian footing in the World, and spread it self Which
spreading it self over
under the whole Heaven, as it were of the Roman Empire, into Towns, Cities,
Nations, Provinces; and the Lord was called upon, who made Heaven and Earth,
the Sea, and the dry Land, of which John speaks, and the Earth was replenished
with the knowledge of the Lord: But in The World occasioned, or the Persecution
because thereof,
this state it stood not long, but the Enemy, as soon as he could, wrought off
that sound, which was of what Jesus was, from all the Emperors that succeeded
Tiberius, and the sense of him and it, and got the constitutions of the Roman
Empire, for the enforcing of the Worship of their Idol become General.
Godds, to take place, which gave occasion of infinite sufferings, and unheard
of Butcheries to be committed on the Christians from the days of Nero who
succeeded Claudius, whom Caius Caligula succeeded, who was Nero the first chief
persecutor of the Christians.
the successor of Tiberius, to the days of Constantine, and so onwards, as the
same spirit ruled in the Emperors, who made their Laws like themselves, and
showed the inward portraicture of their bloody breasts, by inflicting most
inhumane sufferings; of which, what I have further to say, gives a more
particular account. Read your Authors (says Tertullian Tertul. in Apolog. cap
5. his account thereof; and of him,
in his Apology for the Christians to the Gentiles) there you shall find Nero
chiefly to have persecuted this Doctrine (which was that of the Christians) at
Rome, where the whole East was now subdued, he became cruel unto all men. We
boast and brag (says he) of such a famous persecutor, for they which knew him,
may easily perceive that this our Doctrine had never been condemned by Nero,
had it not been passing good.

So the setting up of Religion by man, the requiring of man to observe the
Religion that was set up by man, was that which (at first) gave the occasion,
or was the ground of the first and the fiercest persecutions: And of
Persecution, and the ground of it.
for (as Tertullian has fully and well said as aforesaid) unless that God
please man, he is not made God. -- A strange presumption, that poor man, whose
breath is in his Nostrils, and is not sure that once more he shall breath,
should be so bewitched with the enchantments of the wicked One, and so deluded,
as to take upon him to prescribe unto God, and in effect to say unto him who
made him, Thou shall not be, or have any The sense of Persecution (in effect)
of God, and what of him it says according to Tertullian.
Worship but as I will, and shall please to afford thee. Indeed he might well
assume and say, as upon the former account, as aforesaid, Man must be gracious
and favorable unto God. -- A strange inversion, yet it is that, which all that
which by the force or power of man, would prescribe how God shall be
worshipped, does affirm and speak, viz. If thou please me, or if it so like me,
thou shall be so, and after this manner worshipped; otherwise expect not any
Worship in the World: pray thou unto me that I may be gracious and favorable
to thee, for unless thou please me, thou shall not be God, thou shall not be
worshipped.

It were well if men's eyes were open to see these things, and how their And
what the seeking to enforce Religion signifies, as to that, or speaks.
setting up of Worship, of Religion, something that is of their own mind and
framing, which is not from the Spirit, the Principle, the measure of God in
them, is the same with what has been rehearsed; for if he be a God, knows not
he how to direct his Worship? If he has made the World and Man, and required
Man to worship him, and to do what is pleasing in his sight; knows not he how
to direct man in what manner to worship him? Or has he left man so without
something of himself to guide and instruct him, that man must needs take upon
him to advise and instruct, yea to enforce, as to the Worship of God? Gird up
now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me, said
the Lord to Job, cap. 40. verse. 7. who answered, I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear; but now mine eye does see thee: wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes, Job 41. 5, 6. These things would be ridiculous to
affirm, yet the things speak it, and every days experience manifests it, how
vain man would be wise, who is born as the wild Asses Colt, who Job 11. 12.
would teach his Maker, and instruct the holy One of Is^ael; and instead of
abiding at his Feet to entreat his Grace and Favor, seems to seek to bring his
Maker to his feet to entreat his grace and favor, how, and that he may be
worshipped.

Well, these things cost them hard who ran this course, through And the
consequence thereof, as to punishment, throughout all Generations, as a warning
to this.
all Generations; and this will cost them hard who run the same course now; the
Lord will be known by the Judgments that he will execute. And as Heathens, and
those who bear the Name of Christians (but are otherwise in Nature) do the same
thing, who enjoin Worship, and require men to conform unto their Decrees
therein, (for the spirit in both is the same) so will they partake of the same
punishment. Judah and Edom, and the Children of Moab and Ammon, all that are in
the utmost Corners, that dwell in the Wilderness; For all these Nations are
uncircumcised, and all the House of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart, Jer.
9. 26. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will punish all them that
are circumcised with the uncircumcised, verse. 25.

So all Kings and Princes, Lords and Potentates of the Earth, had need to look
about them, and consider how they meddle with his Dominion, who lives for ever,
in the Conscience, as to his Worship; How they say in effect, Unless he please
them, he shall not be made God; and so by their Decrees speak that they must be
gracious and favorable to God, as the Heathens did of old, lest he dash them
to pieces. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, if his
anger be kindled, yea, but a little: Blessed are all they that put their trust
in him, Psalm. 2. 12.

Thus stood the case of the Heathen Emperors as to God, by the And the reason
thereof.
judgment of Tertullian, whose judgment is true, and this proves the
consequence, when as by virtue of their Power and Jurisdiction, they took upon
them to meddle with his Dominion in the Conscience, as they went over and
murdered all sense of God, or as the sense of God and his Majesty, and dread,
was murdered in their hearts; so they murdered those, who retaining a sense of
the dread and Majesty of God in their hearts, could not bow down unto and
worship their Godds, their National Worship which required all men to fall down
and worship it: The truth of it is, they required God to fall down and worship;
and because that which was of him in men, hindered many from so doing, therefore
they laid at God what they could; but missing him whom they could not reach,
they killed the Creature in which he was, which that of him which was in them
kept them from doing, and bore them through all that which the rage of man
executed upon them because of God. And thus stands it with all those who tread
the same steps; the spirit is the same, and the way is the same, and the work
is the same, and the same will be the end of those that tread therein.

Nero was the first of all the Emperors that gave the fierce on set upon Nero
began the first Persecution, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 4. Anno 41. Cap. 5. Caius
Caligula
the Christians; for although Caius Caligula made himself a Godd, and caused
himself to be proclaimed a Godd; and the Tributaries to the Romans dedicated
Altars and Temples to him, and esteemed him in all other respects as God, (as
those in effect do who take upon them to enjoin as to the Worship of God); and
though his dealing was so grievous unto all men, especially the Nation of the
Jews, who disdainfully withstood the honor done to him of men, and were
accustomed to profane his Name, and vexed so many with manifold and
innumerable afflictions, which are too long to be repeated; for beginning at
Alexandria, he claimed unto himself their Prayers, and set up his own Picture
every where, and dedicated the Temple in Jerusalem to himself, unto his proper
use (which until that time is said to have been undefiled, and free every way)
translating or consecrating the name to New Caius as a famous Godd; who told
Pilate, when he said of Jesus, Behold your King, shall I crucify your King? --
We have no other King but Caesar: Yet Anno. 46. Claudias, c. 25.
I read not that he so fell upon the Christians, nor Claudius neither, who
succeeded Caius: The Historian* says of him these words, -- Nero now Anno. 56.
A particular account of Nero, and
settled in his Seat, fell into abominable facts, and took Armor against the
Service due unto the Universal and Almighty God; how detestable he was become,
is not for this present time to declare, for there be many who have painted out
his wilful malice, which may easily appear, if we consider the furious madness
of that man, through the which, after that, beyond all reason he had destroyed
an innumerable company, he fell into such a sucking vein of slaughter, that he
abstained not from his most dear and familiar Friends; yea, he tormented with
diverse kinds of deaths his own Mother, his Wife, his Brethren, and many of his
nearest Kinsfolks, as if they had been enemies and deadly foes unto him: but it
behoved us to note this one thing of him above the rest, That he was accounted
the first Enemy of all the Emperors to the Service of God. This Enemy of God
(says he) set up himself in the destruction Paul Beheaded, Peter crucified.
How he began, and finished the first of the Ten Persecutions. The Heathen
Lineage of Christ's persecu^ors. Domitian, Anno. 63. Eusebius* l. 3 c. 8. Titus cap
15. Raised the second persecution. An account of him and his Persecution, Anno.
97.
of the Apostles, wherein he was first discovered, for they write that Paul was
Beheaded, and Peter Crucified of him at Rome. -- Thus far Eusebius he began,
and in his Reign was finished the first of the Ten most famous and bloody
Persecutions of the Christians, being the first Enemy or Persecutor (as the
Historian says above) of the Christians, of the Service of God, of all the
Emperors. So see your Stock and Lineage in these latter days, ye who have been
persecutors of the Truth.

Domitian was the next who raised, and upon the foot of whose cruelty is called
the second Persecution; he took the Imperial Crown, when his Brother Titus had
reigned two years and two months, he was very wicked and cruel. The Historian
says of him, -- Domitian, when he had executed much cruelty against many, and
put to death no small multitude of the Nobles of Rome, and notable men, beyond
all rightful Judgment, and punished an infinite company of famous men, with
exile and loss of their substance, dies, and appointed himself successor of
Nero in hatred and war against God. This man also raised persecution against
us, although his Father Vespasian practiced no presumptuous Lordliness toward
us. -- John is said Vespasian, c. 16 John banished
to be banished by Domitian into the Isle of Patmos, the same year in which he
died, as says Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 16. Our Religion (says he again) so
flourished in the aforesaid times, that the Heathen Writers noting exactly the
times, vouchsafed to publish in their Histories this Persecution, and the
Martyrdoms suffered in the same.

Trajan is the third, whose footsteps were covered in the blood of the Trajan
raised, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 18 Anno. 100. The third Persecution.
Christians; great slaughters were made of them, and with most cruel torments
were many of them drawn unto death; he succeeded Nerva, who succeeded Domitian;
the completing of his cruelty made up what Nerva, cap. 30.
is called the third Persecution. Eusebius says, -- So great a persecution An
account of his Persecution, and the Christians Principl^s, by Plinius Secundus.
was raised against us in several places, that Plinius Secundus, a notable
President, made relation there of unto the Emperor, being very much moved with
the number of Martyrs which suffered death for the testimony of their Faith;
signifying withal that they committed no beynous offense, nor transgressed any
Law, saving that they rose before day, and celebrated Christ with Hymns as God,
forbidding Adulteries and Slaughter, with such other like abominable facts,
showing conformity in all things agreeable to the Laws; after which report it
is written, that Trajan commanded by edict, that the Christian Nation Upon
which Trajan commanded the Christians not to be enquired for.
should not be enquired for, but if happily they were found, they ought to be
punished. -- By which Edict the vehement heat of that grievous Persecution was
somewhat quallified: Yet nevertheless there was scope enough left for such as
were willing to afflict us; so that in one place, the people, in another place
the Princes and Rulers of the Regions, laid wait for our men, whereby several
persons suffered Martyrdom in their Provinces, and sundry of the Faithful, with
sundry kinds of deaths, without open or manifest persecution; -- Which he
groundeth out of Tertullians Apology for the Christians Tertul. Apolog cap. 5.
Relates the reason of the Inhibition of the Inquisition.
against the Heathens, where yet Tertullian says, -- Although we have known
the Inquisition directed for us to be inhihited, it was by reason of Plinius
Secundus, who having condemned some of the Christians, and deprived some others
of their Dignities, was moved with the greatness of their Multitude, and
doubted what was best to be done. He made the Emperor Trajan privy thereof,
saying, That he found nothing in them that was impious, but that they refused
the worshipping of Images; signifying this And the Christians Principles.
withal, that the manner of the Christians was to rise before day, to celebrate
Christ as God; and to the end their Discipline may straightly be observed, they
forbid shedding of blood, adultery, fraud, traitorous dealing, and such like:
For answer hereunto, Trajan wrote again, That there should be no inquisition
for Christians, but if they were met with they should be punished: And thus,
says Eusebius, went the affairs of the Christians then.

Marcus Aurelius Verus was the fourth, who drew the blood of the Anno 163:
Eusebius. l 4. c 14 Marcus Aurelius Verus, the fourth Pe^secution, cap. 3.
Christians, and made up what is called the fourth Persecution, who with
Antoninus his Son, and Lucius his Brother, succeeded Antoninus Pius, which
Antoninus Pius succeeded Aelius Adrianus, and Aelius Adrianus, Trajan: Those
two Emperors, (viz.) Adrian and Pius were more friendly to the Christians, who
through their tenderness got some respite. Adrian began his Reign at the death
of Trajan, in the year 119. Trajan having worn the Imperial Scepter for the
space of twenty years wanting six months, (a long time for such issues of
blood, and perpetrations of cruelties) when he was dead, the old spite and
malice of wicked men ended not with him, but it sought its rise with Adrian
against the Christians, who then began to molest them. In the behalf of whom,
and the Christian Faith, Quadratus wrote and dedicated a Book, entitled
Quadrat. Apol: for the Christians.
an Apology of the Christian Faith, The works of our Savior (says he in it)
were manifest and open, for they were true; such as were healed and raised from
the dead, were not only healed and raised in sight, and outward show, but they
continually and constantly remained so indeed, (it seems there were such that
blasted them what they could with the contrary, and that he was an Impostor)
neither lived they only the time that our Savior (says he) had his abode here
on Earth; but a long time after his ascension, yea, and a number of them unto
our time. -- Aristides also an Atheman Philosopher, Aristid. Athen Philosop.
Apol for the Christians. The cruelty of the Persecution, and their valor
procu^es the Apology, c. 8.
wrote another Apology for the Faith of the Christians; for such was the
havoc, desolation and destruction made of the Christians, and with all kind of
torments, and with death, were they so run upon, and esteemed worse than Beasts
of prey, whom all knock in the head, as if they had been the only Creatures on
the Earth who were to be destroyed, and made so to be; that it, and their
unmovable constancy in their sufferings, moved great sense upon sober men,
even among the Heathen, whom it turned to the Faith.

Justinus Martyr, in his Apology for the Christians, assigns that as the
cause why he left Paganism, and embraced the Cristian Faith, -- For Justin
Martyrs own confession; how it had influence on him to become a Christian.
my self (says he) delighted with the Doctrine of Plato, hearing that the
Christians were led Captives, neither fearing death, nor any torments which are
accounted terrible, I thought it could not be that this kind of men were
subject unto malice, and set on pleasure; for what voluptuous person, and
intemperate, or delighted with the devouring of man's flesh, (which it seems in
those days was taken pleasure in) can so embrace death, that he be deprived of
his desire, and not rather endeavor that this always may last, that he may be
able to deceive Princes, and not betray himself to death? -- Also he says, In
the Judaical Wars, fresh before your eyes, Barehochebas a Barochebas the Jewish
Persecutor of the Christians Sereninus Gravianus interposition to Adrian.
Captain of the Jewish Rebellion, commanded the Christians only to be
grievously punished, unless they renounced Christ, and blasphemed God. -- So
they suffered on all hands. Sereninus Granianus, a noble President of the
Romans, wrote also to Adrian, signifying in their behalf, That it was very
injurious, that for no crime, but only at the outcry of the people, they
should be brought and executed; for even amongst their own Commanders and
Governors, the sufferings of the Christians had consideration: whereupon Adrian
wrote again to Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, Stops the Persecution.
wherein their sufferings abounded, That none without grievous crime and
occasion should be put to death. -- And, when as (says Justin, in his Apology
Justin Martyrs Apology for the Christians to Antinous.
for the Christians, to Antinous, speaking of Antinous, a Servant of Adrianus
Caesar, who had a festival Triumph celebrated in those days, and a City built
after his name called Antinoa, and Priests Consecrated, and Prophets appointed
thereunto, whom all Worship (says he) for fear, when as they know well enough
who, and whence he was) We might justly require, by virtue of the Epistles of
the most Victorious and Notable Caesar Adrian your Father, that as he
graciously commanded, so sentence should be given; yet we require not this as
commanded by Adrian, but inasmuch as ye know, that at the request of the people
justice is to be craved. -- So that the sense of what they understood, became
general, and the cry was, that it should be intermitted. Adrians Epistle, or
rather Edict to Minutius, was as follows, -- Unto Minutius Fundanus,
Proconsul of Asia, Adrian sends greeting. I received an Epistle from
Sereninus Granianus, Cap. 9. Adrians Edict to Minutius Caudanus, Proconsul of
Asia, to stop the Persecution.
that worthy Man, thy Predecessor, the occasion whereof I cannot with silence
leave untouched, lest that thereby men be troubled, and a gap left open to the
malice of Sycophants; Wherefore if your Provincials can prove ought against the
Christians, whereof they charge them, and justify it before the Bar, let them
proceed on, and not impeach them only for the Name, with making outcries
against them; for it is very expedient that if any be disposed to accuse, the
accusation be thoroughly known of you, and sifted: Therefore if any accuse the
Christians, that they transgress the Laws, see that you judge and punish
according to the quality of the offense; but in plain words, if any upon spite
or malice, in way of cavilation complain against them, see you chastise him for
his malice, and punish him with revengement. -- and punis^ the Informants. Cap.
10. Anno. 140. Antonius Pius, Just. Martyrs Apology, etc. again for the
Christians, which
Thus Adrian, who when he had finished his Rule for the space of twenty one
years, yielding unto death in the year 140. through whose tenderness the
Christians had some intermission (as I have said) from their sufferings.
Antonius Pius succeeded him, as aforesaid. Justin (among others) Apologizes
again for the Christian Faith, to him, and the Senate of Rome, -- Intituling
it, -- Unto the Emperor Titus Aelius Adrianus, (so called, because he was
Aelius Adrianus Adopted Son) unto Antonius Pius, most noble Caesar and true
Philosopher; unto Lucius Son of the Philosopher (that was an honorable Title
accounted then) Caesar, and Adopted of Pius, favourer of Learning; and unto the
Sacred Senate, with all the People of Rome in their behalf, which among all
sorts of men are unjustly hated, and reproachfully dealt withal; Justinus the
Son of Priscus Bacchius, born in Flavia, a new City of Palestina, one of them,
and one for them all, does make this request, etc. Unto which diverse other
supplications from others with other supplications etc. produced an Edict, c.
13. remitting the Persecution. The Copy of the Edict,
being brought to the Emperor, in the behalf of the Brethren who were grieved
with all kind of contumelies practiced upon them by their Provincials in Asia
he granted to the Commonalty of Asia this Constitution. -- The Emperor Caesar,
Marcus, Aurelius, Antonius, Augustus, Armenicus, Pontifex Maximus, fifteen
times Tribune, thrice Consul, unto the Commonalty of Asia sends greeting; I
know the Gods are careful to disclose hurtful persons, for they punish such as
will not worship them, more grievously than you do those whom you bring in
trouble, confirming that Opinion which they conceive of you, to be wicked and
ungodly men; It is their desire, in Gods quarrel, to die rather than to live;
So that they become Conquerers, yielding their lives unto the death, rather
than to obey your Edicts. It shall seem very necessary to admonish you of the
Earthquakes which have, and do happen among us, that being therewith moved, ye
may compare our estate with theirs; they have more confidence to Godwards than
you have; you during the time of your ignorance despise other Godds, contemn
the Religion of the Immortal God, banish the Christians which worship him, and
persecute them unto death: In the behalf of these men, many of the Provincial
Presidents have written heretofore unto our Father of famous memory, whom he
answered in writing again, That they were no longer to be molested, unless they
had practiced Treason against the Roman Empire; and many have given notice unto
us of the same matter, whom we answered as our Father did before. If any
therefore hereafter be found thus busied in other men's affairs, we command
requiring the punishing of the Accusers, cap. 14. Marc. Aurel. Verus, Antoninus
his Son, Lucius his Brother:
that he accused be absolute and free, though he be found such a one, I mean,
faulty, and that the accuser be grievously punished. -- In the hearing of the
great Assembly of Asia this Edict was proclaimed at Ephesus. Thus far of
Antonius Pius, who was called so, for his gentle and good disposition; he
reigned twenty and two years, and then gave to Death, whom Marcus Aurelius
Verus, aforesaid, succeeded, and Antoninus his Son, together with Lucius his
Brother, so called, because he was Adopted with Antoninus, under whose cruelty
arose, as I have said, the fourth Persecution.

Verus was a wicked cruel man, and under him many famous men in An account of
Verus and his Ty^anny.
their day, and multitudes of others, suffered; It would be endless to go
through all the particulars of that days Tragedy, only some things I shall
touch in the words of the Historian, (as I have done before) to give the Reader
a taste of what they endured, who then were required to give a testimony of
their Faith.

Asia, which had a little release by the Edict of Antonius Pius, as before,
Asia troubled again. Policarp. Bish of Smyrna, suffered Martyrdom, and Cap. 15.
diverse others.
came to be sorely troubled with Persecution again; and Policarpus, Bishop of
Smyrna, amongst many others, met with a full cup of it, of whom the Church
there, to the Church at Philomilium, and unto all the Congregations throughout
Pontus, thus wrote, -- We have written unto you Brethren, of such as suffered
Martyrdom, and of blessed Policarpus, who Signed and Sealed the Persecution
with his own blood. -- The beholders were The cruelties of the Executions
amazeth the beholders
amazed, seeing the flesh of the Martyrs rent with scourges, even to the inner
Veins and Sinnews, so that the most secret Intrals of their Bodies, their
Bowels and inward Privities were piteously to be seen; beholding, again, the
sharp shells of Seafish and pibble stones strewed under the Martyrs backs and
bruised bodies, with every kind of torment that could be devised. Last of all,
They were thrown to be torn in pieces, and devoured by wild Beasts. -- They
wrote of Germanicus, that when the Proconsul exhorted him to relent, and Ger
manicus, and his sufferings, and
admonished him of his tender years, and prayed him to pity his own case,
(which is the usual Crocodile temper of Persecutors, who without pity offer
men to cruelty for their Conscience, and then seem to bespeak them to pity
themselves) being now in the flower of his youth, he without intermission
enticed the Beasts to devour him; yea, constrained and compelled, that Valiant
Martyrdom.
with speed he might be dispatched of this cruel and wicked life, -- the
patience and constancy of whom, and the whole Christian Nation, (says the
Historian) the multitude of Infidels beholding, suddenly cried out, Remove the
Policarpus Martyred, Cap. 16. Justin Martyr,
wicked, seek out Policarpus, -- whom they burned alive.

Justinus also the Philosopher, aforesaid, who Apologized for the Christian
Faith (as has been said) being in life and learning, of that sort of them
called Cynicks, was put to death also, by reason of Cresseus another by reason
of Cresseus, another Philosopher, put to death. France. Antonius Verus Emperor,
then persecutes, Men, Women, Lads Blandina wearied her tormentors,
Philosopher, from whom he carried away the Bell, (as men use to say)
Apologizing for the Christians, and reprehending the Philosophers as gluttonous
and deceitful persons. In France also the Persecution was exceeding hot, by
reason of Antoninus Verus the Emperor, who there had Jurisdiction, Men, Women,
Lads, suffered such torments, as the Letter of the Christians in Vienna and
Lions, of their sufferings, says, as Tongue cannot express. Blandina feared,
as one that would not hold out, so stood it, that the Executioners who
tormented her by turns, from morning to night, fainted for weariness, and
ceased, confessing themselves overcome, and that they were no longer able to
plague her with any more punishments, marvelling that as yet she drew breath,
having Is refreshed wonderfully, feeling no pain, whilst she renewed her
confession, I am a Christ^an. Sanctus, whilst he answered no otherwise
her whole body rent in pieces, and the Wounds open; they confessing withal,
that one of those torments was of force sufficient to cost her her life, much
more so many and great: Her strength was renewed, and she was refreshed, and
felt no pain of her punishment (as the Historian says in the aforesaid Letter
wherein it is repeated) as often as she pronounced, -- I am a Christian, neither
have we committed any evil. -- Sanctus, a Deacon, is said also to bear nobly
and valiantly, yea, above the nature of men, all such vexations as man could
devise, and when as the wicked incompass, by reason of his great passions and
torments, had well hoped to the question asked him, but
to have heard some undecent and uncomely Speech out of his mouth; his
constancy is said to be so great, that he uttered neither his own Name, neither
his Kindred, neither his Country whence he was, nor whether he was Bond or
Free; but unto every Question, he answered in the Roman Tongue, -- I am a
Christian. -- This he is said to have confessed often, I am a Christian, -- was
most ba^barously tormented;
instead of all other things of his Name, and City, and Kindred, neither could
the Gentiles get any other Language of him: Wherefore (it is said) the
President, and the Tormenters, were fiercely set against him; and when as now
there remained no punishment unpractised, at length they applied to the
tenderest part of his Body plates of Brass, glowing hot, which fried, seared,
and scorched his Body; yet he is said to remain unmovable, nothing amazed, and
constant in his Profession: Over all his Body his Flesh (is said to be)
wounded, his Members bescarred, his Sinews shrunk, so that the natural shape
and outward hue was quite changed; And whenas his Tormenters, a few days
after, brought him to the place of Torment, hoping that if they punished him
now, having his whole Body (as it is said) puffed up with swelling and festred
Wounds, so fore that it might not be touched no not with the and the second
time being brought to torment, had his pain* taken away, and the shape of his
body restored. Biblis fainting at first, came on again and had her lot among
the Martyrs.
least finger, they should overcome him, and prevail, or if he died in torment,
it would terrify the rest, and so warn them (as they thought) to take heed.
None of all these things happened unto him, but beyond all men's expectations, in
the latter torments, his Body is said to have been released of the pain, to
have recovered the former shape, and the Members to have been restored to their
former use. -- Biblis having fainted through cruel torments, they brought out
again, hoping again to cast a reproach upon the Christian Faith; but she coming
again to the Torments, is said, as one awakened out of a dead sleep, to cry out
unexpectly to the Tormenters, and to say, How can ye devour Infants, which were
not suffered to suck the blood of bruit Beasts? and confessing her self a
Christian, was appointed to take her lot amongst the Martyrs of Jesus; -- Then
they took a new devise to keep them in noisome Dungeons and New devises to
destroy them by stench and cruelty of Prisons. Photinus Bish. of Lions, above
ninty years of age, carried by Soldiers before the Tribunal Seat;
Prisons, and in Stocks, to the fifth Hole, after their grievous torments,
seeing their torments they went through, as aforesaid, by the stench and
cruelty of which, and the festring of their Wounds, many died. -- And Photinus,
Bishop of Lions, being above fourscore and ten years old, weak of Body, and
scarce able to draw breath, through the imbecility of Nature, (as the History
says, in the repetition of the Letter aforesaid, out of which all that I have
said, is continued) was carried of the Soldiers, and laid before the Tribunal
Seat, with a great shout of the Multitude, as if (says the History) he had
been Christ, where were the Potentates, or Chief of the City; being demanded by
the President, -- Who is the God of the Christians? He answered, If thou become
worthy, thou shall understand. Whereupon he was cruelly handled, and is said to
have suffered Kicked, struck, beaten, cast into Prison.
many stripes; such as were near to him, struck at him both with hand and foot,
reverencing, or having respect to his years nothing at all; and such as stood
afar off, look what each one had in his hand, that was thrown at his head; and
such as ceased from pouring out their poisoned malice, thought themselves to
have grievously offended, supposing by this means (says the Letter) to revenge
the ruin of their rotten Godds, but he almost breathless, they cast into
Prison; where after two days he departed this life. -- Vetius Epagathus, one
of the Brethren, (says the Then dies. Vetius Epagathus, a Noble Man,
History, repeating the Letter) having fullness of love toward God and Man,
whose conversation was so perfect, though a young man, that he was thought
comparable to Zacharias the Priest, for he walked unblamably in all the
Services and Ordinances of the Lord, and very serviceable to his Neighbors,
having great zeal and fervency of the Spirit of God, allowed not of the
Sentence unjustly pronounced against them (for after they had born manfully all
such vexations as the multitude laid upon them, as exclamation, scourgings,
dragging, spoiling, stoning, fettering, and the like, whatsoever the heady and
savage Multitude accustomed to practice against the professed Enemies, they
were led unto the open Marketplace, and examination being had, they were
condemned in the presence of the people by the Tribune, and the other chief
Potentates of the City, until the Presidents coming, before whom they were
brought, (which had exercised all kind of extreme cruelty against the
Christians) but with vehement motion required that audience might be given him
to demanding audience to plead for the Christians; was denied, and confessing
himself a Christian, was Martyred, and called, The Christians Advocate.
plead for the Brethren, alleging that they had committed no impiety; which
being denied him (for he is said to be a Noble Man) of such as compassed the
Tribunal Seat, and of the President, rejecting this just Petition, and only
demanding, Whether he was a Christian? he confessed it with a loud voice; and
so he was received into the fellowship of the Martyrs, and called, The Advocate
of the Christians. -- The aforementioned, stirred by his Example, hastened
themselves to Martyrdom, and became more lively and ready. -- Great (it is
said) was the whole rage, both of the President, People, and Soldiers, against
Sanctus, Sanctus,
Deacon of the Church of Vienna, and against Maturus, lately baptized, Maturus,
yet said to be a noble Warrior; and against Attalus, a Pergamenian, Attalus,
who is said to be always a Pillar and Fortress of the Faith; and against
Blandina, the Woman aforesaid, because of whom (it is said) they quaked Blandina.
for fear; yea, and that her Carnal Mistress (as she is called, which also was
one of the persecuted Martyrs) was very careful, lest peradventure at the time
of her Answer, by reason of the frailty of her flesh, she should not persevere
constant. -- Maturus, Sanctus, Blandina, and Attalus, were led unto the bruit
Beasts, in the popular and public Spectacle of the Led to the wild Beasts.
Maturus and Sanctus diversely tormented,
Heathenish inhumanity, (as are the words) at the day appointed of set purpose
for so beastly a bucking; where again Maturus, and Sanctus were diversely
tormented with all kinds of punishments, as if they had suffered nothing
before, yea rather (as it were with many new means) repelling the Adversary,
they bear again the victorious Garland, suffering again the wonted revilings,
all the cruelty of the savage Beasts, and whatsoever the outrageous multitude
craved and demanded; and above all, they patiently suffered the Iron Chair,
wherein their Bodies broiled, as in a Drying Pan, filling such as were present
with the loathsome Put in the Iron Chair, and broiled,
savor of that their foulsome froth. Neither were they thus contented, but
practiced further to overcome the patient sufferings of the Saints; neither
could they get any other Sentence of Sanctus, saving that confession which he
cried at first. -- At length, when they had endured this great and grievous
trial, they were slain, and executed after all that afterward executed.
whole day they had been a Spectacle to the World in that variable Combat, as
commonly it falls out in equal Matches, where one buckleth Blandina hanged in
Chains for wild Beasts, who touched her not; she is cast into Prison. Attalus,
a Roman,
with another; -- But Blandina was hanged in Chains, an Object for the wild
Beasts to exercise their savage violence upon; after she had hung a great
while, and no beast touched her, she was taken down, cast into Prison, and
reserved for further torments. -- Attalus being, as it is said, a famous Man,
was earnestly called for by the People unto punishment, who being ready, and of
a clear Conscience, came forth, for being (as it is said) notably exercised in
the Christian Profession, was always a Witness, a Defender of the Truth;
Therefore when he was led about the Theater with a Scrowl before him, wherein
was written in the Roman Tongue, -- This is Attalus the Christian; -- and the
People and raged against him, the President knowing that he was a Roman,
commanded him to be closely kept with the other Prisoners, concerning sent to
Prison
whom he had written unto Caesar, and expected an Answer; but the time passing
between was not fruitless: -- For besides many other things wherein they were
of advantage and comfort, many dead were by the living revived; the Martyrs
profited such as were no Martyrs; the pure Virgin, and Mother, the Church, was
greatly comforted and cherished; when as she recovered and received for living,
such as before she had lost as untimely Births, and dead Fruits; for many which
before had fainted, were restored, regenerated, stirred up afresh, taught to
protest their Faith; and now being quickened and strengthened, having tasted of
him which wills not the death of a sinner, but is merciful unto the Penitent,
they came forth before the Tribunal Seat, ready to answer unto Interrogatories
of the President; and because that Caesar had commanded by writing, that such
as had confessed themselves Christians, should be executed, and such as
renounced, should depart the frequented Solemnity, (which by reason of the
concourse of the Gentiles from every Country, was at first time very populous)
he brought forth from Prison the blessed All are brought forth again.
Confessors into the open Spectacle, and presence of the People, to be
scornfully gazed upon; and when he had again made Inquisition of The Romans
beheaded, the rest thrown to be rent of wild Beasts; the fainty confess again,
and carry through;
them, as many as he found to be privileged persons of Rome, those he
beheaded, the rest he threw to be rent asunder, and to be torn of wild Beasts:
Christ (says the Letter) was greatly glorified in them, who at first denied,
and at last, beyond all the expectations of the Heathens, boldly confessed
their Faith; they severally were examined to be set at liberty, but after
confession, they were coupled to the number of Martyrs; but they tarried
without, which had no grain of Faith, no feeling of the Wedding, no spark of
the fear of God, but rather through their wicked Conversation blasphemed the
way of God, as sons of Perdition: All the other were coupled to the Christian
Congregation; and at the time of examination, Alexander, a Phrygian born,
professing Physic, Alexander the Physician,
having dwelt in France many years, a man well known for his great zeal to
Godwards, and boldness of speech, (for he was not without Apostolical
encouraged the fainty at the Bar, with signs, etc. was complained of, demanded,
Whether a Christian?
Grace) stood hard by the Tribunal Seat, and nigh the examined persons,
exhorting them to boldness of confession by signs and tokens, so that by his
sorrowing and sighing, his hopping and skipping to and fro, he was discerned by
the standers-by; and when the people in compass, had taken in evil part, that
they which before had recanted, did again confess, they with one consent cried
out against Alexander as Author thereof; and when the President had urged him,
and demanded of He confesses; is condemned to be torn of the Beasts.
him what he was, he answered, I am a Christian; for which answer the President
allotted him to the Beasts, of them to be rent in pieces and devoured: The next
day after, together with Attalus, he is brought forth; Attalus, to gratify the
people, is delivered to the Beasts the second time. All are put to death.
Attalus f^yed in the Iron Chair, Gives an account of the Christians, and of God.
(for the President to gratify the people, delivered him unto the Beasts to be
baited the second time); And when these had tasted of all the torments provided
for them, in compass of the Scaffold, and suffered great pain, in the end they
were put to death. -- Alexander not once sighed, neither uttered any kind of
Speech, but inwardly from the heart talked with God: Attalus burning in the
scalding Iron Chair, blooming hot so that the savor of his broyled Body filled
their Nostrils, said unto the Multitude in the Roman Tongue, -- Behold this
that you do, is to devour men, but we neither devour men, neither commit any
other heinous offense; And being demanded, What Name God had? he answered, God
is not called after the manner of men. After all these things, upon the last
day of the Spectacles, Blandina, together with Ponticus, (a young man of
fifteen years Blandina and Ponticus exercised with all kind of torments;
of Age) was brought forth (which thing was daily used, to the end they might
behold the torments of the rest) whom they would have compelled to swear by
their Idols Names; but they constantly persevered in their Opinions, and
contemning their Idol Godds, set the multitude in such a rage against them,
that they neither pitied the years of the young man, nor spared the Woman, but
plagued them with all kind of punishments used in their Theater, urging them
now and then to Swear, which Urged to swear, which they refuse.
when they could not bring to pass; Ponticus being encouraged of the Sister in
the presence of the Pagans, who then beheld how she exhorted and confirmed the
young man, after that he had suffered all kinds of bitter Ponticus yields up
the Ghost. Blandina greatly refreshed in the constancy of the rest, and in the
Lord; is scourged, thrown to Beasts, broyled as in a Drying Pan; wrapped in a
Net, cast to a wild Bull, fanned with his Horns, beheaded. The Pagans glorify
God by her sufferings.
torments, yielded up the Ghost. Last of all, blessed Blandina, like a noble
Mother, having exhorted her Children, and sent them before as Conquerers unto
the King, pondering with her self all the punishments of her Children, hastened
after them, joying and tryumphing at their end, as if she had been invited to a
Wedding Dinner, and not to be cast among wild Beasts; after scourging, after
buckling with wild Beasts, after the broyling of her body (as it were) in a
Drying Pan; at length she was wrapped in a Net, and tumbled before a wild Bull,
which fanned and tossed her with his Horns to and fro, yet had she no feeling
of all these things, her mind being fixed, and wholly set upon the conference
she had with Christ; and in the end she was beheaded, the Pagans themselves
pronouncing, That never any Woman was heard of among them to have suffered so
many and so great torments: Neither did their rage and cruelty against the
Christians so cease, for the barbarous Gentiles, being provoked by a wicked
Fiend (says the History) could not quiet themselves, but that their furious
rage practiced another kind of malicious spite upon the dead Carcasses;
neither were they pleased in that they were overcome, and void of natural
feeling, and sense, but proceeded further like bruit Beasts, both President and
People were furiously provoked, prosecuting them with like hatred, that the
Scripture may be fulfilled, He that is wicked, let him be wicked still; and he
that is just, let him work Righteousness still; The Bodies of those that were
choked in Prison, cast to dogs.
for as many as were choked up with the noisome sent of the Prison, were
thrown to be devoured of Dogs, and a continual watch set day and night, that
none of them should be buried; -- And gathering together the Relics of the
Martyrs Bodies, some undevoured by Beasts, some And guar^ed of them to be
devoured.
unburnt by fire, partly torn, and partly burned; with the Heads and stumps of
others uncovered with earth; they committed them for the space of many days to
the custody of Soldiers; others fretted and fumed, snatching at them with the
gnashing of their Teeth, seeking further revengement of them; others derided
and scoffed them, magnifying their Idols as cause of this our calamity; and
such as were of a milder nature, and somewhat sorrowed at our suffering,
upbraided us, and said, -- Where is their God? and what profited them this
Religion which they Others said, Where is their God?
prefer before their lives? And such was the variable and devilish disposition
of the Infidels to our great sorrow, because we were not permitted to bury the
dead bodies of the Martyrs; neither stood the night in any stead to us for that
purpose; neither would money persuade the Keepers, nor our Prayers move them,
but they kept the bruised Carcasses of the Saints, as if some great Commodity
grew unto them, by keeping them unburied. -- To be short, after that the bodies
of the blessed Saints had been every kind of way spitefully and scornfully
entreated, The stumps of their bodies lying six days unburied, are burnt, and
the Ashes cast into the River Rhodanus, lest they should rise again, or, that
their God should help them. The French sustain
lying whole six days unburied, at length they were burned to Ashes, the Ashes
also they gathered and scattered in the River Rhodanus, which passed by, so
that no Jot or Relic thereof should longer remain upon Earth. -- This they
did, to the end they might overcome God, and hinder the reviving of the Saints,
lest that (as they said) there should be any further hope of the Resurrection,
whereof (say they) the Christians being fully persuaded, bring amongst us a
strange and a new Religion; they contemn punishment, and hasten themselves
cheerfully unto death: Now let us see whether they can arise, and whether their
God can help and deliver them from our hands.

Thus far of the Sufferings of the French under this Emperor, out of the
Sufferers own Writings, which though it be a little prolix, and so may seem
somewhat besides the intent of this Discourse, yet being so pertinent, and of
so circumstantial a nature, I thought it convenient to give the Reader a
relation thereof, that in the instance of these he may see how grievous the
persecution was, and how inhumane on the one hand; and on the other, how the
Lord sustained and carried them through like noble Conquerors: In the other
places the persecutions were not so great, nor the inhumanities so long and
terrible to flesh and blood, but he made them easy, and caused those to
overcome, who were faithful unto the greatest Persecutions.
him.

Besides these of cruel Torments and Death, they were exercised with Exile as
well as Death.
Exile from their Houses, Booths, and common Marketplaces; and not only so,
but every one of them were charged not to show his face; with the weakness also
of many, who through fear of torments fell from the Faith; who notwithstanding,
many of them came on again, and confessed The fallings of many for fear;
Exe^cise the French.
themselves what they were, (viz.) Christians, and died constant in the Faith,
though the enemy wrought, by their first stepping aside, no small disadvantage;
and these were diverse of the Ethnicks their own Servants, whom those terrible
Spectacles of grim Beasts, and torments made to start, and to accuse their
fellow Christians falsely, as using the feastings of Thiestes, and the incests
of Oedipus with diverse others, which themselves They are falsely accused of
disorde^ed conversations
say, may neither Godly be thought upon, neither with modesty uttered, neither
without impiety be believed; Through the egging on and persuasions of the
Soldiers these things were feigned and reported of them; which was the wile of
the Devil in all Ages, where he cannot otherwise thereto make Truth to suffer,
and the followers thereof, that his Instruments may have something to pretend
to sober men that they are not such as he knows them to be, and which they are,
and sober people take them for; but on the contrary such as they are
themselves, who so force the report, that they may seem worthily to put them to
death, wiping off thereby the opinion of their sanctity, so far as he is able,
that neither may their sufferings sink into the hearts of others, neither take
with them, so as to turn them to the Truth; but having removed them by such
reports out of the Opinion of the Sober, he might have also an influence on
them to give them sufferings; which proved something to these Servants of the
Lord, for these reports being bruited abroad, every body (they write) was moved
and incensed against them, insomuch that they who for familiarity sake used
moderation before, now were exceedingly moved and mad with them; Then was (say
they) the saying of our Savior And thereby cast out of the minds of the most
sober.
fulfilled, The time will come when every one that slays you, shall think
that he does therein God good service: Then suffered (say they again) the holy
Martyrs such torments as tongue cannot express; and Satan also provoked them
with all might possible that they might utter some blasphemy: There were
certain others (say they) found unready, less exercised, The flagging of many,
and yet weak, not of ability to bear the burden of so weighty a Combat (in
number Ten) which fell through the frailty of the flesh, to our great
heaviness, and sorrowful lamentation, quailing the cheerfulness of others,
which were not as yet apprehended, but accompanied the Martyrs, what torments
soever befell them, and severed not themselves to the great grief of the rest,
from them: Then trembled we all (say they) for fear, and that greatly, because
of the uncertainty of confessions, being not terrified with any torments, but
careful for the end, lest any should fall from the Faith: Yet (say they) daily
there were apprehended, such as were accounted worthy to fulfill the number of
the fallen weaklings, so that out of both these Churches, as many as ruled and
bear the greatest sway, were taken and executed; and the others came on again,
as aforesaid, and died the death, whom to encourage, lest when at the Bar again
they should flag, Alexander offered himself up, and was torn in pieces; A
worthy remembrance Drew Alexander to offer up himself, whe^eby such were
strengthened at the Bar to die.
of the famous power of the Truth, and of the valor of him and the Christians
in that day, who thought not their lives dear unto the death, for the
confession of Jesus Christ. The President commanded publicly a general
Inquisition to be made for them; -- And the inhumane and most cruel butcheries
of them, were made the recreation of the Heathen on their days of pleasure, who
to be so recreated, flocked to The Heathen recreated themselves in their
sufferings, and came to them as to sport.
the Theaters in great multitudes; which would be strange to think that men
could be so far degenerated into cruelty, who are made of a tender nature; So
that no man ever hated his own flesh, as to make sport of the highest torments
inflicted on their Brethren, and to count it a pastime, and come thither to
such savage and barbarous cruelties for that purpose, but that the Devil being
got into Man, and forming his Worship; look how much their understandings are
dark, and they are brought into the grossest sort of Idolatrous Worship, by so
much they are come into his Nature, and he has power over them, who is the
Godd they worship, who is without natural affection, that they destroy and take
pleasure therein: These noble Christians were kept low and tender under all
their sufferings, desiring, with watery eyes, the prayers uncessantly of their
Brethren, that they might hold out unto the end, and in the fullness of the fear
of God (as are those Christians own words) refused to be called of the
Brethren, Martyrs, as thinking themselves not worthy; Cap. 2. The low account
the Christians had of themselves who thus suffered.
but themselves said, We are mean, and base, and humble Confessors, whom the
Lord highly exalted, and counted worthy of this Name, and of the Crown
Immortal, which they enjoy with the Lord in the highest Heavens.

And thus much shall suffice of this horrible Persecution of the French, and
their Noble Constancy and Faithfulness to God, by which may be judged what was
done in other Provinces; for the Persecution under this Verus seemed to be
general, of which in these words I thought fit to give this particular.

Nevertheless the Lord was not absent from his People, but with a The tenderness
of the Lord to suppo^t them, and to work a release.
tender hand, not only upheld those that suffered through the greatest
tortures, and so gave the demonstration of his power in them; but some release
also of those sufferings, in as great a wonder, when he saw good, he gave them,
as he did in carrying them through sufferings, in manner following.

Historians do Record (says Eusebius) that when his Brother Marcus Eusebius. l.
5. c. 5. By the means of the Legion of the Christians under Marc. Aurel.
Antoninus's Brother, in Germany, who praying to the Lord, obtained Lightning
against the Enemy, which overthrew them, and Rain to refresh the Army, which
was near perishing. The Heathen Writers Record it.
Aurelius (viz. Antoninus his Brother, who gave these Persecutions) warred
against the Germans and Sarmatians, his Host was ready to perish with thirst,
so that he wist not what to do; and that the Soldiers of the Legion called
Militina, moved again and again with faithfulness toward their Prince, bowed
down upon their bare knees (as our accustomed manner (says he) of praying is)
in the midst of the Army, turning them to the Enemies, and made supplication
unto God; When as this sight seemed strange unto the Enemies, there was showed
a more sad Spectacle, (viz.) Lightning, which put the Enemy to flight, and
overthrew them, and withal a shower of Rain to refresh the Army, which well
nigh perishing with thirst, poured out their Prayers before the high Throne of
the Majesty of God: The History (says he) is reported by them who favored not
the Christian Faith, yet were careful to set down the things which concerned
the aforesaid persons. It is also written by our men (says he) and of the
Heathen Historiographers themselves the Miracle is mentioned, but not expressly
to proceed from our men; yet our Writers (says he) as Friends and Favorers of
the true Doctrine, have delivered it simply and plainly, as in deed it was
done; whereof (says he) Apolinarius is a Witness of credit, who reports that
this Legion (by whose Prayers this Miracle came to pass) was from that time
forth called by the Emperor in the Roman Tongue, after a peculiar The Emperor
calls them the Lightning, or Thundering Legion.
Name, the Lightning Legion, or Thundering, as some interpret it. Tertullian
also, (says he) a man worthy of Credit, dedicated an Apology in the Roman
Tongue, unto the Roman Senate, in the defense of our Faith, (whereof (says he)
we mentioned before) has confirmed this History with a mightier and more
manifest proof; for he writes (says Marc. Aurel. himself records it.
he) that the most prudent Epistles of Marcus (that is the Emperor aforesaid)
are yet extant (that is in Tertullians time that thus wrote) wherein he himself
testifies, that w^rring with the Germans, his Army well nigh perished through
the scarcity of Water, but yet was saved through the prayers of the Christians;
he says (viz. Tertullian) That the Emperor Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 6. and
threatened them with death, which accused the Christians.
threatened them with Death which went about to accuse them. Unto the aforesaid
things, he adds, -- What manner of Laws are these against us? Impious,
unjust, cruel, which neither Vespasian observed, although Conqueror of the
Jews; which Trajan partly frustrated, commanding the Inquisition of the
Christians to cease; which neither Adrianus, although busiing himself with
every matter; neither he which is called P^us, confirmed.

And under Comodus the Emperor, who succeeded Verus, the rage of the Gentiles
(says Eusebius) was mittigated Commodus ceases, Anno. 182. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap.
10. The Persecution under Verus, who succeeded Verus.
toward us, so that peace was granted through the Grace of God, unto the
Universal Church throughout the World; and the Heavenly Doctrine led the mind
(says he) of all mortal men to the embracing of the true Religion of the only
and Universal God, so that many of the Nobles of Rome drew near Many Nobles,
and others embrace the Christian Faith;
to their Souls Health and Salvation, together with their whole Houses and
Families; Yet Apollonius, a man (says Eusebius) Yet Apollonius confessing
himself a Christian before the Senate, upon the importunity of the Judge,
among the Faithful at that time, for Learning and Philosophy very famous, was
brought before the Tribunal Seat, who exhibiting before the Senate, in the
presence of them all, a notable Apology for his Faith, when the Judge Perennius
had earnestly, and with many words entreated him (after he had (though the Legs
of him that accused him were broken according to the Law) yet
sentenced his Legs to be broken who accused him, according to the Decree of
the Emperor, that the Accusers of the Christians should die the death) to
render an account of his Faith before the Senate, (on purpose to entrap him) by
decree of the Senate he was beheaded.
was beheaded. The ancient decree of the Senate being of force, and prevailing
among them, -- viz. that the Christians that were once presented before the
Tribunal Seat, and not revoking their Opinion, should no more be set at
liberty; As the same Eusebius, in the same Chapter, word for word, at large
rehearses.

Severus was the fifth, upon whose Theater of Blood is placed the fifth Severus
raised Anno. 204. the fifth Persecution.
Persecution; He succeeded Didius Julianus, who succeeded Pertinax, (whose
Reigns are said to be short) Pertinax two months and two and twenty days,
Didius Julianus, called also Salvius, two months; Comodus having reigned
thirteen years before them both.

This Severus was most severe, (as is his Name) and a wicked Persecutor, An
account of him, and his cruelty and wickedness.
and caused multitudes of rare men in their day, and others, to be most cruelly
tormented, and put to death; the matter is long to be particular therein, and
the particular sufferings, I may say, hardly to be reckoned; Therefore minding
brevity so far as well I can, and reach the intent of what I am about, I shall
give a touch or two of what then happened, for the satisfaction of the Reader,
and to give some sense of what then was suffered.

When Severus persecuted the Church of God, (says Eusebius) there were Eusebius.
l. 6. c 1. Eusebius his account of the Persecution.
every where famous Martyrdoms of such as strove for godliness, but especially
at Alexandria, whither chosen Champions out of Egypt, and all Thebay (as unto a
most notable Theater of God) were brought, and after a most patient sufferance
of sundry Torments, and diverse kinds of death, were crowned with Garlands of
Immortality. -- Leonides the Father of Origin Leonides, Origens Father,
beheaded.
was one who was here beheaded: Severus having governed the Empire ten years,
and Laetus Alexandria, and the rest of Egypt; and Demetrius, after Julianus,
had newly taken upon him the oversight of the Congregation there; Origin also,
when the heat of persecution was very vehement, and an infinite Origens
friendliness to the Martyrs, Eusebius. l. 6. c; 2.
number (as says the Historian) were Crowned with Martyrdom, being yet very
young, bore in his mind a fervent desire of Martyrdom, so that he hazarded
himself often, and coveted voluntarily to thrust himself into that dangerous
Combat; yea, narrowly did he escape, for it had cost him his life, had not the
Divine and Celestial Providence of God (says the History) stayed him, by
reason of his Mother, to the further commodity and profit of many, he then
being able to do no other thing, wrote to his Father in Prison, being more
prompt in mind then ripe in years, (as the History says) in the which he
exhorted him thus, -- O Father, faint not, nor imagine amiss because His
prompting his Father to Martyrdo^.
of us. Under Aquila, Lieutenant of Alexandria, he purchased unto himself a
good Opinion among all the faithful, in that he cheerfully embraced all the
Martyrs, not only of his acquaintance, but such as were to him unknown; he
visited not only such as were fettered in deep Dungeons, and close His visiting
the Prisoners and attending them to execution.
Imprisonment; neither only such as looked for the last Sentence for Execution,
but after Judgment given, and Sentence pronounced, he was present with the
Martyrs, boldly attending them to the place of Execution, putting himself in
great peril oftentimes, boldly embracing, and kissing, and saluting them, so
that once the furious rage of the fond multitude had stoned him to death, if
that the Divine Power (says the Historian) had not marvellously delivered him;
so extremely (it is said) he was dealth withal by the Infidels, that Soldiers
were commanded to watch about his House because of the multitude that came to
be instructed by him in the Christian Faith. Plutarch was one of Cap. 3.
Plutarch, Serenus, Heraclides, Heron, Serenus 2d. all his scholars Martyred.
his Scholars whom he accompanied to the place of Execution, not without great
danger of his life. Serenus was the next of his Disciples that gave proof of
his Faith by fire, for he was burned alive, being said to be the second Martyr.
Heraclides was the third out of that School. The fourth was Heron, both of
which were beheaded. Another Serenus, was a fifth Champion for the Truth out of
the same School, who after patience in great torments and grievous pain, was
beheaded. And Phais, a Woman, was Phais burned. Cap. 4. Basilides a Soldier,
Potomiena.
burned alive, and departed this life. Basilides a Soldier (which led forth
the renowned Virgin Potomiaena to execution) was a seventh. Potomiaena is said,
for the chastity of her Body, and purity of Mind, to strive very stoutly with
her Lovers: She is also said to be endued with ripeness of Mind, and goodly
beauty of Body; When she had suffered infinitely (as the Historian says) for
the Faith of Christ; last of all, after great and grievous torments, terrible
to be spoken of, together with her Mother Marcilla, she was Marcilla Martyred.
burned with fire, and consumed to Ashes; the report goes (says the History)
that Aquila the Judge, commanded her whole Body to be scourged over, and that
very sore; and threatened her, he would deliver her Body shamefully to be abused
of Fencers and Ruffians; and that after she had mused a while with her self,
and they demanded an Answer, to have said such things as pleased not the
Gentiles; and therefore immediately after sentence pronounced, to have been
taken and led of Basilides (a Soldier of Authority among the Host) to
execution: when the multitude molested her sore, spightfully handling her with
opprobrious terms, Basilides rebuked and reproved their railing speeches,
pitying her very much, and practiced great courtesy toward her; She answered
to his kindness, and had some communication with him, immediately after which,
Pitch scalding hot was poured by little and little over all her body (as says
the History) from the Crown of her Head, to the Soal of her Foot, the which she
is said manfully to endure in the Lord; and such was the sore combat she
sustained. As for Basilides, of whom I spoke not long after, Basilides refused
to swear,
he was required to swear by his fellow Soldiers, for some occasion or other,
to which he affirmed plainly, -- That it was not lawful for him to Swear, for
he said he was a Christian, and that he would in very deed protest the same. --
At first he was thought to dally, (as says the History) but when he constantly
avouched it, he was brought before the Judge, and there having confessed the
same, he is clapped in Prison, and afterward beheaded, and so suffered
Martyrdom. is beheaded.


Maximinus was the sixth, whose progress in blood and cruelty made Anno. 237.
Eusebius l. 6. c. 14 Maximinus raised the 6th Persecution.
up the sixth persecution; for Severus reigned eighteen years, and dyed at York
in England, in whom the fifth Persecution went out, and was extinguished: After
him Antoninus Caracalla was Emperor in the year 213. he reigned seven years and
six months: Marcinus succeeded Caracalla, and died in the first year of his
Reign, being in the year 220. Antoninus Heliogabalus, in the year 221. took the
Imperial Scepter four years; and he dying, Alexander was Emperor, Anno. 224.
whom after thirteen years, the space of his Reign, Maximinus aforesaid
succeeded, of whom, and the Persecution thus says the Historian.

After that the Emperor Alexander had Reigned the space of thirteen An account
of him and his Persecution, and the ground thereof. He ordered only the
Governors of Churches to be put to death.
years, Maximinus Caesar succeeded him, who being incensed with the anger,
spite, and grudge he bare unto the House of Alexander, which harbored many of
the Faithful, he stirred up the fiery flame of Persecution, and gave
Commandment, that the Governors only of the Churches, as principal Authors of
the Doctrine of our Savior, should be put to death; -- but his Reign was
short, for he continued but three years, though, as to those who cruelly
suffered under his Persecution, as men may judge, it was very long.

Decius was the seventh who mounted the bloody Throne, which made Anno. 254.
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 38 Decius forced the seventh Persecution; the ground of his
persecution.
up the seventh Persecution, for after Maximinius succeeded Gordianus in the
year 240. who reigned six years; Philip succeeded him in the year 246. who is
said to be the first Christian Emperor, who reigned seven years, whom Decius
succeeded, (as aforesaid); who as Maximinus upon his grudge and spite to
Alexander, so this to the House of Philip raised Persecution, in which
Fabianus, Bishop of Rome, was Martyrd; also Fabianus, Bish. of Rome Martyred,
and Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem.
Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, after he had the second time endured
confession for Christ's sake (as the History says) before the Tribunal Seat of
the President of Cesaria, was cast into Prison, where after a famous and
notable testimony of his true Faith given before the Judgment Seat of the
Lieutenant, he is said to end this mortal life. Origin also sustained Origin
suffered.
much for the Doctrine of Christ, Imprisonments, and torments of Body,
scourging at Iron Stakes, stench of close Prison, his feet stretched four
spaces asunder in the Stocks, for the space of many days; and endured the
threats of fire, and all the enemy could terrify him with; the Judge used all
the means possible to save his life. It will not be amiss, if (as in the
former) I give a little further touch of the cruelty of this Persecution, in
the Description thereof, by Dionisius then Bishop of Alexandria, and Fabius,
Bishop of Antioch, in these words, -- This Persecution was not begun by the
Emperors Edict, but Cap. 40. The Persecution began at Alexandria, by means of a
Southsayer, who persuaded,
one whole year before, for there came unto this City a certain Southsayer and
inventer of mischief, who moved and stirred up the whole multitude of the
Heathen against us, and excited them to defend the superstition of their Native
Soil, by whom they being thus provoked, and having won to their side such as
were in That the only Worship of Devils, and the slaughter of the Christians
was Piety it self.
Power and Authority to perpetrate all impious Acts; they persuaded themselves
that the only Worship of Devils, and our slaughter was piety it self. First,
Then they apprehend a certain Minister, whose name was Metras, and command him
to utter Metras a Minister, beaten with Clubs, his face and eyes pricked with
sharp Quills, stoned to death.
blasphemy, who for his disobedience therein is beaten with Clubs, his face and
eyes, they pricked with sharp quils; afterward they led him forth into the
Suburbs of the City, and stoned him to death. Again they bring into the Temple
of Idols, a faithful Woman named Quinta, and constrained her to Worship, who
Quinta trailed along the streets,
contrarying and abhoring their Idols, had her feet bound together, and by them
trailed and lugged all along the streets, which were paved with sharp stones,
and withal, being beaten against Beaten against Millstones,
Millstones, and sore scourged, she was brought forth to the place of
Execution, and executed; which being done, they all with one Sore scourged and
executed; Christians houses run in^o, rifled, the best taken,
accord run into the houses of the Religious, and every one of the wicked
leads the heady multitude unto their Neighbors houses, whom they knew to be
godly and well-disposed; and they destroy, spoil, steal, and bear away the
precious Jewels; The rest thrown out, and burned, as in times of War.
but the vile, and the base, and the wooden stuff they threw out into the
street, and burn it to Ashes, showing forth thereby the resemblance or
spectacle of a City taken and ransacked by the Enemy; but the Brethren gave
back, and drew themselves aside, taking in good part, and very cheerfully the
loss of their goods; They take all patiently.
much like unto them of whom Paul has testified; neither do I remember any
(one only excepted) of them which were apprehended unto this day that denied
the Lord. Furthermore they Apollonia's cheeks beat, her teeth knocked out;
laid hold on the elderly and renowned Virgin Apollonia, they beat her cheeks,
and knocked out all the teeth in her head; over against the City they prepare a
Pile, and threaten to burn her quick, unless she would together with them utter
blasphemy; but she lingering a little while as if she would take further
deliberation, suddenly She leaps into the fire, and is burned to ashes.
leaps into the fire, and is consumed to Ashes: To be short, they laid hold on
Serapion, who continued in his own House, they Serapion variously tormented and
thrown down headlong.
vexed him with sundry, grievous, and bitter torments, bruising all the Members
of his Body, and throwing him down headlong from an upper Chamber, there was no
way left for us to pass, no not Highways beset, no passage by day or night;
the common highway, nor any by-passage, either by day or by night, they cried
out against all, and exclaimed every where, there was no other choice, but
either to utter blasphemy, or to be No medium but blasphemy, or death. The
cruelty returns on their own heads.
drawn and burnt at the Stake. And these things (the more is the pity) endured
too too long; but in the end this Sedition and Civil War overtook the
Seditious persons themselves, and turned upon them the self same cruelty which
they before had practiced Which gives liberty to the persecuted;
upon us, so that for a little season we refreshed our selves, their fury with
which they raged against us, being somewhat abated; This fore-ran the Emperors
Edict.
but a while after the alteration of the Imperial Crown was made known unto us,
which aforetime was very favorable unto us, but now threatened great mischief
to ensue. For the Emperors The Edict of the Emperor, following, puts all to it.
Edict is proclaimed, and that most dreadful saying of our Savior,
prognosticated long ago, now takes place, Now if it were possible the very
Elect themselves should be offended. All do tremble All tremble, some fly away.
Others the World carries away;
and quake for fear; some forthwith of the mightier sort fly away, doubting
what would befall them; some of their own acco^d are carried away with worldly
affairs; some are persuaded by their Neighbors, and being called by their
Names, are present at Neighbors persuade others; Some present at the
Sacrifices; others wax pale, fearing to Sacrifice, fea^ing to suffer; are
divided.
their profane and impious Sacrifices; some waxed pale, and trembled not, as
though they would Sacrifice, but like to become Sacrifices and Oblations to the
Idols, so that the whole multitude in compass divided them, for they seemed
manifestly to be timorous, both to die, and also to do Sacrifice; some went
stoutly to Some at the Altar affirm, they never were Christians* others held on
both sides; some s^ed, others taken;
the Altars, and affirmed boldly that they were never Christians; of whom the
Lord has most truly foretold, that such should hardly be saved; some other
there were that held with both sides, some fled, and some were taken, whereof
diverse endured Fetters, and Imprisonment; other some, after long Imprisontment,
before they came unto the Tribunal Seat, renounced their Faith; some after they
had stoutly endured torments, in the end denied Some having endured, denied
Christ at last.
Christ; but others that were blessed, and valiant as Pillars or Bulworks of
the Lord, being strengthened by him, and stout in protesting Others went
through all, and were martyred.
their Faith, having got unto themselves worthy Constancy, and Courage
sufficient, became renowned Martyrs of the Kingdom of Heaven. -- And so here
goes on, and mentions particulars, Julianus, not able to stand, carried by two,
one denies, the other (Cronian) confesses.
as Julianus, a Gouty man, not able either to stand or go, he was brought out
by two who bore him on their Shoulders; one of them afterward fell from the
Truth; the other called Cronian, whose Surname was Eamus, confessed, and
acknowledged the Lord (as it was meet, says the Bishop) with a perfect and
sound Faith, they were both thrown upon Camels, and scourged Both Julian and
Cronian thrown on Camels, scourged, and burnt. A Soldier rebuking the
exclaimers against them, beheaded.
aloft, and in the end were thrown into the fire and burned to Ashes; when they
were brought forth, a certain Soldier rebuked such as reviled them; he is
exclaimed against, so that he was brought forth, and had stoutly behaved
himself in the great skirmish for the Christian Faith, was beheaded: After him
Macar a Lybian was often admonished by the Judge to deny Christ, and Macar
burned.
renounce his Faith, which he not doing, was burned quick. Epimachus Epimachus
and Alexander, and four women burned.
and Alexander after them, who after they had been long punished with Fetters,
tormented with sharp Razors, and bitter Scourges, were burned, together with
four Women. Amonarian Ammonarian executed.
(said to be a Virgin) was grievously tormented by the Judge, because she
foretold him she would answer him in nothing, which she performed, and was
brought forth to Execution. Mercuria and Dionisia, two famous Matrons, after
they had confounded the Mercuria and Dionisia, confounding the Judge tormented
and ^^headed.
Judge, which used all manner of persuasions to them, who now of the Women was
overcome, were tormented till they were past all sense and feeling, and then
beheaded with a Sword; of all whom Ammonarian is said to pass notably, enduring
all kind of torment; Heron, Ater, Isidorus, being Egyptians, together with
Heron, Ater, Isiodorus, Egyptians. Dioscorus, of fifteen years, is first took
in hand, entreated, tormented, released.
Dioscorus (a young man of fifteen years old) were committed; the Judge first
takes the young man in hand, with fair speeches, as if he were easy to be
entreated; with torments, as if he were soon terrified, but he neither bowed at
his flattery, nor broke at his threats. The rest, after they had endured the
most cruel The rest rended and disjoynted, burned.
rending and disjoynting of their Bodies, he commanded to be burnt with fire.
But Dioscorus he set at liberty* wondering (as the Bishop writes) at his
gracious countenance, which gave a glistering shine, and the wise Answers that
proceeded out of his mouth, saying, He would give him a longer space to repent,
and remember himself for his tender years; who was afterward a man very
eminent. Nemesion, an Egyptian, is accused of Theft, Nemesion double tormented
and vexed*
whereof he had openly purged himself before the Centurian. Again, he is
accused of Christianity, for which he was brought bound before the President,
who delivered him among the Thieves to be twice more grievously tormented and
vexed. Lastly (to add no more in this place) Ammon, Zenon, Ptolomeus, Ammon,
Zenon, Ptolomeus, Ingenuus, certain Soldiers, old Theophilus, encouraging at
the Tribunal those ready to shrink,
Ingenuus, certain Soldiers; and old Theophilus standing at the Tribunal Seat,
when any of the Christians came to hear the Sentence or Judgment, and now were
ready to shrink, so strugled, that they were ready to cry again, nodding with
their countenance, and beckning with their hands; so exhorting them to
stedfastness, which being perceived by the multitude* before they laid hands on
them, preventing their doings* nobly stepped forth No^ly stepped forth, proclaimed
themsel^es Christians, amaze the President and Assitants, encourage the fainty,
cheerfully suffered, and rejoiced in their Testimony.
before the Bar, and proclaimed themselves Christians, which amazed the
President and his Assistants, and encouraged the other boldly to suffer, and
made their Judges marvellously afraid. These (says the Bishop) departed from
the Tribunal Seat very cheerfully, and rejoiced in the Testimony of their
Faith, God gloriously tryumphing in them.

I thought it necessary to give these short touches of these long The reason
why these things are repeated.
and cruel sufferings, which I hope the Reader will not take as a burden, but
rather be refreshed thereby, and encouraged valiantly to go through whatsoever
he may be called unto for the Testimony of his Conscience, and glorify God,
who through these weak Instruments, got unto himself mighty renown and glory
which will last for ever.

Yet a passage or two more briefly, and I shall have done with Cap. 41. Many
Quartered, Dismembered.
this Persecution. Many others (says the aforesaid Dionisius) through the City
and Villages were Quartered and Dismembered by the Ethnicks, whereof for
example sake I will rehearse some, Ischyrion, a Noble Man's Servant, a Steward,
being commanded Ischyrion, a noble man's Servant.
of his Master to do Sacrifice, obeyed not, but was contumeliously reviled; his
Master perceiving him constant, and persisting in his former Opinion, took a
Cudgel in his hand, and beat his Body Beat to death with a Cu^gel by his
Master. Multitudes fled to the Deserts; Consumed with Famine, Col^, Diseases;
Spoiled by Thieves; Devoured by Beasts.
and Bowels till breath departed. What shall I say (says he) of the multitude
of them which wander in the Desert and wast Mountains consumed with Famine and
Hunger, and Cold, and Diseases; spoiled by Thieves, and devoured by Beasts,
whose blessedness and victories (says he) they that remain alive are able to
testify; there was one Chimeron, a very old man, Bishop of a Chimeron, Bishop
of Nilus, very old, and his Wife, fled to the Mountains, never hea^d of more.
City called Nilus, who together with his Wife, fled unto the Mountains of
Arabia, and returned home no more, nor could afterward be seen; and though
they were often sought for by the Brethren, neither could they nor their
Carcasses ever be found: Many also in these Mountains of Arabia were taken
Captives by Many taken captive by the Saracens in the Mountains; Hardly
Ransomed.
the Saracens, whereof some were hardly ransomed for great sums of money; some
not as yet, no never unto this day appeared; And these things (says Donisius
to Fabius aforesaid) Brother, I write not in vain, but that thou may
understand what, and how great evils and mischiefs have happened among us,
whereof they know more, (says he) which among all others have felt most.

Thus fared it with the Christians in these parts, but what they As here, so in
other parts were the Sufferings. Decius is slain, and his Sons. He and his Army
were overthrown in Scythia, exposing the Roman Empire to the contempt of the
Goths.
did in others throughout the Roman Jurisdiction, exceed Herculem, by what has
been said may be judged; but this wicked man had a short Reign, and a just
Judgment fell upon him, for when he had not reigned full two years, he was
slain, together with his Sons, whom Gallus succeeded, of whom Dionisius wrote
unto Hermmamon in these words, -- Neither did Gallus perceive the Impiety of
Decius, neither did he foresee what seduced him, but Anno. 255. Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 7. Gallus succeeds,
stumbled at the same stone which lay right before his eyes; who when the
Imperial Scepter prosperously fell unto him, and his afairs went luckily
forwards, chased away the holy men which prayed for Peace, and his prosperous
Estate; and so together with them he banished the Prayers continually poured to
God for him. -- Yet Persecution ceased, and the Christians had some rest; he
reigned not full two years: after him succeeded Emilianus, who was Emperor but
And Emilianus.
three months.

Valerianus was the eighth, by reason of whom the eighth Persecution Anno. 256.
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 9. Valerianus the Author of the eighth Persecution;
Galienus, he entreats the Christians well at first, afterward Persecutes.
took place, who when his Son Galienus succeeded Emilianus, he was a bloody
wicked man, and caused much sufferings to the Christians, whom at first he
seemed courteously to entreat, but his end was short, and things were turned
again, as shall be made manifest: But in the first place hear the account of
him from Dioscorus, aforesaid, who is said to write in these words, -- It was
Dioscorus his account of him and his Persecution.
revealed unto John, for a Mouth was given unto him (says he) to utter proud
Speeches, and Blasphemies; and power was given him two and forty months, both
things are wonderful in Valerianus; and we have to consider, how that above all
his Predecessors, he was disposed at the first, gentle toward all the men of
God, meek and friendly minded, for there were none of the Emperors before him
so friendly, courteous, and affected toward them, no not they which openly
were accounted Christians; he at the first embraced our men very familiarly,
most lovingly, and that openly, so that his Palace was replenished with the
professors of the Faith, and accounted for the Church of God. But the Master
and Ruler of the Egyptian Sorcerers Synagogue, persuaded him afterward to slay
and persecute these sincere Men, and Saints of God, Adversaries and Impugners
of their most impure and detestable Sorceries, (for the godly then prevailed so
much, and do prevail at this day, that being present, and with their
countenance only blowing the contrary, and resisted as it were with a little
speech, scattered the bewitchings of the detestable Devils) he brought to pass
impure Ceremonies, execrable Enchantments, and abominable Sacrifices; he made a
slaughter of miserable Children, he sacrificed the Sons of unfortunate Parents,
he searched the bowels of the newly born Babes, spoiling and rending asunder
the shaped Creatures of God, as if by such heinous offenses he should become
fortunate. Macrinas offered up unto them gratulatory Gifts and Presents, and
good luck of the hoped Empire; for before it was commonly blazed that he should
be created Emperor, he respected not the consonancy of Reason, neither the
public or common affairs, but was subject to the Curse of the Prophet, saying,
Woe be unto them which prophecy after their own desire, and respect not the
public Prophet. He understood not the Universal Providence, and Wisdom of him
which is be^o^^, ^ll ^^ all, and above all; wherefore he is become a deadly Foe
unto the (...) Christian Faith; he outlawed and banished himself from the (...)
and as he fled farthest from the Church, so has he answered the (...) his
Name. Valevianus was by his means given over to such (...) and abominations,
that the saying of Esaias was verified in him; And they (says he) chose their
own ways and abominations which their Souls lusted after; and I will select
them their own delusions, and recompense their own sins. This Emperor was made,
and doting over the Empire, otherwise then became his Majesty; not able, by
reason of his maimed body, to wear the Imperial Robes, brought forth two Sons,
followers of the Fathers Impiety; in them was the Prophecy manifest, where God
promised to punish the sins of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and
fourth Generation of such as hate him; he poured the sins of the Father
(whereof he could not be satisfied) upon the Pates of his Sons, and posted over
unto them his malice and spite against God.

Much more I could relate of the cruelties exercised in the time Cap. 10.
Dionisius banished.
of this Persecution, of the banishment of Dionisius, aforesaid, from place to
place, and what passed at his Examination; also what befell in Caesarea, to
Priscus called the second; Malchus and Cap. 11. Priscus 2d. Malchus, Alexander,
blaming themselves for slothfulness, came out of the Country,
Alexander, who living in the Country, blamed themselves for negligence and
sloathfulness, because they strove not for the Crown of Martyrdom, but
despising these Masteries, which that present time distributed to such as
coveted after Celestial things, and further advisement therein, they came to
Caesarea, went to the Went to the Judge and were Martyred. A Woman torn in
pieces by wild Beast, etc.
Judge, and enjoyed their desired end: Of a certain Woman also that there was
torn in pieces by wild Beast, and of diverse others; but I am loath to go over
the bounds in the relation of things of this nature, lest I should seem too
tedious to the Reader. The The Persecution ends in the Supremacy.
time also dured not very long, though it ended the days of many in terrible
sufferings, and to flesh and blood very formidable, but Cap. 12: Anno. 262.
Gotten by his Son Galienus,
by another thing made easy because of their Testimony to God. Valerianus
having subdued the Barbarians; Galienus his Son got the Supremacy, and with
better advisement ruled the Empire, and forthwith released and stayed the
Persecution by public Edicts; Who stayed the Persecution.
and to the end that the Presidents and chief Governors of the Christian
Doctrine might freely, after their wonted manner execute their Office and
Function; he gave them his Letters, commanding that it should be so, which are
as follows, -- The Emperor The Copy of the Edict for that purpose.
Caesar, Publicus, Licinnius, Galienus, virtuous, fortunate, Augustus, unto
Dyonisius, Pynna, Demetrius, together with the rest of the Bishops, sends
greeting; -- The benefit of our Gracious Pardon, we command to be published
throughout the World, that they which are detained in banishment depart the
places of all Pagans, for the Execution whereof, the Copy of this our Edict
shall be your discharge, lest any go about to molest you; and this which you
now may lawfully put in ure, was granted by us long ago; Wherefore Aurelius
Cyrenius, our High Constable, has in his keeping the Copy which I delivered
unto him. -- Yet at Cesaria, Marinus, a famous Soldier, Marinus a Soldier and
Christian, and of nob^e Lineage, beheaded, upon cap 14) accusation that he was
a Christian, when he should have had the dignity of the Centurious Vine, (cap*
15.) whose body after the Execution, Astyrius a Senator of Rome, in his
gorgeous apparel, took upon his shoulders, and provided for it a most noble
Funeral.
for feats of Arms, and noble Lineage, and great substance, was beheaded for
confessing himself a Christian, being accused thereof by some who emulated his
Profession to the Roman Dignity, called the Centurious Vine. And Astyrius, one
of the Senators of Rome, well accepted of the Emperors, in good estimation of
all men for his noble Stock, and well known for his great substance, being
present at the execution of the Martyr, took up his Body, laid it upon his
Shoulders, being arrayed in gorgeous and costly Attire, and provided for him a
most Noble Funeral.

Macrinus (says the History) after he had fore-ran one of the Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 22. Macrinus being rooted out, Gallienus is proclaimed Emperor.
Emperors, and followed after another, immediately he is rooted out, and all
his Kindred, and Galienus is Proclaimed and Crowned Emperor, by the consent of
all men, both an ancient and a new Emperor, being before them, but appearing
after them, according to the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, The things of old
are past, and behold the new things come in place; for even as a Cloud darkneth
a little the Sun Beams, and shaddoweth the Sun it self shining in its Sphere,
and after the Cloud is dissolved and vanished away, the Sun which rose before
the Cloud shines, and takes his course: So Macrinus, who intruded himself
before the present reign of Galienus, is now no Emperor, no more he was not
then; but the man is like himself, as he was then, so is he now; And the Empire
it self laying aside heavy and wrinckled old Age, The observation of the
prosperity of the Empi^e by good Empe^ors, and the contrary by others.
Valerianus taken alive, bound, and led in Royal Robes, and flead, and salted,
by Socor King of ^e^sia, Constant. Orat. cap. 24.
and purged of the former malice, now flourishes afresh, is heard and seen
further; -- Thus it fared when good and just men reigned, but when the wicked,
the contrary. Valerianus the Persecutor aforesaid, and Galienus his Son,
reigned together a while, but Valerianus being taken captive of the Persians;
Galienus ruled alone, and the Common Wealth had rest, but trouble when the
contrary, when it persecuted the Christians; of which the Histories give large
Particulars.

Claudius was the ninth, from whose barbarous Inhumanities Anno. 271. Eusebius
lib. 7. cap. 28. Claudius ^aised the Ninth Persecution: The Empire committed
toward the Christians, the ninth Persecution took place, and was so termed
from his Persecution; -- He did many wicked Acts, and the peace of the
Christians was much disturbed by him: And they had great sufferings, but after
two years, he committed Anno. 273. to Aurelianus, he is at first friendly,
afterward Eusebius. lib. 7, cap. 29, persecutes.
the Empire to Aurelianus, who was a while very friendly to the Christians;
summoned the great Synod at Antioch, and did many things in the behalf of the
Christians, as a man well affected to them, but in process of time he so
estranged himself, that wellnigh, (says the Historian) through the lewd motion
of some men, he moved Persecution against the Christians, and much talk was
blazed far and nigh concerning him; but when he had raised Persecution against
them, and now well-nigh subscribed to a public Edict, prejudicial to their
affairs, the just Judgment Judgment overtakes him, cramping his hands, that he
could not sign the Edict against the Christians. Aurelianus making war in
Thrace; was slain in the middle way, and filled the Cart Ruts with his wick^d
blood Constant. Orat. cap 24. The Historians observation of the Ju^gement and
Pow^^ of God, without whom none have power to persecute.
of God (says he) overtook him, and hindered his purpose, camping (as it were)
his Knuckles (for the Cramp so took him in the hand, that he could not hold his
Pen to subscribe the Edict) so he was plagued (who went to write against God)
and to that which he had before cherished and affected, making manifest unto
all men, (says he) that the Princes of the World have never any power to
practice ought against the Church of God, unless the invisible might of God,
for Discipline and Conversion of his People, according to his Divine and
Celestial Wisdom, grant License to bring any thing about in what time it shall
please him best; he reigned six years, after him Tacitus, who was Emperor six
months; Thorianus succeeded him, whose length of Imperial days was fourscore;
Probus took his turn after; and after six years Carus succeeded him, who with
Carinus and Numerianus his Son managed the Empire, but after three years they
had an end.

Dioclesian was the tenth, whose furious rage mounted the Anno. 287. Dioclesian
caused the tenth Persecution. Anaccount of this sore and long persecution.
Throne of the tenth Persecution, as it is called, and made it up; a sore and
long persecution it was, and multitudes of People were tormented, and through
multitudes of torments yielded up the Ghost; it will not be unconvenient to be
a little particular there, partly because the constancy and faithfulness of the
sufferers was exceeding great, which may provoke to Emulation, as it is an
occasion to show forth the virtue and power of Truth, which carries through
whatsoever a man is called to suffer for the same, partly, because it is the
last of these great Persecutions of this sort (viz. Christians from Heathens)
that I have to mention, wherein the fruit of imposed Religions, or National
Worship is made manifest, which was the intent of this Discourse, and the end
of producing these Instances, under this head of suffering, for, or because of
not conforming to National Worships, or the consequences of them.

It was the ninteenth year of Dioclesians Reign, (says the Historian) Anno.
306. Eusebius. l 8. c. 3. The da^e of the Proclamations for Persecution, and the
Contents of the first.
and the Month Disties, after the Romans Thoret; the Feast of Easter then being
at hand, when the Emperors Proclamations were every where published, in the
which it was commanded, That the Churches should be made even with the ground;
and the holy Scriptures, by burning of them, should be abolished; such as were
in Honor and Estimation, should be contemned; and such as were of Families, if
they retained the Christian Faith, should be deprived of their freedom; and
such were the Contents of the first Edict: But in the Proclamation which
immediately followed after, The Contents of the second Edict.
That the Pastors throughout all Parishes first should be Imprisoned, next with
all means possible constrained to Sacrifice: Then I say (says the Historian)
many of the Chief Governors of the Churches enduring, and that cheerfully The
Persecution very cruel Some flag, others very valiant. The diversity
most bitter torments, showed example of most valiant and noble Christians;
many others fainting for fear, at the first onset were quite discouraged: All
the rest tired the experience of sundry torments; one scourged from top to toe,
another tortured and launced with intolerabe pain; some failed of the purposed
end; some other were found constant and perfect, one was drawn to the foul and
filthy Sacrifices, and dismissed, as if he had done Sacrifice, when as in very
deed he had not; another when he had neither approached nor touched ought of
their detestable of torments, and
offerings; and such as were present affirmed, that he had Sacrificed, departed
with silence, patiently suffering this false accusation; another half dead was
thrown away, being thrown of them for dead: Again there were some prostrate
upon the pavement, trailed and lugged all along by the feet, and recounted for
Sacrifices; one reclaimed, and with a loud voice denied that ever he had
sacrificed; another lifted up his voice, Sufferings.
and confessed himself a Christian, and gloried in the Faith of that gladsome
Title: Another again protested that he had neither sacrificed, nor ever would
do Sacrifice. These were beaten on the Face, and buffeted on the Cheeks; their
mouths were stopped by the Soldiers hands, a whole band being appointed for
that purpose, which violently thrust them out of doors; so the Enemies of the
Truth tryumphed, (says he) if at least wise, they might but seem to bring
their purpose to effect; but (says he) their purpose prevailed not against the
blessed Martyrs of God, whose conflicts no tongue can sufficiently declare.
Veterus, a Captain began it privily, with the Soldiers in Veterius, a Captain,
(Cap. 4) began it in the Army p^ivily.
the Camp, sifting them narrowly what they were, and putting them to the
choice, such as he found Christians, either to obey and enjoy their dignities,
or resist, and on the contrary be deprived; whereupon many forsook their
employments, chose rather to live solitary, and now and then one or two of them
were put to Some put to death.
death; he staggering at the multitude, at first fearing the effect Veterius
staggers at the multitude, deals somewhat particularly; afterward gives
inexpressible sufferings.
(as was thought to be most like) of suddenly giving battle unto all; but when
he took upon him more manifestly to persecute, it cannot be told or expressed
(says the History) with tongue, how many, or what manner of sort of Martyrs
were to be seen throughout all Cities and Villages. A noble man of Nicomedia,
Cap. 5. The Edict for persecution tore from the Post, in the presence of both
the Emperors, etc. by a noble man of Nicomedia.
as soon as the Edict against the Christians was published in that City, took
the Proclamation, as it was paisted to an open and public Post, and tore it in
pieces in the presence of both the Emperors, and of him which amongst the rest
was most honorable, and was the fourth Person of the Empire: But he which
first Enduring valliant to the last, he is Martyred.
practiced this noble Act (says he) endured (as it is most like) the penalty
of so bold an enterprise, retaining a valiant and invincible mind unto the last
gasp. Cap. 6. Great persecution at Nicomedia, the place of the Emperors Palace.


Great were the sufferings in Nicomedia, where the Emperors Palace was, and the
Martyrs thereof. This Age (says the Historian) passed all the renowned men
that ever were either of the Grecians or Barbarians. To speak a little of the
Courtiers, and The martyrdom of the Courtie^s.
such who being Pages to the Emperors, (which place was of great request, and
noble men performed it) and of chiefest credit with their Lords, and no less
unto them than dear and natural Sons; such as were Dorothaeus, and Gorgonius,
and Peter, etc. who counted Dorothaeus, Gorgonius, Peter, etc. Pages to the
Emperor.
those reproaches, calamities, and new found torments for the Truth [in] Christ
(as the Historians words are) greater riches than the glory and pleasure of
this present life: To give one instance for Peter brought forth, enjoined to
Sacrifice, refused stoutly, is scourged aloft; his flesh rent in pieces.
all, one of these noble men (says the History) was brought forth at Nicomedia
in the open Assembly, and enjoined to Sacrifice, who stoutly refussing,
commandment was given, that he should be hoised up on high naked, and his whole
body to be scourged, and the flesh rent in pieces with the lash of the Whip,
until he being overcome, should be enforced to yield unto their Sacrifice; when
that he had endured these torments, and persisted constant, and the bones lay
all bare, they poured Vinegar mixed with Salt into Vinegar and Salt poured on
the bare bones, and the wounds,
the festred Wounds, and bruised parts of the Body; when he had overcome also
these torments, and rejoiced greatly thereat, a Gridiron with hot burning Coals
is prepared, and that which remained then put on a Gridiron, and broiled with a
slow fire;
of his Body was laid thereon to be broiled, a slow fire being made under to
consume it by little and little, lest death should quickly deliver him of his
pain; so that they which had the charge of the fire, would release him of no
part of his pain, No re^^^se but ^^ Sacri^^cing.
unless he promised to yield in the end to the Emperors Decree; but he holding
fast his former Opinion, overcame them, and yielded up the Ghost in the midst
of those torments; his He yields up the Ghost in the Torments.
Name was Peter, -- Dorotheus, and Gorgonius, with many more Dorothaeus,
Gorgonius, and many more of the Emperors Family hanged.
of the Emperors Family, after sundry torments (says the History) ended their
lives on the Gallows, and bore away the Garland of Victory.

Anthemius, Bishop of Nicamedia, is said to be at this time beheaded,
Anthemias, Bishop of Nicomedia, beheaded.
and with him a great multitude of Martyrs; for some part of the Emperors
Palace at Nicomedia being on fire, it was The Emperors Palace being some part
on fire, attributed to the Christians, who thereupon are cut off some beheaded,
some burned;
imputed to the Christians; whereupon the whole Troop of all the godly there
(says the History) at that time were executed, some with the Sword beheaded,
some burned with fire, where also (says it) by the Secret and Divine
Providence of God, as the report goes, (says the History) both Men and Women
skipt Men and Women leap and skip into the burning flames; Others put in a
Boat, and drowned in the Sea. The Emperors Pages Bod^es ^ug up and cast into
the Sea, least they should be adored as gods. This was the beginning of the
Persecution. In Syria and M^letis, all the Pasiors ordered to be clapped up.
and leapt into the flaming fire: Another Company the Sergeants set in a Boat,
and threw into the deep Sea; The Emperors Pages after their death being
decently buried, and resting in their Graves, were dug up, and by the
commandments of the Lords cast into the Sea, lest any should adore them in
their Sepulchers, and take them for gods; this was the practice of the
beginning of the Persecution at Nicomedia; but a little while after some of the
Regions of Syria and Miletis being found ready to rebel, the Emperor falls upon
the Christians, and commanded all the Pastors (as they are called) throughout
every Church to be Imprisoned, and kept in hold; the Spectacle (says the
History) of the practices were so cruel to behold, that it exceeded all that
thereof may be spoken; infinite numbers (says it) were every where enclosed,
The Prisons filled with Bishops, Ministers, etc. instead of Robbers, etc
and the Prisons of old appointed and ordained for Murderers, Diggers of
Sepulchers, and Robbers of Graves, were then replenished with Bishops,
Ministers, Deacons, Readers, Exorcists, so that there was no room in the
Prisons, for such as were condemned for heinous offenses: After those other
Edicts took place, by More Edicts for Persecution, Cap. 7. Multitudes of
Martyrs in Africa,
virtue of which such as sacrificed were set at liberty, and such as resisted
were commanded to be tormented with a thousand kind of torments, (as says the
History); but who is able (says it) here also to number the multitude of the
Martyrs in all places? especially throughout Africa, and among the Moors;
throughout Thebais and Egypt, from whence passing into other Cities and
Provinces, Thebais, Egypt,
they (says the History) suffered glorious Martyrdom. We have known (says the
Historian) diverse of these to have flourished Palestine, Tyrus in Phenicia. A
sum mary of the diversity of their constant sufferings through successive
torments and cruelties.
in Palestina, and some others in Tyrus of Phenicia, whose infinite stripes,
who would not be amazed to behold? and in their stripes, mavelous constancy,
and after their stripes, their sudden bickering with ravening Beasts; and in
that bickering, their valiant courage, in withstanding the force of fierce
Libbards, the rage of Bears, of wild Bears, and Bulls, provoked with hot
burning Irons; At the doing of all which we were present our selves, and saw
with our eyes (says the Historian) the Divine power of our Savior Jesus (for
whose sake they suffered these things) present and manifestly aiding these
Martyrs. Neither durst these ravening The Beasts touch not the Martyrs, though
ptovoked, but devour the without standers.
Beasts (says he) of a long time drawing, and approach unto the Bodies of the
blessed Saints, but ranged about, and devoured them, which set them on without
the Ring, touching by no means, among all the rest of the blessed Champions,
though their bodies were bare, though they provoked them, with the stretching
forth of their hands, as they were commanded; and if sometime They retreat on a
sudden from the Marty^s, when they violently set on them, as if repelled by
Divine Power, to the admiration of the beholders.
violently they fell on them, they retired back again, as if they had been
repelled by Divine Power from above, which continuing a long time, brought
great admiration to the beholders; when the first beast ranged about to no
purpose, the second and third Beasts were let loose at one and the same Martyr.
The sufferance of those Saints (says he) was to be wondered at, and their
constancy firm and unmovable in their fresh and green bodies; for then (says
he) might a man have seen a young strimpling under After wild Beasts were let
loose at them, one after another,
twenty years of Age, standing still without any holding, stretching forth his
hands in the form of a Cross (for that was used as a sign, because of the
contempt of the Heathen, to Jesus that was crucified, showing that neither were
they ashamed of, nor denied him that on a Cross was crucified, which since is
come by others to be worshipped, and made as an Idol, this I speak, but not the
Historian) making earnest supplication unto God, with a settled and immovable
mind, not wagging himself at all, or pointing any whither from his standing
place, yea though the Bears and Libbards And several thrown before them, and
yet not touched.
breathed out present death, and were now ready to tear his flesh in pieces
with their teeth, yet I wot not how, as if their Jaws had been glewed together,
they recoiled back again. Again (says he) ye might have seen others, in number
five, thrown at the feet of a fierce Bull, which tossed in the Air, and tore in
pieces with his Horns such as stood without the Ring, and left them as dead;
only (says he) the holy Saints he had no power to hurt with his furious and
cruel threats, though he threw up the Earth with his Feet, and fanned the Air
with his Horns, Though the Beast was provoked with hot Irons.
though he were provoked to fierceness with searing Irons, and foamed out
present death; yet (says he) by the Divine Providence of God he was pushed
back: When this Beast (says he) nothing could prevail against the holy
Martyrs, others were let loose: At length, after sundry They are beheaded, and
their bodies cast into the Sea. Cap. 18. Tyrus in Egypt the sore Persecution
there, and the particulars thereof.
bitter torments and violence of wild Beasts, (says he) all were beheaded; and
instead of still Earth and quiet Sepulchers, they were thrown into surging
Waves of the Seas: The like had they of Tyrus in Egypt; Then would thou have
marvelled (says the Historian) at their Martyrdoms, suffered upon their own
Native Soil, where infinite, both Men, Women, and Children, for the Salvation
procured (says he) by our Savior Jesus Christ, contemning this transitory
Life, have endured sundry kind of torments; whereof some after Maiming,
Wracking, and Scourging, thousands of other vexations (horrible (says he) to
be heard of) were burned to Ashes; others drowned in the Seas; others manfully
laid their necks to the Block; others hanged on the Gallows: Some as heinous
Offenders; some others far worse tied to the Tree with their heads downwards,
and so long beset with a Watch, And va^ieties of most cruel sufferings, and
death. Cap. 9. The exquisite varieties of sufferings in Thebays,
till Famine had bereaved them of their lives. -- But no Speech (says he) can
sufficiently declare the punishments and torments endured of the Martyrs
throughout Thebays, having their bodies torn in pieces with shells of Seafish,
instead of the Tallons of Beasts; the Women tied by the Leg, were lifted into
the Air, and their heads downwards, with a certain Engine of Wood, and And the
diverse and unheard of manner of manner of them, continuing for many years.
there hanged all bare and uncovered, yielding to the beholders a foul, filthy,
cruel, and unnatural Spectacle; others ended their lives upon Boughs and
Branches of Trees, they linked together with certain Instruments, the tops of
boisterous and mightier Boughs, and tied them unto either of the Martyrs
Thighs; afterward loosing the Boughs to spirt and spring into their growing
place, suddenly rent asunder the Members of their Bodies, for which purpose
they invented this pain. All these mischiefs (says he) continued not a few
days, but for the space of many years, sometimes more then ten, some other
time more then twenty Ten, twenty, thirty, sixty, one hundred in a day thus
executed, of Men, Women, and Children, after the first tasting of sundry
torments. The varieties of their sufferings and deaths.
were executed, one while not under thirty, another while well nigh threescore;
again another time an hundred in one day of Men, Women, and very young
Children, after the bitter tastes of sundry kinds of torments, were put to
death. We our selves (says he) being there present at the Execution, saw with
our eyes a great multitude, whereof some were burned, others beheaded, until
the Sword became blunt, and the Tormenters wearied; so that others came in
place and executed by turns, where we beheld (says he) the noble cheer and
countenance, the Divine Power and valiantness of mind in such as builded their
Faith on Jesus Christ our Savior; as soon as the Sentence was pronounced,
(says the Historian) and judgment given upon the former, there stepped forth
others and stood at the Bar, protesting their Faith, and publishing themselves
Christians, not fearing at all the bitterness of manifold and sundry torments,
but with invincible minds laying their whole trust and confidence upon God,
joyfully, merrily, Their joy in suffering.
and cheerfully took the last Sentence of Condemnation, singing Psalms, and
Hymns, and Thanksgivings unto God, even to the last gasp: These (says he) were
truly to be wondered at, but those were especially to be admired, who being
renowned for their Riches, Nobility, Honor, Eloquence, and Philosophy, The
quality of the Sufferers.
yet preferred before all these, the Piety and Faith in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; of which sort Philorenus, a Governor of Philorenus Governor of
Alexandria.
Alexandria, of no small account, put in trust with weighty matters of the
Empire, being guarded after the Roman Dignity and Honor, with a Troop of
Soldiers to his Train, was daily sifted and examined. Such a one also was
Phileas, Bishop of the Phileas, Bishop of Themaite,
People of Themaitae, a famous Man, both for the famous Government of his
Country, as for the oversight of the public Lyturgies, and study of
Philosophy: These men, though they were Notwithstanding all entreaties of
Kindred, Friends, Rulers, and Judge, to sacrifice and spare themselves,
entreated of many of their kinds-folks, and otherwise their familiar Friends,
of many of the chief Rulers, and last of all by the Judge himself, that they
would tender their own case, that they would consider their Calling, that they
would pity their Wives and Children; yet could not they for all the persuasion
of such great personages be brought (by preferring this present life) to
hearkened not, but
contemn the Faith of Christ, and to renounce his Laws, but with constant and
Philosophical minds, yea rather Divine, enduring all the threats and
contumelies of the Judge, ended their lives were beheaded. Page 10. The
sufferers at Alexandria endured not once, but some twice the cruel torments.
with the losing of their Heads; -- Those at Alexandria, not once, but some of
them twice all pain and punishment that could be invented; all the threats of
Soldiers practiced against them, either by word or deed, with an invincible
courage, excluding fear by reason of the fullness of love, whose manhood and
valiantness in all their torments, what man is able with mouth to express?
Everyone did to them as they pleased,
It was permitted, and was lawful for every man to torment them as he pleased;
and because it was so, some smoat them with Clubs and Cudgels, some with sharp
Twigs, some with Whips, some with Leathern Thongs, some other with Whipcord;
The Spectacle was pitiful Most cruel,
both for the variety of torment and superfluity of malice; some with their
hands tied behind them, were stretched along, and wracked in every joint
throughout the Body, and as they hung and lay in the Wrack, the Tormenters were
commanded to torment them all their Bodies over, not plaguing them as Thieves
are commonly handled, with the only renting of their sides, but they had the
skins of their Bellies, New, and unheard
and their Shins, and of their Eyelids rased all off with rugged Hoofs, and
with the Tallons and Claws of wild Beasts; some were seen to hang by one hand
as a hollow Vault, and to endure that way far more bitter wracking of the
joints and members of the Body; some were tied to Pillars, and their Faces
writhed backwards to behold themselves, their of sufferings.
feet standing them in no stead; but they violently wagging by the weight and
poize of their bodies were thus grievously tormented, by reason of their
stretching and hard binding in bonds; this they suffered, not only while they
were examined, and whilst the President dealt with them, but throughout the
whole day. And when Care in the President to see if any would recant, by means
of their torments;
that he had passed from the former, he gave his Ministers charge to oversee
them behind, if peradventure any of them being overcome with the grievous
torment did yield: He commanded also, If that any were in danger of death, by
reason of cold, that their Fetters and Bonds should be released speedily, and
they to be And charge to drag them on the ground to get them heat, lest cold
should kill them in their Irons.
laid on the ground, to be lugged and drailed all along to get them heat; they
had not one spark of compassion, but thought, of duty they should thus be
affected, and furiously rage against them, as though they had been no living
Creatures, wherefore their Adversaries invented this second pain, and added it
to the former punishments, after stripes, they were laid in the Stocks, The
succession of their most cruel torments,
and their feet stretched four spaces (or holes) asunder, that of necessity
they must lie on their backs, and having no feeling of their bodies, by reason
of the Wounds which the stripes printed in their Members; others being thrown
along upon the Pavement, lay poudered in the dust in extreme pain, a more
piteous and lamentable spectacle to the beholders than the torment it self,
bearing in their bodies diverse Wounds diversely invented: The And their
constancy therein, and varieties of deaths.
case standing thus, some died in torment, and confounded the Adversary with
their patience; some half dead, and shut in Prison, after a few days died of
their pain; The rest by careful provision were comforted, and after certain
continuance of Imprisonment became more constant, when they had given them in
choice either to touch the detestable Sacrifices, and so be at ease, and enjoy
among them their cursed liberty, or not to sacrifice and change life for death;
with all speed voluntarily they embraced death, for they were skilful in those
things which concerned them in holy Scripture; He that sacrifices to strange
Gods (says And encouragements to others to endure Persecution,
he) shall be rooted out from among the People, and thou shall have no other
Gods but Me: Phileas wrote from Prison thus to his Parishoners (as the
Historian terms it) before the Judge pronounced the Sentence of Condemnation
upon him, rehearsing unto them the state he stood in, provoking them to march
forwards, And to hold fast their Profession by Phileas from the Prison, a
famous man, and a Philosopher.
and to hold fast the profession of Faith in Christ after his death, which was
then at hand; he is said to be a Philosopher, and a man famous in profane (as
they term it) Literature: Two or three instances more, and I shall end this
Scene of Tragical Persecution.

The Soldiers having besieged a City in Phrygia, wholly inhabited Cap. 11. A
whole City in Phrygia, Men, Women, Children, Lieutenant, Captain, Senate,
People, all Christians, besieged, and burnt to Ashes.
of Christians, and compassed in both Men, Women, and Children, which called
upon the Name of the Lord, they set all on fire, and burnt them to Ashes; for
with one consent, all the Inhabitants thereof, Lieutenant, the Captain, the
whole Senate, and the people every one professed themselves Christians, and
could by no Edicts be brought to adore Idols or carved Images. And there was
also another renowned for Roman Dignity, whose name was Audactus, by Lineage
coming of a noble House in Audactus, a noble and great man in the Empire, and
in great credit with the Emperor
Italy, and for his Virtue in great credit with the Emperor, so that he
governed with great wisdom and uprightness the Common Wealth, and weightiest
matters of the Empire; but above all, he was famous for Religion and Faith in
Christ, so that in the Administration and governing of the Common Wealth, he
endured tormented, and Martyred. Cap. 12. The sufferings in Arabia, Cappadocia,
and the varieties of them, and in
torment, and was Crowned with Martyrdom. In Arabia some were beheaded, some
tormented with the breaking and bruising of their Legs; as it happened in
Cappadocia, some hanged by the feet, and their heads downwards, with slow fire
set under and smothered to death, with choking smoke, as it happened to the
Brethren in Mesopotamia; some others had their Nostrils slit, Mesopotamia,
their Ears boared, their Hands maimed, their Members and parts of their bodies
drawn asunder and disjoynted, as it happened at Alexandria; some burned at
Antioch, hot burning Coals laid Alexandria, Antioch.
under not quickly to dispatch them, but with lingering pain to torment them;
others chose rather to burn their hands, then they would touch their abominable
sacrifices; the experience whereof some going to avoid, before they were
apprehended, and fallen into the hands of their Adversaries threw themselves
down headlong from the tops of Houses, and thought better to prevent death,
than to sustain the torments of their malicious Enemies.

A certain Matron renowned for virtue and integrity of life, and The particular
of a Matron of Antioch, and her Daughters,
among all of them at Antioch, famous for her great Riches, noble Lineage and
estimation, brought up two Daughters, that were Virgins, in the fear of God,
which passed all others in brightness of beauty, and youthly comeliness; these
because they were of great beauty and comeliness,
greatly spighted and envied, though they hid themselves, yet were they found
out; and when at length, with much ado, they understood of their being among
Forreiners, they cited them to appear at Antioch with speed in their proper
persons, and beset cited to Antioch,
the place of their abode with a Band of Soldiers, compassing Beset with a
Pand of Soldiers,
them, as it were, with a Net: This Matron seeing her self and her Daughters in
great peril, by no means possible to be avoided, Advised by the Mother, above
a^l, not to s^ffer the abusing of their bodies, and to be constant,
pondered with her self the punishments ensuing; and that which was most
grievous of all, the abusing of their Bodies, she admonished in no wise to be
suffered, no not once to sink into their ears; and said further, That if they
committed their Souls as Bondslaves unto Satan, it were a thing more
intolerable then any death or destruction: Yet there remained one remedy for
all, and that (said he) was to fly to the Lord for refuge; After deliberation,
and to fly to the Lord,
with uniform consent, they laid down what was to be done, they apparelled
themselves gorgeously, and took their journey toward Antioch; in the midst of
the way, when their Guard severed Cast themselves into the River, as they were
carried toward Antioch, and are drowned. Another couple of Virgins cast into
the Ri^er.
themselves, as about to serve Nature, they cast themselves into the floods
that slided thereby, and drowned themselves: Those Heathen Idolaters threw into
the Sea another couple of Auteochian Virgins, renowned for all Virtues, true
sisters of noble Lineage of good life, of tender years, of goodly beauty, of
honest mind, of godly conversation, of wonderful disposition, as though the
earth could no longer bear them; such were the Tragedies of Antioch. -- In
Pontus they suffered punishment hardly Sufferings in ^ontus, and the variety,
and exquisiteness of them,
to be heard of, fingers of both hands were pricked under the tender Nails with
sharp Quills; others had hot boiling Lead poured on their backs, the most
necessary Members of their bodies maimed; others endured shameful,
intolerable, and such The Judges wit exercised in devising new torments, and
out of measure, cruelties, and contending for that purpose.
torments as may not be told of, in their privy Members, and in the secret
bowels of their bodies. Such (says the History) as these noble and lawful
Judges, excogitated, for tokens of their sharp wit and deep wisdom; daily also
they found new torments, contending one with another who should excel in
spiteful inventions and additions of torments; this calamity was extreme and
out of measure cruel: And when as henceforth they dispaired of increasing They
are wearied with slaughters, and begin to practice courtesy, which is
their mischief, and now were wearied with slaughter, gotten their full of
bloodshed; voluntarily they mittigated their rage, they practice courtesy,
their pleasure (forsooth says the Historian) is henceforth to punish with
death no longer; It is not requisite (say they) that the Cities should be
stained with blood, issuing out of our own bowels, that the most noble Empire
of the Caesar's should be blemished and defamed with the Title of Cruelty, the
Emperor himself being well known for Clemency and Benignity; yea rather, the
gracious goodness of the Emperors Highness is to be stretched forth and
enlarged toward all men, that they be no more punished with death; they deemed
their cruelty aswaged, and Emperors clemency to shine, in that they command our
eyes to be pulled out, (says the Historian) and the their right eye to be
pulled out, and the left leg unjoynted, or sawn asunder in the Hams,
left leg to be unjoynted, wherefore by reason of this cruel courtesy, it may
not be told what number and infinite (says he) multitude of men, having their
right eyes pulled out, and the empty places seared with hot burning Irons;
their left leg sawn asunder in the Hams, and seared likewise; were condemned to
the Quarries and sent to the Quarries; And this is the Emperors cou^^esie.
Several tormented besides.
and Mines throughout the Provinces, to the digging of Metals, not for
commodity and profit sake, but for affliction and misery. But besides all this,
they were led forth to sundry kinds of torments, which may not be rehearsed,
whose valiant Acts also cannot be described. -- Lastly, The Bishops and chief
Rulers Cap. 13: Anthymus Bishop of Nicomedia beheaded.
of those Churches that suffered Martyrdom, were Anthymus Bishop of Nicomedia,
who there was beheaded, as aforesaid. -- In Phenicia, Luciania Minister of the
Congregation at Antioch, who Luciana put to death at Antioch.
preached at Nicomedia, in presence of the Emperor, the Kingdom of Christ. --
Tyrannion Bishop of Tyrus; Zenobius Minister of Tyrannion Bishop of Tyrus.
Zenobius Minister of Zidon. Silvanus Bishop of Emissa, and others put to death,
cast into the Sea.
Zidon; and Silvanus Bishop of Emissa, who together with others were thrown to
feed Beasts; The other two both at Antioch glorified God by their patient
deaths: Tyrannion buried in the bottom of the Sea; and Zenobius reputed an
excellent Physician after Scourgings, and bitter torments, died most
constantly. Among the Martyrs of Palestina, Silvanus Bishop of the Churches in
Silvanus Bishop of Goza beheaded. Nine and thirty Officers sent to the Mine
Pits in Phoenos.
Gaza was beheaded, together with nine and thirty Officers, which were
committed to the Mine Pits in Phoenos. In Egypt, Peleus and Nilus, Egyptian
Bishops were burned to Ashes. -- Of Cesarea, Peleus, Ninus, Egyptian Bishops
burned to Ashes. Pamphilus Senior of Cesaria suffered death Peter Bishop of
Alexandria. Faustus, Ridius, Ammoni^s, Ministers martyred. Phileas, Hezechias,
Pachynius, Theodorus, Bishops of Egypt; and multitudes of other famous men put
to death in Egypt, Thebais, and that Region. The end of the ten Persecutions,
and the reason of producing them. The end of the Tyrants, and sad case of the
Empire, Cap 14.
Pamphilius, the Elder, said to be the renowned Pillar of that place. The most
famous of Alexandria, Thebais and Egypt, that suffered, were Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, Faustus, Ridius, and Ammonius, Ministers and Martyrs: Also Phileas,
Hezechias, Pachymius, and Theodorus, Bishops of the Churches in Egypt: And
besides these (says the History) infinite other famous men whose names are
well known in the Congregations throughout that Region.

Thus have I traveled through the ten most famous Persecutions, and therein
most of the chiefest of them in general or particular, to show the effect, or
the bloody consequence of National Worships, or the enforcing of Religion by
the Laws of men, which is not Spirit and Truth, but Letter and Death, as these
instances have abundantly manifested; and to make appear how God is against
them, and supporting his people in protesting against them, and overthrowing
the Persecutors, as this very Tyrant knew, who in the twentieth year of his
Reign, and not full two years after this hurly burly with the Christians, when
as before the affairs of the Empire prospered well, and found good success; now
it suffered a change, and such a one as the Historian observes never befell the
Empire before, turning all upside down: Dioclesian the chiefest, being overtook
with no small disease, Anno. 307. Dioclesian be reft of his wits, and
Maximinianus depose themselves.
which bereaved him of his wits; together with Maximinianus, the second to him,
after they had been Emperors for the space of twenty years, as aforesaid,
deposed themselves, and lived a private life, from which time to his end
Dioclesian wasted and pined Dioclesian wastes away with Diseases. Maximinian
hangs himself; Constantius and Maximinus sole Emperors.
away with Diseases, and Maximinian hanged himself: Constantinus and Maximinus
then took the sole government of the Empire (which had before four Princes at
one time governing); Constantius was very friendly, and Persecution on his hand
loosened from the Christians; Maximinus persecuted them sorely, though at
Maximinus sorely plagued in his body at Tarsus,
times he would seem to be otherwise minded: The Hand of God pursued him so,
that at Tarsus a great plague fell upon him; first, taking hold in his flesh,
and afterward proceeding to the very Soul, for there arose suddenly in the
secret parts of his body, an impostume, or running sore, afterward in the
lower part of his Privities, a botchy corrupt Boil with a Fistula, whence
issued out with a Botch.
corrupt matter eating up the inward bowels, and an unspeakable multitude of
Lice swarming out, and breathing a deadly stench; and Lice, and stench.
when as the corpulency of the whole body, through abundance of meat, before
the Disease came; was turned into superfluous grosness, and then being grown
into matter, yielded an intolerable and horrible spectacle to the beholders;
wherefore of the Which flew some of his Physicians.
Physicians, some being not able to digest that wonderful noisome stench, were
slain; some other (when there remained no hope of Others were executed because
they could not help.
recovery, by reason of the swelling throughout the whole body) being not able
to help at all with their Physic, were cruelly executed themselves; Whilst the
Hand and Plague of God was on him, and he lay in his miserable plight, he
pondered with himself the rash enterprises he had practiced against the
Worshippers of God; Cap. 18. In this plight he repents, confesses to God;
Commands persecution to cease,
wherefore returning unto himself, first, he confesses his sins to God; next,
calling upon him such as were about him, he gave commandment, that with all
speed they should cease from persecuting the Christians; and that by Decree and
Commandment of the Emperor, they should build again their Churches, and that
they should meet often to celebrate their wonted Ceremonies, and pray for the
life of the Emperor; And immediately that And desires Prayers of the Christians
for his life. The Proclamations hastened.
which by word he commanded, was indeed brought to pass. The Proclamations of
the Emperor were published throughout the Cities, containing a recantation of
those things formerly prejudicial unto the Christians, in this form, --

The Emperor Caesar, Maximinus, Puissant, Magnificent, chief Lord, The Copy of
the Edict.
Lord of the Thebais, Lord of Salmatia, five times Conqueror of Persia, Lord of
Germany, Lord of Egypt, twice Conqueror of the Carpyans, six times Conqueror of
the Armenians, Lord of the Medes, Lord of the Adiabeni, twenty times Tribune,
nineteen times general Captain, eight times Consul, Father of the Country,
Proconsul; And the Emperor Caesar, Flavius, Valerius, Constantius, (some read
Constantius, but it is not so found in the Greek) Virtuous, Fortunate,
Puissant, Noble, chief Lord, general Captain, and Tribune five times, Consul,
Father of the Country, Proconsul. Among other things which we have decreed for
the Commodity and profit of the Common Wealth, our pleasure is first of all to
order and redress all things according to the ancient Laws and Discipline of
the Romans; and withal to use this provisoe, That the Christians which have
forsaken the Religion of their Ancestors, should be brought again to the right
way, for after a certain humor of singularity, such an Opinion of excellency
puffed them up, that those things which their Elders had received and allowed,
they rejected and disallowed, devising every man such Laws as they thought
good, and observed the same, assembling in diverse places great multitudes of
people; Wherefore when as our Edict was proclaimed, that they should return
unto the Ordinance of their Elders, diverse standing in great danger, felt the
penalty thereof, and many being troubled therefore, endured all kinds of death.
And because we perceive many, as yet to persist in the same madness in their
yielding due worship to the Caelestial Godds, nor regarding the God of the
Christians, having respect unto our benignity and godly custom, pardoning all
men according to our wonted guise, we thought good in this case to extend our
gracious and favorable clemency, that the Christians may be tolerated again,
and that they may repair again the places where they meet together, so that
they do nothing prejudicial to public Order and Discipline; We mean to
prescribe unto the Judges by another Epistle what they shall observe: Wherefore
as this our gracious Pardon deserves, let them make intercession to their God
for our Health, for the Common Weal, and for themselves, that in all places the
Affairs of the public Weal may be safely preserved, and that they themselves
may live securely in their own houses.

I have mentioned this Edict or Proclamation, the rather that men, The reason
of the rehea^sal of the Copy of the Edict.
however swelled with Titles, Dominions, and Honors, notwithstanding all that
they can say of them, and do by them, must come to bow to him, whom in their
hearts they despise, and seek to trample his Worship and Worshippers under
foot, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth.

Great calamities attended the Roman Empire, whilst their rage was The sad
consequence of these persecutions to the Roman Empire, and the forbearance of
them.
great against the Christians, whilst they imposed the Worship of their Heathen
Godds, and destroyed all those who could not bow down unto, nor worship them;
which when they forbore, and left to these who worshipped the Lord, to worship
him according to his Spirit, not according to their Law, it flourished, was
safe, and increased. I should be mavelous large if I should go through those
things also in particular. The rebellious invasions, divisions amongst
themselves, Plagues, Pestilences, Famines, Earthquakes, and untimely deaths
that befell those Emperors themselves, the Lord, when he saw time, cutting short
their race, who ordains his Arrows against the Persecutor; notwithstanding
that he saw it good also to suffer those things to be, to prevent greater The
end of the Lord to the Christians in suffering these persecutions.
mischiefs amongst the Christians, and to give testimony before all the World
of his Power, that was in them wonderfully to carry them through whatsoever was
laid upon them for the testimony unto his Name. For the Christians, when a
little ease and liberty befell them, and the Hand of the Lord so wrought, that
instead of being cast out like Dogs, and cut off every way with the most cruel
and detestable sufferings, and trampled under foot as if they were not fit to
live among men, or as Beasts of prey were made to be destroyed, they were
accounted eminent and honorable, and had to doing in the mannagement of
public Affairs, and in the very Emperors Palaces were the men of account and
trust; they degenerated from the natural Rule of Piety, (as are the Historians
own words, and his honest and right observation); and after The Historians
account of the cause, as among the Christians of the Persecutions.
that one pursued another with open contumely and hatred, (as he goes on and
speaks) and when (says he) we impugned our selves by no other than our selves
with the Armor spite, and sharp Spears of opprobious words, so that Bishops
against Bishops, and People against People raised Sedition. Last of all, when
that (says he) cursed hypocresie and dissimulation had swom even to the brim
of malice, the heavy hand of Gods high Judgment, after his wonted manner,
whilst as yet (says he) the Ecclesiastical Companies assembled themselves,
nevertheless began softly by a little and a little to visit us; so that the
Persecution that was raised against us, took his first Original from the
Brethren which were under (Vecturius the Captain, aforesaid, persecuted the
Soldiers in Camp) Banner in Camp; when as (says he) we were touched with no
manner of sense or feeling thereof, neither went about to pacify God; we
heaped sin upon sin, thinking like careless Epicures, that God neither cared
nor would visit our sins; and they who seemed our Shepherds, (says he) Anno.
301. And lamentation over the divisions of the Christians, and the consequences
of them, Lam. 2.
laying aside the Rule of Piety, practiced Contention and Schism among
themselves; and whilst they aggravated these things, that is, contentions,
threatenings, mutual hatred and enmity, and every one proceeded in ambition,
much like Tyranny it self: I say (says he) then the Lord, according to the
saying of Jeremiah, made the Daughter of Sion obscure, and overthrew from above
the glory of Israel, and remembered not his footsteps in the day of his wrath;
the Lord has drowned all the beauty of Israel, and overthrown all his strong
holds; and according to the prophesies in the Psalm. 87.
Psalms, He has overthrown and broken the Covenant of his Servant, and
prophained his Sanctuary, casting it on the ground; by the overthrow of his
Churches he has broken down all his Walls, he has laid all his Fortresses in
ruin. All they that passed by spoiled him, and therefore he is become a rebuke
unto his Neighbors, for he lifted up the right hand of his enemies, and turned
the edge of his Sword, and aided him not in the time of Battle, but caused his
Dignity to decay, and cast his Throne down to the ground; the days of his
Youth he shortened, and above all this, he covered him with shame.

I have repeated this his words at large, for example sake, that the The use of
it as to England.
consequence of such things may be avoided, by the avoiding of such things as
these, and that it may be taken notice of, that the Lord has a correction in
suffering such days as these to come for them that go astray, as he has
judgment for his Enemies who work such things, and seek to set up their
Dominion over his Principality, who lives for ever, who will needs prescribe to
his Worship, and make Laws how he, (or rather themselves, as I have showed)
shall be worshipped, and destroy and cause to suffer such as cannot fall down
and worship the Laws they make, and the Images they set up.

It would require a Volumn if I should go through these things also, as in
observation of what History affords in this particular, even of those very
Christians, and what they suffered as the ends of this Emperor, Maxentius, and
Lucinnius, who rose up in the days of Constantine, Son to Constantius, of whom
I have by and by to treat, and the general end that then became of those
Persecutions, when Maximinus was dead, and Lycinnius also; and Constantine came
also to be Emperor alone, who being a Christian, and a wise and mighty Prince,
struck all those cruelties and death under foot, and gave peace unto all, it
being also something besides my purpose to notify those divisions that (as
peace and rest came) rose up among them, further then what I have observed
already, what was among them then when they had no power, that which followed
in the days of Constantine and after, serving to my intent herein, and of
which I shall speak, when as I come to show how that when the Christians came
to impose Faiths, or National Worships one upon another, as did the Heathens to
them, to gather for their National Worship, or Gods, (of which I have treated)
and through all to prove the truth of what I have laid down concerning these
things, and the consequences of all Religions, Professions, Worships, that are
not from Spirit and Truth, but stand in the contrary,

Before I come unto which, it will be necessary, seeing that I have hitherto
kept along with the History, that I go along in order, and give something to be
understood of the Persecution which yet the Christians sustained after the
death of Dioclesian, and Maximinianu^ aforesaid, which is reckoned the tenth
Persecution, and of this M^^iminus, after his Edict of Liberty to the
Christians, of which I have made mention.

Constantius ending his days in Quietness and Peace, being Emperor Constantius
dies in peace. Anno. 311. Eusebius* lib. 8. cap. 14. Constantine proclaimed full
Emperor by the Army.
alone in the presence of his natural Son Constantine, who was proclaimed full
Emperor, and Caesar by the Army, being a follower of his Fathers Piety (as the
Historian observes) in Christian Religion, and such a one (says he) was he:
But Lycinnius, whilst these things were a doing (for Constantius died at York
in Lycinnius also created Emperor.
England, in the year 310.) by common consent of the Potentates (as he calls
them) was also created Emperor and Augustus. This grieved Maximinus very sore,
who unto that time was alone called Maximinus grieved thereat, invades their
Jurisdictions, intitles himself Augustus; is attainted of Treason against
Constantime, deposed, aspires again, dies a shameful death.
Caesar of all men, who also being Tirannically disposed, violently of his own
mind invaded the Empire, entitled himself Augustus; but being attainted of
Treason, and found to have conspired the death of Constantine, and after
deposition to have aspired again after the Emperial Scepter, died a most
shameful death.

His Son Maxentius which exercised Tyranny at Rome, (as says Cap. 15.
Maxentius his Son at first dissembles with the Christians at Rome; commands
Persecution to cease; proves afterward otherwise than he pretended.
the Historian) in the beginning of his Reign dissembled with the Christian
Faith egregiously, and creeping into credit by flattering the people of Rome,
and therefore he commanded his Commonalty to cease from persecuting the
Christians; but in process of time he was not indeed found the same which men
took him for, and hoped he would be, for he fell into all kinds of enormities,
omitting no heinous offense, how detestable and lacivious soever it were
unessayed, committing adultery, and all kind of lewd wantonness, sending home
again unto their Husbands the loving Spouses and lawful Wives, taken from them
by force, An account of his most abominable wickedness.
after he had ignominiously abused them. These presumptuous practices he
exercised not only upon the obscurer sort, but he dealt thus opprobiously with
the most renowned of the Roman Senators; wherefore all, both high Primates, and
inferour People trembling for fear of him, were oppressed with his intolerable
Tyranny; yet neither by silence, neither by suffering of his grievous
servitude, could they be free from the bloody slaughter and imbrued murder of
this Tyrant; upon light occasions, sundry times delivered he the people unto
the Soldiers, which were in compass to be slain, and innumerable company of
the Roman people, in the midst of the City, he offered to the Swords and
Spears, not of Barbarians nor Scithians, but of his proper Soldiers; it may
not be recited what slaughter of Senators he procured, craftily seeking after
their substance, of whom an infinite number he executed (says the Historian)
for sundry causes, and diverse crimes; This was the drift and mark this
mischievous Tyrant shot at: He applied himself to the study of Magical Arts; he
opened and ripped the Bowels of burdened Women great with Child; he searched the
Intrals of new born Babes; he slew Lions; and after a secret manner conjured
Devils, and endeavored to withstand the Wars then approaching, for he daily
determined with himself to be Crowned Emperor by reason of these Arts. This
Maxentius therefore practicing Tyranny at Rome, oppressed the Commonalty with
such heinous offenses as may not be told; so that they were pinched with so
great penury of necessary Victual, that the like cannot be remembered in this
our Age (says the Historian) to have happened at Rome.

This is Maxentius, and as for Maximinus the Eastern Tyrant, C^p. 16.
Maximinius in the East as great a Persecutor as Maxentius in the West, and as
wicked a person.
as this was the Western, of a long time (says the Historian) he used means to
conceal his malice against his Brother, and his secret friendship to the Roman
Empire; but in the end he was espied, and suffered punishment due to his
desert; it was wonderful to see how he committed things alike, and
correspondent to the practices of the Roman Tyrant; nay he surpassed him in
malice and mischief, the chiefest Inchanters An account of him and his
wickedness.
and Magicians were in greatest credit with him; and because he was a man very
timorus, and wonderfully rooted in Superstition, he highly esteemed of the
erroneous Worship of Idols, and Devils: Without Southsaying, or answer of
Oracles, he durst not move, no, as it is commonly said, the breadth of a Nail,
for which cause (says the Historian) he persecuted us without intermission,
and more vehemently then his Ancestors did before him; he erected Temples
throughout every City; the Idolatrical Worship of a long time defaced and
overthrown, he carefully restored again, and published by Edict, That Idol
Priests should be ordained throughout all Countries and Cities; besides this,
he appointed in every Province one to be high Priest, of such as were accounted
famous for politic Affairs, being also able with decency to execute that
Function, whom he furnished with a great Train or Guard of Soldiers: To be
short, he privileged all Inchanters as godly, and taken as Gods themselves,
with Primacy, Dignity, and chiefest Prerogatives: He went on still, and
oppressed not one City and Region only, but whole Provinces under his
Dominion, exacting Gold and Silver, and sums In particular,
of money, and vexing them with grievous Proclamations, one Penalty ensuing
after another. The Wealth and Substance his Progenitors had gathered before, he
took in great heaps of Treasure, and great sums of Money, and bestowed it upon
his flattering Parasites. He was so drowned with over much Wine and
Drunkenness, that among his Cups he would be stark mad, and besides himself,
and oftentimes being Tipsy, (says the Historian) commanded such things,
whereof afterward being restored to his former sobriety, he repented him; he
gave place to no man for surfeiting and superfluity, but made himself
ringleader of that Vice unto all that were about him, both Prince and People;
he effeminated his Soldiers with all kind of delicacy and laciviousness; he
permitted his Presidents and Captains to practice ravenous extortion, and
Polling of his Subjects, whom he entertained as fit Companions of his foul and
shameful Tyranny.

This is Maximinus, as the other was Maxentius, the Eastern Both of them put
together as a Lookingglass for Tyrants and Persecutors, and setters up of
National Worships.
and Western Tyrants, who persecuted so grievously the Church of God; and this
is the description of them both, which I have set down on purpose, that in
these two Instances may be seen who they were, and of what they were made that
set up National Worships for the Idol Gods, and persecuted the Christians for
not bowing unto them.

I shall now proceed to what remains behind, that I may finish the instances of
this particular.

God plagued Maximinus, (as I have said before) who in the Maximinus overcame
all save the Christians. His cruelty to the Christians, and the particulars of
their sufferings.
things aforesaid prevailed against all sorts of people (says the History) the
Christians only excepted, who contemned death, and despised his Tyranny: The
men endured Burning, Beheading, Crucifying, ravenous devouring of Beasts,
drowning in the Sea, Maiming, and broyling of the Members, Goring, and digging
out of the Eyes, mangling of the whole Body; moreover Famine and Imprisonment.
To be short, they suffered every kind of torment for the Service of God, rather
than they would leave the Worship of God, and embrace the adoration of Idols;
Women also not inferior to Men, through the Power of the Word of God, put on
manly courage, (says the Historian) whereof some suffered the torments with
men; others attained unto the like masteries of Virtue; some others drawn to be
abused, yielded sooner their life unto the death, than their Bodies to be
defiled: This Plague prevailed upon, and wrested from him the Edict, in His
Plagues produced something of liberty; Eusebius. lib. 19. cap. 1. Which being
over, he fetched back his liberty;
the behalf of the Christians. This Edict was matter of Joy and Liberty a
while, but the time continued not long in the Eastern Parts, as in Asia, etc.
Orders were given by word of mouth to the Lieutenants and Officers not to
persecute the Christians, but not in Writing; He fetched things back as he
could, first, he went First, in denying (Cap. 2.) Meetings in their
Churchyards. Then in instigating Petitions to have the Christians banished his
Dominions.
about, under a pretense, to hinder their Meetings, in (what the History calls)
the Churchyards; Then he sets malicious men on work, to desire of him that no
Christian might be suffered to live in his Dominion; it was not six whole
months after the former Edict that he began these things, and thereby gave an
occasion of outward wreck to the Christians, who but a little before had such
occasion (by the said Edict) of Joy and Rejoicing, that the incredulous Heathen
are said to be much dismayed, and wondering at the mavelous strangeness of so
great a change, cried The Heathens confess to the God of the Christians. Cap.
1. Cap. 3. Theotecnus conspiracy in raising false reports on the Christians;
his cruelty, and erecting an Idol to Jupiter, and an O^acle, saying,
out, That the God of the Christians was the great and only true God. -- By
Theotecnus, Lieutenant of Antioch, he began this conspiracy, who (that is to
say Theotecnus) fell upon the Christians, imprisoned whom he could find,
devised means wherewithal to accuse them, and of many was the cause of their
deaths, and at length erected the Idol of Jupiter, as the God of Friendship;
with certain enchantments, and sorceries, feigning to the Emperor what strange
things the Oracle seemed to utter; and being a flatterer, seeing what pleased
the Emperor, raised a wicked spirit against the Christians, and said, God so
commanded, that God commanded that the Christians should be banished.
the Christians should be banished out of the City and Liberties thereof, for
that they were Rebels and Traitors to the Crown.

This wicked man Theotecnus, having done these things of his Cap. 4: Other
Magistrates follow his example,
own accord, all the other Magistrates inhabiting the Cities of his Dominions
premulgated the like; and when as the Presidents throughout the Provinces saw
this pleased the Emperor, they egged the Subjects to do the like, and the
Tyrant very promptly Whereby Persecution grew hot.
(says the History) consented by his Rescript unto their Ordinances; so that
again the heat of persecution was blown against the Christians, and Idol
Priests were ordained by the Decree of Maximinus Idol Priests set up.
throughout every City and Village; and moreover high Priests which specially
excelled in Polices, and passed others in all things; who also were zealous
followers of their Religion, and bestowed great labor about the service of
them whom they worshipped; by reason of which the Emperors Superstition and
Idolatrical mind was again, as it were, fresh incensed against them: And that I
may utter the whole in a few words, (says the Historian) he brought all his
Dominion, both Magistrates and All are brought to practice cruelty upon them.
inferior Subjects, to practice every kind of mischief for his sake against us,
and so thought they requited him fully, and should have great favor, as many
as desired to obtain any benefit at his hand, if they oppressed them with
slaughter, and executed certain new mischiefs against them.

Certain forgeries of wicked blasphemies, of Pilate and Jesus, Forgeries of
Blasphemy of Pilate and Jesus, ordered to be taught in the Schools instead of
Theams, to initiate the Children against the Christian Religion. The antiquity
of the slanders cast upon private Meetings by the Heathen. Slanders forced to
be feigned on the Christians by extremity of torment. The drift and end in
raising those slanders.
he also caused to be dispersed among the Provinces, and delivered to
Schoolmasters to commit to memory, by the Lads instead of Theams: And by force
of threats, of torments, a Captain of Damascus constrained certain infamous
Women to say, That themselves were sometimes Christians, and so had been privy
to the wicked and lacivious Acts which the Christians committed among
themselves at their solemn Meetings on the Sundays, as says the History,
which wicked slanders he caused to be Registered and Coppied, and sent to the
Emperor, who also commanded the same to be published every where, in every
place and City.

Which things I make mention of, to show how it has been the Artifice of the
Devil in all Ages, to raise slanders on those who had fear toward God, and in
that drew near to worship him, that so the most brutish persecution he might
draw upon them, by such as honored not God, nor feared before him, seeming to
enforce thereby that it was not for Religion sake, or Holiness, they persecuted
them but for wickedness. And how the Devil had his Priests and high Priests for
the worships of the Heathens, through whom they were held up, and who wrought
the Testifiers against them the worshippers of the true God, no small
suffering, incensing, and bearing through the Magistrates and chief in
Authority, yea the Emperors against them, as has been demonstrated.

But the just Hand of the Lord overtook this Captain, who in Cap. 6. The end of
the Captain that by torment forced those false suggestions. The Persecution
increases, many notable men put to death.
a while after this wicked deed, procured his own death with his proper hand,
and suffered punishment due for his malicious desert. But the Persecution went
on, and became very grievous by reason of these things, and the Presidents
cruelty stirred it up, so that diverse notable men which excelled among the
Christians were put to death, of which number there were three in Emissa, Three
at Emissa in Phaenicia put to death.
a City in Phaenicia, who of their own accord professed Christianity, and were
delivered to be devoured of ravening Beasts. Also Silvanus an ancient Bishop,
and Peter of Alexandria, two that excelled all Bishops, beheaded.
Silvanus a Bishop far stricken in years was put to death, and Peter of
Alexandria, who is said to excel all others of the Bishops for his virtuous
life, and godly exercise of Preaching, was beheaded by the commandment of
Maximinus and Lucianus, after he had And Lucianus an Elder, after he had
delivered the Emperor an Apology in defense of the Doctrine he had taught.
delivered to the Emperor an Apology in defense of the Doctrine which he
taught, being brought from Antioch (of the Church in which place he was an
Elder, and a man of great repute) to Nicomedia, where the Emperor resided, upon
which he was cast into Prison, and shortly after executed.

It will not be amiss, before I close up the days, and finish the The later
persecution by Maximinus far greater than his former.
rehearsal of the cruel Persecutions of this Maximinus (who is said in short
space to have exercised so great tyranny and cruelty toward the Christians,
that the latter persecution seemed far greater then the former) to give a touch
of a new practice used in those his days, and the Contents of one of his
Edicts, and the consequence thereupon in the Judgment of God, openly reproving
what he wickedly had assigned, and falsely said of the prosperity of his
wickedness.

The Edicts for Persecution, and the Decrees of Cities were Cap. 7. A new
practice, engraving the Edicts of persecution in brass, and nailing them to
Posts.
engraven (which never were seen before, says the History) on brazen Tables,
and nailed up, that so of all they might be seen, and none might miss his
oppertunity in persecuting the Christians; this was the new practice of which I
have intimated.

The Edict or Rescript is as follows. -- At length the weak resistance A Copy
of part of one of the Edicts of Persecution.
of man's mind, laying aside and scattering all obscurity and mist of error
which hitherto possessed their Wits, as well of the impious and miserable men,
wrapped in the pernicious darkness of ignorance, has been able to discern that
the same is governed by the providence of the immortal Gods, embracing
goodness, which thing may not be expressed, how acceptable, how pleasing, how
greatful it was unto us, and how great a trial it showed of your godly will,
when as also aforetime every man knew your disposed diligence and piety toward
the immortal Gods, whose faith is made manifest, not by naked and fruitless
words, but by firm and wonderful works; wherefore your City may justly be
called the Seat of the Immortal Gods, and by many These were the Tyrants whom
he commends for their superstition, and persecuting the Ch^istians.
examples it is apparent how she flourishes, having the Caelestial Gods
present with her: For behold your City, laying aside all the things which
especially concerned her, and despising the things which chiefly should be
sought for her Wealth, when as she perceived that cursed vanity again to creep,
and like contemned and covered sparks of fire, by blowing again to send forth
mighty flames, immediately without further deliberation, you having recourse
unto our Grace, as unto the Metropolitan of all Divine Worship, have made
supplication for remedy and aid, the which sound mind, it is manifest the Gods
for your trusty service have ingrafted in you. He therefore, I mean the most
high and mighty Jove, who
rules your most renowned City; to the end that he might deliver your Country
Gods, your Wives, your Children, your household Goods, and Houses from all
corruption, has inspired your minds with this wholesome counsel, showing and
declaring how excellent and notable a thing it is to embrace the Religion and
Sacred Service of the Immortal Gods with due Worship, who may be found so
bereaved of all his Wits, which cannot understand this thing to happen to us,
by the favorable care of the Gods, that neither the Earth denies the Seed she
receives, frustrating the hope of the Husbandman by vain expectation; neither
is that show of wicked War on Earth strengthened without offense; neither does
the noisome temperature of the Earth despatch with death the corrupt bodies;
neither is the Sea (swollen with intemperate Winds) overflown the Banks; neither
do the Storms which fall down, stir up pernicious Tempests; neither is the
Earth which is fosterer, and Mother of all, drowned in her own bottomless Gulfs
by terrible Earthquakes; neither the Mountains settled on Earth swallowed up by
rending of the Earth asunder. All which evils, yea greater than those who
knows not often to have happened heretofore: Yet all these things came to pass,
because of the mere folly of those wicked men, whereas that shameful spot
overshadows their minds, and well-nigh (as I may so say) prevailed every where;
let them behold the wide and broad Field, the flourishing Corn, and overflowing
Ears, the pleasant Meadows clothed with Herbs and Flowers, moistened with
showers from Heaven, and the Weather become temperate and calm again; let all
rejoice, because the might of the most Potent and sturdy Mars is pacified,
through your Service, Sacrifice, and Worship; let them rejoice, because that
therefore constantly we enjoy quiet peace, and as many as left that blind
error, and returned unto the right and best mind, may the rather be glad for
that they are delivered from that sudden storm and grievous Disease, and
henceforth attained unto the sweetness of a pleasant life. But if they persist
in that execrable vanity, our Will and Pleasure is (according to your request)
That they be severed and banished far from your City, and the bordering
Regions, that your City by this means, after your laudable industry, being made
free from all impurity, may busily occupy her self according to her disposed
mind, in offering up Sacrifices with due honor of the Immortal Gods; And that
you may thoroughly understand how graceful your request in this behalf has been
unto us, (yea, without entreaty or great suit) our most prompt mind to promote
good endeavors, has voluntarily granted unto your devotion, That what gift
soever of our bountifulness ye list, ye crave it of us, in consideration of
this your godly purpose. And that this thing may be accomplished, forthwith ask
and have, which being done, shall be a perpetual testimony unto your City, of
piety toward the Immortal Gods, and shall be a proof unto your Sons and
Posterity, how that you have been worthily rewarded by our goodness, for this
your desire, to lead a right life.

This is the Copy of so much of the Edict which concerns this matter The intent
of quoting the Copy of the Edict.
I have in hand, which I was willing to insert, the rather because all may see
here as in a Looking-Glass, how the Heathen judged of the Christians, and how
the most detestable bloodsheds and torments exercised against them, are
accounted the best devotions, and the indulgence of God extended to the Empire,
whilst there was a little release of the Christians sufferings in the times and
seasons, and freedom from Plague, Invasion, and other miseries, is attributed
to their beginning again to embrue their hands in the blood of the Christians;
And how acceptable such Sacrifices of blood are to those in power, who would
have their blood to be sacrificed forthwith; ask and have, all shall be
accomplished.

Thus of the new Practice, and the Edict, now of the Consequence; The
consequence thereof, from the Hand of the Lord, and his terrible Judgments.
It is true, these things being nailed to Pillars throughout every Province,
they bereaved the Christians of all hopes of better success, as much as lay in
man, so that well-nigh, (says the Historian) according to the Divine saying of
Christ, The Elect themselves (if it could be possible) had been offended at
these things. But when as in a manner the hope of many lay for dead,
immediately (says he) whilst they were yet in their Journey, which were
authorized in certain places to publish the aforesaid Edict, God, the Defender
of his Church, (says he, for his words are good and pertinent, and I may well
use them) not only resisted the insolent outrage of this Tyrant, but showed
unto the World his Celestial Aid in our behalf, for showrs and Rain in Winter
Season ceased from The Rain withheld, Famine ensued, Then the Pestilence.
their wonted streams, in watering the Earth; and Famine unlooked for oppressed
them; after this ensued the Pestilence, and a certain grievous Disease in form
of a Boch, termed for the fervent burning thereof, a Carbuncle; This spreading
it self over the whole Body, A description of the Pestilence.
brought such as were therewith infected into doubtful danger of their lives,
but especially taking them about the eyes; it blinded (says he) an infinite
number both Men, Women, and Children: Moreover there arose a War between the
Tyrant and the Armenians, who unto that time, from the beginning, were Friends
and Fellows of the Romans. These Armenians, when as they were Wars with the
Armenians.
Christians, and careful about the Service of God, the Tyrant (enemy to God)
endeavored to constrain them to do sacrifice to Idols and Devils: So instead
of Friends he made them Foes, and instead of Fellows, Enemies. These things
meeting in one and Which meeting together, quelled the presumptuous boasting of
the Tyrant.
the same time, quelled the boasting of the presumptuous Tyrant against God,
wherewith he gloried, that neither Famine, nor Pestilence, nor War fell in his
time, for that he carefully worshipped Idols, and impugned the God of the true
Christians.

These things running in a heap, and together, contained foresigns Cap. 8. And
presaged his death. The Armenian Wars vex him.
of his death; for he, together with his Army, were sore vexed with the Wars
against the Armenians; and the rest, to wit, the Inhabitants of the Cities,
sore pined away with Famine and Pestilence, that one measure of Wheat was sold
for two thousand and fifty Atticks. An infinite number (says the Historian)
throughout the Cities, but more throughout the Countries and A most sore Famine.
Villages, so that now the sundry and ancient demeasness of Husbandmen were
quite done away, for that all suddenly, for want of food, and grievous malady
(says he) of the Pestilence, were An account thereof in particular.
perished: Many therefore sought to sell unto the welthier sort for most
slender food, the dearest things they enjoyed; others selling their Possessions
by pieces, fell at length into miserable peril of extreme poverty; others
gnawing the small shreded tops of green Grass; and withal, confusedly feeding
on certain venomous Herbs, used them for food, whereby the healthy constitution
of the Body was perished and turned into Poison: Diverse noble Women throughout
the Cities driven to extreme need and necessity, went a begging into the
Country, showing forth by their reverend countenance, and more gorgeous
Apparel, an example of their ancient and free manner of feeding: Certain others
(says he) whose strength was dried up, totring to and fro, nodding and
sliding, much like carved Images without life, being not able to stand, fell
down flat in the midst of the Streets, grovelling upon the ground with their
faces upwards, and stretched our Arms, making humble supplication that some one
would reach them a little piece of Bread; and thus lying in extremity, ready to
yield up the Ghost, cried out, That they were hungry, being only able to utter
those words: Others which seemed And the extremity thereof.
to be of the wealthier sort, amazed at the multitude of Beggars, after they
had (says he) distributed infinitely, put on an unmerciful and sturdy mind,
fearing lest they shortly should suffer the like need with them that craved,
wherefore in the midst of the Marketplace, and throughout narrow Lanes, the
dead and bare Carcasses lay many days unburied, and cast along, which yielded
a miserable spectacle to the beholders; yea many became food unto Dogs, for
which cause (chiefly) such as lived, turned themselves to kill Dogs, fearing
lest they should become mad, and turn themselves to tear in pieces, and devour
men. And no less truly did the Plague spoil every House And Pestilence in
ext^emity.
and Age, but specially devouring them whom Famine for want of food could not
destroy. Therefore the Rich, the Prince, the One Plague took away what the
other left.
Presidents, and many of the Magistrates as fit people (says the Historian,
because they were not pinched with penury) for a Pestilent Disease, suffered a
sharp and most swift death; all sounded An account thereof, and its miserable
destruction.
of lamentation throughout every narrow Lane, the Marketplace, and Streets,
there was nothing to be seen but weeping, together with their wonted Pipes, and
the rest of Minstrels noise; death after this sort (says he) waging battle
with double Armor (viz.) with Famine, and Pestilence, destroyed in short space
whole Families, so that the dead Carcasses of two or three were seen born to
the Grave at one Funeral. -- These were the recompenses The recompense of his
wickedness.
of the braging of Maximinus, and the Edicts which he published throughout the
Cities; when as by manifest tokens it appeared unto all men, how serviceable
and godly (says the History) The Christians appear most tender in that day in
cureing the sick feeding the hungry, burying the dead.
the Christians were in all things, for they alone, in so great an overflowing
of mischief, showed forth true compassion, and studious courtesy every day;
some busily occupied themselves in cureing and burying the dead; whereas (says
he) infinite were otherwise despised of their own Friends, others gathering
together throughout the whole City into one heap and place the multitude of
them which were in great danger by reason of Famine, distributed bread unto
all. To the end they might make that benefit manifest, and famous unto all men,
whereby they might glorify the God of the Christians, and confess that they
alone were godly indeed, and found by their works to be the only worshippers
of God.

These things (says the Historian, for his own words will serve The Historians
observation on the whole.
me in this matter) being thus brought to pass, the great and Celestial God,
Defender of the Christians, which by the aforesaid calamities, showed his wrath
and indignation against mortal men, because they had vexed us (says he) above
measure, made his The most terrible Judgments cease the most cruel Persecutions.
bright contenance of his providence toward us, placable and comfortable, so
that thereby peace shined with great admiration unto us, like light unto such
as dwell in darkness, and made manifest unto all men that God himself is the
continual Overfeer of our Affairs, which chastises his people, and exercises
them with calamities for a season, yet after correction appears again
tractable and merciful to such as trust in him.

Thus much of the description of these two Tyrants, the manner and course of
their proceedings, and what befell the Christians; of the new Practice, Edict,
and consequence of which I have spoken; It remains now that I close up the
end of these Tragedies with the end of these men who were the great Tyrants and
Persecutors of their times, and had their ends accordingly.

Maxentius takes upon him to fight with Constantine, and for that Cap. 9.
purpose gathers together great Forces, and at length being drawn forth,
somewhat from the City of Rome, near unto which Constantine Maxentius and many
of his Soldiers fighting with Constantine, are sunk in the River Tiberis.
had approached, having overcome a good part of Italy, he was totally
overthrown, first himself, then his Guard, sinking as Lead into the deep
Waters, through the falling of a Bridge of Boats that he had caused to be made
over the River Tiberis, for the passage of his Soldiers, so that he was
utterly foiled and overcome. And as for Maximinus, his end was not long after,
for Anno. 318. Dioclesian died about the same time. Cap. 10. Maximinus
overthrown by Licinnius, under great ignomy, slayes his Priests and Inchanters,
Ordains liberty to the Christians,
he waged Battle with Lycinnius, that was Emperor with Constantine, was
overcome also, and forced to fly; he slew many Priests and Prophets of their
gods, (being stricken with rage and madness, and made subject to most vile
shame and reproach) as Inchanters, and Deceivers, which had villanously
betrayed his Person, by the procurement and trust of whose Oracles he had gone
forth and waged Battle. And as for the Christians, after he had glorified the
God of the Christians, he ordained a most perfect and absolute Decree in behalf
of their liberty, as he had upon the Letters of Constantine and Licinnius,
after the overthrow of Maxentius, wrote something before; but this served not
his turn, for he had been an old dissembler, as well as a bloody persecutor,
driving up and down, as I have given instance; so that as the They trust him
not,
Christians trusted him not, notwithstanding his Edict, upon the Letters from
the Emperor, who had dealt so contrary with them before; for neither gathered
they a Synod, nor meddled with public Affairs; neither did the Lord (who
releasing him of his former Neither did the Lord.
extremity upon his bowing by affliction, and freeing the Christians, which he
revearsed and persecuted again thereupon) now give him any release, but
(notwithstanding he was made to confess and give glory to him whom he had ran
against, yet (his measure being full) now cut him off; so he died, not as
Captains in War, (says the Historian) who fighting manfully in Battle for
their Country, for Virtue, and their Friends, are commonly wont to endure
courageously a glorious death; but like an impious person, and a Rebel against
God (his Army as yet lying in the Who whilst he lay in secret, his Army being
in the field, smote him with an incurable Plague.
Field, and he tarrying at home, and in secret) he suffers due punishment,
being stricken with a sudden Plague of God over all his Body, so that he was
vexed with great torments and griefs, pined away with hunger, fell down from
his Bed, his flesh altogether wasted by invisible fire sent from above, so that
it consumed, dropped away, and lost all the fashion of the old form, whereas
there remained nothing unto him save only the bare bones, like a painted Image
dried up of a long time. Neither did the beholders Which after most grievous
torments, and unheard of.
take his body for other than the Sepulcher of the Soul buried in a body that
was now dead, and altogether consumed, when as yet he burned more vehemently
than the boiling Baths are wont out of the inward Closets of the Marrow; his
eyes leapt forth, and passing their bounds, left him blind; but he breathing as
yet And his confession to the Lord that he suffered justly,
in the torments, making his confession to the Lord, called for death, and at
length confessing himself to have suffered these things justly, and instead of
revengement for the madness he presumed and practiced against Christ Jesus,
gave up the Ghost. Gave up the Ghost.


Thus ended Maximinus, and thus ended Maxentius, and so let all The end of both
these Tyrants. The persecution of Lycinnius.
thine enemies, O God, perish: And thus ended the fierce persecutions of the
Christians from the Heathen; only Lycinnius gave now and then some overtures,
but he being laid aside through some workings against Constantine, the
persecutions had a full end, and the Christians, as from the Heathen had rest
from persecution; though from themselves, and as doing that unto one another
which the Heathens exercised toward them, what I have to say yet gives
instance. So I proceed in the particular of the Christians, to give particulars
to this first thing laid down by me, viz. National Worships, Creeds, or
confessions of Faith, Laws, or Doctrine, and Government concerning Religion,
enforced by men, what it has produced in the World, as it is in enmity unto
God, unto the Religion, the Worship of him which is in Spirit and in Truth.

And here I shall gather up matters as narrowly as I can, and yet bear The
(...) praeludiu^ (...) the follow^^g matter.
the intent, and drift of this Discourse, to what I have proposed, which I
suppose will not be unprofitable, seeing that on this very foot what has been
the consumption of multitudes, of thousands in the former days, is the present
sufferings in this, of such who being come to Spirit and Truth cannot conform
to the Worship, either on this Mountain, or at Jerusalem, as was said in the
beginning; And so I come to this second Particular, and therein to the close of
this Head, which (I hope) will not seem large to the sensible and men of
understanding, seeing that the end and drift of what I have said, and have yet
to say, is in a matter of highest importance, viz. the Worship of God, and to
the present case, as to imposition, in relation to Worship. And here (as I said
before) I shall mind no affected Style, or to please the ears of men, but as I
shall receive by that which leads into all truth; so I shall communicate the
counsel that shall be with me in this matter.

No sooner were the Tyrants cut off, and throughout the whole Empire Anno. 330.
The Heathen persecution ceasing, the Christians fall a persecuting one another.
of Rome Peace and Quietness was settled to the Christians, by the means of
Constantine and Lycinnius, who married with his Sister, whom he made Emperor
with him, who as yet had attempted nothing against the Christians, and the
Heathen persecutions on all hands laid aside; but difference began to arise
among the Christians (as it had done before, as I have intimated, which
produced the last persecution, of which I gave former instance) and they who
jointly and together withstood the force of the Heathenish persecution came now
to be at variance, and at length to do the same things one to another, as the
Heathen had done unto them together.

The difference began among themselves, for having all quiet in the When all
things we^e quiet in the Empire, and
Empire, through the wonderful working of the Lord, who thought it fit to give
a little rest after their sore travel in blood and persecution, and to stop the
issue of blood, which for a long time (for the most part) had infested the
Christians, they could not be content to be at rest, but differing in some
things amongst themselves, they knew not how to bear one another; but being
unsensible of the hand that had so wrought for them, (at least not so as they
should be) they began to impose one upon forcing forms of Faiths, with
torments, and the Sword.
another, and to force their several Faiths with torments, and the Sword which
wrought sore destraction and trouble among them, and shamed the Christian
Religion, which is not a Law of blood, or as seeking to enforce it self, by the
destroying of men's lives, but a Law of Peace, endeavoring by distilling, not
by coertion to preserve and save.

In the days of Constantine, free liberty was given to all men Constantine
gives freedom of Religion to all.
to use what Religion they pleased, as by repeating the particular
Constitutions and Edicts (which here I shall omit) I could show at large, so
that there was liberty now of complaints, and Synods called to refute, at least
take off the opposition of the contrary; but when that Emperors succeeded,
which leaned to this or that But as succeding Emperors leaned to this or that
Faith, the contrary came to be persecuted.
Party, or confession of Faith, or Opinion, then force of Arms, or carnal
extremities were exercised toward those who were of the contrary disposition,
banishment, torments, death.

Its sore to remember all the particulars, and indeed besides my A lamenta^ion
for the Divisions, and the reasons,
purpose, for rather would my eye run down with tears when I view them over,
that such a reproach, through such their doings, should rest upon the
Christians, then to give an account of them; but seeing that the things are
past silence and oblivion, so many Histories speaking at large of them, which
cannot be called in, nor taken out of the memories of men; and seeing that they
are Wherefore they are now mentioned.
of use as to this Generation or present Age, what has been wrote in the
former, that they may see at what door the enemy then came from the Heathen
into the Christians, and so may learn to beware by the consequences.

And lastly, in regard it suits my purpose, and the particular I am upon, to
show, or give instance, how in all Ages, and among all sorts of men, when
Religion became National, and was required by Laws of men, or imposed; what
were the consequences, I shall as briefly as I can give some instances, even
among the Christians to this particular, and the rather because the instance
has particular relation to this Age in which I write, or the present
Generation.

Maxentius the Tyrant, and Maximinus being gone, and the Cap. 11. The
Introduction to the ensuing Relation of the Christians difference, and
suffering one by another.
whole race of Maximinus cut off, his Children, Kindsfolks, and the chiefest
favorers of the persecution, in particular Paucetius his greatest favorite,
and Culcianus, who shed the blood of multitudes in Egypt, and Theotecnus
aforesaid, who set up the Image of Jupiter at Antioch, and wrought that later
and sore persecution, together with the Prophets and Priests of that Idol, who
confessed before they were executed, that by Enchantments the Oracle of that Idol
was produced, being first diversely tormented by Lycinnius. This Edict reversed,
his Monuments and his Pictures were overthrown and defaced, and he declared by
public Edicts to have been the chief and most deadly enemy, the most impious,
the most ignominious, and a Tyrant, that was abhorred before the Face of God;
and the Heathen confessing diversely, The the only Eusebius. lib. 10. Cap. 1.
Cicilian^s Bishop of Carthage, and the Bishops with them, beg^n the Tragedy in
Africa.
true God was the Defender of the godly Christians. The enemy being shut out at
this, began to enter at the other door, as I have intimated. A difference fell
out between Cicilianus Bishop of Carthage, and the Bishops with him, the one
siding against the other in Africa, which occasioned Constantine to summon a
Synod of Bishops to meet at Rome, for the hearing and reconciling thereof; Cap.
5. A Synod at Rome appointed thereabouts.
at which something being attempted, and the judgment given by the other
party, not being acquiessed in; but after the rising of the Synod, the
difference increasing, instead of being ended amongst them, a second Synod he
called at Orleance in France, Who ending not the difference, a second Synod is
called at Orleans in France; As a scourge hereunto; Lycinnius (Cap. 8.) comes
forth a persecutor; He falls upon the Christians; Cashires such as were
Soldiers of Place and Dignity. Commands no relief to be given to the Prisoners;
to the end it might be determined, as a scourge or rebuke unto which
dissentions, or the differences that then arose among the Christians, Lycinnius
aforesaid, (who being Emperor, and together with Constantine, had wrote with
Constantine, enjoying the liberty of the Christians) comes forth and fell upon
the Christians under his Dominion, who never did him evil, practicing the same
things upon them as those had done, whom for so doing he had cut off: First, He
banished them from his Court, then the Soldiers he deprived and spoiled of
their Honor and Dignities who would not sacrifice, commanded no charity to be
given to them that were in Prison, and in Fetters, no not by their Kinds-folks,
and punished with the like penalties of the relieved, those Throws down some of
their Meeting-places, shuts up others
who were the relievers of the Imprisoned and Fettered; he overthrew some
Meeting-places of the Christians to the Pavement, and others he shut up; his
flattering Presidents, to gratify him, Bishops are tormented, and their bodies
minced and cast into the Sea. The good Roman Laws revoked, Barbarians
introduced. A short Catalogue of his other abominable wickednesses.
tormented some of the Bishops, whose bodies being cut into many small pieces,
as Butchers use to do their meat, were cast into the Sea for food for Fishes:
He revoked sundry good Laws of the Romans; brought in barbarous and cruel Laws,
unjust, and unlawful, and cruel deceits; sundry Taxes of Gold and Silver,
surveys of Land; gainful penalties on the Lands of those which were deceased
long before; and devised abjurations for them who had done no evil; and making
away of noble and honest Personages, whose youthful and tender Wives he
delivered to his Servants to be contumeliously and shamefully handled: Many
Wives, Virgins and Maidens he abused shamefully, though he was now stricken in
years. Constantine made War against him, seeing things Constantine fights him,
and (Anno. 367) overthrows him, and with his Son Crispus rules the Empire.
come to this pass (who practiced against Constantine) and overthrew all
Chrisopolis, a City of Bithinia: So the Christians from those persecutions had
rest; and Constantine with his Son Crispus (a Son like his Father in all
things) quietly reigned throughout all the Jurisdictions of the Empire of Rome;
so far Eusebius, Pamphilius, and the Records of his History: At noon day those
in the Cities belonging to Lycinnius, a little before the fight, saw armed
Troops and Bands of men marching through all Constantines Army, as if they had
got the Victory, which were only apparitions.

Socrates Scholasticus takes up from his time, and proceeds onwards Socrat.
Scholast. succeeds in the History.
in the prosecution of the History, out of whom I shall give what materially
may serve to what I have in hand, and purpose yet to treat of, in reference to
this first head of National Worship.

I have showed what contentions arose by reason of Cecilianus Bishop of
Carthage, in that and other Provinces; and how Constantine summoned two Synods
in order to the reconciling that difference, and how Lycinnius, as a scourge,
or rather rebuke, stepped in to offer those things unto the Christians, who being
overthrown Ly^innius cut off by Constantine, when he sought to make stirs
after. He had suffered him to live quietly in Thessalonica, having taken him
ali^e.
and cut off by Constantine, when he had endeavored to stir trouble again,
when as Constantine with much humanity had given him liberty to live in quiet
at Thessalonica, after he had taken him alive Prisoner, further then which
Eusebius goes not. Now I shall show what Socrates in the continuation of the
History says concerning the differences that were among the Christians, and
the consequences thereof, as instances of that which I have here asserted, and
so I shall proceed.

Arius is the first whom he takes notice of, who being a Priest Socrat. lib. 1.
cap. 3. Arius, and his Heresy.
under Alexander, (who succeeded Achillas, who succeeded Peter that was
Martyred, Bishop of Alexandria) and hearing Alexander The ground of its Rise,
entreating somewhat more curiously of what is called the Trinity in Unity,
among the Priests that were under him, said, -- If the Father begot the Son,
then had the Son which was begotten a And what it was.
beginning of Essence; hereby it is manifest that there was a time when the Son
was not, and the consequent to follow necessarily, that he had his Essence of
nothing.

This begat a great deal of reasoning amongst them; Arius had It spreads
amongst Bishops, and others in Egypt, Libia, and upper Thebais.
his favorers both of Bishops and others of this his blasphemous Opinion,
which beginning at Alexandria, spread it self throughout all Egypt, Libia, and
the upper Thebais, and at length passed through the rest of the Cities and
Provinces. The spreading of this moved Alexander, who calling of a Counsel of
many Bishops, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, deprives him; Writes against him
to all; The matter spreads further.
deprived Arius, and such as favored his Opinion of the Priestly Order; and
afterward writing to the Bishops throughout the Cities against him, spread the
thing further than it was before, because those unto whom the Letters were
directed, began to burn among themselves with the sparks of contention and
discord.

So the nicety of the Bishop on the one hand, and his sharp The cause
attributed to the Bishops nicety, sharpness, writing.
proceeding and writing on the other, gave occasion for this little sparkle to
burn out into a great flame, which made fore destractions and divisions, and
which in no wise could come to be quenched, but ran over all as a loathsome
leprosy, Bishop against Bishop, It flies over the world, engages one against
the which makes matter of de^ision on the Heathen Theaters,
and People against People, and Synod against Synod, doing the things which the
Heathen had done to them, as aforesaid, which rended them asunder, and caused
the Religion the Christians professed, to be openly derided by the Heathens on
the public Theaters.

Constantine was sorely troubled at these things, and by a principle Cap. 4.
And troubles Constantine; he writes to Bishop and Priest, Alexander and Arius.
person whom he entirely loved, he wrote both to Alexander and Arius, blaming
Alexander for demanding a question of the Elders touching a certain place of
Scripture, yea rather (says his Letter) touching a certain vain piece of a
question what every Reproves them both.
ones Opinion was; -- And Arius for unadvisedly blazeing abroad, and setting a
broach, That which thou should (says the Emperor) not at the first have
conceived, and having conceived it, Offers an accommodation, condesends low for
that purpose, but neither would hear.
thou should have passed it over with silence. He wrote smartly to them both,
and very reasonably concerning an accommodation, and that Union might be again,
saying, Let either of you pardoning each other, like of that which your fellow
Minister (so low he condescended) not without cause exhorted you unto. But
neither of them would hear; He summoned a Council at Nice concerning Cap. 5. He
summons a Council about this and Easter. Three hundred and eighteen Bishops
met; besides others of the Clergy. Five dissent from the Creed of one
substance. Some of those the Emperor exiled, subscribe the Nicene Creed. Arius
and his Accomplices accursed. The Dissen^ers Argument.
that, and what they call the Celebrating the Feast of Easter, concerning the
time of the celebrating of which there was no small controversy: Here the
Council of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, the Emperor being present, who
endeavored all he could to bring to unity, besides many others of what is
called the Clergy, five only excepted, who admitted not of the clause of one
substance, some of whom the Emperor exiled, subscribed that which is called the
Nicene Creed, accursing Arius, and all others that held the contrary Opinion.
The five dissenting Bishops against the Clause of one Substance with the
Father, thus reasoned or affirmed, That to be of one Substance, which has its
Original of something, either by division, or derivation, or production; by
production, as a Bud out of a Root; by derivation, as Children of the Parents;
by division, as two or three pieces out of a piece of Gold; The Son of God by
relation was after none of these manners, and therefore they said they would
not agree to the form of Faith confirmed in the Council of Nice; whereupon they
derided exceedingly the They deride the contrary, and submit not.
clause of one Substance, and would not submit unto the deposition of Arius,
for which cause the Council, not only accursed Arius, (as has been said) and
all his Adherents, but also forbad And forbad Alexandria; and with Eusebius of
Nicomedia, and Thergius of Nice, banished. The two later recant.
him Alexandria: And by the Emperors Edict, Arius, Eusebius, (not of Caesaria,
that wrote the History aforesaid, but of Nicomedia) and Thergius of Nice were
exiled, who afterward gave a Book (that is to say, the two latter) of their
conversion and repentance, and consent to the clause of one Substance, as the
History gives the Relation.

Here they were all mistaken, for the Council or Synod which A Judgment upon
both the Council, and Arius their Opinions.
held the clause of the Sons being of one Substance with the Father, speak they
did not know what, who judged of the Son according to a Carnal Generation, who
is God from everlasting. And Arius, with those who opposed it with him, who
concluded therehence that he was not God, (as in effect what both parties hold
do speak) both which things should have been let alone, but the meddling with
them made this jar and contention, the evil consequence of which is hereafter
to be related.

The Decree of this Synod, by a Solemn Epistle, is sent unto Cap. 6. The Synods
Decrees sent about by Epistles
the Churches throughout Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, wherein not only this
concerning Arius, but the difference concerning Easter has a determination;
and Constantine also writes to the Constantine writes also to Alexandria. Calls
the Decree of the Synod, the Sentence of God, and instinct of the Holy Ghost.
Church at Alexandria, and otherwhere, concerning the matter, wherein he calls
the censure of this Assembly, or the decree of this Synod, the Sentence of God
himself; neither doubted he that so great a company of Bishops was united and
linked together in one Opinion and one mind, but by the motion and instinct of
the Holy Ghost; Notwithstanding Sabinus (who was termed Sabinus Ringleader of
the Macedonian Heresy, opposes them.
the Ringleader of the Macedonian Heresy) impugned those things, tearming
those that met at Nice, unlearned and doltish Idiots.

So things grew on to a height, for Religion coming hereby to Religion comes
now to be National.
be National, or the Emperor siding therewith, and making these Decrees as
Laws, there came to be an injunction, and opposition Laws are made, and
opposition founded.
was founded on the other side; and the Emperor commanded in his Epistle to the
Bishops and Congregations throughout Christendom, That if there could be found
any Book or Work compiled Arius Books ordered to be burnt.
by Arius, that the same should be burned to Ashes. -- This also (says he) we
straightly command and charge, that if any man be found to hide or conceal any
Book made by Arius, and not immediately bring The Concealers to die the death
as soon as taken on them.
forth the said Book, and deliver it up to be burned, that the said offender
for so doing shall die the death; for as soon as he is taken, our pleasure is,
that his Head be struken off from his Shoulders. He also wrote against Arius,
and so the contest grew high, and his Example and Laws animated the division,
and that which in his Letter to Alexander and Arius he reproved, and said, --
Hereby I gather All this against his own Letter to Arius, and Alexander. Part
of his said Letter.
the Original ground of this controversy, in that thou Alexander have demanded
of the Elders concerning a certain place of holy Scripture, yea rather touching
a vain piece of a question what every Opinion was, (as aforesaid) being now
become a Law, and made so by him, woeful wreck and mischief came upon the
Christian Assemblies, although in that his Letter he reasoned to the contrary,
and said to them Cap. 4.
upon the foot of the Unity, -- Wherefore let every of you, pardoning each
other, like of that which your fellow Minister, not without cause, exhorts
you unto, (as aforesaid) And what is that? That you neither object at all,
neither answer any Objection that concerns such matters; for such questions
as no Law or Ecclesiastical Canon necessarily defines, but the fruitless
contention of idle brains sets abroad, though the exercise thereof avail for
the sharpning of the wit, yet ought we to retain them in the inward Closet of
our mind, and not rashly to broach them in the public Assembly of the vulgar
people, neither unadvisedly to grant the common sort the hearing thereof; for
how many be there that can worthily explicate, and sufficiently ponder the
weight of so grave, so intricate, so obscure a matter? But if there be any such
that persuades himself easily to compass and attain unto it, how many parts
are there, I beseech you, of the multitude whom he can sufficiently instruct
therein? And who is there, who in sifting out so curious a question, that can
well pass the peril of plunging into error? Wherefore in such cases we must
refrain from verbal disputations, lest that either we, by reason of the
imbecility of our Wit cannot explicate our mind, either our Auditors, when we
teach, by reason of their dull capacity cannot comprehend the curious drift of
our Doctrine, whereby the people of necessity, either incurreth the danger,
either of blasphemy, or the poisoned infection of discord, wherefore both the
rash Objection, and the unadvised answer, being the cause of the heretical Sect
of the Arrians, Eunomians, and as many as favor the like folly, ought each one
of each other crave pardon.

Yet how these things came to be bruited abroad, and to be made public, His
actions judge his Letter, and his Letter his actions.
and a Law made as to these things, the contrary to that Law, or Decree,
accursed. Arius Books ordered to be burnt, those that conceal them presently to
be put to death, by the sudden striking off their Head from their Shoulders,
what has been said makes manifest.

So see, Reader, here an exact account of this Schism and Division, A
repetition of the ground of the difference. The difference between the Heathen
and the Christians concerning Christ in their Opinion.
and what was the ground and occasion thereof; how it came to be broached and
fostered, and what made it up: The difference between the Heathen and the
Christians, were, Whether Christ was the Son of God? The Heathen that held the
Negative, imposed what they held, and put to death, and made to suffer the
Christians, who were on the part of the Affirmative: Both persecute, and the
Christians
The Heathen being down, the question among the Christians, who held the
Affirmative, was, Whether the Son of God was Eternal? -- Arius, who held the
Negative, and all that adhered to one another, contrary to
him, through occasion of some niceties, and Philosophical curiosities, not
understanding the Godhead, is accursed and prosecuted: The others who held the
Affirmative, imposed what they held, and so did persecute; All came to be rent
(in a moment, as it were) and torn asunder, pretending to the same Jesus, to
Christ, who is not divided, The Doctrine of Chrich, which imposes not Religion.
who never imposed the Faith of him on any, nor gave authority for so doing,
otherwise than by ways that are Spiritual, not Carnal, nor did his Ministers;
Is Christ divided? says Paul; The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but
Spiritual, mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, and every
thought and imagination that exalts it self against the Kingdom of Christ; --
And the Son of Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save, says he of
himself, Luke 9. 56. And my Kingdom is not of this World; if my Kingdom were of
this World, then would my Servants fight that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; but now my Kingdom is not from hence, John 18. 36. Both are besides the
Question, the Heathen and the Christian, so called in this matter, for his
Doctrine allows no other thing, but conviction by and in the Spirit, whose
Worship is Spirit and Truth, as has been declared.

About what is called the Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity, and the The terms
Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity, the ground of all this.
persons of the Godhead, which man cannot attain unto, nor possibly can come
with all his Wisdom to understand, are they divided, and one against another,
who pretend to his Name, which his Kingdom is against, and which is not his
Kingdom; quite besides the matter are all such who by any other way than the
Spirit, seek to enforce the Doctrine of Jesus, and belief in Christ.

This I say was the cause of the division, and in at this door entered the enemy
to make shipwreck of the Flock, as by and by I shall make manifest, though the
Emperor seems to be of another mind in his Letter aforesaid, wherein he says
further, -- Neither is there occasion ministered A further account of the
Emperors Letter to confute his proceedings.
to contend about the chiefest Commandment in holy Scripture; neither is there
sprung any new Opinion touching the Service of God, for you retain the one and
the same sentence in substance of Faith, so that you may easily embrace the
uniform consent of Unity and Concord, for it is not well that for your
contention about slender matters, and trifling toys, so great a multitude of
the People of God, through your negligence, should be at discord among your
selves; yea, it is supposed, not only, not well, but altogether intolerable;
And that in few words I may lay before your eyes some presidents hereof, I will
reason with you; -- And so he goes out and tells them of the Philosophers, how
they agree among themselves, and all jointly profess one Title and Name of
Discipline, and yet vary and disagree in some odd Opinion which severally they
hold, who though they so dissent, yet in respect of their Profession join
hands, and like Birds hold together; And from thence he argues, How much more
should Christians. Then he pleads with them upon the foot of his capacity as
chief Minister; And (says he) let me therefore enjoy the days in peace, and
the mights without molestation, that the pleasure that arises of the pure
Light of Concord and quiet Life, may henceforth be inviolably conserved; if it
otherwise happen (says he) it behooves me to sob and sigh, and to shed many a
salt tear; and beseeches them hereupon to hear him, and tells them how the
understanding of those things turned him from his journey in the East, when he
was come as far as Nicomedia.

I should fill a Volumn, if I should speak very particularly of these Some
reasons of the quoting of these things, and why other things are omitted.
things, and yet I can hardly tell how to let them pass by, they being of such
consequence, and pertinent to the matter in hand, and needful for all men to
know and understand, seeing that so much lies on the foot of this matter,
worthily deserving the most serious consideration, and to be above many things
weighed and considered.

Now I shall proceed to what remains, as worthy of observation The Nicaene
Council held, Anno 328. comes to have an end, but not the Division.
in this matter, the Nicaean, or Council of Nice aforesaid, which began, some
say, in the year 324. some 326. some other 328. came to have an end; but the
Division ceased not, but increased, and banded it self throughout those Cities
and Provinces, and Constantine himself had enough of them, who whether by
conviction Constantine seems to incline to favor Arius
of his rashness, who drew the Sword in the quarrel of Religion, or through the
importunity of his Sister Constantia, late wife The supposed causes thereof.
to Lycinnius, who is said, by the Historian, to have commended a Priest of the
Opinion of Arius to her Brother, during her weakness, of which she died, which
Priest, she dying, is said to be of great account with the Emperor; or whether
both, is hard to determine. This appears by the Historian, that Constantia
had the influence, as aforesaid, which (if she had not, which yet I judge to
have had to do in the matter) that he became more gentle, and being Arius is
bespoke to the Emperor as willing to sign the Nicene Creed.
presented by the said Priest, with the account of Arius, as if he would
subscribe the Canon of that Council, if he might be admitted to Constantines
presence, and moreover that he was falsely accused; the Historian quoteth the
Emperor to have said, If Arius The Emperor receives the account thereof; his
words thereupon.
be of that mind, and (as you say) agrees with the Faith confirmed by the
Council, I will not only give him the hearing my self, but also send him with
honor to Alexandria.

Arius being sent for, comes to Constantinople, and Euxojus a Arius being sent
for, comes to Constantinople, and Euxojus, Constantine bids them welcome.
Deacon, whom Alexander deposed with Arius; Constantine bids them welcome, they
frame, and give their Recantation in writing to the Emperor at his demand; The
Emperor sends him to Alexandria again; Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria (for
Alexander Cap 20. They frame their Recantation.
was dead) refuses to receive him. Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia writes to
Athanasius, and also procures the Emperors Letters to command Athanasius to
admit Arius, and his accomplices: Arius sent to Alexandria again.
Athanasius wrote back again to the Emperor, That it was not lawful for such as
had made shipwreck of their Faith, and had been held Athanasius refuses to
receive ^im Eusebius of Nicomedia w^ites to Athanasius, and procures the
Emperor to write to receive him. Athanasius still refuses. The Emperor is vexed,
writes again, and threa^ens to depose him.
for accursed of the Church, after this their turn and conversion to receive
their former dignities. -- This vexed the Emperor, who being chafed, conceived
great displeasure in him against Athanasius, and thus wrote to him, -- In as
much as thou art made privy to our will and pleasure, see that thou make the
door wide open to all that desire to enter into the Church: for if I understand
that any one which desired to be made a Member of the Church, has by any means
through thee been hindered, or his entrance stopped, I will forthwith send one
of my Officers, who by Authority from me, shall forthwith depose thee, and also
place another in thy room. Athanasius, notwithstanding He refuses,
notwithstanding. Six Bishops take the opportunity to lift him out, and for that
purpose raise false accusations. He is cleared, and charged again, and cleared
before the Emperor, and sent home by the Emperor who writes in his behalf. He
is charged again, and summoned before the Censor. He is reordered to appear
before the Council of Bishops, ordered to meet at Tyrus.
does not receive him; Eusebius aforesaid, with half a dozen Bishops more
inclined to Arius, takes the opportunity to lift Athanasius out of the
Bishopric, and for that purpose raises (says the History) false accusations
against him, thinking if he were once out of Alexandria, Arius's Opinions
should take place. Of these things Athanasius is cleared; they charge him
again, he is cleared again in presence of the Emperor, who sends him home, and
writes a letter to his Church in his behalf; he is accused again, and appointed
to appear before the Censor; The Emperor again forbids the appearance before
the Censor, and appoints him to come before the Council of Bishops, which he
had ordered to meet at Tyrus, in order to the consecrating of a Temple he had
built at Jerusalem, whom he appointed also to hear, and end the business of
Athanasius; he is unwilling to go there, not so much (says the History) that
he was dismayed at the slanderous reports against him, as fearing lest he
should be put upon the innovating something against the Nicene Council; but
because of the angry Lines of the Emperor, who had wrote to him, That if he
came not of his own accord, he would be brought thither with a vengeance: He
came of necessity to the Council, at this Council he cleared himself of He goes
thither against his will, and there clears himself of Arsenius, whose hand he
was charged to have cut off, and so to have killed him. The providence in the
business. He is found out, produced, both his hands found on him.
Arsenius, whose hand he was accused to have cut off, and so consequently to
have killed him; it falling out providentially, that Arsenius was taken
unthought of, and produced, who denying himself to be the man at first, was
forced afterward to confess it; being known to one of the Bishops, and both
his hands found on him, though before he was brought forth, the hand pretended
to be cut off was produced. The second particular was adjourned to another
place, upon pretense of want of proof present, which then Athanasius perceived
to be delegated to certain persons that The second particular adjourned to
another place. Athanasius refuses to go thither; The reason thereof. He
withdraws to the Emperor, is condemned absent.
he had excepted against; having spoken his mind, he withdrew himself, and went
to the Emperor: being withdrawn, the Council condemns him before they had heard
the matter upon the Witnesses on one hand; and at Mereotis, unto which place
the hearing of the matter was adjourned, they agree unto his deposition; and
Arsenius, who aforetime was reported to be slain, as aforesaid, is entertained
by them; and he who aforetime was counted a Bishop of the Miletian Sect, (says
the Arsenius signs his deposition, who was said to be slain by Athanasius.
Historian) even then subscribed to the deposition of Athanasius, and called
himself Bishop of Hepsepolis; and that which seems incredible, (says he) he
that was said to have died under the hand of Athanasius, is now alive, and
deposes Athanasius.

Hereupon the Bishops depart to Jerusalem to consecrate the Cap. 22: The
Bishops depart to Jerusalem to consecrate the Temple built by Constantine.
Arius sent by them to Alexandria, is admitted, and Athanasius, exiled. The
Emperor requires them to appear at Constantinople about the business.
Temple built by the Emperor, having sent to Alexandria for the receiving of
Arius, and his Confederates (as the History terms them) and to banish all
rancor, spite, and malice, and to settle their Ecclesiastical Affairs in peace
and quietness, who are admitted; and by the consent of them all Athanasius is
exiled of which things they also gave the Emperor an account; but Athanasius
having fled to the Emperor, as these things were in doing, came Letters from
the Emperor for their appearing at Constantinople, about the business of
Athanasius, wherein he inveighs greatly against them, for that which through
tumults and troublesome stirs they had decreed; tells them, that the Truth they
had subverted He is grieved, and writes plainly to them
by their hurly burly, and kindled heat of contention, that whilst they
prosecuted their privy spite and hatred one toward another, which in no wise
they would leave unpractised, they seemed to neglect the Service of God, and
the furtherance of the Truth, that he trusted through the providence of God to
bring to pass, that after the proof of that pestilent contention, it might
wholly be banished: And charges them home with doing that which made Truth
suffer amongst the Barbarians, whom his clemency had wrought over to be
Christians,
And that he might perceive whether their Council and Assembly had any care of
the Truth, and whether they had decided the matters called into question
without partiality, favor, and poisoned malice, he willed them that with all
speed they all repair unto him, to the end that they themselves, by no other
than themselves, might yield him an exquisite account. Moreover he tells them,
That the Barbarians through his industry came to the knowledge of God, and
learned to serve him in Holiness, whom they perceived in all things with a
careful eye of providence to have defended him, which thing (says he) moved
them at first to taste the Truth of Christ; whom also (says he) for the awe
and loyalty they owe unto our Imperial Scepter, they serve uprightly, but we
(says he to them) which would seem (I will not say to observe) to maintain the
sacred Mysteries of the Church, do practice nothing else, but that which
breeds discord And to the utter overthrow and destruction of mankind.
and dissension; and to be short (says he) that which tends to the utter
overthrow and destruction of mankind.

Notwithstanding these, and many other strait words in his Letter, Cap. 23. All
came not notwithstanding.
they all came not, but Eusebius, Theogius, Maos, Patropolis, Ursacius, and
Valens, all Bishops inclining to Arius, and Athanasius his chief opposites were
not there, but framed (as the History They frame another accusation against
Athanasius.
says) an Accusation, that Athanasius threatened that he would cause that no
Corn should be conveyed from Alexandria to Constantinople, as was usual, and
that four certain Bishops heard it out of his own mouth: The accusers carrying
credit with their persons, the Emperor was wonderfully moved at this, and
caused him to be banished into France; some (says the History) out of policy,
also He is banished into France. Some say out of policy, that quietness might
ensue.
he did it to see whether his absence would reduce them to Unity and Concord,
for he would by no means communicate with he called Arians; so being exiled, he
leads his life at Trevere in France.

The thirtieth year of Constantines Reign was expired, while Peace ensued not
among the C^ristians, though Constantine had past thirty years of his Reign.
Arius returning, sets Alexandria on fire. The Emperor sends for him to
Constantinople. Thither he comes.
these things were a doing, yet he saw no peace among the Christians; Arius
with his company returning to Alexandria, set the whole City in an uproar, for
they were not only distasted with the return of Arius, but the banishment of
Athanasius: The Emperor understanding (as the History says) of the perverse
mind, and corrupt purpose of Arius, sends for him again to Constantinople, to
render an account of the tumult and sedition he had raised afresh. The City
being divided into two parts, one for the Nicene Creed, the other for Arius;
Alexander then governed the Alexander Bishop of Constantinople holds
disputation with him. He lays aside quirks of Logic; and seeks by Prayer to
overcome.
Church, who a little before succeeded Metrophanes in the Bishopric of
Constantinople, held disputation with Arius, and laying aside the quirks of
Logic, is said with continual Fasting, and Prayer, and Tears, many days and
nights to have fled for aid to the Lord, and on his bare knees, before the
Communion Table (called also the Altar) of ^^e Church called Peace, having
locked himself in to have besought the Lord in these words, -- Grant I beseech
thee, O Lord, that if the Opinion of Arius be true, His Prayer, and his
Obtestation therein concerning him, and Arius, as to the determination of the
matter. The Emperor demands of Arius to sign the Nicene Creed. He does it. He
puts him to his Oath. He swears to it by Equivocation. The Equivocation. The
Emperor requires Alexander to receive him into Communion.
I my self may never see the end of this set Disputation; but if the Faith I
hold be true, that Arius the Author of all this mischief, may receive due
punishment for his impious desert.

Arius being come to Constantinople, the Emperor demands of Arius to sign the
Nicene Creed; he subscribes it cheerfully, he puts him to his Oath, he swears
it also; his juggle (is said to be this) he wrote his own Opinion in a piece of
Paper; the same he carried under his arm in his bosom; coming to the Book, he
takes his Oath, That he verily believed as he had written. The Emperor
believing he had dealt plainly, commanded Alexander Bishop of Constantinople,
to receive him to the Communion. It was on a Saturday (says the History) the
day after Arius looked to be received into the Church and Communion of the
Faithful, but vengeance (says it) lighted forthwith upon his lewd and bold
Vengeance overtakes Arius.
enterprises, when he had his leave, and departed out of the Emperors Hall, he
passed through the midst of the City with great pomp and pontificiality,
compassed and attended with the Faction and Train of Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, that waited upon him; as soon as he came nigh Constantines Market
(for so was the He is taken ill suddenly in the street,
place called) where there stood a Pillar of Red Marble, sudden feat (says the
History) of the heinous faults he had committed, took Arius, and withal he felt
a great lask: Sirs (says Arius) is there any draught or jakes nigh? When they
told him there was one in the back side of Constantines Market, he got him
thither strait, then he was taken with faintness, and, together with his
excrements, he voideth his Guts, a great stream of blood follows, after, the
slender and small bowels slide out, blood, together with the Spleen, and Liver
gushed out, and immediately he dies And dies miserable, and with a remarkable
hand of Judgment.
like a Dog (says the History): And the Jakes was then to be seen (when the
History was wrote); and that Passengers were wont as they went by, to point
their fingers thereat, in remembrance of the miserable end of Arius; Which
(says the History) being done, terror and astonishment amazed the mind of
Eusebius His followers are amazed. The Emperor cleaves the more to the Nicene
Creed, as confirmed (as he said) (Cap 26) by the testimony of God himself. The
Emperor falls sick the next year; makes his Will; trusts the Priest therewith,
that persuaded him to tenderness to Arius, and dies.
his Confederates that followed him. And that the Emperor clave the more unto
the Christian Religion, and said, that the Nicene Creed was ratified and
confirmed to be true by the testimony of God himself, -- and rejoiced
exceedingly at the things which then came to pass. The next year being the 65th
of his Age, he sailed to Helenopolis for his healths sake, where his sickness
more and more increased; he got him strait to Nicomedia, where after a certain
time he was baptized, in which he is said to have greatly rejoiced, made his
last Will and Testament, wherein he had appointed his three Sons their
particular Inheritances, trusts the Priest, which was the occasion of Arius
his return from exile (as aforesaid) with charge to the Priest to deliver it
into no man's hands but to his Son Constantius, whom he had made Emperor of the
East, and died, having reigned one and thirty years.

Yet neither with Arius, nor the death of Constantine, was there Anno. 348.
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 2. Discord ends not with Constantine nor Arius.
Constantius Constantines Son leans to the Arians, by means of the Priest that
Constantine entrusted his Will withal; who also brought Arius in respect with
Constantine.
an end of the troublesome discord that was among the Christians: For the
Priest aforesaid, unto whose charge Constantine committed the trust of his last
Will and Testament, having possessed Constantius therewith, and with the Arian
Heresy, (as it was called) and Constantius being pleased therewith, as he was
with the disposition of his Father to him of the Government of the East, that
Opinion came to vent it self again, and to bear head; for it had entered into
the Empress, and the Chamberlains, and the Emperors Guards, and every where
almost (as the History relates it) the Opinion had entrance and controversies
throughout the East; and plain questions would not serve the turn, but open
contention, tumult, and stir; but in the West, in Illyrium and other Countries,
Contention, tumults, stirs, grew high thereabouts. The Western parts clear.
they held to the Nicene Council, or the Faith, as it was called, of one
Substance, which by no means they would suffer to be abbrogated: And Eusebius
of Nicomedia waited for an opportunity through these tumults, when some or
other should be put into the place of Athanasius, to accomplish his purpose
there: But Athanasius once more goes to Alexandria upon Constantine the
youngers Letters;
through means of Constantine the youngers Letters, (who was also Caesar, who
governed the Western Parts) which he wrote to Alexandria, and his confidence of
them, he returned to Alexandria, where he was received with most willing mind
by them who held Is received by them of the Nicene Creed.
the Nicene Decrees; but those who were otherwise disposed with Arius, rose
what flame they could, and contention in the City, The others raise stir, and
accuse him again, Upon which the Emperor drove him out of Alexandria.
and accused him of having settled himself into the Church without the general
consent of the Assembly of the Bishops, which so incensed the Emperor, that he
drove him out of Alexandria.

Thus the fire of Contention grew hot, and the Separation wonderful, Cap. 3.
The contention increases.
which increased still as opportunity presented it self, and occasion to
minister thereunto.

Constantine the Younger, and Brother to Constantius, invading Constantine the
younger invading by force certain Countries under Constans his younger Brothers
Jurisdiction, is slain.
by force certain Countries under his younger Brother Constans, and fighting
hand to hand with the Soldiers, was slain; and Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople died also at the age of fourscore and Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople, 98 years old. Great contests for a Successor.
eighteen years; about a Successor unto whom there was great contestion: Those
inclined to Arius, whilst Alexander lived, inclined to Macedonius; those on the
other hand, that held the clause of one Substance, would have Paulus, whom
Alexander commended before his death; so the contest was great, but Paulus
Paulus is Elected.
carried the Election in the end.

Constantius shortly after coming to Constantinople, displaceth Cap. 5.
Constantius displaces Paulus, and puts in Eusebius. Cap. 6. A Synod is called
at Antioch, to make an end of Athanasius. Cap. 7. Several Bishops come not
there;
Paulus, and places Eusebius of Nicomedia in his room, but not content
therewith, Eusebius procures of Constantius, a Synod to be called at Antioch,
on purpose to have his ends on Athanasius, and to overthrow (as the Historian
terms it) and subvert the Faith of one Substance, which as they could, they
endeavored: unto which Synod Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem would not come, lest
he should be constrained to subscribe unto the deposition of Athanasius:
Neither did Julius Bishop of Rome come thither, or send any Substitutes; The
Canon Ecclesiastical forbidding any constitution to be thrust into the Church,
without the censure of the Bishop of Rome. Nevertheless before a Council of
fourscore Yet before ninty Bish. Athansius is accused, and is put by Alexandria.
and ten Bishops, Athanasius is accused with rushing into the Church upon his
own head, after his return from exile; That at his return, when the Tumult and
Schism was raised, many were slain; moreover that he caused some to be
scourged, others to hold up their hands at the Bar.

Athanasius being put by Alexandria, and Gregorius a favourer Cap. 6. The Synod
ends herewith, and placing Gregory in his room, and a new Creed being (Cap. 7.)
made, and sent to the Churches. Cap. 8. Gregory attempts his Investure with a
Captain and 5000. Soldiers, and the Arians. The Church (so called) is besieged
by the Captain Sirianus.
of Arius, being appointed in his room, and a new Creed placed in wary and
equivocal terms, being consented unto; somewhat different from another, which
at first at Antioch they had concluded, and sent unto the Churches; the Synod
has an end: And Gregorius attempts his investiture into Alexandria with five
thousand Soldiers under Sirianus the Captain, whom also to aid, came the
Arians, so called in the City, so the matter was made formidable, the Captain
drew his Soldiers in Battle array about the Church (as the History calls it)
where Athanasius was, and the People, for it was Even-tide, and the People
spent the whole night in Vigils, for there was a Communion to be (he says) the
next day: Athanasius seeing how things were, that he Athanasius by a wile gets
out thereof, and escapes,
might preserve the people, and save himself, set his Deacon to read the
Collects unto the People, he bids them sing a Psalm; when the Psalm was sweetly
and harmoniously sung (says the History) all the People went forth at the
Church Poarches, (the Soldiers keeping quiet) and Athanasius through the midst
of Gets to Rome.
the singers got safe away and hastened to Rome. Then Georgorius took possession
of that Church; but the Citizens not brooking The Citizens fire the Church
called Saint Dennis.
those things, set the place, called Saint Dennis, Church on fire.

During these times of trouble among the Christians, the Affairs The State
disturbed. The French invade the Empire. Great Earthquakes in the East; at
Antioch (where these things were done) for a years space.
of the Common Wealth (as it usually fares) grew troublesome; The French
invaded the Roman Borders; then also there were great Earthquakes in the East,
but especially at Antioch, where these things were done, where the Earth was
moved and shaken for the space of one whole year.

Eusebius having effected his purpose in displacing Athanasius, Cap. 9.
Eusebius sends to Julius Bishop of Rome, to give definitive Sentence against
Athanasius, Eusebius dies presently after the end of the Council, and saw it
not. Paulus is made Bishop again by the people; Macedonius by his Colleagues,
viz. several Bishops,
and settling Gregory, that he might yet seem to be wary in his undertaking,
sends a Legate to Julius at Rome, to give definitive Sentence in the cause of
Athanasius; but the Sentence of Julius, Eusebius never saw, for immediately
after the Council brake up, breath departed Eusebius Body, and so he died.

Eusebius being dead, the People at Constantinople bring Paulus to be their
Bishop; Those appertaining to Arius chose Macedonius; the same persons wrought
it, as were Eusebius his Colleagues, who were able to do something at that
time, (viz.) Theoguis Bishop of Nice, Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, Theodorus
Bishop of Heraclea in Thracia, Ursacius Bishop of Zingidon in the Higher Misia,
Valens Bishop of Nursa a City in the Higher Pannonia; Two of which afterward
recanted.
but Ursacius and Valens repented them afterward, and writing a Recantation to
Julius of Rome, submitted to the cause of one Substance, and the Communion of
the Church.

These things producing civil Wars among themselves, through Great mischiefs,
and bloodsheds; the consequence.
the pretenders of Arius (as the History renders it) much mischief was the
consequence, there being said to be many and often skirmishes in that City
thereabouts, in which many were trodden under foot and crushed to death.

Constantius hearing of this, while he abode at Antioch, commanded Cap. 10.
Constantius commands Hermogenes to displace Paulus. The people are disquieted,
and rise.
Hermogenes, that was taking his Journey into Thracia, to take Constantinople
in his way, and to thrust Paulus out of his Church: This gave great disquiet in
the City, they gathered themselves together, and prepare to aid their Bishop;
whom Hermogenes came by force to banish. Hermogenes with his Soldiers
Hermogenes endeavors to disperse them They fall upon him, burn the house over
his head, pull him out by the ears, and put him to death.
endeavors to disperse the people; they being in an uproar fell upon him, they
fire the house over his head, they pull him out by the ears, and put him to
death. This was done when both the Emperors were Consuls, and when Constans had
overcome the French, and concluded a peace between them and the Romans;
hereupon Constantius left Antioch, came to Constantinople, thrusts
Constantius comes to Constantinople, thrusts out ^aulus. Fines the City.
Paulus out of his Church, merced the City, taking from them so many measures
of Grains as their City received, above four hundred thousand, the which (says
the History) by his Fathers Yet for fear forbears placing in Macedonius.
Donation daily was given unto them; yet he delayed the placing in of
Macedonius, for that he was greatly incensed against him, not only because he
was chosen without his advice and counsel, but also in that through the stir
and tumult raised between him and Paulus, not only Hermogenes his Captain, but
also many others besides were slain; the pretenders also to Arius removed
Gregory Gregory removed from Alexandria by the pretenders to Arius. The reason
why Georgius put in.
from Alexandria, because the people hated him grievously, and had set their
Church on fire, and for that he but slenderly maintained their Opinion, and put
in his stead Georgius born in Cappadocia, one that was nuzled in the Opinion
they held.

By this time Paulus of Constantinople, and several other Bishops, Cap. 11.
Paulus and the other Bishops repair to Julius of Rome.
being accused one for one thing, and another for another, and deprived of
their Churches, go to Rome, and having Julius his Letters unto the Bishops of
the East, that every one should be restored again, sharply reproving their rash
deposition, they depending He gives them letters, they repair to their
Bishoprics.
on the Prerogative of Rome, went every one to his own charge, sending their
Letters to those unto whom they were directed, and whom it concerned.

The Eastern Bishops took this correction of Julius Bishop of The Bishops of
the East take Julius correction heinously, summon a Synod at Antioch. They
decree against Julius Bishop of Rome
Rome as a contumely, and summon a Synod at Antioch, where being assembled,
they devise an Epistle by uniform consent, wherein they bitterly inveigh
against Julius, and signify withal, -- That if any were banished the Church,
and excommunicated by their Censure and Decree, it was not his part to
intermeddle, neither to sit in Judgment upon their sentence: For when as he had
removed Novatus out of the Church of Rome, they neither resisted, neither
contraried his doings; Athanasius coming to Alexandria, Georgius Alexandria in
a tumult upon the return of Athanasius by Georgius, (as some said) by
Athanasius (as others affirm) much blood is shed.
the Arrian (so called) made great stir and tumults, in which much harm,
murder, and bloodshed was committed, which the one sort impute to Georgius, and
the other to Athanasius, whom yet the Historian justifies as innocent.

Well, as soon as Constantius (who then remained at Antioch) Cap. 12.
Constantius is displeased at the return of Paulus, commands Philip to remove
Paulus, and place in Macedonius; Philip uses a wile to entrap Paulus,
heard that Paulus was placed again in Constantinople, he took great
displeasure, and was sorely incensed, he gave commission to Philip the chiefest
of his Lieutenants (and called the second person in the Empire) to remove
Paulus, and to appoint Macedonius in his stead; Philip fearing the rage and
tumult of the multitude, circumventeth Paulus very subtly, and covertly
concealeth the Emperors pleasure. He feigneth the cause of his coming to be for
the common Affairs of the City, he gets him strait to the public Bath called
Zeuxippus; he sends thence one unto Paulus, Which taking,
that he should honorably salute him, and will him in any wise to repair unto
the Emperors Lieutenant; as soon as he came, the Governor opened unto him his
Lord the Emperors Commandmant. The Bishop takes patiently his Sentence,
although unjustly decreed against him; But the Governor standing in great fear
of the furious rage of the multitude, and such as stood in compass about him
(for many by reason of the suspicious rumor flocked unto the public Bath)
gave Commandment, that one of the back Windows of the Bath should be opened,
that Paulus He is privily sent to exile,
should be let down at the said Window, into a Ship ready appointed for the
purpose, and thence be conveyed to exile: The Governor had commanded him that
he should sail thence strait to Thessalonica, the Head City of Macedonia (from
thence his Ancestors came) and there make his abode; Paulus thinking little or
nothing of all this, is both deprived his Church, banished the City, and
forthwith brought to exile. Philip got him with And Macedonius carried by
Philip to their Church. The Soldiers guard them with naked Swords. The people
are amazed, run thither.
speed from the Bath to the Church, Macedonius accompanies him, as it was
concluded before, sitting by his side in the Wagon, in the face of the whole
Multitude, the Soldiers guarded them with naked Swords: the multitude in
compass are amazed thereat, and struck with sudden fear, all ran to the Church;
such as defended the Creed that contained the clause of one Substance, flocked
to the Church (says the History) as well as the Arrian To the Nicenians and
Arians.
Heretics: The Governor and Macedonius being come near the Church, a
mavelous great fear afrighted both the multitude and the Soldiers
themselves; so great a company gathered together No passing, the Company was so
great. The Soldiers force their passage on this side and that.
that there was no passing for the Governor to lead Macedonius; The Soldiers
were fain to force the people of this side and that, but the throng was so
great, and the room so narrow, that they could not recoyl; The Soldiers
supposing that the multitude had set themselves against them, and of set
purpose stopped their walk that the Governor might have no passage thereaway,
drew their Swords, let fly amongst them, and laid on lustily; the report was,
That there fell about three thousand one hundred, About three thousand and one
hundred slain, and stifled, and crushed to death. Macedonius not regarding, is
enstalled by the Governor.
whereof some were slain by the Soldiers, others stifled in the throng, and
crushed to death; But Macedonius (says the History) after all these famous
acts, as if he had committed no offense, and were innocent and guiltless,
touching all this heinous and horrible slaughter, is stalled in the Bishops
Seat, more by the censure of the Governor, than by the Canon of the Church:
These be the means (says the History) that Macedonius and the Slaughter and
bloodshed, the Arians means to climb into the Church.
Arrians used to climb by slaughter and murder to be Magistrates in the Church.

Athanasius also comes again to be accused, but falsely (says the Athanasius is
again accused.
History) with turning the Corn or Grain which the Emperor had given for the
relief of the poor within the Church of Alexandria, unto his private commodity;
with which slanders the Emperor being informed, threatened him with death; he
hearing thereof, flies The Emperor threatens him with death, he slies, and
hides. Julius sends for him to Rome. Certificates from the Eastern Bishops come
to Julius, that the crimes were false. Julius writes back to the Bishops of
Antioch, his grief, because of their Letters in reproof of his to them, and
reproves them for diverse things. The proceedings at Mereotis against Athanasius
registered on the one side, and not on the other. Sabinus used the like in his
collection of Councils, whereby little judgment can be given to their writings
away and hides in an obscure place. Julius Bishop of Rome hearing thereof,
sends for him, and willed him to come to Rome; also at the same time he
received Letters from the Council at Antioch, and the Bishops of Egypt, that
all such crimes as Athanasius was charged with, were mere false, therefore he
writes to the Bishops at Antioch, what grief and heaviness he had conceived by
their Letters, how they had transgressed the Canon of the Church, in not
calling him to the Council, insomuch that the Canon commands, That no Decree
be thrust upon the Church without the Censure of the Bishop of Rome. Moreover
that they had covertly corrupted the Faith: Also that they had concluded by
main force, and double dealing, such things as of late they had lewdly handled
at Tyrus, in that they of spite had procured the relations of one side only to
be registered at Mareotes; and that the forged Leasings of Arsenius were mere
slanders, and false reports. The like did Sabinus use to do in his collection
of Councils, (viz.) put down what was on the contrary behalf of those who were
for the clause of one Substance, not what was written in the behalf thereof.
And this was the course and manner of proceedings among them.

Not long after Paulus leaving Thessalonica (the place of his exile) Paulus
gets to Italy, from his exil. Cap. 14. He and Athanasius open there their cause
to the Emperor.
feigned as if he would go to Corinth, but went strait into Italy, where he and
Athanasius jointly open their cause to the Emperor; The Emperor, whose Dominion
was the West, esteeming these injuries as his own adversity, wrote unto his
Brother, requesting He writes to his Brother to send him three persons to
signify the causes of their deposition. The Emperor sends them. They refuse to
reason with Athanasius. Conceal the form of Faith decreed at Atioch Frame
another, give it to the Emperor, depart. Photinus his Heresy sprung up in
Illirium.
three men to be sent him with the full cause of their deposition; The Emperors
Brother sends three, but they would not reason with Athanasius, but concealing
the form of Faith decreed at Antioch, these Bishops frame out another which
they gave the Emperor, which when they had done, and showed it to some others,
they took their leave and departed without further reasoning of any other
matter: Then a new Opinion sprang up at Syrmium, a City of Illyrium, by
Photinus that governed the Churches there, who was born in the Lesser Galatia,
and the Disciple of Marcellus, who was deposed of his Bishopric, following his
Masters steps, affirmed, That the Son of God was only An account thereof.
Man.

Three years after the Bishops of the East summon again another Cap. 15.
Another Council called by the Eastern Bishops and another form of Faith made,
and sent to the Western. The Western refuse it, and the causes why.
Council, and frame another long form of Faith, and send it to the Bishops in
Italy by certain Bishops.

The Bishops of the West Churches would in no wise receive it, partly because
it was written in a strange Tongue, therefore could not understand them: They
also said, That the Nicene Creed was sufficient, and that it was not for them
curiously to search further.

The Emperor of the West having wrote again concerning Cap. 16. The Western
Empero^ writes again for Paulus and Athanasius, but to no purpose. The Reasons
why. They two desire another Council to be called.
Paulus and Athanasius, that they should be restored to their former Dignities,
to no purpose by reason of the civil dissension and discord not yet appeased
among the Multitude. Paulus and Athanasius desired, That another Council might
be called, that their cases may be known the better, and the Faith decided,
protesting that their deposition was wrought to the end that the Faith might be
destroyed.

By commandment of both Emperors another Council is called Another Council is
called by both the Emperors at Sardice. Three hundred Bish, of the West, and
76. Bish. of the East only meet. The excuses of the absent.
at Sardis, of the West Churches, (as says Athanasius) three hundred Bishops
met; and of the East (as Sabinus reports) only seventy and six, the rest making
excuses, some infirmity of Body, others short warning, for which they blamed
Julius Bishop of Rome, when as there was a year and a halfs time between the
Proclamation and the sitting of the Council, which was the eleventh year after
the death of Constantine the Father of the Emperors.

The Bishops of the East would not come to the Bishops of the The Eastern
Bishops refuse to come to the Bish. of the West, unless they two were kept out.
The Western ^ot brooking it, the Eastern depa^^, and meet at Philippi, and
cu^se the Creed of one Substance.
West, unless they would bar Paulus and Athanasius their Company, which the
Bishops of the West not brooking, the Eastern Bishops departed, and at
Philippi, a City in Thracia, they assembled a private contemning the clause of
one Substance, and in writing to sow abroad their Opinion, That the Son of God
was not of one Substance with the Father.

The Western Bishops that continued at Sardice, first condemned The Western at
Sardice condemned them. Depose the Accusers of Athanasius; ratify the Nicene
Creed; abrogate the other.
them which fled from the hearing of their Cause; next, deposed from their
Dignities the accusers of Athanasius; afterward ratified the Creed of the
Nicene Council, and abrogated the Heretical Opinion, (as they called it) which
said, That the Son was Send Letters to the Churches of what they had done, as
did the other throughout the World.
of a different Substance from the Father. Lastly, They set forth more plainly
the clause of one Substance, and wrote Letters thereof, and sent them
throughout the whole world.

Both sides were pleased with their own doings, and every one Each pleased
themselves with what each had done. The causes of the doings of each.
seemed to himself to have done right well; The Bishops of the East, because
the Western Bishops had received them whom they had deposed; The Western
Bishops, because the Bishops of the East, being deposers of others, had
departed before the hearing of their cause; The one for that they maintained
the Nicene Creed; The other for that they went about to condemn it: To Paulus,
Athanasius, Marcellus, restored to their Bishoprics.
Paulus and Athanasius, their Bishoprics are restored, and to Marcellus Bishop
of Ancyra in the Lesser Galatia.

The Bishops of each part having decreed such things as seemed Cap. 18. Each
part depart, separating as far in affection as they were in place.
best unto themselves, they depart every one to his own home, going asunder as
far in Spirit as they were in Person, and so became divided; and the Mount
between Illirium and Thracia, called Tisuris, was the bound of both, beyond
which there was no The Mount Tisuris is set the bound between them for their
Communion. The West Emperor desires the restitution of Paulus and Athanasius.
Constantius delaying, the other sends him in choice, either War, or Restitution.
communion: such confusion, such stir, and such division (says the History)
reigned then in the Church.

Immediately after this the Western Emperor signifies to his Brother what was
decided at the Council of Sardice, and requested him to see Paulus and
Athanasius placed in their Bishoprics: But when Constantius delayed from day
to day his Brothers desire; The Emperor of the West gave his Brother in choice,
Either to restore Paulus and Athanasius, and so account of him as his Friend,
or else to hear the Proclamation of open War, and so find him as his deadly
Foe. The Letters sent by his Ambassador were these, -- There remain here with
me Athanasius and Paulus, who as I am credibly A Copy of his Letters.
given to understand; are persecuted for piety sake; if that thou will promise
me to restore them unto their Seas, and to punish severely such as have injured
them, I will send the Parties themselves unto thee; But if thou will not
accomplish this my will and pleasure, know for surety, that my self will come
thither, and maugre thy bread, restore them to their proper Seas.

This when the Emperor of the East understood, it troubled Constant. is
troubled hereat; assembles the Bishops;
him, and is said to be wonderful pensive and sad; he assembles many of the
Bishops of the East, lays before them the choice his brother gave him,
demands of them, What was best in the Demands of them, What is to be done.
They choose Peace rather than War. He sends for Athanasius; Constantine sends
Paulus to Constantinople with his and the Councils Letters.
case to be done? They answered, It was far better to restore Athanasius, than
to raise deadly and mortal Wars. Therefore the Emperor, being constrained
through necessity, sent for Athanasius; In the mean while Constans the Emperor
had sent Paulus honorably, together with two Bishops, with his own Letters,
and the Letters of the Council for more surety unto Constantinople.

Athanasius yet doubting whether he yet were best go or no to Cap. 18:
Constantius sends again for Athanasius, and a second and third time.
Constantius, because the slanders cast upon him troubled him very sore;
Constantius sent for him not once only, but the second and third time, which he
having received, and the Bishop of Rome being made privy thereunto by
Athanasius, and having the said Bishops Letters unto the Priests and People of
Alexandria, he went to Constantius, who (it is said) received him not
unwillingly, He goes to Constantius.
but through the slights of the followers of Arias went Who desires sufferance
of one Church in Alexandria for the Arrians. He leaves it to the Emperor; and
craves another thing of him, viz. That the Nicenians might have one Church
throughout every City.
about to beguile him, by desiring a permission of one Church, for those that
differed in Opinion from Athanasius, and severing themselves from his
Communion; he answered, -- It lies in thee, O Emperor, to do as pleases thee
best to command, and execute thy Commandment. And craved of the Emperor another
thing, (viz.) That he would grant him one Church throughout every City, for
such as communicate not with the Arrians. The followers of Arius perceiving
that his request was not unreasonable, made answer, That The Arrians hereupon
defer the matter.
it behoved them to defer the matter unto another time, and consider better of
it. They hindered not the Emperor, but suffered him to do what pleased him best;
wherefore the Emperor settled Athanasius is settled, and Paulus with other
Bishops by the Emperor, who writes to Alexandria of Love and Friendship, and to
abregate what Laws were against Athanasius.
Athanasius, and Paulus, Marcellus, and Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and Lucius of
Andrianople into their Bishoprics, and wrote Letters to Alexandria of Love and
Friendship, and for them to receive Athanasius, and all of the same mind with
him, and to settle them in their places; and to abrogate whatsoever Law or
Order was made against him or them, or any thing that appertained unto them.

These things being done, Athanasius takes his Journey to Cap. 19. Athanasius
returns by the way of Jerusalem, Anno. 351. Acquaints Maximus Bishop of that
place; He calls an Assembly of Bishops; assigns him his Dignity.
Alexandria, by the way of Jerusalem, where he acquaints Maximus the Bishop of
that place with the Decrees of the Council of Sardis, and also the Emperor
Constantius his agreement and consent therein, and procured out of Syria and
Palestina an assembly of Bishops, where Maximus gave him the Communion, and
assigned unto him his Dignity; and the Council being dissolved, they wrote and
signified by their Letters to the People of Alexandria, The Council also write
Letters to Alexandria in his behalf.
unto the Bishops of Egypt and Libia, all their Decrees and Canons concerning
Athanasius.

This incensed all the Adversaries of Athanasius, who cried out The Arrians are
incensed hereat; cry out against Maximus.
against Maximus, for that aforetime he had subscribed to Athanasius
deposition; but now repenting of his folly, as if he had not then done well, he
became of his Faith, and awarded him both Communion and Dignity; yet Ursacius
and Valens hearing Vrsacius and Valens, upon the success of Athanasius, recant.
of the prosperous success of Athanasius, they exhibit to Julius Bishop of Rome
their Recantation and Repentance in writing, and subscribed to the Creed
containing the clause of one Substance. But Athanasius traveled by Peleusium
in the way to Alexandria, Athanasius returns by Peleusium, inveighs against
Arius.
preaching in every City where he came, and exhorted them to eschew the
followers of Arius, and to embrace such as confessed the Faith of one
Substance. And in diverse of the Ordains Ministers in other Churches, gives
occasion thereby of new Accusations.
Churches also he ordained Ministers, which gave occasion to the Adversaries to
accuse him again, that he presumed to make Ministers in other men's Provinces.

Whilst the Ecclesiastical Affairs went thus very troublesome Cap. 20. The
Common wealth reels whilst the Christians totter.
about Athanasius, and the clause of one Substance, the quiet estate of the
Common Wealth (as usually it falls out so to be) was not a little out of
square; Constantine, who builded Constantinople, dying, left his three Sons to
succeed him in the Empire, of which Constantine the great left three Sons, they
are divided. Constantines Son the younger slain, Constantius not forbidding it.
The Soldiers did it, when he had reigned but a little while.
number Constantine, that was called after his Fathers Name, was one, and
reigned together with the rest of the Emperors, whom the Soldiers slew, after
he had reigned but a very little while; and as Constantius commanded not he
should be slain, so again he forbad not the slaughter: but how that Constantine
the Younger breaking forth into his Brothers Dominions, lost his life, whilst
he fought hand by hand with the Soldiers, it has been shown before, after
whose death there arose War between the Persians The Persians, War with the
Romans. The Romans have but ill-favored success.
and the Romans, where Constantius had but ill-favored success; for the Camp
being pitched in the night time, about the bounds of the Roman and Persian
Dominion; the Persian Host seemed then to prevail, and for a time to have the
upper hand. Things being at this point, Magnentius the Tyrant became a Rebel in
Magnentius turning Rebel, produces the death of Constans another Son.
the West part of the World, and through Treason procured the death of Constans
the Emperor, who governed the West, and then abode in France: This being
wrought, there ensued great Great Wars follow thereupon.
and grievous Wars; Magnentius invaded Italy, subdued Africa and Libia, and all
France. Moreover at Sirmium a City of Illirium, Bretanion another Tyrant,
raises War at Sermium.
there was another Tyrant set up by the Soldiers, whose Name was Bretanion; At
Rome also there was a great stir, for Nepotianus, Constantines Sisters Son,
having got him a great Troop Nepotianus at Rome stirs then, Magnentius cuts him
off, subdues the West.
of Fencers and Sword-players, aspired unto the Imperial Scepter; but the
Captains of Magnentius dispatched him. In a little time Magnentius overran and
subdued all the West parts of the World.

Constantius understanding all this, and what was befell his Brethren, Cap. 21.
Constantius makes War with the Tyrants; is proclaimed Emperor of the West.
the fourth year after the Council of Sardice, made Title and Challenge to the
Dominions of his Brethren; and being proclaimed Emperor of the West, he makes
expedition to wage War with the Tyrants.

The Scaene now beginning to change, the Adversaries of Athanasius, Athanasius
hereupon is new charged again.
supposing they had now gotten a fit opportunity, forge again (as says the
History) heinous offenses afresh against him, before his coming to Alexandria,
informing, That he perverted all Egypt and Libia; Also they charge him with
making Ministers in other men's Provinces: Athanasius coming to Alexandria,
calls He calls a Council, they decree according to Athanasius. The Emperor
decrees the contrary.
diverse Councils of the Bishops of Egypt, who decreed certain things according
to the Council of Sardice and Jerusalem. The Emperor being said to be addicted
aforetime to the Heresy of Arius, wrested all things he had lately decreed to
the contrary part; and first of all he banished Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople, He banishes Paulus, and is stifled by them that carried him to
Exile. Basilius put in the room of Marcellus Lucius of Adrianople, imprisoned,
and there choked with stink.
aforesaid, whom they who carried him to exile, stifled at Cucusum, a City in
Cappadocia: Marcellus is expelled Ancyra, and Basilius placed in his room;
Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis is clapped in Prison, and there choked up with
stink: but the Relations made to the Emperor against Athanasius, so incensed
him, that he gave forth a Commandment he should be executed where ever he was
taken: He charged moreover, That Theodulus and Olympius Athanasius ordered to
be executed.
Bishops of Thracia should be put to death, which threats of the Emperor,
Athanasius understanding (for he was quickly made privy thereunto) fled away.
He flies.


Macedonius after Paulus was murdered, as aforesaid, was made Cap. 22.
Macedonius put in Paulus room.
Bishop of Constantinople; he had great liberty and access unto the Emperor; he
made Wars among the Christians, nothing inferior to the Tyrannical practices of
those times; he persuaded The Emperor aids him.
the Emperor to aid him, when as in very deed he procured the overthrow (as is
said) and the destruction of the Churches, and Makes Edicts at his Will.
prevailed, that whatsoever he compassed, the same forthwith was by a Law
confirmed; every City sounded of Proclamations; the Soldiers were commanded to
see the Emperors Edicts take place: As many as cleaved unto the Creed,
containing the clause Orders Soldiers to make them take place. The Nicenians
cut off from the Church, and exiled.
of one Substance, were not only cut off from the Churches, but also banished
altogether the Cities; And first, they join heads and hands together to bring
this to pass: But when this Pestilent Infection (says the History) had spread
it self far and nigh, such as had little or no care at all of the
Ecclesiastical Affairs, determined with themselves to constrain men to their
Communion; the They constrain to their Communion, as the Heathens did the
Christians,
violence (says the History) truly was no less than that of old practiced
toward the Christians, when they were compelled and drawn to sacrifice to
Idols, for many endured several kinds of torments, By racking, dismembring,
confiscation, exile, d^^th.
often racking and dismembring of their joints, confiscating of their
Substance, some bereaved of their Native Soil; other some departed this life
under the hands of the Tormentor; some died in Banishment and never saw their
Country again; these This throughout the East, chiefly at Constantinople. All
by Macedonius.
were their practices throughout all the Cities of the East, but especially at
Constantinople. This civil Plague and Persecution (aforetime being not so out
of measure, though the least of it is too much) Macedonius did greatly augment,
as soon as ever he had gotten the Bishopric; but the Cities of Greece;
Illirium, and of the other The West is at rest.
parts tending toward the West, were void of all these tumults and calamities,
because they agreed within themselves, and observed the Canons of the Nicene
Council.

Hear a little further what Athanasius himself writes of what horrible Cap. 23.
Athanasius Account of the sufferings at Alexandria by Georgius. The Nicenians
sought out for Execution. Their Church beset with Soldiers.
practices were exercised at Alexandria, by Georgius the called Arrian, who was
there himself, and felt part of the lamentable affliction, -- There came (says
he) certain people that sought us out to execution, so that the ending was far
worse then the beginning; the Soldiers unawares beset the Church; instead of
devout service of God, they take in hand desperate Swords. Then Georgius that
was sent by them from Cappadocia, coming in Lent time, added unto his own of
the lewd practices which he learned of them; after that the Easter week was
over, the Virgins began to be clapped in Prison, the The Virgins clapped in Prison.
The Bishops bound; and led by Soldiers. The Fatherless and Widows
dispossessed. Families rifled. Persons trailed. Doors nailed up.
Bishops were bound and led by Bands of Soldiers; the Fatherless and Widows
were dispossessed of their Houses; the Families were rifled, the Christians
were violently trailed and lugged out of their Houses; their doors were nailed
up; the Clergy men's Brethren were in great danger of their lives for their
Brethren sake: These things seemed very grievous; but the afterclaps were far
worse; the week after Whitsuntide the people did fast, they got them therefore
into the Churchyard to pray, because they all abborred the Communion of
Georgius; but Beset in their Churchyards by a Troop of Souldie^s.
when this passing lewd man understood of it, be stirred up against them one
Sebasteanus a Captain, which also was a Manichee; he forthwith, together with a
great Troop of Soldiers all in Armor, having naked Swords in their hands,
Bows and Arrows prepared, ran upon the The people ran upon.
people as they were praying on the Sunday; When he found there but a few, (for
the hour being past, the greater part was gone away) he committed such heinous
acts as became very well his person: He set on fire a great company of Faggots,
he made the Virgins to stand The Virgins made to stand near to a burning flame.
nigh the burning flame; he went about to constrain them to confess the Arrian
Faith: but when he perceived they would not yield, and that they despised the
burning heat of that horrible fire, he stripped them Then stripped naked, and
beaten because they would not recant Forty scourged with twigs of Palm Trees
newly gathered. The terribleness of that new torment.
stark naked, he buffeted them about the head and face, so that of a long while
after they were scarce known of their own Friends. Moreover he took forty
persons, and plagued them with a new kind of Torment never heard of before,
their backs and sides were so scorched and rent with Palm Twigs newly plucked
off the Trees, having on their pricking knobs, that diverse, because of the
stumps that stuck in the flesh of their backs, were constrained oftentimes to
repair unto Chyrurgions; other some not able to endure such terrible pain, died
of their Wounds. As many of the men as remained yet alive, together The
remainder alive of Men and Virgins, banished. The bodies of the dead not
suffered to be buried.
with the Virgins, were exiled, and led by the Soldiers to Oasis. The dead
Carcasses, not yet fully cold, were denied the Friends of the deceased, being
thrown here and there, and lying unburied (for that liked them best) the
Soldiers hid them, as if they had not been faulty in committing such horrible
crimes; this did they, having their minds overshadowed with frantic Heresy.
And when as the dear Friends and Familiars of the dead rejoiced at the bold
protestation of their Faith, yet sorrowed because their Carcasses were not
covered with earth; the savage impiety, and beastly cruelty of the Soldiers,
revealed it self with a greater shame and infamy. Moreover they banish
forthwith certain Bishops of Egypt and Libia, (viz.) sixteen, Sixteen Bishops
banished of Egypt and Libia.
whose names he reckons up; these being bereaved of their native Soil, they
handled so roughly, that some of them died by the way, some other in exile
never returning again: They put to death above thirty Thirty Bishops put to
death.
Bishops; they followed the steps of the wicked Achab, employing all their care
and industry for the rooting out of the Truth from the face of the Earth: --
Thus far Athanasius.

The Emperor with his Army came to Illyrium, where Bretanion Constantius with
his Army comes to Illyrium. Bretanion and he parley. The Soldiers brought over
from Bretanion to Constantius.
was proclaimed Emperor; as soon as he came to Syrmium, Truce being made, they
came to Parley, in which time Constantius endeavored to win over the Soldiers
that had proclaimed Bretanion, who refused him for their Emperor; which being
done, they proclaimed Constantius alone, both their Augustus, their King, They
proclaim Constantius Emperor.
and Emperor: Bretanton seeing himself betrayed (for there was no mention of
his Name in the Proclamation) fell down prostrate at Constantius feet, and
craved for mercy; Constantius taking from Bretanion begs mercy.
him his Princely Robe and Scepter, lifted him up by the hand very courteously,
and exhorted him to live a peaceable and quiet life as a private man; saying
further, That it was fitter for such an old man as he was to embrace a trade of
life that were free from all He sends him into ^ private life; b^a^s his charge.
trouble, than to gape after a vain title of Honor, full of disquietness and
molestation. Constantius commanded all charges to be born him out of the
Public, and wrote him several Letters to Prousa a City in Bythinia, where he
made his abode, signifying Writes to him, blames his unadvisedness that he had
not given himself that liberty which he had done to another, viz. to live
privately.
what singular pleasure he had done him in ridding him from cares and troubles;
showing also what misery oft-times befalls to Reign and Government, and that
for his own part he had done unadvisedly in not giving to himself that which he
granted to another.

These things being finished, Constantius made Gallus his Cozen Cap. 24. Gallus
made Caesar by Constantius, and sent into the East. Other Captains against
Magnentius. He remains at Sirmium
German, Caesar, sent him to Antioch in Syria, to keep those parts of the
Empire which lay in the East: Other Captains he sent with great power against
Magnentius, himself remaining at Syrmium, where Photinus aforesaid being
Superintendant of that Church, having broached an Opinion, (as has been
declared) That the Son of God was only man: About which there was a great
tumult, and much trouble arose; he summoned a Council thither, who Anno. 355.
Has a Council there, and deposes Photinus.
deposed Photinus; It was held in the year 355. And then another form of Faith
was agreed on; And because there was great contention about the understanding
of the Word which the Latins call Substantia, and the Grecians (...), about
the equality, The word Substance put out of the Creed.
or as they call it, the Unity of Substance. They decreed, That thenceforth the
controversy should not once be remembered; That the Church of God should no
longer be troubled with the Interpretation thereof, and that for two causes;
First, Because the Scriptures of The Causes thereof.
God made no mention thereof; Next, Because the Interpretation thereof exceeded
the sense and capacity of man: for the Holy Scriptures testify that no man was
able to set forth the Generation of the Son in these words, -- His Generation
who shall be able to declare? Isa. 53.

Much more is rehearsed as the Ground or Reason of their leaving Observations
thereupon.
out that clause of one Substance, about which such tumults and divisions had
been raised, so much blood spilt, and torments exercised, even Christian by
Christian, and other grievous sufferings already rehearsed, which having
wearied themselves with, whether it were this or that in signification, they
will have it left out; and no more remembered, judging themselves, as having
erred from Scripture in the thing which had no such word, and in meddling with
that, or to give account of that which none can declare, and so, as intruding
into things that are not revealed; So the righteous Judgment of God comes at
length to be made manifest, after man having tired himself in his way of blood,
and mischief coming to be weary, sees it time to give over, and so judges and
condemns himself, wherein he had judged and destroyed another. Photinus is put
to dispute his Opinion: the Bishops are present, Photi^^s put to dispute his
Opinion. Bisilius undertakes him. He is foiled. And banished.
by the command of the Emperor, and at his request, of Senators not a few,
Basilius undertakes him and gives him the foil, so Photinus is banished.

This form of Faith was wrote in the Latin Tongue, which afterward The new
Creed dislike because wrote in the Latin Tongue. The Papers called in by
threats.
misliking, they called in the Papers, and when they could not get them all in,
the Emperor by his Edicts, threatened with punishments those who did it not, but
it could not avail. Prev^il not.


Yet Osius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, who was present at this Cap. 22. Osius
Bishop of Corduba in Spain, called from exile to this Council, scourged for not
consenting, and wrack't till he did.
Council, and summoned thither by the Emperor, though an exile by reason of
those called Arrians, not consenting unto this Creed, or the form of Faith
agreed on at this Council, had his sides scourged, and his members put upon the
Wrack, and so constrained to consent thereunto, which was thought to be the
doings of the Emperor, who caused him to be cited there; and The causes
wherefore force a persuasive Argument.
being there, would have him subscribe it, that the Acts of that Council might
have the more force and credit. A persuasive Arguments.

Magnentius having in the mean time taken Rome, and put to Cap. ^7: Magnentius
takes Rome; puts many Senators to death, and other people. Is overthrown, and
runs away, slayes his Mother, his Brother made Caesar, and himself. Decennius
another Brother hangs himself
death many of the Senators, and abundance of the common people, Constantius
abiding still at Sirmium, sends a great power against him, who at length
overthrew him; he was so close beset, that he ran away alone to Lions, for the
Engagement was in France, where first of all he slew his Mother, next his
Brother, whom he had created Caesar, then he murdered himself; not long after
which, Decennius another Brother of Magnentius, hanged himself; yet the Common
Wealth was not in quiet, but another Tyrant steps up to give him trouble, that
troubled the Earth because of the Conscience of men unto God, Sylvanus by name,
who gave Silvanus another Tyrant arises in France. He is soon disparch't. The
Jews in Diocesarea rise against the Romans. Gallus overthrows them. Levels the
City with the ground. Plots against Constantius. He takes his head off, and
makes Julianus his Brother Caesar in his place. He is sent into France.
Constantius falls to persecuting, his troubles being fallen. Summons a Council
into Italy, being removed to Rome. Julius Bishop of Rome dies, Liberius
succeeds. Cap. 28. Aetius and his Heresy comes forth. The Reasons why he
severed from A^ius, though an Arian. His Heresy.
disquiet in France; but he was soon dispatched out of the way: Then the Jews
made a stir in the East, those inhabiting Dtocaesarea in Palestina, took Arms
against the Romans, and invaided the Neighboring Regions, whom Gallus
discomfited, and laid the City even with the ground: Gallus also swelled in his
mind against Constantius, and plotted against him, whose head Constantius
caused to be taken off his shoulders, and made Julianus the Brother of Gallus,
Caesar in his room, whom he sent into France against (as the Historian calls
them) the Barbarians.

Constantius being rid of these present mischiefs or troubles, turns himself
against the Church of God; removing from Sirmium to Rome, he calls a Council,
and requires several Bishops from the East to repair to Italy, during which
time Julius aforesaid died, and Liberius came in his room.

About this time Aetius came forth, who though he was counted an Arrian, yet he
severed himself from Arius, because they admitted Arius into Communion, who had
so dissembled with the Emperor, in signing and swearing the Nicene Creed, as
aforesaid. The History says, He could not understand that there was an
unbegotten birth, or bow to imagine that the begotten could be eternal with the
begetter. Whereupon he was called the Atheist, He is called the Atheist, his
followers Eunomians. Observations upon the several Heresies of Aetius, and
Arius and what they speak.
and those that went after him were afterward called Eunomians. So here are
three things in which the Christians came principally to be divided. The first,
The Faith (so termed) of one Substance. Next, The Opinion of Arius. Then this
of Aetius. The first (as I have said) thinks of God, according to a Natural
Generation. The second, Judges that such a Natural Generation is not God. The
third, That there is no God: For if that were not the Son of God, which Mary,
being overshadowed of the holy Ghost, bore, according to an eternal Generation,
then there is no God; For, of the Son, he says, Thy Throne, O God, endures for
ever; the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness, etc. Heb. 18.
But no God he is, if that Holy Thing that was born of Mary was not God; and if
that Holy Thing that was born of Mary was not God, then there is no God: For,
the Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool, says David, Psalm. 110. 1. And there be that are called
gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many)
but unto us there is but one God, of whom are all things, and we in him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.
And all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
And, For this purpose the Son of God was manifest, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And, Great is the Mystery of Godliness; God
was manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. And if he were not the Son of God, then is
your Faith vain, and ye are yet in your sins; For, He became the Author of
Eternal Salvation to as many as obey him, yea, even to as many as believe in
his Name, Heb. 5. 9. And if he be not God, how can his Name be believed in? for
the Name of God is Power; and how can that which has not power be the Author
of Eternal Salvation? and what obedience due where there is no power? These
things are manifest; Now to return to the History.

The Emperors Edict was for the Council to meet at Millain, Cap. 29: The
Council is at Millain; from the East many Bishops came not, because of the
length of the way. Three hund^ed Bishops of the West came. The East Bishops
require Sentence against Athanasius. The Western decline it. Make their Speech.
whither very many Bishops from the East could not come, because of the length
of the way; but of the Western there were to the number of three hundred: Being
come together, the Bishops of the East in the first place require that Sentence
by their general consent should be pronounced against Athanasius, thinking
thereby to stop all gaps for his return to Alexandria: The Bishops of the West
perceiving that the Bishops of the East bent all their might to enact a Decree
against Athanasius, for no other purpose, but to overthrow the true Faith, they
stood up and cried, That in so doing the Christian Religion should be cancelled
by the means of their deceitful and fraudulent Treachery: That the Crimes laid
to Athanasius his charge, were false reports, and mere slanders; and that they
had invented such things to deface the true and Catholic Faith. When they had
ended these loud Speeches, the Council The Council ends.
broke up.

The Emperor understanding this, commanded them forthwith The Emperor banishes
the West Bishops. Summons another general Council.
to Exile and Banishment, determining to summon another general Council,
thinking thereby to bring them into Unity and Concord; which upon better
consideration he laid down, perceiving it very hard to accomplish, by reason of
the long Journeys from the East unto the West; so he divides them into two
parts, the Divides the Council. Those present to meet a^ Ariminum, the East at
Ni^omedia. Neither agree amongst themselves.
Bishops then present to meet at Arminium in Italy, the Eastern at Nicomedia in
Bythinia; yet he prospered not in his purpose, for neither Council agreed among
themselves, but was divided into several Factions: A new Schism also arose
among the Eastern at Selencia, a City of Isauria, Leontius that preferred
Aetius aforesaid, to be Deacon, being also dead; Eudoxius Bishop of Germanicia,
a City in Syria, who was then at Rome, thought it high time for him to return,
feigns a pretense to the Emperor, and gets a Pasport, and through the interest
of the Emperors Chamberlains, creeps into the Bishopric of Antioch: then seeks
to restore Aetius Leontius getting into the Bishopric of Antioch, seeks to
restore Aetius, but prevails not.
again; summons a Council of Bishops to make him Deacon, but could not prevail:
At Ariminum, the Eastern Bishops letting pass the business of Athanasius,
without mentioning Ursacius and Valens aforesaid, who were observed still to
lean to the stronger and surer side; first, Arrians, then Nicenians, now
Arrians again, having others that joined with them, affirmed, That all forms
The East Bishops lay by all preceding forms of Faith to be cancelled, and
establish the Latin Paper-form of Faith now turned into Greek, which was made
at Sirmium, and called in, with some additions. Observations here-upon.
of Faith laid down in times past, were thenceforth to be cancelled, and that
the new form of Faith published at Sirmium, a little before at the Council
there, was to be confirmed, and gave forth a sheet of Paper which they had in
their hands to be read. The second Creed written before at Sirmium, and
suppressed there, (as I said before) was also read at this Council. See what
divisions here is about forms of Faith, and how their Languages like Babel are
divided, whilst they seek to bring that into Form which is everlasting, and so
make a Law to worship it: What a do and clutter there was about the Creed
containing the clause of one Substance, I have showed before, up and down; now
this, and now that, and then it must not be at all, but omitted; I mean that
clause as has been declared, and now all forms of Faith; But what is now
produced, must be cancelled, and that which themselves sought to suppress the
Copies of, must now be read, being translated out of the Latin into the Greek,
it being before in Latin, and not so well liked of: So whilst men go about in
the wisdom that perishes, And their confusion.
to bring forth that which men have nothing to do to force, or compel, or
enjoin; see what confusion they bring forth, and the consequences thereof,
blood, and torment, and fierce persecution: Behold how the Lord laughs them to
scorn, and has them in derision, and how their folly they bring forth, and
has left it for after Generations to see and consider.

Substance, Substantia; (...), the Greek and Latin of the same Sustantia and
(...), the Latin and Greek for the English word Substance; what a do it made in
the World as to the Creeds;
word Substance, what a do it made, I have in part manifested; (for to speak
all would seem endless) I do but touch at things, that in a series I may bring
something reasonable to serve my purpose, (which as the end will produce) is of
weight, and yet to many I may seem overlong, though upon due consideration I
hope I shall be excused, and that seeing these things having not been before so
produced, and the thing unto which I bring them being of greatest weight that
can be thought of in the World, and even in the things that men hold, that it
may be manifest how they run against the Lord, whilst they run against us in
point of Worship, and forcing of Religion, which the whole series of History
gives to understand; I say, I hope I shall be excused, as not having done amiss
in bringing things thus together in the series of History; I say, what ado the
words (...) and Substantia, the Greek and Latin of the word, in English called
Substance, have made in the World, I have in part manifested, and how through
disagreement it must be left out. Now here is a Creed after the demand of
cancelling And at length is left out. Now the different translations of the
same Creed, what that makes, and the consequences thereupon.
all the other forms of Faith, upon the enjoining of which, such multitudes of
Christians were tormented and destroyed, and the Peace of the Empire broken,
and War, and Earthquakes, and Pestilences, as the consequence from the hand of
the Lord, wherein millions were undone and ruined; I say, all the other forms
of Faith must be cancelled, at least it is so demanded, that this Creed, All
must be cancelled, that the Greek Copy may stand of that Faith, which in Latin
the form thereof is called in.
which being wrote first in Latin, must be called in, but being now translated
into Greek, must be read, as that which should succeed.

Had it not been recorded, and that by men of that Age, and Considerations upon
this.
who in those things were concerned, and wrote, either as being eye Witnesses,
or from them that were, it were hard to be believed, that so many, otherwise
wise and learned grave men, should so extremely be besotted to keep ado in
matters of Faith, the highest thing as to God, to trifle, and (I may say) fool
it in things of such weight, so as to become ridiculous, and a laughing stock
to Children: but this is the consequence, when men go out of their place to
meddle with things which they have nothing to do with, and that are beyond
their reach, in being definitive as to him, and the belief and worship of him,
and the enjoining thereof, who is Infinite, who is of a Spiritual Nature, who
is a Spirit, and so is all that which relates to the Faith and Worship of him,
and therefore ought no otherwise to be attempted, to be defined or enjoined,
but by the Spirit in Spiritual ways and means, which cannot be confined, which
is as the Wind which blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof
(says Christ) but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it geoth: so is
every one that is born of the Spirit, John 3. 8.

The said Creed being read, those who liked not the Contents The Council
hereupon is divided.
and Circumstances thereof, rose up and said, -- We came not hither as if be
wanted Faith and Belief (for we retain that Faith which What the opposite party
said.
we learned from the beginuing) but we are come to withstand novelties, if
ought be practiced prejudicial to the same. And so they And how they bad the
Greek-Copy-men curse Arius:
bad them curse and renounce the Heresy of Arius, if it were otherwise, in
such wise as the old and ancient Canon of the Church has banished all
heretical and blasphemous Doctrines. It is apparent And place the troubles of
the World on the foot of his Opinions. The others withstand them. The Unity is
broken. Some cleave to the Greek-Copy-form of Faith.
(said they) to the whole World, what tumults and troubles the blasphemous
Opinions of Arius, has raised even unto this day in the Church of God.
Ursacius, Valens, and the rest accepted not of this, whereupon (says the
History) the bond of Unity retained in the Church of God, was broken asunder;
Their men cleaved unto such things as the Council of Ariminum had decreed, (I
think it should be Sirmium, where the form was agreed; for this Council seems
to have agreed on nothing but only to divide) the other confirmed the Canons of
the Nicene Council, and derided the Others to the Nicene, and deride the other,
Athanasius his Pasquil on the Greek-Copy-Faith.
Contents of the Creed that was then read. Athanasius also in a Letter to his
Friends, scoffs them exceedingly in that they began their Creed, or the Creed
began thus, In the presence of Constantius, And its date of the Consuls then,
and the name of their Lord the Emperor, the Month, and the day of the month.
our Liege Lord Flavius, Eusebius, and Hypacius, renowned Consuls, the Eleventh
Kalends of June; We believe in one only True God, etc. Which he says was
never heard of before among Christians, when they had written such things as
they thought necessary to be believed of them; they (says he) laid down the
Consuls, the month, and the day, that it might easily appear unto all wise men,
their Faith, not to have been before the Reign of Constantius. Furthermore
(says he) when they take Pen in hand to pronounce what they think of the Lord,
they name another Lord, to wit, Constantius, for it was he that opened the gap
(says he) into impiety; and whilst they denied the Son of God to be Eternal,
(for those enemies of Christ, says he, fell into such outrageous impiety) they
entitled the Emperor to be Sempeternal, or Everlasting. Then whereas they
might pretend the example of the Prophets, who name themselves to have
prophesied in such and such a Kings Reign, as their And his answering the case
of the Prophets, as to the times mentioned of their prophecy.
President; They (says he) are foully deceived, and bewray every one his own
ignorance and folly; for though the Prophets (says he) made mention of the
times they lived in, yet were they not the first founders of the Service of
God, and Sacred Religion, it was long (says he) before their times, it was
from everlasting, it was before the Foundations of the World were laid, the
which verily God himself (says he) by Christ has prepared for us; The times
when their Faith had their Original, they did not signify, for there had been
faithful men long before them, for those were the days when such promises of
God, and Prophesies of things to come were preached by them: Moreover (says
he) in the aforesaid specified times, their Faith had not her first Foundation
and beginning, but the Prophers themselves; but these our Southsayers neither
writing of Stories, neither prophesying of things to come, do write their
Catholic Faith was published, adding immediately thereunto the times of the
Consuls, the month of the year, and the day of the week; Even as the Holy Men
of God (says he) have declared both the times of the matters they wrote of,
and the years of their own Ministry; so these men have noted unto us the days
when their Faith began: and as they (says he) took Maxilla and Montanus for
their Lord; so these men instead of Christ have chosen Constantius: and so in
many other expressions, he goes on to reflect these things upon them, which I
think too long to mention, though hitherto I judge (and I hope it will be so
thought) what is said to be convenient.

Well, the issue of this Council was, they deposed Valens, Ursacius, Valens,
Vrsacius, and four more chief Bish. deposed, for not cursing the Heresy of
Arius. They run to the Emperor. The others write to the Emperor, and send
twenty Bishops therewith.
Auxentius, Germanius, Cajus, and Demophulus, (the chief men in this matter)
because they refused to renounce and accurse the heresy of Arius, who taking
it impatiently, run unto the Emperor, and show him the form of Faith read in
the Council; the Council also wrote unto the Emperor an Epistle, wherein they
signified unto him what they had decreed, and sent certain twenty Bishops
therewith to know his pleasure, who kept them there long, for he stomached
wonderfully the proceedings of the Council, having been infected (as the
History says) with the Arrian Opinion; the other being before, having also
discredited the They are detained and slighted.
Council with the Emperor; so at length he sent his Answer, or rather
displeasure by other hands to the Council, and advanced The others advanced.
Valens and Ursacius into honor and estimation.

The Emperor having delayed the return of the Bishops, and The Council wear^
with attendance.
slighted them, though in his Letters he pretended, that being engaged or
occupied with the expedition he made against the Barbarians (for he had then
new troubles) was the reason, because (says he) requisite it is (as you know
very well) for them that will deal in matters of Religion, to be void of all
care Send again to the Emperor their protestation not to shrink from their
sentence. Entreat a dismiss, Which after long waiting, coming not,
and troublesome Affairs. The Council return him their protestation and
assurance, That they would in no wise shrink from their sentence and
determination: And therefore beseech him to dismiss them, That so many Churches
might not so long be bereaved of their Bishops; And that they might be
dispatched home before the cold nipping Winter. Upon, or for his Answer unto
which, they having waited some while longer, and nothing coming, they departed
They depart.
every one to his own home.

Hereupon the Emperor (being determined to sow the Arrian The Emperor
interprets it
Heresy (says the History) throughout every Church, took hereby occasion at
the Bishops return to bring about what was in his heart, and which he had
endeavored by all means possible to prefer every where, and accomplish; so he
said, That in contempt As done in contempt and despite of him.
and despite of him, and contrary to his will, they had dissolved the Council,
and gave Ursacius Authority freely at his Impowers Vrsacius to send into Italy.
The Faith read at Ariminum according to the Greek, and to depose the
Nonsubscribers thereunto. Liberius Bish. of Rome presently deposed, and Felix
an Arian-Deacon placed in his stead The People rise, force Felix out.
will and pleasure to practice all mischiefs against the Churches of God, and
commanded him moreover to send unto the Churches of Italy, the Faith that was
read at the Council of Ariminum, and to depose all such as would not subscribe
unto the same.

Liberius Bishop of Rome was presently deposed, because he would not sign
thereunto; and Felix Deacon of the said Church, being an Arrian, forced into
the Bishopric, though afterward Liberius was returned from his Exile, and
placed in the Bishopric, because of the tumults the people having been all in
an uproar, and thrust Felix out of the Church. The Emperor by Constrain the
Emperor to send for Liberius from Exile, and place him in again.
reason of these things, being constrained against his will to agree thereunto.

By reason of these things the whole Western parts of the World Great tumults
and discords, the consequence in the West of these alterations, many being
ex^ed, and others put in their places. Vrsacius departs to Nice in Thracia;
Calls a Council* Ratifies the form of Faith read at Ariminum, transla^ed into
Greek, and flourished with glorious Titles.
were in great tumults and discords, whilst some were by force deposed and sent
into Exile, and others put into their rooms; which Ursacius having effected, he
took his Journey into the East, and got him to the City of Nice in Thrasia,
where having continued a long while, he summoned a Council, and endeavored to
ratify the form of Faith that was read at Ariminum, calling it the Nicene
Faith, having translated it into the Greek Tongue; To publish, and set forth
the same with glorious Titles, as agreed upon by a general Council, which he so
called, to the intent that it might prove a snare to the ignorant rude and
simple people, His design therein to ensnare the simple with the thoughts that
it was the old Nicene Faith The deceit manifested, and they laughed at.
who verily thought that it was the same Faith which of old was confirmed at
Nice, a City in Bithinia; But it was not long ere this treachery was made
manifest, and those who did it, were laughed at for their labor.

And not only in the West, but also (and chiefly) in the East The East filled
with tumults, slaughters, etc
were there great tumults, slaughters, and destruction; for the Eastern Bishops
that were inclined to Arius, being swollen with pride and confidence, by reason
of the Emperors Edicts, presumed Maximus Bish. of Rome deposed, in order to the
Summoning of a Council, which was determined. Cyrillus put in his room.
Macedonius and his outrages.
with great boldness to bring their purpose to effect. Maximus Bishop of Rome
they depose (before the summoning of a Council, which a Council to summon they
concluded on, the better to carry on what they intended) and put Cyrillus in
his room; and many outrages were committed, especially by Macedonius Bishop of
Constantinople, of whom I have often spoken, and shall now further give this
particular account.

He made Eleusius Bishop of Cizicum, and Marathonius sometime He makes Eleusius
Bishop of Cizicum. Marathonius of Nicomedia. He thrusts out the very Novations,
and torments them.
his Deacon, Bishop of Nicomedia: This as to the Countries and Cities bordering
about Constantinople, the better to serve his intended purpose; he thrust out
of the Church not only such as seemed to vary from him in the Council, but also
the Novations, because they embraced the Faith of one Substance, and cruelly
tormented them; their Bishop Agelius was forced to fly for his Their Bishop
Agelius forced to fly for his life. Many notable men apprehended, and
grievously plagued for not communicating with the Arrians. After other
torments, their mouths forced open, and gagged, and the mysteries pop't in.
Women and Children dragged to their Communion. The refusers, etc. whipped,
imprisoned; Women laid in Chests, and their Breasts sawed of at the Lids.
life; many excellent and notable men (says the History) were then
apprehended, and grievously plagued, because they refused to be partakers of
their Communion: Yea, after their being tormented, they were constrained by
force to partake thereof, for they stretched wide and open, and gagged their
mouths, and so popped in (as the History has it) the mysteries, which was more
grievous to such then all their torments: They trailed Women and Children by
main force to their Communion; if any refused, or gainsaid their doings,
immediately they were scourged, after stripes, imprisoned, and in the end
compelled to endure more bitter torments: Of the Women that refused to
communicate with them, some were laid along in Chests, and at the lids their
Breasts sawed off, (newfound torments never found among the Heathens, but now
practiced by those which professed Christianity) some The Paps of others burned
with searing Irons, and roasted hot Eggs.
others had their Paps burned with searing Irons, glowing hot, and with Eggs
laid thereunto, that were roasted so hard, that they scalded for heat; this as
an instance of some of their torments. Alexander Paphlagon, a man very famous
for a severe and strait Alexander Paphlagon, scourged and tormented. Of which
he died in Prison.
kind of life, was imprisoned and scourged, and endured many other torments,
who after the grievous lashes of the Whip, died in Prison. Auxanon a very old
man, a Novation, endured very Auxanon an aged Novation, sorely scourged and
tormented.
many torments with him, and scourgings, as he had suffered much before he
entered into Orders: He destroyed not only other Churches (says the History)
in other Cities, but also the Novation The Novation Church in Constantinople
thrown to the ground, And all other Nicenian Churches, by the Emperors Edict.
Church within the City of Constantinople. It was proclaimed by the Edict of
the Emperor, and the cruelty of Macedonius, (says it) That the Churches of
such as embraced the Faith of one Substance, should be thrown to the ground,
even to the Foundations; which was soon put in execution: The true Catholics
(says the History) and the Novations were alike handled together. These An
account of the Novations Opinion, and wherefore they were called so.
Novations were called so, because they denied that those who sacrificed to
Idols, and had recanted, should not be admitted Communion, although they
repented. Novatus was the head of them, from whom they received their Name, or
that from whence the term Novation came; and this not only in Constantinople,
but in all other places they were very friendly, and kept together, though in
that point they differed. Eleusius of Cizicum Elusius at Cizicum follows the
steps of Macedonius. Afflicts the Novations, and the others.
proceeded in the steps of Macedonius, laid the Novation Church there even with
the ground, and arming himself every where against the other Christians, he
afflicted them every where, and tormented them grievously, in which Macedonius
gave the last Macedonius afflsts,
stroke and final conclusion; for there being many in Paphlagonia and Montinium
of the Novation Opinion, which by Ecclesiastical Authority could not
commodiously be removed, he procured of the Emperor four Bands of Soldiers,
whom those of Montinium Brings four Bands of Soldiers on those of Montinium.
They go against the Soldiers. Slay down the Soldiers.
went against with long Hedging-Bills, Axes, and rusty Armor, and joining
Battle, coming to Handy-gripes, are said to have slain down the Soldiers every
one, a few only excepted, though they came in glittering Array, thinking to
have afrighted them, with the loss of many of themselves. These Hostile
proceedings procured the enmity and ill will of many against Macedonius, who
Macedonius hated,
hated these doings, and not only among them, who because of these things bore
incurable Wounds, but of his near Friends and Familiars, yea of the Emperor
himself, whose displeasure he procured, Even by the Emperor. The reasons
thereof.
and whose mind was alienated from him, partly for these things, and partly for
what follows; he went about to pull down the Temple where the Tomb of
Constantine the Emperor lay, which He removes Constantines bones.
lest the falling of the Temple should deface, he endeavored to remove the
Emperors bones; this his enterprise the people withstood as unlawful; and being
in a manner nothing less then the digging him out of his Grave; the people in
this were divided, some were against it, as I have said, and these were those
that held the Faith The people divided thereabouts.
of one Substance; others said, This wicked deed might lawfully be done, and
these were such as followed Arius. Macedonius heeding not the gainsayers,
removed the Corpse into the Church where Acatius the Martyr was buried; this was
no sooner done, but the multitude of the contrary side ran thither in all
haste, and They rise and fight.
setting themselves one against another, went together by the Ears, upon which
so great a slaughter proceeded, that the Body of the The body of that Church
floated with blood. The way filled with blood and dead Carcasses.
Church was a float with streams of blood, and yet not only there, but from the
Porch unto the Street the way was all blood and dead Carcasses crossing one
another; which lamentable and woeful Spectacle wonderfully incensed the Emperor
against them, partly for that he had murdered so many men, and partly for
presuming without his consent to translate his Fathers Bones. Thus far of
Macedonius in this place, and the cruelties that were the consequence of this
new form of Faith, and the Emperors Edicts to enforce it as aforesaid.
Macedonius shortly after was deprived of He is afterward deposed.
his Bishopric, and received no small punishment for so great an offense. The
Emperor after he had committed the Government of the West unto Julianus, whom
he made Caesar, called afterward the Apostate, he returned into the East. Thus
much of these things.

Now concerning the Council, though it pleased the Emperor The Council ordered
to meet at Nicomedia. The Earthquake prevented it.
best that it should meet at Nicomedia, yet the great Earthquake (for there
were terrible significations of the displeasure of the Lord in those days,
because of the things that were done, though they would take no notice thereof)
which shook the Country, and overthrew Nicomedia; Nice was then thought of,
Which overthrew Nicomedia.
but being very far, they appointed to meet at Tarsus a City of Cilicia; and
when they could neither agree upon that, they assemble at Selusia a City of
Isauria, called Rough, where met one They meet at Seleusia, 160. Bishops, then
they agree not.
hundred and threescore Bishops, but neither could this Council agree, being
divided, some for examining the lives of Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem,
Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, and diverse others who had heinous
crimes laid to their charge; others to reason and question concerning the
Faith; and Tholeonas, who Freedom of proposition and speech at first given by
Tholeonas the Emperors Lieutenant or President. The others restrain it till
Macedon. and Basilius came. Who for fear of being accused, absented themselves.
The Council divided, and how.
being in great favor with the Court, proposed at first free liberty (for by
the Emperors Commandment in his hearing they should reason of the Faith) for
every one freely to propose what seemed to him best; yet those present affirmed
it was not lawful to call any thing into question, before they came, whose
presence was required in the Council, which were Macedonius aforesaid, and
Basilius Bishop of Ancyra, who mistrusting their cause, and suspecting they
should be accused of heinous crimes, absented themselves on set purpose. So
they were divided into two Factions; When that side prevailed that would reason
concerning matters of Faith, the Accomplices of Acacius Bishop of Cesarea, moved,
that the Nicene Creed should be abrogated, (which was the first Faction) and
that a new form of Faith be laid down, (so Faiths Faiths turned up and down,
^as the Wind does Weathercocks.
are turned up and down as the Wind does Weathercocks): Georgius Bishop of
Laodicea in Syria, and the others with him, which was the greater number, and
the other Faction approved all other things of the Council of Nice, the clause
of one Substance only laid aside: And whilst they thus brawled together (says
the History) They brawl from morning to night.
from morning to night; Silvanus Bishop of Tarsus cried out, That it was not
their part to lay down a new form of Faith, but to retain inviolable that which
was decided at Antioch, at the dedication of the Church. Presently Acacius and
his party rising up, got them away, who being gone, the Creed concluded on at
Antioch, The Creed at Antioch concluded on: the Council dissolved. They meet in
the Church at Seleucia, and barring the doors, sign the Creed.
was read, and immediately the Council was dissolved. The day after, meeting in
the Church of Seleucia, they bar the doors, and ratify with their Subscription
the form of Faith which was read the day before in their stead who were sent;
their Readers and Deacons subscribed, for they had signified before that they
would by their Deputies approve the aforesaid Creed.

Here is a great clutter about Creeds, attended with bloody and Creeds, and
their clutter, and bloody consequences. The reason and ground of the inserting
of these things.
terrible consequences, which is something indeed to me to draw forth, and it
may prove tedious to the Reader, but being engaged, as I have showed, in a
matter of this importance, I cannot pass them by, but in the way of a
Chronology to draw what is convenient to be said hereunto before the Reader.

This was the fruit of the first days sitting of the Council; the Cap. 23: The
first days work found fault with, because the doors were shut by Acacius and
his Accomplices, because done in hucker-mucker, who sought to introduce a Faith
of his own; which he read in the presence of the Emperors Presidents. This was
the second days work.
next day Acacius and his Accomplices found great fault with the Canons of that
Council, because subscribed when the doors were shut. And, says he, the things
which are done in hucker mucker, as they ought not to be approved, so are they
not void of suspicion. -- This he said, because he had another form of Faith
ready to be offered, which he read in the presence of Lauricius and Leonas,
which were noble Men, and appointed for this Council: This bent his whole might
to have only the same confirmed. Nothing besides this was done the second day
of the Council.

The third day Leonas went about to bring both parties together, Leonas the
President seeks to bring all together on the third day, on which Macedonius and
Basilius appear. Acacius, etc. refuse to appear, till they were put out, being
formerly deposed; they are put out. Leonas proposes Acacius his Book.
at which time Mecedonius and Basilius were present: These being present,
Acacius his Confederates would not appear, but said, It was requisite they
should be banished the Assembly, who of late had been deposed, and then also
were accused. These prevailing, the accused left the Council, whom Acacius and
his Company succeeded: Then Leonas stood up and said, Acacius had presented him
with a Book; yet knew they not that it was a form of Faith, which sometimes
privily, and sometimes openly and plainly confuted the Opinion of the contrary
part, which they giving diligent ear unto, all being silent, thinking nothing
less but this had been a form of Faith. At length Acacius read his own Creed,
Acacius reads his own Faith. The preambulatory protestation.
with a kind of preambulatory protestation in the beginning thereof. -- We
(says he) who by the Emperors Edict met yesterday, that is the fifth of the
Calends of October, in Seleucia, in Isauria, have labored with all might
possible to continue unity and agreement in the Church of God, to dispute and
reason of the Faith, according to the sacred testimonies of the Prophets and
Evangelists, with modest and quiet minds, as the most virtuous Emperor
Constantius has given in charge, and to conclude nothing for Canons of the
Church, which might be found contrary to the Holy Scriptures; but seeing there
were such kind of men at the Council which railed at some, shut up some others
mouths, forbad those to speak, excluded others from their company, joined with
them out of diverse Provinces, certain deposed and excluded persons, and
entertained them contrary to the old Canon of the Church: The Council (as
Lauritius the most valiant Captain saw (more is the pity) with his own eyes)
was all set on tumult and grievous dissension. We have spoken these things to
the end that you may understand we reject not the form of Faith that was
published at the dedication at Antioch, etc. And so goes on and reads his
Creed, whereunto he He and his party subscribes his Creed.
and his party subscribed.

Which being read, Sophronius Bishop of Pompeyopolis in Pyhlogonia, It Is
opposed by Sophronius his Speech.
stood up and spoke after this manner, -- If that the new devices, and daily
invention of your brains be laid down for Creeds, it cannot otherwise fall out,
but that shortly we shall be found without any one grain of Faith. -- In my
Opinion (says the Historian) if The Historians Opinion upon these confusions.
that his Ancestors, and such as lived then with him, had so settled thetr
minds, as touching the Nicene Council, all these stirs and tumults had been
quite taken away, all this hurly-burly, this rash and unadvised sedition had
never reigned in the Church; but to what pass (says he) things are now come,
let them judge that can better discern and give sentence thereof. When they had
reasoned to and fro of this matter, and of them that were accused, and had
brawled together a long while, (as says the History) at last the Council brake
up. The Council breaks up


The fourth day they assembled again, and afresh they chide They chide afresh
the fourth day. Acacius his Speech in behalf of his Faith.
one another; in circumstance of talk, Acacius gave forth this Verdict
following, -- If the Nicene Creed was once altered of old, and afterward
often, what can you say to the contrary, but that a new form of Faith, without
any prejudice at all, might be established of us? -- Eleusius made answer, We
are not come to this Assembly for The answer thereunto by Eleusius.
to learn that which we have learned before, neither to receive the Faith we
have not received before, but to walk in the Faith of our Forefathers, and not
fall from the same unto our lives end. But a man may here reply, and say thus,
(says the Historian) O Eleusius! The Historians return upon Eleusius.
How calledst thou such as assembled at Antioch, Fathers, and yet denyest their
Ancestors to be Fathers? For the Bishops of Nice, and the establishers of one
Substance, ought more properly to be called Fathers, partly for that they were
more ancient, and partly also because the Bishops at Antioch were found to be
such as cut their Fathers throats; these men of their Progeny without good
advisement do tread the steps of Murderers: And how, I beseech you (says he)
do they allow of their electing and laying on of hands as sufficient and
lawful, when as they cancel their Faith, and abrogate their Canons, for
imperfect and corrupt Doctrines. If they had not the Holy Ghost, which lights
upon every one that enters into Holy Orders; these men receive not the Function
of Priesthood, for how can they receive of them which had it not to give? These
things in my Opinion (says he) may very well be urged against Eleusius.

Yet again, another controversy arose among them. Whereas Another controversy
concerning part of Acacius Creed, viz. The Son of God being like unto the
Father. It is demanded how? It is answered.
Acacius his Creed had affirmed, That the Son of God was like unto the Father.
It was demanded, Wherein the Son was like unto the Father? No, Arcacius
answers, not in Substance, but only in Will and Mind. -- The others replied,
That he was like unto the Father in Substance. And of this question all that
day they reasoned. All the day is held with it. Acacius confuted. He is
reasoned with concerning his Books. His answer.
Acacius being confuted, when it was demanded of him, Why in his Books he had
avouched and written the Son in all things to be like unto the Father, and now
denied that the Son was of one Substance with the Father? Made answer, No man
that ever was, either of old time, or late days, is wont to be tried by the
Books that he wrote. -- And this is the Harmony which the Councils and the
Fathers, so Observations upon the whole.
called, have had as to the Truth; which is the consequence of all that which
meddles with the Faith and Worship of God, with the things that are of Man, the
wisdom of the Wise, which (he says) he will destroy, and will bring to nothing
the understanding of the Prudent, That no flesh may glory in his presence. 1
Cor. 1. 14. For, Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer
of this World? For after that, in the wisdom of God, the World by wisdom knew
not God, verse. 20. And, Father, I thank thee, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto
Babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11. 25. And
these things are manifest in these Disputations, which has produced, as is
signified to the Reader.

When they had sifted out this question diligently on both sides, When yet they
could not agree, Leon as dissolves the Council.
and could not agree, Leonas rose up and dissolved the Council: And this was
the end of the Council held at Seleusia. The next day when they made suit to
him to prorogue the Council, he Refuses to hear them the next day: And bids
them go home and brawl in their own Churches. His Speech.
would not sit with them again, but told them flatly, That the Emperor had sent
him to be present at a uniform and peaceable Council; But insomuch that diverse
of you are at discord and debate among your selves, I cannot away (says he)
with your Company; go your ways therefore daily, and brawl ye at home in your
own Churches.

This being done, (says the History) the conspiracy of Acacius, The Faction of
Acacius, absent themselves.
supposing now that they had got their desired excuse, absented themselves, and
would not show their faces at the Council; The The others meet and summon
Acacius to decide Cyrils matters.
others met again at the Church, and summoned Acacius with his Company to
decide Cyrillus his matter, who was Bishop of Jerusalem, who had been accused
and deposed his Bishopric, for what cause the History makes not mention; and
being called to purge himself, absented for the space of two whole years,
thinking thereby to escape, and the crime to be forgotten: as soon as he was
departed, Cyril appeals to the Judges of the High Court. Constantius admits it.
The first President of appealing from the Ecclesiastical Canon.
he appealed unto the Judges of the Higher Court; Constantine the Emperor
admitted the appeal; he was the first of all, and alone, that gave forth a
President prejudicial to the practice of the Ecclesiastical Canon, as if the
matter had been to be decided before Lay Judges; At length he came to this
Council to have his Cause heard, and therefore the Bishops sent for Acacius and
his Company, to the end they might not only hear Cyrillus, but also examine
such as had been accused, and were fled to the faction of Acacius; but when
they had often cited them, and they appeared Acacius is deposed, and many
Bishops more.
not; they deposed Acacius himself, and Georgius Bishop of Alexandria. Ursacius
Bishop of Tire, Theodorus Bishop of Cheteraphon a City of Phrygia, Theodosius
Bishop of Philadelphia in Lydia, Evagrius Bishop of the Isle Miletene,
Theontius Bishop of Trypolis in Lydia, and Eudoxius who first had been Bishop
of Garmanicia, and afterward crept by wiles into the Bishopric of Antioch in
Syria; and last of all they deposed Patrophilus for stubborn behavior and
disobedience: Nine more they excommunicated, Nine are excommucated.
and decreed they should remain in that state, till they had answered for
themselves, and cleared them of the crimes laid to their charge.

When these things were done, they wrote to the Churches Anianus put in
Eudoxious room.
what they had decreed, and put Anianus in Eudoxious room, whom the Faction of
Acacius apprehended and delivered to Eudoxious sent to Exile.
Leonas and Lauricuis, who sent him forthwith into Exile; Then the Bishops that
put in Anianus, made a long Plea, and discoursed at large before Leonas and
Lauricius, against Acacius and his confederacy; Acacius pleaded against and his
confederacy.
federacy; but when they prevailed nothing, they took their But they not being
heard, Get to Constantinople to acquaint the Emperor what was done at the
Council.
voyage to Constantinople, to certify the Emperor what they had done in the
Council; the Emperor was then come thither from the West, and had taken away
the Office of Proconsulship, and instead thereof ordained a certain Government
at Constantinople, which he endowed with the Title of Honor; But Acacius had
Acacius prevents them, and accuses them.
prevented them, and laid grievous accusations to their charge, persuading him
that their form of Faith was no wise to be admitted.

The Emperor being grievously incensed against them, determines The Emperor is
incenc'd, determines to cut them off. Makes a Law to take them from their civil
jurisdiction, etc.
to cut them off; he made a Law, That as many as were Magistrates, and bear
Office in the Commonwealth, should be brought back again to embrace a popular
and private kind of life; For of the Bishops, some were called to govern the
Commonwealth, some were Senators and Counselors, some others were Presidents
and Lieutenants of Provinces.

Acacius and his Accomplices remaining at Constantinople, and Another Council
held at Constantinople by Acacius, etc. Anno. 364. They confirm the form of
Faith read at Ariminum, which was dated with the Consuls, and add thereunto
something of their own.
calling unto them the Bishops of Bythinia, held there another Council, being
to the number of fifty, unto whom came Maris Bishop of Chalcedon; these
confirmed the form of Faith that was read at Ariminum, at whose beginning and
title the Consults were written; unto which they also added something of their
own: So the Faiths changed up and down as Clouds and Meteors, which participate
of various Colors and Appearances, as the Wind, and Sun, and Candence Air
gives them being, rouling up and down until they come at length to that from
which they were, to wit, to nothing, and these are the footsteps, or rather
wanderings of those who know not the Lord, the Principle of God to guide them,
the Spirit of Truth which leads into all Truth.

I have traced this Council, and these things hitherto, to show The
consequences of men's taking upon them to determine Faith, observed through all.
what is the consequence of man's taking upon him to determine concerning the
Faith of Jesus, by that which is not the Spirit of Jesus, and to enjoin it,
which runs them into all these confusions, bloodshedings and destructions, and
yet has no other certainty than the determinations of man, which change and
alter as they please. Now let me rehearse the number of the Creeds, because A
rehearsal of the number of the Creeds, being nine in number At Nice one. At
Antioch two. In France one. In Italy one. At Sirmium three. At Ariminum one. At
Seleucia one. At Constantinople one.
the History gives me in this place an assistance in that particular; The first
is that of Nice, Two others were framed at Antioch, The third in France by the
Bishops which were with Narciscus, and exhibited unto the Emperor Constantine;
The fourth was sent by Eudoxius to the Bishops throughout Italy, Three were
published in writing at Sirmium, whereof one, being gloriously entitled with
the names of the Consuls, was read at Ariminum: The eighth was set forth at
Seleucia; The ninth was given abroad with additions at Constantinople; there
was thereunto annexed. That thenceforth The clause of Substance, etc. left out.
there should be no mention made of the Substance or subsistancy of God, about
whom they had kept such ado, whom they did not understand. Vlphilas Bishop of
the Goths subscribes thus. The Application of the whole, and the Consequences
Unto which Ulphilas Bishop of the Goths first subscribed, who till that time
embraced the Faith established by the Nicene Council, and had subscribed to
that Creed. So see what confusion here is, and which is the Faith upon which a
man may pitch, seeing all these were enforced, and sought to make it self a
Standard for all to resort unto, which were contrary to one another, which many
of the same men made contrary, and put the highest stress thereupon, Thereupon,
even to death.
punishing the Nonconformity thereunto with Prisons, Whipings, Scourgings,
Torments, Exile, Death.

Acacius and Eudoxius (says the History) made foul tumults Cap. 33. Acacius,
etc. make great stir at Constantinople; deprive and depose the Bishops, etc.
and great stir at Constantinople, seeking to remove from their Bishopric some
of the contrary side, and causes of deprivation they invented, not for Piety
sake and Religion (says the History) but of private malice and quarrelsome
spite; for though they varied in their Faith, yet in deposing one another they
charged not each other with their belief; Those of Acacius's side took the
opportunity of the Emperors displeasure, for that he had been the cause of
great slaughter, and had admitted into the Communion a certain Deacon taken in
Adultery; deposed Macedonius; Macedonius in particular, Eleusius and others.
Eleusius Bishop of Cizicum they removed for baptizing Herachius, a sacrificing
Priest of Hercules, at Tire; They deprived Basilius, alias Basillas, who was
made Bishop of Ancira in Marcellus room, for that he cruelly tormented and
imprisoned a certain man, and because he forged slanders, and disordited diverse
persons, and lastly, for molesting the quiet state of the Churches in Africa by
his Epistles.

Several others they suspended and removed, too long to mention, They suspend
several.
nor had I these but only to show the fruits of forced Faith or Religion, and
into what it runs its self, and under cover of piety seeks to vent its spite
and mischief: They gave Eustathius Eustathius deposed, and the causes thereof
Bishop of Sebastia no liberty to purge himself, because his own natural Father
Eulavius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, had but Eulavius Bishop of Caesarea
in Cappadocia.
a little before deposed him for wearing a Weed not decent (says the History)
for the order of Priesthood; Miletius was put into his room, afterward at the
Council held at Gangra, which was summoned for the hearing of his matters,
Eustathius was condemned And his Principles and Opinions.
for forbidding Marriages, for setting forth Precepts of abstinencie, for
parting asunder diverse that were coupled together in Wedlock; for persuading
such as refrained the Churches and public Assemblies, to raise Conventicles
and Brotherhood in the private Houses; for taking Servants from their Masters
under color of Religion; for using the Philosophers habit, and causing his
followers to use strange attire; for causing Women to be shaven, forbidding
accustomed and prescribed fasting days, and commanding abstinences on the
Sundays; for abhorred prayers in married men's houses; and detesting the
Offering and Communion of the married Priests, who when he was a Layman had
lawfully coupled himself in the bond of Wedlock: he attempted many things after
his former deposition against the Canons and Constitutions of the Church, so he
was deposed as aforesaid, and For which he is deposed, and his Doctrine cursed.
his Doctrine accursed.

Eudoxius also supposing Constantinople to be superior to the Sea Eudoxius made
Bishop of Constantinople by Acacius, etc.
at Antioch, was proclaimed Bishop there by Acacius and his Adherents, who made
and put Laws in execution contrary to their former Decrees (as says the
History) for they made Eudoxius Bishop of Constantinople from one Sea to
another, the second time (says the History) having deposed Dracontius, after
this they ratify And Dracontius removed. The form of Faith read at Ariminum,
confirmed. Sent about the World with a Mandamus imperial of perpetual Exile to
the Non-subscribers. Observations on these things.
the form of Faith that was read at Ariminum, together with additions and
glosses, as a very absolute thing, and send it abroad into the whole World,
commanding that whosoever refused to subscribe unto the same, should by virtue
of the Emperors Proclamation be condemned to perpetual banishment.

And to see the ridiculousness of folly, when wise men advancing themselves
into the Throne of God, are turned, their wisdom backwards, and their
understanding into foolishness; Eudoxius having done these things, and
signified to the Eastern Bishops this his intent, who were of the same mind
with him, having placed his Seat in the great Church, called by the name of
Wisdom, gave forth this as his first Sentence, which at this day (says the
History) is rife in every man's mouth, and become a famous jest, The Eudoxius
his foolish Jest of the Father, and the Son, in the Church of Wisdom. Raises a
tumult. His explanation thereupon.
Son Religious, the Father Irreligious, meaning God the Father, and the Son: By
occasion of which words a tumult arising, Let this saying (says he) nothing
grieve you at all, for the Father is Irreligious because he worshippeth none;
The Son is Religious because he worshippeth the Father. This quieted the
contentious multitude, and instead of the hurly-burly, the whole Church (says
the History) was set on laughter: and thus these Faith-makers who turned the
Sets them into laughter. The Faith-makers, and the fruits of their brains.
World upside down, in reference to conformity to their Faith, exercise their
brains in such trifling quirks, and about such fond and frivolous words, having
broke asunder the Bond of Unity and Concord, contained in the Church of God.
This Council The end of the Council at Constantinople.
at Constantinople had such an end as has been declared.

Now Meletius after the deposition of Eustathius, was first chosen Cap. 34.
Meletius and his succession of Bishoprics, he comes to Beraea.
Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, from thence he was taken and translated to
Beraea a City in Syria; after he had been at Seleucia, and subscribed unto the
form of Faith which the factious of Acacius had framed and exhibited to the
Council, he immediately turned to Beraea. The Antiochians hearing how Eudoxius
had made light of them, and for great lucre (says the History) had crept into
the Bishopric of Constantinople, send for Miletius, Is sent for thence, and
made Bishop of Antioch.
and made him Bishop of Antioch, he at first meddling little with Faiths and
such things, delivered unto his Auditors such things as good manners, good
life, and godly conversation; but afterward Preaches the Faith of one
Substance; is exiled. Euxojus put in his room.
expounded to them the Faith and clause of one Substance, which the Emperor
hearing of, commanded him to Exile, and put Euxojus, that was deposed with
Arius, into his place, whereupon the affectionated to Meletius began to meet
privately, and Meletius's Auditors meet in Conventicles.
had their particular Conventicles; yet those who always had been for the
Faith of one Substance, refused their Communion, because Are refused Communion
by those of the Faith of one Substance, because Meletius was made Bishop by the
Arrians.
Meletius had been made Priest by the Arians; and for that his followers had
been baptized of them, though these men being Arians followed Miletius; so the
Church of Antioch leaned to that side which agreed with it self.

Well, the Lord who usually attends these bold presumptions Judgments as the
consequence of these presumptions.
of mortal men about his Faith and Worship, with exemplary Judgments, left not
himself without a Witness in this time, as he had done before, of which I have
given some little instance. The The Persians break League, and proclaim War
with the Romans.
Persians being in amity with the Romans, proclaimed War with them, which
caused the Emperor to have to Antioch.

Thus much of Miletius. Now as to Macedonius, with whom I Macedonius, and the
account of him, and his end.
have had some what to do in this large Tract, and to declare his wickedness
and cruelty, that I may make an end of the History of him, and draw what
concerns him to some conclusion, give me leave a little farther to signify as
follows.

Being banished from Constantinople, he took it very impatiently, Cap 35. His
shifts and turnings,
and could by no means quiet himself, but shifting for himself, made use of his
wits, and turned himself to the contrary side, to such as had deposed Acacius
at Seleucia, and with his Accomplices he dealt with Sophronius and Eleusius by
Messengers, that they should firmly addict themselves to the form of Faith set
forth at Antioch, afterward confirmed at Seleucia, and requested them earnestly
to call it the Faith of one Substance, whereupon many of his familiars
frequented unto him, together with those who after his Name are called
Macedonians; Others also resorted unto him that were foes to the Faction of
Acacius, who at first maintained both publicly and privately the Faith of one
Substance, but afterward trod it underfoot, as it has been the course of many
from the beginning, under policy to cover themselves to serve other ends; he
affirmed, that the Son of God was like unto the Father, as His blasphemy of the
Holy Ghost.
well in Substance, as in all other things; yet he avouched that the Holy Ghost
had not these Titles and Honors, but termed him their Servant or Drudge. --
He is said not to be the first founder of this blasphemous Opinion, but
Marathonius who long before his Marathonius the first founder thereof.
time had been Bishop of Nicomedia, whereupon such as maintained that Opinion
are called Marathonians, unto these Eustathius So the followers are called
Marathonians. Eustathius joins to them. He would neither call the Holy Ghost
God, nor a Creature. This Sect were called deadly Foes to the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost. Acacius, etc. gets another Council at Antioch to undo what they had
assented unto, of the Sons being like to the Father in all things.
aforesaid, linked himself, when Macedonius affirmed that the Holy Ghost was
equal, and partaker of the Godhead, which is in the Blessed Trinity. --
Eustathins made answer, I for my own part (says he) do not mind to call the
Holy Ghost God, neither dare I presume to call him a Creature. -- Wherefore
such as embrace the Faith of one Substance, do call them (...), by
interpretation, Deadly Foes to the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

Again Acacius his Faction endeavored with all might to call a Council at
Antioch, for it repented them that they affirmed the Son in all things to be
like unto the Father; -- Therefore the year following they there Assembled,
Euxojus then governing the Church there, and there the Emperor then made his
abode. See how (as Tertullian before asserted) unless man please, God shall not
be God; which he used to the Heathen, or took up as to them, but now is
verified among the Christians, many of them present at this Council, calling in
question such things as they had decreed in times past; they affirm, That the
clause of likeness, by the Council And abandon the clause of likeness, as not
once to be named again.
of Ariminum, and that held at Constantinople, is quite to be abandoned, and
not once to be named again. See what changes and Observations hereupon.
alterations are here, and (as I have intimated) men like the wind turn every
where, when they have lost that which gives weight to the Winds, by their going
about to determine of him; the clause of one Substance before must go out,
after all the First, The clause of one Substance.
wanderings to and fro, and terrible destractions made by reason thereof: Now
that of likeness must be abandoned also; but when Now that of Likeness must be
abandoned.
do they put it, but then when there is not the thing it self of which the
Likeness and Substance is abandoned, near unto which Aetius drew, as aforesaid?
Whither will not man run when he is turned from God, from the Subjectum quo,
that which gives the first Principle of seeing and knowing, of which the
Philosophers in their Ethnicks speak, where men must make a stop and begin, if
they will have the rovings of their minds stayed and stopped (as I have elsewhere
showed.) But this Generation cloak their business See the visitation to the
Universities, etc: Horrible blasphemy.
no longer, but pronounce with open mouth, That the Son was altogether unequal
and unlike the Father, not only in Substance, but also in Will: And before it
was answered, He was like him in Will, when it was demanded, Wherein he was
like him in all things, if he be not in Substance? So from Substance they come
to Will, and from Will they come to Nothing, as by and by will appear; for as
Arius dreamed, He had his being of Nothing, (and Arius his blasphemy.
so God cannot be said to have, for he has his being of himself from
Generation to Generation of old, even from Everlasting). So such as appertained
to Aetius, entangled themselves also in the Aetius followers fall in with the
Decrees of this Council.
snares of this Opinion; Therefore besides that the Arians were called (...),
which signifies that they affirmed the Son to be unlike the Father; there were
of the Antiochians, who defended the Faith of one Substance, and then were
divided in the aforesaid cause of Miletius, called (...), signifying that they
had affirmed the Son of God to have had his being of nothing. When they were
demanded, Wherefore they constantly affirmed in their Creed, that the Son was
God, of God, and now durst presume to say, that he was unlike the Father, and
had his being of nothing? They used this falacy, -- Whereas we affirmed the Son
to be of God, we meant it in The Falacy of the Miletians in point of the Sons
likeness to the Father.
that sense that the Apostle wrote, where he said, That all things were of God,
therefore the Son is of God, inasmuch as he is included in the word All; -- And
for this cause we laid down in our Creed the clause according to the
Scriptures. -- And so they shuffle, and cut, and Conclusions therefrom.
equivocate with matters of Faith, and the things of the highest import as to
God; and yet upon this falacious, or on such falacious Foundations as these,
which are abominable amongst men, would they have men's Faith as to God bottomed
and pitched, and destroy all them who will not take it to be so, and build upon
it.

Georgius of Laodicea was the Author of this equivocal answer; Cap. 36.
Georgius of Laodicea, the Author of the falacy aforesaid. The Sect of the
Appolinarians, and their blasphemy.
and yet this was not all, for another sort crept up, who are called
Appolinarians, from Appolinarius the Father and the Son; the one whereof was a
Priest, and the other a Reader; the one teaching Grammar, the other Rhetoric;
They held, That God, the Word, took manhood according to the order of
Incarnation without Soul. Again, recanting the same, they affirmed, That he
took Soul, yet not the Mind or Reason, (which is accounted the highest part of
the Soul.) But that God the Word was shut up, included and comprised in man in
place of the mind. -- So whirling round, not knowing where they are, nor
whereof they affirm.

I have set down these things, as I find them in the History, that The reason
of these Quotations.
so the Reader may take notice into what confusions, contradictions,
ridiculousnesses, and vanities, men run, when they would determine of Faith,
and God, not knowing the Principle of God, and enjoin the same; the
Appolinarians, so called, hold in other things the Creed containing the clause
of one Substance.

Well, these cruel Divisions and Persecutions, because of Faith The Judgments
as the Consequences.
and Doctrines in relation unto God, had (as I was but even now observing, and
do mind to carry it along, in the progress of this Discourse, as that which is
necessary, and to my purpose, and a thing worthy of, or fit to be duly
considered) their rebukes from Not only the Persians, but the French put (Cap.
37.) the Romans to it.
the Lord, for not only did the Persians proclaim War against the Romans, but
Julianus Caesar had much ado with the Barbarous Nations in France, of whom when
he got the upper hand, his Soldiers proclaimed him Emperor: Constantius
hearing of this, Constantius hearing that Julianus was p^oclaimed Emperor by
the Soldiers in France, is troubled, marches against him from Antioch.
was wonderfully troubled and disquieted in his mind, so that the grief thereof
brought him into a dangerous Disease, whorefore being first baptized of
Eudoxius, he made expedition from Antioch to give him Battle, and coming as far
as Mopsus Wells between Cappadocia and Silicia, by reason of the great thought
and sorrow conceived in his mind of his unlucky Affairs, (as the History terms
it) he fell into an Appoplexie, and thereof presently Dies in the way of an
Appoplexie.
died in the forty and fifth year of his life, having reigned thirty and eight
years (that is to say) thirteen together with his Father, and twenty five after
the death of his Father.

Constantius being dead, Julianus succeeds him, who being Socrat. lib. 3. cap.
1. Julian the Apostate, how he was bred up, both a Philosopher, a Christian,
and a Pagan.
brought up in the Christian Religion, by the disposition or appointment of
Constantius, yet he had a secret inclination unto the other, to wit, the Pagan,
and therefore by stealth he got the works of Libanius the Syrian Sophist; and
Maximus (whom Constantius had put to death for a Conjurer) taught him
Philosophy, so that he His Scholership
was both a Rhetoritian, a Philosopher, and a man passing eloquent; and though
he was brought up in the precepts of Christianity from a Child, yet he secretly
retained the other, which afterward manifested it self, as the progress of what
I have farther to rehearse will give to understand: he was crafty and subtle,
and therefore and Qualities.
though all along as he passed the Country toward Constantius, after he (to
wit) the said Julian was by the Soldiers proclaimed Emperor; he set open the
Temples and Idol Groves of the Heathen He set open the Idols Temples, and
sacrificed. Calls himself a High Priest. Dissembled with the Christians.
Godds; sacrificed to Pictures, and entitled himself a high Priest; so with
open face manifesting himself what he was, and otherwise than what he had
dissembled to the Christians; yet, when he heard Constantius was dead, he got
him to Constantinople, and there applied himself to the humor of the people;
and because Applies himself to the humor of the People
he found that the Christians that held the Clause of one Substance, hated
Constantius for banishing their Bishops, and confiscating Returns the banished
by Constantius
their Estates; and that the Heathen or Ethnicks had great spite unto
Constantius for shutting up their Temples, and keeping them from sacrificing;
He applied himself to both (as he did to many other things) according to what
he thought would please them; The Bishops (for I confine my self still, for the
most part to matter of Religion, and National Worships, and their Consequences,
as I have often declared) he commanded from Exile, From Exile, and their
Substance to be restored, he orders. And opens the Groves and Temples of the
Heathens to please both, both being in spite to Constantius. But at length
himself falls to flat Paganism.
and their Substance to be restored; And opened the Temples and Groves of the
Idols. So by seeming to hold a kind of neutrality, or indifferency, or liberty
in Religion, he sought to gain all sorts unto him, thereby to settle himself in
the Roman Empire; but the inclination of his mind, through all, appeared to
Idolatry, to the Worship of the Heathen Godds, as the sequel manifests.

By reason hereof, many Bishops returned from their banishment, Athanasius and
other Bishops return from banishment. Georgius and his end.
and Athanasius (of whom I have spoken often in particular) to Alexandria, of
whom farther to speak will not be requisite, until I first declare the end of
Georgius, aforesaid, (of whom I have had occasion oft-times to speak, and shall
now of his end) Bishop in that place, and also thereby give an Introduction
into the Tragical Scene of the Consequences of the dissimulative Reign of this
Emperor Julian, called the Apostate.

There was a void space of ground in the City of Alexandria, Cap. 2. Georgius
attempting to cleanse a void place of ground, formerly used in Sacrifice to the
Heathen Godd Mithra, which being in Alexandria, Constantius gave to the Church
there, and intending there to build a called Church. Finding dead men's bones
there, And the people carrying the bald Skulls about in derision of the Heathen.
full of filth and uncleanness, where the Heathen used to offer up men for
Sacrifice, to their Godd called Mithra, which serving for no use, no purpose,
Constantius gave to the Church of Alexandria: This Georgius would needs cleanse
in this doubtful season, and build there a place called a Church; in the
cleansing of which, finding a Channel or Vault of great height, wherein the
Heathen had laid up the Relics of their Mysteries, multitudes of dead men's
bones were there found both of young and old, which (the History says) were
slain, when they used divination and devilish Southsaying, by Bowels, and
Intrals: the bald Skulls of these the Christians carried about for the people
to gaze upon, that thereby their fond Ceremonies might be manifested and
derided of all men; which stomached the Heathen in that place, so that The
Heathen rise and slay the Christians on every hand, with diverse manners of
deaths.
they took that which first came to hand, and setting on the Christians, slew
of them every kind of way; some were run through with Swords, some brained with
Clubs, some stoned to death, some strangled with Halters, some nailed to the
Trees, casting in their Teeth the death of the Cross; one Friend fell upon
another, one Brother sought the others life, the Parents put their Children to
death; and to be short, one cut the others Throat; and Georgius And Georgius
being haled out of the place called the Church, is tied to a Camel, torn to
pieces, and burnt to Ashes.
himself was pulled out of the place, called the Church, by the Heathen, and
being tied to a Camel, was first torn to pieces, and then his Body was burnt to
Ashes with the Beast, so that the Christians were constrained to give over
cleansing of that place; so mad were the Heathen, through the influence of
Julian, upon their Idols, as the Scriptures speak.

This blood, and murder, and especially of Georgius, Julian Cap. 3. Julian is
troubled hereat.
takes very hard, the rather, because it was popular, and done without order,
and he thought it might give at a sudden a start to his settlement in the
Empire; therefore he writes a cruel angry Letter (as I may so term it) to
those of Alexandria, which being very long, I may not take up time here to
repeat, though for the sedulous flattery therein, and crafty dealings, it
deserves even here a Record, the sum whereof was, Blaming their precipitancy
Not so much that the thing was done, but that being without order. It carried
the outcry of murder; And as fearing the consequence.
in such ways of Murder and Blood in the overthrow of Government, which in
the way of Government might have been (as to Georgius in particular) lawfully
effected, and that so the execution might not have had the outcry of Murder,
but the report of Justice; and he feared also the consequences of these things,
lest it should give the Christians to understand what was at the door, and so
put them to it to give a shake to his Empire; but the others he treated as bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

Georgius being thus dispatched, and receiving from the hand Cap. 4: Georgius
justly punished as from the Lord. Athanasius returns,
of the Lord a due reward for his bloodshed and persecuting-wickedness;
Athanasius returned from Exile to Alexandria, who consulting with Eusebius of
Urcella a City of the Ligurian Itallians, and Lucifer Bishop of Caralitanum a
City of Sardinia, (who had been banished into the upper Countries of Thebe) how
they And consulting with other Bishops, fall to the old trade of (Cap. 5.)
determining of Faiths pa^ticularly that of the divinity of the Holy Ghost, the
reasonable Soul of the Son.
might return to their Bishoprics without breach of the Canons of the Church;
they presently fall to the old trade of determining of Faiths: And Eusebius
joining with Athanasius, the Council which they summoned, confirmed the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost to be of one Substance in the blessed Trinity;
Affirmed the Son of God at his Incarnation not only to have taken humane flesh,
but also a reasonable Soul. So God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost are made and
unmade, as Councils, Fathers, and times pleased, damning, accursing, and
condemning the Faiths of one another as to these things, as they could get the
start of one another in Power and Authority: and a great do they had about the
clauses of Essence and Substance, too long to relate, and at length resolved
And determine the leaving out the clause or term of Essence.
that the clause or term of Essence, in handling of the Divinity of God, should
be left out, or not be mentioned, but that of Substance should, because the
Apostle has the word, the other not being in Scripture.

And yet the word Substance, was seldom found amongst the The Historians
account of the words, Substance and Essence, and their usage and signification.
Ancient Writers, but accounted as barbarous, and as not having relation to one
proper thing, but unto diverse; and so being used, where it was found to be used
by them, being taken for Wiles, or Conspiracies, and Sauce, and Lees, or dreggs
of Wine. Essence also has diverse significations, which therefore cannot be
applied to that which is Incomprehensible, or is used, or can be properly to a
thing of an incomprehensible nature; and therefore Evagrius Evagrius forbids
the definition of the Godhead, and his Argument.
in his Book entitled the Monk, exhorts to refrain from rash and unadvised
reasonings of the Godhead, and forbids the definition of the Divinity of
God, because it is a simple thing: For definitions are always (says he) of
concreat and compound things, not of the abstract, or the simple; And this
Argument lies here, Every Proposition (as the Logicians do write) has either
Genus, of whom it may be verified, or Species, or Differentia, or Proprium, or
Accidens, or that which depends on these; but in the handling of the blessed
Trinity none of all these is to be required, because it cannot be laid down nor
expressed by word, therefore it is not to be defined, but reverently to be run
over with silence. -- But this word they got in opposition to Sabellius, lest
for want of proper words Sabellius.
it should be thought, that there were three Gods, so as they were from that
which gave the knowledge of God, so they made God as they pleased, and formed
words to represent what pleased them of God.

Athanasius being returned to Alexandria, as aforesaid, and Cap. 6. Athanasius,
Apologizes for his flying.
having reflections upon him for his escape when he was beset with the
Soldiers in the Church of Alexandria, as aforesaid, writes an Apology
therefore; he read his Apology to those present in the Council, which being
long, I shall here pretermit: But the Council being broken up, Eusebius got him
to Antioch, Eusebius comes to Antioch. The Heathen the Original of the word
Conventicle, which they gave to the Christians who separated from them, and the
Christians to each other, as from each other they separated, and had the starr
of power of each other.
where he found the people divided into two parts, some for Meletius aforesaid,
who had several Conventicles by themselves; the word Conventicle had first its
rise from the Heathen, who so termed the meetings of the Christians in the
days of the forementioned Persecutions by the Heathens; and now where any that
were accounted dissenters from the enjoined Faiths or Creeds, they met not at
the public Places, or Churches so called, for such enjoined Faiths or Creeds,
but apart, which also amongst the Christians received the same denomination, as
it had from the Heathen. So here is the original of the word Conventicle, and
the use that is made of it in the same nature and term now by the National The
same is it which is applied to the seperators from National Worships. The
Antiochians divided, some for Meletius, some for Paulinus
Worshippers, as it was of old by the Heathen to the Christians, and the
Christians one to another. And those for Paulinus, whom Lucifer had made
Bishop, met apart from them; which troubling Eusebius, and yet concealing his
Sentence or Judgment, because of the respect he bore to Lucifer, having
promised to summon a Council to provide for their quiet State, he departed.
Meletius returning from Exile, and finding his Followers in the same without
the Walls, became their superintendant. Paulinus (it is said) had but one little
Parish within the City, of which Euxojus the Arrian, who had all the rest, did
not deprive him, because of the respect he owed unto him: Thus was Antioch
divided. In the particulars of that one City, I give to understand As Antioch,
so were the rest divided in other places of the Empire. Lucifer and Eusebius
disagree, and the former refuses to communicate with the later. Occasion stir
in that troublesome time, and many to fall away. And the Sect called the
Luciferian Heresy to arise.
how it was in other places in the Empire.

Lucifer took Eusebius dislike of his Election of Paulinus very ignominously,
and was altogether impatient, and refused to communicate with Eusebius, and
rejected the Canons of the Council; which things falling out (says the
History) in those heavy and tempestuous seasons for Ecclesiastical Affairs,
ministered occasion that many fell from the Faith; so that a new Sect, called
the Luciferian Heresy, had then first its rise; But Lucifer being not able to
have his fill, or to satisfy himself with anger, because by his Deacon he had
sent before to Alexandria, That he would give his assent, who thereupon
subscribed in his Name, he got him unto his own Bishopric in Sardinia, but his
followers remained out of the Church there.

Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers, a City of Guien in France, returning Cap. 8.
Hila^ius Bishop of Poictiers in France, returning from Exile, seeks to set up
the Faith of one Substance. Eusebius the like in the East. Macedonius's
followers did the like. As to their Opinions, accu^sing the contrary Faction of
Acacius. Rejected the Faith set forth at Ariminum. Confirmed the Creed of the
Council at Seleucia.
from Exile, endeavoring to instruct the Bishops of Italy, wrote in the Latin
Tongue, expounding the Faith of one Substance, so endeavoring to set that up,
as Eusebius did through the Eastern Countries, from whence he came unto
Illirium, and so into Italy; the followers of Macedonius, Eleusius, Eustathius,
and Sophronius, (all called Macedonians) had their private and often
Conventicles, calling unto them such as were of their own Opinion in Seleucia,
and accursed the contrary Faction (to wit) of the Acacians; rejected the Faith
that was set forth at Ariminum, and confirmed the Creed that was read in the
Council at Seleucia: It was the same which a little before was established at
Antioch, of which I have spoken. These men being reasoned withal in this sort,
(viz.) You that are called Macedonians, if so be that you differ from the
Acacians, how is it that you could find in your hearts to communicate with them
unto this day, as if they had been of one Opinion with you? Sophronius, as in
the name of the rest, Fall into an indifferency between the Faiths of two
Councils, that of Nice, and of Aetius. The difference between both, and the
absurdities.
made thereunto this Answer, The Bishops of the West Churches have in a manner
doted over the Faith of one Substance; Aetius also in the East endeavored to
corrupt the sentere Doctrine, teaching the dissimilitude of Substance in the
Father and the Son: Both these Opinions are absurd, they unadvisedly, and
without discreet judgment joined in one, the distinct and severed Substances of
the Father and the Son, linking it not well together under the name of
Coessential, or one Substance; but Aetius parted and divided the property of
Nature which the Son has together with the Father, terming it the unlikeness,
or diversity of Substance; and inasmuch as both these fall into contraries and
mere extremities, we thought good to walk in the mid way, and hold the mean
between both, to retain the true and godly Opinion, That the Son is of like
Substance with the Father. -- This was the answer Sabellius Collect of
Councils, impugning both Arius, and the Nicene Creed, and Aetius, and
of Sophronius (as Sabinus writes in his collection of Councils) in the Name of
the Macedonians, so called, who by this appeared to impugn both Arius, and
partly those who held the clause of one Substance, charging Aetius as the
Author of the diversity of Substance in the Father and the Son, and not the
Acacians, whilst they Whilst they seem to go between both, make a new one of
their own.
craftily dissemble and cloak the Truth (says the Historian) and impugn them
both, as aforesaid; But with their own words they overthrow themselves (says
he); for, indisplaying and opening both Opinions, they lay down a new one of
their own.

These things I assert and lay down, that it may appear how all The intent of
producing these instances.
Sects of the Christians, having an intermission of their particular
sufferings, yet retained and held their singular Opinions, for which they
suffer, and as they could, sought to enforce them, as what follows manifests,
and shows more particularly what were their Opinions: But a scourge for these
things the Lord soon raised up, as he had in times past; for whilst the
Christians were Whilst they differ among themselves. Cap. 9. Who return from
Banishment. Julian turns a scourge for all. He hears the Christians in spite
to Constantius, but is in grudge to them himself.
thus going together by the ears one with another, as soon as they returned
from Captivity or Exile, Julian who in the beginning of his Reign showed
himself meek and courteous to all men, in process of time appeared not alike
unto all men, particularly to the Christians, whom he would hear at will many
things that tended to the discredit of Constantius; but otherwhile he showed
his grudge and malice to them every where: He commanded Eleusius Bishop of
Cizicum in Bythinia, in two months time to build up the Novation Church (which
he had pulled down) at his own Eleusius commanded to build the Novation Church
(which he had pulled down) in two months, at his own charge. Cap. 10. Julian
Sacrifices at Constantinople. Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, and Julian, and what
passed between them.
cost; he set up afresh the Rites of the Gentiles, he set wide open their
Temples, and offered Sacrifice (says the Historian) in the Cathedral Church at
Constantinople, to the Goddess Fortune, where her Idol was set up. About this
time Maris of Chalcedon being led by the hand to Julian, for he was old, and
had a Web grown over his eyes, which bereaved him of his sight; he began to
rebuke him sharply, calling him an Impious Person, an Apostate, and an Atheist:
The Emperor returned him with the like, and opprobiously said, He was a blind
Fool: And further, Thy God of Galilee will not restore thee thy sight again,
(for Julian called Christ a Galilean, and all Christians the same). I thank God
(replied Maris to the Emperor) which made me blind, lest that ever I should set
mine eyes upon so ungracious a face as thine is. -- To which the Emperor made
no answer, but handled him roughly. And when Julians craft in avoiding, putting
the Christians to death, because he saw they could suffer, and were reverenced
therefore. And his device that they should not be brought up to learning,
he perceived that such as suffered Martyrdom were highly reverenced and
honored by the Christians, under the Reign of Dioclesian; and when he
understood for certain that diverse of them now would willingly suffer
Martyrdom, he went another way to work, and devised how to disappoint them of
that, and yet to accomplish his end on the Christians, which was, he made a Law
That the Christians should not be brought up in profane (as it is called)
Literature; For (says he) seeing they have the gift of utterance so readily,
they will easily be able to overthrow the quirks of Logicks wherewith the
Gentiles do uphold their Doctrine. And (says the History) although he let pass
the unsatiable Tyranny practiced Lest they should outdo the Heathen. Socrates
Opinion of what makes a Persecutor.
in the time of Dioclesian, yet ceased he not altogether from Persecution. In
my Opinion (says he) he is a persecutor that molesteth any kind of way such
men as lead a quiet and peaceable life.

Farthermore he gave out a Proclamation, That such as would Cap. 11. Julian
proclaims a cashie^ing all the Christians out of the Camp that will not
Sacrifice. None to bear Office in the Commonwealth that were Christians. And
his Reason.
not renounce the Christian Faith, should Warfare no longer in the Emperors
Palace: -- That all should prepare to do Sacrifice; That no Christian should
bear Office in the Commonwealth, for their Law (says he) forbids the use
of the Sword unto such as deserve death, and therefore they were not fit to be
Magistrates. He allured whom he could to offer Sacrifice; but those who were
Christians indeed (says the History) and those also who were thought to be no
less, Hereupon Jovianus, Valentinianus, Valence, all three afterwa^ds Emperors,
throw down their Sword-Girdles, to suffer as Christians.
made themselves manifest, as upon a public Theater, Jovianus, Valentinianus,
and Valence, (who were successively all three of them afterward crowned
Emperors) with many more, threw down their Sword-Girdles, and said, They would
rather suffer any kind of torment, then deny their Savior Christ Jesus. Others
Others Sacrifice.
(says he) counterfeit Christians, who thought that the Riches and Honor of
this World was true felicity it self, without any delay fell to Sacrifice:
Ecebolius the Sophist of Constantinople was Ecebolius the Sophist turns Cat in
the Pan again. Falls to Idolatry, after Julianus death turns again. His Speech
in the Church Po^ch, when he laid himself all along for the passers in to tread
upon him*
one of them, who in the days of Constantine, was an earnest follower of the
Christian Faith; but when Julian succeeded him, he fell to Gentility, and the
Idolatry of the Pagans: after the death of Julian he became a Professor of the
Doctrine of Christ again, and lying along at the Porch of the Church (says the
History) cried to such as came in, Tread me underfoot, for that I am the
unsavory Salt.

As a scourge for Julian, who undertook these enterprises for Julians
Judgments. The Persians invade him.
the Heathen Godds, and against the Christians; the Persians invaded some of
the Romans Jurisdiction, of whom to be revenged he took his Journey into the
East through the Coasts of Asia: and Raises money on the Christians for not
Sacrificing, to mainta^n his Wars. Which was rigorously exact^d.
considering that many evils and inconvenies attended War, and great sums of
money were requisite, he set a great fine on the heads of those that would not
Sacrifice; So that the Christians every one rateably were assessed in a certain
sum which was very grievous, and duly demanded; which Law he made of force, not
only where he traveled, but also in such Countries where he came not The
Heathen hereupon insult over the Christians.
near, so that he wonderfully enriched himself with injurious heaps of money
unjustly exacted. Then did the Gentiles insult over the Christians, the
Philosophers celebrated their frequented Conferences; they solemnized certain
detestable Rites and Ceremonies; they made slaughter of Infants, sparing no
Sex; They used Perform their Rites. Slay Infants.
their Intrals for Southsaying; they tasted of their tender flesh: These
detestable practices were both at Athens and Alexandria, and elsewhere. And
because Athanasius was returned to Alexandria, Cap. 12. Athanasius returned, is
falsely accused.
diverse false accusations were raised against him, that he had subverted Egypt,
and the whole City of Alexandria, so that of necessity (they said unto the
Emperor) that it behoved him to banish Athanasius out of Alexandria, so that by
the command of the Emperor, the Governor was sorely incensed against him;
concerning The Emperor incenst.
which Athanasius is said to utter these words to some of Athanasius prophesies
of the shortness of the storm. Gets away, is pursued, but lies hid.
his Familiars, -- My Friends, let us go aside for a season, this is but a
little Cloud which will quickly vanish away. -- He immediately took shipping
and went into Egypt, his Adversaries pursued him, his Followers persuaded him
to fly into the Desert; so he escaped them, and got privily again into
Alexandria, where he hid himself till the kindled flame of Persecution was
quenched. Furthermore The Governors enrich themselves by the Taxes on the
Christians.
the Governors of Provinces thinking it now high time to fill their Bags, under
color of Religion, vexed the Christians far sorer than the Emperors
Proclamation bore them out in, demanding greater Taxes then they were rated at,
and sometimes tormented their Bodies; which the Emperor winked at, and answered
The Emperor winks at it, and flouts the Christians with their required patience.
the Christians when they complained, It is your part, when you have injuries
offered you, to take it patiently, for so your God commanded you. --

At Maris in Phrygia, Amachius the Governor commanded the Cap. 13. A notable
attempt of three Christians in Maris in Phrygia, on the Idols Temple.
Idols Temple to be set wide open, and to be cleansed, and set himself to the
worshipping of the Idols, which pricked not a little in Conscience (says the
History) the zealous Christians; wherefore Macedonius, Theodulus, and Tatianus,
brake in the night season into the Temple, threw down their Idols, and stamped
them into ponder; at which when the Governor was exceeding wroth, and threatened
to execute diverse of the Citizens; the men aforesaid presented themselves, who
were the Authors thereof, that the They present themselves to death, lest the
guiltless should die.
guiltless of that Act might not suffer, and chose to die themselves for the
Truth: The Governor commanded them to clear themselves by Sacrifice,
threatening severely to punish them if they did it not: They set naught by his
threats, and made themselves ready Endure all kind of torments, the Gridiron,
and are broyled to death.
to suffer; The Governor when he had assayed them with all kind of torments,
last of all set them on the Gridiron, and caused fire to be made under, and
broiled them to death; and to the end that they might gloriously encounter
(says the History) under the glorious Garland of Victory, they reasoned thus
with the Governor, If thou long, O Amachius, after broyled meat, turn up the
Their noble Speech on the Gridiron.
other side of us, lest in the eating we seem raw unto thee, and the blood run
about thy teeth. --

Onward in his Journey toward the Persians the Emperor proceeded, Cap. 15.
Julian in his expedition against the Persians, is derided at Antioch with his
long thrum Beard.
when he had from the Christians heaped up a great sum of money, and came to
Antioch, where the people derided him with his long thrum beard, and bad him
make halters thereof, when he had, for the advantage of his Soldiers, put down
the rates of the Market; so playing upon him: which he, to be revenged of them
for the flouting of his Beard, answered in an Oration, which He avenges it in
an Oration.
he called Antiochian, or Misopogon, wherein he defamed the City of Antioch for
ever.

He got him also to the Oracle of Apollo at Daphne, a little from Cap. 16.
Attends the Oracle of Apollo. The Devil would not speak. He interprets the
cause to the Body of Babilas, removes it.
Antioch; But the Devil, (says the History) whose dwelling was in that Den,
would give the Emperor no answer. The Emperor supposing the cause to be the
body of Babylas the Martyr, which lay there, caused his Tomb to be removed
thence with speed: The Christians of Antioch hearing of this, they assembled
together their Men, Women, and Children, they rejoice and are The Christians
rejoice with Songs. Julian is plagued, determines to do as had Dioclesian.
glad, and sing Psalms in reproof or derision of the Heathen god, and such as
worshipped Images; which plagued the Emperor, who thereby discovered his inward
mind, determined to torment the Christians as Dioclesian had before; but his
expedition against the His expedition hinders. Orders these Christians
punishment.
Persians hindered him: Nevertheless he gave order to Solustius, the Lieutenant
of that Province, to see that such as had so sung should be severely punished:
The Lieutenant, though a Pagan, liked not the Work, but seeing that he could
not otherwise help it, clapped many of them into Prison. But Theodorus, a young
Theodorus cruelly scourged.
man whom the Pagans had accused, he punished with diversities of Torments, and
rent his flesh all the body over with the lash of the Whip, and being thought
not possible to be able to live, he Let go as not possible to live, yet dies
not.
let him loose, yet he recovered, and with him a long time after the Governor
had conference, and would needs know, Whether The Governors moderation with the
Christians, and conference with him.
he had not felt great pain when the lash of the Whip rebounded from his Body;
it is said, that he answered him again, that the torments were not so great as
some men thought; that there stood The young man's answer.
by him a young man which wiped away all the Salt drops of that sweating
Combat, confirmed him in the Faith, and that the hour of torment was to him
rather a delectable pleasure, than a doleful pain. At The Persian Ambassadors
call Julian away
this very time Ambassadors came from the Persians to Julian, requiring him to
proclaim open Wars: So that he was constrained to give over his enterprise
against the Christians, to whom, that is to the Persian Ambassadors, he gave
this answer, -- You shall His answer to them.
see me shortly in my own Person, and therefore I shall not need to send any in
Embassy unto you for this matter.

Yet to vex the Christians, being a great delighter in offering Cap. 17. Julian
to vex the Christians, calls on the Jews to Sacrifice. Requires for that
purpose the rebuilding the Temple at Jerusalem. They build. Cyrillus prophesies
upon the prophesies of Daniel and Christ.
of Sacrifices, he called to the Jews, and asked them, Why they did it not?
They answered, They could not without a Temple. He bad them, In all have to
rebuild the Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem, and that the cost be defrayed out
of the public Treasury. After this he took his Journey toward the Persians;
The Jews set upon building. Cyrillus looking into the Prophecy of Daniel,
which Christ had foretold, also prophesied, That the time was now come, when
not one stone should be left upon another: But that the Prophecy of Christ
should now take place, when the Bishop had thus prophesied, (says the History)
the night following there It takes place the night after, not one stone left on
another, by an Earthquake.
was a great Earthquake, which shook the old Foundation of the Temple, and
turned all to the ground, together with the Houses that adjoined thereunto;
which afrighted the Jews, and many come out of other Countries upon the fame
thereof, to see what was done; afterward fire came down from Heaven, and
burned Fire also from Heaven consume the Tools.
all their Tools and Instruments; the fire is said not to cease burning for the
space of one whole day: this astonished the Jews, and (as the History has it)
confessed against their Wills, That The Jews made to confess to Christ. Yet
though there was a third Wonder, bowed not to him.
Christ was an Omnipotent God. When unto these a third Wonder was wrought, the
Jews yet bowed not unto him, They had banished, being blinded, (says the
History) the goodness of God (as the Apostle says) from amongst them.

Well, to conclude this particular, and to give the end of this The end of
Julian.
wretched man Julian, whom the Hand of the Lord crossed, and met with in all
his undertakings, as he was made to be a scourge to the Christians, when they
were not as they should be, by the same hand: A little before Winter he led his
Army into Persia, He enters Persia.
because they cannot endure cold so well as the Romans; he destroyed the
Villages, the Castles, the Country, and fell a ransancking Ransacks and
destroys.
of the Cities; he besieged Ctesiphon the great City of Persia; Distresses the
King. Refuses accommodation and pity.
and so straightened the King of Persia, that he sent Ambassadors, requesting him
to take some part of his Kingdom to end the War, or in compensation thereof.
Which Julian would not hear, neither pity the King; he tryumphed over the
Conquered, he put confidence Tryumphs over the conquered. Trusts to Southsaying
and Dreams.
in fond Conjectures of Southsaying; he trusted to Fantastical Dreams, which
Maximus the Philosopher then present put into his head; he hoped verily to
countervail, or rather surmount the great Glory and noble Prowess of Alexander
the Thinks himself greater then Alexander, and that he is Alexander.
Great, so that he set naught by the humble suit of the Persians: he dreamed
according to the Opinion of Pythagorus and Plato, that by the Transmigration of
the Soul, from one Body to another, the Soul of Alexander had crept into his
Carcass, or rather that he was Alexander himself in another Body; which lead
him into a foul Error, and made him to make slight of the King of Fights the
King of Persia, who being slighted, is constrained to fight.
Persia his Request, who seeing his Embassy was to no purpose, and that he was
drawn to a narrow strait, and sore plunge, the day after gathered his force
together, and fell upon the Roman Host face to face: Julian thinking himself
cocksure, (as they use to say) got him on Horseback to encourage his Soldiers,
but being not completely Armed, by reason of his confidence, an Arrow pierced
through his Armor, and sticked in his Ribbs, Is slain with an Arrow
and killed him; he first pulling it out all bloody, (as some write) threw it
in the Air, saying, Vicisti Galilee, Thou have overcome, His dying blasphemy.
O Galilean! which was his rancorous expression of his detestation of Christ.

So ended Julian, who as he began in spite, so in spite against Cap. 19:
Jovianus chosen in his place.
the Truth ended his days: Him Jovianus succeeds, who being a Tribune when
Julian proclaimed for all in his Army, Either to do Sacrifice, or to depart the
Army; threw down his Sword-Girdle rather than he would Sacrifice; yet Julian
put him not by his Command, he being a valiant man: him the Soldiers, being in
some strait, proclaimed Emperor, he refused the Crown, and He refuses.
being compelled thereto by loud Speeches, expressed himself, In that he was a
Christian, he would not be Emperor where Ethnicks should be his Subjects. But
when all cried out, and with one Voice confessed themselves Christians, he
yielded, and was Crowned Yet accepts.
Emperor.

No sooner was Jovianus returned out of Persia, but Sedition Cap. 20. The
Christians fall to Sedition among themselves. Each Sect seek to get the Emperor
to it.
began again (as usually was the consequence of any peace) amongst the
Christians: the Bishops also hoping each to find the Emperor according to their
Opinion, apply themselves unto him, but he stuck close to the Faith of one
Substance, unto which he had always adhered. He encouraged Athanasius to
return to Alexandria, He cleaves to the Nicene Creed, sends home Athanasius.
Calls the Bishops from Exile. Shuts up the Pagan Temples.
who upon his Letters took courage, and went; the Bishops whom Jultan had not
returned, who were banished by Constantius, he called from Exile; he shut up
the Pagans Temples, and ceased their worshipping of Devils, which Julian gave
way to, and of which they had their fill in his Reign.

Now went on the old work of tearing and rending one another Cap. 21. The
Christians tear and rend one another. The Macedonians supplicate that none but
themselves might be.
amongst the Christians. The Macedonians make a supplication unto the Emperor,
That such as avouch the unlikeness and dissimilitude between the Son and the
Father, should be banished the Church, and themselves substituted in their
rooms. The Emperor gave them no answer at all, but with these words sent them
away, The Emperors answer
I tell you truly, I cannot away with contention, but such as embrace unity and
concord, I do both honor and reverence them. Which cooled the fiery contention
of others, and answered to the Emperors wishes. The Acacians also signed a
supplication to the Emperor, The Acacians conforth to the Emperors Faith, who
turn every where.
acknowledging the Faith of one Substance, who had made such a hurly-burly as
before is mentioned, for they ever were observed to turn according to the minds
of the Emperors; to which the Emperor determining with himself to pacify with
gentle and courteous language all Quarrels and Contentions, made answer, That
he would not molest any, what Faith or Religion soever they professed; The
Emperors declaration of distu^b^ng none, but respecting them that we^e for
peace.
but above all others, that he would honor and reverence such as showed
themselves Peacemakers, and went about to maintain the bond of Unity and
Concord.

One thing is worthy to be noted in their supplication, they The Emperor being
clawed to the setting up one form of Faith.
claw the Emperor with the Faith of one Substance, as if he intending to
promote Unity and Concord, might mind, at least they would insinuate it into
him, That the form of that Faith which they therein call Catholic, would
produce much thereunto; and therefore they declare and subscribe thereunto,
insinuating an Example for an universal Subscription, and to set up that Faith,
because the Emperor being of it, they thought he might set it up, or to
insinuate into him, that so to do were best; but the He refuses, and turns all
Court ship aside.
Emperor wisely turns all their courtships and flattery aside, and answers them
like himself, as aforesaid. All men commended this Is commended by Themistius,
and applauded for giving liberty.
his equality of Spirit, yea the Philosophers themselves, and Themistius in
particular, who in his Oration to him, called Consul, says, -- That in
granting every man his free choice and liberty to profess this or that kind of
Religion, he stopped the mouths of all flattering Parasites and Sycophants,
which kind of men, (says he) as it is known unto the whole world, worship not
the King of Heaven, but the An account of Parasites.
earthly Crown and Scepter, much like unto Euripus, carried headlong, sometimes
this way, sometimes that way.

Thus when Jovianus had appeased the sedition of contentious Cap. 32. He comes
to Tarsus, Inters Julian.
persons, he came from Antioch to Tarsus, then he took his voyage toward
Constantinople, having honorably interred his Predecessor, he came to
Dadastana, lying in the midst between Galatia Ar^ives at Dadastana. There
Themistius, and many Senators meet him in the way to Constantinople. He dies.
and Bythinia; there Themistius the Philosopher aforesaid, meeting of him, with
other sundry Senators and noble Parsonages, he died in the Winter with a deadly
obstruction of his Lungs, having been Emperor seven months, and being three and
Anno. 368.
thirty years old.

Valentimanus succeeded Jovianus, whom the Soldiers proclaimed Valentinianus
succeeds (Socrat. l^b. 4. cap. 1.) him and Valens.
Emperor of Nicia in Bythinia; and he made Valens his Brother his fellow
Emperor, they both with Jovianus threw down their Sword-Girdles, when Julian
made his Proclamation, as aforesaid; who notwithstanding displaced them not;
the first being Tribune, and the other of the ordinary Guard about the Emperor.

Valentinian was of the Faith of one Substance, but molested not Valentinian of
the Nicene Faith.
the Arrians at all. Valens as he endeavored to increase the number of the
Arrians; so he grievously persecuted the others: So Valence an Arrian.
the Emperors varied one from another, and by reason thereof great variety of
occasions exercised, and tried the Christians. The Christians are exercised.


Valentinian, through some necessary occasions removed to the Cap. 2.
Valentinian removes to the West. Valens keeps in the East. The Macedonian Bish.
desire a Council.
West; Valens remained at Constantinople, where he was requested of the Bishops
that favored Macedonius, or were of what were called his Sect, to call a
Council, he thinking them to be one in Opinion with Acacius and Eudoxius, gave
them License; they cite the Bishops from every where to meet at Lampsacum; but
he It Is ordered at Lampsacum. Valens hastens to Syria to keep all quiet, where
he finds it so.
himself hastens to Antioch in Syria, fearing some stir among the Persians; but
when he came there, he found them quiet, and meaning no harm.

Valens living in quietness, fell grievously to persecute those of His
prosperity turns him to persecute. Displaces Bishops. Plagues some, throws
others into the River Orontes.
the Faith of one Substance; he displaced some Bishops, and those of Antioch
that would not communicate with Euxojus, he vexed diversely, and plagued with
sundry punishments, and threw many (as was reported) into the River Orontes,
which runs by the City, and there drowned them.

Whilst Valens was at this work in Syria, the Hand of the Lord Cap. 3. Judgment
meets him.
moved to give him trouble at Constantinople, who before he persecuted his
fellow Christians, knew no trouble; Procopius rebels Procopius rebels at
Constantinople.
against him at Constantinople, gathers a great Army, and marches to give
Battle to the Emperor, who had given Battle to the Lord. Valens was in a sore
taking at this, and by this his cruelty Valens is troubled, restrains
persecution a while. Dreadful Earthquakes, great inundations, and alterations
of Land to Sea,
rested a while from persecuting the Christians: yet this was not all, but
whilst the fire of this tumult waxed hot, there appeared on a sudden another
hand from Heaven in a great Earthquake, which scattered the buildings asunder
of, and destroyed many Cities; nor did the Sea keep within its bounds, but
brake over the Banks, and drowned many Countries: for it fell out in many
places, that where a little before men went on foot, all was on a float,
Barques and Ships were used: Again in other places, the Sea went so far from it
self, that it left much dry land, much sandy And Sea to Land.
ground, and many Fishes. These things happened (says the Historian) in the
first Consulship of both these Emperors.

These were the 2 things that commonly marched hand in hand Observations of
Judgment marching with Persecution.
together, during this History; Persecution and Division in the Church, as its
called, Commotions and Stirs in the State, which Cap. 4. The Historians
observation of the same.
the Historian observes in these words, -- In the time of the aforesaid
calamities, neither enjoyed the Commonwealth peace, nor were the
Ecclesiastical Affairs in prosperous state. The Council at Lampsacum The
Council at Lampsacum gets the start of Valens, confirm the Faith at Antioch of
old established. Curse that at Ariminum.
seven years after that of Seleucia, being met, through the aforesaid troubles:
those appertaining to Macedonius got the upper hand; confirmed the form of
Faith that of old was published at Antioch, which a little before they had
subscribed at Seleucia, and accursed the Creed of the Bishops, which by uniform
consent in Religion, they had lately established at Ariminum: Against Acacius
and Eudoxius they gave Depose Acacius and Eudoxius.
Sentence, as of right deserving to be removed. Eudoxius in no wise could
resist their doings, because of the commotion of Procopius, nor be revenged of
them; wherefore Eleucius of Cyzicum, having gotten the upper hand, maintained
for a while together with his Accomplices, the The Macedonians get the day; and a
while keep it. Anno. 370. Cap. 5. Valens and Procopius pitch Battle. Procopius
taken alive. Strangely executed.
Macedonian Opinion.

Well, Valens and Procopius met the year following at Nacolea a City in
Phrygia; and there pitched Battle; in the first skirmish Valens side was the
weaker; in the next he took Procopius alive, ordered his Thighs to be tied to
the tops of mighty Boughs, groving not far asunder, the which first of all with
certain Engines he wrested to the ground, and afterward loosened them, which
lifted Procopius on high, and pulled him in pieces; Angello and His Captains
sawn asunder that betrayed him.
Gomarius, his own Captains that betrayed him, he sawed asunder in the midst;
Procopius being thus torn into two parts, died miserably.

The Emperor (says the History) being puffed up with his Valens turns again to
Persecution.
prosperous success, turned himself again to molest and persecute the
Christians, (as is the wont of all Persecutors, because he determined with
himself to prefer every where the Arrian Opinion): The Council held at
Lampsacum, stuck in his stomach, not only because they deposed the Arrian
Bishops, but accursed the form of Faith lately established at Ariminum:
Therefore coming to Nicomedia, he called Eleusius Bishop of Cyzicum, who Calls
a Council at Nicomedia of Arian Bish.
was of the Macedonian Opinion before him; also a Council of Arrian Bishops,
and compelled Eleusius to subscribe to their Compel Eleusius to subscribe.
Faith, which at first he utterly denied; but being sore threatened by the
Emperor with Banishment, and confiscation of goods, he yielded: But his
Conscience was not satisfied, for he was in great agony and torment; so he
turned to Cyzicum, and in the face of He is troubled. Makes his public
lamentation.
the Congregation made a pitiful complaint, relating the injury the Emperor
had done unto him, and how he had condescended not by his will, but by
compulsion, and requested them to get another Bishop, but they would not, nor
acknowledge another Bishop over them, nor yield up the Government of the
Church, but took him for their Superior, and kept still to their former
Opinion.

In the place of Eleusius Bishop of Constantinople, he chose Eunomius Cap. 7.
Eunomius put in his place.
aforesaid, who being an eloquent man, he thought the people might be induced
the more to receive him, and the Emperor sent commandment, That he should be
put out, and Eunomius put in his room, whereupon the favorers of Eleusius
built Eleusius's people hold Conventicles.
them what is called a Church without the Walls of the City, and there had
their private Conventicles, (as says the History): This Eunomius was the
Scribe of Aetius (as I have formerly spoken) with whom living, it is said he
learnt his captious falacies, and quirks of Logic, which of Sophisters is
highly embraced: Moreover with vain Speeches and Epithetons he was delighted;
he is said to learn unadvisedly to frame Sophistical Arguments, in which he
took great pride, and ran headlong into blasphemy; he embraced Arius, and
impugned the Faith of one Substance, when Eunomius's Sophistry raises a tumult.
after his wonted manner he fed the Ears of his Auditors out of the Pulpit;
with Sophistical Arguments and Reasons of Logic he amazed them so, that a
great tumult was raised at Cyzicum, and the Citizens that could not away with
his arrogant and insolent Which banishes him Cyzicum. He gets to
Constantinople, plays the Bish. no longer. His blasphemous Opinions, and
Atheistical.
manner of preaching, banished him the City, from whence he got to
Constantinople to Eudoxius, and (says the History) played the Bishop no longer:
He said as follows,-God of his own Essence understood no more then we do,
neither is the same better known or understood of him than of us, and
whatsoever we know of it, the same knows he; and look what his capacity
reaches to, the same thou shall find in us. This was the Heresy, or rather
the Blasphemy of Eunomius, who was made a Bishop, as aforesaid, and became the
head of those who held the same Atheistical Opinion of God; of whom I have
treated the larger, because the Reader may understand what things were held,
and what was amongst them.

Those of the Faith of one Substance, together with the Novations, Cap. 8. The
Nicenians and Navations banished Constantinople. Doors shut up. Agelius exiled.
The Bishop always went barefoot, had but one Coat.
the Emperor banished out of Constantinople, and nailed up their Church doors,
(as they are called) and exiled Agelius the Novation Bishop, who had ruled
their Church from the days of Constantine: It is said of this Bishop, that he
went always barefoot, and had but one Coat; yet through the influence of
Martianus, who was sometimes a Soldier in the Emperors Palace, the Novation
places were opened again, yet were they not rid of the Arrians, nor delivered
from their Persecution.

I must still take notice, as I go along, how the displeasure of the Judgments
again attending Persecution.
Lord always accompanied these Persecutors, in some exemplary or signal hand
of Judgment, or that which is pertentious or significatory thereto. The year
following these unnatural persecutions, Hail of a wonderful bigness, like unto
stones, lighted at Constantinople; Cap. 10. Great Hail at Constantinople.
It is rife (says the History) in every man's mouth, That God sent that great
Hail in token of his displeasure against the Emperor for banishing many Priests
and Bishops who refused to communicate with Eudoxius the Arrian. In Bythinia,
the year Great Earthquakes in Bythinia.
following, there was a great Earthquake which overthrew the City of Nice; it
was the twelfth year after the ruin of Nicomedia. Immediately after many
pieces of Germa, a City of Hellespont, Also in Hellespont.
were turned upside down with another Earthquake, yet neither Valens the
Emperor, nor Eudoxius the Arrian Bishop were moved Neither Valens nor Eudoxius
consider, but turn them otherwise.
any thing at all, nor inclined to Pity, or Reformation, but observing no
mean, furiously raged against all such as held the contrary Faith and Opinion,
as usually is the disposition of Tyrannical Persecutors. These Earthquakes were
no otherwise to be taken The Historians observation of the Earthquakes.
(says the Historian) then for manifest tokens of Schism and Division in the
Church. Yet Basilius Bishop of Cesaria in Cappadocia, and Gregorius of a small
and mean City bordering upon Cesarea, were not exiled their Native Soil, which
then was looked upon as a great kindness.

The Persecution being very hot, in particulat, against the Macedonians, Cap.
11. The persecuted Macedonians apply themselves to Rome.
and they being at their wits end, agree together, and send certain Bishops,
viz. Eustathius of Sebastia, and others to the Emperors Brother; and Liberius
Bishop of Rome, with a Supplication, wherein they conform to the Creed with the
Clause of one Substance, being charged not to disagree with Liberius. This they
did because they could not communicate with Eudoxius the Arrian: The Emperor
Valentinian being then in France, in his War against the Sarmatians, they
delivered their Letter to Liberius, who at first refused to give their Letters
the Reading, telling them they were Arrians, and therefore in no wise to be
entertained of the Church, having abrogated the Nicene Creed. To which they
answered, That his words were true, and that it repented them of their folly;
that they acknowledged the Truth that of late they had condemned; the Opinion
which affirms the Son to be unlike the Father; that they confessed the Son in
all things and in all respects to be like the Father, and that the clause of
Likeness differed nothing from the Sense of one Substance; and subscribing unto
the same in their Supplication aforesaid, which they presented, he received
them into Communion, and writing Letters by them, sent them away. And are
received.


They being returned, sent Letters into every City of them that held the Faith
of one Substance, for an Assembly at Tarsus in Cilicia, They desire an Assembly
at Tarsus.
partly to ratify the Nicene Creed, partly to remove all Schism and Contention
since that time: And the History says, Peradventure it had been done, if
Eudoxius aforesaid had not withstood it, through the great favor he had with
the Emperor, who was wonderfully incensed at the summoning of them, and
afterward diversely Are vexed by Eudoxius.
vexed them.

I quote these things all along as the History bears through, to The reason of
these Quotations.
the end that in a constant Series and Succession for near the first six
hundred years, I may show what I have often laid down as the ground of this my
undertaking, viz. The Original and Succession of National Faiths or Worships,
and the consequences of them in every Age throughout the World; even what they
have produced of tumults, and trouble, and confusion, and destruction, and
death. The Tragical Scenes of every Age bearing nothing more rampant than these
Characters throughout every Generation.

Thus as to the Macedonians dividing from the Arrians. Now I shall show how
Eunomius aforesaid went from them also; such Eunomius divides from the Arrians,
as did the Macedonians.
roulings and tumblings were there in the World amongst men, who knowing not
that which should stay their minds, would yet go to make a definition of God.
Eunomius having made a long The reason thereof.
and tedious suit unto Eunomius, in the behalf of Aetius his Master; Eudoxius
would not receive him into their Church, which (the History says) Eudoxius did
not of himself, for his own Opinion differed not from Aetius, but because of
the Faction of Eudoxius, which abhorred Aetius, as one contrary in Opinion unto
them, therefore Eunomius withdrew from the Arrians; this at Constantinople:
Cap. 12: Persecution at Alexandria.
but at Alexandria, the Writ that was sent thither by the Governor, through the
procurement of Eudoxius, molesting wonderfully the quiet thereof, the
consequence of which, and fearing lest if any mischief were wrought by the
heady and rash motion of the common people, it would be laid to his charge.
Athanasius Athanasius hides himself at Alexandria. The people in an uproar. The
Emperor constrained thereby to let him be there quiet.
hid himself in his Fathers Closet for the space of four months, whereupon the
City of Alexandria being all on an uproar, the Emperor was constrained to
signify by his Letters to the People of Alexandria, that Athanasius should
quietly, as they wished themselves, enjoy the Bishopric; through which it came
to pass, that they had peace and tranquillity to the death of Athanasius, in
that which was called the Church of Alexandria.

When shall I have done with this turmoil and trouble? Eudoxius Cap. 13.
Eudoxius dies. Demophilus put in his place by the Arrians. Evagrius by the
Nicenians.
dies; In his room Demophilus is placed by the Arrians; those of the Faith of
one Substance, supposing now was their opportunity, put in Evagrius, whom
Eustathius had consecrated Bishop, who of old had been Bishop of Antioch, and
lately called from Exile by Jovianus, and now lay hid in Constantinople
secretly to confirm those of the Faith of one Substance. This being done, The
Arrians furiously rise in persecution. Valens hastens to Constantinople,
fearing the Consequence.
the Arrians furiously began to persecute the other Christians, which Valens
hearing, as it came quickly to his ear, being at Nicomedia, in his way to
Antioch from Constantinople, he hastened unto Constantinople great powers of
armed Soldiers, fearing lest the seditious tumults of the vulgar sort should
overthrow the City; and commanded that both the Consecrator and the Consecrated
Banishes the Consecrator and the Consecrated.
(what holiness is here, and how is it turned underfoot, as occasion presents)
should be banished, one to one place, another to another Country; hereupon
Eustathius was exiled into Bizia a City of Thracia, and Evagrius was conveyed
to another City. The Arrians hereupon (says the History) crowed exceedingly
The Arrians hereupon insult, scourge, revile, imprison, merce the other
Christians. They complain to Valens by eighty of the Priestly Order.
over the Christians, they scourged, reviled, imprisoned, merced, and laid upon
them all the grievous and intolerable burdens they could devise. The
persecuted went to the Emperor, and besought some mittigation of some part of
their troubles, if not altogether, and this humbly, (as says the History): but
where they thought to have found favor and Justice, there they found it
otherwise, for whereas they sent about eighty, who were in the Priestly Order,
in the name of all the rest, to Nicomedia, who made supplication unto the
Emperor, opened to him their grief, and certified the injuries they sustained
of the Arrians; he, although he was wonderfully (says the History) incensed
against them, yet concealed he his displeasure, until that privily he had
commanded his Lieutenant Modestus to lay them in hold, and to punish them He
causes them to be put on board a Ship, and being at Sea, the Ship to be set on
fire, and they burned.
with death, whom the Lieutenant commanded on Board a Ship, and ordered the
Mariners to set the Ship on fire, when they came into the main Sea, which they
did in the Astacen Sea, themselves getting into a Cock-boat; and returning
home, a mighty wind arose, which continued till the Vessel was brought into
Dacidizus Haven, where both the Ship and they were burned to Ashes. This Which
was performed
he did, fearing otherwise the tumult of the people, and therefore gave out
that he would banish them the Country; which because it went no further, was
taken in good part. The report of the Country was, and (says the History) it
is yet rife in every ones mouth, That this cruel and horrible Act was not long
after unrevenged, for that immediately after Phrygia was plagued with a sore
and lamentable Famine, so that many were constrained to fly The Country
plauged with Famine, as the consequence.
for relief to Constantinople, and other Provinces.

Yet this dreadful Judgment signified no more to Valens, then Cap. 14. Valens
receives it not as a Judgment, but persecutes more cruelly.
if there had been no such thing, but on in his Journey he goes to Antioch,
where he pursued with deadly hatred such as detested the Opinion of Arius, he
deposed from their Churches for no other Crime, than that they were not one
with Arius, all that held the Faith of one Substance, which he did throughout
the Eastern Countries; and not only so, but with diverse grievous devices he
Torments and executes the other Christians with diverse deaths.
tormented them, and executed a far greater number than has been mentioned
before, with sundry kinds of death, but especially with drowning them in the
Sea. Let me give one famous instance for all, and so close this particular.

At Edessa in Mesopotamia was a famous Temple, unto which Edessa a notable
instance of the prevention of the destruction of multitudes by the hastening of
a Woman with a little Child, through the Soldiers Ranks, toward the Temple,
there to be put to death, which to do, and all that were then there, Soldiers
were thithermarching
multitudes did resort; Valens desired to see it, though he knew the
frequenters thereof hated his Opinion, and gave his Lieutenant a blow with his
fist for not scattering the Conventicles of such as he had given them in
charge. The Lieutenant notwithstanding all this contumely, framed himself
(though unwillingly) to obey the Emperors wrath and displeasure; and yet being
unwilling to murder so many godly Citizens, he sent privily that none should
appear in the Temple, and that none should be found raising any Conventicle:
Nevertheless not any one made account of his advice, nor weighed his threats,
but the day following they flocked in great multitudes to the Temple; and
whilst the Lieutenant hastened with great power of armed Soldiers thither, to
answer to the Emperor, a simple Woman, leading a Child in her hand, all in
haste brake their Array or Ranks, to pass whither she was going, (viz.) to the
Temple. The Lieutenant being moved herewith, called the Woman before him, and
thus reasoned with her; Thou fond and unfortunate Woman, whither runnest The
intercourse between the Woman and the Lieutenant,
thou so rashly? Thither (said she) where others do hasten. -- Have thou not
heard (said he) that the Lieutenant will execute as many as he finds there? I
heard it (said the Woman) and therefore I go thither in all the haste, that I
may be found there. But whither (said he) leadest thou this Child? That he also
(said she) may be accounted in the number of Martyrs. By this the Lieutenant
conjectured of I^s influence on the Lieutenant.
the rest, and getting to the Emperor, he gives him to understand, that all
from the highest to the lowest prepared to die in the quarrel and defense of
their Faith: Adding moreover, That it was very rash, and without all reason,
that so great a multitude in so short a space, should so suddenly be executed;
and in so saying, he fell a persuading of the Emperor so long, until his And
the Emperor.
words prevailed, and the Emperor was with reason appeased.

Notwithstanding his devilish lust after blood and mischief was Cap. 15.
Several executed, whose names began with THEOD, as suspected to succeed the
Emperor. The Nicromancers threw out this. Theodosiolus of Spain lost his head
on this account. Many changing their names through fear.
not appeased, but understanding that some Nicromancers had given out that the
Successors name of this Emperor began with THEOD, he executed several whom he
thought should succeed him in the Empire, (viz.) all such as were called
Theodorus, Theodotus, Theodosius, Theodulus; Particularly Theodosiolus a noble
Man, the Son of a Senator, who being brought to him from Spain, lost his Head:
Many also changed their names for fear of the same, which I note, that nothing
may be wanting that the History does afford to point out the Persecutors.

Athanasius being dead, after he had been Bishop forty and six Anno. 375. Cap.
16. Athanasius being dead, Peter succeeds. The Emperor sends Euxojus the Arrian
with armed men, to put Lucius the Arrian therein. He puts Peter in Prison,
banishes the rest of the Clergy, settles Lucius.
years, Peter was left behind to succeed him; but the Emperor being certified
thereof, and Euxojus the Arrian being then with the Emperor at Antioch,
opportunity was taken to put Lucius the Arrian therein, who with a great power
of armed Men from the Emperor took his Journey to Alexandria, who clapped Peter
in Prison, and banished the rest of the Clergy, some to one place, and some to
another, and settled Lucius therein.

Lucius being settled in Alexandria, great persecution followed Cap. 17. Great
persecution follows in Egypt. Peter gets out of Prison, flies to Damasus Bishop
of Rome. Arrians hold all the Churches of Alexandria. The Religious Houses in
the Desert thrown down by the Emperors Edict. The Religious persons miserably
slain, who resisted not. The slaughter beyond expression miserable. This
through Lucius. Cap. 19. The persecution throughout Alexandria and Egypt very
great. Imprisoned, vexed, tormented, who led a quiet life. Lucius with
Soldiers marches to the Monasteries in Egypt. Finds them praying, etc.
in Egypt, wherein some were imprisoned, some tormented, others exiled: But
Peter, as soon as he was got out of Prison, fled unto Damasus Bishop of Rome.
The Arrians held all the Churches of Alexandria; not long after the Emperors
Edict was proclaimed, by virtue of which the Religious Houses (as they are
called) in the Desert were spoiled, thrown down, and cruelly beat to the
ground; for (says the History) the armed Soldiers setting upon those silly
and unarmed Souls, who stretched not out the hand in their own defense, were
miserably slain, the manner of which slaughter was so lamentable (says the
Historian) that it cannot sufficiently be manifested to the World.

And throughout Alexandria and Egypt, there was great persecution to them that
maintained the Faith of one Substance; they were brought before the Bar, they
were put in Prison, they were diversely tormented and vexed with sundry
punishment, who (says the History) led a quiet and peaceable life; thus was it
practiced at Alexandria, at the pleasure of Lucius, and in Egypt the Captain of
his forces, and Lucius (who vexed those Christians more grievously then the
Soldiers) marched forward toward those places called Monasteries, whom (says
the History) they found pouring out prayers unto God, curing Diseases, casting
out of Devils; these they led away, and stirred up the rash and rude multitude
against them; many of them (says the Historian Ruffinus, who is said to be an
eye witness and partaker with them in the same calamity) were set at naught,
scourged, spoiled of their They are cruelly destroyed. An account of the
several sorts of their sufferings.
Raiment, fetred in Prison, crushed with stones, beheaded with bloody Swords,
shut up in the Desert, covered with Sheep and Goat Skins, destitute of Aid and
succor; grievously afflicted, wonderfully troubled with adversity, who (says
he) the World was not worthy to enjoy, nor the Earth to bear so holy a burden;
many wandered in Deserts and dangerous ways, they hid themselves in Mountains,
and Caves, in Dens, and hollow Rocks; all which, when Lucius had accomplished,
and made those times (says the Historian) to seem to fulfill anew what the
Apostle specified; he persuaded the Captain to banish the Fathers (as they
Macharius the Egyptian, and Macarius the Alexandrian, their Fathers banished.
were called) and Ringleaders of them, viz. Macharius the Egyptian, and
Macarius the Alexandrian.

Nor did Basilius of Cesarea in Cappadocia escape his hand, who Cap. 21.
Basilius and Gregory of Nazianzum sent for by the Emperor.
together with Gregory of Nazianzum being very famous, Valens sent for him in
have to Antioch, and charged him to be brought before the President at the
Tribunal Seat. The President demanded Basilius brought before the President.
The passages.
of him, Why and wherefore he liked no better of the Emperors Religion? Basil
unfeignedly and freely spoke his mind of the Emperors Religion, yet highly
commends the Faith of one Substance. -- When the President threatened him with
present death, I would to God (says he) it would fall out so well on my side,
that I might leave this Carcass of mine in the quarrel of Christ, in the
defense of my Head and Captain. -- When the President advised him again and
again, to remember himself better; he said, -- As I am to day; Basils noble
resolution.
so thou shall find me to morrow, but I pray God thou alter not thy mind. Basil
was laid in Prison that whole day; Galates the Emperors Basil imprisoned. The
Emperors Son Galates si^k. His Wife troubled in her sleep.
Son, a youthly tender Lad, was then dangerously sick, and out of hopes of
recovery by the Physicians, Dominica was troubled exceedingly in her sleep with
ugly shapes, and Devils, of which she told the Emperor; and that the Child was
visited with Assigns the cause of the sickness to be the abusing of Basil.
sickness for the contumely and reproach he had done unto Basil the Bishop. The
Emperor marked her words, and mused a while; at length resolved, and sent for
Basil, and said, If thy He sends for Basil. The passages between them.
Faith and Opinion be true, pray that my Son die not of this Disease. Basil
said, If thou will promise to me to believe as I do, and if thou will bring the
Church to Uniformity and Concord, thy Child no doubt shall live. -- The Emperor
not agreeing unto this, God (said Basil) deal with the Child as pleases him.
Immediately he was set at Basil set at liberty, the child dies.
liberty, and forthwith the Child died.

Long had Rome a day of peace and quietness, by reason that Cap. 24. Rome
quiet, because the Emperors, and Rome were of the same Faith. They fall into
discord themselves. Vrsinus striving to succeed Damasus, is the cause.
the Emperor that there resided, and in the Western parts, were of the same
Faith with Rome, as I have formerly declared; and under Valentinian they had it
now, for he troubled no Sect, but of themselves they fall into an uproar about
the Election of a Bishop upon Liberius his disease; Damasus was chosen, and
Ursinus a Deacon would have had it, who got certain base and obscure Bishops,
(says the History) who in an odd corner of the Cathedral, called Sicona, had
his Consecration: the people hereupon were in uproar, and the multitudes were
so great, and the contention so hot, that many lost their lives besides
Maximinus the Many lost their lives in the qua^rel. For this the Governor
plagues both the Clergy and Laity. Cap. 25. At Millain they are in an uproar.
Also upon the death of Auxentius. Ambrose Lieutenant of the City, comes to
appease them.
Governor, for this Schism and Rebellion grievously tormented many, both of the
Laity and Clergy.

Thus at Rome, at Millain another strange Act appeared: Auxentius whom the
Arrians chose, there dying, the people were all in an uproar about the Election
of another Bishop. The tumult being raised, Ambrose the Lieutenant of the City,
who was also a Consul, came in to appease it, fearing greatly lest that Schism
should breed mischief in the City. After that he had prevailed much with the
people by his presence, so that they were quieted, and had given them diverse
good exhortations; on a sudden, with one mouth they nominated him to be Bishop,
hoping thereby to They choose him Bish.
have all reconciled: the Bishops present judged that the uniform Voice of the
People, was the Voice of God; therefore without any further deliberation, they
baptize and enstall him Bishop; he He is baptized and enstalled.
wondering at the consent and agreement of the people, supposed that which was
done to be the Work of God himself; and signified He obeys, and the ground on
which he does it.
to the Bishops, That they should obey the Will of God, and create him Bishop,
for God rather than men preferred him unto this Dignity. Ambrose being thus
chose Bishop, the Citizens of Millain, who aforetime were at discord among
themselves, thenceforth embraced Peace and Unity. The City at quiet.


After the aforesaid stir was ended, the Emperor Valentinianus Cap. 26.
Valentine marches against the Sarmatians.
having raised great power, and made expedition against the Sarmatians, who had
assaulted the Roman Dominion, they supposing themselves too weak to engage such
a power, sent Ambassadors to the They send Ambassadors to him. He despises them
as Abjects.
Emperor, to join with them in League, and to establish a Peace between them:
He perceiving that they were but Abjects and Rascals, (as the Historian termed
them) demanded, Whether the rest of the Sarmatians were such as they? When they
had answered, Yes, O Emperor, thou see the chief of the Sarmatians before
thee. The Emperor He vexed that the Romans should be infested by such a base
people. Burst forth into passionate words.
was so incensed thereat, that breaking out into vehement Language, he said,
The Empire of Rome has ill luck to fall into my hands, under whose reign so
beggarly and so abject a kind of Barbarians could not be quiet, and content
themselves with safety within their own bounds, but they must take Armor, and
rebel against the Roman Empire, and so boldly proclaim open War. And straining
himself so with his extreme speaking, he opened every Vein in Opens his Veins,
breaks his Arteries, dies.
his body, and broke the Arteries asunder, upon which there gushed out such a
stream of blood, that he died in the Castle commonly called Bergitium: he lived
fifty and four years, and reigned thirteen.

Valentinianus being thus dead, the same day at Acanicum the Anno. 380. His Son
Valentine the younger proclaimed.
Soldiers of Italy proclaimed Valentinianus the younger, so called after his
Fathers Name, who was of very tender years, Emperor. This the other Emperors
took very much to heart, not The other Emperors offended, because chosen by the
Soldiers, not by them. Yet gave their consent.
because he was Brother to the one, and Brothers Son to the other, but because
he was appointed without their consent, unto whom belonged to create him
Emperor, but both gave their consent that he should be Emperor.

Valens still continuing at Antioch, and having little War with Cap. 27. Valens
being quiet from Wars, troubles the Christians. Torments them with new devices.
Themistius the Philosophers Oration in their behalf quiets him.
the Barbarous Nations, who kept themselves within their bounds, still pursued
those that held the Faith of one Substance, and ceased not daily to invent new
devices, and strange torments, wherewith he might plague them, till the Oration
of Themistius the Philosopher, aforesaid, somewhat mittigated him, who
admonished him not to marvel that the Christians varied among themselves in
Religion; that if Christianity were compared with the infinite Opinions
reigning among the Heathen Poilosophers, for there were above three hundred
Opinions, and great dissentions about Rules and Precepts, whereunto every Sect
necessarily addicted themselves; it would seem but a very small thing, and that
God would set forth his Glory by the Diversity and Discord in Opinions, to the
end that every one might therefore the more stand in awe of his Majesty,
because it was not easy for every one to Afterward he puts none to death.
know him perfectly. So that afterward he put none to death, though he yet
punished the Clergy with Exile or Banishment, so Yet he ba^i^^es the Clergy,
till he was stopped upon occasion of the Goths.
long till his mischievous enterprises were stopped upon such an occasion as
follows.

The Goths beyond Istrum, by reason of civil Wars, were divided Who being
divided among themselves. One party got the upper hand. The other prays Valens
help. He orders it, they prevail, and become Christians in recompense.
among themselves into two parts; Athanaricus seemed to get the upper hand;
Phritigernes thereupon sought aid of the Romans; Valens commanded his Soldiers
in Thrace to aid the one side against the other: The Soldiers foiled
Athanaricus, which occasioned many of the Goths to embrace the Faith of Christ;
for Phritigernes to requite the Emperors courtesy, embraced his Religion, and
persuaded his Subjects unto the same. Ulphilas also Vlphilas their Bishop gets
the Scriptures Translated into the Gotthick Letters. Both Factions thereby
became Christians, but Arrians. The subdued side persecu^es.
Bishop of the Goths, having got the Gotthick Letters, translated the Scripture
into that Tongue; so that as well those of the Faction of Athanaricus, as of
Phritegernes, embraced the Christian Religion; but it was that of the Arrians,
because of the Emperor who was one himself. These Athanaricus tormented
grievously, as if his Country, Laws and Ordinances were corrupted thereby, so
that diverse of them suffered Martyrdom. Now (says the Historian) Many put to
death, and suff^red, not as Arius, e^bracing the Christian Faith,
Arius because he could not withstand the error of Sabbellius the African fell
from the right Faith, saying, That the Son of God was but lately created. But
these men received the Christian Faith with simplicity of mind, sticked not to
spend their lives in But in simplicity of mind.
the quarrel.

One thing more concurred in the wisdom of God, quite to The Goths coming to
Unity, are over^un by the Hunni, they fly to the Romans. Valens receives them,
the only thing in which he showed himself clement. Lets them inhabit in
Thracia. Embraces them as his Guard.
extinguish persecution with Valens; the Goths coming to Unity among
themselves, were overrun with the Hunni: They fly to the Romans, and protest
Loyalty and Subjection. Valens commanded (not foreseeing the consequence) that
they should be received courteously, and in this one thing only showed himself
clement; he appointed them certain Countries to inhabit in Thracia, thinking
himself happy for their coming, supposing thereby to have always ready an
exercised Army on all occasions, and that the Barbarians Guard would be a
greater terror unto the Enemy then the Roman Soldiers. Hence it came to pass
that the Neglects the Romans old Soldiers.
Roman Soldiers were neglected to be exercised in feats of Arms, and set at
naught; and the old Weather-beaten Warriors, and valliant Captains laid aside,
and fourscore Crowns required for every Soldier that was pricked and mustred
in every Village, was required. This he did when first he released them of
their Tribute, and which was the Original cause that the Roman Affairs
prospered not a long time after. But the Goths forgetting the The Goths
overrun the Country.
kindness done them, took Arms against the Romans, overran and spoiled the
Country. When Valens heard of this, he thought Valens hereupon forbears
banishing the Nicenians. Turns against the Rebels. The persecution ceases.
it high time for him to leave exiling the true Christians, and to turn himself
unto these Rebels; by this means the heat of Persecution kindled against the
Christians, was wholly quenched. What ways are here brought about in the
Wisdom of God to bring to pass? and what Judgments brings he over men, ere
they will cease their hands from persecuting those whom they should let free as
to their Conscience to God?

Furthermore, that it may appear that by other ways then one, More Judgments
following Valeus.
the Hand of the Lord was stretched out against Valens for his cruelty to his
Brethren.

And so to give yet more evidence of the revealed Judgments of God, and his
Vengeance, Who ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors; and so to show how
he makes that an opportunity of Reconciliation, the running in division against
which is a cause of punishment; I shall produce one instance of reputation and
weight, even answerable to this case, whilst yet Valens is to be discoursed of,
as not having breathed out his last.

When the Emperor had left Antioch, the Saracens who before Cap. 29. The
Saracens war with the Romans under Mavia their Queen, as a scourge. And had
like to overran them.
were fellow-Friends, and in league with the Romans, took up Arms against them,
under the Government of Mavia, (whose Husband a little before had departed this
life) and had like to overran all the Provinces of the Romans that lay toward
the East, had not the same hand stopped them, who raised them up as a scourge
unto Valens, through such an opportunity as this of the Saracens. There was one
Moses who led in the Desert a Monastical The making of Moses a retired man
amongst them, a Bishop, is her Proposition of Peace.
or retired kind of life; and is said for his zeal to Religion, his constant
Faith, and working of strange Miracles, to be famous amongst them. Mavia
demanded this Moses to be her Bishop, and so she would lay down Arms, and be in
league with them. The Roman Captains accept thereof. He is sent from the
Wilderness to Alexandria, to be so made. He refuses to be made by the Bishop
Lucius. His Speech.
The Roman Captains accept hereof, and laying aside all delays, command it to
be done: Moses hereupon is taken from the Wilderness, and sent to Alexandria to
be made Bishop; and being come to be made Bishop, he refuses to receive Orders
from him, and after this sort reasons with him, I think my self unworthy of the
Priestly Order; yet if it be for the profit of the Commonwealth that I be
called unto the Function, truly thou Lucius shall never lay hand upon my head;
for thy right hand is imbrued with slaughter and bloodshed. When Lucius said
again, That it became The Bishop reproves him.
not him so contumeliously to revile him, but rather to learn of him the
Precepts of Christian Religion. Moses answered, I am not come to He replies,
and gives the reason of his refusal, because of his Persecution. And shows what
the true Principles are of Christian Religion.
reason of matters of Religion, but sure I am of this, That thy horrible
practices against the Brethren prove thee to be utterly void of the true
Principles of Christian Religion: for the true Christian strikes no man,
revileth no man, fights with no man, for the Servant of God should be no
fighter; but thy deeds in exiling of some, throwing others to wild Beasts,
burning of some others, do cry out against thee; yet are we surer of the things
we see with our eyes, then of those we hear with our ears. He having uttered
these and such like words, his He is brought to a Mountain, and made Priest by
the Exiled. The Wars cease.
Friends brought him to a certain Mountain, where he was made Priest of such as
were exiled. So the War with the Romans ended, and Mavia married her Daughter
to Captain Victor. And Antioch being left by Valens, the persecuted found
comfort; and Cap. 30. Peter bringing Letters from the Bishop of Rome; the
people th^ust out Lucius, and place Peter in his Rome. He dies in a sho^t time,
Timothy succeeds.
Peter being come from Rome with Letters from Damasus, confirming both the
Religion of Moses, and the Creation, or making of Peter Bishop of Alexandria.
The people thrust out Lucius, who got him to Constantinople; Peter being in his
place, after a little time died, whom his Brother Timothy succeeded.

Valens being come to Constantinople, found the people in great Cap. 31. Valens
coming to Constantinople; finds the people in heaviness because of the Goths.
They reflect upon, and reprove him.
heaviness; the Goths who had overrun Thracia, having set upon the Suburbs of
that City, and there was no power prepared to repel them; such a plague came
upon the Empire for the persecution: the Barbarians (for so the Romans called
the other Nations) being come nigh the Walls, the people of Constantinople were
wonderfully sorry; they lament their case, and steping to the Emperor, charged
him with entertaining in his own Dominion such as now were ready to cut his own
throat; they blamed him for withstanding them no sooner; they condemned him for
proclaiming open War no sooner: as they ran at tilt, and were exercised in such
Warlike Pastime, they all with one consent ran unto the Emperor, and cried out
against him, that he had set such exercises at naught, and said, Give us
Armor, and we our selves will deal with them. -- Thus was this persecuting
Emperor He boils in anger, and is plagued. Leaves the City with threats, what
he would do when he returned.
plagued, and boiling in anger at their exclamations, left the City not without
threatenings, That if he returned again safe, he would plague the City, partly
because they reviled him, partly for the Treason of Procopius, and lay it even
with the ground, and turn it into Arable Land, for the Plough to pass through
the Bowels thereof. But he never returned: for though his marching forth made
the He returns not. The Goths retreat to Adrianople. He joins Battle, and is
slain. The manner how diversely reported. Anno. 381.
Goths to retreat as far as Adrianople, a City of Thracia, lying on the
confines of Macedonia; yet there, as he joined Battle, he was slain in the
fiftieth year of his Age, after he had reigned thirteen years with his Brother,
and three years after his decrease. Some say he was burned to Ashes in a
certain Village whitherto he fled, which the Goths set on fire; others, that
the Horse having yielded without any great fighting, he threw off his Imperial
Robe, and thrusting himself among the throng of Footmen, was there slain, and
his body lay there unknown. And this was The end of the Persecutor, and the
vengeance that overtook him, who pretended to Christ, yet tore the Christians.
the end of this wicked Persecutor, whom vengeance met with at last, though he
seemed to prosper a long time in his persecuting of the Christians, to whose
Master he, as well as they, pretended, whom yet he tore in pieces and
destroyed; which now came to be his own portion, through the just Judgments of
him who ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors.

The Goths having dispatched Valens, they drew near to Constantinople, Socrat.
lib. 5. cap. 2. Valens being dead, the Goths approach Constantinople. The
people engage them, and beat them from the City.
and began to destroy the Suburbs; the People taking Arms, such as came next to
hand, and being paid by Dominia the Empress, out of the Emperors Treasury, as
was the agreement; and Mavia Queen of the Sarazens, having helped them with some
succor a little before, they beat the Barbarians far from their City.

Valens being dead, Gratianus, together with Valentinianus the Anno. 383.
Gratian and Valentine govern the Empire. Cap. 3. Valens cruelty is condemned.
The Exiles are called home. Liberty of Religion for all save the Eunomians,
Photinians, Manichees.
younger, aforesaid, both Brothers, but by two Mothers, governed the Empire; he
condemned his Uncle Valens cruelty toward the Christians, called home the
Exiles, made a Law, That every Sect and Opinion should freely have liberty,
except the Eunomians, Photinians, and Manichees. And to the end that the Roman
Affairs, which were then very low, might be raised up again (for the Barbarians
much infested them) he joined Theodosius a valliant noble Theodorus of Spain
made also Emperor.
man of Spain in the Empire, and at Sirmium, caused him to be proclaimed.

This quiet Affairs as to the Government of the Empire, in reference Cap. 4.
The Empire being quiet, the Christians begin to fall out.
to the Christians, gave again a discovery of what lay within, as to the forms
of Faith in every one, unto which they adhered, and as opportunity was sought
to impose; and those who out of necessity, and for straits sake, because of
persecution subscribed And appear secretly what they were within. The
Macedonians, who subscribed the Nicene Creed before Liberius Bishop of Rome in
their adversity, gather a Synod.
to another than their own, to preserve themselves from suffering, now the
necessity being over, return to their old form again; in particular, the
Macedonians, who though they subscribed to the Faith of one Substance, before
Liberius Bishop of Rome, as aforesaid, yet now every Opinion having liberty,
they show themselves as they were, and how they had dissembled; Therefore being
met in a Council, they Decreed, -- That henceforth, Declare against that Faith
as not to be received, nor those to be communicated with, as were of it. Many
fell from them hereupon and followed the other.
for altogether, the clause of one Substance should never be received; and that
they ought no more to communicate with the Professors of the Nicene Creed. --
Which gave those among themselves, which were more conscientious, so to
understand them, seeing they did say and unsay after this manner in matters of
Faith, that they fell from them, and embrace the other; such turning of times
the Lord in his Wisdom suffering to be for the trial of all, Times of trial
manifest them.
that at one time or another every thing might be made manifest.

Also at Antioch there was a great stir about Miletius and Paulinus; Cap. 5.
Stirs at Antioch about Paulinus and Miletius, And what they were. Paulinus
would not admit the other to be joined with him, because made by Arians. The
people fall out.
the latter was not exiled, as aforesaid, and the former was; who returning,
his Friends would have him joined to Paulinus, who was ready to go into his
Grave. Paulinus would not admit thereof, because it was contrary to the Canon,
That any that were created by Arrian Bishops, should be made Colleagues in any
Bishopric. So to difference they go again, and falling together by the ears,
when a little outward peace, as from the Empire, sprang in among them, and an
uproar here was, because it was endeavored to be enforced in a certain Church
of the Suburbs, which they having performed, raised the tumult which would A
tumult is made. They swear the six Bishops that stood in competition, not to
attempt the place whilst those two lived The stir is composed thereupon. The
Fruits of compulsive Faiths.
not be reconciled, till all the six Bishops that stood for that place, had
bound themselves with an Oath, That none of them would aspire unto the
Bishopric whilst Miletius and Paulinus lived; and that when either of them
were dead, the Bishopric should remain to the surviver of them.

This was the division among themselves, when there was no division made of
them by the Roman Government, which was the usual trades of the Christians
among themselves, whose Faith was of an enforcing or compulsive nature, when
the Governors of the Commonwealth left all things free as to matters of
Religion, and made no compulsion, except as aforesaid.

Matters being thus all out of frame at Antioch, Gregory of Nazianzum Gregory
Nazianzum made Bishop of Constantinople. Cap. 6.
was made Bishop of Constantinople, whitherto Theodosius came, after that
Gratianus and he had overthrown the Barbarians, from Thessalonica; Gratian
being gone to France to encounter the Germans which there had done some
Hostility, where he found things in the same turmoil, as at Antioch. For
Gregory, Cap. 7. Demophilus the Arrian opposes him. He confines himself to a
little Church within the Walls.
though he was chosen Bishop by the uniform consent of the Bishops of the
Nicene Faith; yet Demophilus the Arrian Bishop, had raised such stir against
him, because he was a stranger, that as he only kept him to a certain little
Church within the Walls of Constantinople, before the Emperors coming; so when
the Emperor The Emperor coming he refuses to s^ay. Theodosius requires
Demophilus to sign the Nicene Creed. He refuses.
was come, he utterly refused to continue any longer at Constantinople,
whereupon Theodosius immediately gave Demophilus to understand his mind, and
demanded, Whether he would embrace the Nicene Creed? Which he refusing, the
Emperor said, If thou refuse to embrace peace and unity, I command thee to
avoid the Church. The Emperor commands him from the Church. He withdraws.
Whereupon he assembling those of his own party, stood up in the midst, and
said, Brethren, it is written in the Gospel, If they persecute you in one City,
fly unto another. Insomuch that the Emperor banisheth us the Churches, I would
have you know that to morrow you must meet together out of the City. He
understood not (says the Historian) that such as fly that trade of life which
worldlings follow (for so, says he, must we take the words of the Gospel) must
seek the higher Jerusalem, but he meant it otherwise (says the Historian of
Demophilus) and thenceforth raised Conventicles Raises Conventicles. Lucius
resorts to him.
without the Walls of the City: Unto whom Lucius of Alexandria (who was there
in Exile) resorted. And so the Arrians, who had held the Churches there for the
space of forty years, refusing (says the History) Unity and Concord, which
Theodosius exhorted them unto, departed the City, and those of the Faith The
Arrians depart. The Nicenians take their place.
of one Substance, came into their room, and took possession of the Churches.

Thus whilst the Arrians stood so stubbornly to own their Opinion, What the
stout Spirit of the Arrians met with. Persecution the consequence of
Theodosius, enforcing the Faith of one Substance.
as to Faith and Religion, as stout a Spirit entered into the Emperor, who by
little and little introduced a settlement of his own Opinion, which was of the
Faith of one Substance, which he endeavoring to establish, contrary to the
Universal Liberty which Gratian had granted, brought diverse Persecutions, as is
the proper nature of imposing of Religion.

One hundred and fifty Bishops of the Nicene Faith, or of the Cap. 8. A Council
at Constantinople of 150 Nicene, and 36 Macedonian Bishops. By order of
Theodosius he seeks to persuade the Macedonians to the Ni^ene Faith, which they
had subscribed.
Creed containing the Clause of one Substance; and thirty and six of the
Macedonians being met together in a Council at Constantinople, which Theodosius
had summoned; partly to settle a Bishop in Constantinople, Gregory being gone
to Nazianzum, refusing that Bishopric, as aforesaid; and partly to confirm the
Canons of the Nicene Council, he together with the other Bishops greatly
endeavored to bring them over to them, urging their Embassy by Eustathius to
Liberius of Rome, and their Subscription then; and that not long before,
without exception, they had communicate throughout every Church with such as
held the Faith of one Substance, No Arguments prevail.
(this Faith of one Substance still remaining a jar in the way) and that they
would behave themselves neither godly nor religiously, sithence they aforetime
had ratified the same Opinion and Faith with them, if now again they sought to
overthrow such things as before they advisedly decreed; but all would not do,
Their hat answer, rather to join with the Arrians. They leave Constantinople,
and send their Letters every where against the Nicenian Faith, which once they
had subscribed. The rest place Nectarius in the ^oom of Gregory that was gone.
They make Patriarks, establish the Nicene Faith. No Bishop to intermeddle with
a^others Diocese. The Emperor consents. The Council ends.
they said flatly, Rather than they would subscribe unto the Faith of one
Substance, they would hold with the Arrians. So they left Constantinople, and
sent their Letters every where, that they should in no wise consent to the
Nicene Council. The one hundred and fifty Bishops which remained, placed
Nectarius, (by Office a Praetor, of Noble Lineage, whose Ancestors had been
Senators) Bishop of Constantinople; enstalled Constantinople next in the Empire
to the Bishopric of Rome, because called New Rome; and made Patriarks, and
established the Nicene Faith; and that no Bishop should leave his one Diocese
and intermeddle with Foreign Churches, which till that time, because of
Persecution, was suffered. To all which the Emperor gave his consent: so the
Council was dissolved.

Thus things went at Constantinople, where the beginning of the This new fire
burns after through the Empire.
new fire kindled, which afterward burnt through the Empire, which by and by I
shall in particular treat of, giving only this intimation by the way, That
Meletius dying at Antioch, his Favorites Cap. 9. Meletius Favorites refuse
after his death to be under Paulinus, contrary to the Oath. Flavianus is chosen.
would not be under the Jurisdiction of Paulinus, though the Oath was taken in
the former uproar, which quieted it, that so it should be, but chose Flavianus
one of the six aforesaid, by whom the Oath was taken, that it should be
submitted. So discord rose again in that City, and Tumults, and Divisions, and
those of Antioch became to be divided again, not about the Faith (says Antioch
divided hereabouts.
the History) but the Colleague aforesaid; the Faith was concerned, but their
fond contention in choosing a Bishop: for Meletius being made by the Arrian
Bishop, Paulinus refuses him as his Colleague, as aforesaid.

The banishment of the Arrians from their Churches, caused a Cap. 10. A Council
again is called by Theodosius, to reconcile (if it might be) all Opinions, for
the flame was grown great through the expulsion of the Arrians
great flame of tumult and schism to arise every where; the Emperor perceiving
it, summoned a Council of all Opinions, if so be possible he might reduce them
into one, and particularly the Faith which himself held, for he had peace as to
the Civil State, throughout his Dominion. At that time the Valiant Captain of
the Goths Athanarichus being come in with all his power, and shortly after
dying at Constantinople, and he having created his Son Arcadius, He advises
with Nectarius, how to accomp^ish his design.
viz. Theodosius, Augustus, or Emperor. The Bishops of all sorts being come, he
devised how he might rid the Christians of Contention and Discord, and with
Nectarius advised for that purpose, saying, That the Controversies and Quarrels
that molested the quiet state of the Church, ought to be sifted out, and the
punishment to light on the Pates of them that were found to be the Authors of
Schism, and disturbers of Peace and Quietness.

This made Nectarius very pensive and sad because of the consequence; Nectarius
consults with Agelius.
he consults with Agelius Bishop of the Novations, who held the same Faith with
those of one Substance; Agelius was little Agelius with Sisinius.
at disputation, and appoints Sisinius a Reader of his Church, who was a man
very eloquent, well experienced in all things, a skilful Interpreter (says the
Historian) of Holy Scripture, and a notable Philosopher, who knowing well
enough that Disputations would not only not reconcile Schisms, but also fire
the slimy matters of contention; he thus advised, That it was best to avoid the
Sisinius his Judgment.
strife of Logical Disputations. For this was the manner of the Bishops when
they met together in Councils and Synods, to cleave Hairs (as they use to say)
at Arguments; and they that were most curious and subtle therein, were
accounted the best Masters of Faith, and so carried the matter, not according
to the Revelation of Truth, but the subtilty of man, in things relating unto
Truth, through which came all this ado and trouble in the World; and to lay
before them the form of Faith established by their Ancestors; and in pursuit
hereof the Emperor should demand, Whether they made any account of the ancient
Fathers who governed the Church godly and prudently before the Schism and
Division, (still the matter stood upon man which made all this stir, not
knowing the Principle of God, in and by which only the Truth can indeed be
known and determined) or condemned them as Aliens, and far-estranged from the
Christian Faith. If they rejected them, then let them (says he) boldly
pronounce them accursed. If they presume so bold an enterprise, then (says he)
will the common people cry out against them; if they reject them not, then let
us allege their works and writings, and confirm the matters in controversy
out of them.

This was the advice of Sisinius, and this was the policy of those The policy
of those days as to truth.
days as to Truth, which not being from a right Principle, could neither
determine of Truth, nor quiet the minds of people concerning it; for the
determination of Truth, as it comes from the Principle of Truth, is that only
which can answer to the Witness of God, and so satisfy.

Nectarius having received this advice, acquaints the Emperor, Theodosius
receives his Judgment. Puts the matter. They perceive him not at first.
the Emperor likes it well, and treads the steps thereof; he puts the question
concerning the Fathers, Whether they liked them? They not seeing his drift, who
were of the opposite part, answered, They highly reverenced them as their
Masters. He demanded, Whether they would be tried by their Testimonies
concerning the true and right Faith? Here they were in a puzzle, and knew not
what Afterward were stumbled.
answer to make, for they were divided among themselves, some held with the
Emperor, and some affirmed, That it was altogether contrary to their mind and
purpose. So that not only every Opinion was divided from the other, but each
Opinion among themselves. Each Opinion becomes divided amongst themselves as
well as one with another.
The Emperor seeing this, and how they builded not upon the Ancient Fathers
exposition of the Faith, but trusted in their Sophistical quirks of Logic,
(for they had brought many Logicians with them) he went another way to work,
and bad He bids each give him by such a day their Faith in writing.
every Opinion to take Pen and Ink, and lay down in writing what they held, and
by such a day bring it unto him at the Emperors Palace: They met, viz.
Nectarius, Agelius, of the Faith of one Substance; They meet. The four
Op^nions, and the heads of them under which the whole world was divided.
Demophilus of the Arrians; Eunomius himself in the name of the other
Eunomians, and Eleusius of Cyzicum for the Macedonians. And into these four was
the whole World of Christians chiefly divided, there being under each of them
also several other Opinions, as the History makes manifest.

The Emperor (says the History) salutes them friendly, next Theodosius
receives all friendly. Locks his Closet. Prays for direction. Tears in pieces
all Creeds but the Nicene. Approves of that.
receives every ones writing; then he went aside, and locked in himself, fell
down on his knees, and prayed unto God, That he would assist him in the choice
and revealing of the Truth. Last of all, having perused every ones Opinion, he
condemned and tore in pieces all such Creeds as derogated from the Unity of the
blessed (as the History calls it) Trinity, and allowed, and highly commended
that above all the rest, the Creed containing the Clause of one Substance. This
was the cause that the Novations had their The cause why the Novations had
Churches with the Nicenians. The rest depart pensive, yet endeavor by Letters
to comfort their people.
Churches with their privileges as the rest, because to this Creed they
leaned; the rest, though at their departure they went away sorrowful and
pensive, yet fell they a comforting of their charge by Letters, exhorting them
not to shrink at all from them, because many had left them, and were fallen to
the Faith of one Substance, they being set at naught, by reason of their mutual
discord and difference, yea, by the people committed to their charge, For many
were called, but few were chosen. Yet these of one Substance were not without
molestation, for at Antioch they Factions at Antioch again About. Flavianus.
Three Nations to remove him, three to keep him in.
fell into two Factions, the Egyptians, Arabians, and Cyprians held together,
and thought good to remove Flavianus out of the Bishopric of Antioch, but the
Palestinians, Phoenicians, and Syrians took his part.

Thus this Council ended, which I have the rather been particular The end of
the Council. The cause of bringing these instances.
in, because its of great consequence, as to what I have further to produce, as
to the effects thereof, and what followed thereupon in the World, as well as to
show what Policies have been used in matters of Religions, and how that
Religion has been built thereupon.

Thus fared it at Constantinople. In the Western part of the Empire, Cap. 11.
Persecution in the West by Justina.
which hitherto had generally been more free from Persecution, there arose
Persecution. Justina the Mother of Valentinianus the Younger, whilst her
Husband lived, could effect nothing of this matter; but he being dead, she
removed to Millain, and her Son being of tender years, she raised tumults,
being of the Opinion of Arius, against Ambrose, so that in the end he Ambrose
ordered to Exile by the Arrians. The people resist. Gratian is murdered. The
news stops Justina's persecution.
was exiled; which when the people withstood and hindered their force that came
to carry him to exile; news came that Gratian was murdered by the wiles and
slights of Maximus, which cooled the heat of Justina against Ambrose. So the
Lord that looks down from Heaven, and beholds the doings of the Children of
men, puts stops to their rage, and reproves it as he sees good.

Andragathius, Maximus his Captain, hiding himself in a Chariot The conspiracy
by which Gratian was murdered.
in the form of a Litter born with Mules, went to meet with Gratian; giving in
charge to them that conducted it, That it was the Empress who came to meet the
Emperor: he passed over Rhodanus River that runs by Lions in France; The
Emperor suspecting nothing, went to the Litter, out of which Andragathius
lighted and killed him presently. So Valentinianus was constrained to receive
Maximus (who being a Britain, thus conspired, Designed by Maximu^ his fellow
Emperor. Executed by Andragathius. Probus hasts to Illyrium for fear of
Maximus, with Valentines Army. Cap. 12: Theodosius troubled, who gave trouble
to the World. Gathers a great Army.
and had slain Gratian) his fellow Emperor. But Probus, who had governed
prudently during the nonage of Valentinianus, fearing Maximus power, left
Italy, and hastened to Illyrium, making his abode at Thessalonica a City in
Macedonia.

Now found Theodosius trouble, who began to trouble the World about Religion;
he was wonderfully sorry, and gathered a great power to go against Maximus,
fearing lest he should conspire the death of Valentinianus also. At the same
time Legates came from Persia to conclude a Peace between them; and Honorius
was born to him by Placilla the Empress. So Theodosius leaving his Son Arcadius
at Constantinople, marched toward Maximus to give him Battle: When he came to
Thessalonica, he found Valentinianus's Comes to Thessalonica, finds Valentines
Army discouraged because they had proclaimed Maximus. He neither receives, nor
rejects Maximus's Legates.
Soldiers dismayed and discouraged quite, because necessity had constrained
them to make Maximus Emperor. For his part he made no show of being of either
side; and when the Ambassadors of Maximus came, he neither rejected nor
received them; yet was he sorry that the Empire of Rome should be oppressed
with Tyranny under color of the Imperial Title; therefore He hastens to
Millain; whitherto Maximus was come.
he gathered his power, and made haste to Millain, whitherto Maximus was come.

In the mean time the Arrians at Constantinople thinking now Cap. 13. The
Arrians at Constantinople s^ew themselves hereupon, and their grudge. They
publish false reports of Theodosius. And burn Nectarius's Palace.
that they had an opportunity, upon the false report that Theodosius was
worsted by Maximus, and near taken alive; with a deal of such things which was
raised on purpose, without any truth in them, pluck up their Spirit for the old
grudg they bore to see those enjoying their Churches whom they had persecuted,
and set fire on Nectarius his Palace.

When Theodosius was drawn near to Maximus, the Soldiers of Maximus's
Soldiers bind him, and bring him to Theodosius. He executes Maximus.
Maximus could in no wise bear the rumor thereof, but binding Maximus they
brought him to Theodosius, who presently executed him in the second Consulship
of Theodosius, and the first of Cynegius, 28th Augusti, wherein the things
aforesaid were also committed; of which overthrow Andragatius hearing, ran
Andragath. drowns himself.
headlong into the next River and drowned himself, which gave occasion to the
Emperor, having gotten the Victory, to return Theodos. marches to Rome.
to Rome.

One thing more, and then I shall have done with the consequence Symachus
having wrote a Book in the praise of Max. takes sanctuary in the Novation
Church.
of this Battle: Symachus the Consul, a man of great skill and eloquence in the
Roman Literature, wrote a Book in the praise of Maximus; which whilst he was
alive, was repeated in his hearing, but being dead, he is now charged with
Treason; he fearing death, runs to what is called a Church for sanctuary, (see
the Antiquity of this superstitious Propitiatory in the times of the
Christians) whom at the suit of Leontius Bishop of the Novation He is pardoned.
Church at Rome, he pardoned; and yet the Novations will The Novat. break their
Principles to uphold their Sanctuary.
admit none unto their Communion, though they repent that have sacrificed unto
Idols.

The troubles of Antioch were not yet over: Paulinus being Cap 15. More
troubles at Antioch. Paulinus dies. Evag. chosen. He lives not many days.
Flavian. works that no Bishop is chosen.
dead, the people abhorred Flavianus for his Perjury, and chose Evagrius, who
living not many days, in whose room, through the device of Flavianus, none was
chosen but those that detested him for the breaking of his Oath, met in private
Conventicles. Flavianus rolled every stone to get this over, and to bring them
under his Jurisdiction; which he thus brought to pass: The spite and grudge
between him and Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, being over, and Damasus Bishop
of Rome by his means being reconciled unto him, both of them having been
offended with him, for that he had both forsworn himself, and been the occasion
of the discord of the City; But now Theophilus being Theoph. sends Isidorus to
Damasus of Rome, to indulge his Perjury. As the custom of the Church, to serve
popular ^nds.
pleased with him, he sent Isidorus a Priest to appease Damasus toward
Flavianus, and to instruct him, That it was according to the use and manner of
the Church, if (respecting the Unity and Concord to be trained among the common
people, he would not think amiss of Flavianus for so doing); See how Perjury
came to be pallia^e^ for popular ends by those Bishops, and how it is
represented as the use and manner of the Church so to do. When Flavianus was
thus restored to the Communion of the Faithful, Flavian is restored.
the people of Antioch were in process of time brought to Love and Union one
with another: The Arrians then being thrust out of The Arrians hold
Conventicles.
the Church, raised Conventicles in the Suburbs.

Much stir there was at Alexandria; About the same time the Cap. 16. New
troubles at Alex. about the pulling down of an Idols Temple.
said Theophilus got Orders from the Emperor to pull down the Idols Temple in
that City, and that Theophilus should oversee it, which he did, omitting
nothing that might tend to the reproach and contumely of the Heathenish
Ceremonies: which the Heathen there, and those professing Philosophy could no
longer bear, but jointly ran on the Christians, dispatching them every kind of
way, as they could, whom the Christians resisted, and sought to defend
themselves; so that mischief was heaped upon mischief; the skirmish continued
so long, and was so sore, till both sides Many slain of the Christians by the
Heathens, and the Heathens by the Christians They fight till they can kill no
longer.
were weary and could kill no longer. Not so many were killed of the Ethnicks,
yet a great number of the Christians were killed, and of both sides wounded
(says the History) an infinite number. This is the consequence of doing things
of that nature, in The consequence of reforming Religion in a way of violence.
a grating and insulting manner, which otherwise may be better accomplished.
The Ethnicks (or Heathen) when they had done, were wonderfully afraid of the
Emperors displeasure, and so ran The Heathen hide themselves.
away and hid themselves. Haladius Priest of Jupiter boasted that he had killed
nine with his own hands. The slaughter being over, the Governor of Alexandria,
and the Captain of the Host came and assisted Theophilus in the pulling down of
the Temples. Theoph. assisted by the Captain of the Host.
Thus much of the broiles of Alexandria.

One thing I cannot let pass without mentioning, though it may Cap. 19.
seem no otherwise to appertain to what I am about, than to show the effects of
men's ordering and imposing of Religion, who know not the Principle of God; and
that I may show the rise of many things, which yet some retain, though long
agone they were thought fit to be abandoned: The Novations dividing themselves
from the other Christians Communion, because of receiving again such as fell in
the Persecution under Decius; The Bishops The Office of the shrieving Priest^
Original.
made a Canon, That in every Church there should a Priest be appointed for the
admission of Penitents, that such as had fallen after Baptism, should in the
hearing of the Priest appointed for that purpose, confess their sin and
infirmity: Among some of the Christians this Canon (says the Historian) is yet
of force. But those of the Faith of one Substance, and the Novations, banished
it from them on this occasion; To a Priest appointed for this purpose, a noble
Woman came and confessed her sins orderly after Baptism; the Priest enjoined
her Fasting, and continual Prayers, for penance; and that together with her
confession in word, she showed forth the works of Repentance in deed; as she
continued a while longer a shriving (says the History) she accused her self of
another crime, and declared, That a certain Deacon of that Church had abused
her Body; for which the Deacon was banished the Church; and there being much
ado among the People, for they were wonderfully incensed, and so by the advice
of Eudaemon of Alexandria, Nectarius Bishop of And the taking of it away,
through a Priests defiling a noble Woman that came to confess.
Constantinople took away the Function of the shriving Priest, and granted
liberty to every one as his Conscience served him to be partaker of the holy
Mysteries.

Great was the diversities of Opinions in Religion among the Cap. 20. Great
divisions among the Christians as to Opinion, though only the Eunomians were
exiled by the Emperor.
Christians in this day, wherein, though the outward state of things were not
very troublesome, for Theodosius molested none of the aforesaid Opinions,
saving Eunomius, whom the Emperor exiled for publishing Books, for raising
Conventicles at his own private House within Constantinople, and denying the
others of the public places within the Cities, except the Novations, and the
Friendship of Authority which lay deep in the Breasts of some of them: For they
thought if all had been equally privileged, there had been offense to none; I
say, Theodosius molested them not otherwise than aforesaid; and although things
thereby had pretty quiet as from Authority, yet upon every trifling occasion
they break forth among themselves, viz. the Arrians, Novations, They fall out
among themselves.
Macedonians, and Eunomians, one severing himself from another; and these
Schisms and Rents were many, and too long here to repeat, as it is usual where
the Unity of the Spirit is not known in the bond of Peace, where Logic, and
Wit, and the wisdom which is from beneath, takes upon it the determination of
Truth. In the Suburbs, Theodosius gave leave for them to have Conventicles, The
Heathens the Original of the Word Conventic^e, the Christians take it up after
the same manner and sense.
(for so as I have intimated from the Heathens days, who were the Original,
all professions of Religion, who stood not with the privileges of public
Authority, received appellation); A great ado there was about the successor of
Agelius aforesaid, in the Novation Church, he being very ancient, appointed
Sisinius, Much ado about a successor to Agelius.
and not Marcianus to succeed him. The people were troubled hereat, because
Marcianus preserved them from trouble in the days of Valens, and was a godly
man; so the old man was constrained for the cooling of their heat, to come as
well as he could The poor old man to cool their heat, was constrained to come
into the Church, and declare his Successor. Sho^tly after which he dies.
Marcianus succeeds. Sabbatius a Jew turns Christian, fe^gnedly is made a
Priest. Insinuates Jewish observa^ion of Easter, gets two Priests more to him.
Seeks to be a Bishop. The like attempted at Pazus in Phrygia. Marcian. is
troubled that he laid hands on him and them. Sabbat. Hypocrisy.
(for he was very feeble) into the Church, where he said, -- Immediately after
my decease, you shall have Martianus for your Bishop, after Martianus,
Sisinius. -- Not long after which he died. Marcianus becoming their Bishop,
they were divided again. A certain Jew called Sabbatius, being turned a
Christian, was made Priest by Martianus; he retained the old root of Judaism in
him, notwithstanding, applied himself to the Jewish observations, with which
being not content, he sought to be a Bishop, seeking to alter (by means of two
Priests he had got on his side, viz. Theoctistus and Macarius) the observation
of the time called Easter to the Jewish Observation; as before the Novations
had attempted at Pazus in Phrygia, in the time of Valens. It grieved Martianus,
that he had not taken better advisement before he laid his hands on such vain
glorious and aspiring minds as he; and those Priests were; for Sabbatius
severed himself at first from the Church on pretense of a Monastical or retired
life, (for that was it, which being at first, was afterward called Monastical)
in color of tenderness of Conscience, that he could not administer the
Mysteries to certain men that were stumbling blocks unto him: But in process of
time showed himself what he intended, in raising Conventicles to his Opinion. A
Council of Novation Bishops he A Council of Novat. Bishops summoned at Angaris
about him.
summoned at Angaris a Town in Bythinia, adjoining to Helenopolis, whereunto he
cited Sabbatius, (for he fretted within himself with anger, (says the
Historian) and wished that his hands had been set on pricking Thorns, when they
were laid upon Sabbatius. -- It seems he had ordained a Jew for a Christian)
and expostulated the matter with him, who pleaded the difference about He is
expostulated with about Easter.
the Celebration of Easter, concerning which his Judgment was the Jewish; and
that at Pazus aforesaid, leaning thereunto: The Bishops supposing that he
enterprized all this in hopes of a Bishopric, made him take an Oath that he
would never take upon him Is sworn by the Bishops not to attempt to be a
Bishop. The Canon read for the indifferency of observing Easter.
to be a Bishop. He having taken this Oath, read to him the Canon for the
indifferency of Celebrating that time, as every one would, (for there had been
a great stir about Easter, and the Eastern and Western Churches were divided
thereabouts) which having done and said what they thought fitting concerning
that matter, and laid down a Proviso, that notwithstanding, they should be at
Unity and Concord in the Church of God; that is, those that differed about the
Celebrating of that time, which they said, the Canon for it was of an
indifferent matter. That business had an end, only Sabbatius was beforehand
with them for Fasting and He keeps Easter on Saturday, and meets with the
others on the next day.
Vigils, for he kept Easter on the Saturday, and met the next day with the
others in the Church, and was partaker of the Mysteries; which he did for many
years, and therefore could not be concealed. By occasion whereof (says the
Historian) many simple and ignorant Souls, especially in Phrygia and Galatia,
hoping verily to be justified thereby, became earnest followers of him, and
observing in secret his Celebration of Easter: So in the end Sabbatius is said
to raise many private Conventicles, and forgetting He raises a Conventicle.
the Oath he had taken, was made Bishop of such as addicted And contrary to his
Oath was made a Bis^op* An account of Easter.
themselves to his kind of Discipline.

Now concerning Easter, and other things into which they were divided, it will
be necessary that I speak a little, that I may not leave this work imperfect;
but seeing I am going through the first 600. years, as I have said; and therein
showing in a constant Series the Effects or Fruits of National Worships, Forms
of Faith, and Creeds, and the imposing of them, It will not be amiss a little
to give an account of those things in particular.

Concerning Easter. The greater part throughout the lesser Cap. 21. The greater
part throughout the less^r Asia held it on the fourteenth day of the month,
whether Sabbath day or not. Victor Bish. of Rome excommunicates them all.
Iraeneus Bishop of Lions rebukes him sharply. And gives instances of Unity when
the day is differently observed.
Asia of old, kept it on the fourteenth day of the month, without any account
made, or heed taken of the Sabbath Day, about which they held no Discord, which
those that held the contrary Opinion, till Victor Bishop of Rome through
boiling heat and choler (says the Historian) had excommunicated all Asia; For
which Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, inveyed bitterly by Letters against
him, and rebuked him for (they are the words of the Historian) his fumish
dealing, and furious rage, (so here was Division) and put him in remembrance
that the Elders and Ancient Fathers, who varied among themselves about the
observation of this Feast, communicated nevertheless one with another. Also
that Policarpus Bishop of Smyrna, who suffered Martyrdom under Gordianus,
communicated with Anicetus Bishop of Rome; Neither fell he out with him at all,
though he kept the fourteenth day of the month, as the custom of Smyrna, where
he abode, Those of the furthest part of Asia kept it upon the Saturday, as
observing the Jews, yet differed about the day of the Mon^h, Holding it after
the Equinoctial space,
did prevail. Some again inhabiting the furthest parts of Asia, vary in the
month, yet hold it upon the Saturday, thinking the Jews were herein to be
followed, though they kept not precisely the time of that Feast; they
solemnized it after the Equinoctial space; yet detesting the time limited by
the Jews, for they think that Easter is ever to be kept when the Sun is in
Aries, after the When the Sun is in Aries, as do the Antiochians.
manner of the Antiochians, in the month Xanthicus, but with the Romans in
April: Therein they followed not the Jews of the latter Age, (as says Josephus
in his third Book of Judaical Antiquities) who foully erred therein; but the
eldest and most ancient. And as these varied thus among themselves, so is it
manifest (says the Historian) that all other Countries throughout the The
Western parts celebrated it
West part of the World, whose Banks are beaten with the surging Ocean, of old
Tradition, and prescribed Customs, have celebrated this Feast after the
Equinoctial Line. And although all After the Equinoctial Line.
these Countries, (says the Historian) whose endeavor by all these instances
is to show that the keeping of that time, ought not to be impulsive, Nations
and Languages then varied one All prove it was not compulsive.
from another; yet they never divided from the Communion of the Church; neither
brake they asunder the Bond of Unity, neither is that true (says he) which is
rife in the months of malicious men, that the Council summoned in the time of
Constantinus Magnus, perverted and set quite out of order the manner and custom
retained concerning the celebrating of this Feast: for Constantine himself
wrote to such as varied from others, exhorting the lesser number to follow the
greater. The which Epistle of Constantine exhorted the lesser number to follow
the greater. His Letter thereabouts
the Emperor, thou shall find wholly in Eusebius. 3d book of the Life of
Constantine, which as to this is read in this sort, In my simple Judgment that is
a notable custom the which all the Churches, West, South, and North, together
with many Countries of the East, do retain; and therefore it comes to pass,
that all presently do think well of it. I my self have presumed so much upon
your discreet wisdom, that what custom soever is observed with uniform consent
in the City of Rome, Italy, Africa, and all Egypt, Spain, France, Britain,
Libya, and all Greece; in the Provinces of Asia, Pontus, and Cilicia, you most
willingly approve the same; weighing with your selves aright, that there is not
only more Churches, but a greater number of people in those parts, and that all
of duty should wish and earnestly desire that thing to be most religiously
established, which right and reason requires, which also has no fellowship
with open Perjury, of stubborn and stifnecked Jews. -- This is a piece of the
Emperors Epistle. They Those who are for the fourteenth day, bring John for
their Author. Those of Rome, and the West, bring Peter and Paul, as having left
such a Tradition. Yet none can produce any Testimony for this. The Celebration
more of custom than any Law. The Historians own confutation.
that keep Easter (says the Historian) the fourteenth day of the month, bring
John the Apostle for their Author; but such as inhabit Rome, and the West parts
of the World, allege Peter and Paul for themselves, that they should leave
them such a Tradition; yet (says the Historian) there is none that can show in
writing any Testimony of theirs for confirmation and proof of their custom; and
hereby (says he) do I gather, that the Celebration of the Feast of Easter came
up more of custom, then by any Law or Canon: But concerning the day it self,
hear him what he says, and I think I need say little more for the confutation
of the strictness of the keeping thereof, for I have minded in all these things
to let the words of Antiquity, or the sayings of those whom I quote, as
History, evince the thing for which I produce them; that not in mine only, as
I proposed in the beginning, but in the words of them who are received as
Authentic, the matter may be judged. Presently, me thinks (says he) Of the
observation of Easter by Imposition.
fit opportunity serves to discourse of Easter, for neither had the Elders of
old, nor the Fathers of late days, I mean such as favored the Jewish Custom,
sufficient cause (as I gather) so eagerly to contend about the Feast of Easter;
neither weighed they deeply with themselves, that when the Jewish Forms and
Figures were translated into the Christian Faith, the literal observation of
Moses 's Law, and the Types of things to come wholly vanished away. The which
may evidently be gathered, when as there is no Law established in the Gospel
which allows the observation of Jewish Rites; nay, the Apostle has in plain
words forbidden it, where he abrogated Circumcision, and exhorted us not to
contend about Feasts, and Holy Days: For, writing to the Galathians, he says
in this sort, Tell me, you that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear what
the Law says? Gal. 4.
When that he had discoursed a while thereof, he concludes that the Jews were
become Servants unto the Law, and that such as were called into the Christian
Faith, were thereby made free. He admonishes us further, Not to observe days,
neither months, nor years: And unto the Colossians he is plain as may be,
saying, That the observation of such things were nothing but a Shadow; His
words are these, Let no man therefore judge you in Meats, or Drinks, Col. 2.
in a piece of a Holy Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath, which are the
shadows of things to come. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, he confirms the
same, where he says, Insomuch Heb. 7.
that the Priesthood is translated, of necessity there must be a translation of
the Law: Wherein neither does the Apostle nor the Evangelists press the
Christians with the yoke of bondage and servitude, but left the remembrance of
the Feast of Easter, and the observation of other Holy Days, to their free
choice and discretion, which have been benefited by such days. And because men
are wont to keep Holy Days for to refresh their weary some bodies, already
pining with pain and labor; Therefore it comes to pass, that every one, in
every place, of a certain custom, do celebrate of their own accord the
remembrance of the Lords Passion: for neither our Savior nor his Apostles have
commanded us any where to observe it; neither have they laid it down as a Law;
neither have the Evangelists and Prophets threatened us, or enjoined us a
penalty or punishment, as the Law of Moses has done to the Jews; but only the
Evangelists make mention of this Feast, partly for the great shame of the Jews,
who defiled their Bodies, and profaned their holy Feasts with blood and
slaughter; and partly also to signify that our Savior suffered death for the
Salvation of mankind, in the days of unleavened Bread: the drift of the
Apostle was not to lay down Canons and Decrees concerning Feasts and
Holy Days, but to become Patterns unto us of Piety, of good Life, and godly
Conversation. I am of Opinion (says he) that as many other things crept in of
custom in sundry places; so the Feast of Easter too has prevailed among all
people of a certain private custom and observation; Insomuch that (as I said
before) not one of the Apostles have any where prescribed to any man as much as
one rule of it.

Thus much concerning Easter, now of Lent. The occasion Concerning Lent.
of Fasting usually observed before Easter, as it appears to the whole World,
has been diversely observed. Such as inhabit Rome do fast three weeks together
before Easter, excepting the Saturday and Sunday; Illyricum, all Greece,
together with Alexandria, begin their fasting days six weeks before Easter,
and that space they call forty days fasting, or Lent; others, contrary to the
aforesaid customs, begin to fast seven weeks before Easter; yet in all that
while they use abstinency but only fifteen days, pausing between every one of
them; and these few days they call forty days fasting, or Lent; so that I
cannot choose but marvel (says the Historian) that they differing in number of
days, yet all jointly do call every of their observations forty days fasting,
or Lent. Others have derived the Etymology of the word as it pleases them
best, according to the invention of their own brain. Neither was there this
difference only about the number of days, but also has there been a great
diversity about the kinds of meat, for some have abstained from every living
Creature; some, of all the living Creatures, feed only upon Fish; others
together with fish, feed upon the Fowls of the Air, affirming, as Moses says,
That their Original is of the Water. Others eat neither Nuts nor Apples, nor
any kind of Fruit, nor Eggs neither; some feed only upon dry Bread; some others
received none of that; some who when they had fasted till nine of the Clock,
they refreshed nature with diverse sorts of meats; other Nations had other
customs; the manner and causes (says the Historian) are infinite: But (says
he) insomuch there is no man able to show a President or Record thereof in
writing, it is plain, that the Apostle left free choice and liberty unto every
man at his own discretion, without fear, compulsion, and restraint, to addict
himself unto that which seemed good and commendable: We know (says he) for
most certain, that this diversity of fasting is rife throughout the World. Thus
of Lent.

Again, concerning the Communion. There were sundry observations Concerning the
Communion.
and customs; for though in manner (says the Historian) all the Churches
throughout the World do celebrate and receive the holy Mysteries every Sabbath
Day after other; yet the people inhabiting Alexandria, and Rome, of an old
Tradition do not use it. The Egyptians adjoining unto Alexandria, together with
the Inhabitants of Thebais, use to celebrate it on Sunday; yet did they not
receive the Communion, as the manner is among the Christians; for when they had
banqueted and filled themselves with sundry delicate dishes, in the evening
after Service (as it was called) they used to communicate. Again, at Alexadria
on the Thursday and Friday the Scriptures were read, the Interpreters expounded
them all the solemnity for the Communion is accomplished; yet then the
Communion not received, and this was an old and ancient custom at Alexandria.
It is well known (says the Historian) that Origin flourished in those days in
the Church, who being a wise and discret Doctor, and expounder of Holy
Scripture, perceiving that the Precepts of Moses Law could no way literally be
understood, gave forth of the Passover, a Mystical and more Divine kind of
Interpretation, viz. That there was but only one true Passover, or Easter, the
which our Origen's notable observation concerning the Communion, or Easter,
once only offered or celebrated by Christ on the Tree. Concerning Readers in
the Church.
Savior effectually celebrated (says he) at his nayling on the Tree, when he
encountered with the power of darkness, and tryumphed over the Devil and all
his works. Thus as to the Communion.

Again as to the Readers. The Readers and Interpreters of the Scriptures at
Alexandria, were the Catechumenists, or Baptized, it forced not: when as the
custom in other Churches or Countries is to admit none into that Function,
unless he be first baptized.

Concerning the Priests. I remember (says the Historian) Concerning Priests,
and their Ma^rying.
another custom that is in force in Thessalia, that is, If he that is a Priest
after the receiving of Orders, do keep company with his Wife, the which he
married being a Layman, he is forthwith deposed of the Ministry. Yea, when as
(says he) all the famous Priests throughout the Eastern parts of the World,
and the Bishops And the Bishops.
also refrain the company of their Wives, at their own choice, without Law or
Compulsion. For many of them, (says he) notwithstanding the Administration and
Government of their Bishoprics, beget Children also on their lawful Wives.
Theodorus Theodorus that wrote against Priests Marriages, wrote wanton Books.
a Priest of Trivia, a City of that Country, was the Author and Ringleader of
that custom, who wrote those amorous and wanton Books, the which he made in the
prime of his flourishing years, and styled Aethiopica. Those in Thessalonica,
Macedonia, and Hellas in Achaia, retain the same customs and observations.

Concerning Baptism. In Thessalia they baptized only in the Concerning
Baptism.
Easter Holy Days, (as they are called) and therefore (says the Historian)
very many die without Baptism.

Concerning what is called the Altar. The Church (so called) Concerning the
Altar.
in Antioch in Syria, was situate contrary to other Churches, (so called) for
the Altar stands not to the East, but toward the West.

Concerning what is called Service. In Hellas, Jerusalem, and Concerning
Service.
Thessalia, Service was said by Candlelight, after the manner of the Novations
at Constantinople. In Caesarea, in Cappadocia, and at Cyrus, the Priests and
Bishops did expound the Scripture at Evening-prayer, on the Saturdayes and
Sundays, by Candlelight. The Novations at Hellespont had not the same order
and manner of Service as the Novations at Constantinople; yet for the most part
they imitate the chief Churches among them. To be short (says the Historian)
amongst the customs and observations of all Among all Sects, scarce two follow
the same Order.
Sects and Religions, we shall not be able to find two which follow and retain
one order of Service.

Concerning Preaching. At Alexandria the inferior Priest did Concerning
Preaching
use to preach: that Order first began when Arius turned upside down the quiet
state of the Church.

Concerning Fasting. At Rome they did fast every Saturday. Concerning Fasting.


Concerning Sinning. At Caesarea in Cappadocia, after the Concerning Sinning.
manner of the Novations, they received not into the Communion such as sin
after Baptism a sin unto death. So did the Macedonians in Hellespont, and such
as throughout Asia do celebrate the Feast of Easter the fourteenth day of the
month.

Concerning Marriages. The Novations throughout Phrygia Concerning Marriages
allow not second Marriages: Such of them as were at Constantinople, neither
received it, nor rejected it. Those in the West parts of the World admitted it
wholly. The Originals and Authors of so great diversity (says the Historian)
were Bishops, which governed the Churches at diverse and several times; such as
like of these Rites (says he) do commend them to Posterities for Laws. But
(says he) to pen in Paper the infinite and diverse Customs and Ceremonies
throughout Cities and Countries, would be a very tedious work, and scarce,
(says he) nay impossible to be done. And thus much I have said, and thus much
I have rehearsed concerning this matter, which shall suffice me; and now I
shall proceed where I left off, as to matter of Division and Tumult, as this
has been of Confusion, the natural Children of imposing Religion, or enjoining
Creeds, Confusions, and forms of Faith, which has produced what has been here
rehearsed, and a great deal more during the term of time I have waited upon in
this Discourse throughout the World.

The Christians, who (as I have said) having little or no outward Cap. 22. The
divisions of the Christians when the Empire was quiet.
disturbance, at least in comparison to what had been before; not only fell
into diversity of Opinion and Divisions, as I have signified, but those so
divided, fell from their Fellows, and upon sundry light and trivial occasions,
disagreed among themselves. The Novations were divided about Easter, (as I said
before) The Novations divide about Easter, the month, and day of the week.
yet were not content with one division, but throughout sundry Provinces they
sometimes jarred, and sometime joined together, not only about the month, but
also the day of the week; with such like matters of small importance. The
Arrians were The divisions of the Arrians.
continually arguing and broaching of intricate quirks, which brought their
Disputations to very absurd and horrible Opinions; and whereas the Church
believes (says the Historian) That God is the Father of the Son, which is the
Word. They question, Whether God may be called a Father before the Son had his
being; and because they were of Opinion, That the Word of God was not begotten
of the Father, but had his being of nothing; erring in the chief and principal,
no marvel that they plunged into absurd Opinions. Dorotheus who was translated
thither from Dorotheus and his Heresy.
Antioch, said, That the Father could be neither in Essence, nor Appellation,
if the Son had no being. Marinus, whom they called Marinus and his Opinion in
contradiction.
out of Thracia, before the time of Dorotheus, stomaching that Dorotheus was
preferred before him, supposed that now it was high time to work his feat, set
himself opposite, and maintained the contrary Opinion, wherefore they were
divided; and because (says the Historian) of the vain and frivolous questions
amongst them, parted Companies. Dorotheus, and those with him, continued in
their former places. Marinus and his Company, erected them Chapels, and there
had private Meetings: their conclusion was, -- That the Father was ever a
Father, yea, before the Son had his being.

The followers of Marinus were called Psathyriani, because of The appellation
of the followers of Marinus.
one Theoctistus, a waferer both in Syria, and was an earnest maintainer of
that side. Selenas Bishop of the Goths, who was by Selenas Bishop of the Goths.
Father a Goth, by Mother a Phrygian, and so able to preach in both Languages,
was also of that Opinion.

These were also not long after divided, for Marinus contended Marinus contends
with Agapius Bishop of Ephesus.
with Agapius, whom he had but lately advanced to the Bishopric of Ephesus.
The controversy was not about Religion, but of Primacy; they strove which of
them should be greatest; the Goths sided with Agapius; wherefore (says the
Historian) many Clergymen under these Bishops Jurisdictions, perceiving the
ambition, the rancor, and malice of these proud Prelates, Not so much of
Religion as Ambition.
forsook quite the Arrian Opinion, and embraced the Faith of one Substance.

The Arrians being divided among themselves the space of Arrians divided thirty
five years. The Psathyrians or followers of Marinus make a Law.
thirty and five years, in the end, as many as were Psathyrians, through
persuasion, which prevailed with them, made an end of brawling (says the
History) in the Consulship of Theodosius the younger, and Plinthus the Praetor;
who after their reconciliation and agreement, made a Law, That the Question
that was the principal cause of that stir, should never again be called into
Controversy. Notwithstanding it took place no where but in Constantinople; for
in other Cities where the Arrians had dominion, the stir is rife.

Thus of the Novations and Arrians, now concerning the Eunomians. Cap. 23: The
divisions of the Eunomians.
Eunomius himself first fell from Eudoxius, who had chosen him Bishop of
Cyzicum, because he would not admit his Master Aetius, lately excommunicated,
into the Church. Others called after his name, parted themselves into several
Sects.

Theophrinius a Cappadocian, one that was trained up under Eunomius,
Theophrinius and his Heresy.
in quirks of Logic and captious Fallacies, and having Aristotle's Predicaments
and Perihermenias at his fingers end, wrote Books, intituling them, The
Exercise of the Mind. Because of which he became hated of his own Sect, and
accounted by He is hated of his own Sect.
them as an Apostate; whereupon he raised private Conventicles, and left behind
him an Heresy entitled with his Appellation.

At Constantinople, Eutichius fell from the Eunomians upon Eutichius divides
from them also.
light and trifling occasions, and frequented several Meetings.

The followers of Theophronius were called Eunomotheophrani: From these two
came the Eunomotheophrani, and the Eunomilutichians.
What fond things they brawled about (the Historian says) he thinks not
needful to lay down in writing, but concerning Baptism, which (says he) they
corrupted; they Baptize not in the Name of the Trinity, but the death of Christ.

Thus of the Eunominians. Lastly, concerning the Macedonians, The divisions of
the Macedonians. Eutropius, Carterius, divided from one another.
(for these things are necessary to be particularly instanced): Eutropius a
Priest, gathered a several company of such matters as he thought good (says
the History) to follow his Tail. Carterius also of the same Sect, divided
himself from him: And of these arose others among the Cities. I of my own part
(says Socrates the Historian) inasmuch as I led my life here at
Constantinople, where I was born, bred, and brought up, no marvel though I
write more at large of the famous Acts within this City, partly, seeing that I
saw most of them with mine eyes, and partly also, insomuch they are more
famous, and thought far worthy of memory than any other Acts.

These things reigned not at one, but at sundry times; the several names of
these and all other Sects, may be found particularly by those that are disposed
thereunto, and to learn them exactly in Epiphanius his Book, Bishop of Cyprus,
entitled Ancyrotus.

Whilst these things cluttered so, and were divided among the Cap. 24. The
Commonwealth rouls as the Christians are divided.
Christians, the outward state of the Commonwealth was not at rest, but very
troublesome. One Eugenius, who was first a Grammarian, then a Courtier in the
Western Empire, Guard to the Eugenius conspires the death of Valentinianus, who
is smothered in his bed.
Emperors Person; then his Treasurer: being a politic man; and then puffed up
with pride, consulted with Arbogastes of the lesser Galatia, by Office Captain,
in condition barbarous, and behavior cruel; and together conspired the death
of Valentinianus the Emperor, which to effect, they dealt with the Eunuchs of
the Emperors Chamber, who as he slept, stifled him to death, through which
Eugenius got the Empire of the Western part of the Gets the Empire of the West.
World, behaving himself after the wonted guise of Tyrants.

Theodosius hearing of this, was very sorry, yet prepares to give Theodosius
troubled hereat, prepares for Battle. Anno. 396.
him Battle as he had done to Maximus: So having made his Son Honorius Emperor
in his third Consulship, and the first of Abundantius, the tenth of January,
having gathered great forces together, began his march into the West, leaving
both his Sons behind Leaves his Sons Emperors.
him Emperors at Constantinople; whom to aid against this Tyrant, many of the
Barbarous Nations beyond Illyricum, came The Barbarians freely join with him.
freely and of their own accord. Into France he came with great power: Eugenius
having there drawn together multitudes of men, and fortified themselves; the
Camp was pitched, and the They fight in France. The Battle doubtful. The
Barbarians wo^sted. Theodosius troubled, falls prostrate, and prays.
Battle fought by the River Phrygdus. As the Battle was doubtful when the
Romans came to fight hand to hand; So among the Barbarians that came to aid
Theodosius, Eugenius had the upper hand. Theodosius seeing the Barbarians
foiled and overthrown, was wonderfully pensive, and falling down prostrate on
the ground, prayed to God for aid and assistance: who heard him, and he
obtained his suit; for Macurious his Captain putting on a venturous and valiant
courage, got him where the Barbarians were foiled, came to the Standard, joined
with him the other chief Captains, encountered the Enemy, brake the Array, made
them to fly, and pursued the flight. Immediately after proceeded another
strange Eugenius is routed. The wind turns the Arrows on Eugenius.
Act, there arose such blustering blasts of Winds, as turned Eugenius*s Darts,
the Usurper, on their own sides, and the Arrows of Theodosius forcibly on the
armed Soldiers of Eugenius. Which so coming to pass, Eugenius falling at
Theodosius's feet, craved mercy; Eugen. falls at Theodosius's Feet. The
Soldiers strike off his head.
but as he kneeled, the Soldiers of Theodosius struck Eugenius's head from his
Shoulders.

These things were done on the sixth of September, in the third Consulship of
Arcadius, and the second of Honorius, in the year 396. In the which I have been
the more particular, to show into what a narrow strait Theodosius was brought,
and how at length the Lord turned the hand he had brought against him, who gave
occasion of trouble, by enforcing of Religion, so far forth as has been
manifested.

Arnogastus the Author of so great a slaughter, seeing that by A^nogastus the
Conspi^ator falls on his own Sword.
flight there was no possibility to escape, ran upon his own Sword and
dispatched himself.

The travel and great toil Theodosius the Emperor took about Cap. 25.
Theodosius falls ill.
these things, made him ill at ease; which when the Disease increased, so that
he saw he must conclude his natural race, he was more troubled with the cares
and doubts of the settling the Commonwealth, than the finishing of his course,
and considering how many calamities commonly happen when the Empire is divided;
therefore he sent for Honorius his Son from Constantinople, Sends for Honorius.
purposing by him to establish tranquillity in the West. When his Son was come
to Millain, he was something recovered, so that He somewhat recovers.
he held the triumph of his Victory, and in the morning was present thereat,
but in the afternoon he was so suddenly taken with his Disease, that he could
not go, but charged his Son to see all accomplished, and the night following
departed this life, in the Dies the next night.
sixtieth year of his Age, and the sixteenth year of his Reign, whom his two
Sons, Arcadius and Honorius succeeded, who between Anno. 397. Arcadius and
Honorius succeed.
them divided the Eastern and Western parts of the Empire.

Theodosius being dead, his Sons took in hand the Government Socrat. lib 6. cap
1. Both govern peaceably.
of the Empire, Arcadius in the East, and Honorius in the West, who both of
them lived peaceably and quietly, had those whom it concerned, turned the same
course with them, but the old spirit of The Christians fall out
mischief and rancor still remaining, and the bottom and ground on which the
leading men amongst the Bishops stood, being that which tended not to peace, as
what has already been instanced abundantly manifests, so the Fruits appeared
in them, whose times were outwardly peaceable, but themselves not having the
Prince or Principle of Peace to rule them, produced the effects The reason why.
hereafter to be mentioned.

Theodosius being dead, his Son Arcadius laid his Corpse in the Theodosius
buried by his Sons.
Grave; and the Army that overthrew Eugenius, being come to the City of
Constantinople; and the Emperor going to the Gates to meet them, the Soldiers
laid hands on Ruffinus his Ambassador, and beheaded him, being suspect of
Treason, and procuring His Army strikes off Ruffinus head for treason. He was
Ambassador. Marcianus B^sh. of the Novations, dies. Anno. 401. Sisinius
succeeds. Cap. 2. Nectarius dies. John Chrysostom is put in his place.
Theophilus of Alexandria opposes. Seeks to put in Isidor. Isidorus agency for
Theophilus.
the Hunne^ to invade the Roman Dominions, who destroyed Armenia, and other
Countries of the East. The same day Marcianus the Bishop of the Novations
dying, Sisinius was constituted in his room; and Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople dying shortly after, to put another in whose room, occasioned
some stir; but at length Arcadius, and the people, send for John Chrysostom,
then a Priest, and placed him therein, which Theophilus of Alexandria sought to
oppose, and to place Isidorus, a Priest of his own Church, who had undergone
some peril for him therein; the peril was this, When Theodosius waged war with
Maximus, Theophilus sent presents, and two Letters, charging Isidorus to
present him that had the upper hand with the gift, and one of the Letters.

Isidorus was careful in the business, and going to Rome, waited The discovery.
there to hear who had the Victory; whilst he attended hereon, the Reader he
had with him stole away the Letters, upon which Isidorus betook him to his
heels, and ran away. I mention this Isidorus's flight. The application of the
Narration, and how the Bishops courted the rising Sun.
story, that the World may see what fetches were in those Bishops at that time,
and how they were deceived one by another, as they sought to deceive. The
rising Sun they sought to worship (as the Proverb is) and carrying two faces,
or being Jacks on both sides, (as also is the expression) many of them deal
with the times, as they deal with Religion, which being merely political, And
deal with matters of Faith, as they deal with the Emperor.
they deal with matters of Faith as they deal with the Emperor, and with the
Emperor as with matters of Faith; who could get the Prince on his side (I speak
not of all, for some were honest to what they knew, and suffered for it, but of
too many this was the custom) and according to his Religion they had their
fetches, and designed themselves, as is the ancient saying, -- Regis ad
exemplum totum componitur orbis, (that is) The whole World follows after the
example of the King. But Theophilus his hostility in seeking Theophilus
disappointed, with charging of John to advance his Friend, is changed himself.
to put by John by discrediting him, and to advance his Friend, prospered no
better than his shift by his Friends, for the Bishops that were for John,
charged Theophilus with many heinous crimes; and at length Eutropius belonging
to the Emperors Chamber, The Article showed him. And choice given him to create
John, or stand to the Bar.
showed the Articles and Indictment to Theophilus, and bad him choose whether he
would create John Bishop, or stand to the Bar and answer to the Crimes that
were laid to his charge; which Theophilus seeing, and being afraid, consented
to the enstalling of He creates John.
John. And these were some of the Fathers of the Church, and some of their
doings, whom Policy, not Faith, ruled in matters of Religion, the concernments
of men, not of God.

This John had no great matter of quiet during his being in that Cap. 4. John
disquieted the Clergy for reforming them. Cap. 5. Then by the Magistrates is
banished a first and second time. Cap. 6. The Common*wealth sore shaken. Gainus
the Goth rebels Puts the Emperor to it, is dispatched. Anno. 404. Cap. 7. The
Priesthood divided. A Q^ery put, Whether God had a Body? Anno. 403.
Bishopric, First, The Clergy were offended with him because he was very
severe in reforming them; then the Magistrates: so he was banished a first and
second time, in which latter banishment he died. The Commonwealth also, as for
the most part it came to pass when the Christians were in division, suffered
sore shakings. Gainas a Goth, trusted much in Military Affairs by the Emperor,
because he was a valiant man, rebelled, and put the Emperor exceedingly to it;
who at length dispatched him, and rid the Empire of that trouble.

Then during these turmoils, those in the Priesthood were in great dissension
among themselves, to the great slander (says the Historian) of Christian
Religion. There was a question broached a little before, Whether God were a
Body made after the likeness and form of man? Or, whether he were without a
Body; and not only without the form of man, but also void of all corporeal
shape? Such monstrous Opinions ran men into, who knew not the Principle of God,
but in the Wisdom which is from beneath, which is earthly, sensual, and
devilish, went to determine of God. This ran them into several contentions and
quarrels; certain of the rudest and unlearned sort of them, called Religious,
thought that God was corporeal, and that he was of the form and figure of man:
But others condemned them and their Heretical Opinion. Hence arose the ground
of picturing God like an old man. Amongst The ground of picturing God like an
old man. Theophilus opposes this.
the rest Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria was one that opposed this blasphemous
Doctrine; who inveying bitterly against it, in the hearing of the whole
Congregation; The Worshippers of Egypt understanding it, left their Religious
Houses, and coming to Alexandria, flocked about him, and condemned himfor a
wicked person, and sought to bereave him of his life. Theophilus being Those of
Egypt seek to kill him.
put to his wits end, trusted thereunto more than unto God, and seeking to
gratify them, said, When that I fasten mine eyes upon you, me thinks I do see
the lively face of God. Though the rash He falls before them for his life.
heat of the unruly Monks was alaid at this, yet said they, -- If that be true
which thou say, that the countenance of God is no otherwise than ours,
accurse then the Works of Origin, for diverse of his Books do oppugn our
Opinion; but if thou refuse to do this, asure thy self to receive at our hands
the punishment due unto the impious and open enemies of God. -- Nay (said
Theophilus) I shall do that which is good in your eyes; I pray you be not
offended with me, for I hate Curses the Books of Origin also.
the Books of Origin, I think them worthy of great reprehension which allow of
them.

This quieted the Monks, but whether somewhat else was quieted thereby, which
he dissembled with in this thing, I leave the tender Reader to judge. There
were four natural Brothers who The four Brothers of Egypt Monasteries, called
Long, courted by
had the oversight of the Religious Houses or Monasteries, so called, of Egypt,
Dioscorus, Ammonius, Eusebius, and Euthimius; who by reason of the goodly
statures of their tall Bodies, were called Long, as they were famous otherwise,
and accounted worthy men, especially at Alexandria. These Theophilus aforesaid
Theophilus, Dioscorus he made a Bishop.
entirely loved; Dioscorus he in a manner constrained from the Desert, and made
Bishop of Hermopolis; two others of them, being a Bishop, he constrained to
live with him, which they did, Forced two more of them to live with him.
not of a willing mind, but by force, which usually holds not long; but as
Rivers still gather together by stopping, becomes more strong to run their
former Channel, so is it with force. The They cannot bear his hoording of money.
heaping, and holding, and gathering up of moneys by the Bishop, and his being
set thereupon, much displeased them, and being grieved and pricked in
Conscience, they determine into the Desert Determine to return to the Desert.
again, and would by no means stay with him; which he essaying, and not
prevailing, and finding that they abhorred his manner of living, promised to
work them a displeasure; they not heeding his threats, depart; he, as
opportunity presented, being He threatens them, they depart.
prone by nature (says the History) to anger and revenge, sought their
mischief; first, he began to spite Dioscorus, for it grieved him to the guts
(says the History) that the Worshippers made so much of Dioscorus, and
reverenced him so little; and because he could find no other way to work them
trouble than by seeking to disaffect the minds of the Monks that were under
their Government, and favored them; he wrought this feat, remembering that in
conferring with those Monks, they had affirmed, That God was without Body, and
void of humane form or figure: for had His devilish conspiracy in the murder of
his Principle to work them mischief.
he the shape of man, it would follow necessarily, that he could suffer after
the nature and guise of man; and that Origin and other Writers had excellently
sifted out the truth thereof. That he might be revenged of these Monks, though
he himself was of the same Opinion, he sent to the Religious Houses of the
Desert, That they He works it.
should obey neither Dioscorus, nor his Brethren, forasmuch as their Opinion
was, That God had no Body. For God (says he) as Holy Scriptures does witness,
has Eyes, Ears, Hands, and Feet, even as men have. Dioscorus and his followers
(said he) are of a wicked Opinion; they deny, with Origin, that God has Eyes,
Ears, Feet, and Hands. And into this he deceived many Monks, who were simple
and plain Souls, Idiots, and diverse also, that were altogether unlearned, unto
his side. This divided the Monks, and set Div^des the Monks.
them to the reviling of one another for lewd and impious persons: The
Confederates with Theophilus called their Brethren The Original of the word
Origenist, or wicked men. These Attributers to God the form of man, called
Anthropomorphites. Theophilus marches with forces against the Monks, whom his
plot had divided. It proves a deadly b^ttel. It turns at length upon his own
head.
Origenists, and wicked men: The Accomplices of Theophilus had the name of
Anthropomorphites, by interpretation, such as artribute to God the form of man;
the bickering was great, and fell out to be a deadly Battle. Theophilus with
his great power went to the Mount Nitria where those Religious Houses stood,
and aided the Monks both against Dioscorus and his Brethren. The Religious men
being beset with great danger, had much ado to save their lives; but the end
turned upon Theophilus, in the just Judgment of God, as aforesaid, who to save
his life then, denied his God; as now to destroy these men, he opposed his
Principle. These things I thought convenient (in one Bishop that had The reason
why these two instances of this Bishop and the Emperor are produced.
the Patriarchal Sea) to signify, and in two instances, that of the Emperor,
and this, to show what it was that ruled in the World, that made Forms of
Faith, and Principles of Believing.

Thus as to Principles of Faith. Now as to Service, (so called) Cap. 8.
Concerning Service. The bloody consequence of Anthems.
I shall give one instance of Anthems, and the Original of them, and therein
show how their Songs were as bloody, and founded in blood, as was their
Doctrines or Forms of Faith; and so from Egypt I shall come to Constantinople,
and show how the streams of blood both in Faith and Worship ran through the
Eastern Dominion of the Roman Empire.

The Arrians having their Conventicles in the Suburbs of Constantinople, A
particular instance between the Arrians and the Nicenians at Constantinople.
when the Festival Meetings, which was used among the Christians, were come,
viz. the Saturday and the Sunday, the Arrians divised Hymns of their Faith, and
gathering themselves together into the Porches of the City Gates, sang
interchangeably such Songs as they had devised, almost throughout the whole
night; and as the day began to dawn, they were wont to go through the Gates of
the City to their places where they met, or their wonted Congregations, singing
as aforesaid; which when John Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople understood,
and how they had passages, as this, -- Where be these fellows that affirm three
to be but one Power? Fearing lest the simple sort should be beguiled, caused
several of those of the Faith of one Substance, to go singing such Anthems in
behalf of that Creed, partly to suppress the Arrians, and partly to confirm (as
he thought) those of the same belief with himself, but it proved otherwise: for
when the Arrians found that the Anthems of the other had more majesty and
reverence, and with a more melodious and sweet harmony were sung in the night
season; and because a little before their side had gotten the upper hand, and
prevailed, they were swollen, and puffed up (says the History) and boiling with
revenge, they took Arms and set on the others, in which conflict many were
slain on both sides. And Briso an Eunuch of the Empress, Many slain in the
conflict. Briso the Empress Eunuch woun^ed.
who favored the Faith of one Substance, and the Hymns for that purpose, was
struck in the Forehead with a stone, which wonderfully incensed the Emperor;
who thereupon gave commandment Anthems forbidden by the Emperor.
that no more Hymns should be sung; the Empress Eudoxia was so far in these
Hymns, for those of the Faith of one Substance, that she found silver
Candlesticks made on Cross-wise for the bearing of the Tapers and Wax-candles.

Now for the Original of the Anthems. It is said, That Ignatius The Original of
Anthems by a dream of Ignatius of Antioch, of Angels.
of Antioch in Syria, the third Bishop in succession from Peter the Apostle,
(as says the History) saw a vision of Angels which extolled the blessed
Trinity (as it is said) with Hymns that were sung interchangeably, and delivered
to the Church of Antioch the order and manner of singing expressed in the
Vision, from whence it came to pass (says the History) that every Church
received the same Tradition. Whether this were so or no, I leave to the Reader
to judge as he thinks fit; Angels and Quiristers are two things. The effects of
this Antheming, shows that it was not of A paraphrase thereupon.
the Original of Angels, except those of the bottomless Pit, whose King is
Abaddon; for those whom the Shepherds heard sing, when Jesus was born, was,
Glory unto God on High, on Earth Peace, good will unto men, not destruction; as
was his Doctrine also, who said, He came not to destroy men's lives, but to save.

Thus of Anthems; now as to Bishops again; for I still find the History
interlaced with their Quarrels and Contentions, which usually sets the whole
World on fire, who yet were called Pastors of the Church.

Dioscorus and his Brethren, called Long, and the Monks with Cap. 9. Dioscorus
and his Brethren called Long, get them to Constantinople. Inform the Emperor,
and John; Isidorus goes with them.
them, being so entreated, as aforesaid, by Theophilus, get them to
Constantinople, and with them Isidorus his former great Friend, but now turned
otherwise, that to the Emperor and John they might give an account of the
slights of Theophilus, whom John courteously received, but admitted them not to
the Communion, though he did to the Common Prayer, till the matter had been
John receives them to Common Prayer, not the Communion. Theoph. plots against
John, because (as he heard) he received them to the Communion, and against
Isidor. His plot. He summons a Council in pretense against the books of Origin.
farther sifted out and examined. Theophilus heard he had received them to the
Communion, which set him to think how to be revenged upon John, and also of the
others, and Isidorus too; to effect which he takes this course, he sent Letters
to the Bishoprics in every City to meet in a Council, pretending his dislike
of the Books of Origin as the cause, but concealing his main intent and drift,
from which Books Athanasius in former times had borrowed Testimonies to confute
the Arrians; and to effect his business the better, he linked into him
Epiphanius Bishop of Constantia, Gets Epiphanius unto him, whom he before had
charged with thinking basely of God, in attributing to him the shape of man.
Which now Theophilus turns to, in revenge to the others.
a City in Cyprus; whom Theophilus had a little before charged with thinking of
God basely and abjectly, attributing unto him the form and shape of a man; for
though Theopoilus was of this Opinion, and charged those that believed God had
the figure of man, yet because of the hatred and spite he owed unto others, he
denied openly in word that which he believed secretly in mind, and that in the
highest things which concern the Godhead, A view of a Bishop and a Patriarch.
and yet a Bishop, and (as I said before) set in the Patriarchal Seat as high
as Alexandria. At this Council in the Isle of Cyprus, Origens The Council held
in the Isle of Cyprus. They condemn Origens Books. Send to John not to read
them.
Books are condemned, a Decree being made, That from thenceforth the Works of
Origin should not be read. And by consent of them all, they write unto John,
requesting him to abstain from the reading of the Books of Origin.

Having this success, he called a Council of his own Province He calls a
Council at Alexandria; they condemn Origens books, who was dead about 200.
years before. Yet is not satisfied.
at Alexandria, where they condemned Origens works, who was dead about two
hundred years before. Yet this satisfied not Theophilus, his chief design and
drift being to be avenged on John and Dioscorus, with his Brethren; which being
openly known, there wanted not them who sought, what by Letters, and what by
Messengers, by forging of false stories and accusations, to get a Seeks by
false stories to get a Council at Constantinople. Cap. 11. Epiphanius from
Cyprus ^rings the Decree against Origens books. John invites Theophilus to his
House. He refuses. Gets Bishops. Reads the Decree.
Council to be held at Constantinople.

To this place Epiphanius came from Cyprus, at the request of Theophilus,
bringing with him the Decree of the Bishops, for the condemning Origens Books,
but not excommunicating Origin; whom John courteously invited to his House to
lodge with him; but he to please Theophilus, refused his courtesy, and calling
the Bishops, who by chance were at Constantinople, read the Decree, (of which
the Historian says) I have thus much to say, That it pleased Epiphanius and
Theophilus to condemn them. Of the Bishops, Some sign.
some for reverence of Epiphanius subscribed unto the Decree; some others
denied it utterly, of which were Theotinus Others refuse. Theotinus Bi^hop of
Scyth^a, in particular, his Speech to Epiphanius, and the Council thereabouts.
Bishop of Scythia, who made Epiphanius this answer, -- I of mine own part, O
Epiphanius, will no so much injure the man, who is departed to rest many years
ago; neither do I presume once to enterprise so heinous an offense, for to
condemn the Books which our Ancestors have not condemned, especially seeing
that I understand not as yet, neither read any parcel of the Doctrine therein
contained. And when a certain Book of Origens was brought forth, he read it,
and showed there the interpretation of Holy Scripture, agreeable unto the Faith
of the Catholic Church. Last of all he concluded with these words, They that
reprehend these things, do no less than mislike with the matter whereof these
Books do treat. -- This was his answer, who was of great fame, both for sound
Doctrine and godly conversation, (says the History.)

I have instanced this the rather, not only that the wiles and The reason why
these quotations are produced. The Original of condemning Books after men are
dead, the ground thereof, and the men from whence it came. Cap. 13. Epiphanius
makes a Deacon in John's Church; refuses to lodge with him, or pray with him,
unless he would bani^^ Dioscorus, and subscribe the Decree against Origin.
shifts used in those days, by the chief in matters of Religion, may be seen
one against another; but that the beginning of the work of condemning of Books
after men are dead, may be understood, and the men that undertook it, and the
ground on which they went.

Yet was not the matter ended between John and Epiphanius; for Epiphanius, not
only made a Deacon in John's Church, without John's License, and denied to lodge
with him at his House, saying, He would neither lie with him, nor pray with
him, unless be would banish Dioscorus and his Brethren out of the City, and
subscribe with his own hand the Decree which condemns the works of Origin.
Which John paused upon, and would not rashly undertake, but John pauses hereon.
Epiphanius does both
at celebration of the Communion, Epiphanius being by the Accomplices of
Theophilus, set in the midst, in the Church of the Apostles, he condemned the
Works of Origin, and excommunicated Dioscorus and his Brethren, all to reprove
John for taking their To reflect on John.
part; to whom when John heard this, he sent this Message by Serapion:
Epiphanius, Thou do many things contrary to the Canons; John's Message to him:
first, In that thou have presumed to make Ministers within my Diocese;
secondly, In that thou have ministered the Communion of thy own head, without my
License. Again, in that thou did refuse it when I requested thee, and now
thou did it of thy self; therefore take heed lest Warns him of the hostility
of the people.
the people stomach thy dealings, and be set on an uproar. If ought come amiss,
thou have thy remedy in thy hand.

This Message stroke Epiphanius with fear, who got him away, Epiphanius is
afraid, and hasts away. His Message to John by way of p^ophesie, wishing John's
to him in the same. Both take place.
and it is said, as he went to take Shipping, -- He said of John, I hope thou
shall never die a Bishop. And John of him, I hope thou shall never come alive
into thy Country. Whether these things were true or not, the event proved so,
for neither came Epiphamus alive to Cyprus, for he died on the Sea by the way;
neither died John a Bishop, for he was deposed and banished the Church, as
aforesaid.

Well, Epiphanius having hoised Sail, and John hearing that CAp. 14: John
preaches in di^praise of all Women, because Eudoxia countenanced Epiphanius.
Eudoxia takes it as including her, complains to the Emperor. A Counc^l called
at Calcedon thereupon. John's Opp^sit^s hasten thither, Theophilus among the
r^st.
Eudoxius the Empress had countenanced Epiphanius against him, he presently
steps up and preached a Sermon wholly in dispraise of all Women; which being
taken to include the Empress, and she complaining to the Emperor that she was
contumeliously dealt withal, A Council was called of Bishops at Chalcedon,
witherto gladly resorted all those that owed John a displeasure, or that were
cast out by him, or did not like him; and Theophilus hasted thither also to
take the opportunity, which John himself had administered, to have him out,
which was the end and drift of all his other contrivance and negotiation, where
he was enveighed bitterly against, as a wicked man, and an arrogant and sullen
Bishop. John charged to be an arrogant and sullen Bishop. He is cited to
appear. Refuses four times, because they were his Enemies. And appeals to the
General Council. He is deposed.
So they babble not (says the Historian) against the Books of Origin, but they
fall to forming false accusations against him, and cite him to appear; which he
refusing four times to appear after their citations, because they were his
Enemies, and therefore no indifferent Judges; and appealing from them to the
General Council: They notwithstanding proceed against him, and depose him of
his Bishopric; after they had condemned him, because he refused to appear, and
for no other cause. But the people took The people ^ise.
this ill, and made an uproar, and would not suffer him to be cast out of the
Church; yet he privily got away the third day to Exile Hegoes of himself
privily to Exile. The Emperor forced to fetch him back. He refuses to come into
the City.
of himself, having respect to the public peace; but from Exile the Emperor
was constrained to fetch him, who sent Briso, aforesaid, the Empress Eunuch,
for that purpose; who refused to come into the City till his Cause was heard,
and would have staid in the Suburbs at Marianae till then: but the multitude
forces The people force him.
him thence, and also to take his place of a Bishop again, and both to Pray and
to Preach; which administered occasion to his Adversaries And to Pray and Preach
to accuse him again, though for the present they were constrained His Enemies
lay it up.
to let it lie dead because of the multitude.

Now whilst these things were, and that his Adversaries watched Cap. 15.
Heraclides is charged.
for occasion the second time to have him deposed, Heraclides business was
endeavored to be brought on the Stage, as to what was done at Ephesus, viz.
his unjust punishing of certain persons, imprisoning and leading them
ignominiously through the streets of Ephesus, intending thereby a reflection
upon John, who had made Heraclides, who was a Deacon of his Church, yet of
Cyprus, the Bishops of that place, to cease the tumult upon the death of the
former. John answered, -- That of right no man ought to be judged John opposes
the prosecution because of Heraclides absence. Those of Alexandria urge i^.
in his absence, without the presence of the party, and the hearing of his own
Cause. Those of Alexandria urged notwithstanding the hearing of the Witnesses,
as that which ought to be, though he was absent. So great contention and strife
hereupon arose, between the Citizens of Constantinople, and the Inhabitants of
Alexandria; The people fall out, wound and kill one another thereabouts.
Theophilus and the Bishop hie them home hereupon Blood the fruit of most of
their contentions.
and whilst they skirmished one with another, many were sore wounded, and
diverse also presently dispatched. This being done, Theophilus got him in all
haste to Alexandria, and the other Bishops to their several places, having shed
blood upon their quarrels, the understanding of which was then come to light.
And this was the fruit of most of their contentions and quarrels.

So Theophilus got home, but left behind him greater hatred An account of
Theophilus.
than ever, because that though he condemned Origens Books, yet he looked into
them more studiously than before; for indeed it was John he aimed at, not so
much Origin, when he went about by the Judgment on Origin to reach John; a man
of such convertibility and transformation into any thing, his craft and cunning
led him to accomplish his innate desire of revenge and blood, as one ordinarily
shall meet withal. To whom I have given no more than the History allows, when I
have so spoken.

Dioscorus died not long after, and Serapion was made Bishop of Dioscorus dies.
Heraclea a City of Thrace.

Yet John was not free, for a Silver Picture covered with a John in trouble
again. Inveighs against the Silver Picture of the Empress set up.
Mantle of Eudoxia the Empress, being set upon a Pillar of Red Marble, and
common Plays and Shows being made thereby; John sorely enveighed against the
Authors thereof with very nipping taunts. The Empress took it to her self, and
as done to her reproach, and therefore procured another Council of Bishops to
Another Council is called at Constantinople He preaches against her. The
Empress on fire. John's Enemies his Accusers and Judges.
be called at Constantinople; which he hearing of, preached that Sermon which
thus began, -- Herodias rages afresh, stomacheth anew, danceth again, seeks
yet the Head of John in a Platter. Which made the Empress mad, and set her all
on fire; the Bishops which were his utter Enemies, sat his Accusers; the old
Crimes are brought forth: he trusting to the upright dealings of the Bishops,
desires that things might indifferently be examined: The Emperor sends John
word, That he would not communicate The Emperor refus^s to communicate with
John till he had cleared himself.
with him (it being their Feast of the Nativity) till be had cleared himself of
the Crimes laid to his charge. The accusers mistrusting themselves, and John
building upon the integrity of his Cause, the Bishops perceiving this, would
insist on nothing but his coming into the Church without admission of a
Council; after he was John is charged.
deposed; and when he made answer, That the Canon that required He answers.
that, was not made for their Church, but was to be executed where the Arrians
did reign, (for such as assembled at Antioch to root out the Faith of one
Substance, made that Canon against Athanasius) and that he had the confirmation
of fifty Bishops that communicated with him. They made no account of his
Answer, nor weighed that those that made that Canon were deposers of
Athanasius, but They sentence him. The Emperor for^ids him the Church.
gave sentence against him; And the Emperor sent to him, That he had no
authority to go into the Church, inasmuch as he was deposed and condemned by
two Councils; so he refrained, and He withdraws; and those with him.
those that favored him did the same, and kept Easter in the Common Baths,
called Constantiana, together with many Bishops, Priests, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, who because of their several Conventicles, were called
Johannites. John was never They are called Johannites. He is carried to Exile,
there dies. The Church set on fire as ^e was carried away, by some Johannites,
burns the Senators Court. The Governor sore plagues the Christians therefore.
The cause wherefore these things are rehearsed.
seen abroad for the space of two months, till by the Emperors Commandment he
was carried into Exile, where he died. The same day as he was so carried away,
some called Johannites set the Church on fire, which taking on the Senators
Court, burnt it to Ashes; for which Optatus the Governor of Constantinople, a
Pagan by his Religion, and so a sore plaguer of the Christians, made them
endure heavy punishments, and sore penalties.

I am constrained to mention these things thus at large, that once for all I
may let the world understand what the forcing of Religion, and the strife that
comes through the imposition thereof, has produced in the World.

Many revolutions followed this banishment of John, and his Ominous
consequences of the Exile, and death of John.
death, and certain other significant things from Heaven, which then there
were, that attributed to this persecution of John, as the rotting of Cyrinus
his Foot, Bishop of Chaldon, who was unawares Cap. 17. Cyrinus's foot rotted.
trod upon by Maruthas, Bishop of Mesopotamia, when the first Council met there
to depose John, which the people imputed The imputed cause.
to his reviling of John, and calling of him stubborn Bishop, which rotted so,
as that he was constrained to have it sawn off, It is sawn off.
which he suffered not once, but twice, and oftener, for it ran (viz. the
putrefaction) over his whole Body, and fell into his other foot, so he was
forced to cut off both. The falling of great And the other also. The greatest
Hail that ever was seen falls at Constantinople. The Empress dies. And the
Emperor.
Hail, the likeness of the magnitude of which none had seen before: The death
of the Empress, which followed immediately after his banishment; all said by
the people to be tokens of God's Wrath, because of his banishment; yea, the
death of the Emperor himself, who died shortly after the death of John. All
which are matters for me to speak of, as that which the vogue of that Age All
attributed to the persecution of John.
attributed to be significatory, as to the displeasure of the Lord, as to
things that then were transacted and done, and which still speaks the
consequence of imposing or persecuting because of And speak the consequence of
pe^secution for Religion.
Religion.

In the place of John, Arsacius was made Bishop of Constantinople, Arsacius of
80. years of Age succeeds John.
who was of the age of about fourscore years, in whose time things were very
quiet, he being said to be of singular modesty, and meek behavior; He lived
Bishop of that place not very long, His good description. Dies the year
following.
but in the year following that he was made Bishop, he departed this life: to
pitch upon a successor, unto whom proved a difficult kind of work; and the
contention grew long, but at last ended in Atticus of Sebastia in Armenia, who
was made Bishop of Constantinople. Atticus chosen in his place.


John died in Exile at Comanum, situate on the Sea Euxinus. Cap. 19.


Arcadius died at Constantinople; he reigned together with his Cap. 21.
Arcadius dies. Anno. 412. His Son Arcadius succeeds. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Father thirteen years, and beginning with the one and thirtieth year of his
Age; he reigned fourteen years after the decease of his Father, leaving behind
him his Son Theodosius, of the Age of eight years, who by direction of
Anthemius, governed the Eastern, as Honorius, Arcadius his Brother did the
Western part of the Roman Empire.

These times were not free from trouble, for men took upon Cap. 3. Contention
in Religion grew on. Theodosius of Synada, Bishop, persecutes the Ma^edonians,
banishes them the Town and Country
them in several places to do what they listed in matters of Religion.
Theodosius Bishop of Synada, a City of Phrygia, Pacatiana sorely exercised the
Macedonian Opinion; he banished them not only the Town, but also the Country,
which he did neither according to the rule of the Catholic Church, neither
with zeal of sincere and upright Faith, (says the History) but for his
advantage sake, for foul gain, and filthy lucre, to wring money from For
gain-sake, to wring money from them. Maintains his Clergy against them. His
cruel usages. Punishes Agapetus their Bishop.
them; for which cause he left no way unessayed to vex them, maintaining his
own Clergy against them; he brought them in Fetters, made them hold up their
hands at the Bar: Their Bishop Agapetus he exercised with sundry griefs and
vexations; and because he found that the Commission of the Magistrates extended
not to the punishment of the Macedonians, he made haste to Constantinople Gets
to Constantinople for more power against them. Agapetus conforms, and his
people in the mean time to the Nicene Creed. Gets into Theodosius Church and
Seat. Theodosius being disappointed of his place and power,
to get larger power from the Lieutenant of that Province, for the sharp
correction of them; but whilst he was about these things, Agapetus embraced the
Faith of one Substance, persuaded all his people, both Clergy and Laity to do
the same, got him into their Church, placed himself in the Seat of Theodosius,
and had the ordering of the Churches within the Diocese of Synada. Theodosius
not knowing any thing of this, shortly after comes down with his power, of
which he much bragged, but finding things as aforesaid, and what small welcome
he had, the doors being made fast against him, hasted again to Constantinople,
Hies to Constantinople. Complains, but in vain
and complained to Atticus; but his grief he was forced to retain, for that it
was for the profit of the Church that he was thus put by his Bishopric.

Thus at Synada. At Constantinople Sabbatius aforesaid severing Sabbatius makes
stirs at Constantinople about Easter.
himself from the Novations, took upon him the Jewish Celebration of Easter, on
the day of which he read this part of the Gospel, Reads the Gospel, and adds to
it. Ensnares the people.
-- The Feast of the sweet bread drew nigh, which is called Easter, adding, --
Cursed be every one that keeps Easter without sweet bread. Through occasion
of which, many of the Novations came to be of his Opinion. But there soon came
a reproof upon his corrupting of the Scriptures, for as they were in their
Vigils, for the solemnization of that Feast, they thought they saw Sisinius An
apparition frights them.
their Bishop setting upon them, which an infinite number of men, on which they
getting together in a narrow room, the throng was so great, that threescore and
ten persons of them were smothered Seventy persons smothered to death.
to death, upon which many of them shrunk from their Opinion, as he did from
the Novation Church, of which he was a Priest.

Thus at Constantinople. At Alexandria, Theophilus being dead Cap. 7. A
Successor of Theoph. dead of a Lethargy. Troubles Alexandria. Cyrillus is
chosen. His height, and taking upon him Temporal Jurisdiction. His persecuting
of, and plundering the Novations, and their Bishops.
of a Lethargy, a great contention there was for a Successor, which at length
fell to be the Lot of Cyrillus. Theophilus Brothers Son, who challenged more
Authority than ever Theophilus had; and together with the Ecclesiastical, took
upon him the Government of Temporal Affairs; He shut up the Novation Church in
Alexandria; and not only rifled them of all their Treasure, but bereaved
Theopomptus their Bishop of all his Substance.

These whirlings up and down, and persecuting of one another Cap. 10. The
distracted consequences in the State. Alaricus aspires to the Empire. He
subdues Illyricum.
at pleasure, went not without their attendancies of trouble in the State; for
Alaricus a Barbarian, who was in league with the Romans, and aided Theodosius
against Eugenius, aspired unto the Imperial Scepter; he left Constantinople,
and hasted into the West; all Illyricum he subdued, as he came into it. The
Thessalonians The Thessalonians withstand him, fight him, kill 3000. of his
men. He removes, ransacks all as he goes. Takes Rome: his outrage and cruelty
there.
withstood him when he came amongst them, and at a pitched Battle slew three
thousand of his men; he marched away, ransacking Town and Country as he went,
and at length took the City of Rome, which he ransacked also; defaced and fired
many Monuments; plundered the Citizens of their Money; put to death many of the
Senators with sundry kinds of torments; proclaimed Attalus Emperor Makes
Attalus Emperor to day, and a Servant to morrow, to bring the Imperial
Government into contempt. Theodosius's Army hastens to give him Battle. He
flies A Monk admonishes him as he was marching to Rome, to forbear his outrage.
His Answer, as set on by God.
to day, who had his guard of Soldiers; the next day made him go in the tire
and habit of a Servant, on purpose to bring the Imperial Government into
contempt. Theodosius's Army made great expedition to give him Battle; he
hearing thereof, betook him to his heels. It is said, That as he marched to
Rome, a Monk met, and admonished him, Not to delight in perpetrating of such
heinous and horrible offenses, neither to rejoice in committing slaughter and
bloodshed. To whom he is said to make this Answer, I, God knows, do take this
voyage against my Will; There is one which molesteth me daily, nay he
compels me by force, and says thus unto me, Go on thy journey, destroy the
City of Rome.

And no wonder that these things were, for Celestinus Bishop of Cap. 11.
Celestinus Bishop of Rome banishing the Novations, imputed as the cause of the
sacking of Rome.
Rome banished the Novations out of that City, and deprived them of their
Churches; and thereby constrained Rusticula their Bishop to raise private
Conventicles, who beforetime flourished in Rome, and had there great
Congregations, but now they began to be hated out of measure: The Bishop of
Rome challenging to himself He took upon him sole power, as did the Bishop of
Alexandria.
secular Power and Jurisdiction, as the Bishop of Alexandria had done, which
(says the Historian of the Romish Bishop) he presumed Which the Historian
charges as presumption in the Romish Bi^^ops
to do, passing the bounds of his Priestly Order. So these Bishops, though they
commended the Novations for their uniform consent, as touching the Faith, yet
they deprived them of all The Novations deprived of all their Substance, save
at Constantinople, by Nicenians, though of that Faith, because differing in a
particular. Cap. 12. Chrysanthus chosen Bishop of Constantinople in Sysinnius's
stead. An account of him.
their Substance; But at Constantinople it was not so with the Novations.

Sysinius dying at Constantinople, Chrysanthus the Son of Marcianus was chosen
in his room. This Chrysanthus had been a Soldier from his youth in the
Emperors Court, and Lieutenant of Italy, against Theodosius Magnus his
Vicegerent of the Isles of Britain, where he purchased great commendation for
his politic Government; coming to Constantinople, where he desired to reside
in his old years, was there chosen, as aforesaid; but he not liking of that
Service, conveyed himself away. Whereupon He gets away. Sabbatius steps up for
the Bishop^ick. Getshimself consecrated, to the breaking of his Oath not to be
a Bishop.
Sabbatius aforesaid, thinking this to be his opportunity, got a Company of
obscure Bishops to consecrate him; and so, contrary to his solemn Oath and
dreadful Protestations, steps up a Bishop: one of them that consecrated him,
being Harmogenes, whom before he had excommunicated. But this fetch served not
his turn, for the Novations detesting his abominable proceedings, sought Town
Chrysanthus is found out, and stalled a Bish. Sabbat. disappointed. He is the
first of the Bishops that gave Gold to the poor. His allowance but two loaves
of Blessed Bread every Sunday. A Tragical Scene at Alexandria,
and Country after Chrysanthus; and having found him lurking in Bythinia,
forced him thence, and stalled him Bishop. He was the first that of his own
Substance gave Gold to the poor; he took nothing, but every Sunday two Loaves
of the Blessed Bread (as the Historian terms it.)

Now I have a Tragical Scaene again to enter upon; for without Blood and
Persecution hardly was any thing accomplished; among the Bishops of Alexandria,
where the people, of any, are most prone to such things, it so fell out, That
on a Saturday the people gathered in great multitudes to see a certain Dancer,
and to Through occasion of the Jews present on the Sabbath day at the public
Dancing.
pass time therewith; and because the Jews spent not that day in the hearing of
their Law, being the Sabbath day, but gave themselves wholly to the hearing of
Comedies and Interludes, to the beholding of Shows and Spectacles. That day was
the occasion of great Schism and contention among the people; which though The
ground of the Quarrel.
it was partly appeased by Orestes the Lieutenant of Alexandria, yet the Jews
gave not over their quarrel, for the spite they owed unto the one part of the
Faction: for the Jews as they were found always deadly foes unto the
Christians, so then above all other times they were incensed because of the
Dancers. Wherefore, when as Orestes had nailed on the Theater the Writ of
Politic Government, for so they called the Lieutenants Proclamation, some of
Cyrillus's familiar Friends stepped up, and among the rest one Hierax, to
examine what the Lieutenant had written; whom when the Jews had espied there,
they exclaimed that he came thither for no other cause but to set the people
together by the Ears. Orestes, although he envied the Bishops, because they had
cut short the credit and power of the Magistrates, which was done by reason of
them with the Emperors, yet then he spighted Cyrillus above all other times,
because of his prying into the Lieutenants Writings, and curiously sifting out
the Contents and meanings of them; therefore he caused Hierax openly to be
apprehended Hierax punished.
on the Theater, and extremely to be punished. Cyrillus hereupon cited the
chief of the Jews to appear before him, Cyril threatens the Jews.
and told them plainly, That if they would not give over their Rebellions and
Traitorous Conspiracies against the Christians, he would punish them according
to their deserts. The Jews stomached the They stomached i^, as the Governor did
his meddling with the Civil Authority. They plot against the Christians.
Bishops Threats, and therefore devising with themselves, set an opportunity
wherein to set upon the Christians; on a certain time in the night season, they
caused certain to cry out Fire, Fire; The Christians running out to see what
was the matter, the Jews that watched under the Penthouses, and had a sign of a
Ring of Palm Trees, every one fell upon the Christians and dispatched Many
Christians are slain. Cyril executes some of the Jews in their Synagogue,
plunders, and banishes the rest.
them; which being understood, Cyrillus with great power got him to the Jews
Synagogue, and executed presently some of the Jews; and others he banished;
others he bereaved of their Substance: upon occasion whereof the Jews, who had
inhabited Alexandria, from the time of Alexander King of Macedonia, were
banished thence, and dispersed over all the Countries.

Orestes took this Deed of Cyrils very ill, being sorry that so Orestes is
troubled, informs the Emperor.
Noble a City should be deprived of so great a multitude; therefore he
certified the Emperor thereof. Cyril also painted in Paper Cyril does the same.
the conspiracy of the Jews, and sent it in writing to the Emperor; yet he
sought to be Friends with Orestes, which when Seeks Orestes friendship. He
refuses, yea, the New Testament also which Cyril put into his hand.
Orestes would not hearken unto, he reached into his hand the New Testament,
supposing that he would reverence the Book, and receive him the better: But
when the mind of Orestes would not be turned, another Scaene was acted, which
was as follows.

Fifty Monks of Nitria, partakers in the quarrel of Cyril, came Cap 14. A
second Trag. Scene at Alexandria. Fifty Monks assault Orestes in Cyrils quarrel
to Alexandria, and encountered the Lieutenant in his Chariot, calling him
Sacrificer, and an Ethnic, with such like; he supposing that Cyril was in the
consparacy, cried out, That he was a Christian, and that Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople had Baptized him. But the Monks having no regard to his words,
one of them, viz. Ammonius took him in the Head with a Stone, with which His
head is wounded.
having sorely wounded the Lieutenant, so that the blood ran The blood runs
down. His Guard flies. The people rescue him. The Monks fly* Ammonius that did
the Act, taken.
about his ears, the Sergeants or his Guard, for the most part, fled away, the
stones flying about them, and held down their heads among the multitude: In the
mean time the people came, and in the Lieutenants behalf set upon the Monks, so
that the Monks ran all away, only Ammonius, who being taken and brought before
the Lieutenant, he according to the Law reasoned with him concerning the
matter, pronounced against him the Sentence of Justice, and tormented him as
long as he had breath in his Body. Tormented him whi^st he had breath. Cyril
buried his body, changed his Name, Extolled his courage. Commands him to he
called a Martyr, who was a Ryoter. Sober Christians allow it not.
Cyril took his body, calling him not Ammonius, but Thamnasius, and in the
Church extolled the noble courage of the man, and the great combat he endured
for Godliness, (who was a Rioter) and commanded he should be called a Martyr;
which the more modest and sober Christians allowed not of, knowing him not to
have dyed, because he would not deny Christ, but to have suffered due
punishment for his rash enterprises: So by little and little Cyril was enforced
to let the matter fall unto the ground; yet the Cyril forced to let the matter
fall.
quarrel between Cyrill and Orestes was not at an end, but produced this third
Scene, of which when I have spoken, I shall mention no more.

In Alexandria there was a Woman whose name was Hypatia, Cap. 15: A third
Tragical Scene in Alexandria. Hypatia a Woman, and the most eminent Philosopher
of her time.
the Daughter of Theon, who so profited in profound Learning, that she excelled
all the Philosophers of her time; and not only succeeded in Plato's School,
the which exercise Plotinus continued, but also expounded to as many as come to
her the Precepts and Doctrine of all sorts of Philosophers; wherefore many that
gave themselves to the study of Philosophy, flocked to her from every Country.
Moreover, for her grave courage of mind, her modest and matron-like behavior,
she sticked not to present her self before Princes and Magistrates; neither was
she abashed to come into the open face of the Assembly: wherefore great envy
and spite of mind arose against her, (being had in admiration and reverence of
all Women for her singular modesty) and because Suspected to influence the
difference between the Bishop and Orestes. Is set upon by a Reader, and rude
Company. Carried to a Church.
she conferred often, and had a great familiarity with Orestes, so that she was
charged by the people as the cause why the Bishop and Orestes were not become
Friends; At length one Peter a Reader of that Church, having a company of rude
persons with him, watched her coming from some place or other, pulled her out
of her Chariot, haled her into the Church called Caesareum, stripped Stripped
stark naked, tormented with sharp shells till life departed Her body quartered,
And burnt to Ashes. Cyril, and the Church of Alexandria stained with this
blood. Christians ought to be no fighters, by the Historians judgment.
her stark naked, razed the skin, and rent the flesh of her body with sharp
shells, until the breath departed out of it; then they quartered her body,
brought them to a place called Cinaron, and burned them to Ashes. This heinous
offense (says the Historian) was no small blemish both to Cyril and the Church
of Alexandria. For (says he) the professors of Christian Religion should be no
fighters, they ought to be far from commiting of murder and bloodshed. This
was done the fourth year of Cyril's Consecration, the tenth Consulship of
Honorius, and the seventh of Theodosius, in the Ember days.

The Jews also were not without their devises in this day of Cap. 16. The Jews
come on with a 4th Tragedy. They deride Christ. Crucif^^ a Child.
wickedness and mischief, who at a certain place called Inmestar, between
Chalcis and Antioch in Syria; at their Interludes and Plays, derided Christ
Jesus, and those that believed in him: After this sort they took the Child of a
Christian, and nailed him to Deride, scourge him till breath departed.
a Tree, and set him on high; when they had so done, first they deride and
laugh at him, then like mad men they scourge him as long as breath remained in
his body.

This gave occasion of great contention between them and the Christians, and
the Emperor hearing thereof, wrote to the Lieutenant and Magistrates of that
Province, to make diligent search for the Authors of so great a mischief, and
to punish them severely; They are punished in earnest.
therefore the Jews for that shameful Act which they had committed in jest,
were plagued in earnest.

The Persians also drew a line of blood and cruel torments over Cap. 18. A
fifth Scene of blood acted by the Persians upon the Christians of that Nation,
with great extremity.
those of that Nation, who in the time of Isdigerdes King of Persia were become
Christians, whose Son Baratanes succeeded him, through the persuasion of the
Magicians and Southsayers, being forced thereunto, vexed the Christians out of
measure, and punished them with diverse torments, after the manner of Persia;
through the extremity of which they fled unto the Romans for They fly for
succor to the Romans.
succor, praying them to pity their case, and not to suffer them in that
measure to be so lamentably oppressed; whom Atticus Bishop Atticus of
Constantinople receives them. The Emperor determines their relief.
of Constantinople courteously received, and wrought with the Emperor, so that
what through that and other particulars of difference that lay between them, he
intends to stand to their relief; especially seeing he had sent to demand the
fugitive Christians, of the Emperor, and denied those whom he had lent for the
Gold-Mines to return, and also had stopped the Romans Merchandise; War is
proclaimed.
so that League was broken, and War was proclaimed, and the The Persians are
beaten again and again, and a third time. Cap. 20.
Persians (through the wonderful hand of the Lord, who was near them in their
straits) were again and again overcome: and the Persians being yet again
overcome, upon the refusal of a tender of Peace, by persuasion of his
Soldiers, who were called (a certain number of them) Immortal, who would needs
make one attempt more upon the Romans, ere they accepted thereof, and
multitudes were Prisoners, many of whom died for Famine, and the rest were like
so to do. Accasius Bishop of Amida, gathered his Acacius Bishop of Amida, and
his Clergy. Cap. 21. Redeem the Persian Prisoners, with their Cups, Dishes,
Plate, Jewels,
Clergy together upon the commiseration of their lamentable state, there being
seven thousand that were in this condition, said, Our God has no need neither
of Dishes nor of Cups, for he neither eats nor drinks, these be not his
necessaries. Wherefore seeing this Church has many precious Jewels, both of
Gold and Silver, bestowed of the free will and liberality of the Faithful, it
is requisite that the captive Soldiers should therewith be redeemed and
delivered out of Prison and Bondage; and that they also perishing with Famine,
should be with some part thereof refreshed and relieved.

Which his Clergy consenting unto, and the Treasury being cast, and translated,
he turned it into money, and not only paid Turned into money; Cloth, and send
them home: which so took on the King of Persia, that he lent for Acacius. The
War turns into Peace, and the utter ceasing of Persecution The Saracens under
Alamundarus promising great things to the Persians;
therewith the Ransom-money, but supplied them with necessaries, and to carry
them home; which so took with the King of Persia, that he desired earnestly to
see Acacius, whom the Emperor commanded thither. The issue of these Wars
procured a Peace, and the quite extinguishing the persecution of the Christians
in the Kingdom of Persia. It is said, That in these Wars the Saracens coming to
assist the Persians, under Alamundarus, (a valiant Captain, who promised not
only to beat the Romans, but to take in Syria and Antioch) being in a sudden
fear of the Romans approach, that (though the Romans were not near them) For
fear of the Romans ran into Euphrates, 100000. drowned.
they ran into the River Euphrates, where an hundred thousand with their Arms
were drowned.

Nor was the Roman Empire without trouble within it self, during Cap. 23. John
seeks to be Emperor on the death of Honorius, sends Legates to Theodosius to
proc^aim him. They are imprisoned, John is marched against, and overthrown.
the whirl of Christians persecuting one another; for Honorius being dead, John
his chief Secretary took upon him, and sent Legates to Theodosius to proclaim
him Emperor: who laid up his Ambassadors Prisoners, and with his Army marched
against him, and at length overthrew him, though he passed through many straits
in the accomplishing thereof; after which he caused Valentinianus the Son of
Constantius, and Placida the Aunt of Theodosius, Valentinianus proclaimed
Emperor. Cap. 24. Troubles in Constant. Cap 25. The Johannites courted by
Atticus of Constantinople. John Chrysostoms memorial solemnized at Service.
Observations thereupon.
to be proclaimed Emperor at Rome.

A great stir there was in Constantinople about the Exile and death of John
Chrysostom, (of whom I have formerly spoken) the Church being divided about
him, and those called Johannites, using their private Conventicles, Atticus the
Bishop hoping thereby to cease the Division, and to return many to the Church
of which he was, commanded the memorial of John to be solemnized at Service, as
was the manner for other Bishops that were deceased; So the one deposes,
exiles him as a cursed person, the other Canonizeth him as a Saint: and this
was the contradiction as well as the superstition of those days among the
Christians.

The followers also of Sabbatius removing his Corpse from the Prayers made on
Sabbattius's Tomb by his Followers. Atticus removes his body thereupon in the
night. Observations on both.
Isle of Rhodes (where he died in exile) prayed upon his Tomb, which caused
Atticus to have his Body in the night to be removed to another Sepulcher,
whether for Religion sake, or because of the Opinion of Sabbatius, let the
Reader judge, seeing he caused the name of dead John to be remembered in the
Service of his Church; and these but prayed upon the Tomb of dead Sabbatius;
but the body being gone, those that frequented the place where he lay, ceased
any more to come thither and pray. These were the poor things into which they
ran in those days, who knew not the Principle of Truth; yet few exceeded this
man Atticus, The praise of Atticus.
if any came at him, of whom I read of very few, for charity seemed to be very
little among many Bishops; he is said to have given to Calliopus Minister of
Nice, three hundred pieces of Gold His liberality to the Poor, without respect
to Opinion, but to such as wanted, who were ashamed to beg.
to be distributed among such as were ashamed to beg, without having respect to
practice of Faith, or Sect, or Opinion, but to such who had not wherewithal to
relieve their hunger and thirst; He is commended for very many things, and
especially for tenderness to such, however differing from him, who suffered
persecution in the days of Constantius and Valens: he prophesied of He
prophesies of his death, and dies accordingly. Cap. 26. Great stir about his
Successor: Sisinius chosen. The like at Cizicum about Proclus. Cap. 28.
Dalmatius chosen against the Canon by the people.
his death, which fell out accordingly.

About his Successor there was a great stir in Constantinople, as it fell out
ordinarily: Sisinius carried it against Philip, who yet was not quiet, but
wrote Books, and made all the stir about it as he could; and the like happened at
Cyzicum, where Sisinius appointed Proclus in the place of the Bishop that was
dead, whom they of Cyzicum would not receive, but against the Canon, chose
Dalmatius, so that he was constrained to continue at Constantinople.

In two years after his consecration at Constantinople, Sisinius Cap. 29.
Sisinius dies, new stirs about one to succeed him. Nestorius from Antioch is
the man. He sets all on fire. His proud Speech to the Emperor.
dies; a new stir is again for another to succeed him, the Complotment brings
Nestorius thither from Antioch, he sets all one fire, and in his Oration to the
Emperor, before the people, immediately after his Enstalment, thus said, --
Restore unto me, O Emperor, the Earth weeded and purged of Heretics, and I
will render Heaven unto thee; Aid thou me in foyling of the Heretics, and I
will assist thee in the overthrow of the Persians.

A proud arrogant Speech, which I notify, to show to what a height these
Bishops were come, and what furious persecution lay in the bottom of their
proud stomachs, to all that which was otherwise than their own Religion.

He had hardly drank, as the saying is, before he began to He falls on the
Ar^ians
blow the smoke, and kindle the fire of Persecution; for the fifth day after he
was chosen, he determined to overthrow the Arrians Church, where they had their
service privily and by stealth; who when they saw their Church must needs down,
they set it on fire themselves, which fell on the next houses, and burned them
They burn their Church, when they saw he would have it down. It burns more
houses. He is called the Firebrand by all.
to Ashes, and rose up to revenge them on their Enemies: From that time not
only those that opposed him, but his own party called him a Firebrand. Neither
rested he here, but destroyed, as much as in him lay, the whole City, whilst he
went about to mischieve those who from him differed. The Novations he molested,
He persecutes the Novations.
because Paulus their Bishop was more eminent than himself; but the Emperor who
sent for him, because diverse vainglorious persons in Constantinople sought the
Bishopric (who now had enough of him, meeting with one that was worse than
them all) nipped The Emperor nips him. He vexes the observe^s of Easter on the
4th day of the month, in Asia, Lydia, Caria.
him with sharp admonitions, and so withstood his enterprises; he vexed those
that kept Easter the fourth day of the month, througout Asia, Lydia, and Caria,
with many injuries, and was the occasion of cutting off many in the Sedition,
which he raised at Miletum and Sardis; and so perplexed the Macedonians in
Hellespont, At Miletene and Sardice many are cut off. Cap. 31. In Hellespont
the Macedonians conspire the death of Anthony, through his setting him on to
persecute.
by Anthony Bishop of Germa, that they conspired the death of Anthony, and by
certain persons did accomplish it, which gave occasion to Nestorius to persuade
the Emperor to deprive them of their Churches, many of which thereupon
conformed to the Faith of one Substance.

Commonly (says the History) we say, such as are given to Cap. 32. The scale
comes to turn on Nestorius.
drunkenness, are never to seek for the Cup; and busy bodies never want woe:
Nestorius who endeavored to cast others out of their Churches, comes to be
cast out himself. Anastasius a Priest, whom he brought thither from Antioch,
preached, -- That none The occasion how.
ought to call Mary the Mother of God, because that she was but a Woman, and
that God could not be born of a Woman. -- Nestorius joins to this man, who was
his great Counselor in all his Affairs; and in his Sermons favors Anastatius,
which divided the Church, so that the Members separated one from another, and a
general A general Council called at Ephesus.
Council was summoned for the determination of this matter.

The Bishops came to Ephesus, whitherto the Council was summoned, Cap. 33.
and multitudes of other people flocked thereunto: Thither came Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria, and Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem. But when John of Antioch
tarried; Cyril, that he Cyril begins the Disputation.
might be upon Nestorius, of whom he thought very ill, began and used certain
preambles of Disputation; when many confirmed that Christ was God, Nestorius
pleaded, -- I verily (said he) will Nestorus's blasphemy.
not call him God, who grew to man's state by two months, and three months, and
so forth; and therefore I wash my hands from your Joins to the Bishops that
denied Mary to be the Mother of God.
blood, and from henceforth I will no more come into your company. And so
joined with the Bishops of his Opinion; so the Bishops The Bishops divided.
were divided into two parts: Such of the Council as held with Cyril, called
Nestorius before them, he came not, but said, He Cyril, etc. sends for Nestor.
He refuses to come.
would defer his Cause till John of Antioch came. Cyril, and those with him,
after they had read over Nestorius his Sermons, and gathered out of them, that
in good earnest he had uttered open blasphemies against the Son of God, they
deposed him. Those He is deposed. The Bishops that held with Nestor depose
Cyril, etc. John of Antioch coming, blames Cyril for running so fast. Cyril
deposes John. All in a hurly-burly. Nestor conforms. It is not accepted,
because supposed to be in hypocresie.
which held with Nestorius, met, and deposed Cyril and Memnon Bishop of
Ephesus. John being come, blamed Cyril for running on head, and so soon
deposing Nestorius, and so being the occasion of all that stir; Cyril to be
avenged on John, taking Juvenalis with him, deposed John. Thus the contention
flew up, and a great hurly-burly there was, and the poisoned infection of
Discord was scattered, which Nestorius perceiving, said, -- Let Mary be called
the Mother of God, and I pray you conceive no longer displeasure. -- But being
not supposed to speak this from his heart, he was both deposed and banished to
Oasis. Thus was the Council He is deposed and banished. The Council ends. John
coming to Antioch deposes Cyril. Afterward they restore one another.
of Ephesus at that time divided and broken up. John when he returned to
Antioch, got many Bishops together, and deposed Cyril; shortly after which they
laid aside their grudges, and restored each other to their Bishoprics.

A great stir arose in Constantinople about the Election of a Bishop Cap. 34.
Much ado at Constantinople about a Successor of Nestor.
in the place of Nestorius, for the people were greatly divided by reason of
his Opinion; all the Clergy with one consent accursed it openly, for so the
Christians called the Sentence pronounced against the Author of Blasphemy,
thereby intending to make it as manifest to the World, as what is engraven in a
Table, and nailed unto a Poast; at length Maximinianus was chosen Maximin. is
chosen:
Bishop.

Maximinianus not possessing the Bishopric above two years, Cap. 39. He dies.
died; about the Election of another, lest there should be new Schisms and
Divisions, the Emperor was put to his Wits, and therefore ere the other was
interred, he put Proclus in his stead, The Emperor puts Proclus in his room. He
troubled no Sect.
who was a quiet man, and troubled no Sect, but reserved (says the History)
and restored unto the Church that renowned virtue of meekness required in
Clergymen.

Yet were not the Barbarians quiet, whom John had gathered Cap. 42. The
Barbarians disturb the Empire by John. Their lamentable end. Rugus slain with a
Thunderbolt. Pestilence destroyed most of the Soldiers. Fire from Heaven
consumed the rest. Cap 44. Proclus removes John Chrysostoms bones to
Constantinople, to endear his followers. Who are reduced hereupon. Observations
upon the whole.
to wage War with Theodosius, but purposed to overrun certain Dominions which
appertained to the Emperor, but their end proved lamentable. Rugus their
Captain was slain with a Thunderbolt, and a Plague ensuing dispatched most of
his Soldiers, and those that remained, fire from Heaven came and consumed,
which proved a great astonishment to the Barbarians.

Yet there is not an end of John's matters, though he was dead long ago. But
Proclus, that he might unite those that followed him, to that in which Proclus
was, got leave of the Emperor, and removed his bones from Comanum to
Constantinople, thirty and five years after his deposition, and with great pomp
interred him in the Apostles Church, which effected the reducing of those who
appertained unto him; so he is deposed, exiled, dead, and buried, remembered in
the Prayers among the dead, brought to Constantinople, and enterred in the
Church of the Apostles, upwards and downwards, backwards and forwards; things
ride where Truth is not known in the Principle thereof which should lead into
it, There would have been no matter administered for my Pen, Cap. 47. The
Historians reason why he wrote. The end of Socrates's History of 140. years.
Evag. lib. 1. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
(says the Historian in his last Chapter) if such as set their minds on
Sedition and Discord, had been at Peace and Unity among themselves. And so he
ends his History of 140. years: and Evagrius goes on with the History, and
having given somewhat a more particular account of Nestorius, and the things
then that passed both at the Council of Ephesus, and elsewhere, of which
Scholasticus has given some intimation, he goes on to show of the death of
Nestorius, which, he says, was after this sort, -- His Tongue Nestorius's
tongue eaten up of Worms, dies
was eaten up of Worms, and so he died; whom Maximinianus succeeded, as
aforesaid.

Yet his Opinion died not within him, but Eutyches took it up, Cap. 9. Eutyches
takes up his Blasphemy. An account of his Blasphemy.
who held as follows, -- I confess (says he) that our Lord consisted of two
Natures before the Divinity was coupled with the Humanity; but after the
uniting of them, I affirm, that he had but one Nature, and that the Body of the
Lord was not of the same Substance with ours. -- A Council was called about him
at Constantinople, A Council called at Constantinople. He is degraded. A second
Council at Ephesus.
where Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, an eloquent Rhetorician, in reasoning,
finding him to hold, as aforesaid, he was degraded, and a second Council
summoned at Ephesus.

At this Council Dioscorus who succeeded Cyril in the Bishopric Cap. 10.
of Alexandria, was Moderator, through the working of Chrysaphius Governor of
the Palace, for the hatred he bore to Flavianus, whom the Council before
Eutyches had charged with the forging of the Records which concerned him, but
being searched, it was found otherwise, and the Records were confirmed at the
Council. Now at this Council Elpidius having acquainted them with the command
of Theodosius, which was this, -- Such as in time past gave Sentence of
Eutyches the most virtuous Abbot, good leave have they to be present at the
Council, but let them be quiet, and their voices suspended: My Will is, That
they wait for the general and common Sentence of the most holy Fathers, seeing
that such things were aforetime decided by them, are called in controversy.
Dioscorus, and the Bishops with him, restored Eutyches, Eutyches restored.
Flavian. and Eusebius. deposed, four Bishops more excommunicated and deposed, two
removed. The Council ends.
whom the other Council had degraded, unto his former dignity; and Flavianus,
and Eusebius, they deposed; they excommunicated, and deprived also four Bishops
more, and two more they removed, so this Council broke up.

This kind of contrary work, one Council undoing what the Cap. 11. The
Historian constrained through these contradictions, to apologize for the
Christian Faith to the Heathen. His whole History a continuation of the
rehearsal of the Division.
other had done, and concerning Faiths and Creeds varying and changing, as
aforesaid, put the Historian eftsoons to Apologize for the Christian Faith,
because of these things, with the Heathen among whom his History could not but
come, which in this Chapter he endeavors. Yet the whole series of his Book
holds forth little less than the continuation of such division and
contradiction; which shows the fruit and consequences when men undertake to
determine of him, whom they cannot comprehend, The natural consequence of
imposing Religion.
who should let alone things of that nature, which is too high for them; and if
they have Faith, have it to themselves, that is to say, in such freedom and
liberty unto every man, that they seek to impose no more on another man than
they would have imposed upon themselves, in that which is contrary. Theodosius
decreed Nestor. condemned by the Emperor to perpetual exile, and accursed him.
He yet boasts of the Emperors good will.
Nestorius to perpetual exile, and pronounced him therein to be accursed, being
moved thereunto, no doubt (says the Historian) by the instinct of the Holy
Ghost; yet Nestorius elsewhere boasted, That the Emperor bore him entire and
singular good will. We Decree moreover (says the rehearsal of the said Decree,
Cap. 12. Another Decree against Nestor. and his Favorers. Cod. de sum trin and
fid. cath. tit. 1. l. 3 sancimus.
found in the Code of Justinian, the third Law of the first Title) that
whosoever does embrace the wicked Opinion of Nestorius, and give ear unto his
lewd Doctrine, if they be Bishops, that they be banished the Holy Churches; if
Lay persons, they be accursed. -- Other Laws also he made in the behalf of
Religion.

Many things ran up and down in this Generation; for as the Many opinions ran
up and down in this day, and superstition.
times drew off the days of the Apostles, or were at a greater distance from
them, so superstition and folly, as well as confusion and division, entered in
among the Christians. To give one instance for many: In these times there was
one Simeon, a man famous, and Cap. 13. One instance for all. Simeons living in
a Pillar upon pretense of the Angelical Life. The particulars thereof.
of renown (as the History says) for a godly man; he in pretense of imitating
in life the trade of the Angelical Powers, withdrew himself from worldly
Affairs, forced Nature, which of her self leans downwards, and followed after
lofty things, being placed, as it were in the midst, between Heaven and Earth,
he sought conference with God, he praised him together with the Angels; he
lifted the prayers of men up to Heaven, and offered them to God; he brought the
goodness of God from Heaven to Earth, and made the World partaker thereof. Thus
says the History, a ridiculous kind of Superstition, by placing himself in a
Pillar high from the Earth, and scarce two Cubits wide; to think that this
brought him nigher to the Angels, and to accomplish that which thereof has
been quoted by the History; and all this, as I have intimated, springs from the
ignorance of the Principle of God in man, by, and in which, and as that
reveals him, man only can know God.

I should write very much, if I should be particular in what is said of this
man, and what reckoning was made of him whilst he lived; and how his body being
dead, was worshipped, and carried His dead body adored and carried up and down
as Relics.
about in pieces as Relics. The people of Antioch desired of the Emperor Leo,
who desired the Body, that they might have it for a fortified Wall to their
City, and so expressed it, because the anger of the Emperor had caused the Wall
to be pulled down; so much they put of preservation in a dead Carcass: Gregory
Bishop of that Church, and Philippicus required, That the Relics of the
Saint, for the speedier execution of his martial Affairs in The Relics of the
dead required, for the expedition of Martial Affairs.
the East, should be sent unto him; such blind superstition was amongst them at
that day. First, A singular humor, and fantastical imagination they hold
forth, as the height of Religion; then the Carcass of the humorists they adore
as Religion; they say he lived six and fifty years, nine years in a Monastery,
seven and forty years in Mandrya, ten of which in a very narrow Room, An
account of his life, and of the Iron Chain about his neck.
seven in a very strait Pillar, and thirty years in a Pillar of forty Cubits;
they speak of the Iron Chain that hung about his Neck, and with it the Corpse so
renowned (says the History) of all men, and for enduring so great hardness and
misery, was honored with Divine Praises; and yet in the same Chapter, he
quotes the Religious men of the Desert to have sent a Messenger unto him to And
the message of ^^e Monks to require him to give an account of his so living,
demand of him, What he meant by that newfound and unknown kind of life? and
wherefore he forsook the wonted Trade; the steps and traces of the Saints which
went before, and devised unto himself a foreign and unknown way? and moreover
to have exhorted him by the Messenger to come down from his Lodging, and to
follow the Holy And to come down,
Fathers which were his Predecessors; and to have given the Messenger in
charge, that if he saw him yield and come down, he should license him to go on
in his own way, for they persuaded themselves that his obedience would declare,
Whether God had guided him to lead such a life, and to take upon him in this
World so weighty a Combat to chastise his Carcass; But if he stubbornly
resisted, if he were froward and wilful, not yielding with all speed unto their
Or to pull him down with a vengeance.
counsel and advice, he should pull him down with a vengeance.

But I must not stay longer on the relation of this man, and this The ignorance
of God the ground of all Superstition, and imposing of Religion.
example of superstition in one President, that those times did produce in the
World; this was necessary to give as an instance; I shall now proceed to
matters of another nature, yet proceeding from the same root, viz. the
Ignorance of God.

The Lord was displeased in this day. Attilas King of Scythia, Cap. 17.
Judgments in the Commonwealth. Attilas invades East and West. An Earthquake
exceeding all that went before, Almost throughout the world. Anno. 4^2. The
Palace shaken.
invaded both East and West, and won many great Cities, and behaved himself
nobly to the end of his days. A great Earthquake, the strangeness whereof
exceeded all that ever were before-going in a manner throughout the whole
world, happened in the latter end of the reign of Theodosius: Though yet he was
praised for such a gentle Prince, yet dared he to meddle with Religion and
Faith, and to do therein as aforesaid. Many Turrets within the Palace were
overthrown to the ground, the long Wall of Cherronesis turned to ruin; many
Villages swallowed up, many Many Villages swallowed up. Well-springs dried.
Fountains in dry places. Trees rooted up. Valleys become Mountains. Fish dead.
Islands drowned. Sea overflows. Ships on ground where the Sea was. Many
Countries undone in Bythinia, Hellespont, etc.
woeful mischances fell out unto mankind both by Sea and Land; many Well-springs
dried up; where Fountains were never seen before it flowed out; many Trees were
pulled up by the Roots; the Valleys became high Mountains; the Sea threw out
Fish for dead; many Islands drowned; the Sea overran the Banks, and overflowed
the Countries; many Ships that had been in the Sea, seen on ground, by the
falling back of the Sea, not yielding its wonted streams; many Countries
through Bythynia, Hellespont, and both the Phrygia's, endured such calamities
that they were utterly undone.

Nor were these the only troubles that invaded the Empire, for Cap. 19. Great
Sedition in the West. Wars with the Persians. Theodosius dies.
there was great Sedition throughout Europe, when Valentinianus governed the
Western Dominions; and with the Persians there was War, as aforesaid. He
reigned thirty and eight years, and then he died.

Martianus succeeded Theodosius. No sooner had he entered Cran. p 590. Anno.
450. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Martianus succeeds, and peace with him, but disquiet among
the Bishops. Leo of Rome begins; Complains of Dioscorus's slighting the Dec^ees
of the second Council at Ephesus. Desires a Council. Eusebius complains of
Chrysaphius defrauding him, and Flavianus, of their Bishoprics. Gold demanded
by Chrysaphius, for the admission of Flavianus. Other accusations.
the Throne, but he presently is entertained with some of the old trade of
disquiet among the Christians; Leo Bishop of old Rome sends to him, that
Dioscorus had made light of the Decree which he had laid down in the second
Council of Ephesus, agreeable unto the true and right Faith; others also
complain of the injuries and contumelies Dioscorus had done unto them, desiring
a Council might be called for the hearing of these matters. Eusebius of
Dorilaeum also, chiefly, above all others, follows the Emperor, showing him how
he and Flavianus were defrauded of their Bishoprics through the fraud and
wiles of Chrysaphius, sometimes of Theodosius his Guard; that Flavianus (at
what time Chrysaphius sent unto him, requiring Gold for his admission unto the
Bishopric) sent unto him the Holy Vessels of the Church for to make him
thoroughly ashamed of his demand, and that he wallowed alike in the Heretical
Puddle and Blasphemous Impiety of Eutyches. Moreover, that Flavianus was
lamentably slain by the procurement Flavianus murdered by Dioscorus.
of Dioscorus, who thrust him violently out of the Church, and disdainfully
trod on him with his feet.

A Council therefore was summoned at Chalcedon for the hearing A Council at
Chalcedon.
of these matters, and Legates, and Posts, were sent every where for the
calling of them together; the Bishops come and meet together, some Senators
with them, and also the Emperor; Cap. 4. Dioscorus deposed and exiled. Nicene
Creed against Eutyches's Canons, decreed. Much debating. The conclusion of the
Council.
matters are turned up-side down, and great bustle is made: Dioscorus is at
length deposed, and ordered into banishment, and the Nicene Creed, and several
other things against Eutyches are Decreed, and several Canons of the Church,
and much debatings to and again, and at length it thus ends, -- Seeing we
have sifted out the truth of these things with great care and diligence, the
Sacred and General Council has Decreed that it shall be lawful for no man,
either to allege, or to write, or to frame, or to believe, or to teach any
other Faith. Moreover, the Council commands such as None must allege,
write, frame, believe, teach any other Faith.
presume to devise any other Faith, or to bring forth, or to teach, or to
publish any other Creed, unto such as turn either from Paganism to Judaism, or
any other Sect whatsoever, unto the knowledge of the Truth; If they be Bishops,
that they be deposed of their Bishop-like The penalties.
dignities; If Priests, that they be degraded; If Monks and Laypeople, that
they be accursed. -- Hilarious and the Eastern Bishops The manner of
Exclamation at the accursing of Dioscorus. Cap. 18. And conjuring God to
chastize him, and the Emperor to be avenged on him.
cried out, Let Dioscorus be accursed. In the very same hour Christ deprived
Dioscorus, when Dioscorus deposed Flavianus. Oh Holy Lord, we beseech thee
chastise thou him, and thou, O Catholic Emperor, be avenged on him, (these
were Christians, so called, but what spirit they were of, let understanding men
judge, according to the Spirit of Truth.) God grant Leo (who was then Leo his
Benedictus.
Bishop of Rome) may live many years; God send the Patriark a long life. --
When the Sentence was passed on the Bishops that were deposed with Dioscorus,
(which was afterward to those Bishops The cry upon Dioscorus's Judgment. The
Bishops of Illyrium confessing themselves all to have done amiss.
remitted, but not to Dioscorus) the Bishops of the East cried out, -- The
Judgment is just. -- Then the Bishops of Illyricum said, -- We have all done
amiss, and therefore we all crave pardon. And when the Bishops of the East
cried again, The Sentence is just, Christ deposes the Murderer, Christ
revengeth the quarrel of the Martyrs. -- The Senators bad every one give in his
particular The Emperors Faith according to that of Nice, declared so to be by
the Senators.
Faith in writing, asuring them that the Emperor believed, according to the
form of Faith published at Nice by three hundred and eighteen Fathers, and
agreeable to the Creed framed at Constantinople by one hundred and fifty
Bishops, and no otherwise, then the Epistles of the Holy Fathers, Gregory,
Basil, Hillary, Epistles read.
Athanasius, Ambrosius, and the two Epistles of Cyril read in the first Council
of Ephesus, have directed him; and that Leo the most reverend Bishop of Rome
deposed Eutyches for the contrary.

Lastly, (for it will be too long, though otherwise of some account, Cap. 18.
Dioscorus's Sentence.
to rehearse all the Acts of this Council) Dioscorus's Sentence was in these
words, -- Because thou have despised the Holy Canons of the Church, because
thou have not obeyed this holy and general Council, because thou art moreover
convinced of many other Crimes, because thou being thrice called of this famous
Assembly to answer to such things as are laid to thy charge, thou came not;
know, that for all the aforesaid, thou art deposed by the Holy and General
Council, the thirteenth of this present October, of thy Bishopric, and
bereaved of all Ecclesiastical Right and Title. -- After this Florentius Bishop
of Sardis craved their favor, that with advice, and after deliberation taken,
they might attain unto the Truth; and Cecropius Bishop of Sebastopolis, said,
-- The Faith is most notably set The Faith of the 318. Fathers confi^med by
Athanasius, etc and by Leo, desired to be read.
forth by the three hundred and eighteen Holy Fathers, confirmed afterward by
the godly Fathers, Athanasius, etc. as aforesaid, and now again approved by
most Holy Leo: Therefore our request is, That the Creed of the three hundred
Holy Fathers, and the most Holy Leo, may The cry upon the reading this Faith
and confirmation. The Faith of the 150. Fathers at Constantinople read. The cry
thereupon.
be read. -- Being read, all the Council cried, -- This is the Faith of the
true Professors, we are all of this Faith; This is the Faith of Pope Leo, this
is the Faith of Cyril, thus has the Pope interpreted. Then the Faith of one
hundred and fifty Fathers at Constantinople was read, upon which the Council
cried out, and said, -- This is the Faith of the true Professors, thus we do
all believe. Then the Epistles Cyril's Epistles to Nestorius an^ John,
conce^ning Mary's being the Mother of God, read.
of Cyril to Nestorius, and John of Antioch were read, which treats of Mary
being the Mother of God, (what strange expressions are here of him! the Mother
of him who is from everlasting, and is without beginning of days, or end of
life) and in the behalf The cry upon that.
of that; upon which all the Council cried out, We are all of that Faith; Leo
the Pope believes so: Cursed be he that divides Christ, that confounds his
Natures; this is the Faith of Archbishop Leo, thus believes Leo; Leo and
Anatolius are of this Faith, we are all of this Faith; Cyril is of this Faith,
let Cyril never be forgotten, let the Epistles of Cyril be ever had in memory;
this is our Opinion, thus we have believed and do believe; thus does
Archbishop Leo believe, thus has Leo's Epistle, and the Interpretation read.
The cry after the reading of that.
he written, -- Then Leo his Epistle is read, with the interpretation annexed
thereunto, and the Bishops cried out, This is the Faith of the Fathers, this is
the Faith of the Apostles, we are all of this Faith, the true Professors are
all of this Faith, cursed be he that believes not this; Peter in the person of
Leo, said thus, Thus have the Apostles taught, Leo has godly and truly taught
these things, Cyril has taught this, Leo and Cyril have taught the like,
cursed be he that holds not this Faith; this is the true Faith, this is the
Opinion of the true Professors; This is the Faith of the Fathers: Why were not
these things read in the Council of Ephesus? What meant Dioscorus to conceal
these things?

No less than ten Pages are taken up in such things as these, and Ten Pages in
the History filled with these things.
the proceedings of the Council, which I should much (perhaps) offend some if I
should be particular in them all; only thus much (as in one instance) I
thought convenient to insert, that the Reader may see what work here was, what
cluttering, what clamouring, what being more like a company Geese, gigling
their A comparison of these things, and the reason why they were thus.
noises, than a Council of grave men and sober Christians; and how their Faith
was placed and set, and upon what Foundation. I shall now proceed to the
consequences of these works, and the effects of them, as they seemed to have a
reproof from the Lord, in the matters of the Empire, and the things that ensued
therein.

Dioscorus being exiled to Gangrena, a City in Paphlagonia, Proterius Cap. 5:
The consequence of these things. Great Tumult at Alexandria about exiling
Dioscorus, and pla^ing in Proterius. Slaughter, bloodshed.
was set in his room, upon whose enstalment wonderful and great tumults arose
among the people; some would have Dioscorus called home again, others clave
unto Proterius, the consequence whereof was much slaughter and bloodshed; for
with blood commonly was stained the Seats of these Bishops, as their forms of
Faith were the consequences of such their Seats, and the occasions of them. The
Lieutenant of Thebais coming then into Alexandria, seeing the people all in an
uproar, and setting The people set upon the Magist^ates. Force the Garrison.
Burn the Soldiers quick. Ransack the Temple in which they forced them. 2000.
choice Souldidiers hastened thither. They ravish the Wives, deflour the
Daughters of the Citizens.
upon the Magistrates, how they threw stones at the Garrison, that endeavored
to keep the peace; how they forced the Soldiers into the Temple of old called
Seraphis, how the people ran thither, ransacked the Temple, and burned the
Soldiers quick: The Emperor understanding thereof, sent two thousand chosen
Soldiers, who having Wind and Weather, arrived in six days after; they
ravished the Wives, and defloured the Daughters of the Citizens, which to them
that beheld it, this last skirmish seemed to have exceeded the former in
cruelty. After all this the people gathered together at Circus, where their
Shows used to be solemnized, requesting of Florus the Governor of the Garrison
and City in Civil Affairs, to restore unto them the privileged Corn, their
Baths, their common Shows, and other things, of which for these Tumults he had
deprived them, who by his presence Floras reduces the people into peace. The
Monks near Jerusalem not at rest because of the Sentence of Dioscorus. Great
stir and dissension in the Council aforesaid.
and gentle exhortation brought them for a while into peace.

But the Monks inhabiting near Jerusalem, could not be at rest, for some of
them that had been at the Council aforesaid, and dissented from the Decrees;
for there had been a great stir and dissension in the Council: First, The
Bishops of Illyricum, for a while, with some clauses in Cyrils and Leo's
Epistles, yet afterward they subscribed; and such a cry as this was by the
Bishops of the More cries of the Bishops as to Dioscorus.
East, when the Clergy of the Church of Constantinople cried, Few do cry, we
hear not the whole Council speak, viz. Let the Egyptian be deposed, and the
Bishops of Illyricum requested the same. The Clergy of Constantinople cried,
Let Dioscorus be banished, let the Egyptian be exiled, let the Heretic be sent
away, Christ has deprived Dioscorus. -- Again, the Bishops of Illyrium, and
such as were of their side, cried, We have all offended, we beseech you pardon
us, Cap. 18.
rid the Council of Dioscorus, away with Dioscorus out of the Churches. And
when the Monks tendered their Supplication, who The supplication of the Monks
that subscribed not.
would not subscribe till the General Council past, and they understood the
Councils Decrees. When this was read, Diogenes of Cyzicum remembered that
Barsumus was one of them which made the Insurrection, and murdered Flavianus,
and that he had cried Kill him; and now not having his name in the
Supplication, contrary to order, to have presumed to come into the Council; all
the Bishops cried at this, -- Barsumus has perverted all The cry against
Barsumus thereupon, who killed Flavianus.
Syria, and raised against us a thousand Monks. The Monks required their
Supplication to be read, which was, That Dioscorus, and the Bishops of his
Opinion might be present at the Council. All the Council was moved at this, and
cried, -- Let Dioscorus be The cry against the Monks, at the desire of their
Supplication to be read.
accursed, Christ has deposed Dioscorus, out with these Monks, remove shame
from the Council, take away shame and injury, let not these impious and lewd
sayings come to the Emperors ears, let not the Council be discredited, away
with infamy. -- I say, some of them They come to Palestina, and complain. Seek
to stir up division Juvenalis of Jerusalem forced to fly to the City where the
Emperor was. They chose Theodosius Bishop of Jerusalem, he makes Bishops, is
the Ringleader of mischief. This Monk Theodosius is said to have been expelled
the Monastery for Crimes, whipped for Sedition at Alexandria, being a cleaver
to Dioscorus, set upon a Camel, as Malefactors use to be, and car^ied through
the City. Soldiers required to bring Theodosius to the Emperor. Juvenalis
returned, unmakes the Bishops.
had been at the Council and dissented from the Decrees, who came to Palestina,
and complained of this form of Faith delivered by the Council, and labored to
stir up the rest to Sedition; and Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, having both
confuted and detested his own Religion, being compelled thereunto by his
Adversaries, returning from the Council, was forced to fly to the City where
the Emperor resided. These who oppugned the Council of Chalcedon, gathered
themselves together, made an Election on Easter day, and chose Theodosius for
their Bishop (who is said to be the Ringleader of all the mischiefs raised in
the Council, and the first that certified them of the Decrees and Canons
thereof) unto him came many out of the Cities of Palestina, requesting him to
make them Bishops.

These things coming to light, the Emperor commanded Theodosius to be brought
to him by Armed men, then required Juvinalis to go thither, and reform the
disordered state of the Church, and to depose as many as Theodosius had
preferred to the Priestly Function.

Yet these things had not an end, but they broke out more and They grow more
and more into Faction.
more, and into Factions more and more were they divided, as is the natural
consequence of man's intermedling with the things of God: Many grievous
calamities and mischievous devices ensued (says the Historian) by reason of
these contrary Factions; one device was this, (as says the Historian) The
Devil by changing one Letter, and lewd interpreting thereof, brought to pass,
that it should be pronounced either way, (that is) concerning Christ's The
Devils subtilty about the two words (...) and (...), concerning the Natures of
Christ. And the interchangableness of them.
being IN or OF two Natures, (the Greek words being (...) and (...)) for to
establish a contrary Opinion, the which Sentence, (says he) as diverse do
think, is so repugnant, and infers such contradictory sense and meaning,
that the one seems utterly to subvert and overthrow the other; for he that
confesses Christ to be in two Natures, (which is one of the words) says no
less, but that he consists of two Natures, (which is the other word) for by
granting that Christ is both IN Divinity and Humanity, is to confess that he
consists OF Divinity and Humanity. He again (says he) that says that Christ
consists OF two Natures, affirms plainly that he is IN two Natures; for by
avouching that, he consists of Divinity and Humanity, he testifies him to be
IN Divinity and Humanity, yet not by conversion of the flesh into And how they
are put together.
the Godhead (whose uniting was inexplicable) neither of the Godhead into
flesh; so that when we say OF Two, we understand withal IN Two, and by saying
IN Two, we mean OF Two, not parting the one from the other: For it is most
plain (says he) that the whole not only consists of the parts, but that the
whole is understood in the parts; yet for all that (says he) some men are of
Opinion that they are far severed asunder. And varied.


I had not been so particular in this thing, but that I might here The reason
of this Quotation.
also show what a puzzle men are in, and into what a bottomless Gulf they were
plunged, who went about in their understandings to comprehend God, and to speak
of him what he is, and how they come to be divided shamefully hereabouts, and
what is the consequence of imposing the contradictions of men as Faith in God.

Well, the Hand of the Lord testified against these things, Cap. 6. Judgments
succeed these Impositions and Divisions. The Rain withheld in diverse Regions.
Pestilence the consequence. An account of the Pestilence, and the manner
thereof, and its incurability.
whilst in both Phrygiaes, Galatia, Cappadocia, and Cilicia, the Rain was
withheld, so that men wanting necessaries, they received poisonous nourishment;
from whence arose a great Pestilence, and men after change and alteration of
diet, began to sicken, their bodies swelled; the inflammation was so great, that
it made them stark blind; they had withal such a Cough, that they died thereof
the third day: No Medicine could be had, nor Remedy found for this Pestilence;
yet the Hand of the Lord again, as he saw fit, and the correction was
sufficient, aswaged the Famine to such as was left alive, it being reported,
that in that dear Food from Heaven in the dear years.
barren year there came down Food from the Air, no otherwise than the Manna of
old to the Israelites, and that the year following the Earth of her own accord
brought forth fruit. Neither was Earth of its own accord brings forth Fruits.
These things in Palestina, and other Regions where the former things were done.
only this misery (says the History) throughout Palestina, but also sundry
calamities reigned in many other Regions; and these things (says the History)
were about that time, (that is to say) when the things aforesaid were
controverted and done.

In the Civil State also these things happened, Aetius was lamentably Cap. 7.
Aetius put to death at Rome, also Valentinianus; the Emperor and Heraclius, by
the Treason of Maximus, because Valentinianus had ravished his Wife, Maximus
ma^ries Eudoxia the Wife of Valentinianus against her will.
put to death at old Rome: Valentinianus Emperor of the West, together with
Heraclius, by certain Soldiers of Aetius, through the Treason of Maximus, who
aspired unto the Empire, and therefore wrought their destruction; because the
Wife of Maximus had been ravished by Valentinianus; Valentinianus being dead,
Maximus married his Wife Eudoxia against her will: she taking this in great
contumely and reproach, devised how to revenge her Husbands death; she sends to
Genzerichus to Libia, She sends to Genzericus the Vandal to revenge her.
makes him fair promises, puts him in good hopes of prosperous success,
requests him, that, unlooked for, he would invade the Empire of Rome, and
promised to yield all into his hands: He being a Barbarian, unconstant, of
little trust, gave no credit to her words, sets the City on fire, carries away
the spoil, took Eudoxia He burns Rome, carries away the spoil; takes Eudoxia
and her two Daughters with him. Returns, marries Eudoxia's elder daughter to
his Son. Sends the other and her Mother to Martianus. He tore Maximus in
pieces, and threw his body into Tiber. The short succession of the after
Western Emperors. Avitus reigned eight months, Maximus 70. days. Plague
destroys Avitus Majorinus that succeeded him, cut off by Treason. Severus three
years. Anno. 458. Martianus dies. Proterius opposed. Cap. 8. Anno. 458. Timoth.
Elurus chosen.
with her 2 Daughters, returned got him home to Libia, married Eudoxia the
elder Daughter to his Son Honoricus; but sent Placidia the younger Daughter,
and Eudoxia her Mother, with a Princely Train unto Martianus, thereby hoping to
mittigate his wrath and displeasure, who was not a little offended at the
burning of Rome, and the abusing of Valentinianus his Daughters; he tore
Maximus in pieces, and threw his Carcass into Tiber.

Nor did things cease here, for short dates befell the next successive Emperors
of Rome; Avitus was Emperor eight months after the death of Maximus, who
reigned seventy days; when he was dispatched by the Plague, Majorinus the year
following took the government of the Empire; when Rhecimerus a Roman Captain
had procured, through Treason, the death of Majorinus, Severus became Emperor
for the space of three years.

Also Martianus finished this course, having reigned the space of seven years,
which those of Alexandria understanding, they renewed their opposition against
Proterius; Dionysius the Captain of the Guard being absent, they consulted to
make Timotheus, surnamed Aelurus, to be their Bishop; and having brought him
into the great Church called Caesar's, they proclaimed him, whilst Proterius was
yet alive, and exercised the Priesthood, slew Proterius Proterius slain, as he
fled to the Font. Tied with a Rope, dragged, derided.
whilst he was flying to the Holy Font, (as says the History) tied him with a
Rope, and haled him to the four Poarches for all men to gaze at him; through
the persuasion of Timothy, and with shouting and laughter revealed the
murdering of Proterius; afterward they drew his Carcass through the City, and
burnt it to Drawn through the City, burnt to As^es. His bowels tasted of.
Ashes; neither abstained they from the tasting of his Bowels, as the Bishops
and Clergy throughout Egypt, in their complaints to Leo, who succeeded
Martianus, of them who were Eyewitnesses, gave it at large under their hands,
which is said to be done with a He was run through the body with a Sword, as it
was rumoured, that the Captain hasted into the City. Six more killed with him.
His dead body lashed, disjoynted, and his Ashes thrown into the Air.
naked Sword, as the Captain hearing the rumor of the tumult came in post have
to Alexandria to quench it; so being ran through the Body, died, and six more
were killed with him, and his dead body they lashed with a Whip, and unjoynted
his Members; and when they had burned his body, they threw the Ashes, and
scattered them in the Air.

This outrageous Villainy thus committed, put the Emperor to it, who sent his
Letters throughout the Empire to consider what was Cap. 9. The Emperor
troubled, sends Letters what were best to be done.
best to be done; for there were two things in it, the blood of Proterius, and
the dissatisfaction of the Decrees of the six hundred and thirty Bishops in the
Council of Chalcedon, and how to secure the peace of Alexandria: so the issue
returned upon Timothy, Timothy is deposed, banished.
(who wrote bold Letters in answer to the Emperor's, that were sent about, and
that Council) who was deposed and banished to Gangrena aforesaid, and Timothy
called Basilius was put in to succeed Cap. 10. Basilius succeeds.
Proterius. Annatolius being also dead, Gennadius was Bishop of Constantinople,
and after him Acasius Master of the Hospital or College of Orphans.

Thus things shook in reference to Religion, and reeled up and Judgments on the
State. The Empire shaken.
down, whilst men took upon them to settle and establish Religion. And in the
Civil State things shook also. The Earth moved Cap. 12. An Earthquake at
Antioch again.
at Antioch again, it turned upside down, in a manner, all the building of that
new City, being well peopled, without a waste corner or ruinous piece of
building, but all adorned, and gorgeously set forth by the bountifulness of the
Emperors contending successively who should excel the other therein; the first
and second Lodgings of the Palace were overthrown, the rest stood with the
Bath adjoining thereunto; the Portly Gates of the Palace, the place called the
Four Porches, the utter Turrets and Galleries near the Gates, where the
Stage Plays were kept, some Poarches that came out thence, together with
abundance of other places, were turned to the ground. Before the Earthquake
began, certain The people ran mad before it began.
people born in Antioch waxed mad, raved above measure, seeming to exceed all
furious rage of brutish fierceness, which was preambulatory to this great
calamity; this grievous Earthquake happened in the 506. year after the City was
called Antioch. The fourteenth day of the Month called Gorpiaeus, after the
Romans, September, about the fourth hour in the night; three hundred forty
seven years being expired, after the Earthquake under Trajan. The Baths under
Trajan, Severus, and Adrian, the adjoining Ostracina, with the Porches and
Nymphaeum were overturned.

As dreadful a fire, or beyond it, happened at Constantinople in that Cap. 13. A
dreadful fire at Constantinople, much like that lately at London.
part of the City which lay next to the Sea, and is called Oxstreet; it lasted
the space of four days, and no man was able to quench it; it flashed
throughout the midst of the City, consumed from the North part to the South end
all Houses, five Furlongs in length, and fourteen in breadth, left no building
either public or private, no Pillars, no strong Arches, nor Vaults, in all
that time, and in all that compass, unburned to the Foundation, but to have
pierced the flint Stone, and hard Metal, as if it had been stubble or straw,
on the North part of the City where the Haven lies. This lamentable destruction
reached from the Oxstreet unto the old Temple of Apollo; on the South Side from
the Haven of Julian unto the Temple of Concord; in the midst of the City from
Constantines Market unto the Market of Taurus; a pitiful show, and dreadful to
behold, (says the History) the goodly places and gorgeous high buildings that
had been within the City, the costly carved Timber, yielding heretofore great
majesty unto the eye of man, both public and private, were then become like
craggy Hills and Rocks that no man could pass through; confused heaps of filth,
and all kind of stuff, full of deformity, that the owners themselves could not
discern the bounds of their Possessions, nor say this or that place stood thus
before the fire consumed them: These are the words of the Historian, in which I
have put them down, because it seems to bear some resemblance to the late
dreadful fire in London.

Moreover in the East part of the Empire the Scythian War Cap. 14. The Scythian
War waxed hot in the East. Thracia, Hellespont, Ionia, the Cyclades, or 50.
Isles, Cnidos in Caria shaken with te^rible Earthquakes, storms of Rain like
floods fall in Constantinople and Bythinia. Mountains made Plains, and Valleys
Hills. Villages on float. Islands in Lakes.
waxed hot; Thracia, Hellespontus, and Ionia, were wonderfully shaken with
Earthquakes; no less were the fifty Isles called Cyclades, in the Sea Aegaeum,
Cnidos in Caria and Coo, so that many buildings were thrown down to the ground.
Priscas also writes, that at Constantinople and Bythinia, such storms of Rain
and Water fell for the space of three or four days, it poured down like
streams and floods; beat down the Hills and Mountains with the violence thereof
(as says the History) and made them plain Valleys; that the Villages were all
on float, and in danger of drowning; and that in the Lake Boan, not far from
Nicomedia, by reason of the filth and baggage the Water brought thither, were
seen Islands.

These things happened more Eastward. At Rome, Leo the Emperor Cap. 16. Anthemius
made Bishop. Genzerichus invades the West. Basiliscus sent against him.
sent Anthemius, at the request of the Roman Ambassadors, to be Emperor of
Rome, who had married the Daughter of Martianus; Basiliscus the Brother of
Berina, Leo's Wife, he made Captain of an Army that he sent against Genzerichus
that invaded those parts: but as for Aspar, whom himself had made Emperor, Leo
conspires the death of Aspar, who he made Emperor, and slayes him, his Son, and
Patricius. Anthemius slain. Olymbrius succeeds.
Leo conspired his death, and slew him, with his Sons Ardaburius, whom he had
made Caesar, and Patricius, that he might scorn at the ignorance and insolency
of Aspar their Father. Anthemius after he had been Emperor five years, was
slain, and Olymbrius by Rhecimerus was proclaimed Emperor. After he was
dispatched, who reigned but seven months, Glycerius was proclaimed Emperor;
Glycerius after him. Nepos deposes him. Orestes puts by Nepos. Augustulus
succeeds. Odoacer follows, who called himself King. The last Emperor of Rome,
of the 1300 years after Romulus, was Augustulus.
and after he had continued five years, was deposed by Nepos. Orestes after six
and fifty days puts by Nepos. After Orestes, his Son Romulus, surnamed
Augustulus, succeeded, who was the last Emperor of Rome of the thousand three
hundred years after the Reign of Romulus. When he departed this life, Odoacer
governed the Roman Commonwealth, who refused the name of an Emperor, and would
himself be called King.

So I have traced the Empire of Rome, or the Western part of The end of the
West Empire of Rome. The cause assigned:
the Roman Empire to this foot, which was the end thereof, through the just
Judgment of God, who met with them, and brought his calamities, as he thought
fit, through Sedition and Civil War (as the particular Judgments) it fell out,
that the Empire came to Many reigned in the W^st of equal Authori^y. No Emperor
of the West for 330. years after the year 800. Carolus Magnus translated the
name to the Emperor of Germany.
naught: Many reigned in the West of equal Authority; there was no Emperor of
the West for the space of three hundred and thirty years, before the year eight
hundred; When Carolus Magnus, King of France, was by Leo the Third Bishop of
Rome, created Emperor, from which time the Emperors of the West were called the
Emperors of Germany.

Leo also after he had reigned seventeen years, deposed himself, and placed
Leo, who was of tender years, the Son of Ariadne his Cap. 17. Anno. 457. Leo
deposes himself. Cap. 1: Places young Leo in his room. Zeno comes to be Emperor
with him. Leo the younger dies. Zeno Emperor alone.
Daughter, and Zeno in the Empire; in a while Zeno came to be Emperor with him,
by the procurement of Berina; but Leo the younger departing, he was Emperor
alone.

And thus have I gone through this Council of Chalcedon, and the consequences
that in so small a tract of time ensued thereupon, both of Blood and Judgment;
and to this time, how that was shaken and brought down, which broke the unity
of the Christians, by seeking to establish the Truth: This Council was famous,
not only for the particulars already expressed, but of counterfeiting More
indirect dealings at the Council of Calcedon, and horrible wickedness.
hands, the wringing of the fingers of such as wrote, directing their Pens,
compulsion by force to a Subscription to Blanks, Soldiers with naked Swords
standing by ready to dispatch them if they yielded not, said to be used in the
business of Dioscorus for the accomplishing of his ends, in the second Council
of Ephesus; which I note to show, what fraudulent courses At the second Council
at Ephesus. The proper consequences of forcing Religion.
of force and violence, as well as blood and mischief, were used by those
Fathers of the Church (as they are called) in the taking upon them to determine
and establish the highest part of Religion, viz. Faith in Christ; God, and what
he is; the Son and Spirit. I shall now go unto Zeno, and those that follow, and
see what the History of him will afford me in the things I am about, and do now
treat of.

This Zeno, (says the History) as if he were certainly persuaded Evagr. lib.
3. cap. 1. The unreasonable sensuality of Zeno.
that he could not enjoy the Empire of the whole World, unless with outrage and
Riot, he yielded himself to all fleshly pleasure whatsoever; gave himself in
the beginning so much unto sensuality, that he left no filthy or shameful Act,
nor heinous offense unpractised, but so wallowed in them, as that he thought it
the part of a base mind to commit them in the dark, or in secret, but to do
them openly in the face of the whole world, was Princely, and such as only
became the Emperor: being led into all sensuality, his Dominion became as
himself, weak and rusty, and The decay of the Empire. Cap. 2. Invaded on every
hand. His Subjects vexed. Great losses. The Scenitae, and Hunnies destroy all.
fell away by degrees, as he gradually was captivated by his Lusts; no good
defense was made for his Dominions, but on every hand he suffered it to be
invaded, so that his Subjects were vexed out of measure, and sustained great
losses. The Scenitae, a barbarous Nation, destroyed all places as they came,
and a great multitude of Hunnes, of old called Massagetae, invaded Thracia, and
passed over the River Danuby, without let or stay; by force also, after a
Barbarian sort, he was bereaved of the other parts of the Empire: for things
being at this pass, Basiliscus the Brother of Bernia Basiliscus takes Arms.
Zeno slies. His Subjects desert him.
took arms against him. Zeno being so faint in courage that he fled away,
giving Basiliscus the Imperial Honor and Victory, without any travel; for his
abominable life was so detested of his Subjects, that they mattered not to
assist him; therefore he got him into Isauria, with Ariadne his Wife, who also
fled away from her Mother; and there where he was brought up, he was besieged
(...) So Basiliscus became Emperor, who proclaimed his He is besieged.
Basiliscus Emperor. Marcus made Caesar.
Son Marcus, Caesar, and lad down a platform of Government far contrary to the
manner of Zeno's Reign, and such as were Emperors before him.

Basiliscus being thus become Emperor, he turns all things upside Cap. 4. All
turned up-s^de down by Basiliscus.
down, undoes that which was done before him, calls Timothius Aelurus Bishop of
Alexandria home from Exile, where he Timothy called home. The Council of
Chalcedon accursed by Letters to all the Churches under Heaven. The Decrees
thereof, and of Leo burnt to Ashes.
had continued eighteen years; sends Letters by the advice of Timothy, unto all
the Priests throughout the Churches under Heaven, and therein accurseth the
Acts of the Council of Chalcedon; charge all the Decrees of that Council, and
of Leo, (which he says therein disturbs the quiet state of the Church of God,
and the peace of the whole World) to be burned to Ashes, The Faith of the
second Council at Ephesus, and the 318 Fathers, and the 150 established. The
Bishops required to subscribe these Letters by the Emperor, by Priests also,
Monks, Laymen, as the Council of Chalcedon had done.
and so to be abolished, as to be banished for ever; confirms the Faith of the
second Council of Ephesus, and the 318. Fathers, and the 150. godly Fathers
after them; requires the Bishops to subscribe to these his Letters, and
commands the same to be done by Bishops, Priests, Monks, and Laymen, as the
Council at Chalcedon had done in the conclusion of theirs, as aforesaid, with
much more of the like nature, too long to be repeated.

Now as the Wind drives from every part of the Compass, the stubble flies
before the Wind, so did the Bishops the force of this Cap. 5. The Bishops turn
and subscribe.
Emperor; many signed to these his Letters, being quite contrary to what they
had done at Chalcedon. Anastasius the Successor Anastatius Bishop of Rome, and
40. others.
of Juvenalis Bishop of Rome, and forty more that way, are said to do it, and
that the Bishops of Asia met at Ephesus, tendered Those of Asia.
supplications unto him, wherein they expressed to have subscribed to his
Gracious and Apostolic Letters, (as they are called) with most willing and
prompt minds, and not as it was reported of them, that they did it by
compulsion and constraint. To this Letter Timothy also subscribed, and Peter
Cnapheus of Antioch, Peter of Antioch, contrary to what they had done at
Chalcedon
who was at that time at Constantinople, and in that supplication they desire
the Emperor to depose the Bishop of Constantinople, Acasius, and many others.

Timothy hereupon left Constantinople, puts Paulus again into Cap. 6. Paulus
put into Ephesus. Ephesus restored to a Metropolitan Jurisdiction. Those at
Alexandria requested to curse the Council of Chalcedon.
Ephesus, from whence he was deposed; restores Ephesus to the Metropolitan
Jurisdiction taken away by the Council of Chalcedon, came to Alexandria; and
there he requested as many as came unto him to curse the Council of Chalcedon.

Notwithstanding all this peremptory work and contradiction, Basiliscus,
fearing the disturbance of the Monks might make against Cap. 7. Basiliscus
sounds a retreat for fear of the Monks. Judges his Letters. Writes contrary.
him, through the persuasion of Acasius, who canvassing the matter, set them
on, and so wrought that he was constrained to deny that he had written his
Letters universally unto all men; and to decree that such things as he had
rashly and unadvisedly published, should be called in again, and contrary
Letters, wherein he approves of the Council of Chalcedon, to be wrote unto all
men.

These things wrought not well for Basiliscus, but Zeno, to Cap. 8. Zeno rises
a scourge to Basiliscus.
whom, and for whose sensuality and pleasure Basiliscus was made a scourge, he
is now made a scourge to Basiliscus, and so arising (as it were) out of the
Graves of pleasure and punishment, led his Army toward Constantinople, and
thrusts by Basiliscus, after Puts him by. He flies to the Altar for Sanctuary.
he had reigned two years, taking him out of the Sanctuary, unto which he had
fled (for they used the Altar for Sanctuary in those days) he sent him to
suffer at Cappadocia, where, together with Is sent to Cappadocia. He and his
Wife and Children put to death there.
his Wife and Children, he was put to death in an Inn called Acouson.

Now the Wind turning again, how plyant are the Bishops of Cap. 9. The Bishops
turn again, crave pardon. Swear that they subscribed by compulsion.
Asia? they acknowledge their fault, and crave pardon of Acacius; protesting
that they subscribed not of their own accord, but by compulsion and constraint
to the general Letters of Basiliscus, confirming with an Oath that it was so,
and that they believed no otherwise than the Council of Chalcedon believed. The
thing it self I forbear to rehearse, lest I should seem too tedious.

Thus it fared with the Bishops, and thus Religion came to be Cap. 10.
Observations hereupon.
turned up and down, and Faith, and Creeds, at the pleasure of men, and as it
lists them. Peter being banished the Church of Antioch, Stephen succeeded
him, whom the people of Antioch Stephen at Antioch murdered with Darts.
dispatched with little Darts much like sharp Spears, whom Calandio succeeded,
who persuaded all that came near him to accurse Calandio who succeeds persuades
all to curse both Timothy, and the Letters of Basilicus.
both Timothy, and the General Letters Basiliscus had sent unto all Churches.

Timothy also had gone into banishment, had not Zeno been Cap. 11. Timothy
dies. Pet Moggus succeeds.
told he was a very old man, and ready to lie in his Grave, who not long after
finished his mortal life; and the Bishops of their own heads chose Peter,
surnamed Moggus, to succeed, which Zeno Zeno threatens to put him to death.
Another Timothy called home to succeed.
hearing, it displeased him, so that he threatened he should die the death; and
called home Timothy the Successor of Proterius, who then, by reason of a
certain Insurrection of the people, lived at Canubus.

Not long after Timothy died, whom to succeed, John the Cap. 12. He dies. John
succeeds by Symony. Zeno, because he had sworn he would never be Bishop, turns
him out.
Priest of St. John Baptist, (so called) gave a piece of money to be Bishop,
and was chosen for Alexandria, which when the Emperor heard of, and how he had
broken his Oath to the Emperor, which was, That he would never be Bishop if it
was offered him; he turned him out, and commanded Peter to be restored, Peter
restored on conditions of subscription, etc. Cap. 14. The people brought into
Concord.
conditionally that he subscribed unto the Epistle, and received into Communion
such as held with Proterius, which was an Epistle of Concord of Zeno's, to
those at Alexandria, to draw them unto the Faith held by the Council of
Chalcedon, which the people having heard read, it is said, they returned into
the Catholic and Apostolic Church.

John being thus put out of Alexandria, takes his heels and Cap. 15. John runs
to Rome. Raises a stir there.
runs unto Rome, and there raises a great stir and contention, pretending that
for standing to the Epistle of Leo, and the Council of Chalcedon, he was
deposed; at which the Bishop was much moved, The Bishop writes to Zeno. Zeno
returns, it was for Perjury.
and wrote to Zeno, but Zeno answered it was for John's perjury, and for that
crime he was removed.

Calandio write to Zeno and Acacius, that Peter was not only Cap. 16. Calandio
charges Peter with Adultery, and cursing the Council of Chalcedon. Calandio is
banished. Peter Cnapheus restored to Antioch.
an Adulterer, but had accursed the Council of Chalcedon; notwithstanding
Calandio was banished into Oasis for holding with Ilus, Leo, and Pampreps,
against Zeno. Peter Cnapheus hereupon was restored into Antioch, and subscribed
the Epistle of Concord, wrote by Zeno, and wrote Synodical Letters to Petter
Moggus of Alexandria. Acacius also was reconciled to this Peter* Martyrius
likewise the Bishop of Jerusalem wrote Synodical Letters unto him; yet diverse
withdrawing from his Communion, he openly accursed the Council of Chalcedon.
This troubled Acacius, He curses the Council of Chalcedon. Peter seeks to purge
himself. Observations upon the reeling state of things in that time. John
pursues his quarrel. Felix of Rome sends to the Emperor to depose Peter.
but Peter wrote back to purge himself, as if he had done no such Fact. So
backwards and forwards things turn and reel, and men are unstable as Water,
whilst they know not the Rock of Ages to be their strength and establishment,
in reference unto God. John persists still in his quarrel of deposition, gets
Felix Bishop of Rome to send Vitalius and Misinus, two Bishops, to the Emperor,
to depose Peter of his Bishopric as an Heretic, and to send Acacius unto him
to render an account, and to purge himself of such Crimes as John had laid to
his charge, because he had communicated with Peter.

Before the Messengers came to Zeno, Cyril, head of the Vigilant Cap. 19. The
vigilan^ Monks pursue the business by Cyril. They blame Felix for slackness.
Monks, (so called) charged Felix with slackness of duty, seeing so many
grievous practices took place against the true and sincere Faith. Felix then
wrote unto Misinus, That he should do nothing before he had conferred with
Cyril, and learnt of him what was to be done.

Felix wrote not only unto Zeno, but unto others, to put them Cap. 20. Felix
solicits the Emperor afresh.
in mind of the Council at Chalcedon, and of the persecution in Africa, in the
reign of Theodorichus. Another Epistle he wrote unto Acacius. Zeno returned
him, That he fought with his shadow, in giving an ear to John's report, and
contending with his Adversaries, He turns a deaf ear; tells him, John was put
by for perjury.
for he was the man that bound himself with an Oath, That he would never be
Bishop of Alexandria, yet afterward was found perjured, and to commit every
kind of Sacrilege; that Peter was not advanced to the Priestly Function
without good trial of his Faith, that he had subscribed with his own hand, and
approved the Faith of the 318. Fathers in the Council of Nice, which Faith was
afterward ratified by the Council of Chalcedon.

This was the ado that was kept about John, who was perjured, Observations
hereupon.
as aforesaid, and gave money also to be Bishop, when he had sworn to the
Emperor that he would not be a Bishop; and about Peter, who was charged, as
aforesaid, to be an Adulterer, whom notwithstanding the Emperor in the latter
end of his Letter calls most Holy; for that Title he gives him, which, right or
wrong, it seems, is used to the Bishops, especially that had Patriarchal Seats,
or were Archbishops. -- We would have you assure your self, that our Highness,
with most holy Peter (mentioned before) and all the Christian Congregations, do
embrace and reverence the Sacred Council of Chalcedon, which Council is one in
effect with the Nicene Creed. -- Yet the Monks of Constantinople, and the
Bishops throughout Egypt, charge Peter to be an Heretic, and so write against
him to Felix the Bishop of Rome, and against all that communicated with him; as
many also of the vigilant Monks which came to Felix, reproved Misinus and
Vitalis, because at their coming to Constantinople, the name of Peter was
secretly used to be read in the holy Catalogue; notwithstanding they since that
time communicated continually with Peter; the Bishops of Egypt their Epistle
signified, That John (the perjured person aforesaid, and that bought his
Bishopric) was of the true Faith, and consecrated according to the Canons of
the Church; That Peter was ordered only by two Bishops, infected with the same
error with him, and that after the flight of John, he left no punishment
unpractised upon the true Peter a Persecutor.
Professors.

Simeon also, one of the vigilent Monks whom Cyril had sent Cap. 21. A great
ado still about John.
unto Felix, augmented the accusations, who reprehended Misinus and Vitalis for
communicating with Heretics, specially seeing the Name of the Heretic was
openly read in the holy Catalogue, whereby many simple people were snared of
the Heretics, who sticked not to brag that the Bishop of Rome received Peter
into the Communion, and that when certain questions were asked Misinus and his
Company, would not confer with the true Catholics, nor receive their Writings,
nor exquisitely sift out things which were done in the prejudice of the true
Faith, which when Silvanus, who accompanied them to Constantinople, avouched to
be true what was alleged; and Acacius his Epistle being read, wherein he gave
Simplicius to understand that Peter was lately deposed, and pronounced the
Child of darkness. Misinus and Vitalis were deposed of their Dignities, and cut
off from the holy and undefiled Communion, and that by the censure of the whole
Assembly: -- This that follows is part of the Decree, which I set down, that it
may appear after what manner those things were penned with them, -- The Church
of Rome does not communicate Part of the Decree of the Assembly against Peter.
with Peter the Heretic, who was lately condemned by the Apostolic Sea,
excommunicated the Church, and held for accursed; although there were no other
Crime to charge him withal, yet is this of force sufficient, That he cannot
govern the faithful People of God, because he was ordered of Heretics. -- Also
it says, It appeared evidently that Acacius Bishop of Constantinople was
greatly to be blamed, because, though he wrote unto Simplicius, and called
Peter an Heretic, yet he would not make Zeno privy thereunto, whenas in very
deed, if he had born good will unto Zeno, he would have done it; but he desired
rather to please the Emperor, than to provide for the Faith.

When the Schism grew hot, and the Sedition grievous within Cap. 22. Many
Bishops, etc. communicate with Peter. The Decrees of Leo, and the Chalcedon
Council condemned, though signed to (in effect) in signing the Epistle of Leo.
Diverse banished.
the City of Alexandria, Peter persuaded many Bishops and Governors of
Monasteries to communicate with him, and condemned the Decrees of Leo, and the
Chalcedon Council (though in effect he had signed unto them in Zenoes Epistle
of Concord) And such as would not receive the Books of Dioscorus and Timothy,
he banished the Monasteries, when to his Opinion he could not allure them.
Whereupon Nephalius went for Constantinople, and to Zeno revealed the whole
matter, who was troubled, and sent Zeno troubled. Sends Cosmas thither.
Cosmas one of his Guard to rebuke Peter sharply, and to threaten him both for
contemning his Epistle, and causing the Sedition, He prevails little.
or being the occasion thereof, who when he could prevail no farther than for
the expulsed to be returned to their Monasteries, he Arsenius is employed, but
to as little purpose.
went back to the Emperor, who employed Arsenius Lieutenant of Egypt, who with
the other went strait to Alexandria, and entreated them to keep the peace; but
when he could not obtain his purpose, he sent some of them to Constantinople;
and though Some sent to Constant.
there was a great reasoning in the presence of Zeno about the Council of
Chalcedon, yet there was nothing concluded, in that Zeno No agreement, the
Emperor dissenting.
did not consent thereunto.

Great stir there was in this business, as indeed nothing hardly Cap. 23. More
stir in the business. Acacius dies, Phranitas succeeds. Pet. rejects his
friendship. Phranitas dies. His Successor is Euphremius. Peter courts him.
Euphremius refuses.
without it was accomplished; Acacius dies, who was Peter's great Friend;
Phranitas is put in his stead, he writes Letters of friendship unto Peter, but
Peter would not hear him, but bitterly enveighs against the Council of
Chalcedon. Phranitas dying after four months, Euphremius succeeded him. Peter
to him writes Letters of Friendship, in which he accusing the Council of
Chalcedon, Euphremius would in no wise communicate with him: These two
contending one with another, and purposing to call Synods to one another
Opinion; Peter dies, whom Athanasius succeeds; he Peter dies, Athanasius
succeeds. He seeks friends^ip of Palladius, so does Joh. Palladius dies,
Flavianus comes in his room He sends to John Letters of friendship. John dies,
another John takes his place. Anastatius the Emperor (to whose days these
things held) deposes Euphremius.
sends Letters of friendship to Palladius, Peter's Successor at Antioch,
concerning the Council of Chalcedon; so did John the Successor of Athanasius of
Alexandria. Palladius dying, Flavianus succeeds him, who sends Solomon Priest
of Antioch with Letters of friendship unto John. John deceasing, another John
succeeds in Alexandria. These things continued to the Reign of Anastatius, who
deposed Euphremius; which for the better understanding of the consequence of
the Council of Chalcedon are here together repeated.

Zeno was not without his troubles in the State, as these things Cap 24. Zeno
finds trouble for his troubling about Religion.
otherwise exercised the Christians. Armatus the Cousin of Berina the Empress,
whom Basiliscus sometime made Captain against him, yet he won him to his side,
and instead of his Enemy made him his Companion, and created his Son
Basiliscus, Caesar, at Nice: Notwithstanding these great benefits, he got him to
Constantinople, and conspired the death of Armatus; instead of Caesar, he He
conspires the death of Armatus. Makes his Son Basiliscus a Priest, who was made
Caesar.
made his Son Basiliscus Priest, who afterward was preferred to a Bishop. This
dispatching of this man, was through the procurement of Ilus.

Then Theodorichus a Scythian born, prepared to give Zeno Battle, Cap. 25.
Theodoricus the Scythian engages ^im, destroys in Thracia, likely to have
taken Constantinople. He is dispatched.
raised a mighty Army in Thracia, and marched toward Constantinople,
destroying all the Country before him unto the entry of Pontus, and (its like)
had taken Constantinople, had not some of his dearest Friends been displeased
with him, and conspired to bereave him of his life.

He being dead, Martianus Son of Anthemius sometimes Emperor Cap. 26. Martianus
Son of Anthemius, rebels. They fight in the Palace. Martianus by tarrying
till to morrow lost his day.
of Rome, being Allied to Leo the Emperor, rebelled against him; he married
Leontia the younger, Daughter of Leo: When they had fought in the Palace, and
many were fallen on both sides, Martianus had gotten the day, had he not set
^^ip the opportunity, and posted off his devise till the next day, wherein he
was betrayed of his own men; left desolate, and constrained to Is betrayed of
his men. Left desolate. Flies to the Temple of the Apostles. Removes to Cesarea.
fly to the Temple of the Apostles, from whence being driven out, he removed to
Cesaria in Cappadocia; and whilst he sought to hide himself there, with certain
Monks, he was taken, and sent by Is taken among the Monks, and made one.
the Emperor to Tarsus in Cilicia, and there shaven, and made Monk.

Ilus also conspired against him in Cilicia, because of Berina, Cap. 27. In
Cilicia, Ilus conspires against him. Is sent Captain into the East to cover the
intent. Takes off the poor man's head, who mist, being sent to dispatch Ilus.
Zenoes Wives Mother, whom he had banished thither to Papirium Castle, whose
life oft-times he sought. Ilus he made Captain of his Army in the East to cover
his intent, and then sent one to dispatch him, who because he did not, but
failed of his purpose, he took the poor man's Head from his Shoulders.

At Tarsus also Leontius was proclaimed Emperor, against whom Cap 28. Leontius
at Tarsus is proclaimed Emperor. Theodorichus sent against him. Is plotted
against by Zeno. Goes to old Rome. Overcomes Odoacer.
he sent Theodorichus, a Goth, of great honor among the Romans, with great
power both of Romans and Barbarians, yet he wrought evilly against them, who,
in love they bare him, traveled hard in his Affairs, and cut some of them off,
insomuch that Theodorichus hearing of his malicious purpose against him, got
him to old Rome; and yet some report, that through the procurement of Zeno,
Theodorichus overcame Odoacer, and so conquered Rome. Conquers Rome. Cap. 29.
Himself comes last on the Stage; dies of the Falling Sickness. Longinus would,
but Anastatius, by Ariadne's means, becomes Emperor.


At length himself comes upon the Stage, and in the seventeenth year of his
Reign dies of the Falling Sickness: Longinus his Brother hoped to succeed him,
and for that purpose raised great power, but he accomplished not; for Ariadne
took the Imperial Scepter, and therewith Crowned Anastatius, who was not as yet
a Senator, but only was enroled in the School of those who were called
Silentarij. He took to Wife Ariadne, and sent Longinus He marries Ariadne,
dismisses from the Count all that would. Peace he desired. Alteration he made
none. Gave all liberty. Every Governor of a Congregation did as he would
himself.
into the Country, and dismised all such from the Court that desired it: He was
a man that earnestly desired peace and quietness; he made no alteration of what
is called Church or State. As for the Council of Chalcedon's Decrees, it was
neither openly preached, nor generally rejected, every Governor of the several
Congregations did therein as he thought fit himself. And as some maintained the
Canons of that Council, not admitting the change of one syllable, but avoiding
the company of, and refusing to communicate with them that were otherwise; The
miserable division that was among the Christians when they had no Persecution.
So others not only condemned that Council, and the Decrees thereof, but also
accursed it with Leo's determination of the Faith. Some cleaved wholly to
Zeno's Epistle of Unity; yea when they were at bitter contention among
themselves, whether there was one or two Natures in Christ, (they are the very
observation of the Historian) some were deceived in the very joining the
Letters together. Some were rather disposed to reconciliation and peace;
insomuch that all the Churches (says he) were divided into sundry Factions,
and the Bishops themselves refused to communicate one with another, so that
there arose great ado in the East, West, and Lybia, whilst the Bishops of the
East would communicate neither with the Western Bishops, nor the Bishops of
Lybia, neither among themselves, but every day more then other fell to exceed
other in malicious contention. For the Bishops of the East would not be
reconciled amongst themselves, neither would the Bishops of Europe, neither of
Lybia, be at one, either with themselves, or with Foreigners. These things
Anastatius understanding, took the best counsel he could, as he thought to
preserve Constrained Anastat. to banish the heads of Novellisms, and that
introduced any thing that was contrary to the custom of the place. As the
Bishops of Constantinople and Antioch.
the peace, and so deposed all the Authors of Novelties, and all such as
contrary to the custom of the place either preached the Council of Chalcedon,
or accursed the same; and first he began with Euphremius Bishop of
Constantinople, whom he banished, and after him Macedonius, whom Timothy
succeeded: Moreover he drove Flavianus out of Antioch.

Peter being dead at Alexandria; Alexandria, Egypt, and Lybia, Cap. 31.
were at variance among themselves, and other Countries in the East contended
within themselves, the West Churches would in no wise communicate with them,
but upon condition that they accurse Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, Peter
surnamed Moggus, and Acacius; wherefore seeing the Churches throughout the
World were at this point; the favorers of Dioscorus, and Eutyches were brought
to a narrow strait; and now being, as it were, rooted from off the face of the
Earth; one Xenaias made an insurrection under Xenaias makes an Insurrection
under color of Religion.
color of Religion against Flavianus, charging him with the Heresy of
Nestorius; when Flavianus had accursed Nestorius and his Heretical Opinion, he
left him, and turned to Dioscorus, and Theodorus, and Theodoritus, and Ibas,
and Cyrus, and Eutherius, and John, and to others, of which some in very deed
were Nestorians; some, to avoid the suspicion of that Heresy, accursed
Nestorius, and returned unto the Church. Unless thou accurse (said Xenaias) all
those which savor of Nestorius sink of Heretical Doctrine, thou thy self shall
seem to be of Nestorius his Opinion, although thou accurse both him and his
Doctrine, yea a thousand His insolent demands.
times. Then he dealt with the favorers of Dioscorus and Eutyches, to hold
with him against Flavianus; not that they should accurse the Council, but only
the persons above named. Flavianus after he had withstood them along while, and
saw that others held against him, perceiving, at length, that they would be
pacified if the aforesaid persons were accursed; he yielded unto them, and then
wrote to the Emperor: yet Xenaius was not satisfied, but again required
Flavianus to condemn both the Council, and those that affirmed there were two
Natures in Christ; which he refusing, is charged afresh with the Heresy of
Nestorius. Last of all, when this Patriarch had published a form of Faith,
wherein he gave to understand that the Council was to be approved, as to the
deprivation of Nestorius and Eutyches, but not for the Decree of their Faith
and Doctrine, they threatened to take him in hand again, as a favourer of
Nestorius, unless he will accurse both the Council it self, and them that
affirmed there were two Natures in Christ, the one Divine, the other Humane:
And the new patched Faith of him, and those with him.
And the Isaurians by flatteries and fallacies they got to their sides, and
patched together a form of Faith, wherein they accursed both the Council, and
such as esteemed there were two Natures in Christ. And in the end, divided
themselves from Flavianus Their horrible division.
and Macedonius, and joined with them who had subscribed to their patched
Faith. The Bishop of Jerusalem in the mean time they requested to lay down his
Faith in writing, which he did, and sent it by the faction of Dioscorus to the
Emperor; and this Its sent to the Emperor.
Faith at last they brought forth, accursing those that said he had two
Natures; but it seems they had corrupted his form of Faith, Complained of to be
corrupted. Another is wrote. The Books and Writings of the Fathers corrupted.
for he charged them therewith, and wrote another, wherein there is no such
accurse; it seems they oft-times corrupted the Books and Writings of the
Fathers, by changing their Titles and Inscriptions, and fathering of many of
the works of others upon them. They craved of Macedonius to see his Belief in
writing, Macedonius's belief.
who protested that he only allowed the Faith published of old at Nice, by
318. Fathers, and afterward ratified at Constantinople; accursing Nestorius,
Eutyches, with such as said there were two Sons, or two Christ's, or divided the
Natures; yet spoke he not a word of the Ephesian Council, which deposed
Nestorius, neither of the Chalcedon Council which deprived Entyches; therefore
the Monks at Constantinople were wonderfully moved at this, and divided The
Monks divide from him. The intolerable behavior of Xenaias and Dioscorus.
themselves from Macedonius. All this while Xenaias and Dioscorus, having
linked to their sides many other Bishops, behaved themselves intollerably
toward such as would not accurse whom they would have accursed, insomuch that
they procured diverse, because they would not yield unto them, to be banished.
Many by them banished, viz. Macedonius, John, Flavianus.
Thus they made Macedonius, John Bishop of Platum, and Flavianus to leave the
Country.

In these things I have been the more particular, because they The end
wherefore these divisions are mentioned.
are so significant to the matter I have in hand, which is (once for all, as I
have said) to draw a line over all professions of Faith, and imposing of
Religion, as that which has produced the saddest Scenes of Murder and
Division, as has been yet in the World, and which I mean to close up with that
which appertains thereunto, viz. Judgment and Destruction. Therefore I would
have none to be offended with me, for a necessity lies upon me thus to bring
these things into the World.

That which gave Anastatius the secret displeasure, was this; Cap. 32. The
ground of Anastatius's displeasure with Macedonius.
Ariadne intending to put the Imperial Robe on Anastatius, after the death of
Zeno; Macedonius would in no wise assent unto his Coronation, unless he would
give it under his hand, and confirm it with an Oath, that he would maintain the
true Faith, and bring no novelty into the Church, which he gave Macedonius to
keep, for Anastatius was suspected to be a Manichee. Anastatius taking it as a
great disreputation to the Empire, that his hand should be kept to testify
against him, called for it; Macedonius denied him, saying, That it should never
be said of him, (viz. Macedonius) that he betrayed the Faith. Therefore
Anastatius sought to And wherefore at first he carried it so indifferently in
matters of Religion.
work him mischief, as there was opportunity, and the aforesaid was the reason
why Anastatius carried it so indifferently at first in matters of Religion.

This as to M^cedonius, and what gave the occasion of working him out of the
Bishopric of Constantinople. As for Flavianus, the Monks of Cynegica, which
inhabited the chiefest Countries of Syria, being persuaded by Xanaias, a Bishop
of Hierapolis, bordering upon Antioch, aforesaid, surnamed Philoxenus; after
the Grecians came all on head to Antioch, having made an Insurrection, with
resolution to force Flavianus to curse the Council of Chalcedon, and Leo's
Decree of the Faith; which Flavianus taking very grievously, the Monks urging
him with violence, the Citizens Many of the Monks slain at Antioch, because of
the things aforesaid, and thrown into the River.
made such a slaughter of the Monks, that very many of them instead of quiet
Grave and Earth, were covered with the swift Waves of the River Orontes,
whereinto they were cast.

On the other side, the Monks that inhabited Coelosyria, now called The Monks
on the other side came to assist Flavianus. Are slaughtered. He is banished.
Syria Minor, came to Antioch to assist Flavianus, which proved of mischievous
consequence, and in the end no less lamentable than the former; whether for the
former, or the later slaughter and calamity, or for both, the History
determines not, but banished he was the Province, to inhabit the craggy Deserts
in the farthest part of Palestina.

Severus succeeds Flavianus, and a great bustle there is about Cap. 33.
Severus, and the bustle about him.
him; from him fell the Province of Apamia; and Cosmos Bishop of Epiphania, and
Severianus Bishop of Arethusa, first divided themselves from his Communion,
then sent him a Libel of Deprivation, A Sentence of Deprivation sent to him by
a Deacon in a disguise
which to him was delivered by a Deacon in the disguise of a Woman, faining
both Voice and Apparel: Of which Anastatius hearing, and considering their
practices, charged Asiaticus The Emperor charges hereupon Asiaticus to remove
Cosmos and Severianus.
Lieutenant of Libaeesa in Phoenicia, to remove Cosmos and Severianus from
their Bishoprics, because of the Libel of Deprivation. But Asiaticus
perceiving that without slaughter and bloodshed it could not be accomplished,
because the people stood to He durst not do it, because of the people.
Certifies the Emperor
them, and manfully defended their Walls; he certified the Emperor thereof, who
returned him in answer, -- That he would have The Emperors gentle Answer for
avoding the effusion of blood. Severus held in whilst Anastatius reigned. His
name blotted by some out of the Sacred Catalogue.
no enterprise taken in hand, were it never so noble and worthy, if it did cost
him as much as one drop of blood. He kept Severus in his place whilst he held
the Scepter, and had tenderness, as aforesaid, yet some blotted him out of the
Sacred Catalogue, (as it was called) as an Enemy to the Council of Chalcedon,
for he was accursed at Jerusalem. Thus much as to the Affairs Ecclesiastical.

As to the Civil, Longinus, Zeno's Brother, after his coming Cap. 35. Civil
Troubles. Longinus raises War against Anastatius in Isauria. The Bishops of
Apamia assist him.
into Isauria, his Native Soil, of which I have spoken, practiced against
Anastatius, and made preparation to proclaim open Wars, he having other Nations
besides the Isaurians to assist him, himself marching to the Battle; the Bishop
of Apamia being his Assistant; but Longinus was defeated, the Isaurians foiled,
the heads He is defeated. His, and Theodorus heads sent by John the Scythian,
and stuck upon Poles.
of Longinus and Theodorus sent by John the Scythian to Constantinople, and
stuck upon Poles beyond the Water over against Constantinople at Sica, which
pleased the Citizens, and was a goodly show to them, (says the History)
because Zeno and the Isaurians had heretofore grievously vexed them. A second
Longinus surnamed Selinuncius and Indus sent alone.
Selinuncius, one of the chiefest of the Company, and Indus, were sent alive by
John unto the Emperor, of which both he and the Made show of in the Tryumphs.
Citizens were glad; they both were tied in Chains about their necks and hands,
and led about the Theater, as is the manner of Tryumphs, and throughout the
Streets also.

The Scenetae also; a Barbarian People (so called) because of Cap. 36. The
Scenetae invade, and destroy Mescpot. Phoenicia, Pal^stina.
their living in Tents, were so lifted up, that they took Arms against the
Romans, destroyed Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, and Palestina, but to their own great
damage and hurt, it tended in the end, so that they were constrained to make
truce, and join in Are co^st^a^ned to make peace.
league with the Romans.

The Persians also broke their League, and under the Conduct Cap. 37. The
Persians War also in Armenia. Are overcome. Dacas builded.
of Cabades their King, came into Armenia, took Theodosiopolis, besieged Amida,
which with great toil and trouble was hardly recovered. This Battle being
ended, Anastatius builded Daras as a bound between the one Country and the
other, walled it about, and beautified it with goodly buildings; he took away
the Tribute called Chrysargyrum, which was the Mulct for license The Tribute
Chrysargyrum taken away. And Chrysotelia set up. A selling of the Soldiers
Wages.
for uncleanness, but set up Chrysotelia, (which was something like the Sale of
Debentors sometimes here in England) a making Merchandise of the Soldiers pay;
and from the places of Judgment he took away the Tribute and Revenue, and
appointed The Revenue for the Seats of Judgment, removed, and Proctors and
Attorneys set up.
through every City Proctors and Attorneys: which much reflected upon his
reputation, and discontented the people.

Vitalianus also a Thracian, rebelled and overran Thracia and Cap. 43.
Vitalianus rebels in Thracia. Marches to Constant. Hyspatius sent against him;
he is betrayed by his own Soldiers, taken alive, ransomed. Cyrillus sent
against Vitalianus. Fights him. A doubtful Battle. Cyrillus seemed to have the
upper hand. Vitalian. turns again, takes Cyril. Marches toward Constantinople.
Mydia, as far as Odyssus and Anchialus, and with a great company of people
that had no dwelling place, marched toward Constantinople. Against him the
Emperor sent Hypatius, whose own Soldiers betrayed him; he was taken alive,
and ransomed with a great sum of money; then Cyrillus made great expedition to
engage him, who fighting a doubtful field, and dangerous, so that many began to
fly; by pursuing the Enemy, and calling again his own Soldiers, seemed to have
the upper hand, against whom Vitalianus turning, as the Soldiers retreated in
spite, he took him in Odyssus. Unto Sycae, he invaded the whole Country,
destroying with Sword and Fire all that came in his way, purposing to take
Constantinople, and to be Emperor; his Camp he pitched at Sycae: Marinus Syrus
went with a great Navy to Ma^inus Syrus fights him on the Water.
give him Battle; they fight with their Navy about Bytharia, where Vitalianus
was beaten and put to flight; his Soldiers fled also, Vitalianus beaten.
not one of them being to be seen the day after. Pilas also in Cappadocia was
infested with another sort of Barbarians, and about Pilas infested by the
Barbarians. Rhodas the third time shaken with an Earthqu^ke, and overthrown.
the same time Rhodos on a certain night, now the third time, was shaken with a
wonderful great Earthquake, and in a manner all overthrown.

Great tumults about this time were also at Constantinople, because Cap. 44.
Great tumults at Constant. because of the Emperors adding a Clause to their
Trisagium. The Priests the Ringleaders.
the Emperor had added unto their Trisagium, [who was crucified for our sakes]
they thinking thereby, or, as if the interlacing that clause had been an
overthrow to the Christian Religion. Macedonius with the Priests were the
Ringleaders unto all this. This helped on Macedonius his banishment. The
tumult was so great, that many noble men were in danger of their lives, and
many great buildings set on fire. The people finding a certain rude and A
simple Monk put to death on supposition by the Tumult.
simple Monk in the house of Marinus Syrus, struck off his head, saying, It was
by his procurement that the clause was interlaced. Then they tied him to a long
Pole, and lift him up on high, with Lift him upon a Pole, and deride him.
great shouting, deriding him, and saying, -- Here is he that conspired against
the Trinity. The Sedition was so great, that the The Emperor throws aside the
Imperial Scepter. Proclaims that he will be Emperor no longer
Emperor not knowing what to do, and being so vexed with sorrow, threw aside
his Imperial Scepter, came unto the Theater, sent the Beadles about to proclaim
that with good will he would be Emperor no longer; that many in no wise were to
be preferred to that room, for the place allows but of one that was to
succeed him in the Empire. The people hearing of this, on a The people hereupon
change their minds, and are quiet. Shortly after he dies.
sudden changed their minds, requesting Anastatius to take the Crown, and in so
doing they would be quiet. Shortly after this stir, he departed this life,
having been Emperor twenty seven years, three months, and so many days.

Justinus a Thracian succeeded Anastatius, by the Pretorian Soldiers, Anno.
519. Evagr. lib. 4. cap. 1. Justinus succeeds.
whose Captain he had sometimes been; and so unlooked for he came to the
Government, there being then many worthy Personages of Anastatius Alliance
flowing in wealth and felicity, and of very great power.

It seems Amantius, who was a man of very great power, and The manner how he
attained it.
chief of the Emperors Chamber, seeing no Eunuch could be Emperor, wished the
Imperial Robe to Theocritus his sworn Brother; and employed Justinus in the
distributing a great sum of money to effect it. But Justinus, whether by
bribing the people on his own behalf, or gaining the Watch and the Guard by
money, obtained it for himself; and then put Amantius and Theocritus, with many
others, to death.

Vitalianus seeing by force it was thought it could not be done, Cap. 3. He
courts and kills Vitalianus.
he courted with flattery, sends for him to Constantinople out of Thrace, makes
him one of the Captains called Presens. And moreover consults then by
conspiracy, had him slain in a certain Gate behind the Emperors Court; so he
had his reward for rising against Anastatius.

As Anastatius stood in the indifferency, and endeavored to Cap. 4. Justinus
prosecuts the Faith of the Council of Chalcedon. Religion is imposed. All goes
to wreck. Severus punished for cursing the Council of Chalcedon. His tongue
pulled out of his mouth. Vitalianus begged his Tongue, not thinking his own
doom had been so near. Severus flies.
keep all things quiet, so Justinus was on the other hand a zealous prosecutor
of the Faith of the Council of Chalcedon: So things went to wreck again, on the
foot of public Authority, which before had the issue of private discontents.
Severus Bishop of Antioch ceasing not daily to accurse the Council of
Chalcedon, and raising up great stirs and contentions thereabout, he was
severely punished, for his Tongue was pulled out of his mouth by the order of
Justinus, which Vitalianus, whilst he was in great favor, begged of the
Emperor, because Severus had reviled him out of measure in his Sermons, not
thinking what a Rod was provided for his own back: Severus forsook his
Bishopric hereupon, and fled, in whose place Paulus was set, who going the way
of all flesh Paulus succeeds, dies.
quickly, Euphrasius, one who came from Jerusalem, succeeded Euphrasius is next.
him.

This heat of Persecution in the beginning was not without Cap. 5. Anno. 526.
Consequences as to Judgment. A grievous fire at Antioch.
some sore attendances, and signal Tokens of displeasure from Heaven; for about
the same time a great and grievous fire and burning happened in Antioch, as a
preambulatory forewarning of dreadful Judgments, of Earthquakes, and other
calamities that followed, as is the observation of the Historian: For
immediately in the 7th year of Justinus, in the month Artemesius, called of the
Romans Afterward a trebble Earthquake.
May, the nine and twentieth day, being Friday in the afternoon, such a
shivering, rattling, and shaking of the Foundation there The City overthrown
was, that in a manner overthrew the whole City; after which the fire came
again, as if they had been conjoined together, or went Fire comes again,
destroys the rest.
hand in hand to destroy all; for what the Earthquake had not destroyed, the
fire took hold of, most horrible to be seen, flashing about, and burning the
whole; and which seemed very hard to them, Euphrasius their Bishop was crushed
to death with the fall Euphrasius Bishop crushed to death by the Earthquake.
of ruinous buildings; Lest any one (says the Historian) should remain to
oversee the City; The places of the City that came by this means to utter
ruin; the people that perished by the fire, and The destruction of the People
and City, very lamentable.
the falling of the Houses, the lamentable consequences were so strange, (says
he) that they could not by any style be expressed. John Rhetor (says he) has
so lamentably bewailed it, that the Reader by perusing cannot choose but shed
tears.

Afterward, in the space of about two years and six months, the Cap. 6. Two
years and six months afterward the City shaken with an Earthquake again, loses
its name. Euphrem. Lieutenant chosen Bishop, because of his tenderness. The
City by the Emperor rebuilt. Cap. 8. Epidamus sore shaken, and Corinth, and
Anazarbus with an Earthquake, the latter the fourth time repaired by Justinus.
Edessa overflown by the River Scirius. Many houses and people carried away and
destroyed. Their names changed by Justinus, viz. Edessa and Anazarbus, and
called Justinopolis. Cap. 9. He finishes his race himself, and dies* Anno. 528.
Cap. 9. Justinianus succeeds. New troubles. Religion imposed.
City was so shaken with an Earthquake, that her name was changed, and called
Theopolis. Euphremius Lieutenant of the East taking such care for Antioch in
the former Earthquake and fire, that it might be supplied with necessaries, the
people chose for their Bishop in the room of Euphrasius; the City was raised up
again by the bountifulness of the Emperor.

Epidamus, of late Dyrrachium, was also, whilst Justinus was yet alive, sore
shaken with an Earthquake, so was Corinth in Greece, and Anazarbus a head City
in Cilicia the less, which now the fourth time endured that calamity, whom
Justinus repaired with great sums of money. Edessa was also overflown with the
streams of the River Scirius, which slided by in such a manner, that many
houses were carried away with the violence of the stream, and multitudes of
people drowned. Edessa and Anazarbus had new names given them by Justinus, who
called either of them Justinopolis.

And in the close of all, Justinus came to end his race, for having made
Justinianus his Sisters Son fellow Emperor, and reigned together with him about
four months, and in the whole eight years nine months and three days, he died.

Now come new troubles on again, by reason of that which still disquieted the
State and the Christians, viz. the imposing of Religion; Justinianus was
Emperor alone, and the Faith of the Council of Chalcedon was ordered to be
preached alone, which The Council of Chalcedons Faith ordered to be preached
alone. The consequence, great troubles. Anthimus of Constant: Theodosius of
Alexandria hold against him.
gave occasion of great disquietness and troubles in the State, as the
consequence, as I have all along observed in this Tract, and which the
Historian also brings in order to my hands. For Anthimius Bishop of
Constantinople, and Theodosius of Alexandria, held the contrary, viz. That in
Christ there was but one Nature.

Justinianus was a great favourer (as I have said) of the Chalcedon Cap. 10: So
does Theodora the Empress.
Council, and his Wife Theodora held with the contrary, viz. those that held
that in Christ was one Nature: Whether out of design, that between them both,
both Opinions might have countenance; or whether they were really in
opposition. This is certain, the Neither yielded to the other of the Emperor
and Empress. He defends that Faith. She countenances those who appertained to
her own. She persuades he Emperor to send for Severus from Exile. Cap. 11. The
World set upon jangles. Anthimus turned our of Constant. Epiphanius put in.
Theodos. out of Alex: Zolus must in. The Faith of the Council of Chalcedon only
must be preached. Severus accursed, and all that hold with him by Imperial
Edict. His plot fails, who by setting up only one; thought to put down all
other divisions in Religion.
one would not yield unto the other, for he was very earnest in defense of the
Chalcedon Council, and she was very careful for the Patrons of one Nature, whom
she lovingly and friendly entertained, especially her Countrymen, and unto
them sent Gifts and Presents. Nay, she persuaded the Emperor to call Severus
from Exile.

Things relating to Religion being thus distributed, the World was set upon a
jangle; Anthimus Bishop of Constantinople must out, and Epiphanius must
succeed; and Theodosius of Alexandria must give way to Zoilus; and the
Chalcedon Council must only be preached throughout the whole World, and none
must be so bold as to accurse it; and if any were found to be of the contrary
Opinion, they must by all means be endeavored to be persuaded. For Justinianus
published an Edict, wherein he accursed both Severus, and as many as held with
him, and enjoined great penalties on such as maintained their Opinion; to this
end, (as he thought) but it proved quite otherwise, as it has in all
experience throughout the World been found in imposing Religion; that from that
time forth there might no dissension take root in any of all the Churches
throughout the World, but that the Patriarchs of every Province might hold
together, and the Bishops of every City obey their Archbishops; and that the
four Councils, the first at Nice, the Council of Constantinople, the first held
at Ephesus, and the Council of Chalcedon should be preached in the Churches.

As Justinian forced Religion thus over the World, so over the Cap. 12.
Justinian finds trouble who forces Religion. The Perfian King engages him. Many
bloody Battles sought between him and Belissarius. The Scenite also: Who
overthrew the Romans.
World had Justinian trouble; Cabades King of Persia engages him; and between
him and Belissarius, his chief Captain of the East, are many bloody Battles
fought; unto this the State of Armenia is annexed, which Alamundarus Captain of
Scenetae aforesaid, infested in the borders of the Roman Empire, whom
Belissarius was enforced to fight, and was overthrown, the Romans not following
the Council of Belissarius.

At Constantinople the stir went very high, a watch word they Cap. 13. A
conspiracy at Constantinople. Hypatius and Pompeius forced to rebel, their
heads are cut off, 32000 killed in the Insurrection. Cap. 14. The Vandals
infest Lybia. The Christians sorely persecuted by them. Burnt to Ashes. Tongues
cut out. Cap. 20. The Goths take Rome.
had, which was Nica, (that is) overcome; and in it Hypatius and Pompeius they
constrained to rebel; yet Justinian caused their Heads to be cut off, after the
Insurrection was appeased, in which thirty thousand are said to be slain.

The Vandals also in Lybia, under Honoricus the Son of Genzerichus, who was an
Arian, gave the Christians a great encounter, that were of the contrary
Opinion, and most vehement persecution: Those that yielded not to his Opinion
in Religion, he burnt to Ashes, and executed with sundry kinds of lamentable
deaths; and out of some he pulled their Tongues, in which guise some of them
got to Constantinople. The Goths also under Totilas took Rome again, who became
Emperor, which Belissarius took from them, and which Belissarius retook again;
above one hundred 150 Cities in Africa repaired (taken in the Wars) after Lybia
was won the second time.
and fifty Cities are said to be repaired by Justinianus, after he had won
Lybia the second time, being ruined by the Wars; the consequence of the Wars
with the Vandals.

In Greece, Baeotia, Achaia, and the Countries about Crisaeus Cap. 22. Strange
Earthquakes in Beotia, Achaia, Criseus Haven in Greece.
Haven, strange Earthquakes happened, so that many Regions were destroyed, and
Cities overthrown; and gapings and openings of the Earth there were, which in
some places closed up again, and in other places continued so still.

The Wars were great and thorough, and the miseries many, The whole force of
the Romans engaged. The Wars at length, and athwart the whole Empire. Ofttimes
ready to sink. They are brought on their knees who would give Law to God.
which were the consequences thereof, almost from one end of the Empire to the
other, and athwart, so that the whole force of the Roman power was engaged, and
with much ado things were stemmed, that the Roman Empire sunk not, which would
give Law to God, and how he should be believed in, and worshipped; so he
brought them on their knees, who would bring him to theirs, and attempt that
which they could never bring to pass.

The Persians also broke their League again with him, and destroyed Cap. 24.
The Persians break their League again. Take Antioch and Seleucia, destroy all
with Fire and Sword. Sarus took, Berea set on fire. Cap. 28. Pestilences such
as have not been heard of thorough the whole World; Sword and Pestilence er
gage him on every hand. The Plague lasted 52 years Lighted on Antioch. Began in
Aethiopia. A short Relation of the lasting, and destroying extremity of this
Pestilence, and how it took, began, and ended.
many places; took Antioch, destroyed all with Fire and Sword; came to Selucia,
then to the Suburbs of Daphne, then to Apamia; Sarus also he took, and set
Beraea on fire.

Pestilences also infested the World in such a manner as has not been heard:
The Lord seemed, as it were, on every hand to make his Hand General in Sword
and Pestilence; whose Dominion Justinian on every hand would run over; This
Plague, this Historian says, lasted fifty and two years; it prevailed so much,
(says the Historian) that it destroyed in a manner the whole World; It lighted
on Antioch two years after the Persians had taken that City; it began in
Aethiopia, and spread it self afterward throughout the whole World; neither
was there (says he) almost any one that escaped the infection thereof; in some
Cities it raged so vehemently that the Inhabitants thereof were dispatched;
with others it was more gentle and mild; it began not at any one certain time
of the year, nor did it cease or abate after one manner or order; in some
places it entered in Winter, in some others about the end of the Spring; in
other Countries in the midst of the Summer; in other places in the midst of
Autumn: When it had infected some part or other of some Cities, in some Regions
it left the other untouched. Certain Families in some places were wholly
dispatched, in others one or two rooted out, and the rest not visited. The
Families that escaped this year, were alone, and none others dispatched the
next year, (this says he) we marked diligently, and which (says he) is most
remarkable; if any which inhabited the infected Cities fled into other
Countries where the sickness was not; they only were visited, although they
removed (hoping to save their lives) out of the Contagion into the clear Air;
the Calamity during the term and compass of these years, which are called
Revolutions, passed through both Town and Country: but the greatest mortality
fell upon mankind the second year of the Revolution, which comprised the term
of fifteen years; the Disease was compound, and mixed with many other Maladies;
It took some men first in the head, made their eyes as red as blood, and puff^d
up their cheeks; then it fell into their throats; and whomsoever it took, it
dispatched him out of the way: In some it began with a Flux, a voiding of all
that was within them; in some others with swellings about the secret parts of
the body, whereof arose burning Fevers, so that at two or three days at the
farthest they died thereof, in such sort, and of so perfect a remembrance, as
if they had not been sick at all; some died mad; and Carbuncles that arose in
the flesh killed many; and many times those who had this Disease, and escaped
the first and second time, died of it the third: Some had it by lying and
keeping company together; some only by touching and frequenting the infecting
Houses; some in the Market; some that fled out of the infected Houses were not
visited themselves, but infected where they came; others which kept company
with the sick, and touched not only the sick but the dead, had it not at all;
some others who would have died gladly, because of the departure of their
Children and Friends, and so thrust themselves among the sick, the infection
fled from them, and so they could not have their wills. It exceeded all the
Diseases that ever had been before. Philostratus wondered at the Plague that
was in his time, because it continued fifteen years; but this was of fifty two
years continuance, throughout the whole World; the greatest The greatest and
longest Mortality that ever was heard of. Four times in Antioch, a place famous
for division and bloodshed, Earthquakes, Fires, Pestilences. The Consequences
of enforcing Religion.
and longest mortality that has been heard of. In Antioch it had been four
times, a place famous for Divisions, Tumults, Bloodsheds, Earthquakes, Fires,
Pestilences, and the Sword, which I have quoted; and this in particular, that
men may see (if they will yet open their eyes) what things have infested the
World, whilst they have infested the World with imposition of Religion.

Yet all these things would not warn Justinian, but with Religion Cap. 37.
Justinian is not yet at a stand. Anno. 555. A fifth General Council he will
have. He expels the Origenists New Laura, banished by Eustachius of Jerusalem,
makes a Journey for that purpose. They disperse, and increase the more
he will yet have to do, and a fifth General Council he would needs have, when
the favorers of Origen's Opinion prevailed, especially in New Laura, whom
Eustochius Bishop of Jerusalem banished, he making a Journey thither on set
purpose, and driving them out of that Coast; yet he had not his end, for being
dispersed, they had the opportunity the more to sow their Opinion, which
produced many favorers, and some that were chief with the Emperor, and to whom
he most leaned. At this Council the Question was put, Whether it were lawful to
accurse the dead The Question put at this Council, Whether it were lawful to
curse the dead? Carried in the affirmative, by the Plea of Eutychius.
or no? Eutychius made it out by the Example of Josias, who not only cut off
the Idol Priests that were alive, but caused the Tombs of such as were lately
deceased to be dug up. This gave him acceptance with Justinian, who made him
Bishop of Constantinople; when the Emperor put the Question, What they thought
of Theodorus? And what they said to the things that Theodoritus Theodorus,
Theodoritus, Cyril, Ibas, their books condemned.
had written against Cyril, and to his twelve Points of the Faith? Lastly, What
their Opinion was of the Epistle which Ibas wrote unto Maris the Persian? When
they had read many pieces of Theodorus and Theodoritus's Works, and proved
manifestly that Theodorus had lately been condemned, and his name wiped clean
out of the Holy Catalogue or Register; when they had concluded also, That
Heretics were to be condemned after their decease, and Heretics to be
condemned after their decease.
with general consent to accurse, not only Theodorus, but also the words of
Theodoritus, against the twelve points of the Faith laid down by Cyril, and
against the true and right Faith, together with the Epistle of Ibas unto Maris
also, they laid down their Censure The form of their Censure.
in such order as follows, -- Seeing our great God and Savior Jesus Christ
has spoken, as it is in the Parable of the Gospel, etc. we condemn and
accurse, not only all other Heretics heretofore condemned by the four Holy
Councils above mentioned, and by the Holy Catholic Church, but also Theodorus
Bishop of Mopsovestia, with his wicked Books; together with the ungodly Works
of Theodoritus, impugning partly the True Faith, with the twelve Points of the
most Holy Cyril concerning the Faith; and partly also the Holy Council at
Ephesus, and what other things soever the same Theodoritus has published in
defense of Theodorus and Nestorius: Moreover we condemn the wicked Epistle
which Ibas wrote to Maris the Persian.

Thus they dealt concerning the dead, as they had done before Living and dead,
all are persecuted that are otherwise than them. Fourteen Articles of Faith
made.
with the living; so living or dead they will needs deal with Religion, Faith
in God, and condemn men therefore, whether dead or living; so having made
fourteen Articles or Points of Faith, and done some other things; that Council
ended, which was gathered The Council ends. Eustichius and John deposed.
at Constantinople; after that Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople was deposed,
and John of Sirimis, a Village of Cynegia, bordering on Antioch, put in his
place.

Notwithstanding Justinian was not set right in the Faith by all Cap. 38.
Justinian swerves from the Faith, his monstrous Opinion of Christ.
this; but after all these things, he wrote an Edict, wherein he affirmed, That
the Body of the Lord was not subject to Death or Corruption; that it was void
of such afflictions as Nature engrafted, and were unblameable; that the Lord
ate before his Passion, in such sort, as he did after his Resurrection: That
his most Holy Body was nothing altered and changed, either in the framing
thereof in the Matrix, or in the voluntary or nutural motions, no not after his
Resurrection. Thus roling up and down from one thing to another, not The fruit
of meddling to impose Religion.
knowing the Lord, and so running into those things, which are quite contrary;
and yet taking upon him to settle Religion, who knew not the Lord.

This he purposed to compel both Bishops and Priests to subscribe He attempts
Bishops and Priests to subscribe it. They put it off till Anastatius came. The
Bishop holds the Truth against the Emperor, and many Monks, That Christ was
man, and subject to death, etc
unto, and put it to them, who put him off the first time, till Anastatius
Bishop of Antioch came, who coming, he argued with him very narrowly; but the
Bishop held to the Truth against him, and many Monks, and stood it, That he was
man, and subject to death, and partaker of the unblameable affections naturally
impressed in the mind, and continually read that of Paul, if any preach any
other Gospel besides that which we have received; yea, if he be an Angel from
Heaven, let him be held for accursed.

Justinian threatened to banish him, but his Edict for that purpose, Cap. 40. He
threatens to banish the Bishop and his Clergy, and made an Edict for that
purpose. Death disappoints him. Anno. 566. Who had set the whole World into
Tumults and Sedition about Religion. The Historians Judgment on his Eternal
State, to be perdition for ever. Evag. lib. 5 cap. 1. Justinus his Sisters Son
succeeds. He sends the Bishops and Priests to their own homes. Swam himself in
sensuality. Devouring all for gain. Sells every thing, and Benefices.
and the banishment of Anastatius's Clergy, was prevented by the death of
Justinian, when he had reigned thirty and eight years full, and eight months,
and so he finished up his years, and died, without settling of the Truth; Nay,
(says the Historian) when he had set the whole World into Tumults and
Sedition; and in his latter days received that which was due for such lewd
practices; he departed into endless torment, appointed for him by the just
Judgment of God.

Justinus his Sisters Son succeeded him, who gave out a Commandment, That all
the Bishops, and the Priests that were gathered together at Constantinople out
of all Countries, should depart every man to his own home, there to serve God
in Holiness; yet he swam in sensuality, and wallowed in pleasure; and so greedy
he was of other men's goods, that he sold every thing for gain, and set even
Benefices themselves to open sale; he commanded his Kinsman Justinus, a
renouned Soldier, to come home, who about the River Danubius had his station
to keep off the Abari, a people of Scythia, as if he should participate of the
Covenants that were drawn between them, which were, That whethersoever was
Crowned Emperor, he should make the other the second person in honor, yet in
such sort, that though he were second in respect of the Emperor, yet he should
be first in respect of all others.

But having taken from him the Guard of Pretorian Soldiers, Cap. 2.
and his Train and commanded him to keep his House, in the end he gave charge
he should be conveyed to Alexandria, where about Causes his Kinsman* Justinus
whom he had called home from keeping of the Abari, under pretense of
participating with him in the Empire, according to Covenant, to be murdered in
his bed at Alexandria.
midnight, as he sat in his Bed, he was murdered; which mittigated not the fury
of the Emperor and Empress until with their own eyes they saw his head taken
off his shoulders, and tumbled it with their feet; and this was the recompense
he received for the good will he bore to the Commonwealth, and the notable
service he did in the Wars.

Yet this Justinus, who also shed more blood, would needs be Cap. 4. He meddles
with Religion, makes an Edict for Faith, according to the same with Justinian.
Cap. 5. He misses his end. Deposes Anastatius. Anastatius's account of him.
meddling with Religion, and an Edict of the Faith he would make, suitable to
that which was in the days of Justinian, and he would enforce it: but he mist
his end, as well as did all they that went before him; Anastatius he deposed
from Theopolis, or Antioch, on pretense of his wasting the Holy Treasury, (as
it was called) and for that he should say, being demanded why he did so? Lest
that Justinus, the monster of the World, should spoil them of it: But the
History says, the cause was, because when he required money of him for his
admission into the Bishopric, he would not give Gregory succeeds. Cap. 6. Cap.
7. Troubles come upon him. Armenia afflicted by the Persians for their
Religion, fall to
him a penny; whom Gregory succeeded.

The days of trouble soon came upon this Emperor, for the Nation inhabiting
the greater Armenia, afterward called Persarmenia, which were under the
Persians, as Armenia the less was under the Romans, being grievously afflicted
by the Persians, especially for their Religion, and Conscience, they being
Christians, that they might be freed thereof, and serve God without any let or
hinderance, sent their Ambassador, Requesting that they might the Romans.
become Subjects to the Romans: Which being concluded, they slew Are accepted.
They slay their own Princes, yield up themselves. Bordering Countries did the
same.
their own Princes, and yielded themselves, with all they had, to the Empire of
Rome; which not only they did, but the bordering Country, being partly of that
Nation, and partly Foreigners, with their Captain Varden, who for his Noble
Parentage and Prowess in Martial Affairs, was esteemed of them as their Prince,
also tendered themselves, and became subject, which gave occasion of offense to
Chosroes the Persian King, who sent to The Persian King Chosroes complains.
the Emperor, complaining of these injurious dealings, but he answered, That
the date of the League was out, and that it became Justin. returns answer That
the League was out, and he would succor them, but prepares not to War against
them, but wallows in pleasure.
not the Professors of the Christian Faith, to leave succorless such Christians
as fled unto them for aid in the time of War, but to relieve and cherish them.
But notwithstanding these things, he prepared not against the Persians, but
still wallowed in his wonted sensuality, preferring pleasure above all.

Yet he sent Martianus his Kinsman into the East, as some show Cap. 8. Martian.
sent, as some show of resistance, with a miserable company.
of resistance, but unfurnished with Soldiers, Arms, and other necessaries, to
give Battle unto the Persians, having a company of naked Soldiers, of which
some were tributary Ditchers and Carters; so that he came into Mesopotamia not
without plain danger and wreck to the Roman State. Some advantage he got over
He gives the foil to some naked Persians. Lay down before Nisibis. They despise
him and shut not their Gates. Prognostications of great changes.
some naked Persians, who were not in Armor, about Nisibis, and so by chance
(as it were) getting the upper hand, he lay about the City, but was so despised
of the Persians, that they shut not the Gates of their City, but accounted them
as such as were set to keep Sheep. Prognostications of ill days there were
also, as some reckoned, in that several Monsters were seen at that time, as a
Calf with two Heads and one Neck.

Chosroes sends Adaarmanes on his way with his Army furnished Cap. 9. Chosroes
proceeds, sends Adaarmanes one way with a great Army; he by another gets into
Nisibis. Justinus understands not, lives in sensuality Hearkens to idle stories
suitable to his mind. Great shame and reproach occurs hereby to him. Gregory of
Antioch informs him from the Bishop of Nisibis.
for Battle, commands him to break into the Town Circesium, and with other
Forces he got over Tigris into Nisibis, of which expeditions the Romans for a
long time understood not; for Justinus being sunk in pleasure instead of
looking diligently into his Affairs, as was wont to be the care of the Romans,
hearkened to rumors of idle Stories, That Chosroes was either dead, or at the
point of death; and was sore displeased at Martianus that he lingered the
Siege, and brought him not the Keys of the City. Who was in no capacity to
reduce it, and which City was thus relieved, as aforesaid. These things brought
great shame and reproach to Justinus, especially seeing that Gregory Bishop of
Antioch being fully informed of all those expeditions by the Bishop of Nisibis,
who bore good will both to the Romans and to the Christians, gave Justinus
fully to understand it; which he gave neither ear to, neither He will not
believe.
did he believe what Gregory had wrote in his Letters, only those things he
thought to be true, which best seemed to serve his profound sensuality, and
living in voluptuousness and pleasure, and so (as such persons use to do, who
build too much on prosperous conceits, and cannot endure to hear any thing that
is otherwise) he wrote back to Gregory, rejecting his Letters as false reports;
Rejects his Letters.
If they were true, yet the Persians should not win the City, Builds Castles in
the Air, thinks this, and that, but not what concerned the safety of the Roman
Empire: According to his Dreams, so is his success.
and raise the Siege before his power came; or if they won it before, they
should be met with ere they left the Country. Thus building Castles in the
Air, and divining according to his pleasure of the coming to pass of every
thing, or that it must be so, because he thought it so, as if all the World
must be captivated to what he said, and did think, or would have in the height
of his pleasure, whether there were means, or no, reasonable to accomplish it:
and to heighten up his shame and downful, instead of enforcing his Affairs and
making them better, he sent for Acacius, a man of a He removes Martian. by
Acacius.
proud spirit and disdainful condition, to Martianus, with this commandment,
That if Martianus had not before put one foot into the City, he should put him
besides his Honor and Dignity; which Acacius in all have performed, to the
great hurt of the Roman Commonwealth, to satisfy the Will of the Emperor, for
unknown to the Army, he deprived Martianus, being out of the Empire, of all
Martial Honor and Dignity; which when The Captains hereupon shake off their
Armor, steal away, leave the Siege. Justin laughed at by all men. Adaarmanes
destroys all before him.
the Captains understood, they shook off their Armor, and stole away privily,
scattered themselves here and there in their flight, and left the Siege to the
great laughter of all men.

Adaarmanes on the other side, having a mighty Army both of Persians, and the
Barbarians, called Scenetae, passing by Circisium, (which was a strong boundary
between the Romans and the Persians) destroyed all the Roman Countries before
him with Fire and Sword, and every sort of lamentable invasion, showing no
Makes lamentable havoc. Shows no mercy in word or deed. Chosroes besets the
Soldiers about Daras. The Country overrun freely.
mercy at all, neither in word nor in deed; he took Castles, and many Villages,
and no man withstood him: First, because the Roman Army wanted a Head; next,
for that Chosroes had beset all the Soldiers about Daras, and therefore the
Country was overrun freely and destroyed without any fear at all. Chosroes
Soldiers also invaded Antioch, yet they had a repulse unexpectedly, though
part of the Wall was fallen down, and most of the people Antioch assaulted, yet
strangely preserved. The Country in Rebellion.
and the Bishop with the Treasury of the Church gone, and the Country all in
rebellion.

Adaarmanus missing here, he set fire on Heraclea, afterward Cap. 10: Heraclea
he set on fire. Broke his Articles with Apamia. Plunders, destroys.
called Gagalica, and marched strait to Apamia; and contrary to his Covenants
(for the City submitted to Articles, their Walls being down to the ground) he
burned the City, bereaved them of all their substance, destroyed all, subdued
not only the City, but the Country about, and taking with him the Bishop and
Lieutenant of the City, went his way, and joining with Chosroes, who was in the
Siege of Daras, after five months Leaguer Takes Daras (being joined with
Chosroes) The Governors treachery.
from the beginning, took it, John the Major making no resistance; the City was
of exceeding strength, but made no resistance as they might; it was ransacked,
many of them were slain, and many were taken alive, and the City reserved, and
fortified Many slain, many taken alive. The City fortified. Cap. 11. Justin.
falls as much below, as he was high before, and would hear nothing.
by the King, and so he returned home.

Justinus hearing of all this adverse success, as being drowned in sensuality,
as he would hear nothing that might have been in order to withstand it; so
great was his pride and insolency, banishing, understanding, and removing
reason out of his Seat; So now he takes it far more grievous than the common
course of Nature could bear, and falls into frenzy and madness, so that he
Falls distracted.
had no sense or understanding of that which was done: whereupon Tiberius, a
Thracian born, one that was of chiefest Authority Tiberius takes on him the
Government. Sends Trajanus from the Empress to Chosroes, bewailing her state to
get a peace.
and Estimation with Justinus, took upon him the Government of the Empire; he
sent Trajanus as from the Empress Sophia, Bewailing her condition, as having a
Husband bedrid, and in such a condition, and so he speaking her condition, and
a peace upon the lamenting the woeful plight her Husband stood in, and the state
of the Commonwealth wanting a head, and that it would not be for his honor to
triumph over a silly Widow; to insult over an Emperor that was sick and bedrid,
to invade a Commonwealth that was destitute of aid and succ^r; that he of old
being diseased, had not only the like humanity showed to him, but also the best
Physicians sent to him from the Empire of Rome, to ease him of his grief;
obtained a three Obtains it for the East for three years.
years League, not only for the Romans, but Armenia, from Chosroes, who
immediately before was determined to overrun the Roman Dominions.

Thus Tiberius wrought about, and stoped the inundation of The inundation stopped
then. Sermium taken elsewhere.
the ruin of the Romans, which like the Sea was flowing in at that door in the
East; but in other places he could not so presently quiet things, and set the
Commonwealth in order, for Sermium was taken by the Barbarians.

In the mean time Sophia the Empress, or rather the Hand of Cap. 13. Justin.
brought to sense, consents that Tiberius should be his fellow Emperor.
God so wrought upon Justinus, that he came to a sense of his condition, and of
what he had done, so that he consented that Tiberius should be his fellow
Emperor, and in the open Hall, before John the Bishop, together with his
company, the Princes and Magistrates, and the Pretorian Soldiers, clad
Tiberius with Puts the Imperial Robe openly on him, and the Soldiers
Cloak-Makes a Speech with great sense and tenderness.
the Imperial Robe, and compassed him with the Soldiers Cloak, and said to him
as follows, -- Let not the glory of this Garment lead thee into error,
neither be thou deceived with the glorious show of such things as are subject
to the senses, wherewith I my self (now alas!) being snared, have brought my
self foolishly into these grievous torments; Wherefore in governing the Empire
in great moderation and mildness of Spirit, redress what is amiss, and correct
what I have lewdly committed. And pointing at his Magistrates with Bids him
beware of the Magistrates present, who brought him into that misery.
his Finger, Thou must in no wise (said he) be ruled by these men, for these be
they that brought me into this lamentable plight, and the misery thou see me
in.

This he uttering, with many sighs and sobs, made the tears to Tears trickled
down the eyes of those present.
trickle down the cheeks of those present; no History having to that day on
record such lamentable words as he then uttered. And Tiberius being proclaimed
Caesar, he set himself to the recovery Cap. 11. Tiberius sets himself to the
recovery of the Empire, being not able a little before to look the Abari in the
face.
of the Commonwealth, which was brought very low: for he himself being sent
but a little before against the people called Abari, his Soldiers were not
able to look them in the face, so that it was much he came alive into the Roman
Jurisdictions; for by following the rash head of Justinus, he, together with
the whole Commonwealth of Rome, was in such danger of utter The Commonwealth
near utter wreck.
foil, that they were like to lose unto the Barbarians the great renown of the
Roman Empire.

Tiberius is commended, not only for his person and mind which The praise of
Tiberius
became Majesty, but for his wise and discreet management of things, and
moderation both for diet and otherwise. He took Relieves the oppressed; Takes
off Taxes.
all that Gold for counterfeit which was got with the tears of the Commonalty.
The Tributaries to the Empire he forgave one years Tribute; the Manors and
Farms which Adaarmanes, the Persian General, had in a manner brought to decay,
by setting them at grievous Tribute, he released; and not only considered their
loss, but recompensed them over and besides; the injurious Exactions and
Pensions he forgave, for the which other Emperors were accustomed to deliver,
and in a manner to sell their Subjects, to be abused of the Magistrates at
their pleasure; and Makes Laws against Oppression.
made a Law that no such things afterward should be committed. And with the
sums of money, which his Predecessor had both wickedly and injuriously
appointed to be gathered, he made ready Provids against the Persians an
exceeding great Army.
for Battle against the Persians, a great Army of valliant men and noble
persons he gathered together beyond and on this side the Alps, of the
Massagetae, with other Scythian Nations; so that he had well nigh one hundred
and fifty Troops of chosen Horsemen ready, and well nigh appointed, whereby he
gave an utter foil to Chosroes, who after the taking of Daras in the Summer
Armenia overrun by Chosroes. He marches toward Cesarea.
time, had over run Armenia, and from thence marching toward Caesarea, the
head City of Cappadocia, thought to have taken that, and behaved himself so
insolently, that when the Roman Is very insolent to Tiberius's Ambassadors.
Ambassadors came from the Emperor to him, he would not give them audience, but
very disdainfully bad them follow him to Caesarea, and there he would sit, and
hear them what they had to say; but when he saw the Roman Host, whose Captain
was Justimanus, Thinks not of this mighty Army which now looks him in the face.
He is appaled and daunted.
(the brother of Justinus, who was cruelly murdered at Alexandria, as
aforesaid) all in Armor, coming to meet him, the Trumpet sounding to Battle,
the clamor of the Soldiers piercing the Sky, orderly placed in the Front in
Battle Array, foming out with great fury nothing but present death, and so
goodly a Troop of Horsemen, such as none of the Emperors before ever thought
of, he was greatly astonished; and because it fell out unlooked for, and on a
sudden he sighed heavily, and would not give the onset: as he lingered and
deferred the Battle, thinking Would not give the onset. Curs a Scythian engages
him, cuts many to pieces, takes the Train, the Kings Treasure, etc.
by craft to deceive them, Curs a Scythian Captain of the right Wing set upon
him; his violence the Persians could not withstand, but forsook the Front of
the Host; he made a great slaughter of them, and pursued them at their backs to
the Artillery, and the whole preparation of the Army, where he took the Kings
Treasury and Jewels, and all his Ordinance for War, which Chosroes saw and
suffered, thinking it better than that Curs should set on him; he took also
great spoils and sums of money, and the continual And the continual fire, the
God of the Persians.
Fire, the God of the Persians; so singing a Hymn of praise by Candlelight, he
came to his Company. All this while Chosroes stirred not, nor as yet was the
set Battle began, but only light Skirmishes, as the manner is, one while on
this side, and the other while on that: At length Chosroes setting a mighty
Beacon on fire Chosroes makes an onset on one part of the Roman Army.
in the night, purposed to give the Enemy the Battle; The Romans being divided
into two Armies, he set about midnight on that Host which lay in the Camp on
the North side, who giving back, They give back. burns Miletina. The Roman Army
conjoined, pursue him to Euphrates. He escapes over on an Elephant. The
greatest part of his Army drowned. Gets into the East to live in peace.
being unprovided, he set fire on Miletina, and sought to cut over the River
Euphrates; but the Romans Army joining together, pursued them so, that he
fearing himself, got upon an Elephant, and passed over Euphrates, but the
greatest part of his Army in swimming and conveying themselves over, were
drowned; he understanding this, with as many of his men as were left alive, got
into the East, after this recompense of his insolence and cruelty, where he
abode, because of the league aforesaid held in those parts. After this
Justinianus overran the Marches of the Persian Dominion, Justinianus over-runs
the marches of the Persians, none resisting
and remained there all the Winter long without let or hinderance, and returned
without the loss of any part of his Host, and tryumphed that Summer on the
parts that separate the Roman and Persian Dominion.

Chosroes being afflicted with this deep distress, dismayed and Cap. 15.
Chosroes with deep distress dies, having made a Law, That the Persians should
never make War with the Romans. The Roman inundation of Judgment stopped. Little
mentioned of Tiberius as to Religion. The Reasons supposed and given.
discouraged, pining away, and languishing with sorrow, died, leaving a Law
behind him, That the King of Persia should never make War with the Romans; as
an everlasting memorial of his utter foyl and flight; whom succeeded his Son
Hormisda.

Thus the Affairs of the Romans had success, and a stop was put on the
inundation of Judgment, which had like to have overrun the whole Roman Empire,
and put it in the dust: There is little or no attempt that I hear of, made by
this Tiberius about Religion, the History therein is silent: It Is very like
there was a good sense remained of what was the cause of the former Judgments,
which he was loath to draw further upon him, by new matters, for the Empire was
like to have fallen by what had been already; only Anatalius of Antioch, being
found to have sacrificed to Cap. 18. Anatalius of Antioch Sacrifices to Idols.
A great ado about him, and with Gregory, because of him.
Idols; and he having got into great friendship with Gregory the Bishop, a
great ado there was, and suspicion was had of Gregory, so that the Emperor was
constrained to sift out the matter, and by torment to put Anatalius to it,
whether Gregory was in such things as those: Anatalius hearing what should
befall him, ere he was brought from Antioch, is said to have run to the Picture
of Is brought from Antioch. An instance of their Superstition.
Mary, called the Mother of God, which hung by a Cord in the Prison, setting
his hands behind him, and making supplication, and praying unto it; the Picture
is said to have turned away from him, detesting him as a wicked person, and one
that God abhorred. Also that she appeared to many that are called faithful, and
set them against Anatalius, saying, -- He had reviled her Son. Which things I
quote, to show how Superstition was entered in those days, and how the
Historian seemed to be addicted thereunto. The Sacrificers condemned to
perpetual banishment. The people put them into a Boat, burns them quick.
In the end nothing could be found against the Bishop, but the Sacrificers were
condemned to perpetual banishment, which the People would not suffer, but
putting them into a Boat, burnt them quick. Also against the Emperor and
Eutychius they cried out as Traitors to the Faith, and both Eutychius, and
those who sat in Commission on Anatalius had been dispatched, could they have
been found, whom they diligently sought for. As for Natalius, he was first
thrown to the ravenous Beasts, in compass of the Theater, Anatalius thrown to
the ravenous Beasts. Then hanged on a Gallows. The wolves haled his Carcass to
the Earth.
of them to be torn in pieces, next hanged on a Gallows, on which hanging, the
Wolves came, and haled the Carcass to the Earth, and with great ravening rent
it in pieces, which was never seen before.

Nor was the Empire free from other troubles, but in the third Cap. 17. A great
Earthquake at Daphne, and Antioch. Anno. 580. Other troubles at Constantinople
and Antioch.
year of the Reign of Tiberius, about noonday, there arose such an Earthquake
at Antioch and Daphne, that Daphne with the force and violence thereof fell to
the ground, and many both private and public buildings in Antioch were
unjoynted and broken asunder. Other calamities at Constantinople and Antioch
followed, which vexed the Cities out of measure, with great Tumult and Sedition.

The Affairs of the Empire standing as aforesaid, in reference Cap. 19. Justin.
dies, Tiberius sole Emperor. Sends Mauricius against the Persians. His great
success.
to Persia, Justinus being dead, and Tiberius being clad with the Imperial
Robe, saw cause to put Justinianus from his command, his latter enterprises
having not so good success against the Barbarians; and to place Mauricius, a
wise and sober man, very diligent and politic, and moderate in his diet and
otherwise, in his room, who waging War in Foreign Countries, took both Cities
and Castles, which lay most commodious for the Persians, and carried thence so
great a prey, that he filled Isles, Towns, and Countries that had lain a long
time desolate, and not inhabited with the Captives; manured the untilled Land,
and made it arable, and filled his Armies (who valiantly fought with him
against other Nations) and stored Families with Captives, of which there were
both good cheap and store.

With the Head and chief of all Persia he also made War, to Cap. 20. The
overthrow of the greatest Captains of Persia.
wit, Tamo Chosroes, and Adaarmanes, who led great Armies in the field; the
former was overthrown in the front of his Host; not (says the History) with
the fortitude of the Roman Army, but the only piety of the Captain, and his
Faith in God; Adaarmanes by plain force was put to flight; and that not only
when Alamundarus Captain of the Barbarians, called Scenetae, betrayed him, in
that he would not come over the River Euphrates, and aid him; but also when
Theodorichus Captain of the Scythians durst not tarry within the reach of the
Enemy, but showed them immediately a fair pair of heels, together with the men
whom he led.

Tiberius being now ready to give up the Ghost, he caused Mauricius Cap. 22.
Anno. 585. He dies (having caused Mauricius to be proclaimed Emperor, and given
him his Daughter) full of Glory.
to be proclaimed Emperor, and to him gave in marriage his Daughter Augusta,
giving him the Empire in Dowry, and his own title of Tiberius and Augusta, the
name of Constantia: So he ended his days, leaving behind a name of glory and
praise to future Generations. Justinus reigned alone twelve years ten months
and odd days, with Tiberius, three years and eleven months; Tiberius was
Emperor by himself four years.

During the Reign of Mauricius, there is nothing mentioned Mauricius is not
mentioned (Evagr. lib. 6. per totum) as meddling with Religion. So the History
of his Wars is not made mention of in this Tract, which has relation only to
Religion; and as the meddling therewith was a consequent, because of which,
Wars, Fire, Earthquakes, and other Judgments are mentioned, as a Looking-glass
for, and an admonition to England.
in the History of matters of Religion, imposed or sought to be so by him at
all, only variable conditions of the Empire, as good and bad men had to doing
in the under management thereof; Therefore I need not be particular in those
things which related to the Wars, which no otherwise stand me in stead, or
serving my purpose, then as I can produce them as consequences of having to do
with Religion, and the imposing thereof, or National Faiths, or Worships, which
is the first Head which I laid down, and under which I have couched all the
particulars herein mentioned, that once for all, throughout almost the whole
Series of the first six hundred years, I may show, as in one continued line,
what has been the proper consequences and effect, both as to Division, Schism,
Tumult, Opinions, Wars, Bloodsheds, Earthquakes, all kind of extremities from
God and man, one to each other, upon the foot thereof. That this Age may yet be
warned, lest the driving on of the same things which those heretofore did, and
so suffered, and these hitherto have so far gone on in, as to This Head is
finished.
extreme sufferings and banishment, make England an Acheldama, and instead of
settling, disjoynt it for ever.

I now come to the other particulars, in which I shall be more curt or short,
as having to do with such things as neither in their matter, nature, or
tendencies, require so large an entertainment.

Evagrius closes up the sixth Book of his Ecclesiastical History Anno. 595.
The History ends the twelfth year of Mauricius. Phocas murders him and his
Family. Becomes Emperor; Makes the Bishop of Rome Universal Bish. or Pope,
Anno. 600. Gave him an Indulgence, Anno. 600.
with the year five hundred ninty and five, being the twelfth year of Mauricius
Tiberius; Shortly after came the Bishop of Rome to be made Universal Bishop, or
Pope, through the donation of Phocas, about the year 600. who would seem to
forgive him his bloody murder of his Master Mauricius, and his house about five
years after, which makes the sum six hundred.

THE Second General Head CONCERNING SWEARING.
The second general Head, which I proposed in the beginning to treat of, is
SWEARING, concerning which I shall thus speak.

SWearing, as National Worship had its institution under the Jews, where their
Worship and Service being outward, that which was the Bond or Obligation
thereunto, was also of the same nature; So the Jew was required to swear, Thou
shall swear the Lord lives, in Truth, in Righteousness, and Judgment; and so
among men an Oath was an end of all strife. And many of the holy men of God
swear, who were before the Law, who notwithstanding were in the state unto
which the Law was afterward administered. As Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who
built Altars, (were in outward Administrations) and worshipped the Lord; and so
were Abel and Cain after the Transgression, they offered unto the Lord the
first Fruits of the Ground, and their Cattle; for transgression having entered,
and man by reason of transgression being from that in which he was made,
thitherto he was brought again, or the communication of the knowledge of God,
was by things which were outward, and their service unto him, though yet they
were not without the thing that was inward, which gave them the sense of the
Lord, and from which the outward many times proceeded.

So the Jews had the inward, and there was an eye that saw through all that
which was outwardly administered, the Seed, which is Christ; but the sight and
sense of this was little and weak, by reason of transgression which had
entered, which had blinded the eye, which to open, and to bring to the sight of
that which was before the transgression was, the Law was added, or the outward
administration, which being earthly, and like to that into which man was drove
after he had sinned, by things that were earthly and outward, man was brought
by little and little to the sight of the inward, which was veiled over. And so
the Law came to be added, or the outward administration, or that which stood in
the earthly, to answer to the state of man which was in the earth, that so in
or by an administration of that which was earthy, suitable to the earthy
estate, in which he was; the understanding or sight of the other thing might be
brought through, and the Vail might be done away.

Now these things held (as I said before to the first particular of National
Worship) but till the time of Reformation, till that time came, which being in
the flesh, the nature that had sinned and transgressed, over which darkness was
come, which took upon it the nature, and was made flesh, broke through the
outward Administration, and the Nature which was suitable to it, and from
within, rent the Vail, which was the flesh, or the earthy, into which man was
drove (as I said) when he had transgressed, and tore it in pieces, the
Partitian Wall, that which separated, and of twain made one new man, which is
Christ.

So as in the Nature which is fleshly, and of the Earth, the Seed, which is
Christ, in which man was made, being covered over, and entombed, so that man
had little or no understanding of that in which he was made, to lead and guide
him, but as that Nature was helped by administration which was suitable unto
it; so he coming in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemning sin in
the flesh, broke through in the Nature, Death, and Hell, and the Grave, and the
powers of the Prince of Darkness, which lodged in the Nature, and there had its
hold by reason of transgression, over that as to the particular of every man,
in which man was made and brought to light, to the understanding of man, the
manifold wisdom of God, that which had been hid from Ages and Generations past,
which had been covered over, and buried, and laid in the earth, and the earthy
over it, as aforesaid. And so ceased the thing of an outward administration, as
he, the Seed, which is Christ, coming into the Nature unto which the outward
was, which was of the same Nature, which kept the Seed under, in which lodged
the enemy, who entered by reason of transgression, to keep it from rising, as
in the particular of this, and that man, and as to any thing that came from
without, to get entrance through this Bar, to that which lay under, by reason
of which man might come to see where he is; I say, ceased the thing of an
outward Administration, as he coming into the Nature, passed through and rent
it to pieces, that is to say, the Nature in which stood the Bar, and the
Administration, which was to the Nature in which the Bar stood.

So that which at first, which by reason of transgression came to be put under,
being brought through again, the understanding and knowledge of man to lead and
guide, that which was a help to man in the state in which he stood, came to be
removed, as was the Nature in the particular of him, who took not upon him the
Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, and by one offering for ever
perfected those that are sanctified.

And now those things being come to an end, as he (as aforesaid) came through
all, and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, which is the
power of God to salvation; no stress is to be put upon things of that nature,
nor may they be required, but he the Reformer is to be heard in all things, the
Law wrote in the heart, the fear put in the inward part, who has put an end
unto them all, the way is open unto the Father, Through him (says the Apostle)
we have all access unto the Father through one Spirit. And there is neither Jew
nor Gentile, Barbarian, or Scythian, Bond or Free, Male or Female, but all are
one in Christ Jesus; he has put an end to them all, who is come through, and
has made way through Death, Hell, and the Grave, and has slain the enmity,
even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, and nailed them to his
Cross, and broke down the Partian Wall, and abolished them; So that there is an
end to all things of this nature; he has put it, who has made the end, and to
this of Swearing as unto the rest, and that not only inclusively, or as a
particular of that administration which was outward, which he wholly put an end
unto, but exclusively (as I may so say) or by a particular provision or
prohibition. -- Ye have heard that it has been Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35, 36.
said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform
thine Oath: But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is
Gods Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem,
for it is the City of the great King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head,
because thou can not make on Hair white or black; but let your communication
be Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. --

And James, who wrote unto the twelve Tribes who were scattered abroad, says
to them, But above all things my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your yea be yea, and
your nay, nay, lest you fall into condemnation. -- Emphatical and plain words
[above all things] swear not, nor by [any] other Oath -- lest you fall into
condemnation. -- And swear [not at all] [whatsoever] is more than these comes
of evil. --

These things are as full as they can be expressed, words of weight and depth,
and large comprehensiveness; so peremptory and flat, that one would think none
could find out a way to evade them, that is to say, durst to do it; Yet what
has not man dared to do in this particular, and upon this very foot? How have
they put multitudes of people, both in this and other Ages, to most exquisite
sufferings?

Policarpus who suffered under Verus the Emperor, who began his Eusebius. l. 4. c.
15
Reign about the year 163. being brought forth, and demanded by the Proconsul,
to Swear by the Fortune of Caesar, to repent him of what was past, and to say,
Remove the Wicked, (by which was intended the Christians.) And again, Swear,
and I will let thee go; Blaspheme, and deny Christ, and I will let thee go. --
And again, Swear by the Fortune of Caesar. -- Policarpus answered, If thou
requirest this vain glory, that I protest the Fortune of Caesar, as thou
say, feigning thou know me not, who I am, Hear freely, I am a Christian.
-- He was burned quick at Smyrna, of which he was Bishop.

Ponticus and Blandina, a Lad of fifteen years old, and a Woman, who Eusebius. l.
5. c. 10
endured notable torments, and at last death, by the Heathen in France, in the
Reign of Antonius Verus, about the year 179. being the seventeenth year of his
Reign, of whose sufferings and constancy I have already given a particular
account, who often by the Heathen were urged to swear, which they refused.

Basilide^ a Soldier in Authority in the Roman Host, being upon some Eusebius. l.
6. c. 4.
occasion required to swear by his fellow Soldiers, affirmed plainly, -- That
it was not lawful for him to swear, for he said, he was a Christian, and that
he would in very deed protest the same. I have given an account of him, and how
he came to be a Christian before, page To which I refer the Reader, as to a
noble example; they thought he dallied at first, but being brought before the
Judge, and he confessing the same, was clapped in Prison and beheaded.

Evangelica veritas non recipit juramentum, -- says Jerome, -- The Evangelical,
or the Truth of the Gospel admits not of an Oath. --

And says Chrysostom, -- Non oportet ut vir qui Evangelice vivit juret
omnino, -- It behooves not, or, it is not meet, or it ought not to be, that the
man, or he, which lives according to the Gospel should swear at all. --

(...), Christians ought not to swear at all, says Justin Martyr.

Plato says, (...), (i. e.) Let an Oath be absent from every one, (as much as
to say) let none Swear. -- (...).

Meander also has these words, (...), -- (i. e.) Fly an Oath, although thou
may swear justly. --

Plato also says again in his twelfth Book concerning Laws, -- Ne quis juret
ipse and ne ab altero jusjurandum exigat, (i. e.) Let no man swear himself, and
let him not require (or compel) an Oath of another.

Ausonius in his second Epistle says, Jurare, aut falsum dicere par habuit, To
swear or speak falsely is the same.

Hesiod in his Theogonia, places an Oath among the brood of contention, (...),
etc. Page 88.

-- An Oath (says he) which greatly burteth men. --

Again he says, (...), Presently an Oath goes with corrupt judgments; Cito
enim abit jusjurandum una cum pravis judiciis.
or, When Justice appears among men, then swearing vanishes. -- As is Hesiod's
scope in that place, p. 13.

And, (...), (viz.) neither ought he to swear this, or any thing, this thing
(or swearing) shall never be, or there ought to be no such thing as to swear,
-- says Theognis, Verse. 660.

Wherefore should I reckon up Origin, Chrysostom, Theophilact, Oecomenius,
Hillary, Athanasius, Jerome, Theodoret, Lactantius, and others who had frequent
invectives against swearing: Or Basil, who commended a famous Greek called
Clineas cum posset effugere trium talentorum mulctam jurando, injuriam pati
maluit, quam jurare.
Clineas, who rather than he would save a Mulct of Accounted 300 l. Sterling at
the least.
three Talents, by swearing, suffered loss of his honor, which he thought
caution sufficient for his honesty, suffered the payment, mentioned by Sam.
Fisher, in his Answer to Bishop Gauden about Swearing; or the many thousands of
these latter Generations, contained in the Books of Martyrs and other
Histories, I should fill the World anew with that with which it is full enough
already, and yet signify little more than as a drop does to the Sea, show what
from the Principle came; but the fullness is the Principle; that he changed it,
that he put an end to it, with all the body of that, of which it was an
Appendix, which he did away, that he made a particular and full revocation
thereof; and he is the Judge of all, and to him all must account, and it is
better to obey God than man, and to please a man's Judg^ for ever, than man
whose breath is in his nostrils, who must also give an account for himself: I
have given the Ground of it, and the thing, as it stands in Truth; he that can
receive it, let him receive it: I am satisfied, and that others may be
satisfied, I have written, at least to convince that our Principle herein is no
other than the Doctrine of Truth, which he preached, who is the Lawgiver of his
people, out of whose Lips never came guile, to whom be glory and dominion for
ever: And many of the Fathers (as they are called) and others since his day, as
well as his Apostles, have so spoken, which was the thing I laid down in the
beginning; and here I shall make an end of this particular.

THE Third General Head CONCERNING Bearing of Arms.
The third general Head, is, Bearing of Arms; and here I shall be constrained
to bear things up unto the beginning, and bring this thing from the rise
thereof, as I have at first proposed; and how this thing also stands in Truth,
that by the right stating of things, I may give people to understand where this
Principle has its bottom, and what is the ground or foundation thereof.

BEaring of Arms stood in the old Covenant, in the Administration of the Jew,
which was outward, of which I have spoken; As the Administration was outward,
and earthly, and corporeal, so was the defense thereof: The Jews under this
Covenant or Administration might War, and there are Orders or Laws of War; and
it was Figurative, as was the other; the body of that Administration, of which
this was part, was so, and so had its end, as had the other, even that whole
Administration.

You have heard (says he) that it has been said, An Eye for an Eye, and Mat.
5. 22, 29.
a Tooth for a Tooth; But I say unto you, Resist not evil, but whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. -- You have heard
that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy;
But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do Mat 5. 43,
44, 45.
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and
persecute you; That ye may be Children of your Father which is in Heaven: for
he makes his Son to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends Rain on the
just and unjust. -- Leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps, 1
Pet 2. 21, 22; 23, 24.
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously; who his own self bare our sins in his own body on
the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; by whose
stripes ye were healed. -- Recompense no man evil for evil. -- Avenge Romans 12.
17, 19, 20, 21.
not your selves, but rather give place to wrath, for it is written, --
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, says the Lord; therefore if thine
enemy hunger, feed him; if he be athirst, give him drink; for in so doing, thou
shall heap coals of fire on his head: Be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good. -- Put up again thy Sword into his place, for all they that
Mat. 26. 52, 53
take the Sword shall perish with the Sword; think thou that I cannot now
pray unto my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels. -- My Kingdom is not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World,
then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but
now is my Kingdom not from hence,

This said Christ Jesus, and this said his Apostles, who knew him to John 18.
27.
be the Power and Wisdom of God, who was the Power of God. As any come to know
him to be the Power of God, to know the Power, they will witness this, to wit,
Dominion over injuries, provocations, abuses, the very nature that leads into
Wars and Divisions, that can forgive. From whence comes Wars and fightings
amongst you? come they not ^ence, even from your lusts, that War in your
members? ye lust and have not; ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain;
ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not; ye ask and receive not,
because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it on your lusts, James 4. 1, 2, 3.
Here is the ground of all, the spirit that is in man lusts to envy, boylings
are in his heart, revenge is in his breast, he cannot bear an indignity, he
knows not that which gives to overcome; he has not dominion over that which
lusts in him; he would have, and he kills to have; he cannot rule his
inordinate desires, it is not made subject; from hence proceed the things
aforesaid, from that which destroys the Creation, which is not that in which
it was made: that is not in good will to his fellow Creatures, that seeks to
cut him off, that is not in peace, that cannot sing the Song of the Angels
(when he was born) to the Shepherds. -- Glory to God in the highest, and on
Earth peace; good will toward men, Luke 2. 14. That would rend and devour,
that know not the peaceable Spirit; Who shall harm you if ye be followers of
that which is good?

So I have gone through this thing also, and shown the ground and original
thereof, and of that which is contrary, that which encounters the spirit of
wickedness, and subdues and destroys it; not that which fights with men's
persons, and kills, and slayes, is the power of God, or that which stands in
the power of God, does the first, but not the latter; there is the change: and
herein is the mistake of men, and the ground of their persecution because of
Religion; they know not that which subdues the spirit, that takes revenge on
wickedness, on every disobedience, that lays hold on him that is the Usurper,
the Murderer, who was so from the beginning; that led man at first to kill, and
it kills him, destroys, and puts him under, and sets the creature free, but
destroys not the creature. The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal but
spiritual; mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. -- And having in readiness to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 4,
5, 6.

This is that which has been wanting in all the World, and the want of this
has been the cause why there has been such Wars, Bloodsheds, and destruction
in the World; men avenge themselves on persons, and destroy them: they know not
that, or are not guided by it, which conquers the risings of evil in their own
minds, and that which rises in another; The strong man Armed that keeps the
House, they know not to be bound by the stronger than he, which spoileth him of
his defense, and takes his goods; to overcome themselves, which is greater
prowess than to overcome strong Cities; Every one ought (said the Poet of old)
to tame or make subject his own heart. -- This is the thing that keeps all
things in order, that leads captivity captive, that cannot be overcome, which
overcomes ill will, strifes, variance, mischiefs, hatreds, envies, emulations,
whisperings, backbitings, risings, blood, which kills things in the root, the
Devil and his nature, and spirit that leads into those things, the works of the
Devil; the which to destroy the Son of God was manifest, who says, He came not
to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Here is the Safeguard, the Rock, the Buckler, the place of Defense, the
Pavilion, the hiding place under the shadow of the Wing of the Almighty, the
Defense from the strife of Tongues, the Secret of the Almighty, the Mountain
full of Horsemen and Chariots of Fire, the more with us than against us; where
the Sword is beaten into a Plowshare, and the Spear into a Pruning-hook, and
War is learnt no more, as the Prophets Isaiah, and Micah prophesied should be
in that day, That the Mountain of the Lords House is established on the top of
the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it,
and many people (say they) shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the
Mountain of the House of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his Paths: For out of Sion
shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and he shall
judge many Nations, and shall rebuke many People, and they shall beat their
Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall
not rise up against Nation, nor shall they learn War any more. O House of
Israel, come ye and let us walk in the Light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Micah 4. 1, 2, 3. And he adds, But they shall sit every man under his Vine, and
under his Figtree, and none shall make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord
of Hosts has spoken it, verse. 4. And says Joel, Proclaim ye this among the
Gentiles, prepare Wars, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of War draw
near, let them come up; Beat your Plough-shares into Swords, and your
Pruning Hooks into Spears; let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble your selves,
come all ye Heathen, and gather your selves together round about, thither cause
the mighty ones to come down, O Lord: Let the Heathen be awakened, and come up
to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to judge all the Nations
round about. Put ye in the Sickle, for the Harvest is ripe; come get ye down,
for the Press is full, the Fats overflow, for the wickedness is great.
Multitudes, multitudes in the Valley of decision; for the day of the Lord is
great in the Valley of decision, Joel 3. 9, to 14. So there is their judgment.

And here is that which preserves and keeps, the Arm of the Lord, and his
Dominion, which is greater than all, which keeps the heart in peace, in perfect
peace, which trusts in him, which he that is of this World is not so great,
which gives to overcome the evil of this World, all provocations, enmities,
malice, mischiefs, all that would stir up a man that is of this World, and
overcome him, which bears all things, and suffers all things, which thinks
no evil, that hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
which never fails, which suffers long, and is kind; which envyeth not,
which vaunteth not it self, which is not puffed up, which does not behave it
self unseemly, which seeks not its own, is not easily provoked, rejoices not
in iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth, the Love, which man being an enemy,
seeks to reconcile him to God, the Power of God which preserves and keeps.

The Jews were required thrice in the year, all their men Children to Exodus 34.
23, 24.
appear before the Lord the God of Israel; and whereas they might object and
say, The Enemy then that lives round about us, may come and invade our Land,
and possess our Habitations, when there are no men to keep it; but they are all
in one place far distant from the Borders. The Lord answers them, For I will
cast out the Nations, and enlarge thy Borders: Neither shall any man desire thy
Land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in a year.
This was when War was lawful to them; and yet being thus required, the Lord in
the time of Wars, when all was against them round about, when the Nations were
cut off, and they had possessed their Land, none invaded them till there was an
end of them. He passed through them whom the Jews sought oftentimes to kill,
whose Kingdom was not of this World, who had no outward Arm to preserve and
keep him; his Apostles and Disciples, who had no Arm of flesh, and whose
Doctrine had no tutelage or defense by the Sword of man, whom the powers of the
Earth were against, carried through their Doctrine throughout, notwithstanding
all opposition; and though they were esteemed as perverters, changing the Laws
and Customs, and turning the World upside down, Acts 17. 6, 7.
doing contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, saying, There is another King, one
Jesus; and had the whole World in opposition, who were contrary to the World,
and not of it, therefore the World hated them; yet their Doctrine stood it
throughout the whole World; and though multitudes of the Christians were
suffered to be cut off during the Heathen Persecution, as a proof of the power
of God in them, which carried them through; on whom also the Apostasy had
entered, yet the thing was the same which carried them through all the torments
imaginable, and cruelties of deaths, so that they were not overcome, but by
death overcame him that had the power of death, (viz.) the Devil; and left a
good savor of the virtue of the power of him who is everlasting, who made them
more than Conquerors; as what has been repeated out of History gives
abundantly to understand.

So that the Testimony is abundant to this thing of which I have declared, even
the whole Series of that which has born through and suffered for the Truth
from the beginning; and that the Truth yet is from the beginning,
notwithstanding all that in this World has made head against it; which has
seemed always (in comparison) to be little in the World, and which the men of
the World, and the Prince of it, has sought to pull down, but has not been
able; Naked Truth which is greater than all, by its own force and virtue, which
is spiritual, has overcome and given all to do the same, who have been led and
guided by it; that which subdues the spirits of men, that which chains, that
binds the strong man armed, and makes the Devils subject, can certainly prevail
to keep all that are guided by it, in whom it lives, and by whom they are
preserved and kept. The Lord, the everlasting God, neither faints, nor is
weary, there is no searching out of his understanding. The Power of God, Christ
Jesus, by whom all things were made and preserved, without which (said he to
Pilate) nothing could be done unto him, without doubt is able, and will (as he
sees its most advantage to his Truth, and the glory of his Name) keep those in
whom it lives, who know the Rock that is higher than they, the strong Tower,
the Name of the Lord, to which the Righteous fly and are saved.

This may suffice to answer the Objection which happily may arise in some in
point of safety, should that be insisted on which looks to outward Arms; the
Truth had never been at this day, had not the virtue and power thereof
preserved and kept it self, and all who have kept to it: Wars and the Sword
were not in the beginning, in the beginning it was not so; man was made in
that, or by it which made the Creation; there was no variance; Adam gave names
to all the Creation; the Creatures came to Noah by an instinct, not humane, to
be preserved in the Ark. The first use of Arms was found in Cain, who killed
his Brother because of Religion; the enmity entered with transgression, the
strange Nature, which knew not that in which all things were made, which sought
the destruction of that which was made; that which is come to redeem from
transgression, redeems from the consequence, or that which followed by reason
of transgression as well as transgression; removes the enmity, casts it out,
which having entered into the Creation, seeks to destroy it, which is the
Devil, and brings where man was in the beginning, where one Spirit, that by
which all things were made, which is tender to that it has made, which is the
Harmony or Union, where no Jar is, lives and rules; and hitherto things must
all come again; And as that in and by which all things were made comes to live,
as it comes to live, works to this out of the contrary; and that which will be
in the end must be in the beginning, and a beginning it must have, and some
must begin it, and who should, or can do this, but those in whom this is so
come to live, that in the particular has so far overcome, that this it can do,
which is to be an example, or a leader to the rest, till iniquity being
overcome, and that which destroys the Creation being cast out, the Earth enjoy
her Sabbaths again, and the oppressor cease out of the Land; Happy is that
people who are in such a case, (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. 15. in a thing
of another nature) Yea, happy are the people whose God is the Lord.

He gave his back to the smiter, and his cheeks to them that plucketh off the
hair, and hid not his face from shame and spitting, Isa. 50. 6. The same is
now, where, and as he is witnessed, and his Dominion is an everlasting
dominion, and his Kingdom that which shall not pass away. All that were led by
his Spirit in all Generations, pertook of his mind in this, and thereby
overcame; the Lord sustained them so, that they fainted not: That which fights
with the Sword, must subdue the Spirit, or it cannot overcome the body, in
which the Spirit is; if the Spirit be overcome without the Sword, bound or
chained up, is it not the same? yea, is it not better? and there is a way to
this, and the man sees, and has proved it so, who knows the Wisdom and the
Power of God.

So let all men be satisfied in this thing, the Doctrine that I preach is not
new, it was in the beginning, and is in measure in some again, and will be in
the end. The Prophets have prophesied so, the Lord of Life in his humiliation
witnessed it to be so, so did the Prophets and Apostles, so have all his
Witnesses to this day, and so now it is witnessed, and will be till all has an
end, and till time is no more. The Witnesses of Jesus, though men of War,
otherwise, laid down to this. The Roman Captains and Soldiers, when it came to
this, laid down their Sword-Girdles, as aforesaid, and embraced death as
Christians; I am a Christian, and so suffered; so have the Christians in
succeeding Ages. Why should I fill the World with reports of what Histories
have said of this matter any further? The ground has been shown wherein War
stands, and the reason and ground of the alteration, and wherein that stands
which gives it. I hope no considerate man by this time will look strange upon
this Position, but having duly weighed things, will see the rise of the one and
of the other; Arms, and that which subdues them, and so will be more gentled
(at least) to the contrary Principle, if not convinced of it, which they may be
in due season, for which cause this is written, at least, that the ground on
which we stand as to these things may be understood, or that we may give a
reason thereof to this and Generations to come, and not appear as Monsters,
which the opposites to us would make in this thing, who are no otherwise
therein, then on the ground aforesaid, which he that thinks he can overthrow,
let him manifest himself therein. So far at this time is it with me to write of
this thing, and so I shall proceed.

THE Fourth General Head Concerning the Changeable Priesthood.
The fourth and last Head is, the Changeable Priesthood, the Rise and Original
of that, and of the contrary, to which I shall speak, and then I shall end as
to these Heads or Particulars.

THE Changeable Pristhood had its Date with the Nation of the Jews, it was
Figurative, and ended in him who changed the Priesthood, who is a Priest for
ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, without beginning of days, or end of
life, whom the Changeable Priesthood signified; For Christ is not entered into
the Holy Places made with hands, which are the figures of the True, but into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us: Nor yet that he
should offer up himself often, as the high Priest entered into the holy Place
every year with blood of others; for then must be often have suffered since the
foundation of the World; but now once in the end of the World has he appeared
to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: And as it is appointed for men
once to die, but after this the Judgment; So Christ was offered once to bear
the sins of many, and to them that look for him shall he appear the second
time, without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

So the Changeable Priesthood had an end in him who changes not, Jesus Christ,
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever; And his Apostles were Ministers of
that of which he was, of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the
Spirit; not of that which changes, but of that which changes not; for the
Letter (that which changed) kills, but the Spirit (that which changes not)
gives life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And who (says the Apostle) is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor. 2. 16.

The changeable Priesthood was then of the Law, which could not make the comers
thereunto perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope, which hope is Christ,
Christ in you the Hope of Glory, the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, now
made manifest to his Saints, (says the Apostle) which makes not ashamed,
because the Love of God is spread abroad in our hearts; which was a steadfast
and stable thing, which was not subject to change, neither was it to pass away.
So Paul an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by the Will of God. And when it
pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his Grace,
to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen immediately;
I consulted not with flesh and blood, neither went I up to Jerusalem to them
who were Apostles before me; But I went into Arabia, etc. Gal. 1. 15, 16, 17.
And here stood their bottom, in Christ that changes not, whose Minister he
was; he preached his Ministry that changed not; his Ministry did not change,
because he of whom he preached, and who sent him to preach, did not change; he
was not in man's will which made and unmade at his pleasure, nor was he a
Minister of Man, to preach what man pleased, or Conformity he received not by
Tradition, or by certain conclusions or Systems of Divinity, or Art what to
say; but the Son of God being revealed in him, he consulted not with flesh and
blood, neither with the other Apostles that were before him, but preached, etc.
Thus stood the state of Paul and the Apostles, who had the mind of Christ; but
the Form and the Letter which was done away, from that he preached not, in the
oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit.

Now the Form and the Letter being done away, there was no room for that which
was the Ministry of the Form, or the Letter, no more killing of Sheep, and
slaying of Oxen; no more Sacrifices, Washings, New Moons, Sabbaths, Shadows of
good things to come, who were the Shadows, but not the very things themselves,
which changed into the thing come, or had an end in it; no ground or footing at
all for that, but as he who is everlasting was come, the same for ever, so the
Ministry must be of and from him; he must send, he must be revealed, the words
must be spoken from his mouth, not the Letter but the Spirit; not the oldness
of the Letter, but the newness of the Spirit: Thus stood it in the days of the
Apostles.

So the Ministry or Priesthood that changes, has no ground from Christ and
his Apostles, but is quite otherwise, it is a changing or deviation from them,
it has no footing either in the Letter or in the Spirit; not in the Letter,
for that was a Priesthood Figurative, having relation to him that was to come,
which in him ended; so there was to be no more, as there never was but that:
not in the Spirit, for that is it which changes not, is not at the will,
order, or direction of man, but the Will of God; its ground, its bottom, its
fountain, its beginning and end is from him who changes not, whom the
changeable signified.

I need not be long in these things, the matter being so plain already; the
whole progress of the History, which I have before been particular in, speaks
the Priesthood after the Apostles decease to be changeable, leaning to this
Creed, and that confession of Faith, and varying and changing, according to the
leaders of that Confession, and this Creed; and what work it made in the World,
I have manifested, whatsoever stands not in him which changes not, that is
called Ministry, which is not Spirit, and proceeds from it; is not from him who
is the Head of the Church, the Lawgiver and Teacher of his People; it has no
footing from the Scriptures of Truth, nor the Spirit of them; it is so far from
the Spirit, that in that sense it is not Letter; it has no relation to that of
the Jews, the Priesthood, which was changed, and ended in Christ, nor to Christ
Jesus, or the Ministry of him, who changed the Priesthood, -- Jesus I know, and
Paul I know, but who are ye? said the evil Spirit which was in the man, whom
the Exorcist Jews took upon them to adjure by Jesus, whom Paul preached; from
whence comes Acts 19. 13, 14, 15.
this new covered Priesthood which fills the earth (may a man say) that is
neither Paul, nor Jesus, nor Jew, nor Christian; it is much that men are not
ashamed of these things; Man makes man, men make themselves; diversities of men
make diversities; here is the Priesthood, a God they make, a System of Divinity,
a Form of Worship, and then they form themselves, or one another, Ministers of
that form of Worship, Teachers of the Systems or Precepts of Religion, they
made of the God whom they formed.

Thou shall have no other God but me, said the Lord to Israel of old, who gave
Israel a form whereby to worship God; but now men make Godds, and make forms of
Worship for their Godds, and Priests to their forms, and whosoever will
consecrateth himself a Priest, or is consecrated to whatsoever Godd he has
made, or Worship he has formed, which is not from that which is everlasting,
the Priest that is for ever that changes not; Whosoever would, he consecrated
him, and he became one of the Priests of the high places, it is said of, and in
the days of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13. 33. And the man Micah had an house of gods,
and made an Ephod and Teraphim, and consecrated one of his Sons, who became his
Priest: In those days there was no King in Israel, Judge. 17. 5, 6.

So the matter is plain, the ground, original, or rise of all the Priesthood,
or Ministry that is not Spirit, that is not in and from that which changes
not, the Ministers of Christ, in whom is no variableness or shadow of changing,
is neither from Christ nor the Scriptures, and has neither ground nor
foundation to be believed in, or heard, whose rise is not in the Letter of the
Scriptures, nor the Spirit, whose bottom is man, and the will of man, or rather
the Devil in man, who cheats him into Worship, to make it, and then to bow down
thereunto: And such is all that which changes, which is in the will of man,
that is up and down as man will, that is political, which serves times and
seasons, and which changes with them; its not the Ministry of Jesus Christ,
but its rise is in that which is opposite unto him, the will, and wisdom, and
understanding of man, which is convertible, and changes, which knows not God,
which he came to confound, which he came to bring to naught, to whom every knee
must bow, and tongue confess, who is God over all, blessed for ever.

And so I have finished this particular, I shall only now lay down certain
sayings of the Ancients, which relate unto our Principle, and something also of
men of latter days, or this present Generation, out of their own Writings,
which conform thereunto; that so through all I may yet further show that Truth,
or that which the People called Quakers profess, is neither an upstart thing,
nor that which neither Scripture or History, or the men of this Generation
know, or before this day have heard of, but has a more ancient Date, even from
the beginning; and is found not only before he came in the flesh, who came to
bear witness thereunto, (as I have declared) but since his days and his
Apostles, even along the Apostasy, unto, and in this day, to the intent that a
calm and quiet consideration of these things may render Truth the less
offensive, because it looks like their Image, or is the very thing, which
themselves unawares in other terms have held forth and professed.

Doctor Jngelo in his Romance entitled Bentivolio and Urania, the second Part,
helps me to some recitals which shall serve me in this matter, though
otherwhere he seems to reflect upon that which himself has held forth.

In the first place in his Preface, having relation to the Atheist, who
acknowledged not God, to evince that there is one, that is to say, a God; among
other things he produces this saying of Plutarch, as that which that Opinion
sought to do, which the Philosophers (says he) were so inflamed with a sober
zeal against, that they made use of words which were justly reproachful, and
condemned as most unworthy persons for attempting to extinguish the noblest
sense of our Souls, and to eradicate, (...). The ancient Faith of Mankind, that
natural belief which is planted Plut. Dion. P^us.
in all reasonable Souls, and to overthrow the strong and everlasting
foundation of virtue. -- And (says the Doctor) Who can justly blame their
heat, when they did only oppose such as do, (...), insolently afront the
Common Faith.

Now, what is the Ancient Faith of Mankind, and the natural Belief which is
planted in all reasonable Souls, which to eradicate, is to overthrow the strong
and everlasting Foundation of Virtue; but the Faith of God's Elect, the Nature
by which the Gentiles, not having the Law, did the things contained in the Law,
and so were a Law unto themselves: The foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Christ Jesus being the Cornerstone; The Law wrote in the heart, the Fear put
in the inward parts; The Principle of God: for no other than the Principle of
God can be of Virtue, the strong and everlasting Foundation; the natural Belief
which is planted in all reasonable Souls, that there is a God, can be no other
than the Principle, or that which flows from the Principle of God, which is
planted in all reasonable Souls: So all have it, or it is not in all; for
Nature that is in the Fall cannot give to understand God, or be a foundation of
Faith in him, but intitles to wrath, as the Apostle said, -- By Nature Children
of Wrath. -- So then the natural belief planted in all reasonable Souls, must
be another nature than that which intitles to wrath, or naturally genders to
it; for in that the Faith is not set, that there is a god which knows not God,
for he that sins has neither seen him nor known him, says the Apostle; but
it must needs be the Nature in which all things were made, which is of God, in
which the Faith of God stands, the Faith of Gods Elect, the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, the common Salvation, which whosoever opposes, opposes
the Faith of Gods Elect, the Faith once delivered to the Saints, the common
Faith which is planted in every one, in all rational Souls, or which gives them
to know there is a God, and to believe in him, which may be called Salvation;
forasmuch as the Apostle says, By Faith ye are saved; which they who oppose
this Principle, without which God cannot be known, much less be believed in, do
affront, and that insolently the common Faith which is in every man, or the
Principle of God, concerning Nature, and what he understands thereby. Hear the
Doctor what he says further himself.

In his Table adjoining to the Book aforesaid, which is as explanatory to that
his Book, he says thus, -- The Laws of reasonable Nature, eternal and
indispensible, not customs of men, or constitutions of Princes, alterable at
pleasure, but written in our Souls by God. -- And (says he) here I think it
not inconvenient to insert two or three noble Testimonies of this Truth.
Amongst the Heathen, that of Sophocles is (says he) incomparable, who in
Oedip. Tyr. writes thus, (I omit the rehearsal of the Greek, because of
tediousness, and give it in his own English) to wit, God grant that I may be so
happy always to observe that venerable sanctity in my words and deeds, which
is commanded by these noble Laws which were made in Heaven. God is their
Father, not mortal Nature, neither shall they ever be forgotten and abrogated,
for there is in them a great God that never waxes old. To which I shall add
(says the Doctor) that of Plutarch, who speaking of this Law, says, -- (...).
It is a Law not written in Tables or Books, but dwelling in the mind always
as a living Rule, which never permits the Soul to be destitute of an interior
guide. -- Of the Jews, that of Philo (says the Doctor) shall serve for all. --
(...).
Right reason is an infallible Law; not a mortal Rule given by this or that
Mortal. No liveless Precepts written in Papers, or upon Pillars, but immortal,
being engraven by the eternal Nature in immortal minds. -- Of the Christians,
(says he) Saint Paul calls it, -- (...).
A Law written in our hearts, Romans 2. 15. Justin Martyr says, -- (...).
The Rules of it are an eternal Righteousness. -- Origin, (...).
A Law, which, with the common Notions of good and evil, is planted in our
Souls. -- Tertullian, Testimonium animae naturaliter Christianae.
A natural kind of Christianity. -- Chrysostom, (...).
A Teacher dwelling in our natures. --

Then which what can be more clear to the thing which I have asserted, and for
which I quote the Doctor, -- A Teacher dwelling in our Natures. -- A natural
kind of Christianity. -- A Law, which, with the common Notions of good and
evil, is planted in our Souls. -- An eternal Righteousness. -- A Law written in
our hearts. -- An infallible Law, not a mortal Rule, given by this or that
mortal. No liveless Precepts written in Paper, or upon Pillars, but immortal,
being engraven by the eternal Nature in immortal minds. A Law not written in
Tables or Books, but dwelling in the mind always as a living Rule, which never
permits the Soul to be destitute of an interior guide. -- Neither shall they
ever be forgotten or abrogated, for there is in them a great God that never
waxes old. -- The Laws of reasonable Nature eternal and indispensible, not
customs of men, or constitutions of Princes, alterable at pleasure, but written
in our Souls by God. -- I think I need say no more, but leave this thing to the
consideration of all moderate men concerning our Principle, which being as much
as I need say to it, let me only add what the Doctor presently by way of
anticipation produces, in reference to the aforesaid Aphorisms or Positions, as
to what may happily be objected by such as see not Nature to be so, or such as
is here asserted. -- Nature (says he) may be so perverted by vice, that men
will not acknowledge the innate motions of Truth; so Justin Martyr (says the
Doctor) told Trypho, (...).
Being corrupted by a bad education; evil custom and wicked institutions, they
destroy their natural Notions. -- And as Porphryry's Phrase is, -- (...).
Do speak falsely of our Nature. -- And are therefore justly rejected by
Aristotle, as incompetent Judges of Nature, (Pol. 1. 5.) in these words, --
(...).
We are to enquire concerning what is natural of these who are in their natural
temper, and not of those who have corrupted their Nature. -- I think no more
needs be said then the very words before rehearsed, in reference to those who
take upon them to judge and speak evil of this Principle, -- (...), (says the
Doctor) of vulgar Practice, and the M. Tyr. Dissert. 20.
producing thereof, for slight justifications of actions, in the Preface
aforesaid; For no place can create Virtue by common Suffrages; But it is the
glory of men (says he) to conform their lives to the external reasons of
goodness, whose indispensible Principles is connate with our Souls. -- And
(says he) do not men perceive in their Souls Bentevol. and Vran. 2 Part, cap.
6.
a natural Obligation to the practice of Justice, and know certainly they
should not invade the rights of others, because they would not be disturbed in
their own possessions? -- Which answers to what he said as to the Principle,
which is the Law and the Prophets; That is all that is religious, or relative
from one man to another in that little or narrow Sentence is comprehended, --
to wit, says Christ, Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat.
7. 12.

To this of the Doctors, let me add a few more instances of the Ancients, which
seem both to speak and explain what I have quoted of his, and what he has
spoken concerning Nature and God. -- Out of the Minor Poets, page 213. (...).
The mind is, God in us in the particular. -- And page 227. (...). -- (i. e.)
God is Conscience in all mortal men. -- Thus as to the Mind and Conscience.

As to Nature, says Seneca, De Benefic. cap. 7. Quid enim aliud est natura,
qnam Deus est Divina ratio toti Mundo, and partibus ejus inserta.
-- What other thing is Nature than God, and the divine Reason placed in the
whole World, and its parts. -- And the same Seneca in his Epistles, lib. 1.
says, -- Epist. 31. Debit tibi illa quae si non diserueris par Deo surges.
-- Nature has given thee those things, which if thou forsakest not, thou will
arise like God. --

I may now proceed to another, (viz.) Doctor John Owen, sometimes
Vice Chancellor of Oxford, who taking upon him to write against the People
called Quakers, thus wrote for them and their Principles.

Concerning the interpreting of the Scriptures, he lays it down as an
indubitable Truth, and which has been proved to be such by the reformed
Divines (as they are called) the things following, viz.

That the only public, authentic, and infallible Interpreter of Doctor Owen's
Exerc. 2, 9, 7. against the Quakers.
the Holy Scripture, is he who is the Author of them, from the breathing of
whose Spirit it derives all its Verity, Perspicuity, and Authority. This Author
and Interpreter of the Scriptures, is the Spirit, partly speaking in the
Scripture, and setting down its mind therein; and if there be any doubtful and
obscure passages therein, explaining himself by that Analogy or Harmony of the
whole Doctrine which is found therein, and partly infusing a spiritual [Light]
into our hearts, whereby we may be led into the knowledge of all necessary
Truths revealed in the Word. -- And therefore, as there never was any [visible]
Judge of Faith (then man, quatenus as man, has nothing to do in it; and so
what is become of all the institutions and inforcings of men, or their meddling
with Religion? and the imposings, which the Doctor himself wrought the Council
of the late Army to, in their Address to the then called Long (yet ending)
Parliament, which undid the Army, and wrought them against their Declarations
and Engagements) appointed by Christ; So neither is there any use or need of
such an Arbitrator.

Again, he says, That every Christian has it as a duty incumbent upon him to
inquire into the mind of God in the Scriptures, (and no man knows the things of
God but the Spirit of God, and he to whom the Spirit shall reveal them; but we
have the mind of Christ; then Christ must be within the Hope of Glory, for
where the mind of Christ is, there is Christ) that is, to seek into the meaning
of them (and that must be by the Spirit, as are his own words, as aforesaid) by
all requisite means (and himself says there is no other but the Spirit, the
only public, authentic, and infallible Interpreter, as aforesaid) and to
expound them to himself (which must be by knowing his Teacher within) for his
own edification, for the just shall live (so every man must have it in his own
particular) by his Faith. --

Thus as to the Interpretation of the Scriptures. Now as to Teaching, and the
teaching of others, or Preaching.

Sect. 14. In that community (says he) between God and man, through a
Relation, which a reasonable creature cannot but have to a good Creator, from
whence arises this indispensible necessity to worship and obey him; it is
requisite that all should know him, and what is his will, (and how can they do
that, unless they know the Principle of him, where only his Will is to be
known?) according to the decree of means conducing thereunto, (and this can
only be the Spirit, as his own words has expressed it, as has been rehearsed)
which is graciously afforded them. (which must by the Doctors own words, be the
manifestation of the Spirit given to every one to profit withal, of which the
Apostle speaks, and which he himself in the next words further expresses what
it is) This is the great Dictate of Nature (which cannot be that which is in
the transgression, but the Divine) and Prescript of the Law. (and what Law that
is, in the very next words he expresses) This Duty is no less imprinted in the
heart of man, than in the Decalogue, (So it is the Law written in the heart, and
the fear put into the inward parts, which till it was come, viz. the new
Covenant, the Seed, which is Christ, the Law or Decalogue was added, or the
outward administration, which the other should do when it was come, which was
within, but not seen or felt, but put under, or as it were dead, buried, and so
lying, the Seed, which is Christ, as has been said) amongst the means which
God makes use of for the discovery of himself, the Holy Scripture (this must be
understood by his own expressions by the Spirit, as aforesaid) is not only the
most excellent of all others; but as to saving Truths, it is the sole and only
manifester thereof.

Thus as to the first part, that is, That all should know God, and do his Will,
the great Dictate of Nature, and Prescript of the Law; And this great Dictate
of Nature, and Prescript of the Law, must needs be the measure of God, by which
only God can be known, and his Will done, which all must have, or how else can
it be natural, for Nature is a comprehensive word, or that in which all that
are of that stock and kind are entitled or invested; or it cannot be Nature,
or a Law to be observed by all, or prescribed, if all have it not; And so it is
our, or the Principle of the Quakers, (viz.) the measure of God in all,
whereby, and in which he is to be known, and who is the Teacher of his People.
Now as to the other which is Preaching, or teaching of others. -- As the
knowledge of God (and what knowledge that is, and how it has been declared
already out of his own words, and unavoidable conclusions therefrom, which I
must desire the Reader to carry along with him, that he may bear the sense, for
there is something in this matter) attended with the Spiritual subjection of
the Soul; unto him entirely is the principal Commandment in the first Table;
(which is the Principle of the People called Quakers, as aforesaid, as his own
words has concluded it) So in the second, the main thing enjoined, is the love
of our Neighbor: Now to love another, is to wish and to will unto him all
these things which we think good for him, and as far as lies in our power to
procure them for him; (yet this is not to love ones Neighbor as ones self, by
the Doctors leave, as they use to say, but as a man thinks it is good for his
Neighbor; So this is a wrong interpretation to the Commandment, and so a
taking away from thence, and it is too narrow, and has a restriction) And the
more perfect discoveries of things that a lover has, the more perfect and
excellent is the good that he wishes, and cannot but wish unto him whom he
loves. Now since that love must be of a very transcendent degree, and
proportioned to that wherewith we love our selves, it cannot be such, unless we
desire to communicate and impart unto our beloved, (as far as in us lies) that
which is the principal of all Goods; and since the knowledge of God, is life
eternal, and consequently the chiefest good one can wish unto another; (and
what that knowledge of God is, and wherein it consists, and where it lies, has
already been observed from his own words, viz. the great Dictate of Nature, the
Prescript of the Law, no less imprinted in the heart of man, than in the
Decalogue, viz. the measure of God in every man, which gives to know God, and
wherein only he is to be known, the knowledge of whom is eternal life) It
follows from the Dictates of this commanding and commanded Love, that it is not
Arbitrary for any to will or refuse to instruct another in this saving
Knowledge, (viz. the measure of God, the great Dictate of Nature, the Prescript
aforesaid to teach from this) if he be able so to do, but all are indispensibly
obliged to this performance of their duty.

Thus the Doctor has in terminis, or so many words, held forth the very same
thing, and no other than what the people called Quakers affirm, as their
Principle, viz. that [all] should know God, and what is his Will. That this is
the great Dictate of Nature, and Prescript of the Law; that this duty is no
less imprinted in the heart of man, than in the Decalogue, that this Knowledge
is saving, and to instruct one another in this saving knowledge, all that are
able, that is to say, such as have received a gift in whom the thing moves to
speak, which gives the ability, for this must be necessarily understood by
those words, and I suppose will be judged to be no straining of the
signification of those his words) are indispensibly obliged to the performance
of this as their duty, that is to say in the Scripture words, As every one has
received the gift, so minister the same one unto another, as good Stewards of
the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Moreover, that the [only] public,
authentic, and infallible Interpreter of the Holy Scripture, is he who is the
Author of them, from the breathings of whose Spirit it derives all its verity,
perspicuity and authority; and that therefore, as there was never any visible
Judge of Faith appointed by Christ, so neither is there any use or need of such
an Arbitrator. -- These things, and many more to the same purpose, (which I
have omitted, because of brevity) A friendly man has helped me to in his Book,
Entitled, Light shining out See Light shining out of darkness, page 76, 77.
and so onwards.
of Darkness, etc. printed in the year 1659. in which year the Doctor was
Vice Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and for profession of those called
Independants; as the Doct. Ingelo.
other Doctor is now of Eaton College: and so of the Collegiats.

I shall now take a third Doctor, one of the Episcopals, and a present Bishop,
by name, Doctor Jeremiah Tailor, now Bishop of Down and Connor in Ireland, and
a man of singular abilities and ingenuity, and very famous for a Book of his,
Entitled, Liberty of Prophesying, written in the life time of the late King
Charles, whose Chaplain he then professed himself to be, when those called the
Synod were sitting at Westminster, and had consulted the Directory and
Catechism, his words (in a Printed Book of three Sermons, preached by him at
Dublin in Ireland, out of the first of which these are taken) are these. --

Speaking from that Scripture, -- Except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 20. Which is the Text from which he preached, and
in particular of the Law of Moses, in, or according unto which stood the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which must be exceeded, he says,
-- When Christ brought life and immortality to light Evang. Righteous. Page 3.
through the Gospel, and has promised to us things greater than all our
explicit desires, bigger than the thoughts of our hearts, then says the
Aposile. -- (...).
Then we draw near to God, and by these we are enabled to do [all] that God
requires; and then he requires [all] that we can do; more love, and more
obedience, then he did of those, who for want of these helps, and these
Revelations, and these Promises which we have, but they had not, were but
imperfect persons, and could do but little more than humane Services; Christ
Page 4.
has taught us more, and promised to us more than ever was in the World known
or believed before him, and by the strengths and confidence of these, thrusts
us forwards in a holy and wise Oconomy, and plainly declares that we must serve
him by the measures of a new love, to do him honor, by wise and material
glorifications, be united to God by a new Nature, and made alive by a new
Birth, and fulfill [all] Righteousness; to be humble and meek [as] Christ; to be
merciful [as] our Heavenly Father is; to be pure [as] God is pure; to be
partaker of the Divine Nature; to be wholly renewed in the frame and temper of
our mind; to become people of a new heart, a [direct] new Creation, new
Principles, and a new Being, to do [better] then [all] the World before us
[ever] did, to love God [more] perfectly, to despise the World [more]
generously; to contend for the Faith [more] earnestly; for [all] this is but a
proper and [just] consequent of the [great] promises, which one Lawgiver came
to publish and [effect] for all the World of Believers and Disciples.

The matter which is here required, is certainly very great, for it is to be
[more] righteous than the Scribes and Pharisees, [more] holy than the Doctors
of the Law, than the Leaders of the Synagogues, than the wise Princes of the
Sanhedrim; [more] righteous than some that were Prophets and High Priests, than
some that kept the Ordinances of the Law [without blame], men that lay in
Sackcloth, and fasted much, and prayed more, and made Religion, Page 6.
and the study of the Law, the work of their lives. This was very much, but
Christians must do [more]; they did well, and we must do [better]; their Houses
were Marble, but our Houses must be gilded, and [fuller] of glory: but as the
matter is very great, so the necessity of it is the greatest in the World; it
must be so, or it must be [much] worse; unless it be [thus], we shall [never]
see the glorious Face of God. Here it concerns us to be [wise] and [fearful],
for the matter is not the question of an Oaken Garland, or a circle of Bays
and yellow Ribbond; it is not a question of Money or Land, Page 7.
nor of the vainer rewards of popular noise, and the undiscerning suffrages of
the people, who are contingent Judges of good and evil; but it is the [great]
stake of life eternal. We cannot be Christians, unless we be righteous by the
new measures: The righteousness of the Kingdom is now the [only] way to enter
into it; for the Sentence is fixed, and the Judgment is decretory, and the
Judge infallible, and the Decree irreversible; for I say unto you, said Christ,
Unless your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter the Kingdom. -- I have put these things
together, as they lie in the Bishops own order and words, that I might not seem
by dis-joyning them to vary his sense, whilst I repeat his words. In what
follows I shall be more short.

In speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees, wherein the Righteousness did
consist, and wherein it fell short of the Evangelical Righteousness, which he
says is required, he says, -- It was a great innocence, if they Page 15.
did not rob the poor, then they were righteous men, but thought themselves not
much concerned to acquire that [godlike] excellency, a Philanthropy and love to
[all] mankind. --

Again, in the conclusion of such his discriminations of them, he says, Page
18. Page 19.
This was the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and their Disciples,
the Jews, which because our Savior reproves not only as imperfect then, but
as criminal now, calling us unto a new Righteousness, the Righteousness of God,
the Law of the Spirit of Life, to the Kingdom of God, and the proper
Righteousness thereof. It concerns in the next place to look to the measures of
this. -- And as for these measures, he says, -- Ibid.


-- As for this in my Text, it is indeed our [great] measure, but it is not a
question of Good and Better, but of Good and Evil, Life and Death, Salvation
and Damnation; for unless our Righteousness be Page 20.
weighed by [new] weights, we shall be found [too] light, when God comes to
weigh the actions of all the World; and unless we be found [more] righteous
than they, we shall in no wise, that is, upon [no] other terms in the World
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Now concerning this we shall do very much
amiss, if we take our measures by the manners and practices of the many, who
call themselves Christians; for there are, as Nazianzen expresses it, the old
and the new Pharisee. I wish it were no worse among us, and that all Christians
were indeed righteous as they were, it would not be just nothing; but I am sure
that to bid defiance to the Laws of Christ, to laugh at Religion, to make
merriment at the debauchery and damnation of our Brother, is a state Page 21.
of evil, worse than that of the Scribes and Pharisees. And yet even among such
men, how impatient would they be, and how unreasonable would they think you to
be, if you should tell them, Then there is no present hopes or possibility that
in this state they are in they can be saved. But the World is too full of
Christians, whose Righteousness is very little, and their iniquities very
great: And now adays, a Christian is a man that comes to Church on Sundays,
and on the week following will do shameful things; being according to the
Jewish Proverbial Page 22.
reproof, as so many Mephibosheths, their Master teaches them to go uprightly,
but they still show their lame leg, and shame their Master; as if a man might
be a Christian, and yet be the vilest person in the World, doing such things,
for which the Laws of men have provided both smart and shame, and the Laws of
God have threatened the intolerable pains of an unsufferable and never dying
damnation.

And in his measure of the Evangelical Righteousness, he says, -- It must at
least be so much, (that is, as the Scribes and Pharisees) We must keep the
Letter of the [whole] Moral Law; We must do [all] that lies before us, [all]
that is in our hand; the outward work must Page 24.
be done; and it is not enough to say, My Heart is right, but my Hand went
wrong; a right Heart alone will not do it, or rather the Heart is not right
when the Hand is wrong, for [once for all] let us remember this, That
Christianity is the most profitable, the most useful, and the most bountiful
institution in the whole World; and the best definition Page 25.
I can give of it, is this, -- It is the Wisdom of God brought down among us to
do good to men. --

-- Christian Religion is something that is [not seen] it is the [hidden] Page
29.
man of the heart, (...).
it is God that dwells within. True Christians are men, who as the Chaldee
Oracle said, (...). Hos. 2. 14.
are clothed with a [great deal of mind]. -- I will speak unto their Heart. --
To preach the Gospel, (says he) where the Spirit is the Preacher, and the
Heart is the Disciple, and the Sermon is of Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. -- Our Service to God must not be in outward works and Scenes
of Religion, it must be something by which we become [like God], solemn
Prayers, and the Sacraments, and the Assemblies of the Faithful, Page 31.
and Fasting days, and Acts of external Worship, are the Solemnities Page 32.
and Rights of Religion, but the Religion of a Christian is in the [Heart and
Spirit]. -- And this is that by which Clemens Alexandrinus desired the
Righteousness of a Christian, (...).
[all] the parts and faculties which make up a man, must make up our Religion;
but the Heart is, Domus Principalis, it is the Court of the great King, and he
is properly served with [Interior] Graces, and Moral Virtues, with a humble and
a good Mind, with a bountiful Heart, and a willing Soul, and these command the
Eye, and give Law to the Hand, and make the Shoulders stoop; but anima cujusque
est quisque, (then he is within) A man's Soul is the man, and so is his
Religion, and so ye are bound to understand it. -- No external action can
purify the Soul, because its Nature Page 33.
and Operation being Spiritual, it can no more be changed by a Ceremony, by an
external Solemnity, than an Angel can be carressed with sweet meats, or a man's
Belly be filled with Music, or long Orations.

-- The Sum is this, -- No Christian does his duty to God, but he that serves
him with [all] his heart; and although it becomes us to fulfill [all]
righteousness, even the external also; yet that which makes us gracious in his
eye, is [not] the external; it is the [love] of the heart, and the [real]
change of the mind, and obedience of the Spirit: That Is the first great measure
of the Righteousness Evangelical. --

-- Our Righteousness must be the [purification], and the [perfection] of the
Spirit. -- A Christian must not look upon a Woman to lust after her; he must
hate sin in [all] dimensions, and in all distances, and in every Angle of its
Reception. -- To abstain from [all] appearances of evil. -- Charity vaunteth
not its self: And upon this Saint Basil says, That Ecclesiastic Persons (and
so every Christian in his proportion) ought not to go in splendid and vain
Ornaments; every thing that is not wisely useful or proportioned to the state
of the Christian, but ministers only to vanity, is a part of this (...); It is
a vaunting, which the charity and grace of a good Christian does not well
endure: it is no wonder, if Christianity be nice and curious, it is the
[cleanness] and the [purification] of the Soul; and Christ intends to present
his Church to God, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, N. B. or [any]
such thing; if there be any irregularity [less] than a wrinkle, the Evangelical
Righteousness does not allow it: And certain it is, he is dull of hearing, who
understands not the Voice of God, unless it be clamorous in an express and a
loud Commandment, proclaimed with Trumpets and Clarions on Mount Sinai: A
[willing] and an [obedient] ear understands the [still] Voice of Christ, and is
ready to obey [his] meaning at [half] a word, and that is the [Righteousnesse
Evangelical]. --

The Righteousness Evangelical must be like Christ's seamless Coat, Page 44.
[all] of a piece, from the top to the bottom; it must invest the [whole] Soul,
Misma, Dumah, Massah, said the Proverb of the Rabbis, it is this, and it is
the other, and it must be [all] it must be an [Universal] Righteousness; not a
little knot of holy Actions, scattered in our lives, and drawn into a sum at
the day of Judgment, but it must be a [state] of holiness.

-- To be zealous for God and for Religion is good, but that will not Page 45.
[legitimate] cruelty to our Brother. -- The Righteousness Evangelical is
another kind of thing, it is, a [holy] conversation, a [God-like] life, an
[Universal] obedience, a keeping [nothing] back from God; A Sanctification of
the [whole] man, and keeps not the Body [only] but the Soul and the Spirit,
unblameable to the coming of the Lord Jesus. -- These are such things, (says
he a little before) which if a man will stand to defend, possibly, a modest
reprover will be more ashamed, than an impudent offender. -- Page 40. Page 49.


Among the Hebrews, the Trees of the Lord did signify such trees as grew of
themselves; and all that are of God's planting, are such as have a [vital]
principle [within], and grow without constraint, (I do not know how to give a
fuller expression to the Principle of the People called Quakers, and indeed the
whole of them are very full, and as much as in so many words can well be
expressed) (...), one said it of the Christians, -- They obey the Laws, and by
the goodness of their lives [exceed] the Laws: And certain it is, no man has
the Righteousness Evangelical, if he resolves always to take all his liberty
in every thing that is merely lawful, or if he purpose to do no more than he
needs must, that is, no more than he is just commanded, for the reasons are
plain. --

The sum of all is this, The Righteousness Evangelical, is Page 67, 68.
the same with that which the Ancients called, (...), To live an Apostolic
life, that was the measure of Christians; the (...) Men that desired to please
God, that is, as Apostolius most admirably describes it: (...). Page 69.
Men who are curious of their very Eyes, temperate in their Tongue, and of a
mortified Body, and a humble Spirit; pure in their intentions, masters of their
passions; men who when they are injured, return honorable words, and when they
are lessened in their estates, increase in their charity; when they are abused,
they yet are courteous, and give entreaties; when they are hated, they pay
love; men that are dull in contentions, and quick in loving kindness; swift as
the feet of Asahel, and ready as the Chariots of Aminadabs. True Christians are
such as are crucified with Christ, and dead unto [all] sin; and finally place
their [whole] love on God, and for his sake on [all] mankind; so that it was
well said of Athanagoras, (...), Legate. pro Christianis.
No Christian is a wicked man, unless his life be a continual lie, unless he be
false to God and his Religion; For the Righteousness of the Gospel is in short
nothing else but a [Transcript] of the life of Christ, De Mathana Nahaliel, de
Nahaliel Bamoth, said Rabbi Josuah; Christ is the [Image] of God, and every
Christian is the Image of Christ, whose example is [imitable], but it is the
[best], and his Laws are the [most] perfect, but the [most] easy; and the
promises by which he invites our greater services, are [most] excellent, but
[most] true, and the reward shall be [hereafter]; but they shall abide for
ever; the threatenings of them that fall short of [this] Righteousness are
[most] terrible, but [most] certainly shall come to pass; they shall [never]
enter into the Kingdom of God, that is, their portion shall be shame, and an
[eternal] Prison, a flood of Brimstone, and cohabitation with Devils to
[eternal] Ages. And if this consideration will not prevail, there is [no] place
left for persuasion, and there is no use of reason; and the greatest hopes, and
greatest fears can be no Argument or Sanction of Laws; and the greatest good in
the World is [not] considerable, and the greatest evil is [not] formidable; but
if they be, there is no more to be said, if you would have your portion with
Christ, you must be righteous by [his] measures; and these are they that I have
told you.

So I have done with this Doctor or Bishop, unto whose words I suppose I need
not to add, seeing that in themselves they hold out what the People called
Quakers hold forth as their Principles, in as full and large expressions as
need to be signified; I shall quote one or two particulars more of Alexander
Henderson's, the great Scottish Minister, out of the printed Passages of the
Papers that passed between the late King Charles the First, and him, in
reference to Government, when the said King was at Newcastle, having cast
himself on the Scottish Army, when he came from Oxford: Also something out of
the said Kings Papers, and his Book to his Son, the now King Charles the
Second, called, EIKON ASILIK, And then I shall draw toward a conclusion. --

Alexander Henderson, in answer to the Kings first Paper dated at Newcastle,
Alex. Henders. Paper 1. Page 6.
May 29. 1646. and to that part of it which related to the Kings education and
settlement in that Religion which he professed, and the Kings Plea or
Allegation on that foot, says, -- I do not wonder, nor think it any strange
thing, that Your Majesty has not at first given place to a contrary
impression. I remember that the famous Johannes Picus Mirandula, proves by
irrefragable reasons, (which no rational man will contradict) That no man has
so much power over his own understanding, as to make himself believe what he
will, or to think that to be true which his reason tells him to be false;
much less is it possible for any man to have his reason commanded by his will.

2. It is a true saying of the Schoolmen, Voluntas imperat intellectui, quoad
exercitium, non quoad specificationem, Mine own will, or the will of another,
may command me to think upon a matter; but no will or command can constrain me
to determine otherwise then my reason teaches me. (Then no man ought to be
persecuted for his Religion; then no man can be forced into a Religion; then no
Religion ought to be forced; then every one ought freely toward God to
exercise his Religion: The matters are plain, I need not manage the words any
farther to prove this matter.)

The King in his reply to Alexander Henderson's Answer to the Kings Kings
Reply. Page 17.
first Paper, says, -- My taste cannot be guided by another man's palate; --
And as for your Romanorum Malleus, his saying, (which was Grosted of Lincoln,
whom A. Henderson in his Answer aforesaid to the Kings first Paper, calls
Romanorum Malleus, The Roman Maul, or the Maul of the Page 8.
Romans, or Papists; In these words, -- It was a hard saying of Romanorum
Malleus, Grosted of Lincoln, That Reformation was not to be expected, Nisi in
ore gladii cruentandi, (i. e). unless in the mouth of a bloody Sword.) It is
well you come off it with [yet this I may say], for it seems to imply, as if
you neither ought, nor would justify that bloody ungodly saying, (says the
King) which words, -- Yet I may say, -- were adjoined to the former, which he
speaks of Grosled, as some qualification, or further testimony of his (viz. A.
Henderson's) dislike of that bloody Principle, which the King takes notice of,
as aforesaid, as that which was to be detested, and which he detested and
argued against, as being his own case, as he understood the matters managed
against him in that War, of which the pulling up of Episcopacy, or Bishops,
Root and Branch, and reforming of Religion, according to the Word of God, Page
20.
was part of the Covenant: And further the King tells him in the latter end of
that his Reply, -- He (says the King, speaking of his Father King King James
in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, page 46, 47. says, -- But as I well
allow of the Hierarchy of the Church, for the distinction of Order, (for so I
understand it) so I utterly deny that there is any Earthly Monarch thereof,
whose word must be a Law, and who cannot err in his Sentence, by an
infallibility of Spirit: Because earthly Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs;
it does not follow that the Church must have a visible Monarch too; for the
World has not one temporal Monarch; Christ is his Churches Monarch, and the
Holy Ghost his Deputy. The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, but ye shall
not be so, Luke 22. 25. Christ did not promise before his Ascension, to leave
Peter with them, to direct and instruct them in all things, but he promised to
send the Holy Ghost unto them for that end. --

And in his Speech to the Parliament, 1609. he says, -- It is a sure rule in
Divinity, That God never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed,
etc. And in his Apology, aforesaid, page 4. speaking of such Papists as took
the Oath, he says thus, -- I have a good proof, that I intended no persecution
against them for Conscience Sake, but only desired to be secured for Civil
Obedience, which for Conscience cause they were bound to perform.-And in his
Expos. Rev. 20. printed 1588, and 1603. he says, The compassing of the Saints,
and the besieging of the beloved City, declares unto us a certain note of a
false Church to be persecution; for they came to seek the faithful; the
faithful are those that are sought, the wicked are the besiegers, and the
faithful besieged. --


James, whom Alex. Henderson had quoted in reference to the Argument he was
upon, in relation to Religion) would tell you, -- That a bloody Reformation was
never lawful, as not warranted by God's Word; and that Preces and Lacrimae sunt
Arma Ecclesiae, (that is) Prayers and Tears are the Arms of the Church. -- I
need say nothing farther to demonstrate this matter also seeing that on both
hands, in the Kings, and A. Henderson's Papers, there is a plain detestation of
Persecution. To which let me ad some few instances of the said Kings, in his
said EIKON ASILIK, which may make up this sum.

In that part of it which relates to the coming in of the Scottish Army, Head
the 13th. the King says, -- Nor do I know any such tough and malignant humors
in the constitution of the English Church, which gentler Applications than
those of an Army (persecution and force are equivocal in their nature, though
not in measure to an Army; and so what is said of the one, may be as truly said
of the other, or the same word to the one, says the same to the other) might
not easily have removed, nor is it so proper to hew out Religious Reformations
by the Sword, as to pollish them by fair and equal Disputations, Page 93.
amongst those who are most concerned in the differences, whom [not] Force,
[but] Reason ought to convince: And sure, in matters of Religion, those Truths
gain most on men's Judgments and Consciences which are least urged with secular
violence, which weakens Truth with prejudices. -- And if Presbytery in such a
Supremacy be an institution of Christ, sure it differs from all others, and is
the first and only point of Christianity that was to be planted, and watered
with so much English blood, whose effusions run in a stream so contrary to that
of the Primitive Planters, both of Christianity and Episcopacy, which was with
[patience], shedding of their own blood, not [violent] drawing of other men's.
Sure there is [too] much of man in it to have [much] of Christ. -- Nor may any
men, I think (says the King) without sin and presumption Page 95.
forcibly endeavor to cast the Churches, under my care and tuition, into the
moulds they have fancied and fashioned to their designs, till they have first
gained my consent, and resolved both my own and other men's Consciences, by the
strength of their Reasons; other violent motions which are neither Page 96.
[Manly, Christian, nor Loyal] shall never either shake or settle my Religion,
nor any man's else who knows what Religion means, and how far it is removed from
all Faction, whose proper engine is [Force] the Arbitrator of [Beasts] not of
[reasonable] Men.

Also in reference to the Covenant under the 14th Head, he says, -- The
enjoining of Oaths upon the people must needs in things doubtful be dangerous,
Page 100.
as in things unlawful damnable. -- Also in the Prayer adjoining to that Head,
he says, -- Make them at length seriously to consider that nothing [violent]
and [injurious] can be [religious]. Page 108.


And upon the Head of the many jealousies raised, and scandals cast upon him,
to stir up the people against him, being the 15th Head, he says, -- In point
of true conscientious tenderness, I have often declared how little I have desired
my Laws and Scepter should entrench on Gods Sovereignty, which is the only King
of men's Consciences; and yet he has laid such restraints upon men, as commands
them to be subject for Conscience Sake, giving no man liberty to break the Law
established further than with meekness and patience, they are content to suffer
the penalties annexed, rather than disturb the public peace. --

And upon that Head of the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book, being the
16th, he says, -- That these men (I say) should so suddenly change the Liturgy
into a Directory (speaking of that alteration of the one to the other by those
men, who cried out of the rigor of the Laws and Bishops, which suffered them
not to use the liberty of their Consciences in not using the Service Book, who
lately had either subscribed to, used, and maintained, or refused to use it in
the Page before, and now applies these words to them) as if the Spirit needed
help for invention, though not for expressions; As if a matter prescribed did
not as much stint and obstruct the Spirit, as if it were clothed in, or
confined to fit words, -- which he calls in the next words Legerdemain, to
deceive the vulgar: And in the next Paragraph, he says, -- Thus I see that no
men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exacters on others to
conform to their illegal Novelties, than such whose pride was formerly least
disposed to the obedience of lawful Constitutions, and whose licentious humors
most pretended conscientious Liberties. -- And in the Prayer after that Head,
he says, -- Evermore defend thy Church from blind Zeal, and over-bold devotion.

Then upon the 18th Head, which speaks of Uxbridge Treaty, etc. he Page 132.
Page 150. Page 151. Page 159.
says, as to his Sword and Reason, -- Having greater confidence of my Reason
than my Sword; -- And, it being an office not only of humanity, rather to use
Reason than Force, but also of Christianity, to seek peace and ensue it. And
the highest tide of success set me not above a Treaty, nor the lowest ebb below
a Fight; Though I never thought it any sign of true valor to be prodigal of
men's lives, rather then to be drawn to produce our own Reasons, or to subscribe
to other men's. And in the Prayer, -- O thou that art the God of Reason.

In that to the now King, then Prince of Wales, being the 27th Head, he says,
-- Take heed of abetting any Factions, or applying to any public
discriminations in matters of Religion, contrary to what is your Judgment, and
the Church well settled; your partial adhering, as Head, to any one side, gains
you not so great advantages in some men's hearts, (who are prone to be of their
Kings Religion) as it loses you in others who think themselves and Page 229:
the Profession first despised, then persecuted by you. -- Your Prerogative is
best showed and exercised in remitting, then exacting the rigor of the Laws,
there being nothing worse than Legal Tyranny. -- Beware of exasperating any
Faction by the crosness and asperity of some men's passions, humors, and
private Opinions employed by you, grounded only upon the differences in lesser
matters, which are but the skirts and suburbs of Religion, wherein a charitable
connivance, and Christian Toleration often dissipates their strength, whom
rougher opposition fortifies; and puts the despised and oppressed Party into
such Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full revenge on those they
count their Persecutors; who are commonly assisted by that vulgar
commiseration, which attends all that are said to suffer under the notion of
Religion. -- The more conscious you shall be to your own merits* upon your
people, Page 225.
the more prone you shall be to expect all love and loyalty from them; And to
inflict no punishment upon them for former miscarriages: You will have more
inward complacency in pardoning one, than in punishing a thousand. --

And in his Meditations upon Death, after the Votes of Non Addresses, Head the
28th, he says, -- I can both forgive them (to wit) those he calls Page 239.
his Destroyers, speaking of his Charity, which was his noblest revenge upon
them, by which he says, I thank God I can both forgive them and pray for them,
that God would not impute my blood unto them, further than to convince them
what need they have of Christ's blood to wash their Souls from the guilt of
shedding mine. -- The Will of God has confined and concluded mine; I shall
have the pleasure of dying without any pleasure of desired vengeance. -- And in
that Head, of the denying of his Chaplains their attendance on him, being the
24th, he says, They that envy my being a Page 198. Page 189, 190, 191.
King, are loath I should be a Christian, whilst they seek to deprive me of all
things else, they are afraid I should save my Soul. -- I pity all of them, I
despise none, only I thought I might have leave to make choice of some for my
special Attendants, who were best approved in my Judgment, and most suitable to
my affection, for I held it better to seem undevout, and to hear no men's
praying, then to be forced, or seem to comply with those Petitions, to which
the heart cannot consent, nor tongue say Amen, without contradicting a man's own
understanding, or belying his own Soul.

Lastly, -- Alexander Henderson in his second Paper to the King, thus Alex.
Henders second Paper to the King, page 34, 35.
speaks, Concerning the forcing of Conscience, which I pretermitted in my other
Paper, I am forced now, but without forcing of my Conscience to speak of: Our
Conscience may be said to be forced, either by our selves, or by others; by our
selves, when we stop the ear of our Conscience, and will not hearken or give
place to information, resolving obstinately, Ne si persuaseris persuadebis,
which is no less than a resisting of the Holy Ghost, and the hardening of our
hearts. (2.) Or when we stop the mouth, and suppress the clamor of our
Conscience, resolving rather to suffer the Worm to gnaw, and the fire to burn
inwardly, than to make confession of that we are convinced to be Truth. (3.) Or
when we sear our Conscience as with a hot Iron, that it becomes senseless,
which is the punishment of the former, unto which is opposed the truly tender
Conscience, such as Josiah had, 2 Kings 22. 19. Again (1.) our Conscience is
said to be forced by others, when they obtrude upon us what is in it self evil
and unlawful; the other is, by doing it against a Dictate of Conscience, which
is a contempt of God, whose Vicegerent it is. (2.) Or when others urge us to do
that which in it self good, or may lawfully be done, but through error of
Conscience we judge it to be evil and unlawful; if in this case, we do not that
which is pressed upon us, we sin, because the thing is good and lawful: And if we
do it, we sin, because we do against our Consciences, which in this case
binds, but obliges not: And yet there is a way to escape out of this
Laborynth, it being repugnant to the equity of the Will of God, to lay a
necessity of sinning upon any man; the only way is, to lay aside such a
Conscience, it being a part of the old Man, which we are commanded to put off;
otherwise we being sufficiently informed, and yet cleaving to our old error, we
rather do violence to our Conscience our selves, than suffer violence from
others.

Unto this of the late Kings, and Alexander Hendersons, let me add a few
sayings of the Fathers, -- Tertullian writes thus to Scapula, Quia Religionis
non sit, cogere Religionem, quae sponte fuscipi debeat, non vi.
It appertains not to Religion to force Religion, which ought to be freely
taken up, not by force.

And in his second Book against Marcian, he says, Non imponere^ur lex ei, qui
non habet obsequium debitum legi in sua potestate, eadem arbitrii libertas and
potestas quae fuit in Adamo, etiam nunc efficit victorem de eodem Diabolo.
A Law should not be imposed on him, who has it not in his power to do what
the Law requires: the same liberty of the Will and Power which was in Adam,
even now accomplishes dominion over the same Devil. -- And in his fourth Book
against Marcian, he says, Regnum Dei intra vos est, quis non ita
interpretabitur, intra vos est, id est, in manu, in potestate vestra, si
audiatis, si faciatis Dei praeceptum.
The Kingdom of God is within you, who will not interpret, is within you, in
your hand, in your power, if you hear, if you do what God commands.

And says Cyprian in his Sermon about Baptism, Nos quod agendum est scire and
quod scimus facere posse.
We know what we should do, and we can do what we know.

Also Arnobius says, Injustum est extorquere invitis in contrarium voluntatis,
and inculcare quod nolint.
It is an unjust thing to force an unwilling mind to that which is contrary to
its will, and to press that which men would not have.

Lactantius concerning true Worship, cap. 8. says, Nobis autem lex Dei
revelata est, quae perinde ut stellae Nautis noctu, nobis praelucer ad viam
sapientiae. Lex illa est recta ratio, naturae congruus, diffusa in omnes,
constans, sempite^na, quae vocat ad officium, jubendo, vitando, a fraud
deterriat.
The Law of God is revealed to us, which enlightens, or shows the way of
Wisdom, as the Stars do the Mariner in the dark night: That Law (to wit, the
Law of God) is right Reason, agreeing with Nature, diffused or shed abroad in
all, or put into every one, constant, eternal, which by requiring, forbidding
and deterring from deceit, calls to duty.

In nobis viam esse perveniendi ad Dei notitiam, probatur, quia Verbum Dei
intra cor tuum est, inquit Moses, and Regnum Dei intra vos est, inquit
Christus, si autem fides and Regnum Dei in nobis est, utique intelligere
possumus Verbum Patris.
And Athanasius against the Gentiles thus expresses himself, The way to come
or attain unto the knowledge of God, is within us; it is proved, because (says
Moses) the Word of God is within thy heart; And Christ says, The Kingdom of
God is within you: If Faith, and the Kingdom of God be within us, then we may
and can understand the Word of the Father, page 25. Again in his first Tome, p.
838. he says Cum ultronius sit hominum motus, and sui arbitrii meus, in te
situm est, velisne temet ipsum lolium fieri, and pabulum brutorum animalium, an
potius in frumentum mutari.
Since the motion of men is spontaneous, and the mind of thy Will is placed in
thee, will thou be made Tares and Fodder for bruit Beasts, or rather be changed
into Corn.

And says Seneca in his second Chapter concerning a blessed life, Argumentum
pessimi turba est quaeramus quid op^^me factum sit, non quid usitatissimum, and
quid nos in possess^onem aeternae foelicitatis constituat, non quid vulgo
veritatis pessimo interpreti probatum sit. Habeo melius certiusque lumen, quo a
falsis vera dijudicem. Animi bo^um animus inveniat.
The multitude is the worst Argument; let us enquire what best is to be done,
not what most usually (or commonly) is done, and that may settle us in the
possession of everlasting happiness, not what is allowed by the vulgar, the
worst interpreters of Truth; I have (says he) a better and more certain light,
by which I may judge the truth from falsehood; the good of the mind the mind can
find out. -- Again, Epist. 41. he says, Stultum est optare cum possis a te
impetrare. Proprius est a te Deus, tecum est, intu^ est. Sacer intra nos
Spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque nostrorum costos, hic procul a nobis
^^actatus est, ita nos ipse t^actat.
It is a foolish thing for thee to wish what by thee cannot be obtained: God is
near thee; and he is in thee; the Holy Spirit sits, or resides within us, or
dwells, the observer of our good and evil actions: as he is dealt withal by us,
he deals with us. -- And Epist. 43. ^anito^es Conscientia nostra non superbia
opposuit O te miserum si contemnis hunc testem.
Our Conscience, not pride, has put keepers. O miserable man art thou, if thou
despisest these witnesses. -- And Epist. 66. Nihil honestum quod ab invito,
quod a coacto fit. Omne honestum voluntarium est.
There is nothing that is honest comes from an unwilling and constrained man.
Every honest thing is a free thing. -- See also Epist. 76, 92. Moreover Erras
enim si existimas nobiscum vitia nasci, supervenerunt. Nulli nos vitio natura
conciliat.
thou errest (says he, Epist. 94.) if thou think vice to be born with us,
they come over, (or after); Nature makes Friends with no vice. -- Lastly,
Epist. 98. he says, Licet reve^ti in viam, licet in integrum restitui, nos
modo purgemus animum, siquamurque naturam.
We may return into the Way, we may be made whole if we cleanse our mind and
follow Nature. Epist. 150. Sed lucescere ^i velimus potest.
If we will we can enlighten our minds.

And (says he) in his Book concerning the Benefic. Chap. 17. Maximum hoc
habemus naturae meritum, quod virtus in omnium animos lumen suum praemittit,
etiam qui non siquuntur illam, vidiat.
We have this great gift of Nature, that Virtue has sent before its light into
the minds of all, even they that follow her not, see her.

And says Augustine on John, Mentium Rex Deus est.
God is the King of minds.

And says Lactantius again, Quis mihi imponat necessitatem vel credendi quod
nolim, vel quod velim non credendi.
Who can impose a necessity on me either of believing what I will not, or of
not believing what I will? Again, Nihil tam voluntarium quam Religio, in qua si
animus ave^sus est, jam sublata est, jam nulla est.
Nothing is so voluntary as Religion, in which if the mind be averse, its taken
away (or gone) presently there is none.

King Theoderike said, as Casiodore reports, in his Epist. 27. Religionem
imperare non possumus, quia nemo cogitu^^ut credat invitus.
We cannot command Religion, because no man is compelled to believe against his
will.

Velcurior, Chap. 26. has it thus, Ad legem naturae referuntur princip^a
practica, ut december praecepta decalogi. Causa efficiens hujus legis est Deus
ipse qui eam insc^ip sit cordi, and animo, and intellectui cujus libet homi^is
nascentis, ut ejus voluntatem excitet ad bona, and absterreat a malo. Praecepta
Legis naturae. 1. Deum venera^i, 2. Vivere honest. 3. Patrie magistratibus,
parentibus obedire. 4. Laedere neminem. 5. Suum cuique t^ibuere. 6. Rebus
communitur uti quatenus fieri potest. 7. Tollere nocentes e medio propter
servandum publicam salutem. 8. Rerum dominia, proprietates, possessiones, and
usum distinguere quibus communiter alioqui non licet uti.
Practicable Principles belong to the Law of Nature, as the ten Commandments;
the efficient cause (says it) of this Law is God himself, who writes it in the
heart, and in the mind, and in the understanding of every one that is born,
that it may stir its mind to good things, and drive it from the evil, Romans 2.
The Precepts of the Law of Nature are. 1. To worship God. 2. To live honestly.
3. To obey ones Country, Magistrates, Parents. 4. To hurt none. 5. To give to
every one their due, 6. To have things in common as far forth as may be lawful
or conveniently done. 7. To remove the guilty out of the midst, for the public
safety. 8. To distinguish the Lordships, Proprieties, Possessions, and use of
things otherwise community cannot be used. And Chap. 27. Dictamen rationis est
vis ipsius, quo dictat quasi and praecipit, seu admonet facere bonum and
omietere malum. Officium ejus ex generali Lege Naturae est elicere quid
particulate.
The Dictatorship or Authoritativeness of Reason, is its own force by which it
speaks, and as it were, commands or admonishes to do good, or to omit evil; its
office from the general Law of Nature, is to choose that which is particular, or
to draw forth particulars.

Augustine mentions a Superior and Inferior Reason, Augustinus nominat rationem
superiorem, and inferiorem, superior ratio est lumen humanae naturae and quasi
vis dictans and praescribens divina, aeterna, mere honesta. Ut cum Conscientia
dixit, peccatum hoc est fugiendum, dictamen rationis ponit causum, quia hoc
peccatum offendit Deum, quia turpe est, and contra naturae Legem, quia hominis
natura indignum est, cum Conscientia dicit hoc justum opus est faciendum,
dictamen ponit rationem, quia hoc justum opus praecipit Deus, quia est
pulchrum, quia est homine dignissimum.
The Superior is the Light of humane nature, as it were a power dictating or
prescribing divine, eternal, merely honest things; As when Conscience says,
This sin is to be avoided, the Dictatorship, or Authoritativeness, puts the
cause why; Such a sin offends God, because it is filthy, and contrary to the
Law of Nature, because it is unworthy of, or unbecoming the nature of man.

Conscience says, This just work is to be done, the Dictamen or
Authoritativeness, puts or gives the reason, because God has commanded this
just work, because it is beautiful, because it is most worthy or becoming a man.

Justin Martyr in his defense to Antoninus, says thus, Porro ab justio Deus
genus humanum ita creavit, ut intelligentia praeditum esset, and arbitrii
liberil potestate delectum, tum vera consertandi, tum been agendi obtineret.
Uno circa excusatione nulla defendi possunt mortales apud Deum, rationales enim
and ad contemplationem oppositi per eam creati.
Moreover God at first so created man, that he was endued with understanding,
and obtained choice in the power of his free will, as well to follow after true
things as to do well; wherefore mortals by no excuse can defend themselves
before God, or are left without excuse, for he made them reasonable and fit to
contemplate.

And in his Triphon, he says, Volens namque Deus and Angelos and Homines per
liberum arbitrii delectum suae quemque esse potestatis, ut quisque quae pro
virili sua part posset, faceret, tales cos creavit, quo placita sibi si
deligissent a corruptione and poena omnis liberi conservarentur, sin malign
agerent, sicuti visum illi esset, quisquis torqueretur: Ac condidit Deus
homines ut si vitam ipsius volunta i^ attemperarent, cum illo degerent
regnarentque impatibiles and immortales.
For God willing that every one, both Angels and Men, should be at their own
liberty, by the free choice of their will, he so created them, that every one
might do what he would; if they choose those things pleasing to him, they should
be kept free from corruption and punishment; but if they did wickedly, he would
punish them as he pleased: God so created man, that if they ordered this life
to his will, with him they should dwell and reign impatible (or unchangeable)
and immortal.

Hillary also against Auxentius writes thus, The Christian Church does not
persecute, but is persecuted, and lamentable it is to see the great folly of
these times, and to sigh at the foolish Opinion of this World, in that men
think by humane aid to help God, and with worldly pomp and power to undertake
to defend the Christian Church; I ask you Bishops, What help used the Apostles
in the publishing of the Gospel? With the aid of what power did they preach
Christ, and converted the Heathen from their idolatry to God? When they were
imprisoned, and lay in chains, did they praise and give thanks to God for any
Dignities, Graces, or Favors received from the Court? Or do you think that
Paul went about with Regal Mandates, or Kingly Authority to gather and
establish the Church of Christ? Sought he protection from New Vespasian? etc.
The Apostles wrought with their hands for their own maintenance, traveling by
Land and Water from Town to City to preach Christ; yea, the more they were
forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ. But now alas! Humane help
must assist and protect the Faith, and give the same countenance: to and by
vain and worldly honors do men seek to defend the Church of Christ, as if he
by his power were unable to perform it.

And against Arius, he says, The Church now which formerly by enduring misery
and imprisonment, was known to be a true Church, does now terrify others by
imprisonment, banishment and misery, and boasts that she is highly esteemed
of the World, whereas the true Church cannot but be hated of the same.

Tertullian against Scapula again writes this, It agrees both with humane
equity, and natural reason, that every man worship God uncompelled, and believe
what he will; for another man's Religion, or belief neither hurts any, nor
profits any man; neither beseems it any Religion to compel another to be of
their Religion, which willingly and freely should be embraced, and not by
constraint, forasmuch as the offerings were required of those that freely and
with a good will offered, and not from the contrary.

Jerome in his Proemium upon Jeremiah, Book the fourth, says, Heresy must be
cut off with the Sword of the Spirit; all Sons and Disciples of misled
Heretics, let us strike through with the Arrows of the Spirit, that is, with
the Testimonies of Holy Scriptures; the slaughter of Heretics is by the Word
of God.

Brutius on 1 Cor. 3. says, No man has power to make urging Laws to
Christians whereby to bind their Consciences, for willingly, freely and
uncompelled, with a ready desire, and cheerful mind, must those that come run
unto Christ.

Luther in his Book of the Civil Magistrate, says, The Laws of Civil
Government extend no further than on the Body or Goods, and to that which is
External, for over the Soul God will not suffer any man to rule, only he
himself will rule; therefore wheresoever the Civil Magistrate does undertake to
give Laws to the Soul and Consciences of men, he usurpeth that Government to
himself, which appertains to God.

Again, 1 Kings 6. in building of the Temple there was no sound of Iron heard;
to signify that Christ will have in his Church a free and willing people, not
compelled and constrained by Laws and Statutes.

Again upon Luke 22. he says, It is not the true Catholic Church that is
defended by the secular Arm, or humane Power, but the false and feigned Church,
which although it carries the name of a Church, yet it denies the power thereof.

Again, upon Psalm 17. he says, The true Church of Christ knows no Brachium
Seculare, (or Secular Arm) which the Bishops now adays chiefly use.

Again in his Postil of the first Sunday after the Epiphany, he says, If the
Civil Magistrate would command me to believe thus or thus, I would answer him
after this manner, Lord or Sir, look you unto your Civil or Worldly Government,
your power extends not so far to command any thing in Gods Kingdom, therefore
herein I may not hear you; for if you cannot suffer any man should usurp
authority where you have to command, how do you think God should suffer you to
thrust him from his Seat, and to set your self therein?

The Puritans (so called) in their Answer to the Admonition to the Parliament,
in King James his time, page 109. say, The Papists nor others, neither
constrainedly nor customarily communicate in the Mysteries of Salvation. And in
their supplication printed 1609. page 21. etc. they write much for Tolleration.

The Papists (so called) are quoted in a Book entitled, Persecution for
Religion condemned, etc. printed 1615, and 1620. and reprinted 1662. (wherein
are also many of the things aforesaid) I say they are quoted to have written in
a Book of theirs about that time published, relating to the Oath of Allegiance,
etc. then put (viz.) in the days of King James after this manner, Moreover the
means which Almighty God appointed his Officers to use in the Conversion of
Kingdoms and People, was Humility, Patience, Charity, etc. saying, Behold I
send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10. 16. He did not say, I send
you as Wolves among Sheep, to kill, imprison, to spoil and devour these unto
whom they were sent. Again, verse. 7. he says, They to whom I send you, will
deliver you up to Councels, and in their Synagogues they will scourge you, and
to Presidents and Kings shall you be led for my sake. He does not say, You whom
I send shall deliver the people (whom you ought to convert) unto Councels, and
to put them in Prisons, and lead them to Presidents and Tribunal Seats, and
make their Religion Felony and Treason. Again he says, verse. 12. When ye enter
into the House, salute it, saying, Peace be unto this House. He does not say,
Ye shall send Pursevants to ransack and spoil the House. Again he says, John
10. The good Pastor gives his life for his Sheep; The Thief comes not but to
steal, kill, and destroy. He does not say, The Thief gives his Life for his
Sheep, and the good Pastor comes not but to steal, kill, and destroy, etc.

The same Book, (viz. Persecution for Religion condemned, etc.) says of
Stephen King of Poland, that he should say, I am King of Men, not of
Consciences, a Commander of Bodies and not of Souls.

And that the King of Bohemia had thus written, viz. Notwithstanding the
success of the latter times, wherein sundry Opinions have been hatched about
the Subject of Religion, may make one clearly discern with his eye, and (as it
were) touch with his finger; that according to the verity of holy Scripture,
and a Maxim heretofore held and maintained by the Ancient Doctors of the
Church, That men's Consciences ought in no sort to be violated, urged, or
constrained; and whenever men have attempted any thing by this violent
course, whether openly or by secret means; the issue has been pernicious, and
the cause of great and wonderful innovations in the principallest and mightiest
Kingdoms and Countries of all Christendom, etc. And further says that Book, he
says, So that once more we do protest before God and the whole World, that
from this time forwards we are firmly resolved not to persecute, or molest, or
suffer to be persecuted or violated any person whatsoever for matter of
Religion, no not they that profess themselves to be of the Roman Church,
neither to trouble or disturb them in the exercise of their Religion, so they
live conformable to the Laws of the States, etc.

William Greenhil of this day in his Exposition on the 11th of Ezech. page 424.
says, You know who said, In the things of the mind we look for no compulsion,
but that of Light and Reason. He is of the Independants so called.

And Epictetus that famous Philosopher, in his Dissertations, collected by
Arrians, Book 1. Chap. 14. thus says, ( (...).
) When ye have shut your Gates, and made darkness within, that is to say, are
retired, do not say that ye are alone, for ye are not alone, but God is within,
and your genius (or the Principle of God) what need have they of light to see
to do? (as much as to say, God and the Principle of him see what you do.)

And Aristotle (to add no more) in the 5th Book of Ethics, chap. 8. says, (
(...).
) A man acts justly or unjustly, as he acts freely; but when constrainedly, he
does neither justly nor unjustly, but by accident.

And so I have done with Alexander Henderson and these Doctors, and the Book
and Papers of the late King, and these sayings of the Ancient, having through
all convinced in their very words, or their very words holding forth the
Principles of the People called Quakers; as I have in the words of others in
preceding Generations: if so be that yet men will reflect, or take a view of
Truth, as it looks through their own Glass, though they will not take it in
another. I shall now bring it through the Protestant Religion, or that on
which the name Protestant is grounded, and some few more instances of the Ages
that are past, and so conclude this my long yet necessary tract of these things
which are so eminent and fit to be considered.

John Milton in his Treatises of the power of the Civil Magistrate in causes
Ecclesiastical, has excellently pitched the bottom of this matter, It cannot
be denied, (says he) being the main foundation of our Protestant Religion,
That we of these Ages having no divine Rule or Authority from without us,
warrantable to one another as a common ground, but the Holy Scripture, and no
other within us, but the illumination of the Holy Spirit, so interpreting that
Scripture as warrantable only to our selves, and to such whose Consciences we
can so persuade, can have no other ground in matters of Religion, but only from
the Scriptures. And these being not possible to be understood without this
divine Illumination, which no man can know at all times to be in himself, much
less to be at any time for certain in any other; it follows clearly that no
man, or body of men in these times can be the infallible Judges, or determiners
in matters of Religion to any other men's Consciences but their own. And again
(says he) with good cause therefore it is the general consent of all sound
Protestant Writers, That neither Traditions, Councels, nor Canons of any
visible Church, much less Edicts of any Magistrates, or Civil Session, but the
Scripture only can be the final Judge or Rule in matters of Religion, and that
only in the Conscience of every Christian to himself. Which protestation (says
he) made by the first public Reformers of our Religion against the Imperial
Edicts of Charles the fifth, imposing Church Traditions without Scripture, gave
the first beginning of the name Protestant, and with that name has ever been
received this Doctrine, which prefers the Scripture before the Church, and
acknowledges none but the Scripture the sole Interpreter of its self to the
Conscience. -- For if the Church be not sufficient to be implicitly believed,
as we hold it is not, what can there else be named of more Authority than the
Church, but the Conscience, than which God only is greater, 1 John 3. 20. But
if any man shall pretend (says he) that the Scripture judges to his Conscience
for other men; he makes himself greater, not only than the Church, but also
than the Scripture, than the Consciences of other men. A presumption (says he)
too high for any mortal, since every true Christian is able to give a reason of
his Faith, has the Word of God before him, the promised Holy Spirit, and the
mind of Christ within him, 1 Cor. 2. 16. A much better and safer guide of
Conscience, (says he) which as far as concerns himself, he may far more
certainly know then any outward rule inposed on him by others, whom he inwardly
either knows not, nor can know; at least knows nothing of them more sure than
this one thing, That they cannot be his Judges in Religion, 1 Cor. 2. 15. The
Spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is judged of no man; chiefly
for this cause do all true Protestants account the Pope Antichrist, for that he
assumes to himself this infallibility over both the Conscience and the
Scripture, sitting in the Temple of God, as it were opposite to God, and
exalting himself over all that is called God, or is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 4.
That is to say, not only above all Judges and Magistrates, who though they be
called Godds, are far beneath infallible, but also above God himself, by giving
Law both to the Scripture, to the Conscience, and to the Spirit it self of God
within us; when as we find, James 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy: who art thou that judge another? That Christ is the only
Lawgiver of his Church, and that it is here meant in Religious matters, no
well-grounded Christian will deny. Thus also St. Paul, Romans 14. 4. Who art thou
that judge the Servant of another? to his own Lord he stands or falls;
but he shall stand, for God is able to make him stand. As therefore of one
beyond expression bold and presumptuous, both these Apostles demand, Who art
thou that presumest to impose [other] Law or Judgment in Religion than the only
Lawgiver and Judge Jesus Christ, who can only save, and can destroy, gives to
the Conscience? And the forecited place to the Thessalonians, by compared
effects resolves us, That be he or they, who or wherever they be, or can be,
they are of far less Authority than the Church, whom in these things, as
Protestants, they receive not; and yet no less Antichrist in this main point of
Antichristianism; no less Pope or Popedom than he at Rome, if not much more, by
setting up Supreme Interpreters of Scripture, either those Doctors whom they
follow, or which is far worse themselves, as a Civil Papacy, assuming
unaccountable Supremacy to themselves, not in Civil only, but Ecclesiastical
Causes. Seeing then that in matters of Religion, as has been proved, none can
judge or determine here on earth, no not Church-Governors themselves, against
the Consciences of other Believers; my inference is, or rather not mine but our
Savior's own, that in those cases they neither can command, nor use restraint,
lest they run rashly on a pernicious consequence forwarned in that Parable,
Mat. 13. 26, to 31. Lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the
Wheat with them, let both grow together until the Harvest; and in the time of
Harvest, I will say to the Reapers, Gather ye together Page 13.
first the Tares, etc. Whereby he declares that this work, neither his own
Ministers, nor any else can discerningly enough, or judgingly perform, without
his own immediate direction in his own fit season, and they ought till then not
to attempt it; which is further confirmed, 2 Cor. 1. 14. Not that we have
dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your joy. If the Apostles had no
dominion or constraining power over Faith or Conscience, much less have
ordinary Ministers. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Feeding the Flock of God, not by
constraint, etc. neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage.

Much more I might have produced as to this Author, even the whole Discourse,
wherein he fully convinces what in his Title page he asserts, to wit, That it
is not lawful for any power on earth to compel in matters of Religion. He is
one who pretends to the Church of Christ, but not by compulsion to Church-ship,
or matters of Religion; as this his Treatise shows him.

Concerning God, Doctor Ingelo produces Plotin, as expressing him Doctor
Ingelo, See Tabu. Bentivo. and V^an under the respective Heads of this and that
which follows.
to be (...), The Root of the Soul; And Pithagoras, (...), The Fountain of
everlasting Nature.

Concerning a man's knowing of himself, he says, He has called the Governor of
Tapinophorosine, or Humility, because the knowledge of ones self is the natural
root of Humility. Now what gives the knowledge of a man's self, but that which
searches the Heart? And what is the natural root of Humility, but the Fountain
of everlasting Nature, from which humility springs, of whose fullness we have
all received grace for grace, says the Apostle, in whom the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, who says, Learn of me, for I am lowly and meek. And
behold the King comes meek, riding on an Ass, the Foal of an Ass; who is the
high and lofty One, who inhabiteth Isa. 57. 1^.
Eternity, whose Name is Holy, who dwells in the high and holy Heavens; in
him also that is of an humble and contrite Spirit, to revive the heart of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones, whose Nature is
Everlasting; and who is the Spring thereof, but he who is without beginning of
days, or end of life, who is a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedeck, (as aforesaid) from whom every thing that is like him springs.

Concerning Conscience, he says, It is a natural Principle (and what that
Nature is I have already showed) not to be eradicated by any Act of man, (so it
is Eternal, for what man cannot eradicate, is not of man) a severe reprover,
and sharp Corrector of those bold sinners who offer violence to it, (by the
Doctors leave, if I may so say, after the usual manner amongst men, that which
witnesses in the Conscience, is that which here is put under the notion of
Conscience; for there be, whose very Consciences are defiled, who have made
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; whose Conscience is seared with a hot
Iron; and so (whilst such) it answers not, or not aright: But that which
witnesses in Conscience, which is the severe Reprover, the sharp Corrector
fails not, nor Conscience, as it is undefiled and unseared, and has not been
made shipwreck of, but answers thereunto) it has been called by great
Philosophers, by the most venerable names, as (...).
a Domestic God, or a God within, Hieron. (...).
A Divine, or God the Overseer; a Sacred Goad, or godly Prick; Sophicles. A
(...).
God who has framed to himself a natural Temple in the Conscience, Justin
Martyr.

To conclude this of the said Doctor, when he has given his conception
Bentevol. and Vran. p. 189.
of the notion of God, Which we (says he) form in our minds, when we think of
him; This notion (says he, when he has given it) is natural, that is impressed
upon our Souls by that God whose Idea it is, men having not learnt it by
custom, or been forced to the belief of it by any Law. (What then is it which
gives the understanding thereof? By what is it natural, or how comes it to be
so? And what nature is it that makes it so, and whose impress is it? or whence
comes it* but from himself? and what is that which comes from himself, but that
which is of his own Nature, whose Idea or Image it is, who is the Son of God,
the belief of which Law makes not, nor forces; but nature constrains, or rather
gives to every man, in which every man was made, which gives to man to know
that in which he was made, which is everlasting, the Principle of God, by and
in which man was made, which forms this on man, and gives him to believe it; so
that all men believe there is a God, and the reason is, Because God is in all
men, who gives them their beings, and convinces them that it is so, who is the
Nature in which man was produced: So all have this, because in and by this all
were made; that which is of him in them, gives them the knowledge of this,
leaves the impress, as it makes the man; they both stand together, because it
is the Parent, (as I may so say) or that by which man is, which gives the Idea
or Impress of him that made him, and is as natural as he is who is made) Unto
which the Doctor says further, It is a Truth professed by all Nations, who
notwithstanding the difference of their customs, the variety of their Laws,
diversity of Dispositions, and hostility of their practices, have universally
agreed in this, as a thing that naturally results from the use of Reason, and
which even by such as have not spoken very honorably of God, has been
acknowledged as a common Prolepsis, that is, a connate information. (Which is
the same that I have expressed, Connate, signifying as much as a thing that is
born with a thing, or things that are brought forth together.) The Doctor goes
on to evince the same thing by father demonstration in what follows. Of this I
think my self (says he) the more assured, because no beginning of time can be
assigned when the World entertained this belief, but that the common Parent of
mankind, who was made with it, and to whom it was confirmed by conversation
with God, taught it his Children, who easily received it, because when they
arrived to that Age, in which they were capable of being taught by others; they
plainly perceived that it did naturally spring from the free exercise of their
own understandings. If this were not true (says he) I can give no rational
account how it came to be generally received by the World, it being impossible
that by force or fraud any contract should have been made to have necessitated
such a common Faith.

It is also manifest, that this is an everlasting Truth, deeply engraven in
humane Souls, since no succession of time has been able to wear it out, though
falsehood steal the mantle of Truth, yet it cannot so conceal it self long, for
time will pull it off and discover the cheat: If it Page 190.
had been unnatural, men would long before this time have rejected it, and
being always impatient of Yokes, they would not so long have born this, which
does oblige them to the strictness of religious observances; but they have been
so far from abandoning this Truth, that they have not subjected it to be
dishonored with disputes, and so have declared that this is that great Article
of their common Faith, in which they all agree.

And speaking of the Kenapistians, or the men of vain Faith, who in Bent. and
Vran. lib. 3. p. 151.
that his A Romance is a kind of Parabolical expression of things under certain
names fitted for the purpose unto which it is intended. Page 152.
Romance, among others he reflects upon, he thus says in reproof of them, The
Kenapistians having thus reposed their hopes of security, upon false
Principles, (which what they were, he lays down before, too long in this place
now to repeat) contented themselves with a form of Religion, and neglected the
indispensableness of a holy Life; The severities of Godliness were rediculous
to them, and the practice of Charity, Arbitrary: They reckoned the examples of
the Primitive times inimitable, and concluded the desire of goodness sufficient
to Salvation. In Theoprepia, (or the state worthy of God, which by that term
he gives to understand) they love what these do but profess, and do what these
only say; Flesh is allowed its dominion over the Spirit; envy and hatred have
banished Love, and they have devised a new way to go to Heaven without peace of
Conscience, which they endeavor to quiet by neglect of examination: Or, if by
chance they find they are not conformable in disposition or practice to holy
Rules, yet they excuse the business, by alleging, That sin is unconquerable
in this mortal Body; That obedience is impossible; That the best things we do
are but splendid sins, and the worst are but sins; They repent as often as they
please; Nay, they believe, That if they do but repent at the hour of death, it
serves their turn for the sins of their whole life; and notwithstanding the
greatest causes of despair, they may believe, and be safe for ever.

And Page 153. That God was obliged to excuse our disobedience, because of the
naturalness of sin, and that he, (viz.) Tuphlecon, (i. e.) one that is wilfully
blind, who the Romance pretending to be sick, Colax, (i. e.) the flatterer took
upon him to cure, and for that purpose said thus to him, He needed not to doubt
of pardon for such faults as he was forced to commit by the irresistible power
of tentation; That God does not exact perfection of us, because it is
impossible; that he needed not to trouble himself that he was so bad, since God
had predestined him to be no better. And in short, That he might make one
answer for all Objections, even of hypocrisy it self, That Christ had been
obedient for him.

I must end with the Doctor (my old acquaintance) and this Discourse,
Conclusion of the whole.
having turned through the Histories of the Times aforesaid, and the Principles
of men, both in former and latter Generations, of most Professions, and through
all evinced the thing of which I have declared; to the end that seeing things
as they stand in their own pretensions, and the things they own themselves,
they may be brought into a little more familiarity and friendliness with that
which they thought monstrously of, looking at a distance, but taking a nearer
view, they may of those things be the better persuaded. For my part, all may
judge, I needed not these things as to my own information, for I am satisfied
and resolved upon that everlasting Truth which I have here asserted, and
elsewhere, (viz.) The Principle of God in man, which is in every man a measure
thereof, to lead and guide him, which is able to lead him into all Truth, and
to deliver him from evil, which will bring him to God; And of all that which
flows from thence, which also may be called Principles, because they are the
reasons and grounds from whence they have their beings. I delight not in
prolixity, nor would I have been thus long, had mine own natural Genius or
inclination led me; But I have been doing the will of another, (viz.) of the
Lord, who moved me to this thing, and whose will I have done; not through
constraint neither, but of a ready mind, that men may see how near that is to
them, which they think afar off, and how natural, if that they would but come
down unto that in which they were made, for whose sakes I have thus written.

Geo. Bishope.
Bristol this 12th of the 5th month, 1667.
THE END.

