The Warnings of the LORD To the Men of this GENERATION PARTICULARLY, To those
in Power, who are lately past away, ere they so passed; and to Them that
Remain, who are 17th. of the 10th. Mon. 1659
ready to pass except They speedily Repent.

AS They were given forth in sundry Letters, and sent TO OLIVER CROMWELL,
RICHARD his Son,
Late Protectors. The PARRLIAMENT succeeding. The Council of Officers of the
ARMY. The COUNCIL of STATE. A Member of the Parliament and Council of State,
and Committee of Safety. The General Council of the Officers of the Army A
Citizen of London and One of the Commissioners of the Militia there.


By His Servant GEORGE BISHOP.

Who is moved, of the Lord (now) to Publish them, to the end, That all may see
that He has given to every sort of these men, a Day, who gives to Nations,
Kingdoms, States, a Day wherein to know, and to do the Things that appertain
unto their Peace, which they not heeding, and the hour of their Visitation
passing Over, they fall irrecoverably, and are left without excuse.

ALSO, As a Testimony to the Approaching, Great, and Terrible Day of the Lord,
wherein he will Reward every Man according to his Works.

Whereunto is added, The Burden of Dumah upon occasion of this Query, sent in a
LETTER by One related to the ARMY, Viz.

-- Watchman! What of the Night? Watchman! What of the Night?

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto Thee, how often would I have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her
Chicken under her wings, but ye would not? Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate; for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not henceforth see my face, till
ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

London, Printed by M. Inman, and are to be sold a the Three Bibles in Paul's
Churchyard, and by Richard Moon, Bookseller in Windstreet in Bristol. 1660.

THE Warnings of the Lord To the Men of this GENERATION.
To OLIVER CROMWELL Protector, THESE. Friend, The Burden of the Lord upon me,
for thee, is great, and the weight thereof heavy: Therefore in the Fear of God
hear and consider, for it does concern thee.
ART thou still asleep? Are thine eyes yet closed? and thine ears stopped? Will
nothing awaken thee? Perceivest thou not that the presence of the Lord is
departed from thee, and Wisdom from thy Counsels, and Spirit from thy men of
War, and success from thine undertakings; and the fear of thee (that was once)
from off the Nations? and the Magnificence and State of England, which whilst
the Lord was with it, stood with dread and terror over the Kingdoms round
about, sinking down, and falling, languishing, and crumbling into the Dust? How
have the Men of England, who have been as strong and fierce as Lions, as swift
as Leopards, whom nothing could overcome whilst their Rock was with them,
Hispaniola. See the brief and perfe^^ Journal. etc. by I. S. an Eye witness,
where it is related how the English Army consisting of some thousands, fled
before Fifty poor Spaniards, and could not be made to stand, no not so much as
with their Major Genesis Heane, though he besought them for God sake; but left him
alone to sacrifice his life among the thickest of his Enemies, which he then
did, who slew him, and six hundred of the English, (besides two hundred which
crept into Bushes, and were left behind in the woods, whom the Negroes and
M^lattoes soon after dispatched) and woundded near Three hundred, most of the
executions being done in the back parts; and so returned weary with their
slaughterings, and laden with their Victory, to their Town of Domingo, of
which, seven English Colors which they carried with them, were the sure
Trophies. A plain demonstration what men are when God forsakes them.
fallen in the Day of Battle? At the rebuke of one, (as it were) how have a
Thousand of them fled? And at the rebuke of a few, how have Thousands been put
to flight, and the Carcasses of many hundreds fallen to the ground? The
children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the day of
Battle? How heavily drives on thy expensive and great expeditions at Sea? How
vain and fruitless are they in their enterprises upon a Spain.
Nation whom thou have disdained, who were in a manner at the soles of thy
feet, whom thou thoughtst to have swallowed up quick, and their power and glory
to have weighed down in One day, who now defy thee, and thy strength, and with
no charge (in comparison) walk up and down smiling, and as secure in their
habitations, whilst thou emptiest thy Treasures, and weariest out thy Fleets,
without effecting upon them any considerable damage? How are the People of this
Nation, who were wont to run readily under thy Conduct, and even rejoiced to
hear of a Foreign Expedition, especially against the Spaniard, whom they
always chastised, as they did of late Master down the Mightiest The United
Provinces Fleets.
Powers of the world at Sea, even then when they were but newly come out of a
long and sore intestine War, now become dead at the heart, lumps of flesh, and
averse to War? How are the robbings and spoilings of the Merchants at their own
doors, by an inconsiderable people crawled out of a Dunkirk.
Hole of the Earth, from whom thy Fleets have not secured them, exceeded in a
short time all that they suffered throughout the Dutch Engagements; and when
some of thine have attached them, how have those uncircumcised come off with
advantage, and over the English Captives have they not insulted and vaunted, Of
what Nation are ye? Ye are not English men; ye are not the People who fought
with the Dutch. The Sea the King of Spain's Declaration of the War.
Subjects of the King of Spain beat them off. How does this once contemned
Enemy distress thy Counsels, provoke thee to anger, and put thee to it, how to
engage them? How do thy Taxes continue, and Trade decay, and the hearts of thy
old Friends draw from thee, and thine Enemies hate and watch thee mischief, and
thirst after thy destruction? And of what sort of people can thy calm and most
weighty thoughts give thee assurance of their standing by thee, should
affliction from the Lord arise up against thee? Then thou will see the Guard
gone, the Fence removed, the Presence withdrawn, thy Horses flesh, and not
spirit; thy men shadows, thy strength to sit still.

Was it wont thus to be with thee? Did thy Sword (till of late) ever return
empty from the blood of the slain, and the spoil of the Mighty? Could the
spirit that was risen up against the Lord in these three Nations, and the
Dominions thereunto appertaining, stand before thee? Was ever any thing too
hard for thee? Missedst thou in thy Counsels at any time? What ever thou did
put forth thine hand to do, was it not brought to pass? Was not Wisdom with
thee, and Counsel as the Oracles of God? Of a little despised one, becamest
thou not as the Army of God? At thy feet did not the proudest enemy fall down
and bow? Did not thou come upon Princes as upon Mortar, and as the Petter
treads the Clay? Were not the hearts of honest men knit to thee as one man?
Was any thing so great that they could not entrust thee with? Was any thing so
dear that they were not ready to lay down for thy sake? did they sigh at any
time at the remembrance of thee? Did their faces wax pale, confounded, or
covered? Or, was not the remembrance of thee to them sweet and pleasant, as the
dew upon the tender Herb, as life from the dead, as of him that took off the
yoke on their Jaws, that removed the burden from off the shoulder, that
relieved the oppressed, that delivered the poor from him that was too strong
for him? Wast not thou a dread and terror to the world abroad? Was it ever so
with man in these later Generations, as it was with thee whilst God was with
thee, whilst the Rock had not forsaken thee? Is it not time for thee to
consider, and lay to heart? How can thou sleep? How can thou suffer thine
eyelids to give thee any slumber, whilst it is thus with thee? Be still
therefore, and cool, and let the witness of God in thee, search and try thee,
and hear thou what it says in this thing.

Did not the Lord hear the groans of those who suffered because of their
Consciences in the days of the Bishops? Pulled he not up that generation in
his anger? Swept he not away the Powers that supported them, in his sore
displeasure, though of many hundred years standing? And when the same spirit
arose more exceeding fierce in another form, viz. of Presbytery, thereby taking
in to the former the Nation of Scotland, and the multitudes of the same Faction
in England and Ireland, who suffered by, and opposed it in Episcopacy, and
fought against it in Monarchy? Lop't he not down those lofty Boughs with
terror? Became he not terrible to the men of high stature? And when at length
he had drawn them together as into a pit, braked he not in upon them with a
furious blow of horror and amazement? And did he not smite them with a wound
incurable, they and their King, and their Nobles; their mighty men of war,
their Captains and Counselors, their Priests and their Officers, their Horses,
with those that sat thereon, and their whole strength, leaving their Name an
astonishment and a wonder, and a curse unto posterity; giving this later
generation in which this spirit appeared, only so much time as to show what
they would do to Us for our consciences, could they have but gotten power in
their hands to have brought it to pass.

Was It not Thou one who suffered and groaned in those days? wast not Thou
principally hated, despised, and sought to be cut off with the rest of us, then
whom, never was a generation more contemned, and scorned, and reproached, and
maligned, and thirsted after, to be rooted up from off the face of the Earth,
nor more unlikely (as to men) to carry the Day against such Powers of three
such Nations? Wast not thou the man who did bear, as on a common shoulder,
the sufferings of the oppressed for conscience sake, who with thee were
appointed to the same destruction? Went not then every such suffering to thine
own heart? Felt not thou every one of them on thine own shoulder? Could not
thou have laid down thy life for one of them? How tender was (then) thine
heart? How sounding thy bowels? Therefore flowed not in the hearts of them all
to thee? In them and thee, was there not one Spirit, and one heart? For th^s
cause did not the Lord call thee, and raise thee up to head his Armies? Made he
not thee his Sword? Did he not execute by thee, his vengeance upon those
Generations? And as thou returnedst laden with Victories in England, Ireland,
and Scotland, was not this the burden of thy Letters and Declarations to the
Parliament and Nation, LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE? Were not thy Speeches in
Parliament and Council, and where ever thou came, in the behalf of tender
Consciences? Came not it from thee in thy Letters, Declarations, and speeches,
with such weight and heaviness, as manifested thee a man pained at the very
heart, and in a continued travel of soul for it, and bitterness of spirit, and
as one whose very life was oppressed? Wadedst thou not through the Blo^d and
War, the difficulties and temptation, the hardships and dangers of three such
Nations, so divided, and in Factions, with a restless and an unwearied spirit,
till it was eased in the total overthrow of the conjoined strength of all those
in whom that spirit appeared and acted.

And whilst it was thus with thee, did the Lord ever fail or forsake thee? Or
wantedst thou the hearts and hands of the honest men of these Nations? Needed
what thou declaredst and spakest (thou) an Interpreter? Was it to them in an
unknown Language? Can the generations that are past, produce the like, of the
Lord's and his people being with a man, as with Thee? Was it not thus with
thee whilst thy heart was tender, pleading the cause of the Lords Oppressed?
and of his Kingdom in the consciences of men, which thou looked it upon as near
at hand, and often have expressed it in word, Declaration, and Letter, to be the
design and end of the Lord in the wars, to set it up? Was ever man's words in
that day, like thine, in relation hereunto? And was it not thine own
observation often, That as any party of men in the Parliament rose up to make
Laws against it, and so to limit the spirit of the Lord, it was a sure and
certain symptom and forerunner of their being broken in pieces, and of all
that were with them in spirit and assistance. And did not the observing and
seeing of this, become strength in thee to oppose them? Did it not carry thee
thorough the difficulties that thou knew thou should meet withal therein,
which to outward consideration seemed impossible to be encountered with and
overcome? And become it not the over^hrown of ^ll that attempted it? Have not
Thou seen this with thine eye, and compassed it in thine heart, and effected it
with Thine hand? Call to mind the former days, and let the things that are
past, come into thy remembrance? And since all power was in thine hand, have
thou not See O. C. Speech to the little Parliament in the Council Chamger at
White Hall, July 4. 1653. Page 25.
expressed thy self that thou thoughtest something was at the door of that good
we waited for, that we were at the edge of the promises and prophesies; not
vainly looking on that prophecy in Daniel, And the Kingdom shall not be
delivered to another people; and said, thou did thank God thou had thy
hopes exercised in these things: And to make way for that, did thou not place
the ground of the alterations and changes thou have made? And have thou not
said, That See O P. Speech to the Parliament in the Painted Chamber, Sep. 12.
1654. Page 30, 31. Page 36, 37.
Liberty of Conscience is a natural Right? That it is one of the four
Fundamentals of the Government thou had set up, as the issue of all these
Wars, for which things sake the Powers of the Government were taken up; and
might that be secure, thou could be contented to lay them down again: But
rather then to give thy consent to the wilful throwing away thereof, and that
in relation to the good of these Nations and Posterity, thou could sooner be
willing to be rolled into thy Grave, and buried with Infamy: That, had it not
been for the hopes of Liberty of Conscience, Page 31.
all the Money in the Nation would not have tempted men to fight upon such an
account as they have engaged; and otherwise to do, was no part of the Contest
with the Common Adversary: With much more of the like nature contained in thy
Speeches to the short, and the late Parliament, and to others upon occasion, as
full and significant as need to be in such a thing, or can be well expressed.

But has it proved according to what thou have so said to those who are come
to witness the Seed of the Eternal God raised, and raising up in them, (which
is come to, and must reign for ever and ever; to make way for the reign of
which, was all the late Wars and battles of Blood?) Has thine heart and thine
actions, (since all Power has been in thine hand) been toward such as it was
before the Wars were ended, or as thou have since expressed? Are there any that
have, and do groan for Liberty of Conscience that suffer because of it in these
Dominions? Let the Prisons in most parts of the Nation, the cruel mockings and
stonings, and whippings, and beatings, and stockings; the tumults and
insurrections, the finings, and long and sore imprisonments in heat and cold,
in hunger and nakedness, shut up from Friends and Relations, and the wholesome
air, and conveniences of Livelihood; the inhumane and barbarous usages, without
regard to ages or sexes, young or old, children, or the hoary-headed men or
women, some of which not fit to be related to modest ears, without mercy,
reason, or compassion, declare and speak: together with the filthy dungeons,
and noisome holes, and close vaults, and the spoiling of their goods, with many
more sore and cruel sufferings undergone by many hundreds for conscience sake,
since, and within the time of thy Rule and Government, who have been as
faithful as any, to the Commonwealth, and as much (in their places) have
undergone, and fought for it and Thee; Some for reproving of sin and iniquity
in the Streets and Marketplaces; some for bidding people fear the Lord; some
for giving out a Paper in compassion to the ignorant, directing them the way to
Salvation in the words of the Scripture: Some for declaring against Deceit, and
witnessing against the changeable Priesthood, (against whom thou have had a
Testimony) as they have been moved of the Lord: Some for that in Conscience
they cannot respect the persons of men, nor swear, nor pay Tithes, (which Thou
and the Army have so often and long complained of, even to the Parliament, as a
sore Grievance, reminding them thereof, with other things, by a Petition
according (as Thou See O. C. speech to the little Parliament in the
Council Chamger at White Hall, July 4. 1653. Page 7.
said) ye thought it was your Duty, who had many desires and thirstings in
your Spirits, to find out ways and means upon your return from the Wars, being
fully bent to find out ways and means for the Nation to reap the fruit of all
the Blood and Treasure that had been expended in this Cause. And because
nothing was done as to the particulars in that Petition, but words, thou
reckonedst that up against the Long to the Little Parliament.) Nor pay the
unreasonable Fees of Jaylors, where they have not offended, nor acknowledge
themselves transgressors where they are innocent, nor bring themselves under
Engagements, who are not their own, nor guided by their own, but by the Spirit
of the Lord; nor conform to the Fashions and Customs of the world: Some for
coming to visit their Friends and Relations in Prison. Some have been taken
out of their peaceable Meetings waiting on the Lord, and cast into Prison; some
for having such Meetings in their Houses; some taken up in the Streets as they
have passed quietly along, neither saying, nor doing any thing; some out of
their Innes and Chambers; some for refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration, out
of Conscience to an Oath; some for going about doing good, (as did Jesus of
Nazareth, whom God anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power, who so went
about all the Cities and Villages) at his Command. The time would fail to
instance all the Cases and the Sufferings as to each, a Volume would not
contain them: The Presidents of all the Records in this Nation (all things
considered) will not parallel them: The ears will tingle of all that hear all
that has been inflicted herein by Judges, Justices, Officers, the rude
multitude, Jaylors, Thieves and Murderers, amongst whom they have been numbered
and cast, contrary unto, and in the overthrow of Law and Government, wherein,
and whereby diverse of them have suffered the loss of their lives; and many more
had perished, but that the life of the Son of God, which they witnessed, and
for which they suffered, preserved them alive beyond the possibility of
Creature-expectations, having lain in prison after the manner aforesaid, some
many Months, some a Year, some above two years; yea At a Meeting near
Northampton, where this was done by order (as was said) of Major Butler, then
called a Maj. Genesis and the man whose ground it was where the Meeting was kept,
imprisoned notwithstanding this Trespass upon gim, and outrae.
thy Troopers have rod in with their horses upon men and women, as they have
been praying on their knees to the Lord in their peaceable Meetings, and
violently have pulled William Deusbury, a Minister of the everlasting Gospel.
him away, who was speaking to the Lord in Prayer upon his knees amongst them,
(a cruel unmanliness, never heard of before this thy Day; and on others who are
innocent, have thy Soldiers been Miles Malhead, and Thomas Salthouse, at
Exeter, etc.
long and inhumane Guards, keeping them close Prisoners, and imprisoning those
who come to visit them, contrary to all Law, Equity, Justice, and common
Humanity; yea, some have had In the North
Pistols presented to their mouths, by the Troopers, hall'd out of their
Meetings, and with blasphemous dammings have the Troopers sworn that there they
should dye if they did not deity their Religion, and some have they The Lord
healed the wound miraculously, as it was made barbarously.
run through the Arm for refusing to deny the Lord that bought them.

And of many of these things thou have not been ignorant, for the Lord, (who
delivered thee out of all thy troubles and difficulties, and was thine Arm and
Counselor when thou wast the instrument of his indignation on those who did
and would have done some such things as these) has rising early, moved and
sent many of his Servants and Handmaids from most parts of the Nation to thee,
Messenger upon Messenger, and Testimony upon Testimony, who in his fear and
dread have laid many of these things before thee, some in Writings, others by
Verbal Declaration; and from his mouth has he by them often warned thee of his
displeasure, and the fury of his jealousy, which is waxing hot against thee,
because thereof; yea, thy warnings have exceeded whatever man had before thee,
as have thy mercies; And to that of God in thee have some of them reached, and
the burdens many of them have born for thee, have been great, and the sounding
of their bowels that thou might hear, and be deliverered from the wrath
which is coming, and hasteneth a-pace; and the long-suffering and patience of
the Lord and his people, has been much to thee, and his compassion not willing
that thou should die, but hear and live.

But have thou heard? Have thou delivered the poor out of the hands of him who
is too strong for him? Have thou broken the unrighteous bonds? Have thou
delivered the prisoner, and eased the oppressed? Have thou been the sword of
God upon their oppressors? Or, a Protector of them, who for witnessing of his
name suffer wrong? Are the prisons clear? Has care been taken that the
innocent suffer not for conscience sake; as there has been of speaking and
declaring thereof in the Government? Has one offender in these cases been made
exemplary by thee? Or, has so much as one cruel Jailor been by thy order
punished? Or, are not these things done, and continued to be done in thy Name,
and by thy Authority, and under thy Government? And for thy use are not those
Fines imposed? Has not thy Proclamations given encouragement for what is done?
Have not thou been told that those who do these things, have said, they have
done them by authority from thee and thy Officers? Have thou taken notice
thereof, when it has been so told thee? Were thou clear, would thou let it
lie upon thee? Do not understanding men know, that if it were not thus with
thee, such things dare not to be done in these Nations? Is it not plain to all
that are reasonable, that thou, who carriedst it through so many years wars and
difficulties even against some of the Powers that ruled, can surely preserve
it now thou have all Power, and art in peace within these Dominions, did that
spirit rule thee now, which, for it, carried thee through such wars and
difficulties? Charles Stuart could have put off from himself the sufferings of
the Puritans on the Bishops, and have alleged that they were a non-conformable,
factious Generation, who disturbed uniformity in the Nation, and did contrary
to the Law; But that would not excuse him, nor his standing still, and looking
on, whilst he had power to remedy it, but did not, nor that those Laws were of
long standing; nor the dis-affection of the Great men, and Nobles, and Rulers,
and Bishops, and Priests, and the generality of the Nation to that way from the
Judgment of God, which has taken hold on Him, and his Children, and his
Party, whom he has made a dreadful example of his vengeance, and that by thy
sword as an instrument. But the case between thee and us is otherwise; no Law
have we transgressed, except thou will have Maryes Law, which was made for, and
guarded the Priests and Jesuits, to stand, and that for treble damages for
Tithes. The righteous ends of the Wars, in which we have born our part in the
heat of the day, and thy Speeches and Government, (as has been said) say
otherwise; We have been experienced sufficiently the Commonwealths and thy
friends whom no temptation, nor difficulty, nor danger could turn us from; nor
for it and thee were our lives, or any thing we had dear; which Charles Stuart
had never opportunity to understand by the Puritans, but through the glass of
prejudice he always beheld, thought, and judged them his real enemies: nor
were they and he ever one in principle, spirit, and action, espcially in such a
one, and in such action as thou and we have been, being the highest on which
men were ever engaged in the field; the nearest, and in the greatest
engagements: Yet do we (thus) suffer at thine hands, whom we have loved above
any man; whose, with all that is dear to us have we become, and thy lot and
portion have we chosen, to stand or fall, as it should be unto thee; and so
have we stood by thee against all thine opposers, whether in field or Council.
Thine enemies we have accounted and made our own, and never left thee, till
thou wast brought through all. And under thy Government, though speaking as
aforesaid, in the behalf of Liberty of Conscience, are we (who through the
unspeakable love of the Father are come to witness the end of the Wars, the
Son of God made manfest in our mortal flesh, whose is the Kingdom, and the
glory and the Dominion for ever; even his immortal seed raised, and raising up
in us, by which we are brought to testify against the world, and all the
Deceivers therein; and against the Fashions and Customs, and works and deeds
thereof, that they are evil as by his Light we have been shown, and by his
blood redeemed therefrom in our own particulars) made the scorn and prey of
all men; and have we suffered as aforesaid, by the spirit of this world ruling
in them, and now risen up against the Lord and his anointed, who by the
brightness of his coming it knows does, and is come to destroy it. And
delivered up are we into the wills, and lusts, and hands of our Enemies, of
Malignant, Neutral, Impeached, Secluded, and other Judges, Justices, and
Officers, and of the rude multitude, even of the most unreasonable and basest
of men, whom we have fought against, and overcome in the field, and totally
overthrown, who now disgorge themselves of the deadly malice and enmity they
contracted then against us in the illegal and cruel usages aforesaid, for, and
upon occasion of the exercise of our Conscience, who when the wars were ended
for Liberty of Conscience, had little reason to expect such dealing as we now
receive from such a Generation, who by the Sword sought to have cut thee and us
off for our Consciences, But were overthrown, and this after that for these
things sake we were over them Victors and Conquerors; Or such a Day as this had
we cause to look for, especially at thy hands, and under thy Government, whom
the Lord of Hosts, the jealous God, the God of these his suffering People, has
now tried and proved, to see what a one thou would be, and what thou would
do, who did so vow and promise to him in the Day of thy distress, when He
should have delivered thee: And therefore has He let thee remove all out of
the way, whether Enemy or Powers, that thou might be without excuse; No
Parliament or Government have thou now to wrestle withal, or to complain of as
thy hindrance in this particular; or Faction therein, or Council of State, or
Nation of Scotland, or City of London, or Dominion of Ireland: And in his
mighty Power has he made strong his Witnesses, and armed has he them with
invincible and unheard of patience, to bear, endure, and suffer so, and in such
a manner, and by such hands, and in such a season as has been said; some of
whom now suffering, have a witness in thee, that they are dear and precious to
the Lord, and innocent: And now art thou proved, art thou tried and weighed in
the balance; behold the fruits thou have brought forth, which the day does
make manifest, according unto which can thou otherwise expect then to have
thy reward from the Just and Righteous God, whom in requital of all his Love
and Mercy, and Long-suffering to thee, thou have (thus) dealt withal in his
seed, unto whom whatsoever has been done, has been done unto him, who will
reward every man according to his deeds. Remember what thou said to me at the
Cockpit, about six Months before the Long Parliament was broken, viz. What
ever men think and say of me, yet the end will make it to appear, That I have
nothing in mine eye but the glory of God, and the good of these Nations: And if
in mine old Age through my folly, I shall spill all these Mercies on the ground
the Lord has shown me, know this, God will not bless me -- Now to that of God
in thy Conscience, the measure of him which thou have, in his fear and dread
consider, and let it search and try thee; Have thou spilt on the ground (now in
the time that gray hairs are coming upon thee) the Mercies the Lord has shown
thee in thy former days, yea or nay? Does God bless thee? Let his Witness in
thee be heard to speak and answer. Art thou (whose heart all the Sufferings
aforesaid do not now melt) in the same spirit as thou wast in 1645. wherein
thou wast ready to have hazarded thy life and thine interests, on such a case
for to have remedied, such was then thy tenderness, and sense, and bowels? (And
yet what were the sufferings by the Bishops in comparison of these?) Or art not
thou gone out of that which made and preserved thee so; and whilst so, caused
thee to prosper, into that spirit which caused thee and honest men to suffer,
against which thou wast made so prosperous and succesful? And being so, Can
thou expect it otherwise to be with thee, then at this day it is, or look to
prosper.

Is not the Cause of the suffering people of God become a despised thing? Is
not the Interest of those his people grown very cheap, and not laid to heart?
Art not thou, instead of hearing the loud cry of their Oppressions, and
clothing thy self with Zeal for their deliverance, become exceeding jealous
of them, that they are designing against thee, and against thy Kingdom? Does
not this make thee to deal subtly with them, to keep Bonds and Sufferings
upon them, to stop thine ears at their sufferings, and to permit those violent,
cruel and barbarous usages of them, to go unpunished, thereby (as thou
think) to keep them low, and under, and to depress their spirits, and by
rendering them the prey and scorn of all, to secure thy self of them, as to what
thou fear they may attempt against thee? Hence comes it not to pass, that a
bare suggestion of those who thus evil entreat them, as that they are listing
of men; or that their meetings are great; or they are designing, with such
like, proves enough to turn thee from hearkening to the voice of Justice, which
calls upon thee to punish such evil doers, and to cause thee to listen to the
Enemy of thy soul, who seeks upon all occasions to persuade that those are
conspiring against thee; who are so far from any such thing, that they have not
to thee so much as an ill thought, but in secret mourn and weep for thee,
(knowing the condition in which thou art) and are pained at the very heart,
that thou might once hear and return from whence thou art fallen, that so
the Indignation of the Lord, which is coming like a Whirlwind, may be turned
away from thee, and so thou may come to enjoy the mercies for which thou
have so long, and so sorely traveled, the Eternal God is our witness that it
is so, and our innocence herein shall be made clear as the light, and our
upright dealing toward thee as the noonday; and here do not they who watch
for, and contrive, and act iniquity, escape and find encouragement from thee,
and protection? And are not the innocent sought to be cut off, for, against,
and upon whom iniquity is watched, contrived and acted, as aforesaid? And this
manner of dealing found not the Seed of God from the Spirit that is of this
world, from the beginning? This Michaiah never prophesies good of me, I hate
him, said that spirit in Ahab; Art thou he that troubles Israel, said he to
Elijah? The Land is not able to bear all his words, for thus he says, Jereboam
shall dye by the Sword, and Israel shall surely be led away capture out of
their own Land; sent the High Priest at Bethel to King Jeroboam concerning
Amos, who spoke these words from the mouth of the Lord, There is a certain
People scattered abroad, and dispersed amongst the people in all the Provinces
of the Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they
the Kings Laws, therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them; If it
please the King, let it be written that they be destroyed etc. Said Haman to
Ahashuerus of the Jews. There are certain Jews whom thou have set over the
Affairs of the Province of Babylon; these men O King, have not regarded thee,
they serve not thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image which thou have set up.
Said certain Chaldeans which came near and accused the Jews to Nebuchadnezzar
That Daniel which is of the Children of the captivity of Judah, regards not
thee O King, nor the Decree which thou have signed, but makes his Petition
three times a day, said the Presidents of the Kingdom, the Governors and the
Princes, the Counselors and the Captains, concerning Daniel to King Darius. We
have found this fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give Tribute to
Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King, said the Elders of the People,
and the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the whole multitude of them in
their accusation of Jesus unto Pilate. Those who have turned the world
up-side-down are come hither also, whom Jason has received, and those all do
contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another King, one
Jesus, cried the Jews who believed not, and were moved with envy, who took
unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and
set all the City an Uproare, and assaulted the House of Jason, and drew him
out, and certain Brethren, unto the Rulers of the City. W have found this man a
pestilent Fellow, and a mover of Sedition amone all the Jews throughout the
world, said Turtullus of Paul to Foelix. This is what that spirit suggested
throughout all Ages, on Record in the Scriptures of Truth; and with this that
spirit blinded the Kings, Princes and Rulers, and set them against the Lord,
and against his anointed, which proved in the issue, their destruction. This
is that the Bishops said of the Puritans, to the late King. This is that which
brought forth the law in those days against their Meetings to seek the Lord
upon pretense of Conventicles; and with this the late King they blinded, and
set him against these people, which became the overthrow of him, his Posterity
and followers, and of that generation, and of those that joined with them. And
this is that spirit that is now blinding of thee, who wast the Lords
Battel-Axe, and weapon of war, to the cutting down of him, and those whom
after this manner it blinded, and set against the Lord and his people, and
which is now setting of thee against the Seed of God, which in this fullness of
the dispensation of times he is raising up to reign for ever and ever; Unto
which spirit if thou continue to hearken, and to follow, and to be guided by,
thou shall be The 11 of the 5th Mon 1656 came this word of the Lord to me, and
it was fulfilled the 3d. of the 7. Mon. 1658. the day on which he had his two
great Victories at Dunbar and Worcester.
cut off, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

Therefore does my heart mourn, and my bowels are even turned within me, least
thou should not know in this thy Day, the things that belong unto thy Peace,
and so they be quite hid from thine eyes; least thou should not embrace the
tender visitation of the Lord, whose Arms are yet open to thee, and his long
suffering, and patience, and love toward thee, calling thee to return and
live, that thou may see the felicity of his chosen, and instead of setting
against, come into that Kingdom, and be made a partaker of that glory which
thou have been long looking, and sighing, and traveling for, and which was in
thine eye to be designed of God, as the end and issue of all the wars, though
it thou know not, but is now come and coming to be made manifest, and to be
set up, of which there shall be no end, which thousands of his Saints in this
Nation are come to see and witness, which is not of this world, nor can be
comprehended by the Wisdom of the Princes thereof, which it is come to cause to
perish, and to bring to naught; therefore it is that in this mighty day of his
appearance, his Visage is to them more marred then any man's; in him they see no
comeliness nor beauty whereby they should desire him; therefore it is that with
one consent they are confederate; all Forms and Professions, Judgments and
Opinions without the life, with the more gross and rude, and vile people of the
world, and drawn together, and mustered unto Battle in, by, and under that
spirit, where they are one, and which is one in them all, as the Day does now
manifest, and their fruits do make to appear, with a rage reaching up to
heaven, against the Lamb and his followers, who is lowly and meek; not
resisting evil, nor lifting up its voice in the street because of violence and
oppression, nor seeking deliverance, but laying down its body as the ground,
and as the street to them that go over, who have said, Bow down, that we may go
over, who have no kindred upon Earth, nor none to enquire after their blood, or
that pleads their cause, or that is their helper and deliverer amongst the
men thereof, in this hour of its sufferings, wherein its testimony is
finishing, and the measure of Iniquity filling up. Nevertheless, Conquering,
and to conquer he rides on, having the Armies of Heaven following him; and
through the blood of his Cross, through sufferings overcoming; and yet a little
while, and to him whom man despises, to him whom the Nation abhors, to a
servant of Rulers, Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship; for
the time is come, and coming, wherein the Lords Plant of Renown shall be
exalted, unto whom every knee shall bow, and every Tongue confess; and the
Nation and Kingdom that will not serve it, shall perish; yea, those Nations
shall be utterly wasted; every Battle of the warrier is with confused noise,
and Garments rolled in Blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of Fire.

This is he in whom Abel and Noah, and the Fathers believed, with whom Enoch
walked, and was translated; whose Day Abraham saw, and rejoiced; of whom Moses
and the Prophets spoke that he should come; this is He who was in the Church in
the Wilderness; with the Angel that spoke to him in Mount Sinai; and with the
Fathers who received the lively Oracles: This is He who was manifested in time;
the holy Thing that was born of the Virgin; who by the eternal Spirit offered
up himself once for all; and by one offering perfected for ever those that are
sanctified. This is He whom the Apostles witnessed to be risen and ascended far
above all Principallities and Powers, and every Name this is named both in
Heaven and Earth, that he might fill all things; who is the Head of his Church;
the fullness of him who fills all in all; the Mystery hid from ages and
generations, Christ in us the hope of glory: The making known of which is the
Riches of the Glory to the Gentiles: This is He that was with thee in thy
streights, thy strength, thy Counselor, thy Deliverer; to whom thou did
promise, to whom thou did vow, and who requires thee now to perform; this is
He, a measure from whom thou have, which has shown thee evil, and reproved and
judged thee for sin, and caused thee to breath after God; and after Justice,
and after Righteousness, which sometimes did refresh thee, and warmed thine
heart, strengthened thee, and gave thee many and large openings: This is He,
the making way for the setting up of whose Kingdom was the design and end of
the Lord in the Wars: This is He who was to come, so earnestly looked for, who
is come the second time without sin unto salvation; and whom to be come,
Thousands of his Saints do witness; Eternal living praises be unto him who has
loved us, and visited us with the Dayspring from on high, and washed away our
sins in his Blood. This is he that calls thee to lay down the Scepter at his
feet, whose Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness; by it to be guided and
acted, that so thine Enemies may be confounded, and thine House established.
This is He who is the Heir of all things, by whom the worlds were made; the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person; the
upholder of all things by the Word of his Power; the Light of the World; the
Covenant of Light to the Gentiles; the Life of Men; the true Light, that
lights every one that comes into the world; who is come into the world, but
the world knows him not; who has suffered, and still suffers at thy hands, and
by the people under thy Government; who preserved thee when thou wast a
sufferer, and exalted thee when thou wast little in thine own eyes, despised
and contemned; and when thou did plead the Cause of his innocent people, who
suffered without cause; who because thou have hardened thy heart, and turned
against him, has turned from thee his presence, Wisdom from thy Counsels,
Spirit from thy Men of War, and Success from thine undertakings, and is
stripping of thee of thy Fence and Guard, and making thee naked and bare, and
is coming against thee; therefore prepare to meet him whilst he is in the way,
who shows thee where thou have been, and where thou art; and what thou have
done, and what thou art doing, and the way to return, which is yet open. His
tender Visitation of Love this is to thee, who has long waited to be gracious,
and born and suffered thorough him who is a lover of thy soul, known unto thee
by the Name of

GEORGE BISHOPE.
Bristol, the 16. of the 5. Mon. 1656.
To RICHARD, Protector of these Nations These Present.
R. Protector,
SEeing thy Father is fallen asleep, and thou his Son art set upon the Throne
of the Government of these Nations, I am moved of the Lord to counsel thee, To
heed him by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, the Principle of God
in thee, which moves to Justice, and to Mercy, and the fear of the Lord; and
discovers and judges the contrary; which if thou do, and give up to be
governed by it, the Lord will dash in pieces all the consultations against thee
and thy Fathers house, and will settle the Throne under thee, and make thee a
dread and a terror to all the Nations round about, as he made thy Father: But
if thou shall refuse to hearken unto, and to be guided by it, the Lord will
This was fulfilled the later end of the Month called April, and the beginning
of the Month called May, following, when the Army caused him to dissolve his
Parliament, and the session of Parliament succeeding, to resign bis
Protectorship; as was also fulfilled, what I had seen in the Eternal, in the
Month called June preceding, as I was walking in the great Court in White Hall,
and weighing in that which is not of this World, O. Protector, his Council,
(which was then sitting) his Family and Government, viz. The earth rising, and
as it were, opening on the right hand, and the left, and overturning him and
his Government, his Council, and Family -- With which, as soon as I came out
of White Hall Gate, I acquainted a Friend of mine whom I met by the
Banqueting House, and which I again saw as I was on my way to Bristol, a mile
or two out of London, as I was turn^d about by the moving of the Lord, and the
direction of his spirit, sitting on my Horse, and looking on White Hall By
which doubling of the Vision, I knew that it should (as it qu ckly has)
assuredly come to pass.
overturn thee; for he has overturned, over-turned, overturned, that he may
reign whose right it is, and he is come to reign whose right it is, of the
increase of whose government and peace there shall be no end; upon the Throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with Judgment
and Justice, henceforth, even for ever. Thus in bowels of love and tenderness,
in obedience to the Lord, as I am moved of him, that it may be well with thee
and thy Posterity after thee, have I written, who am known to thee by the name
of

GEO. BISHOPE.
Bristol 9. of the 7. Mo. 1658.
To the General Council of the Army, in whom is risen the Spirit of the Good
old Cause, these following Particulars are tendered, in order to the carrying
thorough of what is by them begun, for the good of the Nation, and all honest
men in it. By a Friend, who though remote in person, yet wishes well to the
Cause and them, and to both on that foot, thus contributes, Viz.
HEed the Principle of Righteousness in you all, which shows your goings
astray; and reform what it shows you to be amiss in your selves, as to God or
Man.

2. Purge the Army of every Branch that springs not from the Root of the Good
old Cause; and see that the degenerate plant be plucked up.

3. Call back every honest man that was cashiered for the Cause.

4. Make some of Parliament, Court, Council, Army, examples, who acted in the
late hateful degeneration, and would have betrayed and destroyed you and the
Cause.

5. Read over, consider, and stand to your Virgin Declarations, and do your
first works.

6. Declare in what ye understand the good old Cause to consist, and your
resolutions to adhere thereunto, and never again to deviate therefrom.

7. Entrust such every where with places of Power and Command, in whom does
live, and is the Spirit of the Cause.

8. Summon the surviving Members of the famous Long Parliament (who managed and
carried thorough the Good old Cause) and Council of State, in Statu quo.
Declare that the obstruction is removed: That the People obey them, as before
that obstruction, to all intents and purposes. And a General Indemnity of all
that has been done, whether in the making of that obstruction, or pursuance of
the same.

9. Protect the (now) Protector, and let him enjoy his Personal and Paternal
Estate.

10. Vex the Midianites, (i.e. the Lawyers) and smite them, for they vex you
with their wiles wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peer and
Cosby, (i.e. the King and Protector.) Reform the Laws, and the Administration
of them; and severely punish the perverters of the Righteousness of each.

11. Remember Amalek (i.e. the soul-murthering, and Conscience-binding
Clrgy-man and what he did unto you by the way when ye were come out of Egypt,
how he met you by the way, and smote the hindmost of you, even all that were
feeble behind you, when ye were faint and weary, and he feared not God.
Therefore blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven, (i.e. the
principle that is against Liberty of Conscience) ye shall not forget it.

12: Set at liberty forthwith all the Conscientious People called Quakers, now
in Bonds because of their conscience to God, (the good old Cause) on whose
sufferings presented the late Parliament, the said Parliament instead of
enquiring into the matter, set their foot (as they had done a little before) on
the good old Cause, viz. In asserting a coercive Power in Religion, Worship,
etc. and would have done on you once for all, and have destroyed You All; yea
after all your Conquests of them all, had not the Spirit of the Good Old Cause
lifted up your foot upon them All.

April 27. 1659.
A Copy of another LETTER sent shortly after to the said Council of Officers.
Friends,
SEeing the Lord has heard you in your distress, and the voice of your Cry
has entered into his ears, when ye were near swallowing up by your proud
Enemy, and has delivered you when there was scarce a step betwixt you, and the
destruction of you and your friends, and the Public Cause of these Nations,
and has spared and given you (once more) space and time to recover strength,
and your dying reputation amongst honest men, before ye go hence, and be no
more. It lies upon me (as a sometime fellow laborer with you in the work of
the Nation; yea, as moved of the Lord) to warn you, That ye bring forth fruits
meet for repentance; for, verily friends, it is your day of trial from the
Lord, wherein He is trying you, proving you, to see whether there be such an
heart in you, to do according to all ye have said in your late April 6. 1659.
Representation (even that ye would fear him, and keep all his Commandments
always, that it may be well with you and your children for ever.) And for this
purpose he has (once more) overthrown your Enemies, and in the thing wherein
they dealt proudly, has shown himself above them, and put the Power of these
Nations into your hands, to try You, and prove You, and to see whether ye will
do as ye speak. If therefore the Good old Cause against Tyranny and
intolerable Oppression, in matters Civil and Religious, (as ye expressed it in
your said Representation) whereupon ye first engaged, and unto which the Lord
has in such a continual Series of Providence given so signal a Testimony; and
for the carrying on whereof, there has been such a plentiful pouring forth of
Treasure, Prayers, Tears and Blood, during the late War; (in the difficulties
and dangers whereof, ye also (the living Monuments (as ye say; and truly ye are
so, and it is good for you ever to mind it) of Patience and Mercy (have had your
shares) be not thoroughly asserted and vindicated. If in very deed and good
earnest ye appear not now as ever, equally endeared to the Good old Cause, and
utter Enemies to all Tyranny, Oppression, and disturbance; of the public
Peace, under what pretenses soever. If whilst your Lives and present
Capacities are continued to you, ye pluck not the wicked out of their Places
wheresoever they may be discovered, either among your selves, or in any other
Places of Trust. If Law and Manners so frequently declared for, and so
earnestly expected by all sober unbyassed men, be not reformed. If the Course
of Justice and Bowels of Mercy be not opened. If the ways of holiness he not
encouraged. If a stop be not put to the inundation of Malignancie and
Profaneness: If there be not such a public asserting of the Good Old Cause,
and a Justification and confirmation of all proceedings in prosecution and
maintenance thereof, and Declaration against its Enemies, as may (for the
future) deter all persons from speaking or attempting any thing to the
prejudice thereof, and of the Persons that have acted in the prosecution of it,
and afford present Security to the Civil and Religious Right and Liberties of
these Nations, and the Peace thereof. It the Liberty of good and well affected
People in repairing with freedom to their Meetings for the Worship of God (of
late much violated by indicting and imprsoning Yea, cruel whipping.
their Persons) be not still asserted. If wh^reinsoever ye have back sudden, ye
do not take shame to your selves, as (in your said Representation ye confess)
ye have Cause; and say, you desire to take frame and further, that ye cannot
but bewail your own great failings and turning aside: And if (by the doing of
these things) ye do no receive the ^earts of your faithful friends, and
vindicate your own integrity against all censures and jealousies, and make it
to appear, that ye did indeed engage in judgment and conscience for the just
rights and liberties civil and religious, of your Country, and not as a
mercenary Army, as in your, said Representation ye say and affirm (and as has
been before rehearsed) ye have as members of the Army, often solemnly
declared, not without appeals to God say ye) for your sincerity therein. If
from henceforth the people of the Lord shall suffer, or be continued in their
sufferings, because of their conscience to God (the Good-old-Cause). Hear O
heavens, and give ear O earth, and be ye witnesses, and all good men; ye shall
not All are witnesses of the fulfilling of this.
prosper, the Lord has spoken it. Therefore up and be doing; fear not, nor be
dismayed, the presence of the Lord will be with you in these things (as
heretofore) and his arm stretched out for you (as in former days) against
your Adversaries. That which touched and awakened the honesty in you, and
brought you into sensibleness, and to confess, and to act hitherto (viz. the
grace of God, the light of Christ in you) will carry you through, ye abiding
and believing therein. This is your day, a day ye thought not of, nor could
scarce hope for; viz. to have the public Interest saved utterly from sinking,
during the late desperate wrecks and dashings on the rocks, and your selves in
it delivered into a capacity to save and secure it, and your own particulars,
who were first designed to be sunk. If a man should have told you this, ye
could not have believed it. This is your hour of trial, wherein, as I said, the
Lord is trying you, to see whether, being delivered, and having power in your
hands, ye will stand by, and secure your selves and it. Nothing (now) but
integrity, uprightness of heart, truth in the inward parts, and proportionable
actings will serve If ye Notwithstanding this close and peremptory Warning from
the Lord so enforced and obrested, yet May (so called) the 12. following, being
the eighth day after the date of this warning, and the 20. after their
Deliverance, and the 36 after the Date of their said Representation; in which
they so much complained, and confessed, and bewailed, and Resolved, and
Declared to the contrary (as has be^n said) They started aside pointblanck, in
changing the Cause of Liberty of Conscience in the 6th. Article of their
Address, which by some of them was that Day, viz. May 12. Presented to the
Parliament, and the 27. of the 10th. Month following, (called December) they
were gone; those men whom they shut our, flowing over their Heads, (whilst the
Officers lay under) that day into the Parliament, by the hand of those very
Soldiers who were chiefly instrumental in the keeping them out, and had
declared for the Officers, which is remarkable; but that which makes it the
more observable, is, That the Hand is fallen First on those very Officers that
presented the said Address, who were looked upon, and were in their day, the
chiefest among them for Conscience Liberty. Here Is starting aside, and a
Farewell indeed; the Lord is righteous, let men tremble before him.
start aside again, farewell; ye have confessed against your selves, and your
Representation is witness against you; Deliverance shall come another way, but
ye and your House shall perish. A warning from the Lord God it is unto you all,
by and through him who is,

Your friend, and tenderly desires it may be well with you, both now, and for
ever. GEO. BISHOPE.
Bristol the 4. of 3. Mo. 1659.
To the Supreme Authority of these Nations, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth
of England, am I moved of the LORD to write.
Friends,
THis Day to have seen, was lately beyond the thoughts, of any, He that should
have told you but a very few days before the late Parlaments dissolution, that
the Power which was so near the swallowing up of all, should be so soon
scattered: That those who were made instrumental (through a wrong pilotage) to
waste this Commonwealth on such desperate Rocks, during these last six years
(the interval of your steerage) should be awakened to see their danger, and to
set (yea pray you) to the Helm again; that they and you together, should be put
into such a capacity (the like was never) to assert and settle the
Commonwealth, (preserved in and after all) and to secure it themselves and
you. That the hopes of Englands enemies should so suddenly be dashed, when at
the highest pitch and confidence to have prevailed against it, and their
designs struck backwards, who were ready to cry Aha! she is broken, which was
the Gates of the people, she is turned unto us; we shall be replenished, when
she is laid waste: she is given us to consume (when as the Lord was there)
this is the day we have looked for. That your friends who (seeing such things)
for very anguish and vexation of spirit, were even giving up the ghost, should
be (as it were in the twinkling of an eye) revived and brought back again from
the gates of the grave, I say, He that should have told you, but a little while
since, that so it should be, could ye have believed it? Would ye not have
said, he dreamed? Or, are ye not like them that dream? now that the Lord has
(thus) turned back the captivity of the Commonwealth; yea, whilst ye are told
of it, whilst your eyes are seeing, and your hands exercised in the work
thereof. What man could have seen this day through the late thick clouds, what
arm could have brought about such an act? What Counsel have designed it? But
this the Lord has done, that he may bring to pass His Act, His strange Act.
This wonder has he wrought (beyond all his mighty works of wonder done before
your eyes) that it may appear that his own arm has brought salvation, and that
his fury has upheld him, when he looked, and there was none to help, and
wondered that there was none to uphold These are his doings, who is come to
reward every man according to his works: And thus it becom'd him to do, who is
come from Edom with dyed Garments, from Bozrah glorious in his Apparel,
traveling in the Greatness of his Strength, who speaks in Righteousness,
mighty to save. And wherefore has he done it? Friends, let me deal plainly
with you, and suffer me a little whilst I am speaking to you from God. Ye were
wronged, ye were slandered, ye were abused, ye were cast out (and the
Commonwealth with you) as abominable; you (and what the Lord had done for, and
by you, were made the scorn and the derision of the Nations, whom his dread on
you had made to tremble, (I have seen it, says the Lord, and am witness) and
he is come (who is a God of Faithfulness and Truth, the Judge of the whole
Earth, who will Judge the World with Righteousness, and the People Earth, who
will Judge the World with Righteousness, and the People with Equity) to do you
Right, and this Right has he done you (in a wonder) before the face of all
People, and proportioned your healing to your wound; yea your reparation has
he caused to exceed your Sufferings; Friends, fear not, for God is with you.
And this He has done that He may try you, and prove you, and see whether ye
will do according to all that ye have said and declared; according to all that
the Nation has bled for, and suffered; according to all ye have vowed and
promised to God in secret, in the day of your distress, if ever he should give
Power again into your hands: According to all that ye ought to do, and to what
is the end of the Lord in this his late wonderful and astonishing dispensation:
And verily (Friends) this is your Day of Trial from the Lord, wherein he has
given you the Day ye desired, (a full opportunity, the fullest that was ever:
Look not for such another) to do as ye have said, and to perform what he
requires of you, and with you he will be (therein) as heretofore, and greater
things ye shall do, ye abiding with him. Moved of the Lord God Almighty I am,
to tell you so, who has given all Nations, Kingdoms, and People, a Day, and to
those who have gone before you, a Day; and to him that came after you, a Day;
and this is your Day; therefore in this your Day, know the things that belong
unto your peace: Be liberal to God in suffering no man to suffer for his
Conscience, as he has been liberal to you in suffering none to injure you and
go unpunished, what ever were their Conscience. Be liberal to the Nation in
giving it its Right, as it has been liberal unto you, in hazarding its all in
your service for the recovery of its Rights. Repeal the Laws against
Conscience, and the Liberties of the Nation; and make no Laws but what may
answer that of God in the Conscience, and the Nations Liberties. Reform the
Laws, and the evil administration of them. Check the Licentiousness of the
Clergy. Take away the cruel oppression of Tithes, and compulsive Maintenance;
and let them who pretend to be Gospel Ministers, be content with
Gospel-Maintenance. Join not with them, nor consult, whom God has cursed,
(whether Ministers (so called) or People, or both joined together) nor fear
them, least God How this has been fulfilled, is manifest.
confound you before them. Make no Laws against the Truth of God in the
Conscience. Come into a sensibleness (in common) of the sufferings and welfare
of the People, so as the People by your tenderness, may feel you touched with
the sense of their sufferings. Be not lifted up, because God has pleaded your
Cause, and executed Judgment for you; but be ye therefore laid low, to execute
Judgment for God, and to plead the Cause of his People. Think not your
Mountain so strong that ye shall never be moved, but rather be in expectation
It was but the 12th. of the Month called October following, and the door was
again shut against them.
every day, (not knowing what shall be to morrow) that it may be moved and
ready, because it may be moved to give a good account to God and man when it
shall be moved. Take heed of taking liberty to do and speak as ye please,
because ye are Judges of the Law; but so speak, and so do, as those who shall
be judged by the Law of Liberty. Finally, Let What a tender Visitation was
this of the Lords love? and how will it leave them without excuse in the day
that is at hand, ( yea that already is begun upon them) wherein he that
searches the heart, and tries the Reins, will render to every man according
to his work, as in the end of this Letter I have spoken from the Lord
my Truth, mine Outcasts, dwell with you, says the Lord know it in your own
particulars, the Light which makes manifest; the Christ which shows you all ye
have done; Be ye a Covert to them from the face of the spoiler; For, yet a
little while, and the Extortioner is at an end, the Spoiler cease, and the
Oppressors are consumed out of the Land: And in Mercy shall the Throne be
established, and he shall sit upon it in Truth, whose Right it is, in the
Tabernacle of David, judging and seeking Judgment, and hastening
Righteousness. The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this; Of whom I am
moved in much love, and bowels, and tenderness, thus to write; and from whose
mouth I have written, that it may be well with you, if ye heed and do it: If
otherwise, ye will be left without excuse in that Day that is at hand, wherein
he that searches the heart, and tries the Keins, will render to every man
according to his work.

GEO. BISHOPE.
Bristol, the 12. of the third Mon. (called May, 1659.
This following LETTER was for the Council of State, directed and sent to a
Member thereof, and of the Parliament.
My Friend,
MAjor Dawbone returned yesterday in the evening, with his Party, having
visited Bathe, and Lambsdown, and Bassets-House, and Freshford in Somerset, and
Bradford in Wilts, and crossed the Country again to Stroudwater, and Painswick
in Glocestershire, and Malmsbury, which was much to the terrifying of the
Enemy, who dispersed themselves, and dared not to stand or appear, and the
reviving of your Friends in those parts in this his March, which was about one
hundred Miles to and again, he neither saw nor left any Party of them (as he
could hear of, for he sought them diligently, and marching by night) in those
Countries, but found not the spirits of men so subdued, as that they were not
ready to rise, if the bond of the Lord were taken off them, and there should
appear a reasonable encouragement, which speaks a necessity of the expeditious
and continual marching of your Horse up and down in all parts, especially where
these insurrections have been, and that ye give orders for that purposes, least
(as I have wrote) these scattered parties get time to draw together (the most
desperate of them) and lay the foundation of another War, into which the rest
may flow, and so put ye to extremity for Force and Money, ere ye have time to
breath for the security of the Commonwealth: And this let me tell you, that
had not the Lord confounded them by his Power before, and persecuted them by
his Tempests that Night, the wind and rain fighting against them, and caused
Massey to be taken, of which they had notice, (though he was suffered to
escape) and given timely discovery, and broken their spirits, in which the Lord
only is seen) the Country had generally flowed in as one man from all parts,
on this place, and those here had generally rose with them, and your Interest
here by this time, had (in all probabil ty) been extinct, if not totally
hazarded by reason thereof, throughout this Nation, and (as I have said) should
the Lord but withdraw his band upon them, (so wonderful it is to see how they
are chained and tormented) would be suddenly in the same resolution. Therefore
it concerns you whilst ye have time, to bear down this enemy, and so to secure
places necessary for defense, and the Country, that this spirit get not up
again, and put you to new diversions. And seeing that the Arm of the Lord has
thus inexpressibly delivered you, and given your enemies once more into your
hands for his despised peoples sake, see that ye improve it for, and not
against him and those his people; and the doing Justice on those whom he has
given into your hands, least out of this Serpents egg do come a Cockatrice, and
his fruit he a fiery-flying Serpent, and the Lord deliver you and your Forces
into the Power of those who seek the destruction of you and your Interest. And
beware of falling under this spirit, or of thinking that the Breach between you
can be healed: For I declare it to you from the Lord, That it is
irreconcilable; it cannot, it will not be healed; yea, the Day will come, and
now is, wherein it will be said, We would have healed Babylon, but she would
not be healed; Let us depart every one to his own place. Therefore in the Power
and Dread or the Almighty, stand, and bear over it, crush it to pieces, stamp
it to powder; so ye will find it to crumble as the Clay, and fall before you as
the Mire of the Streets: But if ye fear it, and because of its afflicting you,
and that it may not afflict you, ye sacrifice to their Gods, and a1fflict the
People of the Lord, and offer up his Sons and his Daughters in Sacrifice,
causing them to pass through the fire, through sufferings for the pacifying of
it. Be it known unto you from the Lord, it shall prosper against you, and leave
you neither What is become of those in Parliament, Council, and Army, to whom
this was principally intended? what Place or Interest is now left them? I speak
not to upbraid them in the least, or to insult over them, the Lord is my
witness, I mourn for them, but that the Lord may be glorified, whose word he
has fulfilled.

Is not the life of him and his People gone for its life, whom he and they let
go out of their hand? Is not the King of Israel gone home to his House heavy
and displeased? As I wrote to them in the Name of the Lord, telling him and
them, that it should be so, and that is was Faithfulness in me to tell them or
him so, and that we would be to me if I should not, being required of the Lord,
of whom I had received it, however the King of Israel might take it, and go
home to his House heavy and displeased; yea, that they knew the story, and that
they should read and apply it to themselves in the case, they who were
concerned, who had done that thing; for it was their portion, and should
assuredly come upon them from the Lord. See Mean Tekel, page 39, 40

Again, are they not bowed down, and humbled? Is not their last done? Are not
their Locks off? Are they not bound? and have not they bound themselves? Can
they work any more such deliverance in the earth for themselves or their
Country, as has been through their hands? Must it not (now) come from another
place? Are they not submitted? and have they not submitted themselves? Are they
not lowr'd, and have they not brought themselves low, and their friends, and
the Cause of liberty of Conscience, even to the ground, to the dust? Do not
their Masters put them to grind at their pleasure? Do they not dishand and do
with them as they will? And when they have gone forth, when affliction is on
them, and sh^ck themselves as heretofore; have they not found the Cause, (which
whenever they brought it in their hand, and could say of a truth, Lord here
is the Cause, he never failed to deliver them, what ever were their streights
and difficulties.) I say, have they not found their Cause, their Locks, their
Power gone, and themselves bound as with Fetters of Brass? Is any strength left
in them. Yea, is not their Kingdom rent from them, and given to a Neighbor of
theirs that is better then they, even to David, according as I spoke to, and
warned them from the Lord, that so it was, and so they should find it. Me. Tek.
p. 40, 41, 42, 43. Let God be glorified, and all men fear and tremble before
him. Righteous art thou O Lord, just and true are thy ways, O thou King of
Saints; who would not fear and tremble before thee, because thy judgments are
made manifest?


place nor Interest. From the Lord God Almighty (whose power wrought, and yet
works through me for the confounding of the Enemy in this his bloody design
against innocent People and the Commonwealth, (for its laid all on them, as if
they had designed the shedding of the blood of these) who watched over you when
ye slept, and had regard to your safety for his Peoples sake, when ye knew not
the depth and nearness of your danger) am I moved thus to write, that ye may be
warned and left without excuse in the day when these things shall befall you,
which will not be long if ye shall so turn it; for verily I see them (in that
which is not of this world) all desperately bent against you, and ready to
overrun you, should He but withdraw his hand which yet restrains them, even (
some of them) almost to distraction: And withdraw he will, if ye turn this
great Deliverance (which was for) against his People: Which that it may never
be by you, O how are my bowels turned within me. My dear Friends, for your
sake, that so the Lord may never have cause to reckon with you on this account.
But if it so be, the will of the Lord be done, He will be a City of Refuge for
His People, and those amongst you who in faithfulness discharge your own souls
upright to him against such proceedings, will find a hiding place in the day of
his fierce wrath, which is hastening upon the heall of the wicked. The time
draws nigh; Blessed are all they who in that day shall be found written in
the Lambs Book of Life. In Bowels of love, and truth or heart, as foreseeing
the things that are at hand, yea at the door, and in obedience to the Lord have
I thus written.

George Bishope.
Bristol, the 6th. of the 6th. Mon. 1659.
Another Letter sent to a Member of the Parliament, and Council of State.
Dear Friend,
I Have formerly writ to thee concerning the Affairs of the Commonwealth, as
opportunity presented: The occasion of this is in reference to these our
New-English Friends, the Bearers hereof, late of, and near the Town of Salem in
New England, who having passed through the rigorous execution of their cruel
Laws, as to Imprisonments, Whippings, Scourgings, Confiscation, and Sale of
their Goods and Estates, are at length banished upon pain of death, which is
their state at this present, having not above four days time to transport
themselves for England, whither to come, and to spread the merciless sufferings
of them and their Friends before those in Authority, it lay upon them from the
Lord, for which purpose they are arrived here, and are now passing for London,
to unload themselves of their heavy burden before the Parliament, to whom, or
to such as they shall appoint, they (with their friends and fellow sufferers in
England) are able and ready? what by Copies of their Laws, and the Order of
Banishment (which they have under the Secretaries own hand, and the manner of
prosecutions, as to apprehensions, imprisonments, fines, distresses,
scourgings, whippings, beatings, cutting off of ears, burnings, selling for
Bondmen and Bondwomen in other Plantations, to make appear such Monstrous
cruelties as England has not known before this day to have proceeded out of
it, much less from such as once suffered, and quitted their Native Country
because of Conscience, which makes it the more to be admired; and all this for
no other cause but their Conscience to God, because they cannot come to their
Worships, and eat the sacrifices of such men of Blood; because they meet
together to wait upon the Lord, and speak to one another to fear God: Because
they entertain strangers, and receive the servants of the Lord into their
Houses: Because they are such as are called Quakers, whom without warrant to
apprehend, even upon suspicion that they are such, and imprison, power is given
to their Officers; and against whom in reference to all their barbarous
executions, they have not so much as with one of them proceeded according to
due order or process in Law, but with rage and cruelty, and with a high and
strong hand endeavor and determine (as themselves have said) yea, in open
Court have not been ashamed to declare) because they have power in their hands
to wear out, cut off from, and expel the Country this whole Generation.

The consideration whereof, and what may be the consequence of this, as to the
body of friends there, ( in whose On the 27. of the 8. Month, 1659. the
Government of Massathusets Bay in New England, murdered at Boston viz William
Robinson, and Marmaduke Stevenson, two servants of the Lord, whom they slew,
and hung upon a Tree, for no other cause but for their conscience to God, being
legally convicted of no one Opinion or Practice, but were put to death barely
for being such as the world calls Quakers, and coming into their Jurisdiction,
whose innocent Blood cries aloud to the Lord for Vengeance, who will assuredly
bring it upon them, and it hastens: For such a Barbarous piece of murderous
cruelty, (thoroughly circumstantiated) was never ^eard of, being from men who
sted their Native Country because of Conscience, on their Country men for
their conscience, who stood it out to the death, (glory to the Lord for ever,
who was near them) but their bloody persecuters (when in old England) could not
look so much as a Prison in the face But of this a particular Relation may
shortly be made public.
blood ere this time they may have imbrued their hands) and this Nation, and as
to you who are in Authority, should such Bloodsheds, Murders, Rapines and
Cruelties be suffered in your Dominions, has filled my heart with grief and
sorrow; and in the depth of my spirit am I moved of the Lord, the Maker of
heaven and earth, in whom is the breath of all men, to write to thee about it,
who have been sometime Governor of that Country, and know their manners and
powers, and the cruelty of their spirits, and art eminent in Authority in this
Commonwealth, that thou may consider and lay it to heart, and be zealous for
the deliverance of those who have no helper; for which purpose I have enclosed
to thee their Address to the Parliament, which thou art desired to help into
the House, and by such ways and means, and with such Members to proceed and
work, as thou shall think fit, for the more speedy and effectual accomplishing
of what therein is justly desired, and is requisite in the case. I am not
unsensible of the multitude of business which throngs in upon thee for the
Public in this hour, nor of the burdens thou bear in reference to that,
and the spirit amongst you that hinders the doing of what ye would for honest
men, and the Commonwealth: Nor of the Cross that is to be endured in
undertaking a thing of this nature; but when I consider that it is the Eternal
Truth of God in them, for, and because of which they suffer; which Truth must
(and the time is at hand, when the measure of sufferings is full, which
hastens) reign over all; (the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform it.) And
when I consider how the Lord tenders his Truth and suffering-people, even as
the apple of his Eye, and will not suffer a Cup of cold water given to a
Disciple in the Name of a Disciple, to go without a Disciples reward: Forasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, will the Son of
man say, (and the hour is near) when he shall reign in his Glory, and sit on
the Throne of his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him:) ye did it unto me.
And when I consider what need every man will have of the Mercy of the King, in
the day when he shall separate the sheep from the Goats, and say to the sheep
on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you before the foundation of the world. And to the Goats on his left hand,
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, which is at the door. And when I mind the movings of God that is upon
me, I am pressed in spirit to render this unto thee, that thou may have thy
reward in the day which is nigh, wherein the Righteous God shall render to
every man according to his works.

Therefore dear Friend, let this my Request be acceptable unto thee, and what
in thee lies, do in the behalf of these poor, despised, suffering People, the
Lord's Banished, who are appointed as Sheep for the slaughter, and for Gods
sake are killed all the day long; and are beaten, and made to cry by Reason of
the Oppressor: That so the Blessing of the God of Abraham may rest upon thee
and thy Posterity for ever. For this I know, That the Day is at hand wherein if
man shall not, yet the Lord will thoroughly plead the Cause of his People; and
then those who have shut their ears at the cry of the poor and needy; when they
cry in their calamity, the Lord The Case of these suffering friends, was
presented to the Council of State by that Member of the Council and Parliament
to whom it was wrote, it being judged that so to do, was the quickest expedient
in a matter of such weight and consequence as the Estates, Liberties, and Lives
of so many Families of people who fear the Lord; which they took into
consideration, but passed away, re infecta, without doing any thing, as also
did the Parliament, ( who were shut out of their house the 12th. of the Month
following) to the Speaker of which, and many of the Members, several Abstracts
of the cruel whippings, imprisonments, beatings, confiscation of Estates,
Burning, and cutting off of the Ears of many innocent persons, were delivered
sometime before by the hands of some of the chiefest sufferers. There is yet a
little time for them that remain in Power, to hear the Cry of the poor and
needy, and to deliver them who are appointed to dye, least the Lord refuse to
hear them in the Day of their calamity, and so this his Word be fulfilled upon
them.
will not hear them. So to that of God in thee which mourns with them that
mourn, and weeps with those who weep, and suffers with them that are in
adversity, as being in the body, I commend, and leave this thing, and remain

Thy Friend in the Bowels and Compassion of Christ Jesus, GEO. BISHOPE.
Bristol, the 20. of the 7th. Mon. 1659.
To the General Council of the Officers of the ARMY, and those with them who
are now consulting the good of the COMMONWEALTH.
Dear Friends,
IF ye mean to prosper, or that the Lord be with you as heretofore; with his
presence to help you out of all your streights and Difficulties, Purge out from
amongst you the spirit of the sixth Article of your late Here lies the bottom
of their miscarriage, and the very ground and cause of all their misery; For
having by the sixth Article of their Address presented the Parliament May 12.
1659. Point blank changed the Cause of Liberty of Conscience, Viz From the Good
Old one, to a New Bad One; from that which at first, and all along they engaged
in, and for, and declared to that which they engaged against; which whilst
they engaged against in the behalf of Liberty of Conscience, ( the Dominion of
God) he never failed to deliver them, what ever were their straits and
difficulties; and so having drawn forth their Address, after so wonderful a
Deliverance, against their Declarations, ( as I lately showed them from the
Lord in the handwriting, Mean Tek^l, which he caused me to draw against them,
wherein they were weighed in the Balance, and found wanting) their Kingdom
became divided against it self, and was numbered, and is finished. Nevertheless
the Lord gave them therein time and space of Repentance, and this other Day
also, wherein he warned them, as in this letter, being loath to give them up,
who had been the Sword of his Excellency and the hel^ of his strength, by whom
he had wrought such wonderful Deliverances, in which he was glo^^fi^d, but they
not heeding, this their day passed over also in such a manner, as is b^yond the
wonders of the twenty years preceding, which made the earth to tremble: And
although some of them when they saw the waters flowing over their heads, came
again to the Cause, and placed liberty of Conscience in the 7th. Head of the
ten Particulars, agreed on by them as the thi^g^ in which (it is said) they
were Resolved to live and dye; in the very words of the third Ar^icl^ ^f t^^
^e^t^ement which I produced against the sixth Article of their Address, in
proof of my cha^g^ upon ^h^m, that they had Point Blank changed the Cause,
there^y justifying the Lord and me in what I had so charged upon them from his
mouth, and condemning themselves; yet it ^as (...), their ^^ur was over. And so
he who led into capti^ity is ^ed into c^p^^v^^^ (...) ^he who k^^l^d with the
sword is killed by the sword; He^e ^s the pa^ience and faith of ^h^ S^^^^s.
Address to the Parliament, and whatsoever is against Liberty of Conscience,
the Dominion of God, which he has owned, and will own, and set over all; so
shall ye prosper, the Lord has spoken it. If otherwise, and that upon
Political, or other ends, ye cherish that spirit, or suffer it to live, or act,
or be in you, or oppress the People of the Lord, or of the Land, and so by an
evil or an heart of unbelief, ye again depart from the living God who has once
more delivered you, know this from the Lord, Ye cannot prosper This concluded
them, (they not heeding in this their hour) and then was no remedy; the word of
the Lord is fulfilled upon them
; for he is come to reign whose Right it is, of the increase of whose
Government and Peace, there shall be no end; Upon the Throne of David, to order
it, and to establish it with Judgment, and with Justice, from henceforth even
for ever: The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this, and the hour is at
hand: Therefore my dear friends, let this my Counsel be acceptable unto you,
and break off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of your tranquillity: For from the Lord
God Almighty, ( the Angel of whose presence went before you, and has been your
Rereguard) am I moved thus to write; who am known to you by the Name of

Geo. Bishope.
Bristol, the 16th. of the 8th. Month, 1659. in the Morning.
Another Letter sent to a Citizen of LONDON, and a Commissioner of the MILITIA
there.
Dear Friend,
I Received thy Letter, and thy Love; by this time ( I suppose) thou have an
answer in thy self, as to the desire of my coming up; seeing that the General
Council of Officers have not laid the Basis of their Government in Justice and
Righteousness; but in the mixtures of corrupt and bad Interests, and the men of
each, which God has cursed, and not only so, but have quickened their strange
composition with the Their declaring for the Priests, and courting, or falling
under the spirit that rose up against them, was that which slew them.
black spirit of that generation, who from the beginning Time has, and does,
and will make this most manifest.
hitherto has been, and from henceforth will be the destruction of all who are
swayed by it. So this gives rather a reason of my silence, then that I have (as
yet) any thing upon me to move to you-ward, Indeed I must say, This last turn
was also of the Lord, and at the very time of it when I had heard nothing by
the hearing of the ear; I bore and went thorough as of them that went before)
the travel thereof, and, the Power of the Lord, wrought in, and thorough me, to
the accomplishing of this thing, Which For being so closely pursued, presently
upon their Return from defeating G. Booth, what other thing could be expected
but their utmost endeavors for the preservation of themselves; and how
otherwise could that be done but by the laying aside of those who gave the
Prosecution.
desperate necessity on the Officers part, and the just hand of the Lord on the
Parliament, who had their Day, and misused it, has constrained. But what? was
it that they might take up, and Court the accursed thing, and close with the
Men and Interests, whom God had spewd out, In particular, the business of
Tithes, with which they never before yoked the Commonwealth, (I say the
Commonwealth) but left it hanging on the pendant Twig of the Statute for
trebble damages, which was ready to fall with its own weight, the weight
whereof, and of the cruel sufferings of the Generality of the People of these
Nations, (except the Interested, and their creatures) by reason of Tithes,
particularly the People of the Lord, in their Persons, Estates, and lives, was
so great, and the cry so loud, that the Parliament upon their very first
sitting after their interruption, as a Retribution to the Lord for their
wonderful return, did appoint among their first things, a Committee of their
own Members to send for the Sufferers then in Prison, to examine their
respective Cases, and to make report of them to the Parliament, which upon
examination appeared so hard and foul, and consequently the laws by which they
suffered, the witness of the Lord in them answering to the cry of these
sufferings, that they though fit to set them at liberty, and not to remand them
to their old captivities, which is a witness against themselves in the case,
unto which answers the witness of God in them, which is greater then all, and
will be their great cond^mnation. Now for the Parliament to exact the payment
of Tithes in such a time and season as by these their own proceedings, gave
honest men every where reasonable cause to expect their utter taking away; for
them to establish those very Laws for Tithes by which those conscientious men
suffered, which laws they so judged in appointing a Committee of their own to
send for the prisoners, and examine their cases, who suffered by those laws;
which Prisoners so suff^ring by those laws, their Committee so set at liberty
as aforesaid, and to or er the Judges to cause such their Order to be read in
the Courts at the several assiz Sin this Nation by which the same People were
rendered into a capacity of sufferring a new by these very ^aws which by their
former proceedings the Parliament had judged so gri^vous, and this in the
behalf of a generation of men who had been even then designing against them
throughout this Naion, by Plot and Force to have overturned them, against
another generation who had stood by them in that great hour, and were very much
inst^umental in the overturning of those designs, who also had been alw^yes
their sure, tried, and constant Friends, which the others were not, ( most of
them) but the contrary. This was that which displeased the Lord, being an ill
r^quital of that their wond^rful deliverance for the sake of those his people,
and caused (among other things) his just hand to bring that Turn upon them, of
which I am a witn^ss, even of the curse of the Lord, which passed thorough me
against them, upon that their Resolution.
and pointed at with the most legible Characters of overturning and Blood, as
those, and that which he abhorred; and so lay a bottom for their station, in
that unto which is his sore displeasure; That the Lord has given them the
great deliverance: Or, that they should have observed the direction of his
providence in laying aside of such Men and things, and the narrowing of All to
Truth and Righteousness, the end of his workings, and unto that have taken
heed, and on that Basis to have raised in Honesty and Justice, such a
Government of the Commmwealth as God would bless. Surely these men, the last
and best of them who remain, have had their Day wherein to know, and to do the
things that belong unto their Peace, and the good of the Commonwealth, which
the Lord has given them for that purpose, and to try them also, and to prove
them, and to leave them without excuse, who upon proof and trial having already
brought forth the Grapes of Sodom, and the Clusters of Gomorrha; what now
remains but a fearful expectation of the speedy and final overthrow of the
things that are, which already This the Lord showed me, even that the
Parliament, Council of State, Commissioners of Sequestrations, and the things
that then were, were waxing old, and ready to Vanish; and that this generation
of men, (the men then in power) were but as the last blinch of a Candle, and as
a little lightening before death; and it is but a very little time, and they
are waxen old, and vanished, (the men then in power and conduct:) And so what
he showed me, has the Lord soon fulfilled; to whom be glory for ever: The rest
he will assuredly accomplish in its season, and the hour is at hand; for it is
that which will follow the Revolution of all these things, as certainly as are
the Revolutions; which Revolutions he makes for the accomplishing of it, and
the things make haste.
was old, and are ready to vanish, that he may reign whose Right it is; and he
is come to reign whose is the Right, of the increase of whose Government and
Peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to
order it, and to establish it with Justice and with Judgment, from henceforth
even for ever: For He has tried all men, and found them wanting: He has given
a Day to every sort of men; but they have proved faulty, and have turned
against Him; Therefore his own Arm will bring to himself Salvation, and his
Fury shall sustain him; and none but him, on whose shoulders the Government is
laid, who is King of Righteousness, and Prince of Peace, will he trust to rule
the Earth, after He has brought man low, and made him to appear as a thing of
naught: For this purpose is he shaking not only the Earth, but the Heavens
also, and bringing great distress, tribulation and anguish, Clouds and thick
darkness, even that the desire of all Nations may come and take to himself the
Dominion: And he is come, and is taking to himself the Dominion, whose Kingdom
is an everlasting Kingdom; and the Scepter of whose Kingdom is a Scepter of
Righteousness: On whom we wait; in whom we trust; who will be unto us a City of
Refuge in the Day wherein he will punish the Host of the high ones of the
earth, and the Kings of the Earth, upon the earth, and will gather them into a
Pit: And the Sun shall be confounded, and the Moon abashed; then shall the Lord
reign before his Ancients gloriously: And the Day is at hand, even the Day
wherein the Lord will come in ten thousands of his Saints, and will execute
vengeance upon all, and convince all that are ungodly among men, of all their
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed; and of all their hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him; and every eye shall see him they
also which have pierced him; and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because
of him: Even so Amen.

Thus my Friend, thou have some account of my spirit in this thing, to the end
that thou, and the Honorable Woman from whom thou wrotest, and her Husband, (
my dear Friends, to whom is my Love) may see that I slight ye not, but that
your kindness is accepted by

Your Friend in the Truth of God (now) made mamanifest, George Bishope.
Bristol, the 2d. of the 9th. Mon. 1659.
To those in the Army and else where, who under the Burden of the Night that
is come upon them, do cry out, Watchman! What of the Night? Watchman! What of
the night? Am I moved of the Lord to write, and it is to them the tender
Visitation of his Love. The BURDEN of DUMAH.
DUmah was one of the Cities of the Mountains, in the Land of Canaan, which
fell by lot to the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah, situate
among the uttermost Cities toward the coast of Edom, (which is Esau, Jacob's
elder Brother) and bearing the Name of Ismaels sixth Son, who was the Son of
Hagar the bondwoman. In the night of the burden of Babylon, when the Watchman
was set by the Commandment of the Lord to declare what he saw, after that he
had seen a Chariot with a couple of Horsemen; a Chariot of Asses, and a
Chariot of Camels, and had hearkened diligently with much heed, and had cried
like a Lion, My Lord! I stand continually upon the watch in the day time, and I
am set in my ward whole Nights, and behold there comes a Chariot of Men with a
couple of Horsemen. And after he had answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, and all the graven Images of her Gods he has broken to the ground. O
my Threshing, and the Corn of my Floor! That which I have heard of the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you. He called to me out of
Seir, (which is Edom, whither he was gone) Watchman! What of the Night?
Watchman! What of the Night? (This in the Letter without, but read in the
Spirit within.)

Friend!
TO thy Call, Watchman! What of the night? Watchman? What of the night? I
answer from the Lord. -- The morning comes, and also the night: If ye will
enquire, Enquire ye: -- Return, -- Come --

The Most High GOD, who changes times and seasons, and does whatsoever he
pleases in Heaven, and in the Earth; the Watchman of Israel, who neither
slumbers nor sleeps; who gives unto all men a Day; to Nations, Kingdoms,
States a Day, wherein to know and do the things that appertain unto their
peace, has given to the Army a Day; yea, a Day, and a Day, and has raised
them up from a Little one, a Despised one, into a Great Host; and in blessing
has blessed them, and in multiplying has multiplied them, and has prospered
them whithersoever they went, and in whatsoever their hand found them to do,
and has laden them with victories, and gave to their O. Cromwell.
General a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory and Honor. And for the Majesty that
he gave him, all Nations trembled and feared before him; whom he would he slew,
and whom he would, he kept alive: whom he would, he set up; and whom he would,
he put down. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride,
the Lord cut him off, according to his word which he has spoken by me. See
Letter to O. P. page 14.
And when his Son rose up in his stead, and a Power under him seeking to do
that, for which the Lord had cut off his father before him, He soon overturned
him, See Letter to R. P. page 18.
as I had writ to him in the name of the Lord, and deliver all Power into your
hands, whom he and his Power sought to over-turn. And having delivered all
Power into your hands, whom he and his Power sought to over-turn, he moved me
to See letter to the Genesis Coun. of Officers, page 18.19.
write to you what ye should do, and again See a second Letter to the said
Council, page 80, 21, 22
warned you by me a few days following. And when notwithstanding his warning
ye had started aside, and changed the Cause of Liberty of Conscience, the
Dominion of God, in your May 12. 1659
Address to the Parliament, He caused the Sea Mean Te. throughout.
handwriting MEAN TEKEL to be drawn against you, and moved me to send it you,
leaving unto you therein yet space and time of Repentance. And afterward, when
ye had Power again in your hands, He moved me See Let. to the General Coun. of
Officers. p. 33. 34.
to write unto you, which you not heeding, the hour of your visitation passed
over, and your Day closed into Night. And now darkness is over you, and the
Word of the Lord which he spoke by me to you, through all, has taken hold on
you, and ye are delivered into the will of your enemies. And as ye have
profaned the Holiness of God, which he loved, and married the daughter of a
strange God; he has profaned the Sanctuary of pour strength, and given you
into the power of a strange King, and now your sorrows are multiplied, and your
hope is cut off: and under the deep sense of the burden of the Night which is
come upon you, the honesty in you cries out; Watchman! What of the Night?
Watchman! What of the Night?

To which I answer in the Name, of the Lord The Morning comes ( and it is not
long first) wherein the Lord shall rise up, as in Mount Perazim; and be wrath,
as in the Valley of Gibeon; that he may do his work, his Strange work; that he
may bring to pass his Act, his strange Act; wherein he will make bare his Arm
in the sight of the Heathen, and put on Righteousness as a Breast Plate, and a
Helmet of Salvation on his head, and the Garments of Vengeance for clothing,
and Zeal as a Cloak, and according to their deeds, accordingly will he repay
fury to his Adversaries, recompense to his Enemies, and will save his afflicted
People: For the Day of Vengeance is in his heart, and the [Year] of his
Redeemed is come; and the Son has said, God Almighty is with me, God eternal
is my Refuge, who lives for ever: I live for ever; I stand and lift up my Hand
to Heaven, and say, I live for ever; I come, and my reward is with me; and
every eye shall see me, and the eyes also of them who have pierced me; and all
Nations shall wall because of me; even so Amen. I am ever ye, all ye Powers of
Darkness; I trample ye under me from mine High Places: I who was dead, and am
alive, and behold, I live for evermore, and have the keys of Hell and of Death:
I am he who shakes Heaven and Earth; I have overcome, and shall inherit all
things, and will subdue all mine Enemies under me: I will come up on Princes as
Mortar, and as the Potter treads Clay: I will rule them with a Rod of Iron,
and break them to pieces as a Potters Vessel: I will tread the people in mine
anger, and trample them in my fury, and their Blood shall be sprinkled upon my
Garments, and I will stain all my Raiment; for the day of Vengeance is in mine
heart, and the [year] of my Redeemed is come: O Death! I will be thy Death; O
Gravel! I will be thy destruction, Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes. O
thou Enemy! Destruction is come to a perpetual end; and I will reward every man
according to his works. Be wise therefore, O ye Kings, and be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way,
when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that trust in him.

Therefore my dear friends, be not ye troubled, neither let your hearts faint
within you, nor be ye offended nor stumbled because that your hope is cut off
from among men; because the proud are counted happy, and they that tempt God
are delivered; because that Iniquity seems to have the Day, and corrupt
Interests the price of the Blood of these Nations; because your body is laid
down as the ground, and as the street to them that go over, who say to your
soul, Bow down, that we may go over: Because that since the time of these
twenty years, wherein ye hoped that God had arisen to save all the meek of the
earth, and that he would not slack his hand until he had brought forth
Judgment into Victory; the Day of trouble ( as ye complain) seems to gather so
dark, that none has been like unto it: I say, Be not ye troubled because of
these things that are already, or that may, and shall yet come before this
night be over; of which the things that have been, are but the approaches; for
these things must be, that man may be shown what he is, that man may see what
he has done that man may eat of the fruit of his doings, and all who have
leaned upon him, whose breath is in his Nostrils, and have departed from the
living God; that man may be stripped, and brought low, and humbled even to the
dust, and that his haughtiness may be bowed down, and the Lord alone exalted;
that Iniquity may have its Day wherein to fill up its measure, and it is its
last ( cannot ye suffer it then?) And the higher it grows, the nearer it is to
its end; and its measure must be filled up, ere deliverance can arise, and
refreshing from the presence of the Lord; who is come to do (himself) what Man
promised, and had his Day to do, and should have done, yet did it not, but
trifled away time long, and at length shamefully quitted and betrayed it, and
left the Nation more overgrown with wickedness then before, and Judgment
further off then ever, and Equity it cannot enter; and he is cutting short the
work in Righteousness, and making a speedy end in the Earth; and for this
purpose is letting Iniquity loose, that it may have its swing, its full career,
(the Hedge is up, the Fence is down, the Wall is broke; that which let, is
taken out of the way) that it may fill up its measure quick and finish its
course, to try a People in whom He will be glorified, that so He may make of it
an utter end at once; that He may devour and destroy at once; that he may
consume the Briars and the Thorns, Branch and Root, Head and Tail, Soul and
Body in one day; and place salvation in Zion for Israel his glory: And when
Iniquity seems to mount highest, then is its end nearest; and when it seems to
caress it most, then is its destruction nighest, even at the very door. It must
be fully ripe ere the stroke come that will swinge it to the Pit. It must cry
peace and safety, ere sudden destruction come upon it, as pangs upon a woman in
travel, and it shall not escape. And let me tell you for your comfort, its
already bundling up, and making ready for the fire. And though a Consumption be
determined even upon the whole Earth, and from the Lord of Hosts I have heard
it; yet the Consumption determined shall overflow with Righteousness, and
England shall be the glory of all Lands, and a Blessing to all the
Nations-round about her; and from her shall go forth Salvation, even to the
ends of the Earth; and of her it shall be said after her captivity is returned,
Blessed be thou O habitation of Justice! O Mountain of Holiness! The Eternal
God has spoken it, and the Lord will avenge the Blood of his Elect which cries
day and night unto him; I tell you he will avenge it speedily, yea speedily:
But what? even now? The time is come, yea the set time is come; the Lord has
spoken it. Nevertheless when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith in the
Earth? But who shall live when God does this? Is it said already, and it will
seem Mean Tekel, page 47.
impossible as to man ((...) I have said) But then it will be, that the Lord
may be known in the earth by the Judgments that he executes. These things may
seem strange ( as I Mean Tekel, page 47.
said) but the time is at hand; blessed is he that endures to the end, the same
shall be saved: And Judgment must begin at the House of God and the time is
come; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel of God? And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
wicked and the ungodly appear?

Therefore I say again to you, Be not ye troubled, neither faint in your minds,
nor be offended nor stumbled; but turn in hither, Return -- come to the
Immortal in you which witnesses for God, which gives you the sense of these
things, and shows unto you all that ye have done, (Is not this the Christ?) and
reproves you, and searches your hearts, and tries your reins; heed it,
believe in it, obey it whilst ye have time, a little time: This is that which
is come to reign over all for ever; and God is come to set it over all, even
for ever and ever; and all these shakings are in order thereunto: Man's day is
done; but the Lords day is come: Man's hope is cut off, because his day is done;
but because his day is come, there is hope in the Lord. I say, Turn in hither;
Return -- come to the Immortal (our City of Refuge, and there is no other,
you will find it so in the end; I have seen you as a poor desolate man in the
middle of a field, whom I met (in my spirit) distressed in spirit, and broken
down with sorrow, not knowing whither to go, or what to do; and the Lord bad me
say to you, Turn in hither) that so ye may find a hiding place in the day of
the Lords fierce wrath, ( which is even hastening on the head of the wicked)
and see the Morning of the Eternal Day, which comes, yea (as I have said) it
is not long first, yea it has been seen already, and also the Night -- after
it, which will be eternal to those that are not gathered into it. The Night is
far spent, the day is at hand; if ye will enquire, enquire ye, Return, come;
The Word of the Lord it is to you, and his tender Visitation of Love,

By his Servant (who has born your burden, and suffered that which ye are not
able to bear) G. Bishope.
Bristol, 21. of the 11th. Month 1659.

BUt as for you who shall not return to the Lord, nor come to the immortal in
you which witnesses for God, but shall continue to go on in the stoutness of
your hearts, and the stubborness of your spirits, in Rebellion against the
Lord; know this, not only what is already, but what is yet to come to pass, of
that which I have spoken to you in the Name of the Lord, in the Mean Tekel.
Handwriting sent against you, shall assuredly come upon you, and ye s^all know
that there has been a Prophet amongst you; For, our God shall come, and shall
not keep silence: A fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very
tempestuous round about him. He shall call to the Heavens from above, and to
the Earth, that he may judge his People. Gather my Saints together to me, those
who have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. And the Heavens shall declare
his Righteousness, for God is judge himself: Selah. Consider this ye that
forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. And the
Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, and shall
sit upon the Throne of his Glory; and before him shall be gathered all Nations;
and he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his sheep
from the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on
his left; and the King shall say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world: And unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: And these shall go
away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. And so I
am clear of your blood.

G. Bishope.
I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of Days did fit,
whose garment was white as Snow, and the Hairs of his Head like the Pure Wool:
His Throne was like the fiery flame, and his Wheels as burning fire: A fiery
stream issued and came forth from before him; Thousand Thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the Judgment was
set, and the Books were opened; and another Book was opened, which is the Book
of Life; and the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
Books, according to their Works. I beheld then, because of the Voice of the
great words that the Horn spoke; I beheld even till the Beast was slain, and
his body destroyed and given to the burning flame* And behold, One like the Son
of man came in the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they
brought him next before him, and there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him; His Dominion
is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed; and the Kingdom, and Dominion, and greatness of
the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saint
of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions
shall serve and obey him. Amen: Hallelujah, the time is at hand.

G. B.



The End.

