AN Epistle of Love TO All the SAINTS scattered in these Nations, of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto appertaining.

EXHORTING Them All to stand fast in the Day of Trial, that now is come to try
All the Inhabitants of the Earth, and them [chiefly] and in Particular.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord in GEO. BISHOPE;

That all may be Warned, and all may be left without Excuse.

For your selves know Perfectly that the Day of the Lord so comes as a Thief
in the Night. For, when they shall say Peace, and Safety, then sudden
Destruction comes upon them as Travel upon a Woman with Child, and they shall
not Escape.

But ye Brethren; be not weary in Well-Doing. Little Children, It is the last
Time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, Even now, there are many
Antichrists; Whereby we know that it is the last Time.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson. 1661.

To the Friends of Truth wheresoever Distributed in these Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof; The SALUTATION of my Love to
you All. Grace, and Peace be multiplied upon you from God our Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ.
DEar Friends, and Brethren; Partakers of the High and Heavenly Calling, To you
it is that I am moved of the Lord to write concerning the Times and Seasons
which now are come, and coming upon you, to wit, The Day of the Lord, wherein
he will try you to the Uttermost; that ye may be found to Praise, and Honor,
and to Immortality and Eternal Life; and that his Name may be glorified which
has long suffered in the World by reason of the heaps of Professions, which
have Professed him with their Lips, and with their Mouths have drawn near him,
but their hearts have been far from him; and their fear toward God has been
taught by the Precepts of Men; and the Lord has been Dishonored; and his
Truth Blasphemed by reason of them; and Many have stumbled, and have been
driven into the World again to seek for Pleasure, and to their Lusts to have
Satisfaction; seeing that the best of Profossions without the Power of
Godliness have proved but as a Bryar, and the most Upright as a Thorn hedge in
the Day of their Trial, Doing, yea surpassing the Deeds of the Wicked, as has
been seen in this Day, and in the Years that have lately passed; and Religion
has been as an Abominable thing in the Eyes of many by Reason of them; and
their turning to the Times, and Seasons; and Doing themselves when they have
been in Power the things they have condemned in Others; So that many in whom
something has been awakened to look after God when Each Profession came at
first forth in some sincerity, have been turned back again seeing their
Apostasy; and have thought whether there were any such thing in the World as
Truth; and have been ready to Question Every thing that has been called so in
the World, and nothing has been more hateful to them then the Name of
Profession; made Abominable to them by those, who in Words have Professed, and
in their Deeds Denied the Power of Godliness. And this you know, and of this
you have been sensible.

Now, the Spirit of the Lord has been grieved with these things, and this
Abominable Profession, and his Soul has be^ long pressed therewith as a Cart
is laden with Sheaves; and has said, Ah! I will Ease me of mine Adversaries,
and be Avenged on mine Enemies: and has brought this Day, and hour (as ye
know) to Judge and try them; and to show how Odious all this Abominable
Profession is in his sight; which has made his Name to suffer, and his Truth
to be abhorred in the World. And now, how they have turned (many of them) and
Do turn you see, and have seen, and many of you have born Testimony; and how
they have fallen at the Threshold of the Door before their Day is (in a manner)
entered, and have Veiled their Glory, and laid their honor themselves in the
Dust: Even before you whom they have Persecuted, and abused, and set at Naught
and Despised, whilst ye have stood (as many as have been faithful unto him)
through the Arm of the Lord; the Mighty God of Jacob, Ye have Understood.

And now Friends, the Lord is come to Vindicate his great Name, and his Glory
which he will not give unto another, and to Redeem his Truth, and clear his
People in the sight of the World; and to Let them Know, That there is such a
thing as Truth in the World; and the Power of Godliness; That is able to Endure
and suffer all things; That will not deny the Lord nor Limit the Holy One of
Israel; That is not of this World, and therefore can part with this World for
the Lord; That can Endure as seeing him that is Invisible. And this is that of
him which is in you; which is heir of all things, which he has Visited, and in
Measure, Raised up in you; that his Name may be Glorified, and that he may be
known in the World; and that the stumbling blocks may be Removed, and his Seed
raised up, by which [onely] he is known; and in which he will be Glorified. And
of You it is of whom the Lord has said, This People I have formed for my Self,
they shall show forth my Praise: and ye are they by whom his Truth must and
shall be Redeemed from all that is cast upon it, and his Glory cleared; which
he has said He will not give unto Another; (as has been said) and his Name
Vindicated; Whom he has raised up, and is raising up for that purpose; and
Visited, and Refreshed, and chosen as First Fruits unto himself, by whom he
will be glorified; by whom he will be honored; by whom he will be known in the
World; by whom he will Do his Mighty Works of Wonder in which he will be
glorified; by which he will be known and Exalted in the World; And from the
Foundation of the World has he not chosen Another People to bear this his Name
which he will now get, which will be Wondrous Great, his Seed in you; Nor
shall there a People come up after you that shall bear the like; the Lord has
spoken it; By whom he will Do that which from the beginning of the World has
not been told; Nor shall be (as to any that shall rise up after You, by whom
the same shall be done) Even that he will do which if a man should speak, it
would not be believed. For, the Lord shall Roar out of Sion, and utter his
Voice from Jerusalem; and the Heavens, and the Earth shall shake. But the Lord
will be the Hope of his People, and the strength of the Children of Israel.

So, my Dear Friends, You must bear his Name, and You are they, by, and in whom
he will be glorified, and get himself a Name such as never has been, nor shall
be. Therefore Your Trial will be such as never has been or shall be; For, as
is the Trial so will be the Name; and as the Name must be so will be the Trial;
and because the Name must be Great; therefore the Trial will be great; and
because the Trial will be great, that the Name may be great, therefore has the
Lord moved me to let you know it, That as Men ready and Expecting the Uttermost
as to whatsoever may come upon You for your Trial, ye may be so as that the
Lord may be glorified.

For, this We know as among Men; the greater the shock of the Battle is like
to be, and the more Signification there is of it; the more is usually the
Preparation thereunto, especially if the Issue will turn the Balance Absolute
to the Destruction, or Dominion of the One or Other, and that for ever. Men at
such times use to prepare for, use to Engage according to the concernment of
the thing, especially when its for their All, and that for Ever, though but as
to a Temporal Crown for which they strive; and a Life which is but for a Moment
in respect of the Eternal Day that attends it afterward. Therefore says
Christ; What King going to make War against Another King, sits not Down
first and Consulteth, Whether he be able with Ten Thousand to meet him that
comes against him with Twenty Thousand. Or, else, whilst the Other is yet a
Great way off, he sends an Embassage, and Desires Conditions of Peace.

Now, Conditions of Peace, You know you cannot have, (and your life remain) nor
can ye ask it (your Life in you) nor are you unable (in your Life) with Ten
Thousand to meet him who comes against you with Twenty Thousand; Provided it
be All you have. For, whosoever he be of you that forsakes not [all] that he
has, cannot be my Disciple. Says Christ upon those his Words of a Kings going
to War as aforesaid. So likewise (says he) Whosoever he be of you that
forsakes not [All] that he has, cannot be my Disciple.

And this I Declare unto you in the Name of the Lord, you will be Tried for
[All] you have within, and without, and to the Uttermost too, before this hour
be Over, which is already Entered, and the time is near. For, the Devil must be
cast out who has [long] Usurped it in the Creation of God Over his Seed which
has lain in Death; So that the Lord has not been known by Men who has filled
them with food, and gladness; Nor can he be known but by his Seed, and the Seed
is come that the Lord may be known, which is the Heir of all things; which
moves to cast out him that has Usurped, that the Lord may be known, and he
that has Usurped moves, and will move against the Seed, that he may not be
cast out, and into the Pit out of which he came, and into which he must Return,
that the Seed of the Lord may Inherit the Earth, and Possess his Holy Mountain.

Therefore will he Rage, because his time is short, and withal the Artifices,
and Deceit Imaginable will seek to preserve his Station, and to draw whom he
can into it; That his Torment may not come; For, he knows that when that is
Risen which is Lord of All; and ascends into ^is Throne, out of which It has
long been by him Kept; he must be Tormented, and that his Torment will be for
Ever and Ever; and that he will have No Place then but his Own in the Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death.

And this he knows (as I have said) and who it is that is come the second Time
without Sin unto Salvation; To whom he said in that Day of his Flesh; W^ know
thee who thou art, Jesus the Son of God. Art thou come to Torment Us before Our
time? And wrought against him till they brought him to the Cross. Where by
Death he Overcame him who had the Power of Death, which is the Devil, and
spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and made show of them Openly on his Cross:
Yet that time passed away (as ye know) and an Apostasy there was from that
state which his Disciples were in after his Resurrection, of which he foretold,
as Did his Apostles, and which So came to Pass; and which has been Even until
now that Life is rose again in the Witnesses, which lay slain in the great City
which Spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where Our Lord was Crucified; and
they stand upon their feet, and the Kingdom, and the Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, is Returning unto the People
of the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominions shall serve, and obey him, to whom It is given. As Daniel saw and
spoke of, and John in the Revelations, that so it should be.

And, now, It beginning to be so; and the time drawing nigh wherein it shall be
finished; He works, and will work what he can that he may not be taken out of
the Way; and moves as, and where he has Place, and as that which Lets is
taken out of the Way to Preserve his Kingdom; stirring with the Kings of the
Earth, and the Great Men; and the Mighty Men, and the Captains; and the Chief
Counselors, and in all Men both High and Low, and Rich and Poor in whom he is
to draw them to Battle against the Great Day of the Lord God, and against his
Army, which are chosen, Faithful and true, that follow him which sits on the
White Horse, upon White Horses in fine Linen, White and clean; And against him
that sits on the White Horse that goes forth Conquering and to Conquer; who
has on his Vesture, and on his Thigh a Name written, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords.

And as he works in the World, so he does and will among Friends what he can
where he is yet uncast out, and has yet a Place, as he can work; that he may
keep a Place and station in them, and out of his secret Places may appear to
slay the Innocent; and to Keep that from Rising which is Lord and King.

For, whilst Men have slept, the Envious One has sowed Tares even where the
good Seed was sown, which have sprung up with the Seed, and have hurt and
choked it in some, and there he works, where yet there remains that undone
away which was before convincement; or that he can Deceive, or that he has got
advantage upon by the negligence of any, or the falling of such into
Transgression, and there remaining; and there he is making his Forts Night and
Day; and strengthening them that he may be able to withstand his Appearance, who
shall Destroy him with the Brightness of his coming; and keep him under at
least as to the Particular of this and that Friend, who is Lord of all; and
that such may be made serviceable to him; and unserviceable to the Lord in that
Day, and that he may be kept from Arising in them; and they may be swept away
in Perdition and Destruction, which shall come from the Presence of the Lord.

And, this work he has been at long, and with great Industry (though as Covert
as he may) Night and Day, to keep his hold that so be may not be cast out; as
Friends will see as they come to it; and what an Enemy they have; and how
Subtle, and Vigilant; and what holds he has, and how he has strengthened them;
and how strong they are; and how he Lurks in them; and what ado it is Ere he be
cast out; and what it will Cost, and what they have been Doing in Neglecting
their Precious time (I speak to such as have done so) and how Precious that
time so Neglected was; and what it is to have suffered the Enemy to Lodge
within them, and to Eat Bread with them, and to go to Meetings with them; and
to be with them in their Shops, and upon their occasions as their familiars.
And then they will cry out and say (that in them which has suffered; whicwhath
been checked by this, and Oppressed and bowed down all the Day long, which the
other has made Merry over; will so cry out) had it been an Enemy (an Enemy
without) that had done me this harm, I could have born it; but it was not an
Enemy that Reproached me; neither was it he that hated me that did Magnify
himself against me (will the Seed say) but it is thou, A Man, Mine Equal, my
Guide, and mine acquaintance; We took sweet Council together, and walked to the
House of God in Company; said David of Achitophel when he Joined to Absalom the
Son of David's Bowels, which rose up against him, and Expelled him Jerusalem.
Let Death seize upon them (said he) and let them go down quick into Hell, for
Wickedness is in their Dwellings, and Amongst them; Yea, mine Own familiar
Friend (says he Again) in whom I trusted which has Eat of my Bread, has lift
up his heel against me.

Then will you see (I speak still to such as have neglected the hour of their
Visitation) what ye have lodged in your Bosoms; and what ye have Cocker'd with
your hands, and Dandled on your knees, when the Son of your Bowels shall put ye
to Distress, and seek the Kingdom; and ye would be saved from it, if ye knew
how; In Bowels of Tender Compassion, and in Tears do I write for the Seeds
sake, that you mind in time your state (all you that are here) whilst there is
yet a little time, and the Light is with you; that the Oppressor may be cut
off, and the Extortioner may cease out of the Land, Ere God come to plead the
Quarrel of his Covenant; and he make you to know what ye have been Doing, and
Avenge the Blood of his Elect which cries Night and Day unto him.

For, though you hear it not; and shut your Ears at its Cry; (I speak still to
you in whom the Seed suffers) and as Joseph's Brethren did of Old, sit down to
Eat, and to Drink when they had put Joseph in the Pit. And as Haman and
Ahasuerus sat down to Drink, when the Posts were gone out being hastened by the
Kings Commandment, and the Decree was given in Shusan the Palace, to cut off
all the Jews, and the City Shusan was Perplexed; And as they did (whom John in
the Revelations saw; that so they should, Rejoice over the Dead bodies of the
Witnesses which were slain in the streets of the Great City, which Spiritually
is called Sodom, and Egypt as aforesaid; even they of the People, and Kindreds
and Tongues and Nations, who dwelt upon the Earth, and suffered not their Dead
bodies to be put into Graves, and made Merry, and sent Gifts One to Another;
because those two Prophets Tormented them which dwelt upon the Earth; I say,
though ye may shut your Ears, and refuse to hear its Cry, and make Merry Over
it, yet the Lord will not; but will arise, and Deliver it, and then Woe will be
to that which has caused it to suffer. A sad Day it will be for that when the
Seed cries to the Lord against you; I tell you, he will Avenge its quarrel, and
come and Deliver it; but that must Know Sorrow that has made it to suffer, and
what that is you will know in that Day when the Lord arises to Deliver it. He
that has an Ear, Let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, and so
I am Clear.

Now, This I say Friends, as I said before, as the Deceiver works in the World,
so he does, and will among Friends: I say in them (each One in his Own
Particular where he has Place) and among them (Each One as to the Other) if so
be by any means, he may Prevail there. For he must be cast out of Friends, Ere
he can be out of the World; For, that in Friends which is Lord and King, must
first arise, and Reign Over all in their Particulars; Ere it can in the World;
And here will be the Great Engagement. For he knows who it is that is Come,
that will cast him into the Pit, and rule for Ever; Therefore against him will
he work, and against his Arising that he may not be cast into the Pit; and
against this has he been preparing long in the Night; when Men have slept (as
I have said) for he has been long wary of this Day, and knew that it would
come, and hinder it he Did what he could that it might not come; and now that
it is come, he works, and will work, Even as well in them in whom it is Come
where he has Place, as in the World, that Night may come Over again; and
because he has seen all this, and knew it coming therefore has he bestirred
himself the more that he Might sit sure, and withstand his Enemy. And whether
any of you think So, or No, this is So.

And into Heaven has he got (as well as into other Places) to secure his
Station (high enough as One may say) Principalities, and Powers; Spiritual
Wickednesses in high Places; He has built his Nest among the Stars; and into
the Temple of God is he got, and has Exalted himself in many, Over all that is
called God; and sits as God, and shows himself that he is God. And here he
Does, and will Oppose, and Exalt himself above all that is called God (where he
is so got) or that is Worshipped. And he has begotten a Son of Perdition fit
for his turn, which will serve his Father, and work for his Father; and this is
him; the Man of Sin. Who So Opposes, and will Exalt himself; the Mystery of
Iniquity which does already work; only He who now Lets; will Let till he be
taken out of the Way; and then shall that [Wicked] be Revealed whom the Lord
shall consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and Destroy with the Brightness of
his Coming; Even him whose Coming is after the Working of Satan; with [all]
Power and Signs and Lying Wonders, and with all Deceiveableness of
Unrighteousness in them that Perish.

Now; of these things Paul testified to the Thessalonians in in that Day; Even
to the Church of Thessalonica which was in God; when, in that Day, these things
were beginning to Enter; and John saw a Great War in Heaven; Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon fought and his Angels, and
Prevailed not; Neither was their Place found [any more] in Heaven. And the
Great Dragon was cast out, the Old Serpent; called the Devil, and Satan, which
Deceived the whole World; he was cast into the Earth, and his Angels were cast
out with him; and his Tail drew the Third part of the Stars from Heaven; and
did cast them to the Earth. And he Persecuted the Woman which brought forth the
Man Child, when he saw that he was cast into the Earth, and he was wroth with
the Woman, and went to make War with the Remnant of her Seed, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. And the Serpent
cast out of his Mouth Waters as a Flood after the Woman that he might cause her
to be carried away of the Flood. And the Earth helped the Woman; and the Earth
Opened her Mouth, and swallowed up the Flood which the Dragon cast out of his
Mouth. And this was a Wonder which John saw in Heaven.

And he that is come said to his Disciples in that Day, who also says it now;
There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great Signs
and Wonders; insomuch that (if it were Possible) they shall Deceive the [very]
Elect. Behold I have told ye before.

And he says Immediately after the Tribulation of those Days, shall the Sun
be Darkened, and the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars shall fall
from Heaven, and the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And then shall appear
the Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven; And then shall all the Tribes of the
Earth Mourn; and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven
with Power and Great Glory. And he shall send his Angels with the Great Sound
of a Trumpet; and they shall gather his Elect from the four Winds, from One End
of Heaven unto the Other. Now Learn a Parable of the Fig Tree; when his Branch
is yet tender; and puts forth Leaves, ye know that Summer is Nigh; So
likewise ye when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near even at
the Doors. Verily I say unto you, this Generation shall not pass till all
these things be fulfilled. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words
shall not pass away.

And the Prophet Zachery says; Awake, O Sword! against my Shepherd; and
against the Man that is my Fellow. Says the Lord of Hosts. Smite the Shepherd,
and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn my hand upon tht Little Ones;
And it shall come to pass that in all the Land says the Lord, Two Parts
therein shall be cut off and Die; but the Third shall be left therein; and I
will bring the Third Part through the Fire, and will Refine them as Silver is
Refined; and will try them as Gold is tried; they shall call on my Name, and I
will hear them. I will say it is my People; and they shall say the Lord is my
God.

And he that is come, says again. All ye shall be offended because of Me this
Night. For, it is Written; I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the
Flock shall be scattered abroad. But after I am risen I will go before you into
Galilee.

And the Prophet Isaiah says; Whose Fire is in Sion, and his Furnace in
Jerusalem. And the Light of Israel shall be for a Fire, and his holy One for a
Flame, and it shall burn, and Devour his Thorns, and his Briars in One Day; and
shall consume the Glory of his Forests, and of his Fruitful Field both Soul
and Body; and they shall be as when a Standard Bearer faints: and the rest of
the Trees of the Forest shall be few, so that a Child may Write them. And it
shall come to pass in that Day that the Remnant of Israel, and such as are
Escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more stay upon him that smote them, but
shall stay upon the Lord the Holy One of Israel in Truth; The Remnant shall
Return, Even the Remnant of Jacob unto the Mighty God; For, though thy People
Israel be as the Sand of the Sea; Yet a Remnant of them shall Return. The
Consumption Decreed shall overflow with Righteousness. For, the Lord God of
Hosts shall make a Consumption. Even Determined in the midst of all the Land.
Therefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, O my People that Dwell in Sion,
Be not afraid of the Assyrian; He shall smite thee with a Rod, and shall lift
up his staff against thee after the manner of Egypt, but yet a very little
while, and the Indignation shall cease, and mine Anger in their Destruction.
And it shall come to pass in that Day; that his Burden shall be taken from off
thy shoulder; and his Yoke from off thy Neck; because of the Anointing. Behold,
the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, shall Lop the Bough with Terror, and the High
Ones of Stature shall be hewn Down; and the Haughty shall be humbled. And he
shall cut the Thickets of the Forest with Iron; and Lebanon shall fall by a
Mighty One.

And the Apostle Peter says (who said it to the Saints in that Day; who (some
of them) came in that Day to the End of their Faith, the Salvation of their
Souls; and Witnessed the things he spoke of, whilst they were in this
Tabernacle; and he speaks it now, as to the things that are at the Door, and
must be Witnessed Ere this hour is Over; for their Prophecies reach unto Us,
and of Us, it is that they Prophesied, chiefly, and to Us it was to whom they
spoke, who spoke of the Day of the Lord; the Apostles of Our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, in whom what they so spoke is to be fulfilled; for the Lord had a
Regard to Us in that Day, and spoke as to Us upon whom the Ends of the Earth
are Come, and in whom he is now come to finish his work; which he has been
about since the World began; that We might be found unto Praise, and Honor,
and to Immortality and Eternal Life; and be the First Fruits of his Seed, whom
he has Chosen and Brought forth in this Day to Do his Mighty Works of Wonder
by, in which he will be Glorified. For, they have all Prophesied unto Us, and
in Us their Prophecies shall be fulfilled. But (says he.) The End of all
things is at hand (and the Lord has said it Now) Be ye therefore Sober, and
Watch unto Prayer; And think it not strange concerning the Fiery Trial, which
is to try you as if some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice in as much
as ye are made Partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when his Glory shall be
revealed ye may be glad also with Exceeding Joy. Be Sober, be Vigilant because
your Adversary the Devil as a Roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may
Devour, whom resist steadfast in the Faith. For, the time is Come that Judgment
must begin at the House of God; and if it first begin at Us; What shall the End
be of them that Obey not the Gospel of God. And if the Righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear? And; The Day of the Lord will
Come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a
great Noise, and the Elements shall Melt with fervent heat, and the Earth also
and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up (here is a Fiery Trial indeed,
think it not strange, Friends, when this thing comes on you; who have not known
it yet, for this ye must witness Ere ye be Perfect; and the Time is near. For,
things must not be, as they have been, the Seed suffering still, the Seed
under, the Seed Languishing; the Seed growing Lean; the Seed Oppressed; the
Seed still compast about with Enemies, and beset round, and Lying down in
Bitterness, and in Sorrow, and in Tears, and in Death, but it must Reign Over
All, It must lead Captivity Captive; It must feed that which Oppressed it with
its Own Flesh, and make it Drunken with Its Blood as with sweet Wine; And in
the Day that it arises this will be witnessed) Seeing then that [all] these
things shall be Dissolved (says he) What manner of Persons Ought ye to be in
all holy Conversation and Godliness; looking for, and hastening unto the coming
of the Great Day of God; wherein the Heavens being on Fire shall be Dissolved;
and the Elements shall Melt with fervent heat. Novertheless. We, according to
his Promise, Look for New Heavens, and a New Earth. Wherein Dwells
Righteousness. Wherefore, Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things; Be
Diligent that ye may be found of him in Peace, without spot and Blameless. And,
account that the long Suffering of God is Salvation. Even as Our Beloved
Brother Paul also according to the Wisdom Given unto him has written unto you.
As also in all his Epistles; speaking in them of these things in whith are some
things hard to be Understood; which they that are Unlearned, and Unstable
Wrest, as they Do also the other Scriptures to their own Destruction. Ye
therefore Beloved seeing that ye know these things before, beware least ye also
being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.
But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
to him be Glory, both Now, and for Ever. Amen.

And, Paul said to the Thessalonians. But of the Times and Seasons; Brethren,
ye have no need that I write unto you. For, your selves know Perfectly that the
Day of the Lord so comes as a Thief in the Night. For, when they shall say
Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them as Travel upon a
Woman with Child, and they shall not Escape. But ye Brethren are not in
Darkness, that that Day should overtake you as a Thief. Ye are all the Children
of Light, and the Children of the Day, we are not of the Night; Nor of
Darkness: Therefore let us not sleep as do others, but let Us Watch, and be
Sober. For, they that sleep sleep in the Night, and they that be Drunken, are
Drunken in the Night; but let us who are of the Day, be Sober, putting on the
Breast Plate of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation: for God
has not appointed Us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Who died for Us that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together
with him. And, that knowing the time, that now it is high time to Awake out of
sleep; for now is Our Salvation nearer then when we Believed; The Night is far
spent, the day is at hand, let Us therefore cast off the works of Darkness; and
let Us put on the Armor of Light: Let Us walk honestly as in the day, Not in
Rioting and Drunkenness, Not in Chambering and Wantonness, Not in Strife and
Envying; but put ye On the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. And, Put on the whole Armor of God, that
ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. For, we wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers; against
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World. Against Spiritual Wickednesses in
high Places. Wherefore take unto ye the whole Armor of God, that ye may be
able to withstand in the Evil Day; and having done [all] to stand. Stand
therefore, having your Loins girt about with Truth; and having on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness; and your feet shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace. Above all taking the shield of Faith; Wherewith ye shall be
able to Quench all the Fiery Darts of the wicked; and take the Helmet of
Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying
always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance; and Supplication for all Saints, and for Us, etc. And
take heed least any fall short of the Grace of God; and by an heart of Unbelief
depart from the Living God. Let Us therefore labor to enter into that Rest,
least any Man fall after the same Example of Unbelief. Take heed, Brethren,
least there be in any of you an Evil heart of Unbelief in departing from the
Living God; but Exhort one another daily whilst it is called to Day, least any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. For, we are made Partakers
of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our Confidence steadfast unto the End:
while it is said, to Day if ye will hear his Voice harden not your hearts, as
in the Provocation; For, Some when they had heard did Provoke; howbeit not all
that came out of Egypt by Moses; But with whom was he grieved Forty years? Was
it not with them that had sinned whose Carcasses fell in the Wilderness? And to
whom swear he that they should not enter into his Rest; but to them that
believed not? So we see that they could not enter in because of Unbelief.

And John in the Revelations says of him. If therefore thou shall not watch, I
will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come
upon Thee. And, Behold I come as a Thief; Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his Garments; least be walk naked, and they see his shame. And, without
are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore-mongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes a Lie. And, the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the
abominable, and Whore-mongers, Murderers, Sorcerers, Idolaters; and all Liars,
shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which
is the second Death: I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify of these things
in the Churches. And, He that is Unjust let him be Unjust still, and he that is
filthy let him be filthy still; and he that is Righteous let him be Righteous
still; and he that is holy let him be holy still; and behold I come quickly,
and my reward is with me to give Every Man according as his work shall be.

Now, these things will come to Pass in this Day of the Lord which is already
entered, Ere it be finished. And what these things are, and what they will
amount unto; and what your sufferings, and what your Trial thereby; and what
need ye have to look about you, and to see on what Ground ye stand; and where
ye are; and how it is with you; and how ye may Encounter with all this; and how
ye may overcome, and be counted worthy to Escape all these things, and to stand
before the Son of Man; You will be able to Judge in the Spirit of Truth: as it
opens unto you; and as these things come to Pass; and It behooves you to
consider. For, Nation shall rise up against Nation, (says he) and Kingdom
against Kingdom; and there shall be Famines, and Pestilences, and Earthquakes
in diverse places. All these are but the beginning of Sorrows. Then shall they
Deliver ye up to be Afflicted; and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all
Men for my Names sake, And, then shall many be offended, and betray One
another, and shall hate One another: And many false Prophets shall arise, and
shall Deceive many; and because Iniquity shall abound the Love of many shall
Wax Cold; But he that shall Endure unto the End, the same shall be saved. And
this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Preached in all the World, for a Witness
unto all Nations, and then shall the End Come. When ye therefore, shall see the
Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy
Place (who so reads let him Understand) then let them which be in Judea flee
unto the Mountains. Let him that is on the house Top, not come down to take any
thing out of his house. Neither let him which is in the Field Return back to
take his Clothes: And woe to them which are with Child, and to them that give
suck in those Days. But pray ye that your Flight be not in the Winter; Nor on
the Sabbath Day; for then shall be Great Tribulation, such as was not from the
beginning of the World to this time, no nor Ever shall be. And Except those
Days should be shortened, there should no Flesh be saved: but for the Elects
sake those Days shall be shortened. Then if any Man shall say unto you, Lo here
is Christ, or there, believe it not; For there shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and shall show Great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that if it
were Possible they shall Deceive the very Elect, Behold, I have told ye before:
Therefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the Desert; go not forth;
Behold he is in the secret Chambers, believe it not. For as the Lightning
comes out of the East; and shines even unto the West. So shall also the
coming of the Son of Man be: For, wheresoever the Carcass is, there will the
Eagles be gathered together.

Brethren, and Friends, These things are Deep and full of Mystery, Read them in
the Spirit, and Ponder them well; and see what ye have to go through, Ere ye
come to your Crown; and what it will Cost; that ye may not be as Foolish, but
as Wise, that ye may not only begin, but Finish.

Not to lay a stumbling block or a Snare before you, or to Discourage the least
of you, do I thus Write; but that you may be aware of what ye will meet with;
and so counting your Cost before hand, ye may come to your Crown.

For, this has been often seen among Men; Many a Glorious thing set as the
Mark, and pursued for a Time; but what has been in the Way to it, having not
been considered so well, or known, They have been swallowed up; and so never
came to that, at which they Aimed; and that was in their Eye, and before them:
So Run that ye may obtain (said Paul) Know ye not that they that run in a Race,
run all; but One obtains the Prize. So run that ye may obtain.

And of this I am sencible, and it lies (and has done long when I consider
these things) as a heavy Load upon me, and a grievious Burden for the Seeds
sake (knowing what must be past through) to see how few sit down in the
Reckoning of these things; Or set these things before them; But, many are
looking to a Glorious Day beyond; and the falling of the Nations, and the Reign
of Truth, Over all for Ever, and Ever; (And so it will be in the End of this
hour to as many as abide) but what will be before that; and what must be
Engaged with; and with what an Enemy; and how Subtle and Politic; and what
will be Ere this is attained; and what must be lost, and parted with and
suffered; and what a Cross there is to the Crown, that is not so much
considered, nor the consideration thereof so entered into, and the weight, as
it Ought, in Many.

Hence it has come to Pass already, that some have made (upon these little
Trials, (in Comparison) which have Ushered in this hour) and are making
Shipwreck of Faith and a Good Conscience; because they had not Parted with all;
and yet it was but things of this World; and but a Trial neither as to that;
for those that stood Faithful to the Lord at that time he soon Delivered in
many Places, whilst some stood lookers on; and shrunck away because of the
Cross.

Hence it has come to Pass also, that some not minding as they should have
done, their Enemy within, but suffering Him to have a Lodge in them, and strong
holds which he has fortified; have been gone Ere they have been aware; or in
the twinkling of an eye have been overtaken, or, the Day of the Lord has
overtaken them, when the Enemy has rose up like a Flood; and has come upon
them unawares; and as a Thief in the night. For, here is the Danger, when
something remains yet uncast out, in which the Enemy has a place, and he can
bring something from without that is suitable unto this, thereby to enter and
can enter thereby, he then runs such away as with a Flood; and when the Lord
suffers this to be, then Look to it; For, When the Lord has long born and
suffered, and kept off that which should have entered to have Joined with that
which is not cast out and So to have carried such away; and when yet the Lord
is not heeded, and his Seed suffers, and when that is still nourished and kept
which is the Degenerate Plant of a strange Vine; and when there is still a
bringing forth Fruit according unto it; And, He withdrawes, and suffers that to
enter which he has kept off long, and fenced off, and so It Joins with that
which is suitable unto it in such a One; then such a One comes to be Eaten up,
and trodden down, and carried away; for the Wild Beast is entered, and they are
neither Pruned nor Dug; but Briars and Thorns they come to bring forth, and
the Clouds rain no rain on them; and they are near unto Cursing, whose End is
to be burnt. Now (says he) I will sing to my welbeloved a Song of my Beloved
touching his Vineyard. My welbeloved has a Vineyard in a very Fruitful Hill;
And he [fenced] it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and Planted it with
the choicest Vine, and Built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a Wine
Press therein, and he looked that it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought
forth [Wild] Grapes. And, now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men of Judah.
Judge I Pray you betwixt me, and my Vineyard. What could have been done more to
my Vineyard that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, it brought forth [Wild] Grapes. And now go to, I will tell
you what I will do to my Vineyard. I will take away the hedge thereof; and it
shall be Eaten up; and break down the Wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down; and I will lay it Wast, it shall not be Pruned, nor Dug, but there
shall come up Briars, and Thorns; I will also command the Clouds that they Rain
no Rain upon it. For, the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel;
and the Men of Judah his Pleasant Plant; and he looked for Judgment and behold
Oppression; For Righteousness and behold a Cry. And, Ephraim is given to Idols,
let him alone. And, I will not Punish your Daughters when they commit Whoredom;
Nor your Spouses when they commit Adultery; And, Pray not thou for this People;
Neither lift up Cry, or Prayer for them; Neither make Intercession to me, for I
will not hear thee. And, I will even forsake you says the Lord; And, yea,
also, Woe unto them when I Depart from them.

Therefore He said, Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with Suffeiting, and Drunkennsss, and the Cares of this Life, and
that Day come upon you Unawares; For, as a Snare shall it come on all them that
Dwell on the Face of the Earth: Watch therefore, and Pray always, that ye may
be Counted Worthy to Escape all these things, and stand before the Son of Man.

Watch therefore, for you know not what hour your Lord does come. But know
this, that if the Good Man of the house had known in what Watch the Thief would
come, he would have Watched, and would not have suffered his house to have been
broken up: Therefore be also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not of the
Son of Man comes.

Take ye heed, Watch and Pray; for ye know not when the time is, For, the Son
of Man is as a man taking a far Journey; who left his house, and gave Authority
to his Servants and to every Man his Work, and commanded the Porter to watch;
watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the House comes, at
Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning; Least coming
suddenly he find you sleeping; And what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch.

Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning, and ye your selves
like unto Men that wait for their Lord when he will return from the Wedding,
that when he knocks they may open to him Immediately: Blessed are those
Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find Watching. Verily I say unto
you, that he shall Gird himself; and make them sit down to meat; and will come
forth, and serve them. And if he shall come in the second Watch; Or come in the
third Watch; and find them so, Blessed are those servants. And this know, that
if the Good Man of the house had known what hour the Thief would come, he would
have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye
therefore ready also, for the Son of Man comes at an hour ye think not. Who
then is that Faithful, and Wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over
his household, to give them their Portion of meat in due Season; Blessed is that
servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing; of a Truth I say unto
you, he will make him Ruler over all that he has. But, and if that servant say
in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to beat the men
servants, and the Maidens, and to Eat, and Drink, and to be Drunken. The Lord
of that servant will come in a Day when he looks not for him, and at an hour
that he is not a ware; and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
Portion with the Unbelievers. And that servant which knew his Lords will, and
prepared not himself; Neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes;
shall be beaten with few stripes. For, to whom soever much is given, of him
shall much be required; and to whom Men have committed much; of him they will
ask the more.

Thus said he, who is Come, in that Day of his Flesh to his Disciples of the
Day and hour that now is come; and this he now says, who is Come; and Blessed
are they who hear, and make ready for his coming; Who is Come the second time
without Sin unto Salvation.

Dear Brethren, and Friends; I am Even melted in the Bowels of Compassion, and
Love unto you; and am Weighed Even down with Tears, and closed about with
Tenderness; That Every One may be found ready when he comes from the Wedding,
and may Enter with the Bridegroom into the Bride Chamber.

For, he said also, to them in that Day; and he says it now; Then shall the
Kingdom of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins; which took their Lamps, and went
forth to meet the Bridegroom; and five of them were Wise, and five were
Foolish. They that were Foolish took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them;
but the Wise took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps. While the Bridegroom
tarried they all slumbred, and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made.
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him. Then all those Virgins
arose, and Trimmed their Lamps; and the Foolish said unto the Wise, Give Us of
your Oil for our Lamps are gone out: But the Wise answered, saying, Not so,
least there be not enough for Us and you; but go ye rather to them that Sell,
and Buy for your selves. And while they went to Buy the Bridegroom came; and
they that were ready went in with him into the Marriage; and the Door was shut.
Afterward came also the other Virgins, Saying, Lord, Lord open to Us; and he
answered and said, Verily, I know you not. Watch ye therefore for ye know not
the Day nor the hour, wherein the Son of Man comes.

For, Friends, the time is not as heretofore when the Lord was Visiting you,
and Watering you, and refreshing you, that ye might grow up, and bring forth
Fruit unto God that he might be Glorified; but now he is come Expecting the
Fruit that he may be glorified, And now, Woe be unto that which shall not bring
forth Fruit unto God; that shall not Glorify God; that shall not show forth
the Virtue of him that has called it from Darkness to his mavelous Light
that he may be Glorified. For, he has called you, Friends, unto Grace and
Virtue; and what Grace and Virtue Ye have, he will call ye to show forth; and
he will suffer Men to try you that ye may show forth his Grace and Virtue, That
he may be Glorified. Now that which starts aside in this Day; that Soul that
Draws back; that which proves the Degenerate Plant of a strange Vine, after
all this Digging, and Pruning, and gathering out of the Stones, and fencing,
and Watering and Refreshing, and brings forth [Wild] Grapes; Grapes of Sodom,
and Clusters of Gomorrah; Woe Woe, will be to that in this Day of the Lord: For,
the Lord is Come to make himself known in the Earth; and the Lord will be known
by the Judgment that he Executes. The World has long been without the
Knowledge of him; He has brought forth a People by whom he has made known
himself; he has not dealt so by Another Nation; Neither has the Heathen the
Knowledge of his Law. Friends you are they that must make him known, and by
whom he will be known in the Earth; by what of him shall appear in you before
Men, when you are tried, which is not in themselves; which is his Virtue; which
shall get to him a Name and a Praise, such as Never was nor shall be: If any of
you shall not answer to this; but cause his Name to be Blasphemed through the
contrary; Now he is Come to show what a People he has; and how he is in them;
and how they are as they say; and do as they speak; Who are not of this World;
though they are in the World; and who do make it So to appear in sticking to
the Lord in the loss of this World; and in not being overcome by the World, nor
of Evil, but overcoming the World, and Evil with Good, and Praying for their
Enemies; and Blessing them that Persecute them, and doing good to them that
despightfully use them, and unmoved in the loss of All, and unshaken,
notwithstanding the shaking of all things; and obeying God before Men,
notwithstanding what Man may be suffered to do unto them; and Man will be
suffered to do very much; and the Devil what he can within, and without to try
them to the Uttermost; I say, if any of you now shall be offended, and fall
off, and Dishonor the Lord, and cause his Name to be Blasphemed; the Lord God
will be Avenged of such, and his Fury, and his Indignation will break forth,
and burn against such; and better it were for such that they had not been born.
The Lord has spoken it. And he will make such Examples of his Vengeance, that
Men may Fear the Lord, and Tremble before him, because his Judgments are made
Manifest; Who is a God that will be Feared, and had in Reverence by those that
draw nigh unto him.

Therefore All my Dear Friends, All stand fast, Unshaken, Unmovable; forasmuch
as your Labor shall not be in Vain in the Lord; nor your sufferings; but the
Lord will Reward ye, who is near, and will be with you; and will not suffer ye
to fall, as ye abide with him, whatsoever may be your Trial; For, it is his
Name, and his Glory, and his Truth, and his Seed that is at Stake; and you it
is (as I have said) that he has formed for himself, to show forth his Praise,
and ye shall show forth his Praise. And he will stand near you; he will hold
the Balance; that your sufferings overturn you not. Underneath will be his
Everlasting Arms; he will never suffer you to be moved who keep in him. For it
is his Great Day, and his Great Battle that is to be sought; and his Great Work
in the World; The Greatest that Ever was or shall be (as has been D^^lared)
after which there is No more; but the Seed of God shall Reign over all for Ever
and Ever. He will assuredly now mind for his Name, and his Glory, and his Seed,
and his Truth, and his People, and his Kingdoms sake, which is an Everlasting
Kingdom; and his Dominion that which never shall have End; which he is come now
to set up, and you must fight it, and in and by you he will overcome by the
Power of the Sword, which proceeds out of his Mouth, that sits on the white
Horse, whom the Armies of Heaven follow Riding on white Horses; Therefore he
will uphold you, he will support you (who abide Faithful unto him) with the
Right hand of his Righteousness; and he will Crown you with Glory and Honor. A
Crown, such as never was nor shall be; because the Day will be such as never
was nor will be; and by you he will make way for the opening of the Graves of
his Seed throughout the whole Earth. By you he will make Nations tremble (his
Power in you) and the Isles shall be afraid, and stand afar off; and will cast
by you the Deceiver into the Pit; Out of which he shall arise no more. And as
the things aforesaid are Dear unto him, and as his Seed in you is Dear to him
as the Apple of his Eye; and as ye are willing to Glorify his Name, and Engage
all unto that; will he Regard you. For, Who is this that Engages himself to
draw near me, says the Lord.

And this let me say unto you, and you know it who are in the feeling of the
Life Immortal, which the Lord has Delivered, your very Life makes to this. It
Presses on unto the Battle; It is as ready to Glorify the Lord as he has been
to Deliver it, and to Redeem it out of the Pit. It came into the World to Do
his Will; Its ready to Do his Will, and that his Will may be done in Earth as
it is in Heaven. It longs to be at his Work; It Presses you On. O Death! I will
be thy Death. O Grave! I will be thy Destruction. Repentance shall be hid from
mine Eyes; And so you feel that which shakes all things, that that which can
be shaken may be removed, that that which cannot be shaken may Remain. Your
Life it is that shakes all things; how then can ye be shaken, as ye abide in
your Life? It swallows up Death in Victory; how can ye then be swallowed up of
Death? It overcomes, through the Blood of the Lamb; how then can ye be
overcome? And to him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne says the
Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World; Who was Dead, and is alive,
and behold he lives for Evermore, and has the Keys of Hell, and of Death; Who
by Death overcomes him that had the Power of Death which is the Devil; and will
Cast Death, and Hell into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimston which is
the second Death; and the last Enemy that shall be Destroyed is Death.

Friends, and Brethren, stand still and see the Salvation of God. It Is but One
brunt more, though it be a Great One, that you are to go through, the Greatest
that Ever was, or shall be in the Dominion of the Lord God Eternal, and in his
strength stand to it Now; Buckle on to the Day in that which is Immortal, set
your faces thitherwards; As Men that have Counted your Cost; and come with all
you have, who have parted with all, for an Incorruptable Crown; March on. Its
but this One Engagement more, and it is yours. Its but passing through this
Storm and you are in your Haven; where you shall never be disturbed more. This
is that for which you came into the World; This is that which must stand by you
in the World; This is that for which the World was made, unto this are you
called; This is your Privilege above all that have gone before you, or shall
come after you. It Is a Work worth your while, the weightiest that Ever was; Its
that unto which all things have wrought since the World began in the Counsel of
God; That which the Holy Men of God have spoken of, and the Prophets prophesied
since the beginning of the World; That such a Day there should be, and Its
coming now to be fulfilled, now to be finished in, and by you; whom he has
chosen above all, and brought ye forth at such a time as this to Glorify his
Name, and to get unto him his Great Praise; His heart is on you; His Love is to
you; and he will write upon you (who overcome) his New Name, even the Name of
the City of God. the New Jerusalem that comes out of Heaven from God. And ye
shall have right to Eat of the Tree of Life that (...) the midst of the
Paradise of God; And ye shall have (...) over the Nations; and Rule them with a
Rod of Iron, as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers; and he
shall go no more out, but shall be a Pillar in the Temple of God for Ever, and
for Ever.

Friends, Ye cannot be overcome because ye are in God, (as ye abide in him,) ye
cannot be shaken because ye are upon the Rock of Ages; ye shall Prevail and
Prosper; ye shall be stronger then your Enemies; your Right hand shall teach
you Terrible things. The Lord your God that stands at your Right hand, shall
strike through for you the hearts of Kings in the Day of his Wrath. Your
Enemies shall be confounded. The Lord shall Reign over all for Ever and Ever.

And this, Dear Friends; I was moved of the Lord to write to you while this
little Breathing is, and Ere the Door be closed up, for time is short; That the
Breathings of my Life may come at you, and to you; and that I may be a help to
you (such as have need) as I stand in the Body in the Will of God, whose Will
this is that I should So write unto you; That all may be warned, and all may be
left without Excuse. And so the Blessing of God be on his Seed in you all for
Fver and Ever. The Salutation of my Love to you all is Ended. Fare ye well in
the Lord.

Bristoll 24th. 8th. Month. 1661. Your Brother and Companion in Tribulation,
and the Patience, and the Kingdom of God, for the Seeds sake, for which We
suffer; and shall Reign with him, We who suffer with him. GEO. BISHOPE.

THE END.

