A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE House of Commons, AT St. Margaret's
Westminster, January 30th. School/9.

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

Mr. BLACKALL's SERMON Preached before the HOUSE of COMMONS, January 30th.
School/9.

Martis 31 die Januarij, School. Ordered,
THat the Thanks of the House be given to Mr. Blackall, for the Sermon by him
Preached before them Yesterday, at St. Margaret's Westminster, and that he be
Desired to Print the same; And that Mr. Hare, Mr. Hammond and Mr. Perry do
Acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cl' Dom' Com'.

St. JOHN ix. 3. Jesus answered, Neither has this Man sinned nor his Parents;
but that the Works of God should be made manifest in him.


THE Occasion of these Words may be seen in the foregoing-Verses: As Jesus
passed by, he saw a Man which was blind from his Birth; And his Disciples asked
him, saying, Master, who did sin, this Man, or his Parents, that he was born
blind? Jesus answered, Neither has, etc.

For the right Understanding of which Answer of our Savior's, we must first
inquire into the Ground and Meaning of the Disciples Question; Master, who did
sin, this Man, or his Parents, that he was born blind?

And the Ground and Reason of their Question seems to be an Opinion which they
had entertained, That the good and evil Things of this Life were, by the Divine
Providence, always proportioned to Men according to their different Deserts;
And particularly, that whenever God sent upon any Man any sore and
extraordinary Affliction, some great Offense or extraordinary Provocation was
always the Reason of it.

And this indeed is an Opinion that is too generally received in the World, and
is the Occasion of those rash and uncharitable Censures, which People are too
apt to pass upon others, from the Consideration of the evil Things which they
see do befall them in this Life.

They can hardly forbear thinking that Man, a great Sinner, whom they see very
sorely afflicted, although they themselves know nothing that he has done amiss;
nor perhaps ever heard any thing ill of him: But the Judgment of God, they
presume, is right; and they take it for granted, that he would not have
inflicted such Punishment upon any Man, if he had not well deserved it.

So the Inhabitants of the Island on which St. Paul was Shipwrack'd, argued
with respect to him, when a Viper out of the Fire had fastened on him; Acts
28.4. When the Barbarians saw the venomous Beast hang on his Hand, they said
among themselves, no doubt this Man is a Murderer, whom, though he has escaped
the Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to live.

And thus also the Disciples seem to have thought, viz. That such a great
Calamity as Blindness, would not have been sent upon any Man, but for some very
great Fault; though what the Fault was, or where the Fault lay, they could not
guess.

Had the Man been suddenly struck with Blindness, they would have made no doubt
but that it was a Judgment of God upon him, for some great Crime that he
himself had committed; although they had not been able to name the particular.

But his Case was extraordinary, for he was born Blind; so that the Calamity
was sent upon him before he could have done any Thing to deserve it; And so
what Account to give of this, they could not tell.

But they seem to have heard of the Opinion of the Pythagoreans (which was
embraced also by some among the Jews) who held that there is a Transmigration
of Souls from one Body to another; Great. in Loc.
so that, consequently, every Man that is born into the World, had a
Pre-existence in some former State, And if this Opinion were true, they could
not tell, but that this Man's Blindness from his Birth, might be a Punishment
sent upon him by God, for his Misbehaviour in that former State which he was in.

Or if not so; yet they remembered, that it was threatened in their own Law, that
God would sometimes visit the Sins of the Fathers upon their Children. And so
they could not tell but that this Blindness of the Child was designed as a
Punishment to his wicked Parents, and that the Sin of the Father or Mother was,
hereby, visited on their Son.

One or the other of these, they took for granted, was the Cause of this Man's
Blindness; viz. either that it was a Judgment of God upon him for the
Wickedness of his Parents; or else, for some great Crime committed by himself,
in some State that his Soul had formerly been in, before it was united to this
Body: And therefore they came to our Savior to be resolved which of them it
was. Master, say they, Who did sin, this Man, or his Parents, that he was born
blind?

In Answer to which Question, our Savior, wisely avoiding to satisfy their
Curiosity in a Point that it was needless for them to know; viz. Whether the
Soul has any Existence, or is capable of contracting any Guilt, before it comes
into the Body; tells them that they had mis-stated the Case; that the Question
should not have been, Whether this Man's Blindness was a Judgment or Punishment
inflicted on him, for his own, or for his Parents Sin; But whether it was at
all designed for a Punishment of Sin; Or, whether it was inflicted for some
other Cause? for that the temporal Evils that befall Men, are not always for
Punishment, but are sometimes designed for quite other Purposes; And that this
last was the Case of the Man they had asked about. Jesus answered, neither has
this Man sinned nor his Parents; that is, it is not any extraordinary
Wickedness, either in this Man, or his Parents, that was the Reason of his
Blindness; but it was, that the Works of God should be made manifest in him.

The meaning of which last Clause, as spoken with a particular respect to the
Blind Man, I take to be this; That he was therefore born blind, to give
Occasion to our Savior to exert and manifest his Power, in the miraculous Cure
of such a Defect, or Imperfection in the Body of this Man, as by any natural
Means or Remedies that could be used, was altogether incurable; and thereby to
give an undeniable Proof, that he was endued with a divine Power, and
consequently that he was the Messiah. He was therefore born blind, that the
Power of our Savior should be manifested in him.

But as the Words may be generally understood, and applied to any other Case of
the like Nature, the Meaning is this; That when any temporal Evil or Affliction
befalls any Man, which is not designed for a Punishment of his Sin, and to make
him an Example of the divine Vengeance: it is not however by any Oversight or
Carelessness of Providence that he is so afflicted; But that there is always
some other good and wise End of Providence designed to be served by it. Neither
has this Man sinned, nor his Parents; that is, they have not either of them so
sinned, as that he should be born blind, for a Punishment of his own or their
Sin; but he was therefore born blind, that the Works of God should be made
manifest in him.

From the Words thus explained, I shall take Occasion, very briefly, to do
these two Things.

I. To show that the temporal Evils which befall Men, are not always inflicted
upon them as Punishments for Sin. II. To show what other wise Ends of
Providence, the temporal Evils and Afflictions that befall good Men, do serve
for.
I. I shall show that the temporal Evils which befall Men, are not always
inflicted upon them as Punishments for Sin. Neither has this Man sinned, nor
his Parents, that he should be born blind; says our Savior.

And what was true in his Case, is undoubtedly true in a great many others; And
the Holy Scripture it self furnishes us with several Examples of this kind. But
that of Job being one of the most remarkable ones, I shall at present instance
only in that.

Where, first of all, we may take notice of the Character that is given of him,
by the Holy Spirit of God; Job 1.1. That Man was perfect and upright, and one
that feared God, and eschewed Evil. So far was he from being a greater Sinner
than others, that, on the contrary, there was none upon Earth, at that time, so
good as he. Have thou, says God himself, considered my Servant Job, that there
is none like him in the Earth? Job 1.8. Certainly then, if any Man could even
merit to be exempted, even from the common Miseries and Calamities of Humane
Life, it was he. And yet it pleased God to order it quite otherwise; And in him
that Observation of the Wise Man was strictly verified, That there be Just Men,
unto whom it happens according to the Work of the Wicked. Eccles. 3.14.


For, if in the next place, we take notice of the Afflictions which befell this
good Man; I believe we may truly say, that there is no Example of any, the
greatest Sinner that ever lived, that was so hardly dealt by, as he was.

Sometimes, indeed, a mighty Oppressor is forced to disgorge his ill gotten
Wealth, and is on a sudden, from the greatest Plenty, reduced to the most
Miserable Want. Sometimes, again, a notorious Sinner, who escapes in his own
Person, is punished very severely in his Children; and has his Punishment
multiplied, by enduring, in the Misery of every one of them, whom he loves as
himself, as much Pain and Torment, as he would do, if the Calamity that befell
them had befallen himself. And again, The Punishments that are inflicted upon
Men in this Life, by the divine Providence, are commonly single, either
miserable Want and Poverty, or some painful Sickness, or noisome Disease, or
perhaps a violent or untimely Death. And when any of these Evils befalls any
Man, we can scarcely forbear crying out, A Judgment! A Judgment! Surely this
Man was a great Sinner, or else he would not have been so afflicted!

What then should we have thought of a Man, in whom all these Miseries and
Afflictions were united, as they were in Job? Who was, one Day, Job 1.3.
the greatest of all the Men of the East, having seven thousand Sheep, and
three thousand Camels, and five hundred Yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she
Asses, and a very great Household; Job 1.21.
and the next day was bereft of all his Substance, Job 1, 2, 4, 5.
and left as naked as he came out of his Mothers Womb; who was, one Day,
blessed with ten hopeful Children, who were very obedient to their Father, and
very loving to one another; and the next Day, was deprived of them all at once,
and that too, by a violent Death, Job 1.19.
by the Fall of an House upon their Heads. And it added not a little to the
Greatness of these Afflictions, that they came all upon him suddenly, when no
such Evils were foreseen, or could reasonably be feared; and that they happened
all at the same time, the Messenger of one ill piece of News, having scarcely
told his Tale, Job 1.16, 17, 18.
before he was succeeded by another, the Messenger of a worse.

But hitherto he had suffered only in his Estate, and in his Children; but it
was not long before he was brought to suffer likewise in his own Person; Job
2.6.
and that too in the worst Manner that the Devil himself could devise; in such
a Manner, as perhaps no other Man either before or since has ever suffered;
being smitten all over with sore Boyls, Job 2.6, 7.
from the sole of his Foot unto his Crown, so that he had not one sound Part in
his whole Body.

And who would not have thought this Evil, especially when added to all the
others aforementioned, a sufficient indication of God's high Displeasure
against him? Who that had seen such a miserable Object, as he then was, would
not have concluded, as his Friends then did, Job 4.7. etc. 8.3, 4.11.6.
that all these Calamities were certain Expressions and sure Tokens of God's
severest Vengeance upon him, for some great and crying sins, well known to God,
although concealed from the World?

It Is true indeed, all this while his own Life was spared; Job 2.6.
the Devil had no Permission from God to touch that; and he was not, as some
notorious Sinners sometimes are, taken off by an untimely Death. But his
Affliction was not the less, but much the greater for this; for though an
untimely Death, to such as live in Ease, and Plenty, and Prosperity, and Sin,
may be justly reckoned a Misfortune; yet most certainly, to such as are good
Men, and yet are in extreme Want or Pain or Misery, it is a great Happiness to
be delivered out of their sad and wretched state, though it be by Death. And so
this good Man thought it would have been to him, and therefore, as patient as
he was, Job 3.2. etc.
could not forbear cursing the Day wherein he was born to endure such Misery,
and heartily wishing for Death to put an End to it; Wherefore, says he, is
Light given to him that is in Misery, and Life unto the bitter in Soul? Which
long for Death, but it comes not; and dig for it more than for hid Treasures?
Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the Grave? Job 3.20,
21, 22.

Thus you see, that all those Miseries and Calamities of Life, which when they
singly befall Men, are sometimes Acts and Expressions of the divine Vengeance
upon them, for some great and crying Sins, did all together befall this good
Man; of whom yet, in the midst of his Calamity, God himself gives this
excellent Character, Job 2.3. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou
considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect
and an upright Man, one that fears God and escheweth Evil? And still he
holds fast his Integrity, although thou movest me against him, to destroy him
without a Cause.

And this one Example alone, is, I think, a sufficient Proof of the first Point
I was to speak to; which was to show that the temporal Evils which befall Men,
are not always inflicted upon them as Punishments for Sin.

But the Day we are here met together upon, may likewise furnish us with
another great Example of it, in our late gracious Sovereign King CHARLES I. And
we should be injurious to his Memory, if we should not, now at this time,
briefly reflect thereupon. Of whom we may say, as was said of Job, That he was
a perfect and upright Man, One that feared God and eschewed Evil; for even his
greatest Enemies, his wicked Murderers, could not charge him with any Vice or
Immorality; or even with any Frailty or Infirmity, but such as might be
consistent with Integrity of Heart and Mind; And of whom, if we consider him as
a King, we may, I think, truly say, (for what Profit can there be in flattering
the Dead? especially One, whom a great many now adays make it their Business;
and, I suppose, hope to find their Interest in it, to blacken and defame?) as
was said of good King Josiah; Like unto him, was there no King before him: May
there, 2 Kings 23.25.
after him, arise many like him.

A King, that could not by the softness of his Education, nor by the Ease and
Plenty of a Court, nor by the many bad Examples that were ever before his Eyes,
of those who had greater Restraints upon them than he had, be tempted to any
Luxury, or Excess, or Extravagance in his way of Living.

A King, whom the Pleasures of Sense (of which he had, or might have had as
great a share as any) could not make in love with Pleasure, or fond of this
World; and whom the Multitude of Cares and Business that attend a Crown could
not make to neglect or omit his constant Exercise of Devotion.

A King, that naturally cared for his Subjects, and pitied them as a Father
does his Children; that readily condescended to any thing that he thought was
for their Good; and would have granted more than he did to them, if he could
have done it, without betraying the Rights of the Crown, wherewith he was
entrusted; and (which he valued more,) the Interest of Religion; And indeed
rather than do either of these, he was contented to lose, not only his Crown
from off his Head, but his Head too.

Such was the Saint of the Day, whose Memory we now celebrate, and whose Death
we lament. A Sinner indeed we cannot deny him to be, in the same Sense in which
the Scripture says, that all Men are Sinners; Romans ^.23.
and that there is not a Just Man upon Earth, Eccles. 7.20.
that does Good, and sins not; But excepting only the Weaknesses of Humane
Nature, and such slips and infirmities as the best Men are liable to; we may
truly say of him, 2 Kings 22.2.
as was likewise said of Josiah, that He did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, -- and turned not aside to the right Hand, or to the left.

And yet to this just Man it happened according to the Work of the Wicked; or
rather, much worse. For though there have been many cruel Tyrants, and bloody
Persecutors, and Monsters of Wickedness, which have been made Examples to the
World of the divine Vengeance; yet hardly has it happened even to the worst of
them, so ill, as it did to this, the best of Kings, and the best of Men.

They have indeed, some of them, been overpowered by some neighboring Prince,
displaced from their Government, and driven into Exile; And they have, others
of them, been risen up against by their own oppressed Subjects, and either
slain in Battle, or else, being overcome, they have been deposed from their
Kingly Power, shut up in Prison, and secretly Murdered; the just and wise
Providence of God so permitting it to be: But in all History, I believe there
is no Example parallel to this in every Respect, scarcely any like it; That a
Sovereign King, even while he was owned a King, should have an Army of his
Subjects, levied in his Name, and, as 'twas pretended, by his Authority,
against his Person; That they that endeavored to depose and kill him, should
yet give out that they were fighting for him; And that, when they had got him
into their Power, they should set up a Court of Judicature upon him, composed
out of his own Subjects, who had sworn Allegiance to him; That there, they
should formally Arraign and Try him against whom only Treason could be
committed, for the Crime of High Treason; And that at last they should proceed
so far in their Hypocritical Impiety, as to pass Sentence of Death on him, from
whom only the Judges of Life and Death could legally derive their Power; and to
Execute, as a Villainous Malefactor, the Father of their Country, their
rightful Lord and Sovereign.

The Evils that he suffered, considered in themselves, were as great as could
well be endured; but the Manner in which they were inflicted, and the Persons
from whom he suffered them, were highly aggravating Ingredients in his
Affliction; so that all things considered, perhaps no Man (our Lord and Savior
only excepted) did ever suffer more.

And now from these two great and notable Examples, I hope, we are sufficiently
convinced, that the temporal Afflictions which befall Men, are not always
certain Tokens of God's Displeasure; nor always designed for the Punishment of
their Sin, upon whom they are sent.

And what we should learn from the Consideration of this Point, is, To beware
how we pass a Judgment upon any Man, from what befalls him in this Life;
Because such Judgment, if it be not false, is, at the best, rash and uncertain;
and we cannot, Eccles. 9.1, 2.
as the Wise Man says, know Love or Hatred by all that is before us; for all
things come alike to all, and there is one Event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked. And though nothing comes to pass by Chance; and no Evil of any kind, ever
befalls any Man, but by the Designation of the divine Providence; yet the very
same Event, which to one Man is an Expression of God's Anger, to another Man
may be an Instance and Token of his Kindness; and therefore, when we cannot
certainly tell which it is, Charity obliges us to believe the best.

And this leads me to the Second thing propounded; which was,

II. To show what other wise Ends of Providence are served by the temporal
Evils and Afflictions which befall Men. Neither has this Man sinned, nor his
Parents, that he was born blind, but that the Works of God should be made
manifest in him.

And what was said of this Man's Blindness is as true of any other worldly Evil
that at any time befalls any Man; If it be not intended for Punishment (as it
is not always) there are some other Works of God that may be manifested
thereby: some other wise Ends of Providence that it is designed for.

But in discoursing on this Head, it would be great Presumption to pretend to
mention all the Ends of Providence, in any of its Dispensations; seeing the
Righteousness of God is like the great Mountains, Psalm. 36.6.
and his Judgments are a great Deep, Romans 11.33.
and his Ways past finding out. Nevertheless there are two Ends of Providence,
which are general; and which, I believe, we may say, are always designed in all
the Afflictions of good Men, besides others which may be special and peculiar
to some Cases, or which we may not have Wisdom enough to discern; viz. 1. The
spiritual Improvement of the Persons afflicted, whereby they will be entitled
to a greater Reward in Heaven: And, 2. The Benefit of others, who beholding
their good Example, may be thereby both directed and encouraged in the Practice
of those Virtues which are proper to an afflicted State.

1. One End of Providence, in sending Afflictions upon good Men, is for their
spiritual Improvement in Grace and Virtue, whereby they will be entitled to a
greater Reward in the other World. For there is no Man so good, but he may be
made better, and there is no one State of Life, in which there is Opportunity
of exercising all Virtues; And therefore though a Man be as perfect as any Man
can be, in that State wherein he now is; yet if he be called to another State,
and has Trial made of him another Way, he may, and if he acquits himself well,
he will thereby be rendered more perfect.

And accordingly, it is observed by the Apostle, Heb. 2.10. that even our
Blessed Lord and Savior himself was made perfect through Sufferings; and Heb.
5.8. that though he were a Son, yet he learned Obedience by the Things which he
suffered: And that this same is the Design of God in the Chastisement and
Correction of all his Sons, we are told by the same Apostle, Heb. 12.10, 11. He
chastneth us for our Profit, that we might be Partakers of his Holiness. And
though no Chastning for the present, seems to be joyous, but grievous;
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby.

And upon this Account the Holy Psalmist thankfully acknowledges the Kindness
of God, in laying Afflictions upon him, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted; that I might learn thy Statutes. Jam. 1.2, 3, 4.
And the Apostle exhorts us, to count it all Joy, when we fall into diverse
Temptations; knowing this, that the Trying of our Faith works Patience; And
let Patience, says he, have her perfect Work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.

So that to what was said before, that temporal Adversities and Afflictions are
not always Marks of God's Displeasure, we may now add this; that when they
befall good Men, they are Tokens and Expressions of his Kindness. He means
thereby to make them more perfect in Holiness, that so they may be capable of a
more perfect Happiness; these light Afflictions which are but for a Moment,
working for them a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory: as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.17. For the more they are tried, the more they will be
refined and purified. And the greater Difficulties they are put to encounter,
being enabled by the divine Grace to conquer them, their Victory will be so
much the greater, when they overcome; and their Crown will be so much the more
glorious.

And therefore our Savior pronounces a Blessedness to such as are reviled and
persecuted; and commands his Disciples rather to rejoice, than to be cast down,
when such things happen to them, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are
persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed
are ye when Men shall revile you and persecute you -- Rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven.

And that this was one End and Design of Providence in the Afflictions of our
late martyred Sovereign King CHARLES the First, cannot be doubted by those who
reflect upon his Carriage and Deportment under his Afflictions.

An excellent Man, indeed, he was before; But nevertheless we may truly affirm,
that he was much improved and bettered by his Sufferings. And of his Profiting
under them, all they were Witnesses (not only his Servants, his Chaplains, his
Friends; but even his Enemies) who attended him in his Restraints, and have
given Testimony to the World of his Piety and Meekness and Patience and
Charity. And that excellent Book (...), or, The Portraicture of His Sacred
Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings.
composed by himself, in the time of his Distresses, will, I suppose, be an
everlasting Evidence thereof to after Ages, notwithstanding the Endeavors that
have been formerly used by some to prove it spurious; and the Confidence of a
late Author asserting it to be so, Life of John Milton, Printed 1699.
without either producing any new Evidence for the Proof of his Assertion; or
offering one Word in Answer to those just and rational Exceptions that had been
made before to those only Testimonies which he insists upon, Vindication of K.
Charles the Martyr, etc. 2d Edition, with Additions, 1697.
to prove it a Forgery; or making any Exceptions to those later Evidences that
have been produced to prove it Authentic.

But (to use his own Phrase) We may cease to wonder that He should have the
Boldness, without Proof, and against Proof, to deny the Authority of this Book,
who is such an Infidel as to doubt, and is Shameless and impudent enough, even
in Print, and in a Christian Country, Life of J. Milton, p. 91, 92.
publicly to affront our Holy Religion, by declaring his Doubt, That several
Pieces under the Name of Christ and his Apostles, he must mean those now
received by the whole Christian Church, for I know of no other, are
suppositious; although through the Remoteness of those Ages, the Death of the
Persons concerned, and the Decay of other Monuments which might give us true
Information, the Spuriousness thereof is yet undiscovered.

And it is much to be feared that all your pious Designs and Endeavors to
suppress Vice and Immorality (for which, if they succeed according to the Hopes
of all good Men, you will highly deserve the Blessing, not only of the present
Age, but of all Posterity too, which will inherit a Blessing by your Means;
it is, I say, much to be feared, that these your pious Designs and Endeavors)
will not have altogether so good an Effect as might be wished; so long as the
Foundation of all Revealed Religion is so openly struck at, and the public
Records and Evidences of our Christianity, are, without Control or Censure,
suffered to be called in Question; For if any of the Pieces (as he calls them)
under the Name of Christ and his Apostles, which are received by the whole
Christian Church, as Portions of divine Revelation, are spurious and
supposititious, who can tell but that those which forbid Swearing and
Drunkenness, and Fornication, and Adultery, and other abominable Lusts not fit
to be named, are so, as well as those (which I suppose this Author chiefly aims
at) which deliver to us the Doctrine of the Trinity, and other Articles of our
Christian Faith? And therefore seeing the heavenly Doctrines, and the pure and
perfect Precepts of Christianity are both built upon the same Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone; if
this Foundation be peck'd at and undermined, and so weakened, that one Part of
the Building falls to the Ground, I doubt it will be impossible, by any Art, to
uphold the other. -- But to return to my Subject --

2. Another End of God's Providence in sending Afflictions upon good Men, is
for the Benefit of others; who beholding their good Example, may be thereby
both directed and encouraged in the Practice of those Virtues which are proper
to an afflicted State.

This was probably the Reason of Job's Afflictions; This most certainly was one
Reason why the History thereof, and of his Behavior under them is recorded in
the Holy Scripture; that by his Example others might be incited to the like
Patience and Submission to the divine Will, under all the Adversities of this
Life.

Nay this was, in part, the Design even of our Savior's Sufferings, as we are
told by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an
Example, that ye should follow his Steps.

And therefore, this also, we may reasonably think, was one End and Design of
Providence, in the Afflictions of our late martyred Sovereign, whose Memory we
this Day celebrate.

For to excite Men to the Practice of difficult Virtues, there is need, not
only of Precept to direct, and of Promise to stir up their Endeavors; but
likewise of Example; to show them that the Duties commanded them are not
impracticable; and thereby to encourage them to do their utmost, in an
Assurance that their Labor shall not be in vain.

And the Example of Kings and great Persons being generally the most taken
Notice of; and also, upon other Accounts more influential than the Examples of
meaner Men; it was agreeable to the Goodness of God, and the Wisdom of
Providence, to choose him out for this purpose, that he might be an excellent
Example to his own, and to all succeeding Ages, of all the Graces and Virtues,
that are proper to almost every State and Condition of Life that Men can be in;
And to this End, it was expedient that God should expose him to diverse
Temptations, and put him upon almost every kind of Trial. In all which he
acquitted himself bravely, like a Man, and like a Christian.

For in his Prosperity, he was not high-minded; he did not trust in uncertain
Riches; he did not forget God; he did not despise the Poor; he was guilty of no
Excess in the Use of sensual Pleasures. So that in him, amidst the Glories of a
Crown, and the Splendour and Plenty of a Court, you might have seen all that
Humility, that Temperance, that Chastity, that Contempt of the World, that
Mortification and Self-denial, and that strict and regular Piety and Devotion,
which might be expected, but is not always found even in a Religious Cloister.

And yet in his Adversity, when it pleased God to make Trial of him that Way,
he was no less an eminent Example of all the Virtues and Graces that are proper
to that State. Indeed had he been always bred up in the School of Adversity, he
could not have born his Afflictions better than he did; And this Consideration
adds very much to the Excellence of his Example; because his Afflictions, as
they were very grievous in themselves, so they were also highly aggravated by
their succeeding to a State of the greatest Plenty and Prosperity. For it is no
such great Matter for a poor Man to be contented, if he was always poor, and
was bred up hardly from the Beginning; Nor is it so much Commendation to a Man
to bear any Affliction patiently, after he has been a long while used to it;
But the greatest Trial of a Man's Virtue, is in bearing well a great Change of
his Condition for the worse; And when from Plenty he is reduced to Want; from
great Prosperity, to miserable Adversity; from the highest Honor, to the
vilest Disgrace; if then he acquits himself well, and bears this great Change
of his Fortune with Meekness and Equanimity, he becomes an excellent Pattern to
the World, of the most difficult and heroic Virtues.

Such therefore was that Prince whose Memory we now celebrate; Who was exactly
the same in all Conditions; and showed himself even at the first Trial, a
perfect Master of all those Virtues which are suitable to an afflicted State,
which others can scarcely learn after they have been long in it. Such was his
Piety, that in every thing that happened to him, he meekly resigned himself to
the divine Will; and cheerfully submitted to whatever God was pleased to lay
upon him, in a firm Belief that what God ordered was best. And such was his
Charity, that he freely forgave the rude Insolences and Affronts of his own
Subjects; even of those who had been, in a particular Manner, highly obliged by
him; And he not only forgave them himself, but prayed earnestly to God, to
forgive them too.

And this humble and dutiful Behavior toward God, under the severest Trials;
And this charitable and Christian Behavior toward Men, under the greatest
Provocations to Anger and Revenge, fully justified his Integrity, and perfected
his Example; so that now, from the various Accidents both of Prosperity and
Adversity which befell him, and his Behavior under them, all Men, in all
Estates, may be instructed in the Duties of their Condition; and, by the
Pattern of such a great King, and such an excellent Man, may be encouraged to
the Practice thereof. And if it had not happened to this Just Man according to
the Work of the Wicked, we should have wanted one of the most Excellent
Examples of Piety and Virtue that ever the World produced.

And upon these Grounds, I suppose, it is, that the Church always celebrates
the Memory of Martyrs with Joy and Gladness; nay, and keeps even the Days of
their Martyrdom, as Festivals, not as Fasts; as Days of Rejoicing, not of
Mourning; viz. partly, because of the great Advantage which the Church reaps
from the Instruction and Encouragement of their Example who have suffered for
the Truth's sake; And partly, because those Days on which they suffered the
worst of Deaths, were even to them themselves, the best Days of their whole
Life; the Days which did put a Period to all their Miseries, and give them
Admittance to everlasting Joys. And therefore the ancient Church, called them
not the Days of their Death or Martyrdom, but their Birth Days; because they
were then delivered out of an evil and troublesome World, and born again unto a
new and endless Life of unspeakable Felicity; Eccles. 7.1.
so that to them the Day of their Death was, in truth, much better than the Day
of their Birth.

And upon both these Accounts, we also might very well celebrate this Day of
the Martyrdom of our late Pious and Gracious Sovereign K. CHARLES I. as his
Birth Day, and keep it as one of our highest Festivals; had he fallen, as the
ancient Martyrs did, by the Hands of Infidels, or Strangers; or by any other
Hands than our own. But this is our Unhappiness, and indeed a most just Cause
of the bitterest Grief, and deepest Humiliation to us; that we can never think
of his exemplary Piety and Goodness, without, at the same time reflecting upon
our own great Wickedness; And that the more we admire his Virtues, the more we
must condemn our Selves, through whose Iniquity it thus happened to him.

For though the Justice of God may be easily cleared and vindicated in suffering
the best of Men, to be grievously afflicted, to be reviled and persecuted, and
even to be barbarously murdered, by the Hands of the Wicked; though, I say,
these Dispensations of Providence, so far as they are the Acts of Providence,
are, both just in themselves, and ordained to wise and good Ends; this will by
no means serve to excuse those wicked Men, who are the Means and Instruments of
the Afflictions of the Righteous; because every Act is to be judged of by its
self, and not by the Effects which may follow from it, but are not the natural
Consequences thereof. And if we may not do Evil, that Good may come; and our
Damnation is just, if we do that which is Evil, though we design Good by it; as
the Apostle Teaches, Romans 3.8. much less may we allow our selves to do Evil,
only because God can bring Good out of it; and much more will our Damnation be
just, if we do Evil with an evil Design, although God can turn our Injury into
Good, to them to whom we meant it for Evil, or may otherwise so order it, that
it shall produce very beneficial Effects to Mankind.

For who can think that the Persecutors of the Apostles and first Christians
were the less to blame, because God, in his Wisdom, so contrived it, that the
Blood of the Martyrs became the Seed of the Church, and the most effectual
means of Spreading Christianity in the World? Or who will go about to excuse
from the greatest sin that ever was committed, the Betrayers and Murderers of
our Lord, because what they did, Acts 2.23. 4.28.
was what God himself had foreordained for the accomplishing the Redemption of
Mankind?

And therefore, by the same Reason; Although the sufferings of our late Martyred
Sovereign did, without all Doubt, conduce much to his own spiritual Advantage,
and to the increasing the Glory of his Celestial Crown; And He, by his pious
Deportment under them, became an excellent Example to all others who are, or
shall be called to the like sufferings; And while we consider these Advantages
thereof, both to him and us, we may justly commemorate the same with Joy and
Thankfulness; and might reasonably keep this, as we do the Days of other Saints
with Feasting and Rejoicing; yet when we consider, on the other Hand, who were
the Means and Instruments of his Afflictions; this opens quite another Scene,
and brings a black Cloud upon this most glorious Day; and justifies the Wisdom
of that Authority which has commanded us to keep it in a quite different
manner, even with Weeping, and with Fasting, and with Mourning; because there
is no Way to expiate a National Guilt, but by a National Repentance; For though
it may charitably be believed, nay though it be certainly true, that there was
not an actual consent of all the People (perhaps not of an Hundredth Part of
the People) even of that Generation, to this Act of great Wickedness and horrid
Barbarity, by which the Protestant Religion has received the greatest Wound
and Reproach, and the People of England the most unsupportable Shame and
Infamy; Stat. 12. Car. 2. c. 30.
yet when it is considered, that it was done by those, who had then, by the Help
and Affistance of better meaning Men, attained to an uncontrollable Power; and
that it was done under the Name and Authority of a Parliament; (though the Party
which called themselves so, and which passed the Ordinance for erecting that
prodigious and unheard of Tribunal, which they called An High Court of Justice
for Trial of his Majesty were not a tenth Part of the whole) And when it is
further considered, that a great many of those, who did not give an actual
consent thereto by their Voices, gave too great a consent thereto by their
Silence, and by their not endeavoring in time to hinder it; The whole Nation,
I fear, can hardly be thought guiltless.

Nay, and even we also who live now, so many Years after the Act is done, may
yet be justly thought to give too great a consent to it; and to be, in some
sort, Partakers with our Fathers, in the Guilt of shedding this righteous
Blood; if we can speak of this villainous Act, or of the Preparations to it,
without Abhorrence; Nay more, If we do not heartily grieve and mourn at the
Remembrance thereof; for if you look into Ezekiel. 9.4, 5, 6. you will see that
even in the Judgment of God himself; they which do not mourn for the sins of
others, and especially for the public Abominations that are done in the midst
of the City or Nation to which they belong, are Partakers therein.

And besides, It may be also considered; That though we, who live now, were not
any of us of the number of those that were actually concerned in this
villainous Act, of murdering the Lord's Anointed; being perhaps not then Born,
or not of competent Age to be concerned in such Matters: yet it is an usual
thing with God, (and what he has expressly threatened) to visit the Sins of the
Fathers upon the Children, Exodus 34.7.
and upon the Childrens Children, unto the third, and to the fourth Generation.
And if he sometimes does this, for private and personal sins; much more, may we
reasonably think, he often does the same, for such sins as are public and
national; because though one Generation passes away, and another comes, the
Nation never dies, the Nation is still the same in this Age, that it was in the
last, and will be the same in the next.

And this Threatening of God, I think, has been, in some measure, verified upon
us. For we have already felt many strokes of the divine Vengeance, as we have
great Reason to believe, upon this very Account. It Is reasonable, I say, to
think this, because some of the Judgments which have befallen us since, have
been the natural Effects and Products of this Days Wickedness; for such, I
think we must all allow to be, those many Years of Anarchy and Confusion which
immediately succeeded this bloody Tragedy; and also (to name no more) those
dismal Fears and Apprehensions that we have since been in of Popery and
Arbitrary Power; occasioned, in great measure, by the Expulsion of the Royal
Seed and Education in a Foreign Country and Religion.

That these will be the last Expressions of God's Anger against us for this
great sin, we hope; but at the same time, we have much greater Reason to fear
they will not, so long as all the same Wickednesses do abound which have drawn
down those many heavy Judgments of God upon us which we have already felt; And
we can have no reasonable Assurance that we shall not be punished yet seven
times more for our Iniquities, unless now by a sincere Repentance, and a
thorough Reformation of our Lives, and an unfeigned Humiliation of our Souls,
and an utter Detestation of all such villainous Practices for the future, we
endeavor to appease the Anger of God, and to move him to Compassion toward us.

This then let us do; and then let us Pray, as we are taught in our Litany,
(and we may reasonably hope God will hear our Prayer) Remember not, Lord, our
Offenses, nor the Offenses of our Forefathers; Neither take thou Vengeance of
our Sins; Spare us, good Lord, spare thy People, whom thou have redeemed with
thy precious Blood; and be not angry with us for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
GReat Men's Advantages and Obligations to Religion: Represented in a Sermon
Preached before the King, in the Chapel in St. James's, July 17th. School. By
Henry Hesketh, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen and
Governors of the several Hospitals of the City of London, at St. Bridget's
Church, on Wednesday in Easter-Week, School. being one of the Anniversary
Spittle-Sermons. By Thomas Lynford, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

A false Faith not Justified by care for the Poor; Proved in a Sermon Preached
at St. Paul's Church, August 28. School. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the
Church of England.

Mysteries in Religion Vindicated: Or, the Filiation, Deity and Satisfaction of
our Savior asserted against Socinians and others; with occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the Church of
England.


