THE BISHOPS POTION, OR, Dialogue between the Bishop of ^ANTERBURY, and his
physician, wherein ^e desires the Doctor to have a care of his Body, and to
preserve him from being let blood in the neck, when the sign is in Taurus.



Printed in the Year, 1641.

CANTERBURIES POTION.
WElcome good M. Doctor.

Doct. I understand by one of your Gentlemen, your Grace was pleased to send
for me.


Can. Not without cause, good M. Doctor, for I find my self diseased in all
parts, insomuch that without some speedy remedy, I cannot long continue, I have
a great desire to take Physic, in case the time of the year be seasonable.


Doct. Yes, the time of the year may be seasonable, but we must have a care of
the constitution of your Lordships body, the nature of the disease, and the
quality of the medicine. our Cordials, Potions, Electuaries, Syrrops,
Plasters, Unguents; Glysters, Vomits, Bathes, Suppositories, and the like,
must be duly regarded, with a due care what Planet is predominant.


Can. I approve your learned skill good M. Doctor, in having respect to the
Constellations, for I am of opinion (which the Brethren forsooth call
superstition) if I be let blood in the neck, when the sign is in Taurus, I
shall certainly bleed to death.


Doct. That may very well be, unless your Surgeon have a more saving skill
then my Lord Deputies had, but I pray my Lord, let me see your Graces water,
for by it I shall easily perceive the state of your Body.


Cant. Reach that Vrinall there, look you Master Doctor, this water I made
last night, after my first sleep, what do you think by it?


Doct. My Lord, your water is a most thick, dense, solid heavy, almost ragged,
putrid, stinking, and rotten Urine, your grace has kept a very bad diet, there
are certain raw crudities, that lie heavy and indigested upon your stomach,
which will without remedy, and that speedily, ascend so high, until it stifle,
and suffocate your Grace.


Cant. I pray good M. Doctor use your learned skill, in removing them, I must
confeffe I owe a Death, which I would be loath to pay, before it be due,
wherefore if it be within your power to prolong my life, spare no cost for the
effecting it.


Doct. My Lord, it is within the power of my art, to prolong your life, in case
it be not cut off untimely, I have here prepared a Vomit for your Grace, which
I doubt not, but will have a speedy operation, down with it my Lord, fear
not, twill bring something up by and by, and see, it begins to work already.


Cant. Hold my head good M. Doctor, Ough, Ough.


Doct. Well done, up with it my Lord, what is here a great piece of Parchment,
with a yellow seal to it, the writing is obscure, I cannot read it, but what is
this that comes next, a rout of Tobacco, I protest it is pure Spanish, how comes
this to pass, had your Grace any hand in the Tobacco Patent?


Cant. Yes, it has stickt on my stomach these four years at least, and I
could never digest it before, hold the Basin.


Doct. What Is this, a Book, Whosoever has bin at Church may exercise lawful
recreations on the Sunday, what is the meaning of this?


Cant. It Is the Book for Pastimes on the Sunday, which I caused to be made, but
hold, here comes something, what is it?


Doct. It Is another book, the Title it, Sunday no Sabbath, did you cause this
to be made also.


Cant. No, Doctor Pocklington made it, but I licenced it.


Doct. What, he that looks so like a Nicromancer, he that was for his pains
preferred besides his benefices? But what is this, a Paper. it is if I be not
mistaken, a Star Chamber order made against Mr. Prinne, Mr. Burton, and Dr.
Bastwicke, had you any hand in that?


Cant. I had, I had, all England knows it: but oh here comes something that
makes my very back ache, oh that it were up once, now it is up I thank Heaven,
What is it?


Doct. It Is a great Bundle of papers, of presentations, and suspensions, these
were the instruments my Lord, wherewith you created the tongue tied Doctors and
gave them great Benefices in the Country, to preach some twice a year at the
least, and in their place to hire some journey-man Curate, who will only read
a Sermon in the forenoone, and in the afternoon be drunk with his
parishionera for company; and with or hers you silenced the long winded
Ministers.


Cant. I must confesfe it is true, but here is something that pains me
extremely, oh that it were up, this troubles me more then all the rest, see
what it is good Doctor, for it is up.


Doct. Why my Lord, the book of Canons, charged with the horrible Monster.


Cant. Now I am pretty well at ease, but I pray Master Doctor what was this
made of:


Doct. Why my Lord, 3 ounces of Tobacco, 3 scruples of pillory powder, 1
scruple of his brains that looked over London Bridge, and three handfuls of
the herbs gathered by the Apprentices, wrapped up in a high Commission Roll, and
boiled in a pottle of Holy Water, to the third part, and strained through a
pair of Lawne sleeves.


Cant. Nay if this be your physic, I Will take no more of it: oh, there comes
something else, I protest the Miter, alas I had almost broke my Longs.


Doct. Nay if the Miter be come, the Devil is not far off, farewell good my
Lord.


FINIS.

