Prince ARTHUR. An Heroic POEM. In Ten Books.

BY RICHARD BLACKMORE, M.D. AND Fellow of the College of Physicians in London.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and John Churchil at the black Swan in
Paternoster Row, MDCXCV.

THE PREFACE.
TO what ill purposes soever Poetry has been abused, its true and genuine End
is by universal Confession, the Instruction of our Minds, and Regulation of our
Manners; for which it is furnished with so many excellent Advantages. The
Delicacy of its Strains, the Sweetness and Harmony of its Numbers, the lively
and admirable manner of its Painting or Representation, and the wonderful Force
of its Eloquence, cannot but open the Passages to our Breasts, triumph over our
Passions, and leave behind them very deep Impressions. It Is in the power of
Poetry to insinuate into the inmost Recesses of the Mind, to touch any Spring
that moves the Heart, to agitate the Soul with any sort of Affection, and
transform it into any Shape or Posture it thinks fit. It Is therefore no wonder
that so wise a State, as that of Athens, should retain the Poets on the side of
Religion and the Government. The Stage there was set up to teach the People the
Scheme of their Religion, and those Modes of Worship the Government thought fit
to encourage, to convey to them such Ideas of their Deities, and Divine
Providence, as might engage their Minds to a Reverence of superior, invisible
Beings, and to observe and admire their Administration of humane Affairs. The
Poets were looked on as Divine, not only upon the account of that extraordinary
Fury and Heat of Imagination, wherewith they were thought to be inspired, but
likewise upon the account of their Profession and Employment, their Business
being to represent Vice as the most odious, and Virtue as the most desirable
thing in the World.

Tragedy was at its first Institution a part of the Ancient Pagans Divine
Service, when the Chorus which originally was so great a part, contained many
excellent Lessons of Piety and Morality, and was wholly employed in rectifying
their mistakes about the Gods, and their Government of the World, in moderating
their Passions, and purging their Minds from Vice and Corruption. This was the
noble Design of the Chorus. And the Representation of great and illustrious
Characters, gradually afterward introduced, their Impious, or their Generous
Actions, and the different Event that attended them, was to deter Men from Vice
and Impiety, and encourage them to be Generous and Virtuous, by showing them
the Vengeance that at last overtook the one, and the Rewards and Praises that
crowned the other. The End of Comedy was the same, but pursued in another way.
The business of Comedy being to render Vice ridiculous, to expose it to public
Derision and Contempt, and to make Men ashamed of Vile and Sordid Actions.

Tragedy designed to Scare Men, Comedy to Laugh them out of their Vices. And
it is very plain, that Satyr is intended for the same End, the Promotion of
Virtue, and exposing of Vice; which it pursues by sharp Reproaches, vehement
and bitter Invectives, or by a Courtly, but not less cutting Raillery. The Odes
of the Lyric Poet were chiefly designed for the Praises of their Gods, their
Heroes and extraordinary Persons, to draw Men to an Admiration and Imitation of
them.

But above all other kinds, Epick Poetry, as it is first in Dignity, so it
mostly conduces to this End. In an Epick Poem, where Characters of the first
Rank and Dignity, Illustrious for their Birth or high Employment are
introduced, the Fable, the Action, the particular Episodes are so contrived and
conducted, or at least ought to be, that either Fortitude, Wisdom, Piety,
Moderation, Generosity, some or other Noble and Princely Virtues shall be
recommended with the highest Advantage, and their contrary Vices made as
odious. To give Men right and just Conceptions of Religion and Virtue, to aid
their Reason in restraining their Exorbitant Appetites and Impetuous Passions,
and to bring their Lives under the Rules and Guidance of true Wisdom, and
thereby to promote the public Good of Mankind, is undoubtedly the End of all
Poetry.

It Is true indeed, that one End of Poetry is to give Men Pleasure and Delight;
but this is but a subordinate, subaltern End, which is it self a Means to the
greater, and ultimate one before mentioned. A Poet should employ all his
Judgment and Wit, exhaust all the Riches of his Fancy, and abound in Beautiful
and Noble Expression, to divert and entertain others; but then it must be with
this Prospect, that he may hereby engage their Attention, insinuate more easily
into their Minds, and more effectually convey to them wise Instructions. It Is
below the Dignity of a true Poet to take his Aim at any inferior End. They are
Men of little Genius, of mean and poor Design, that employ their Wit for no
higher Purpose, than to please the Imagination of vain and wanton People.

I think these Poets, if they must be called so, whose Wit as they manage it,
is altogether unuseful are justly reproached; but I am sure those others are
highly to be condemned, who use all their Wit in Opposition to Religion, and to
the Destruction of Virtue and good Manners in the World. There have been in all
Ages such ill Men that have perverted the right Use of Poetry, but never so
many, or so bold or mischievous as in ours. Our Poets seem engaged in a general
Con'federacy to ruin the End of their own Art, to expose Religion and Virtue,
and bring Vice and Corruption of Manners into Esteem and Reputation. The Poets
that write for the Stage (at least a great part of 'em) seem deeply concerned
in this Conspiracy. These are the Champions that charge Religion with such
desperate Resolution, and have given it so many deep and ghastly Wounds. The
Stage was an Outwork or Fort raised for the Protection and Security of the
Temple, but the Poets that kept it, have revolted, and basely betrayed it, and
what is worse, have turned all their Force and discharged all their Artillery
against the Place their Duty was to defend. If any Man thinks this an unjust
Charge, I desire him to read any of our modern Comedies, and I believe he will
soon be convinced of the Truth of what I have said.

The Man of Sense and the Fine Gentleman in the Comedy, who as the chiefest
Person proposed to the Esteem and Imitation of the Audience, is enriched with
all the Sense and Wit the Poet can bestow; this Extraordinary Person you will
find to be a Derider of Religion, a great Admirer of Lucretius, not so much for
his Learning, as his Irreligion, a Person wholly Idle, dissolved in Luxury,
abandoned to his Pleasures, a great Debaucher of Women, profuse and extravagant
in his Expenses, and in short, this Finished Gentleman will appear a Finished
Libertine.

The Young Lady that must support the Character of a Virtuous, Well-manner'd
Sensible Woman, the most perfect Creature that can be, and the very Flower of
her Sex, this Accomplished Person entertains the Audience with confident
Discourses, immodest Repartees, and profane Raillery. She is thoroughly
instructed in Intreagues and Assignations, a great Scoffer at the prudent
Reservedness and Modesty of the best of her Sex, She despises the wise
Instructions of her Parents or Guardians, is disobedient to their Authority,
and at last, without their Knowledge or Consent, marries her self to the Fine
Gentleman above mentioned. And can any one imagine, but that our Young Ladies
and Gentlemen are admirably instructed by such Patterns of Sense and Virtue? If
a Clergyman be introduced, as he often is, it is seldom for any other purpose,
but to abuse him, to expose his very Character and Profession: He must be a
Pimp, a Blockhead, a Hypocrite; some wretched Figure he must make, and almost
ever be so managed, as to bring his very Order into Contempt. This indeed is a
very common, but yet so gross an Abuse of Wit, as was never endured on a Pagan
Theater, at least in the ancient, primitive Times of Poetry, before its Purity
and Simplicity became corrupted with the Inventions of after Ages. Poets then
taught Men to reverence their Gods, and those who served them. None had so
little Regard for his Religion, as to expose it publicly, or if any had, their
Governments were too wise to suffer the Worship of their Gods to be treated on
the Stage with Contempt.

In our Comedies the Wives of Citizens are highly encouraged to despise their
Husbands, and to make great Friendship with some such Virtuous Gentleman and
Man of Sense as is above described. This is their Way of recommending Chastity
and Fidelity. And that Diligence and Frugality may be sufficiently exposed,
though the two Virtues that chiefly support the Being of any State, to deter Men
from being Industrious and Wealthy, the Diligent, Thriving Citizen is made the
most Wretched, Contemptible Thing in the World: and as the Alderman that makes
the best Figure in the City, makes the worst on the Stage, so under the
Character of a Justice of Peace, you have all the Prudence and Virtues of the
Country most unmercifully insulted over.

And as these Characters are set up on purpose to ruin all Opinion and Esteem
of Virtue, so the Conduct throughout, the Language, the Fable and Contrivance
seem evidently designed for the same Noble End. There are few Fine Conceits,
few Strains of Wit or extraordinary Pieces of Raillery, but are either immodest
or irreligious, and very few Scenes but have some spiteful and envious Stroke
at Sobriety and Good Manners, whence the Youth of the Nation have apparently
received very bad Impressions. The universal Corruption of Manners and
irreligious Disposition of Mind that infects the Kingdom, seems to have been in
a great Measure derived from the Stage, or has at least been highly promoted by
it. And it is great Pity that those in whose Power it is, have not yet
restrained the Licentiousness of it, and obliged the Writers to observe more
Decorum. It were to be wished that Poets, as Preachers are in some Countries,
were paid and licensed by the State, and that none were suffered to write in
Prejudice of Religion and the Government, but that all such Offenders, as
public Enemies of Mankind should be silenced and duly punished. Sure some
Effectual Care should be taken that these Men might not be suffered by
Debauching our Youth, to help on the Destruction of a brave Nation.

Some of these Poets, to excuse their Guilt, allege for themselves, that the
Degeneracy of the Age makes their lewd way of Writing necessary; they pretend
the Auditors will not be pleased, unless they are thus entertained from the
Stage; and to please they say is the chief business of the Poet. But this is by
no means a just Apology; it is not true, as was said before, that the Poet's
chief business is to please. His chief business is to instruct, to make Mankind
Wiser and Better; and in order to this, his Care should be to please and
entertain the Audience with all the Wit and Art, he is Master of. Aristotle and
Horace, and all their Critics and Commentators, all Men of Wit and Sense
agree, that this is the End of Poetry. But they say it is their Profession to
Write for the Stage; and that Poets must Starve if they will not in this way
humor the Audience. The Theater will be as unfrequented, as the Churches, and
the Poet and the Parson equally neglected. Let the Poet then abandon his
Profession, and take up some honest, lawful Calling, where joining Industry to
his great Wit, he may soon get above the Complaints of Poverty, so common among
these ingenious Men, and lie under no necessity of prostituting his Wit to any
such vile Purposes as are here censured. This will be a course of Life more
Profitable and Honorable to himself, and more useful to others. And there are
among these Writers some, who think they might have risen to the highest
Dignities in other Professions, had they employed their Wit in those Ways. It Is
a mighty Dishonor and Reproach to any Man, that is capable of being useful to
the World in any Liberal and Virtuous Profession, to lavish out his Life and
Wit in propagating Vice and Corruption of Manners, and in battering from the
Stage the strongest Entrenchments and best Works of Religion and Virtue.
Whoever makes this his Choice, when the other was in his Power, may he go off
the Stage unpitied, complaining of Neglect and Poverty, the just Punishments of
his Irreligion and Folly.

It Is no dishonor to be a true Poet, if indeed a Man be one; that is, a noble
Genius well cultivated, and employed in Writing in such a way, as reaches the
End of his Art, and by discouraging Vice, promotes the Good of Mankind. But
it is a mighty Dishonor and Shame, to employ excellent Faculties and abundance
of Wit, to humor and please Men in their Vices and Follies. Such a one is more
hateful, as an ill Man, than valuable, as a good Poet. The great Enemy of
Mankind, notwithstanding his Wit and Angelick Faculties, is the most odious
Being of the whole Creation.

Nor is this Abuse confined to the Stage* the same Strain runs through the other
kinds of Poetry. What monstrous lewd and irreligious Books of Poems, as they
are called, have been of late days published, and what is the greater wonder,
received in a Civilized and Christian Kingdom, with Applause and Reputation?
The sweetness of the Wit, makes the Poison go down with Pleasure, and the
Contagion spreads without Opposition. Young Gentlemen and Ladies are generally
pleased and diverted with Poetry, more than by any other way of Writing; but
there are few Poems they can fix on, but they are like to pay too dear for
their Entertainment. Their Fancies are like to be filled with impure Ideas, and
their Minds engaged in hurtful Passions, which are the more lasting, by being
conveyed in lively Expressions, and all the Address of an artful Poet.

For this End among others, I undertook the writing of this Poem, hoping I
might be able to please and entertain, not only without hurting the Reader, but
to his advantage. I was willing to make one Effort toward the rescuing the
Muses out of the hands of these Ravishers, to restore them to their sweet and
chaste Mansions, and to engage them in an Employment suitable to their Dignity.
If I succeed not my self in this good Design, I hope at least I shall awaken
the Courage and Compassion of some other brave Adventurers, that may more
happily attempt this honorable Work.

To write an Epick Poem is a work of that Difficulty, that no one for near
seventeen hundred years past has succeeded in it; and only those two great Wits
Homer and Virgil before. That the modern Poets have been so unsuccessful, has
not, I imagine, proceeded so much from want of Genius, as from their Ignorance
of the Rules of writing such a Poem; or at least, from their want of attending
to them. Though Aristotle's excellent Rules of Poetry were early published by
Victorius at Florence, and soon after farther illustrated by the Comments of
several Italian Critics, yet we do not find that Ariosto or Tasso either, were
very careful to observe them. And indeed our modern Writers neither seem to
have attended to those incomparable Rules, nor carefully to have considered the
great Models that Homer and Virgil had left them. Some Readers that are not
versed in this matter, imagine every thing written in Heroic Verse, is an
Heroic Poem; but these have not considered the Nature of such a Work, nor
looked into the Critics, who have written on this Subject. I shall therefore
give the Definition of an Epick or Heroic Poem, that those that have it not
already, may now have a true Idea of its Nature.

An Epick Poem is a feigned or devised Story of an Illustrious Action, related
in Verse, in an Allegorical, Probable, Delightful and Admirable manner, to
cultivate the Mind with Instructions of Virtue. It Is a feigned or devised
Discourse; that is, a Fable; and so it agrees with Tragedy and Comedy. The word
Fable at first signified indifferently a true or false Story, therefore Cicero
for distinction, uses Fictas Fabulas in his Book de Finibus. But afterward
Custom obtained to use the word always for a feigned Discourse. And in the
first Ages, especially in the Eastern World, great use was made by Learned and
Wise Men of these feigned Discourses, Fables or Apologues, to teach the ruder
and more unpolished Part of Mankind. Theologians, Philosophers, and great
Lawgivers, every where fell into this way of instructing and cultivating the
People in the Knowledge of Religion, Natural Philosophy, and Moral and
Political Virtues. So Thales, Orpheus, Solon, Homer, and the rest of the great
Men in those Ages have done, and the famous Philosopher Socrates is by some
affirmed to be the Author of many of the Fables that pass under Aesop's name.
Most of them made their Fables in Verse, that by the addition of Harmony and
Numbers they might the better attain their End. Strabo and Plutarch greatly
commend this way of teaching the People; and these Reasons may be given for the
usefulness of it. Naked Philosophical Precepts and Doctrines are of themselves
harsh and dry, hardly attended to, and ungratefully entertained. If the Hearers
are rude and course, or very vicious, there is no hope of gaining them by a
grave and solemn Discourse of Virtue, and even the better and more civilized
Auditors are hardly kept attentive to it. Man is naturally a lover of Pleasure,
and if you would do him Good, it must be, by pleasing him; you must give him
Delight, and keep his Mind in a constant agreeable Agitation, else he will not
attend to the most useful Counsel and Instruction. He is pleased already with
the Notions and Habitudes, howsoever false or vicious, that have the present
Possession of him, and you must give him a great deal of Pleasure and
Entertainment to engage him to hear you, when you would persuade him to the
trouble, of becoming Wiser and Better. Now the first Wise Men that undertook to
civilize and polish the barbarous World, found this way of Fables especially in
Verse, to be mighty Acceptable to the People: The Contrivance gave them
Delight, and the Novelty raised their Admiration. They could learn them
perfectly, and repeat them often, by which means the Instructions of Virtue
covertly contained in them, were inculcated on their Minds.

And we find, that many Ages after Orpheus, Solon, Homer, etc. the Divine
Lawgiver of the Christians thought fit to teach the People by Apologues,
Parables or Fables, under which he covered and disguised his Heavenly
Instructions.

The Action must be Illustrious and Important; Illustrious in respect of the
Person, who is the Author of it, who is always some Valiant, or Wise, or Pious
Prince or great Commander: But let his Character be what it will in other
respects (for there is no Necessity the Hero should be a good or a wise Person)
it is always necessary he should have Courage; which single Quality is
sufficient to make the Hero. And the Action must be important, both in respect
of its Object and its End. It Is the Action of some great Person, about some
noble and weighty Affair. It Is true, there are many other Persons concerned,
but it is the Action of the chief Person that gives the Being and Denomination to
the Poem. This Action must be but one; when it ceases, the Poem is ended; and
if it be revived, and taken up again, it is a new Poem begins. Action is Motion;
and if it ceases cannot be revived, so as to be numerically the same. There are
indeed many other Actions besides the Principal one, but they all depend on,
and have relation to that which is Principal, with the Unity of which, the
Unity of the Poem stands or falls. If this principal Action be broken, the Poem
is broken too, if there be any other Action coordinate and independent on this,
the Poem is monstrous, and has as many Heads, as there are found independent
Actions. The Narration therefore of many Actions successively of one great
Person, or the History of his Life related in Verse, is by no means an Heroic
Poem, any one great Action being sufficient for that. That which makes the
Unity of the Action, is the regular Succession of one Part or Episode to
another, not only as Antecedents and Consequents, but as it were Causes and
Effects, wherein the Reader may discern that the former Episode makes the
following necessary, and the Connection between them is such, that they assist
and support each other, as the Members of the Body do, no Episode being out of
its place, of a disproportioned size to the Rest, or that could be spared from
its place, without maiming, or at least deforming the Whole. If this order of
the Episodes be preserved, and there appears none but what naturally and
probably results from the principal Action, then the Action may be looked on as
one.

The Action must be related in an Allegorical manner; and this Rule is best
observed, when as Divines speak; there is both a Literal Sense obvious to every
Reader, and that gives him satisfaction enough if he sees no farther; and
besides another Mystical or Typical Sense, not hard to be discovered by those
Readers that penetrate the matter deeper. Virgil seems most happy in this
Conduct, whose Poem all along contains this double Sense, Homer has often only
an Allegorical Sense without the Literal, and therefore is not so well
accommodated to this Age, as he was not to that of Augustus. But Ariosto and
Spencer, however great Wits, not observing this judicious Conduct of Virgil,
nor attending to any sober Rules, are hurried on with a boundless, impetuous
Fancy over Hill and Dale, till they are both lost in a Wood of Allegories.
Allegories so wild, unnatura l, and extravagant, as greatly displease the
Reader. This way of writing mightily offends in this Age; and it is a wonder how
it came to please in any. There is indeed a way of writing purely Allegorical,
as when Vices and Virtues are introduced as Persons, the first as Furies, the
other as Divine Persons or Goddesses, which still obtains, and is well enough
accommodated to the present Age. For the Allegory is presently discerned, and
the Reader is by no means imposed on, but sees it immediately to be an
Allegory, and is both delighted and instructed with it. The devised Story must
be related in a probable manner; without this all things will be harsh,
unnatural, and monstrous; and consequently most odious and offensive to the
Judicious. Probability must be in the Action, the Conduct, the Manners; and
where humane means cannot, Machine s are introduced to support it. Nothing is
more necessary then Probability; no Rule more chastely to be observed.

An Epick Poem must likewise be delightful and admirable; and to make it so,
must concur sublime Thoughts, clear and noble Expression, Purity of Language, a
just and due Proportion, Relation, and Dependence between the Parts, and a
beautiful and regular Structure and Connection discernable in the Whole.
Without these it will not be capable of giving Delight, or raising Admiration.
Admiration is the Formal Object of an Epick Poem, nothing is to be admitted
there, but as it is admirable; and by this it is discriminated from all other
sorts of Poetry. Every kind endeavors to please and delight, but this only
attempts to please by astonishing and amazing the Reader. In an Epick Poem
every thing should appear great and wonderful, the Thoughts cannot be too much
Elevated, the Episodes too Noble, the Expression too Magnificent, nor the
Action too Wonderful and Surprising, if Probability be preserved. No Riches of
Fancy, no Pomp of Eloquence can be laid out too much on such a Work where the
Design is throughout to raise our Admiration. To render the Action the more
Admirable, Homer and Virgil have introduced the Gods, and engaged them every
where as Parties; and though I cannot say this is Essential and Necessary to an
Epick Poem, yet it is evident, that interesting Heaven and Hell in the matter,
does mightily raise the Subject, and makes the Action appear more wonderful.
The Pagan Poets had in this a great advantage, their Theology was such, as
would easily mix it self with their Poems, from whence they received their
greatest Beauties. Homer indeed to raise his Subject by his frequent Machines,
seems to have debased his Religion. Virgil's Conduct, in my Opinion, is more
careful and chaste. But some of our modern Critics have believed it is scarce
possible for a Christian Poet to make use of this advantage, of introducing
Superior, Indivisible Powers into the Action, and therefore seem to despair of
seeing an Heroic Poem written now, that shall reach to the Dignity of those of
the Pagans. They think the Christian Religion is not so well accommodated to
this matter, as the Pagan was; and that if any Attempt be made this way,
Religion will suffer more, than the Poem will gain by it. My Opinion has always
differed from these Gentlemen's, I believe a Christian Poet has as great
advantages as the Pagan had; and that our Theology may enter into an Epick
Poem, and raise the Subject without being it self debased. And this indeed was
a second Reason why I undertook this Work, so full of Difficulty and Hazard. I
was willing to give an Instance wherein it might appear, that the Assertion I
have advanced, is actually true.

In the Definition which I have given of an Heroic Poem, according to the
Sense and Judgment of the best Critics, I have said, its End is to convey some
Instruction of Virtue. But of this, I have discoursed at large at the beginning
of this Preface, and there is no need of repeating it.

It Is not for me to proceed to Censure other Men's Performances of this Kind;
whoever will be at the Pains to read the Commentators on Aristotle, and
Horace's Rules of Poetry; or that will but carefully consider Rapin, Dacier,
and Bossu, those great Masters among the French, and the Judicious Remarks of
our own excellent Critic Mr. Rymer, who seems to have better considered these
matters, and to have seen farther into them, than any of the English Nation;
will be soon able to see wherein the Heroic Poems that have been published
since Virgil by the Italian, French, and English Wits have been defective, by
comparing them with the Rules of Writing set down by those great Masters.
Whether I have succeeded better, must be left to the determination of the
Judicious Reader.

In this Work I have endeavored mostly to form my self on Virgil's Model,
which I look on, as the most just and perfect, and which is most easily
accommodated to the present Age, supposing the Christian Religion in the place
of the Pagan. I do not make any Apology for my Imitation of Virgil in so many
places of this Poem; for the same great Master has imitated Homer as frequently
and closely; and I do not find that any of his Critics have condemned him for
his doing so. Nor is it at all improbable, but that the Greek Poet himself
imitated his Predecessors of the same Nation, though no doubt he wonderfully
improved their Model. Homer was not the first Writer of an Epick Poem. We find
Aristotle in his Book of the Art of Poetry, makes mention of several before
him: He tells us of an Epick Poem, entitled, The Little Ilias, and another the
Cyprica; and censures them both, as containing many perfect, distinct, and
independent Actions. The last of these Poems is likewise mentioned by Herodotus
in Euterpe, by Athenaeus and Pausanias. And it is likely many more such Poems
were written before Homer's time, who might be well supposed to have imitated
them in what they had done well, as well as to have improved them in avoiding
many of their Errors.

What Homer and Virgil have performed with Honor and universal Applause, I
have attempted: What they have been able, I have been willing to do. If I have
not succeeded, my disappointment will be the less, in that Poetry has been so
far from being my Business and Profession, that it has employed but a small
part of my Time; and then, but as my Recreation, and the Entertainment of my
idle hours. If this Attempt succeeds so far, as to excite some other Person
that has a noble Genius, Leisure, and Application, to Honor his Country with a
just Epick Poem, I shall think the Vacancies and Intervals that for about two
years past, I have had from the Business of my Profession; which
notwithstanding was then greater then at any time before, have been very well
employed.

Books lately Printed for, and Sold by A. and J. Churchil, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row.
A View of Universal History, from the Creation to the Year of Christ 1695.
wherein the most memorable Persons and Things in the known Kingdoms and
Countries of the World, are set down in several Columns by way of Synchronism,
according to their proper Centuries and Years: By Francis Tallents, sometime
Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge. The whole graven in 16 Copper Plates,
each 15 Inches deep, and 22 broad; bound up into Books, the Sheets lined. A
Work of great Exactness and Curiosity. Price 16 s.

Camden's Britannia, newly Translated into English, with large Additions and
Improvements. By Edmund Gibson of Queens College in Cambridge.

The General History of the Air. By Robert Boil, Esquire

A Complete Journal of the Votes, Speeches and Debates, both of the House of
Lords and House of Commons, throughout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Collected by Sir Simonds Dewes Baronet, and Published by Paul Bows of the
Middle Temple, Esquire The Second Edition.

The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Written Originally in Italian, and from thence faithfully Translated into
English.

Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane Understanding. The Second Edition, with
large Additions. -- his Thoughts of Education, 8o.

The Fables of Aesop and other Mithologists; made English by Sir Roger
L'Estrange, Knight. Fol.

Two Treatises of Government: The first an Answer to Filmer's Patriarchae. The
latter an Essay concerning the true Original, Extent, and End of Civil
Government, 8o.

Notitia Monastica, or a short History of the Religious Houses in England and
Wales, etc. By Thomas Tanner, A. B.

The Resurrection of the (same) Body asserted from the Traditions of the
Heathens, the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church: With an Answer to the
Objections brought against it. By Humphry Hody, D. D.

Bishop Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching; Enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and
Dr. Williams, 8o.

Considerations about lowering the Interest, and raising the Value of Money, 8o.

Short Observations on a Printed Paper, entitled, For encouraging the Coining
Salver Money in England, and after for keeping it here.

Sir William Temple's History of the Netherlands, 8o. -- Miscellanea, 8o.

Dr. Gibson's Anatomy of Humane Bodies, with Additions, 8o.

Dr. Patrick's new Version of all the Psalms of David in Meter, 12o.

Mr. L'Clerc Logica, 12o.

Two Treatises of Rational Religion, 8o.

Gentleman's Religion, with the Grounds and Reasons of it. In which the Truth
of Christianity in general is vindicated; its Simplicity asserted; and some
Introductory Rules for the discovering of its particular Doctrines and
Precepts, are proposed. By a private Gentleman.

In the Press.

Leland de Viris illustratibus, and Boston of Bury, from the MSS. with large
Improvements; and a Continuation. By Mr. Tanner.

Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England, continued down to this
time.

Cambridge Concordance, Fol.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 12. read Dominions, p. 16. l. 25. r. Armoric, p. 17. l. 10. r.
mingled, p. 46. l. 3. r. Emanations, p 50. l. 1. r. roll, p. 54. l. 20. r.
brighter, p 58. l. 19. r. unexampled, p. 62. l. 9. r. gilded, and dele had, l.
20. r. drawn, p. 63. l. 32. dele with Joy, p. 65. l. 6. r. Conversation, p. 66.
l. 13. r. ly, p. 66. l. 14. r. Bank, p. 68. l. 1. r. Spears, p. 84. l. 31. r.
they are, p. 85. l. 9. r. Illusions, p. 114. l. 22. r. bloody, p. 137. l. 19. r.
Oblivion, l. 17. r. Naphtha, p. 147. l. 11. r. Northumbrian, p. 161. l. 9. r.
Meridoc, ib. l. r. Ordovician, p. 165. l. 27. r. great, p. 167. l. 29. r.
Osron, p. 169. l. 22. r. Turbulent, p. 175. l. 7. r. Titullan, p. 177. l. 25.
r. Maximius, p. 177. l. 30. r. rise, p. 171. l. 13. r. Earthquakes, p. 178. l.
23. r. Decree, p. 185. l. 22. r. in, p. 188. l. 21. r. Land, l. 23. r. this,,
p. 189. l. 19. r. sharp'ning, p. 213. l. 27. r. Daughters, p. 218. l. 24. r.
from, p. 224. l. 21. r. stooped, p. 236. l. 19. r. spacious, p. 242. l. 18. r.
Princes generous, p. 249. l. 8. r. trail'd backwards, p. 251. l. 20. r. of, p.
252. l. 16. r. they, p. 264. l. 13. r. Picti, p. 275, l. 32. r. blow, p. 294.
l. 13. r. into, p. 294. l. 17. r. upon.

Prince Arthur.
BOOK I.
I Sing the Briton, and his Righteous Arms,
Who bred to Sufferings, and the rude Alarms
Of bloody War, forsook his Native Soil,
And long sustained a vast Heroic Toil,
Till kinder Fate invited his Return,
To bless the Isle, that did his Absence mourn:
To re-enthrone fair Liberty, and break
The Saxon Yoke, that galled Britannia's Neck.
Tell, Sacred Muse, what made the Infernal King
Use all his Arts, and all his Forces bring
The Generous Briton's Triumphs to oppose,
Afflict his Friends, and aid his cruel Foes.
Tell, why the angry Powers below, combine
TO oppress a Valiant Prince, and thwart his brave Design.
Ambitious Lucifer, deposed of late
From Bliss Divine, and high Angelick State,
Sinks to the dark, unbottom'd Deep of Hell,
Where Sin, and Death, and endless Sorrow dwell:
Here plunged in Flame, and tortured with Despair
He plots Revenge, and meditates new War.
His Thoughts on deep Designs the Apostate spent,
When this Conjuncture favored his Intent.
A spacious, dusky Plain lay wast and void,
Where yet Creating Power was never employed
To fashion Elements, or strike out Light;
The silent, lonesome Walks of ancient Night.
In the Archives kept in Heaven's bright Towers, was found,
A sacred old Decree, wherein the Ground
Was set distinctly out, from Ages past,
For a new World, on this unbounded Wast.
Here did the Artificer Divine of late,
The World so long before marked out, create.
And gave it to the Man he newly made,
Where all things him, as he did Heaven, obeyed.
In Eden's Walks he made his blessed Abode,
All full of Joy, of Glory, full of God.
Nature with vast Profusion on him pours,
Unmeasured Bliss, from unexhausted Stores.
The Apostate raging at his own Defeat
And envying this new Prince his happy Seat;
Labors to win him to his Side, to bear
Arms against Heaven, and wage Confed'rate War.
Nor did his Arts in vain weak Man assail,
His false Seraphick Tongue, and Charms prevail.
Deluded Man from his high Station fell
Deserting Heaven, to serve the Cause of Hell.
This Fatal Conquest over fallen Adam gained,
A mighty Empire Lucifer maintained;
Till the blessed Prince of Peace, Heaven's Lord and Heir,
By Pity's Tears, and charming Mercy's Prayer
Drawn down from Heaven, freed lost Mankind, and broke
The Power of Hell, and Sin's Tyrannick Yoke.
He makes Proud Lucifer his Host disband,
And wrests the Scepter from the Usurper's Hand.
The Prince of Darkness owns the Conqueror,
And yields his Empire to a mightier Power.
From Idols and their Priests the Nations freed,
Celestial Light, and Truth Divine succeed.
Religion large Dominions soon obtained,
And daily Conquests, and fresh Laurels gained.
To Albion's Shore she early passed the Main,
And brought along her bright Etherial Train.
From thence she chased Infernal Shades away,
And over the Isle, diffused a Heavenly Day.
The Prince of Hell at her Appearance flies,
Spoiled of his Altars, and his Votaries.
Confined to Barbarous Northern Lands he staid,
Till the fierce Saxon, Albion did invade.
Victorious Octa who his Shrines adored,
Rebuilt his Altars, and his Groves restored.
Long abdicated Gods make Albion mourn,
At theirs, and their devouring Priests Return.
The Arch-Traytor's Rage hence against Arthur rose,
And all the Infernal Powers his Arms oppose;
Conscious should he his glorious End acquire,
And force the intruding Pagan to retire,
Theirs, with the Saxon Empire must expire.
They must again forsake fair Albion's Land,
And leave Divine Religion to Command.
Scarce had they left the happy Neustrian Coast,
Born with a Prosperous Gale, scarce had they lost
The Tops of Spires, and rising Points of Land,
When Lucifer, that did observing stand
On the high Southern Promontory's Head,
Of Vecta's Isle, the Seas beneath him spread
With sharp Angelick Ken, views far and wide,
And soon Prince Arthur's hateful Fleet descried.
The Heavens serenely smiled, and every Sail
Filled its wide Bosom, with the indulgent Gale.
Mercy, Deliverance, Pity, Hope displaid
Their Silver Wings, and glad Attendance paid,
Sung on the Shrowds, or with the Streamers played.
Rage flashed, like Lightning, from the Apostate's Eyes,
And Envy swelled him to the vastest Size
Then thus he to himself.
Was not to me in the famed Wars of Heaven,
The chief Command of all the Forces given,
Sent by Confederate Potentates to wage
Unheard of War, and all Heaven's Power engage?
When I, to end with Honor the Campaign,
Drew my bright Troops out, on the Etherial Plain;
And pushed on that great, last decisive Day,
With God-like Vigor, for the Imperial Sway.
In Luster chief, in Danger and Command,
Did I Proud Michael's Veteran Troops withstand.
Michael, than whom a Braver Combatant,
For Skill and Strength, the Foe could never vaunt.
Against fresh Battalions still poured on I stood,
Smeer'd with Celestial Dust, and Seraphs Blood.
Had not our Mould been Ether, Pure and Fine,
Labored with Care, anneel'd with Skill Divine;
The Blows of mighty Cherubs Death had cloyed,
Unpeopled Heaven, and the Bright Race destroyed.
With Michael pained with ghastly Wounds, at length
I closed, and grasped him with Immortal Strength;
And down Heaven's Precipice, had headlong hurled
The great Archangel, to the Infernal World,
Had not swift Uriel trembling at the Sight,
That filled all Heaven, with Horror and dire Fright,
Rushed in, to save him from unequal Fight.
Their stagg'ring Army shrunk, and we had won
The Throne we fought for, but the Almighty's Son
Brought strong Recruits, to reinforce their Host,
And win back what their General Michael lost.
'Tho' overmatcht, did I not firmly stand,
The chiefest Mark of his Revenging Hand?
Did I from Posts of greatest Danger run,
Or once his bright Triumphal Chariot shun?
Did I once shrink, when Showers of poisoned Darts
Dipped in Eternal Wrath, shot through our Hearts?
When massy Rocks of Heavenly Crystal flew,
Which the strong Arms of mighty Seraphs threw?
Did I not run and timely Help afford,
Where Storms of Fire, and loudest Thunder roared?
It Is true, o'er-born with Force, at last I fell,
But got Immortal Fame, though with it Hell.
Scarce was I vanquished and overthrown but late
By Power Almighty, and Eternal Fate.
Since that chief Lord, and Prince of Hell I Have reigned,
And from the Foe, his new-made World have gained.
And long maintained the Conquests I had won;
Now much lost back to his Almighty Son.
But faithful Octa has once more restored
This happy Isle to me its ancient Lord.
Have I been thus for great Achievements famed,
My Deeds throughout all Heaven and Hell proclaimed;
And shall this British, despicable Wight,
Me and my Priests, force to a second Flight?
Rifle my Temples, and in Triumph bear,
Through shouting Throngs, the Spoils high in the Air?
Who then to me will Hymns of Praise return,
Who on my Altars Odorous Incense burn?
If I chastise not this vain Briton's Pride,
That does insulting on the Ocean ride.
If I secure not my new conquered Seat,
And all his wild, ambitious Arms defeat.
This having said, to Heaven he mounts upright,
And to the Northern Pole directs his Flight.
All fired with Rage, and full of anxious Care,
With his swift Wings, he cuts the yielding Air.
As when the Sun pours from his Orb of Light,
A glorious Deluge, on the Face of Night.
His Golden Rays shot from the Rosy East,
Reach in a Moment, the remotest West,
And smiling on the Mountains Heads are seen,
The immense Expansion past, that lies between.
The Prince of Darkness now, once Prince of Light,
With equal Swiftness takes his Airy Flight,
And the vast Interval of Seas, and Isles,
Wild Deserts, spacious Forests, snowy Hills,
Past in a Moment, does on Fioel Light;
Of Lapland Alps, chief for amazing Height.
Where Thor resides, who heretofore by Lot
The Sovereign Rule over Winds, and Tempests got.
Here in strong Prisons bound with heavy Chains,
His howling, savage Subjects he restrains,
And in Eternal Din, and Uproar reigns.
In close Apartments, round his desert Court,
Fierce Prisoners are confined of different Sort.
Here Boundless Stores, and Treasures Infinite
Of Vapors, Steams, and Exhalations, fit
TO engender Winds, or Snow, or Hail, or Rain,
In Subterranean Magazins remain.
Here new fledged Winds, young yelping Monsters try
Their Wings, and sporting round their Prisons fly.
Here whistling East-winds prove their shriller Notes:
Here the hoarse South-winds, strain their hollow Throats.
Boreas the fiercest and most turbulent,
Of the mad Race, raves in his Dungeon pent.
At the Adamantine Door vast Hills are thrown,
And abrupt Rocks of Ice, pil'd sevenfold on.
Capricious Whirlwinds, of more Force than Sound,
In everlasting Eddys turning round,
Grow Giddy, Furious and Extravagant,
And strive to break from their close Den's restraint.
When Thor unlocks their Prisons, out they fly,
A lawless Rout, and with their Hellish Cry
Out-howl the hideous Monsters of the Seas,
Or savage Roarings of the Wilderness.
Some range the Flats, and Scour the Champain Land,
Or roll in tottering heaps the Desert Sand.
Some to the lofty Woods direct their Course,
And with an uncontrolled, impetuous Force
O'erturn opposing Structures in their have,
Tear up tall Pines, and lay the Forest wast.
Some to the Ocean with like Speed resort,
And in loud Tempests on the Billows sport.
Embroil the Coasts, and in wild Outrages
Turn up to Heaven, the Bottom of the Seas.
But hushed at Thor's Command they all obey,
And to their ancient Prisons haste away.
To him, thus Lucifer, great Prince on thee
Fate has bestowed the Empire of the Sea,
All there concerned, invoke thy Deity.
The Merchants pray to thee to fill their Sails,
Enrich thy Priests, and purchase Prosperous Gales.
I too thy Suppliant, ask thy Powerful Aid,
A Haughty Prince, designing to invade
My Faithful Subject Octa, and beguile
Me of my Hopes of fair Britannia's Isle;
Sails with a Numerous Fleet, with Men and Arms,
And Octa trembles at his Proud Alarms.
Let him in Furious Hurricanes be tossed,
Be sunk, or wreckt, or on the Ocean lost,
Beat him at least, from his intended Coast.
Make him thy Vengeance feel, thy Power regard,
And be what e're thou ask, thy Reward.
Great Prince, then Thor replied,
Who rul'st the Realms of Hell with Sovereign Sway,
Whom all the Infernal Thrones, and Powers obey,
I own Obedience to thy high Command,
Who putt'st this Scepter first into my Hand.
Thou led'st in Heaven our bright Battalions on,
And bravely did attempt the Almighty's Throne;
I saw thy mighty Deeds, and kept my Post
Close by thee, till that Glorious Day was lost.
Thy faded Splendour, and illustrious Scars,
From Ghasty Wounds, received in those just Wars,
I view with Reverence, it is true subdued
Headlong we fell from Heaven's high Tow'r's, pursued
With Whirlwinds, and loud Thunder, down to Hell,
And Storms of Fire beat on us as we fell.
Yet after that, thou led'st us to invade
This Globous World, which we our Conquest made.
And my Election Patronized by thee,
This great Command and Province fell to me.
That said, by him their heavy Gates unbar'd,
That loud on mighty Iron Hinges jarr'd,
Out rattling Eurus, and loud Boreas fly,
And with Outrageous Tempests fill the Sky.
They bend their Course strait to the British Coast,
And on those Seas lay out their Anger most.
Their Furious Wings the swelling Surges beat,
And rouse Old Ocean from his Peaceful Seat.
The raging Seas in high ridg'd Mountains rise,
And cast their angry Foam against the Skies.
Then gape so deep, that Day Light Hell invades,
And shoots gray Dawning through the affrighted Shades.
Low bellying Clouds soon intercept the Light,
And over the Britons spread a Noon Day Night.
Exploded Thunder tears the Embowel'd Sky,
And Sulphurous Flames a dismal Day supply.
The Dire Convulsions, for a certain Space
Distorted Nature, wresting from its Place
This Globe, set to the Sun's more oblique View,
And wrench'd the Poles some Leagues yet more askew.
Horror, Confusion, Uproar, Strife and Fear
In all their wild amazing Shapes appear.
Mean time old Chaos joyful at the Sight,
Looked and smiled horrible on older Night,
Hoping that Nature, their grand Foe would crack
With universal Ruin, and her Wreck
Would give them all their lost Dominions back.
The Sailor's Clamor, and enormous Cries,
The Crack of Masts, mixed with the outrageous Noise
Of Storms and Thunder, rending all the Air,
Form the last Scene of Horror and Despair.
When the Just Arthur filled with Grief and Dread,
And Pale Confusion, deeply sighed, and said,
O righteous Heaven, why have thou ranged this Day
Against me all thy Terrors in Array!
Armed in thy Cause, thy Temples to restore,
And give that Aid thy sacred Priests implore.
If thou such fierce Destruction do dispense,
To punish some unpardoned old Offense,
On me let all thy Fiery Darts be spent,
Let not my Crime involve the innocent.
Whelm over my guilty Head these raging Seas,
And let this Sacrifice thy Wrath appease,
But let the British Youth return in Peace.
That said, his Ship unmasted, without Guide,
Driven by the Winds and Seas impetuous Tide,
The Sight of all the scattered Navy lost,
Strikes on the Quicksand of an unknown Coast.
Mean time bright Uriel, Heaven's high Favorite,
Left the Celestial Palaces of Light,
Sent by supreme Command, and down he flies,
Let by a Golden Sunbeam through the Skies.
Meekness divine, serene and Heavenly Grace,
And fresh immortal Youth shone on his Face.
Godlike his Form, his Looks so charming mild
That where he came all ravished Nature smiled.
He strait alights on lofty Gobeum's Head,
That wondered at the Heaven about it shed,
From the bright Cherubim, who touched his Lyre,
Famed for his Sweetness in the Heavenly Quire:
The enchanted Winds straightway their Fury laid,
Grew wondrous still, and strict Attention paid.
Aerial Demons that by Twilight stray,
Sport in loud Thunder, and in Tempest play,
Spread their brown Wings, and fly in Clouds away.
The Day returns, the Heavens no longer scowl,
And fierce Sea Monsters charmed forget to howl.
The Winds retreat, and leave the peaceful Waves,
To rest their Wings, and sleep in Lapland Caves.
Soft Zephirs only stay to fan the Woods,
And play in gentle Gales along the Floods.
The Ocean smiles to see the Tempest fled,
New lays his Waves, and smooths his ruffl'd Bed.
All things thus hushed, great Arthur gave Command
To quit their Ship, stuck in the barren Sand,
And in their Boats to make the Neighboring Land.
They spy a Creek not far a Peaceful Seat
Where flying Waves by furious Tempest beat,
Find from the fierce Pursuit a safe Retreat.
Free from the outrageous Clamours of the Deep,
They rest secure, and unmolested sleep.
Stretched smooth beneath the shady Trees and Rocks,
That guard them from the Winds impetuous Shocks.
Here smaller Vessels may securely ride
And all the Assaults of angry Sorms deride.
Here they arrived, and Heaven they first adored,
That gave the Aid, their earnest Cries implored.
That saved them from the Winds, Waves, Rocks and Storms,
Deaths of so many, and such hideous Forms.
Then for their parted Friends, with humble Prayer,
They ask Heaven's Pity, and indulgent Care.
Now Arthur from the Rock, views far and wide
The Seas beneath, if thence might be descried
The Friends he lately lost, but views in vain,
No Friend appears on all the Desert Main.
Returned he thus began:
Too dark the Eternal's ways are, too profound,
For the most sharp created Wit to sound.
Clouds black, as those that rise the sacred Fence
Of his high Throne, surround his Providence.
Whose walks are trackless, and on every hand
About her paths, shades and thick Darkness stand.
Her ways are so perplexed, so wide her steps,
Such turns and windings, and such frightful leaps;
Such Gulphs, and interposing Rocks appear,
There such Ascents, such dreadful Downfalls here,
That Reason strait affrighted stops her pace,
Is soon thrown off, and quits the unequal Chase.
The Almighty's Councils are so high and steep,
Immense, unbounded, without bottom deep;
Angels amazed from their high Thrones of Bliss,
Trembling look down on this profound Abyss.
Sometimes he seems to thwart his own intent,
Stop and defeat his long designed event;
Yet which way e're he steers, his end's attained,
By uncouth means, with greater wonder gained.
Sometimes his high permission, leaves oppressed
The Men most like him, and that serve him best:
But still their Sufferings and severer Fate
Prepare them for some glorious future state.
Invited by sad Britain's Prayers, and Tears,
To save her State; and ease her deadly Fears,
We armed, deposed Religion to enthrone,
TO enlarge the Christian Empire, not our own.
We armed thus, to restore in Hell's despite,
To Heaven its Worship, and to Men their Right.
Resume your Courage then, it cannot be true,
That Heavens Revenge should Heaven's own Cause pursue.
These Evils are not in displeasure meant,
Heaven is too Just, and you too Innocent.
Success and Triumph will our Arms attend,
And these rough ways lead to a glorious End.
With Pleasure we hereafter shall relate
These sufferings, that will greater Joys create.
He said, and all his anxious Cares suppressed,
And kept concealed his trouble in his Breast.
With looks composed, 'twixt pleasure and despair,
Grave but serene, he bids them all repair
Their strength, exhausted with much toil and care.
Of Meats and Fruits part of their Naval Store,
That with them from their Ship they brought ashore:
Their weary Limbs reposed, beneath the shade
Of well spread Trees, a grateful Meal they made.
Rich Wine of Burgundy, and choice Champaigne,
Relieve the toil they suffered on the Main.
But what more cheered them than their Meats and Wine,
Was wise Instruction, and Discourse Divine,
From God-like Arthur's Mouth, by Heaven inspired;
That all their Breasts with sacred Passions fired.
Great were his Thoughts, strong and sublime his Sense
Of Heaven's Decrees, Foreknowledge, Providence.
He reasoned deep of Heaven's mysterious Ends,
And made stern Justice, and fair Mercy Friends.
How high he soared, how Noble was his flight,
Speaking of Truth divine, and Wisdom infinite!
He opens all the Magazins above,
Of boundless Goodness and Eternal Love.
From these rich Stores of Heaven, these sacred Springs
Of everlasting Joy and Peace, he brings
Ambrosial Food, and rich Nectarean Wine,
That cheer pure Souls, and nourish Life Divine.
He then compared this transient mortal state,
To the fierce Tempest they escaped so late,
That here is every great and good Man's Fate.
If God-like Men for Heaven embark, and stand
Their Course direct, to make the blissful Land;
Strait Hell the bloody signal gives to Arm,
Cain's cruel offspring takes the dire alarm;
And potent Fiends by Sea their Forces join,
TO obstruct their way, and break their brave design.
All with consummate Malice, furious Rage,
Against the adventurous Voyagers engage.
Through all the Sky they raise outrageous Storms,
And Death stands threatening in a thousand Forms.
Clouds charged with loud Destruction drown the day,
And airy Demons in wild VVhirlwinds play.
Thick Thunderclaps, and Lightning's livid glare
Disturb the Sky, and trouble all the Air.
Outrage, Distraction, Clamor, Tumult Reign,
Through the Dominions of the unquiet Main.
The laboring Bark with Heavenly Treasure fraught,
Now almost sunk, now up in Tempests caught.
Near Sands and Rocks, rides on the dark Abyss,
Long beaten off from the bright Coasts of Bliss.
At last calm Day succeeds this stormy Night,
And the glad Voyagers find in their sight,
The Realms of Peace, and the blessed Shores of Light.
Here they arrive, and find a safe Retreat,
And all their pain and labors past forget.
There was a Cave hard by, that Nature made
In the hard Rock, and covered with the shade,
Of spreading Trees, that Day could not invade.
Hither the Pious British Prince retires,
To offer Praises up and pure desires.
Here rapturous Converse he with Heaven maintains,
And aided by Devotion's purest strains,
Combats Almighty Power, and Conquest gains.
Devotion, that often binds the Almighty's Arms,
And with her Prayers and Tears, her powerful charms,
Of all its Thunder, his right hand disarms.
She passes quick Heaven's lofty Crystal Walls,
And the high Gates fly open when she calls.
The charming Goddess of Divine Address,
Has to the Almighty's Presence free Access.
Her Power can sentenced Criminals Reprieve,
Judgment Arrest, and bid the Rebel live.
Her Charms did once the Sun's swift Chariot stay,
And on the Verge of Heaven, held back the falling Day.
She makes contentious Winds forget their Strife,
And calls back to the Dead, departed Life.
Charmed by her Voice, Rivers have stopped their Course,
And the chilled Fire laid down its burning Force.
Such is Devotion's Power, which Arthur knew,
And when distressed still to this Refuge flew.
Much to his Conduct he, much to his Arms,
But more he trusted to Devotion's Charms.
Of Triumph and Success he rarely failed,
For those on Earth, and these in Heaven prevailed.
Now in the silent, shady Cave retired,
He with her sacred Fury lay inspired.
The Prince being thus entranced, a Heavenly Light
Shoots smiling through the Wood with silent flight:
The Trees admire the Glory on them shed,
And seemed to start, and humbly bow their Head;
When fresh arrived on Earth, with Heaven's Commands,
Great Raphael's glorious Form by Arthur stands.
Celestial Sweetness, Mild and God-like Grace
Ineffable, sat on his blooming Face.
His Cheeks such Beauty showed, such Light and Joy his Eyes,
As from full Bliss, fresh Youth, and Strength immortal rise.
The purest piece of Heaven's Etherial Blue,
In a rich Mantle, from his Shoulders flew.
Celestial Linen, finely Spun and Wove
On Looms Divine, by all the Skill above,
Bleach'd on the Empyreal Plains till White as Snow,
Made the long Robe that to his Feet did flow.
Immortal Gold, Illustrious as the Morn,
And dazzling Gemms by high Arch Angels worn,
With ponderous Pearl, from Heaven's bright Eastern Shore,
Adorn the shining Garments that he wore.
A Purple Girdle, from the Morning Sky
New rent, does round his Starry Vesture tie.
Thus he appeared, and with the Light he gave,
And unknown Fragrancy, filled all the Cave.
Then thus he spoke, Hail mine and Heaven's kind Care,
Hither I come, drawn by thy powerful Prayer.
Know Righteous Prince, the Almighty does approve,
Your firm Adhesion, and unshaken Love.
Ends Great and Wise lodged in his secret Breast,
Obstruct your Wishes, and your Course molest.
Yet still pursue your great and just Intent,
No Force or Arts shall your Design prevent,
Propitious Heaven Decrees your wished Event.
You on these Coasts for happy Ends are thrown,
And after this, expect the British Crown.
Your Friends and Navy on the Ocean lost,
Are all arrived safe on the Armorie Coast:
By the impetuous Tempest beaten back,
But Men and Ships saved from the threatened Wreck.
You're cast on Hoel's Lands, amidst your Foes,
That hate your Cause, and your just Arms Oppose.
But fear not Hoel's Power, though now your Foe,
By Hell incensed, he will not long be so.
Go then directly to his Court, for there,
A Glorious Work demands your Pious Care.
That said, with outstretcht Wings he soars upright,
And through the Winds vast Empire takes his flight*
He cuts the Clouds, and by the Planets flies
Up the steep Crystal Mountains of the Skies.
And swiftly passing through the Starry Spears,
Before the Throne he in his place appears,
The Cherub's gone, and with him Arthur's fears.
Who to his Lords returns, and to their Heart
Courage and Joy, his Words and Looks impart.
His God-like Language does their Fears abate,
And with fresh hopes their troubled Breasts dilate.
Mean time the Infernal Thrones and Powers resort,
At their great Monarch's Summons to his Court.
Where they in Council meet, and there debate
Important matters, high Designs of State.
Their Prince with Pride extended, mounts his Throne,
Of polished Gold, whence horrid splendour shone:
And mingled with the Shades tremendous Light,
More dreadful thus, as Fires, that Flame by Night.
In sad Magnificence, and dismal State,
He sits, and round the Infernal Orders sat:
Then Lucifer began:
Immortal Potentates, Illustrious Lords,
The British Youth's ambitious aim affords,
A weighty subject for your high debate;
Who seeks the ruin of your Power and State.
You all have heard, how with a mighty Force
Embarked, he strait for Albion steered his Course,
King Octa to attack, our Votary,
And make our Priests from our new Altars fly.
I watched, and aided by the Power of Thor,
I showed the Miscreant another Shore.
His Fleet beat back, and haughty purpose croft,
He wanders, Shipwreckt on the Armoric Coast.
Where faithful Hoel does the Scepter hold,
Mighty in Arms, and in our Service bold.
Spirits Divine, high Peers of Hell, suggest,
By what sure Plagues he may be more distressed,
His Ruin finished, and his Sect oppressed.
That said, a Fury crawls from out her Cell,
The bloodiest Minister of Death and Hell.
A monstrous Shape, a foul and hideous sight,
That did all Hell with her dire looks affright.
Huge, full gorged Snakes on her lean Shoulders hung,
And Death's dark Courts with their loud hissing rung.
Her Teeth and Claws were Iron, and her Breath,
Like Subterranean Damps, gave present Death.
Flames worse then Hells, shot from her bloody Eyes,
And Fire and Sword Eternally she Cries.
No certain Shape, no Feature regular,
No Limbs distinct in the odious Fiend appear.
Her squallid, bloated Belly did arise,
Swollen with black Gore, to a prodigious Size.
Distended vastly, by a mighty Flood
Of slaughtered Saints, and constant Martyrs Blood.
Part stood out prominent, but part fell down,
And in a swagging heap, lay wallowing on the ground.
A Monster so deformed, so fierce as this,
It self a Hell, never saw the dark Abyss.
Horror till now the ugliest Shape esteemed,
So much outdone, a harmless Figure seemed.
Envy and Hate, and Malice blushed to see
Themselves Eclipsed by such Deformity.
Her Feverish Thirst drinks down a Sea of Blood,
Not of the Impious, but the Just and Good.
Against whom she burns with unextinguish'd Rage,
Nor can the exhausted World her Wrath assuage.
Then thus the Fury Persecution spoke:
I mighty Prince of Hell, will undertake
This glorious Work, I quickly will inspire
Hoel, with my ungovernable Fire.
Without remorse he shall my Will Obey,
And crush this Briton, now his easy Prey.
Nero by me raised his Illustrious Name,
And Dioclesian got Immortal Fame.
I their rude, inbred Cruelty refined,
And stamped my perfect Image on their Mind.
My flames all Love's course mixture did destroy,
And purged off soft Compassion's base alloy;
I formed and disciplined their untaught Hate,
And raised their fierceness to a perfect State.
Where shame, and all reflecting Sense is lost,
And Hell cannot purer strains of Malice boast.
Inexorable they all Cries withstood,
Ravished with Slaughter, and regaled with Blood.
Hard marble Rocks might with more ease relent,
And Fire and Plague, learn sooner to repent.
Then Christian Kings my Fury entertained,
And taught by me, in Blood and Slaughter reigned.
With pious Rage and fierce destructive Zeal,
I first inspired their Minds, and did reveal
The mystery, how deep Revenge to take,
And slay the Servants for the Master's sake.
How bloody Wrath might with Devotion join,
And sacred Zeal with Cruelty combine.
By me the unknown way they understood,
TO atone the Christians God, with Christian Blood.
By me they shook off Fear's and Love's Restraints;
And on God's Altars burnt his slaughtered Saints.
I made them call, that all remorse might cease,
Murder Compassion, Desolation Peace.
Whilst my Infernal Heats their Breasts inspired,
To the vile Sect their own mad Zeal acquired,
Wider Destruction, and more fatal Harms,
Then all your Scythian, or your Gothic Arms.
And Rome, proud Rome her self, must owe to me
Her present State, and future Dignity.
The greatest Genius this, I e're could find,
And to receive my Image best inclined.
I will her Mind inspire, and to her Heart
Immortal hate, to Abel's Race impart.
These Breasts she empties with her Infant Jaws,
I File her Teeth, and Shape her tender Claws.
I Nurse her on the horrid Alps high Tops,
And feed her hunger with Cerberean Sops
Dipped in Tartarean Gall, and Hemlock Juice,
That in her Veins will noble Blood produce.
Fierce Tigers, Dragons, Wolves about her stay,
They grin, and snap, and bite, and snarling play.
I to her Jaws, throw Infants newly Born;
She sucks their Blood, and by her Teeth are torn
Their tender Limbs, while I rejoice to see
Such noble proofs of growing Cruelty.
To her wide Breast, and vast capacious Soul,
I often Torrents of black Poison roll:
She drinks the livid Flood, and through her Veins
Mad Fury runs, and wild Distraction reigns.
I Will lead her from the Rocks, her strength full grown,
Fix her high Seat in the Imperial Town,
And give her Scarlet, and a threefold Crown.
No Blood will then her mighty Thirst assuage,
No Ravage cloy her Antichristian Rage.
Her Mitred Sons that never can relent,
From the great Cain, shall prove their high Descent.
Their Deeds of strange Infernal Cruelty,
Shall show their Race worthy of Him and me.
Lay-Bigots, I with time and labor wrought,
Some inward Grudgings still against me fought:
'Twas hard to raise their hate to a degree,
From struggling Nature, and all Pity free.
But these Church-Zealots, of a truer breed,
Are formed with Ease, and scarce my Labor need.
Their forward Genius without teaching grows,
And all my hopes, and even my wish out-does.
How often shall thy glorious Sons, O Rome,
With Martyrs Flames inlighten Christendom?
How often shall they, to deride their God,
Lift up in Prayer, their Hands all full of Blood?
The wasted World shall feel their loud Alarms,
Their blessed Massacres, and their hallowed Arms.
As if their high intent were to Efface,
All Footsteps left of Abel's hateful Race.
Bloody Tribunals, Rapine, Fire and Sword,
And Desolation, daily Sport afford.
Mankind they shall with such dire Plagues attack,
As will their Church a holy Desert make.
Such is my Zeal to serve the infernal State,
And shall this British Prince escape my Hate?
Forbid it Hell, and here she made a pause;
The Lords in Council gave a loud applause.
The Prince of Darkness leaping from his place,
Did in his Arms, his darling Fiend Embrace.
Her Anger then rose higher, and all Hell
Uneasy seemed, she grew so terrible.
She strait contracts her vast dilated Size,
And through Hell's dusky Void, she upward flies.
As when rich Towns great Cost and Art employ
In Fireworks, to express their public Joy,
For some great Victory won by Land, or Sea,
Or on some Prince's Coronation Day.
The flaming Rockets hizzing fly by Night,
And fill the Sky with unknown Noise and Light.
The Spears amazed stand, or move slowly on,
And wonder how the Day returns so soon,
And what new Stars rise brighter than their own.
So does the Fiend, her Snakes all hissing rise,
Through the thick haggair'd Air, and as she flies
Leaves tracks of Light, cast from her fiery Eyes.
And now arrived on the gray Coasts of Day,
Direct to Hoel's Court she takes her way.
Where she alighted, when the Sun had hurled
His glorious Orb hence, to the other World.
'Twas then when all things looked, as if old Night
Had Nature crushed, and seized her ancient Right,
Whilst Silence, Shades, and Lights around create,
Sad, solemn Pomp, t'express her Death-like state.
Winds, and wild Beasts lie in their Dens at rest,
Nor these the Woods, nor those the Seas molest.
The sleeping Vultures drop their prey, the Dove
Ceases her Cooing, and forgets to love.
The Jocond Fairies Dance their silent round,
And with dark Circles mark the trampled ground.
Tartarean Forms Skim over the Mountains Heads,
Or lightly sweep along the dewy Meads.
Ghosts leave their Tombs hid Murders to reveal,
Or Treasures which themselves did once conceal.
Visions through the Air, and careless Phantoms stray,
Or round Men's troubled Heads while sleeping play.
The Fury Alman's Reverend Shape assumes,
Odin's High Priest, and so to Hoel comes.
For the Priest's Form, is fittest to engage
Princes in Blood, and move destructive Rage.
Thus changed the Fiend, such is her Craft, appears,
And thus began, just Hoel, all those years
I lived, I did with studious Care employ,
How best I might the Christian Crew destroy.
I thy great Soul in this blessed Cause engaged,
Inspired with Heats Divine, not yet asswag'd.
I quit Elysian Pleasures to impart,
What does with greater Joy extend my Heart;
And will do thine, Arthur, Cursed be that Name,
Designing Empire, and Illustrious Fame
Embarked with Arms, fair Albion to invade,
But by just Heaven, is thy cheap Captive made.
Pursued with Thunder, and in Tempests tossed,
At last he is Shipwreckt on this happy Coast.
With his sad Friends he wanders up and down,
Naked, perplexed, deserted, and undone.
But yet just Heaven Decrees him greater Harm,
But saves that Glory for your Zealous Arm.
To take his Life must be your Pious Care,
And with the Gods divided Honor share.
Thus you their En'my, and your own remove,
Secure your Peace, and please the Powers above.
To Christians this can be no Injury,
That call for Torments, and are pleased to Dye.
They all seem fond to wear the Martyr's Crown,
And meet the Flames, with greater of their own.
No Rights, no Rules of Justice you invade,
For Ruin's their Profession, Death their Trade.
Go then, and grace the Briton, that comes on
To meet you, and receive the Martyr's Crown.
Remove this Pillar of their Church, and all
The unsupported Roof, will crack and fall.
Take this Defender of their Faith away,
The passive Rabble, tamely will Obey.
Their Lives in Sport you may at leisure take,
They quickly fall, that no Resistance make.
The Gods into your Hands have cast your Foe,
To take his Life will please Heaven, him, and you.
That said, she breathed her Soul into his Breast,
And her wild Fury all his Veins possessed.
Infernal Flames Rage in his poisoned Blood,
And his swollen Heart Boils with the impetuous Flood,
The Fiend her Shape of thickened Air dissolves,
And disappears, Hoel surpised revolves
The welcome message in his Mind, and strait
Commands his Lords and Guards should on him wait,
On the first Shooting of the tender Day,
So eager did he seem to seize the Prey.
Now was the Eastern Sky-dy'd Purple spread,
For fair Aurora's Radiant Feet to tread.
She mounts serene, and with mild dawning Light,
Smiles on the lowering, dusky Face of Night;
That to Victorious Day yields up her Seat,
Whilst her black Forces silently Retreat.
As when a Lion at the dawn of Day,
Roused with fierce Hunger up to Hunt his Prey,
Stretches his Limbs out, Yawns, and tries his Paws,
And for sure Death prepares his cruel Jaws.
He stands, and rolls about his Angry Eyes,
Lashing his Sides to make his Fury rise.
Then Scowrs the Hills, Ranges the Forests over,
And Thunders through the Desert with his hideous Roar.
The Winds all hushed sit trembling on the Trees,
And scarcely Whisper out a gentle Breeze.
Wolves dare not Howl, but grinning softly creep,
And Leopards stretched out, feign themselves asleep.
The affrighted Herds close in their Covert lie,
And to escape his Rage, with Terror dye.
Thus Hoel, with infernal Rage possessed,
With fierce desire speeds to the bloody Feast.
A deadly Storm does on his Forehead lowr,
Himself his Rage, Arthur his Hopes devour.
Breathing out Death he marched, but at midday,
He stands by Heaven arrested in his way.
The Air serene a black thick Cloud appeared,
And as it hovered over their Heads, were heard
Celestial Flutes, and Harps divinely Strung,
With Hymns and Hallelujahs Set and Sung
By the best Masters of the Quire above,
With Bliss transported, and inspired with Love.
Whilst Hoel and his Friends pleased, and amazed,
Listened, and on the Scene descending gazed;
The broken Cloud, pours out pure Floods of Light,
Showers of Celestial Rays transcendent bright,
And Storms of Splendour, dazzling Mortal Sight.
The illustrious Tempest does on Hoel beat,
Who falls astonished, headlong from his Seat.
Confounded with unsufferable Day,
Grovelling in Glory on the shining Way,
And with bright Ruin overwhelmed, he lay.
'Twas then, a soft, still Heavenly Voice, that broke
From out the Cloud, to trembling Hoel spoke.
Against me, what Fury did thy Arms Engage?
What moved thee with inexorable Rage
Vain Man; to persecute my Saints and Me?
In vain thou seek'st to baffle Heaven's Decree.
Vain is thy Force, and impotent thy Hate,
Too weak thy Arms, to stem the Tide of Fate.
The Torrent bears thy saint Resistance down,
Retire, or in Eternal Ruin Drown.
Then Hoel thus, O tell me, who thou art,
Great Spirit, and thy Will to me impart.
Tell me if Error has my Feet misled,
What safer Paths I may hereafter tread.
The Voice replied:
I am the Christians God, whom you pursue.
Go meet my Servant Arthur, he shall show
At large, what thou have to believe, what do.
The Scene here disappeared, his Lords come round,
And raised reviving Hoel from the Ground.
Who marches on, the British Prince to find,
And Act not what himself, but Heaven designed.
With anxious Thoughts the Vision he revolves,
And to Obey Heaven's high Command resolves.
Whilst to his Lords the Vision he relates,
They find themselves advanced to Conda's Gates.
Arthur mean time, to whom great Raphael's word,
Unshaken Hopes, and Courage did afford;
Proceeded on his Way, but sent before
Ambassadors to Hoel, to explore
His temper, and the Genius of his Court,
That he just steps might take by their Report.
He chose out to discharge this weighty Trust,
Valiant Pollador, Roderick the Just;
And Faithful Galbut, Friends that in distress,
(A thing unknown to Courts) their Love express.
Soon after Hoel had his Entrance made,
At the same City they arrived, and staid
But little, for the admission which they prayed.
Then Hoel first the Britons thus addressed,
Let no sad Thought your pious Prince molest.
A Message sent from Heaven preventing yours,
To me great Joy, Safety to him procures.
Friendship and Love, fill my enlightened Mind,
From Hatred purged, from Treachery refined.
Return, and let your Valiant Leader know,
His God has to a Friend, transformed his Foe.
Tell him he is safe from all intended Harms,
And that I have, to Embrace him in my Arms.
With Regal Bounty, he to all presents
Rich Swords, and various splendid Ornaments.
To Arthur sends a Chariot, dazzling bright,
That to the Sun returned redoubled Light.
And Horses of the Iberian Noble Race,
That right Descent from the swift Eurus trace.
Bold, Generous, Sprightly, as the Illustrious Breed,
That in the Etherial, blue Enclosures Feed.
That through Heaven's Wast, with the Sun's Chariot play,
And govern Time, by carrying round the Day.
Their Furniture of Gold, their Bridles Gold,
And golden Bits, their champing Mouths did hold.
They have and all their Diligence employ,
To fill Just Arthur's Mind, with Peace and Joy.
To him returning they impart at large,
The kind, endearing Things they had in Charge.
As when his Sons to Jacob did relate,
That Joseph lived, and lived in Regal State;
Telling of all his Riches, Power, Renown,
Egypt's Support, and Prop to Pharoah's Crown.
Resistless Floods of sudden Pleasure Roll
Along his Veins, and break in on his Soul.
He sinks beneath the pressure of his Joy,
And Ioseph's Life, does almost his destroy.
Then Doubts and Fears, his Joys, high Tide oppose,
From which Contention fiercer Tempests rose.
While his cross Passions fight with equal Power,
Each Triumphs in his turn, as Conqueror.
The Patriarch in this Distraction lost,
Is in each Storm with equal Danger tossed.
But when the Chariots and rich Train he saw,
He did from thence fresh Life and Vigor draw.
His Breast from all contending Passions freed,
Calm Joy, and unmolested Peace succeed.
Enough the Patriarch was heard to Cry,
I Will have to Ioseph's Arms, and in them Dye.
So when Just Arthur heard the Message first,
His wavering Mind with Fears and wise Distrust,
And rising Tides of sudden Joy was tossed,
Uncertain which strong Passion pressed him most.
But when he saw the Presents Hoel sent,
His Doubts suppressed, he grew more Confident.
And his calm Mind eased of his anxious Cares,
TO embrace his new, and generous Friend prepares.
And now advancing Night the Sky invades,
While close pursued by the Victorious Shades.
The Rays that faintly from the Ground recoil,
On the green Fields, let fall their pearly spoil.
When Arthur to his secret Joys retires,
Where his exhaling Soul to Heaven aspires,
In sacred Anhelations, and inflamed Desires.
Fixed Contemplation feeds his Hope and Love,
With rapturous Preludes to the Joys above.
His ravished Eyes view the unmeasured Bliss,
In the next Life enjoyed, believed in this.
So David often passed the silent Night,
And in his Transports felt sublime Delight,
Surpassing all that mighty Monarchs have,
That his own Crown, and all his Triumphs gave.
While baser Birds the humble Valley love,
And sing contented with their little Grove;
The Eagle's generous Pride does nobly rise
To Heaven, and thence does this low World despise.
Scorning a Vulgar Bough, he thinks he sees
Woods in the Clouds, and hanging Groves of Trees.
Thither he hasts, and leaves the ignoble Brood,
That aim no higher, to their Shrubs and Wood.
If to his Prey he stoops, ashamed he flies
Back to his airy Dwelling in the Skies.
Where in the Clouds he hides his Royal Head,
Safe from the Snares, that watchful Fowlers spread*
So Men of courser Mould, and baser Birth,
Pleased with the Dust lie groveling on the Earth.
For Food their Souls all foul and bloated, seek
The Damps and Steams, that from its Bowels reek.
While Men divinely Born, still upwards move,
And scorn this World, that courts in vain their Love.
In Flames of Zeal, and Pangs of pure Desire,
These to the Seats of Light and Peace aspire.
Where they converse with the blessed Minds above,
And wonder what on Earth invites Men's Love.
This Molehill Earth has lost its former Charms,
Molehill for Bulk, and Stings wherewith it swarms.
With Wonder they observe how Mortals Pride,
Can into Kingdoms this small Heap divide.
How one to enlarge the Empire he has got,
Invades the Borders of his Neighbor's spot.
How this proud Monarch of a Turf, is vexed
With restless cares, to dispossess the next.
As Heaven's vast Globes that fill the World with Light,
Seem little Balls to distant Mortals sight,
That in the most capacious Planets, we
No room for States, and large Dominions see.
So these more noble Minds advanced so high,
Believe the same of us, that from the Sky,
The low-hung Earth's contracted Body Spy.
They keep above free from the fatal Nets,
That for unwary Feet the Tempter sets.
Free from the Earth's dark smoke, and endless Noise,
They dwell in Peace, and feed on Heavenly Joys.
Such Pleasures Arthur while retired, enjoyed,
And wished he ever might be thus employed.
And now the radiant Gates of the Eastern Sky,
Unbar'd by bright Aurora, open fly.
Strait issues out the Sun with mighty Force,
As Giants do, prepared to run his Course.
The joyful Britons all things ready make,
And their new Friend to meet, their Journey take.
Scarce had the Sun his glittering Chariot driven,
Up the steep Brow, and sharp Ascent of Heaven.
When the glad Princes did each other meet,
And Hoel thus did first the Stranger greet.
As a faint Traveller in Arabian Sands,
Scorcht with the burning Sunbeams, panting stands,
Views the dry Desert with despairing Eyes,
And for the Springs, and distant Rivers Sighs.
As Sailers long for Land, Heaven's Aid implore,
And with their greedy wishes grasp the Shore;
When beaten from the hospitable Coast,
And in loud Storms upon the Ocean tossed;
Where Ruin in so many Shapes appears,
They scarcely can attend to all their Fears.
I Have wished to see you with the like desire,
The Oracle of whom I must enquire,
The way to Peace, and Everlasting Bliss,
Which lost in Night, and unknown Paths, I miss.
When first I set out with an hostile Mind,
And Evils which I dread to name, designed;
The Powers that guard your sacred Life alarmed,
Soon interposed, and my wild Hand disarmed.
Kind Heaven that both our Safeties did design,
Turned from your Head the Blow, the Guilt from mine.
For on the way a Glory dreadful Bright
Around me shone, and with excessive Light.
As they do Stars, the weaker Sunbeams drowned:
I as transfixt, fell headlong to the Ground.
'Twas then a wondrous Heavenly Voice I heard,
The words were these, but no blessed Face appeared.
Against me what Fury does thy Arms engage?
What moves thee with inexorable Rage
Vain Man, to persecute my Saints and me?
In vain thou striv'st to baffle Heaven's Decree.
Vain is thy Force, and Impotent thy Hate,
Too weak thy Arms to stem the Tide of Fate.
The Torrent bears thy faint Resistance down,
Retire, or in Eternal Ruin drown.
I strait cried out, O tell me who thou art
Great Spirit, and thy Will to me impart.
Tell me if Error has my Feet misled,
What safer Paths I may hereafter tread.
The Voice replied:
I am the Christians God, whom you pursue,
Go find my Servant Arthur, he shall show
At large, what thou have to believe, what do.
Prince Arthur paused a while, then Silence broke,
And friendly thus the Armoric King bespoke.
The Eternal's Providence I must adore,
That has compelled me to the Armoric Shore.
That I might here, serve such a glorious End,
And to the Christian Cause gain such a Friend.
Goodness Divine, King Hoel does invite
By Miracles, to enjoy Celestial Light.
Cast on your Coasts, with Pleasure I will stay,
To aid and guide you in your Heavenly way.
To whom the Armoric Monarch thus Replied;
While we to Nannetum together ride,
Instruct, O Pious Prince, my willing Mind:
It is a task your God has you designed.
Unfold his Heavenly Will, and let me know,
What Worship to him, what Belief, I owe.
To whom the Prince, this favor must I ask,
Before I undertake the pious Task:
That you will dispatch your Servants to the Coast,
To seek my Friends out, in the Tempest lost.
And if by chance cast on the Armoric Shore,
They wander up and down, distressed and poor,
Your angry Subjects, may not them annoy,
Nor with devouring Flames, their Ships destroy.
This Friendship shown, I Will with a cheerful Mind,
Attempt the Task by you, and Heaven enjoined.
When the past Night did with her dusky Train
Advance, over shadowing all the Aierial Plain;
A sudden Transport did my Soul engage,
And all my Limbs shook with the sacred Rage.
Straight caught up from the Body, through the Skies
To the third Heaven, my ravished Soul did rise.
Where Things ineffable I saw, and heard
Divine Instruction, which my Mind prepared
To aid you in your Heavenly Way, and show
What Worship, to the Eternal Mind is due.
Straight Hoel to the Shores his Servants sent,
Who might the Harms, that Arthur feared, prevent.
Who might the hapless Britons kindly treat,
And safe conduct them to his Royal Seat.
Such Love the King to Arthur's Friends expressed,
Who now prepared to obey the King's Request.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK II.
ATtentive Hoel's Eyes on Arthur's Face
Were fixed, who thus began with God-like grace.
Before the unshaken Pillars of the Earth
Were Reer'd, before prolifick Nature's Birth,
Before the Register of Time begun,
Or Heaven's bright Forces thronged about the Sun,
Was a wild Void, that no set Bounds restrained,
Where Silence, Night, and Desolation reigned.
Where yet no glimmering track of Light appeared,
No Discord yet, or Harmony was heard.
From Ages past lay in the Eternal's Mind,
A finished Model of a World, designed
To be Erected by Almighty Hands,
Where now this Round, Capacious Fabric stands.
The deep Foundations laid, in Heaven they said
A strange new World was making, Fame soon spread
The tidings through the Palaces of Bliss,
To see a work so wonderful as this,
Millions of Angels to Heaven's Turrets fly,
And on the Crystal Terras of the Sky,
Stood in bright Throngs, and on Creation gazed,
And at the Sight were ravished, and amazed.
Almighty Vigor strove through all the Void,
And such prolifick Influence employed,
That ancient, barren Night did pregnant grow,
And quickened with the World in Embrio.
The struggling Seeds of unshap'd Matter ly,
Contending in her Womb for Victory.
No Order, Form, or Parts distinct and clear,
Did in the Crude Conception, yet appear.
Thick Darkness did the unripe Light Embrace,
That faintly glanced on Chaos shady Face.
The unfledged Fire has no bright Wings to rise,
But scarce distinguished, with the Water lies.
It Is sprightly, ruddy Youth not yet attained,
The glittering Seeds, Mother of Fire, remained
Like golden Sands, thick scattered on the Shore,
Of the wild Deep, and shone in burning Oar.
In glowing Heaps the Stars lay dusky bright,
Rude and unpolished Balls of unwrought Light.
The Spears pil'd up about their Poles were Furled,
Designed the Swaddling Bands of the Infant World.
The Sky dispersed, lay in Etherial Oar,
And azure Veins, betrayed the Empyreal Store.
The watery Treasures in the unfashion'd Birth,
Lay in the rough Embraces of the Earth.
But at the great Command will Thaw, and throw
The Dross off, and like melted Metals flow.
Besides vast numbers of loose Atoms stray,
And in the restless Deep of Chaos play.
In dark Encounters they for Empire strive,
And gain what Chance, and wild Confusion give.
Which jointly here possess the Sovereign Sway,
Pleased with those Subjects most, that least Obey.
Order, a banished Rebel, flies the Place,
And Strife and Uproar fill the noisy Space.
Tumult and Misrule please at Chaos Court,
And everlasting Wars his Throne Support.
Troops armed with Heat have here a Battle won,
But Moist and Cold the Victor soon dethrone.
Here heavier Seeds rush on in numerous Swarms,
And crush their Lighter Foes, with ponderous Arms.
The Lighter strait Command with equal Pride,
And on wild Whirlwinds in mad Triumph ride.
None long submits to a Superior Power,
Each yields, and in his turn is Conqueror.
If some grown mild from fierce Contention cease,
And with calm Neighbors court a separate Peace;
If Truce they make, and in kind Leagues combine,
Their short Embraces some rude Shocks disjoyn.
The Eternal's Voice composed these Atoms jars,
And justling Elements intestine Wars.
He sets imprisoned Heat and Vigor free,
And suits and ranges Natures that agree.
He through the Mass a mighty Ferment spread,
And where it came mis-shap'd Confusion fled.
Dark Chaos now throws off his gloomy Face,
Puts on fresh Beauty, and a Heavenly Grace.
The Almighty spoke, and strait the Sprightly Light
With lovely Looks broke from the Abyss of Night;
On Golden Wings it mounts, and in its way
Its Smiles diffuse new Morn, and unripe Day.
Aloft vast spreading Sheets of Either rise,
Matter for Spears, and pure transparent Skies.
The Sky that for its Compass scarce finds room,
Spun thin, and wove on Nature's finest Loom.
The newborn World in its soft Bosom wraps,
And all around its Starry Mantle laps.
The Sun's vast Globe that till the Birth of Day,
All Rough and Cloudy in wild Chaos lay;
Well wrought and polished, is advanced on high;
The vagrant Beams that strayed about the Sky,
Now becken'd by Creating Power obey,
And the bright Forces hither have away.
Then hovering on the Spungy Globe they wait,
And round their new appointed Mansion fate.
The thirsty Orb drinks in the liquid Beams,
And now but one vast Sea of Glory seems.
It self a Heaven with dazzling Luster bright,
Pours out pure Floods of overflowing Light.
Here as in Furnaces of boiling Gold,
Stars dipped come back, full as their Orbs can hold
Of glittering Light, here too the Moon all drowned,
Does with the Golden Metal fill her Round.
Sometimes half dipped it but in part adorns
Her Face, and shines with Blunt, Refulgent Horns.
The Etherial Plain now cultivated bears,
A shining Harvest of Illustrious Stars.
That at a distance seem small Lights, but near
Capacious Realms, and glorious Worlds appear.
The Spears spread forth their Bosoms, now refined,
And Belly out, like Sails swollen big with Wind.
The Air beat out, and purified does lie,
A Crystal deep between the Earth and Sky.
Through this thin Void the Sun's indulgent Beams,
Flow gently on the Earth in Golden Streams.
That kindly steal away the Watery Store,
And rob the Earth, but to enrich it more.
The Earth with its own Burden tired, and pressed
Down with its weight, lies in the midst at rest.
A Deep broke up, God calls the Waters, they
Feel the Command, and with quick flight Obey.
In mighty Heaps the foaming Deluge flows,
High liquid Walls and curling Ridges shows.
Some Waters with a smooth and gentle Tide,
On the Earth's plain and level Surface glide.
Others that meet a Steep abrupt Descent;
Roll down in Floods more loud and turbulent.
At last they fall from the high Precipice,
In noisy Floods into the dark Abyss.
Till the vast Deluge with its liquid Stone,
Fills up the Deep, and Crowns the Ambient Shore.
Now their tall Heads the rising Mountains show,
And wide mouthed Valleys sink themselves, as low.
The Earth as yet all bare and naked lay,
For Heaven's Command the imprisoned Spirits stay.
God spoke, and straight a lovely Spring appears,
And every Field fresh, verdant Clothing wears.
Green Herbs adorn the Hills aspiring Heads,
And smiling Flowers paint the Enameled Meads.
Trees starting up, lifted their Heads so high,
They met the Clouds descending from the Sky.
Some ranged in beauteous Order, Stately stood,
Others pressed close, and thronged into a Wood.
Some where the Sun gives more indulgent Heat,
Transparent Gums, and Odorous Juices Sweat.
The fragrant Balsom-Tree distills around,
Her healing Riches on the neighboring Ground.
The humble Jess' mine breaths Perfumes abroad,
And wanton Zephyrs bear the balmy Load.
Pure Crystal Rivers through the Meadows flow,
Their flowery Banks smile on them, as they go.
Their watery Train in Snaky Windings slides,
And in their Streams the scaly Nation glides.
Birds glad to try their Wings rise from the Earth,
And with their Songs they Celebrate their Birth.
Beasts in their various Kinds all Mild, and Tame,
Stood gazing round, and wondered whence they came.
The Bleating Flocks wander on every Hill,
And lowing Herds the Ecchoing Valleys fill.
The sporting Lion Paws the wanton Bear,
Wolves seek the Woods, the Lawns the timorous Deer.
The Crested Snake rolls on the flowery Plain,
The shining Volumes of his Spiral Train.
Leviathan in the Ocean takes his place,
Prince of the Waters, and the Finny Race.
Rolling amidst the Waves, he takes his Sport,
As a great Sea-God in his watery Court.
Swimming to Land he drives high Seas before,
Like a great Island floating near the Shore.
In wanton pastime he sucks in with Ease,
Then spouts against the Skies the exhausted Seas:
Like some prodigious Water-Engine made
To play on Heaven, if Fires should Heaven invade.
So fair, so rich a Paradise as this,
Almighty Power called from the dark Abyss:
To keep the Birthday of the World, the Spring
Does all her Joys and fragrant Riches bring.
Nature appearing in her brightest Dress,
Does all her Sweets and Heavenly Charms express.
The Spears in tuneful Measures Roll above,
And Heaven's bright Orbs in beauteous Order move.
The smiling Earth discovers perfect Joy,
Where nothing noxious can its Peace annoy.
The Air's so soft, such balmy Odours fly,
So sweet the Fruits, so pure and mild the Sky,
The Blissful States, too great to be expressed,
By all the Pleasures of the wanton East,
By the Arab's Sweets from Zephirs tender VVings
Gently shook off, or what the Merchant brings
Of Foreign Luxury with tedious Toil,
From Asia's Coast, or soft Campania's Soil.
Thus after five days Labor Nature stood,
God viewed his Creatures, and pronounced them Good.
But still there wanted one that might adore
Divine Perfections, and Heaven's Gifts implore.
That might himself, and his great Author know,
Obey his God, and rule as God below.
Then Man was made, the Author framed and wrought
The purer Mould with more Concern and Thought.
His Mind made up of pure Etherial Air,
Came from the Hands Divine all Bright and Fair.
And lodged in Clay did at its Entrance give
So quick a touch, as made that Clay to live.
And both united with such wondrous Art,
In part he is Angel, Animal in part.
In whom the Bounds of both the Worlds are seen,
Where Earth does terminate, and Heaven begin.
One part, like sprightly Flames, will upward move*
Kin to the blessed, unbody'd Minds above.
The other, only shaped and quickened Earth,
From molded Dust receives its humble Birth.
Yet Life divine, and high Perfection gains,
Ennobled by the Guest it entertains.
His Form erect, and Cherub-like his Face,
Where Sweetness tempered Stern and Manly Grace.
Mil'd to be loved, and awful to be feared,
He, like some new discovered God, appeared.
Then did the Almighty to his Bosom give,
To bless him perfectly, his Consort Eve.
Of a more soft and nicely tempered Mould,
Her strokes were tender, his more strong and bold.
Sweetness that ravished, milder than the Morn,
And perfect Beauty did her Looks adorn.
She like a Goddess, with the Heavenly Charms,
Of blushing Innocence, comes to his Arms.
What Joys Divine did on the Favorite wait,
These happy Hours that knew his Native State!
His Work thus finished, and Creation done,
The Almighty rests on his Eternal Throne.
Straight the loud Shouts and Acclamations given,
Shook the high Towers and jarring Gates of Heaven.
There stood an Alabaster Mount that shone,
In the Air sublime, from the Imperial Throne
Removed at distance, and between them lay,
All paved with Stars, a broad, frequented way.
Hither for great Assemblies they repair,
From all the Regions of the Etherial Air.
Here they in perfect Love and Peace debate,
The Affairs that most affect their sacred State.
Hither the Princes of the Heavenly Court,
Followed with Throngs unnumber'd now resort.
There met, a solemn Jubilee they Vote,
In Honor of the Wonders lately wrought.
Straight a Procession public was enjoined,
And thus performed to adore the Eternal Mind.
Trumpets marched first, and chiefly that whose Sound
Shall strike Convulsions through the trembling ground:
Break their dark Prisons down, and call away
The awakened Dead, on the great Judgment Day.
Next Heavenly Viols, soft harmonious Flutes,
Resounding Dulcimers, and tuneful Lutes
And Harps, like that which hangs the glittering Pride,
As Poets feign, of young Apollo's side.
With perfect Skill here chosen Cherubs play,
And Celebrate the Almighty's Resting Day.
Then the blessed Voices came with Hymns of Praise,
Angelick Music, sweet Melodious Lays,
Such as bright Spirits in high Raptures sing,
Around the Throne of their Eternal King.
Now the first Rank of Potentates and Peers,
Mighty Archangels, and high Thrones appears.
Crowns of substantial, massy Glory made,
Adorned with Gems, and Flowers that never Fade,
And Greens of Heavenly growth all wreathed between,
Are on the Heads of this bright Order seen:
Fresh Greens and Flowers, such as their Gardens bring,
Blessed with mild Rays, and Everlasting Spring.
Vials of Incense in their Hands they bare,
And the sweet Clouds in Wheels roll up the Air.
Odours not to be told, fanned from them fly,
And wondrous Fragrancy Perfumes the Sky.
Each had his Lyre, that from his Shoulders hung,
With Golden VVire, like radiant Sunbeams, strung.
Such was their Splendor, with such grace they trod,
In Looks and Motion each appeared a God.
Hither thick Crowds of vulgar Angels made,
And to admire this glorious Order staid,
And, as they passed, humble Obeisance paid.
Then lower Ranks in long Procession passed,
With Crowns and Badges of Distinction graced.
And all so Splendid, all so Rich and Gay,
That Heaven before never saw, so bright a Day.
Unfading Roses of a Heavenly Red,
On the bright Pavement were profusely spread.
Elysian Jess'mine, and blessed Am'rant lay,
In odorous heaps along the Milky way.
The Fountains all such Cost was then bestowed,
With unexhausted Springs of Nectar flowed.
And now advanced before the Imperial Throne,
That losty with excessive Brightness shone,
They from the uneasy Luster of the Light,
Protected with spread Wings their dazzled sight.
In prostrate Adoration down they fell,
Oppressed with Glory unsupportable.
Entranced, Transported, Ravished there they ly,
And with blessed Hallelujahs fill the Sky.
In Songs Sublime they praise the Eternal Mind,
His Works from all the Ages past designed,
His Greatness, Wisdom, Empire unconfined.
His Justice, that no Force or Prayer can move:
His spotless Truth, and Everlasting Love.
They Sing the Eternal Son's Immortal Praise,
And to an equal height the sacred Spirit raise.
Then all arising from the sacred Quire,
Overflowing with unbounded Joys, retire
To the blessed Shades of the Celestial Bowers,
Where often they choose to pass their happy Hours.
Their Hunger here delicious Banquets met,
With vast Profusion on rich Tables set,
Banquets Divine, not such as Mortals Eat.
High Dishes in long Pomp and Order stood,
Filled with choice Fruits, rare Meats, all Angels Food.
Ambrosial Juices, sweet Nectarean Wine,
Ravished their Taft, and made their Faces Shine.
The Sons of God thus cheered, dissolve in Joy,
Whilst his high Praises their blessed Tongues employ.
In Joys and Triumphs so the Day they spend,
Such Mirth and Show the Festival attend;
Then when the Evening came, or what instead
Of Evening there, does in its turn succeed.
Glorious illuminations made on high,
By all the Constellations of the Sky,
In bright Degrees, and shining Orders placed,
Spectators charmed, and the blessed Dwellings graced.
Through all the inlight'n'd Air rare Fireworks flew,
Which the Celestial Youth with Shouting threw.
Comets fly up with their red sweeping Train,
Then fall in Starry Showers, and glittering Rain.
In the Air ten Thousand Meteors blazing hung,
That from Heaven's gilded Battlements were slung.
Here furious, flying Dragons hissing came,
Here harmless Fires play in a lambent Flame.
Such Universal Joy in Heaven they showed,
And in such hallowed Mirth the day conclude.
In such Delights they pass their time above,
And so shall we, if like them, we Obey and Love.
In all the Joys that happy Minds attain,
Blessed Adam first began to live and reign.
He to fair Eden's Paradise resorts,
Where every Sense its proper Pleasure courts.
The joyful Spring by soft Favonius fan'd,
Diffused her Riches with a wanton Hand.
From new-blown Flowers luxurious Odours fly,
And Heavenly Landskips meet his ravished Eye.
The twining Branches weave him shady Bowers,
And Hony-Dews fall in delicious Showers.
Birds with their Songs their Sovereign salute,
From Boughs that bend beneath their Golden Fruit.
Pure Streams to him their Crystal Waters bring,
And the glad Fish leap up, to see their King.
The harmless Beasts their humble Homage paid,
And the sole Monarch of the World obeyed*
Uninterrupted Peace his Mind possessed,
And Joys unutterable filled his Breast.
He viewed his great Creator's glorious Face,
Clearly reflected from fair Nature's Glass.
On her bright Form he saw, the Impressions shine,
Of Wisdom Infinite, and Power Divine,
Whence all things, as free Examinations flow,
As Streams their Being to their Fountain owe.
Which binds fast Nature's vast unshaken Frame,
Lest it dissolve to Nothing, whence it came.
Whilst in his Thoughts the pleasing Objects Roll,
Fresh Pleasures Feed his still transported Soul.
His Eyes thus fixed, the great Seducer's Skill,
Could not engage his Thoughts, or move his Will.
A Day Serene smiled on his Heavenly Mind,
Dark with no Cloud, and undisturbed with Wind.
No Guilt, no Frown from Heaven disturbs his Soul,
Calm as deep Rivers in still Evenings roll.
No Storms of Passion, such as us molest,
Annoys the Peaceful Region of his Breast.
No boiling Lust swelled the overflowing Blood,
To bear down Reason with the impetuous Flood.
His spotless Mind knew yet no other Fire,
Then those pure Flames, that Heavenly Minds inspire.
O happy Man! above description blessed,
Had he maintained the Station he possessed.
Upon the Crystal River's flowery side,
That winding did in slow Meanders glide;
As loath to leave the Blissful Place, there stood
A Tree that rose above the Hesperian Wood,
Its Fruit seemed pleasant, but forbidden Food.
For he that with enormous Bounty pours
On Man, fresh Pleasures in incessant Showers;
That nothing can disturb his flowing Joys,
Unless Variety suspends his Choice.
Bids him not Eat the fatal Fruit, to prove
His due Obedience, and his constant Love.
The grand Apostate for high Crimes displaced,
From Heaven by fierce Almighty Vengeance chased,
Till down the unfathomed Precipice he fell
Confounded, to the fiery Gulf of Hell:
With Rage and Envy sees Man's happy State,
Whence he for ever lost had fallen so late,
Himself undone urged with infernal Spite,
And dire Revenge, makes Ruin his delight.
That he from Heaven might this fair Province gain,
That Sin and Death might wider Sway attain,
And he his baleful Empire might extend,
Concealed beneath the specious Air of Friend,
Does to Man's Choice the fatal Tree commend.
As such whose Worth transcends the greatest price,
The Flower and Beauty of his Paradise.
Pleasing to Taste, but much more to the Mind,
Which those that Eat, should boundless Knowledge find.
Then points up to the fair forbidden Meat,
Bids him be Wise, and boldly take, and Eat.
He tempts him with the flattering Hopes of Bliss,
Great as his God's, and lasting too, as his.
This gaudy Scene of Glory charmed his Eye,
And his proud thoughts at God-like Greatness fly.
The bright Illusion turned his giddy Head,
And with vast Hopes his vain Ambition fed.
Thus gazing at the Glory of a God,
The Precipice was hid on which he trod.
The splendid Phantome now advances nigh,
And in his reach appears Divinity.
Which straight he grasps at, and to hold the more,
Empties his Hand of what it held before.
But sooner might he grasp unbody'd Minds,
And with closed Arms clasp in the raging Winds.
The glorious Shadow from his Hands does slide,
Mocks his Embraces, and defeats his Pride.
He Eat, but did no other Pleasures find,
Than the sad Terrors of a guilty Mind.
His cheated Hopes can no new Knowledge boast,
But of the Ill he feels, and Good he lost.
Thus fell lost Man, straight troubled Nature moan'd,
And shaking, with a strong Convulsion groaned.
Even Paradise looked Sad, the Herds repined,
And lofty Cedars shook without a Wind.
The Roses fade, the Golden Apples turned
Pallid, and all the Sick Creation mourned.
To the thick Trees in vain fallen Adam made,
To hide his blacker Guilt beneath their Shade.
Close Trees may so their well mixed Branches spread,
That Sunbeams cannot pierce their shady Head.
But God's clear Eye needs not so gross a Ray,
His Glory sheds a more Illustrious Day.
But had he been from his bright Eye concealed,
The crying Guilt had to his Ear revealed
Apostate Man, that Voice to Heaven does rise
Loud, as the Thunderclaps, for which it cries.
What a black Train of VVoes and hideous Fears,
Headed by one bold Crime, to Man appears.
The Serpent's Venom spreads through all his Veins,
And Sin's Contagion unresisted Reigns.
A Death-like Damp shoots through his poisoned Blood,
And fears cold Chains Arrest the beating Flood.
A dreadful Face of Things confounds his Eye,
He cannot stay secure, nor can he fly.
Black thoughts of Vengeance seize his guilty Heart,
And Conscience wounds him, with her poisoned Dart.
Amidst the Trees he starts at every Noise,
Grows pale, and thinks he hears the Almighty's Voice.
The trembling Branches make him tremble more,
Now feebler, than the Fig Leaves, which he wore.
Man's Soul, by this rude Shock from's Center driven,
Stands so a-skaunt, and so remote from Heaven,
It Is scarcely warmed by its weak, Oblique Ray,
And has at best but a cold, darksome Day.
Fallen from its bright Etherial Seat on high,
Down to the lowest Regions of the Sky,
It feels the attractive Earth's Magnetic Force,
And round this low-hung Ball directs its Course.
As when a Planet, once all fair and bright,
Sickens, and shines with pale and faded Light;
By some fierce Storm bred in its Bowels rent,
As Clouds are by the Thunder in 'em pent.
The mighty Orb disjoynted cracks, and all
The broken Parts in Noisy Ruin fall.
The hideous, Burning Hull does floating lie,
And with the wondrous Wreck affrights the Sky.
Sometimes it blazes with a dismal Light,
And then grown dim, seems lost and drowned in Night.
Then sinking does the Starry Sky forsake,
Contented some inferior Seat to take.
Where Heaven new moulds the Heap, and from the Abyss,
Calls forth perhaps a Moon, or Earth, like this.
So Man seduced by the Impostor fell,
From Heaven's bright Coasts, to the black Verge of Hell.
There he his Luster lost, and God-like Grace,
Shows the sad Ruins of a Heavenly Face.
Where Peace dwelt undisturbed, and smiling Light,
Confusion now, Chaos and horrid Night.
Black, frowning Clouds, and murmuring Thunder rose,
Over the vexed Region of his guilty Soul.
Fierce, driving Storms, and bleak Tempestuous Wind
Beat on the wasteful Desert of his Mind.
Revenge, Despair, Grief, Jealousy, and Fear,
Have in their Turns, supreme Dominion here.
Reason dethroned must the Commands obey
Of this wild Rout, that holds the Sovereign Sway.
Mean Time, the Almighty does his Summons send,
Through Heaven for all his Angels to attend.
High in the Midst of the Etherial Skies,
A Mount of rocky Diamond did rise:
Insuperably steep, and too sublime
For the tired Wings of Cherubims to climb.
O'er-looking Heaven's wide Vales and spacious Plains
It stands, and unmolested Peace maintains.
Here the Almighty's bright Tribunal stands,
Whence his Decrees are sent, and high Commands.
Hence he gives Laws to all the Worlds below,
And hence eternal Right and Justice flow.
Hence Punishments proceed, and just Rewards,
Hence Orders come to all the Angelick Guards,
To keep the Peace of Heaven, and next secure
On Earth the afflicted, from the Oppressor's Power.
And now the Thrones and Powers the Valley fill,
And stand adoring round the sacred Hill.
Adam's Rebellion they had newly heard,
And God's fierce Wrath in dreadful Signs appeared.
Lightnings and Thunders issue from his Throne,
Lightnings scarce heard of, Thunder seldom known
Tremendous Murmurs, and a mighty Sound
Of wondrous Ruin from the Hill rebound.
TO express incensed Omnipotence conspire
Whirlwinds, thick Darkness and consuming Fire,
United Terrors, that with Fury broke
From the blessed Mount, whence thus the Almighty spoke.
The Man I made, and with my Image graced,
And next to your Angelick Order placed,
Revolting to the Apostate Prince of Hell,
Against my Throne has yielded to Rebel.
The Death I threatened, now I must inflict;
So Justice bids, nor is its Rule too strict.
You're here from all the Regions of the Sky,
To hear the Rebel doomed, and see him Dye.
He spoke, and through all Heaven a Terror struck,
The Spears, and all the Frame of Nature shook.
The Moon grew Pale, the Sun all Dim appeared,
And all the Sons of God stood Mute, and feared.
The Almighty his Vindictive Arm makes bare,
Stretched out his Hand, and did for Death prepare.
Mercy Shreek'd out, and trembling on her Face
Fell down, and did with Tears his Feet Embrace,
Offspring Divine, in Heaven the most beloved,
By whom even Fate unchangeable is moved.
Her Looks so moving, such Celestial Grace,
So mild, and sweet an Air dwell on her Face,
So tender and engaging all her Charms,
That often the Almighty's Fury she disarms.
Her Language melts Omnipotence, arrests
His Hand, and thence his Vengeful Lightning wrests.
Then thus she spoke:
Shall the successful, sly Impostor boast,
That by his Power the new Creation's lost?
Shall he thus Triumph in his impious Deed,
And all our Hopes defeat from Adam's Seed?
Must this fair Race be lost, so lately made,
And Hell made Bold your Empire to invade?
Adam has sinned, and Heaven's high Grace abused,
But sinned betrayed, and by Hell's Fraud seduced.
Cannot Wisdom Infinite, Expedients find,
To punish Guilt, and yet preserve Mankind?
Compassion, with stern Justice mixed, will draw
Honor to Heaven's just Government, and Awe
All from offending the Established Law.
At this, the Eternal Son rose from his Place,
The bright Effulgence of his Father's Face,
His fair and express Image, full of Grace.
In whom Divine, Substantial Glory dwelt,
And who Almighty Life and Vigor felt.
The Essential Wisdom, the Everlasting Word,
The Universal Heir, and Sovereign Lord.
And thus he Silence broke, mine be the Task
To do what Justice and Compassion ask.
To rescue Man, my self will Man become,
Assuming Substance from a Virgin's Womb.
A willing Sacrifice, I Will Death Embrace,
Justice to atone, and Ransom Adam's Race.
The Father straight assented, Mercy smiled,
To see the Serpent of his Prey beguiled.
Justice well pleased, accepts the offered Price,
And Heaven's atoned by its own Sacrifice.
The Heaven's with loud rebounding Shouts did ring,
And the glad Angels in new Anthems sing,
The Intercessor, and mysterious King.
The rolling Years their Circles fill apace,
And well-breathed Time runs its appointed Race.
Till it brought on the Hour when all should see,
The Son make good to Man, his blessed Decree.
That our expected Hope might be enjoyed,
Divinity appears with Man alloy'd.
His Native Glory darts destructive Light,
And bright Oppression pours on Mortal's Sight;
He therefore draws a humane Veil between,
That tempered Luster might not Kill, when seen.
Here two Extremes of distance infinite,
In one ineffable, mysterious Knot unite.
God lives concealed, within a Mould of Clay,
And does in Dust himself, and's Glory lay.
He that in all the expanded Skies wants room,
Lies now encompassed with a Virgins Womb.
Immensity is wrapped in Swaddling Bands,
The Prince by whom the World's wide Fabric stands,
Supported in his Mother's Arms we see;
And vast Eternity begins to be.
He leaves his Starry Seat, and glittering Crown,
And lays his dazzling Robes of Glory down.
Then in an humble traveling Dress is seen
Seeking, as unknown Strangers do, an Inn.
Lord of the World, to whom proud Monarchs owe
Their Crowns and Scepters, he that does bestow
Honors and Wealth profusely on the Great,
Cannot for his own Repose, find out a Seat,
But must from Men, to kinder Beasts, Retreat.
No other Court receives the newborn King,
That to debase himself, did choose to bring
No other Pomp, but naked Innocence;
Nothing for Ornament, or for Defense.
He that the Wants of all the World supplies,
Himself oppressed with Pain and Hunger, Cries.
He Man's Assistance asks in vain, to whom
For Aid and Comfort all the afflicted come.
Angels that did the Royal Stranger know,
The greatest Signs of Joy and Triumph show.
The Out-guards of their Camp saw marching round
Celestial Splendour rising from the Ground.
And gave the alarm, the shining Squadrons fly
To the Out-lines, and the Frontiers of the Sky:
To see the wondrous Mediator Born,
Whom they Adore, though stupid Hebrews Scorn.
Some with spread Wings shoot swiftly through the Air,
And to the Shepherds first the Tidings bear,
That a great Shepherd was at Beth'lem Born,
Whose Deeds and Triumphs should that Name Adorn.
Though Angels Sing, obdurate Men are mute,
Nor will their Savior, and their King Salute.
Yet some few famous Sages come from far,
Conducted by a brigter Morning Star,
Left all the Wealth and Wonders of the East,
To see a greater Sun rise in the West.
To find the Prince to Herod they resort;
For where should Kings be found, but in a Court?
But the directing Star that led their Way,
Stands still, and points down with a streaming Ray,
To a mean Stable, where the Stranger lay.
Where they with humble Adoration View,
The Infant Intercessor, known to few.
Whom they present with Odoriferous Gums,
Choice Spices, and Arabia's rich Perfumes.
The Sun of Righteousness begins to rise,
And Streaks with radiant Lines the Purple Skies.
Here did he from his healing Wings display,
The tender dawn of Everlasting Day.
Pale Terror through the Courts of Darkness flew,
And Hell's sad Regions doubled Sorrow show.
The Infernal Spirits wandering in the Air,
As Thunderstruck, in Anger and Despair,
With Shreeks and hideous Yellings fly the Sight,
And the keen Horror of the Heavenly Light.
Like obscene Birds of Night, they have away
And shun in Clefts and Caves the Rising Day.
The Prince of Darkness now begins to fear,
The Dissolution of his Empire's near.
The ambiguous Oracles with Fear struck Dumb
Proclaimed by Silence, the Messiah come.
Troubled and Sad the Infernal Counsel sat,
Thoughful how best to avert the impending Fate.
Various Projections, deep Designs were laid,
How best the dreaded Foe they might invade.
They first the Fury Jealousy dispatch,
To Herod's Court that might Occasion watch,
To kindle strong Suspicions in his Breast,
That the Infant from him should his Scepter wrest
She did so well perform her Hellish Part,
Herod soon yielded to her subtle Art.
For while the Sages leave their Eastern home,
And to admire the wondrous Infant come.
Herod, afraid his ravished Crown to loose,
The Royal Infant's hated Life pursues.
What to pale Tyrants dreadful will not appear,
When Love and Innocence can move their Fear.
It Is true,
A King he is, whose Empire's vast Extent,
Shall pass all Bounds, and last when Time is spent.
Submissive Monarchs shall their Scepters lay
Before his Feet, and his Just Laws Obey.
Kingdoms oppressed shall his strong Aids invoke,
And thrust their Necks beneath his gentle Yoke.
The Roman Eagles shall the Conqueror own,
And Caesar Court him to Ascend his Throne.
Admired by all, he shall in Triumph go
Where fruitful Nile, or famed Hydaspes flow,
Uncheckt by Africa Heats, or Scythian Snow.
Nations invited by his Fame, shall come,
More than ever made their Court to Conquering Rome,
In splendid Embassies to sue for Peace,
And Worlds unknown his Empire shall increase.
The Earth shall banished Justice now regain,
And Love and Truth attend the happy Reign.
Soft Peace and Joy the cheerful Earth shall Crown,
And Savage Beasts shall lay their Fierceness down.
The Lion, Wolf, and Lamb, no more their Prey,
And little Infants shall Promiscuous play.
The years in Golden Harness smiling pass,
And keeping beauteous Order run their Race.
Nor shall his Kingdom cease, or Subjects dye,
For when Time finds its empty Channel dry,
And all its disappearing Streams shall Sleep,
Lost and engulph'd in vast Duration's Deep.
Then shall this King his full Dominion gain,
And in Eternal Peace, and Triumph Reign.
But it is not Worldly Empire he designed,
His Scepter is his Grace, his Throne the Mind.
Kings unmolested may their Scepters sway,
And Peaceful Subjects without Strife obey.
They may unrivaled, and unenvied reign,
And all their Pomp, and Regal State maintain.
The great Redeemer has his Court unseen,
And reigns in Light, and Heavenly Love within.
But from the false Usurper's Cruelty
Officious Angels warn their Prince to fly.
He and his happy Parents leave their Home,
And all to Egypt's safer Border's come.
Egypt, though for its Monsters famous grown,
Is now by trech'rous Palestine outdone.
For here they find a more secure Abode,
Egypt once Jacob saved, and now his God.
The wandering God returns, the Tyrant dead,
To rich Iudea's Soil from whence he fled.
Where he begins his Kingdom to assert,
And his mirac'lous Virtue to exert.
The Blind received their Sight, their Feet the Lame,
And the Dumb spoke to celebrate his Fame.
Loud Storms and Winds were hushed at his Command,
And fierce wild Beasts did tame and harmless stand.
The wondering Dead arise, and hasty come,
Obsequious to his Call, from out their Tomb.
With fresh-created Fish and Loaves he fed
The admiring Crowd, that lay around him spread.
To the Decrepit he new Force appoints,
And with strong Nerves new-brac'd their withered Joints.
His Breath often cooled fierce Fevers raging Flames,
And his sole Word the deadly Poison tames.
Round him in Crowds the sick and feeble throng,
The sick grow easy, and the feeble strong.
Fresh healing Virtue he diffused around,
And dying Men rose leaping from the ground.
The Languishing revived, the Afflicted cheered,
Took healthful Looks, and smiled when he appeared.
Demons at his Command vexed Men forsake,
And to the Infernal Caves and burning Lake,
Their hasty Flight with piercing Screeches take.
Such Miracles did his high Office prove,
And Universal Admiration move,
Of all the chiefest was his wondrous Love.
He whom rebellious Men might justly fear,
In all his chosen Terrors would appear,
With Military Pomp, and Trumpets Sound,
His shining Host of Cherubs poured around;
Armed with keen Lightning, and the sharpest Sword,
That all his Magazins of Wrath afford,
To lay all Wast before him, and Efface
All Footsteps of Apostate Adam's Race,
He, unexampl'd Love! Attempts to win
Man from the Curse of Death, and Curse of Sin,
With Pity, more than that of Mothers Hearts,
With Mercy's Charms, and Love's persuasive Arts.
His high design was with his Heavenly Light,
To chase away the Impenetrable Night,
That covered this lost World, and re-inspire
Man's Frozen Breast with fresh Celestial Fire.
The Almighty's faded Image to repair,
That its bright Lines might shine distinct and fair.
To raise lapsed Minds to that high State of Love,
Of Light and Bliss, the Blessed enjoy above.
To pull all bold Usurping Passions down,
And settle Reason in its ancient Throne.
To break Sins heavy Chains, its Slaves release,
And fix 'twixt Earth and Heaven a lasting Peace.
The Jews amused with Worldly Empire's Charms,
Hoping some Monarch with Victorious Arms,
With Roman Pomp and Grandeur would arise,
The great Redeemer's humble State despise.
Inspired from Hell, his Message they refuse,
Deride his Person, and his Deeds accuse.
He that Supplies on all in want bestowed,
Feasting with Miracles the hungry Crowd:
Finds from the obdurate Hebrew no relief,
But with the Twelve Companions of his Grief,
He walked on his Eternal Purpose bent,
Scattering his Heavenly Gifts wherever he went.
Yet did unwelcom through their Regions stray,
From those ungrateful Cities thrust away,
Whence he had Devils and Diseases cast,
Him, and his proffered Heaven they from them chased.
At last his spotless Innocence traduced,
He stands before the Roman Throne accused;
On Caesar's King Pilate in Judgment sits,
Condemns him, yet his Innocence acquits.
To please the inexorable Jews he sheds
Blood, and Heaven's dreadful Curses on their Heads.
That done, he washed his guilty Hands in vain,
The Blood he spilt, alone could Purge that Stain.
No Form of Cruelty his Foes omit,
They give sharp Stripes, and on his Face they Spit;
Which now adoring Angels blush to see,
Not for its Splendour, but Deformity.
To please united Cruelty and Scorn,
On's wounded Head they fix a Crown of Thorn.
They dress him in a Purple Robe, that gone,
His Blood with richer Purple dies his own.
A Reed his Hand must for a Scepter sway,
Which with a Rod of Ir'n shall that Contempt repay.
They bow in Scorn before him, whilst he sat
A Pageant Prince, the mockery of State.
What various Shapes of Cruelty are shown,
Under, and on his Cross he is made to groan.
And yet he bears a heavier Load within,
The pressure of the World's united Sin.
Stretched on the cursed Tree his Body hangs,
Groaning its Life away in dying Pangs.
Forsaken both of Earth and Heaven, his Breath
He wasted in the pains of lingering Death:
Whilst on his Soul the blackest Horrors dwell,
That feels the Pains, without the Guilt of Hell.
The Barbarous Hebrews for whose sake he died,
Stand by, and see their Sovereign Crucified,
Without the slight Compassion of a Tear,
Scarce in the Crowd does one sad Face appear.
Their Insolence dares mock his dying Moans,
Sport with his Torments, and deride his Groans.
Though solid Rocks touched with Compassion rent,
The more obdurate Jew does not relent.
For Man he Dies, that Heaven may be atoned,
He dies, the Universe afflicted groaned,
Heaven's Everlasting Frame shook with the Fright,
And the scared Sun shrunk back, and hid his Light.
Through the Earth's dark Vaults a shivering Horror fled,
That whilst Convulsed threw up the awakened Dead.
Thin pallid Ghosts come sweeping over the Grass,
And howling Wolves Glare on them as they pass.
Hoarse Thunder Rolls in Subterranean Caves,
Chaos to hearken stills his Raging Waves.
Even Hell gaped horribly, such was the fright,
And through the Chasm let through prodigious Night.
Night that extinguished the Meridian Ray,
And with its gloomy Deluge choked the Day.
Sad Moans were heard, Shreeks, Howlings, Midnight Cries,
And Globes of Fire hung Blazing in the Skies.
A fierce Convulsion through the Temple went,
The Pillars trembled, and the Veil was Rent.
The Heaven's and Earth both suffered when he died,
As Nature's Self were with him Crucified.
Down by their Sides the silent Angels laid
Their Golden Harps, and neither Sung nor played;
Their drooping Wings, and Looks dejected show
Sadness, as much, as those blessed Realms can know.
Thrice the swift Sun his radiant Chariot drove
Over the blue Hills, and out-stretch'd Plains above.
As often the Moon had shot her paler Light,
In silver Threads through the brown Vest of Night.
When the Reviving Savior leaves his Tomb,
And, as newborn, breaks from the Earth's dark Womb*
The Chains of Death shook off, he from the Ground,
Does with new Force, Anteus like, rebound.
He comes in Triumph from the Conquered Grave,
And this blessed proof of Resurrection gave.
Often to his mournful Friends their Lord appeared,
And their sad Minds with Heavenly Pleasures cheered.
He then the Plan of his wise Kingdom laid,
Who should submit, and who should be obeyed.
To these he gave a Power to loose, and bind,
And with fixed Bounds that Sacred Power confined.
He set the Rights his Subjects should enjoy,
Which Princes must Protect, but not Annoy.
And by wise Laws fix all things that relate,
To the Support of his new founded State.
That done, pursued by their admiring Eyes,
Born on a shining Cloud he did arise,
In Heavenly Pomp Triumphant through the Skys.
The Clouds dividing in Obsequious Haste,
Smiled, yielded by his Glory, as he had passed.
Great Michael, Raphael, and the rest that boast,
The chief Commands in the Celestial Host,
Great Princes, Thrones, and high Seraphick States,
With splendid Equipage poured from the Gates;
Sublime in high Celestial Chariots rode,
Far out of Heaven, to meet the ascending God.
The Powers and high Dominions with their Train,
Shone glorious bright on all the Etherial Plain.
On a fair Hill that the wide Vale commands,
The numberless, angelick Army stands.
Drawn up in shining Lines, and Warlike Bands.
The Trumpets all salute him passing by,
And in the Air displayed the Banners fly.
And now arrived at Heaven's Eternal Gate,
Attended with his long Triumphal State,
The blessed Inhabitants due Honors give,
And all in Arms their conquering Prince receive.
Disposed in glorious Ranks each Order shines,
And all the way the bright Militia Lines.
On's Chariot Wheels the thronging Cherubs hang,
With whose loud Shouts the Heaven's high Arches rang.
Thus did he to the Eternal's Palace ride
The Guards stood to their Arms on either Side.
Entering he took his Place, and Brightly shone
On the Right Hand of his great Father's Throne.
Where he shall our great Intercessor stay,
Till the last Summons to the Judgment Day.
He ceased, and Hoel in his Arms embraced,
His God-like Friend, and cried, I Am highly graced
With this Divine Discourse, what Thanks to you,
Illustrious Prince, what Thanks to Heaven are due?
Blessed Peace came rolling on the raging Waves,
And your late Wreck, me and my Kingdom saves.
Kind Heaven for me has called forth Joy and Light,
From those fierce Storms, and that outrageous Night,
That forced your Vessels on the Armoric Shore,
Your Loss I mourn, but Heaven's Designs adore.
Long have I strayed in gloomy Darkness lost,
Deep Gulphs, thick Woods, and trackless Mountains crossed;
In endless Mazes, and in endless Night,
Without a Glimpse of Day, or Ray of Light.
The Gates of Light thrown open, you display
The first reviving Beams of Heavenly Day.
Which darts across the Shades in shining Streaks,
And on my Mind in tender Dawning breaks.
How much I wish to see this Light Divine,
Rise to its Noon, and in full splendour shine?
You Have opened Heaven's Eternal Springs, whence flow
Those sacred Rivulets which you bestow
On the parched Region of this barren Breast,
Now with pure Streams of living Waters blessed.
I drink them in with Joy, but thirst for more,
And for this thankful, still more Aid implore.
He ceased, the Prince who to oblige him strove,
Thus spoke, all Seasons offered I Will with Joy improve,
To give more Light, and kindle greater Love.
My Toil and Sufferings when reviewed, will please,
Caused by the stormy Winds and angry Seas,
If I can thus assist your Heavenly Course,
Through gloomy Night, thick Mists, and Tempests force,
Through all the Snares of Hell, till you attain
The Eternal Haven, where blessed Spirits Reign.
Now to the Foot of Heaven's steep Precipice,
Ready to plunge into the deep Abyss,
The Red-fac'd Sun had rolled the sinking Day,
Shooting along the Plains a level Ray.
The loving Turtle to his Airy Nest,
Flies with his moaning Mate, to Coe, and rest.
The timorous Hare steals from the Brakes to Feed,
And from the Yoke the laboring Ox is freed.
With strutting Teats the Herds come lowing home,
And Beasts of Prey over Hills and Forests Roam.
And now the Princes that had passed the Day
In various talk to Conda came, to stay
Till the appearance of the Morning Ray.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK III.
NOW the Victorious Sun the Night invades,
Chasing from Hill to Hill, the flying Shades.
Up rose the Princes, and were soon prepared
To take their Way, attended with their Guard.
In the same Chariot friendly they abide,
And feeding grateful Conversation ride.
The British Captains, and the Armorick Train,
On either Side their generous Coursers rein.
They past not far, when Hoel thus addressed,
With pleasing Looks, his Pious, British Guest.
Your losty Subject now, brave Prince, resume,
How shall your Lord from Heaven to Judgment come,
What follows, what precedes the general Doom?
The Briton then began.
Before the Son of God appears on high,
Prodigious Signs are seen through all the Sky.
New lighted Comets shake their Fiery Hair,
Or trail their flaming Trains along the Air.
Vast Circling Flakes of Fire the World amaze,
And intermixed, prodigious Meteors blaze.
The Sky shines terrible with Lightning's Flame.
And Thunder shakes the universal Frame.
The impetuous roar o'erturns Heaven's lofty Towers
And starry Fragments fall in burning Showers,
Rent Clouds, pour Seas of raging Sulphur down,
Whose livid Flames the extinguished Sunbeams drown
Cross the red Air the flaming Torrents fly,
Gushing from all the fiery Springs on high.
The melting Orbs, and Firmaments conspire,
To make up one Tempestuous Sea of Fire,
The glowing Spears dissolve with Heat and all
In mighty Floods of liquid Crystal fall.
The lofty Digues gape wide, that stood around,
And from the dark Abyss did Nature bound;
Chaos came pouring through the hideous Crack,
And Nature's Ruins, and the amazing Wreck
Of burning Worlds, by floating on his Waves:
Scarce its high Mounds the Empyreal Region saves.
Heaven's spacious Balls are on each other hurled,
Ruin with Ruin crushed, and World o'erturn'd with World.
Confusion, Noise, and Horror fill the Air,
The Earth, loud Cries, Distraction, and Despair.
Fierce Storms of raging Vapors, that aspire,
Mixed with hot Steams, from subterranean Fire,
That Lakes of Sulphur burning all beneath,
That kindled Naphtha, and hot Metals Breath;
The Earth's gripped Bowels with Convulsions rack,
And with loud Noise their trembling Prisons crack.
Imprisoned Thunder roars for wider room,
Proclaiming loud the World's approaching Doom.
The Globe distorted, burst, disjoynted, rent,
Gives to the burning Exhalations Vent.
Through gaping Clefts, the flaming Tempest flies,
And Hurricanes of Fire confound the Skies.
Great Cities, Mountains, Rocks, and shattered Hills,
Vast abrupt Tracks of Land, and sinking Isles,
Sap'd by the Flame, that underneath destroys;
Fall down with mighty Cracks, and dreadful Noise;
Prodigious Ruin filling all the Caves,
And dashing high the subterranean Waves.
Aetna, Vesuvius, and the fiery kind,
Their Flames within blown up with stormy Wind;
With dire Concussions, and loud roar complain
Of deadly Gripes, and fierce consuming pain.
The laboring Mounts Belch drossy Vomit out,
And throw their melted Bowels round about.
Broad Sheets of Flame, Pillars of Pitchy Smoke,
And glowing Stones, the Airy Region choke.
Down their scorcht Sides metallic Torrents flow,
And form a dismal, flaming Sea below.
The fiery Deluge rolls along the Ground,
Dreadful for Color, horrible for Sound.
Huge Stones, and vast unmelted Cakes of Oar,
The thick, unweildy Tide encumber more.
Horror in Triumph, smeared with Smoke and Blood,
Rides cross the Ridge of the Tremendous Flood.
It burns new Channels riding over the Plain,
And turns over Cities with its ponderous Train.
Down to the Deep it rolls its massy Waves,
Outroars the Ocean, and its Waters braves.
Plunged in the Seas it unextinguish'd lies,
And over the Waves the glowing Wedges rise.
The affrighted Seas the burning Horror fly,
And the bare Shores beneath the Deluge Fry.
Into the Air the exhaling Ocean goes,
Where Waters slept, a Lake of Sulphur glows.
All the hot Seeds, and hidden Stores of Fire,
From subterranean Prisons freed, conspire
With their bright Arms to lay all Nature wast,
And to the general Conflagration have.
A fiery Chaos Reigns with lawless Power,
And unresisted Flames the World devour.
These Signs first given, amidst the Starry Shears,
With all the Pomp of Heaven the Judge appears.
Before his Chariot Wheels that roll on high,
Whirlwinds, and Clouds discharging Thunder fly,
And curling Lightnings run along the Sky.
Immortal Thrones, poured out from Heaven's bright Gates,
Dominions, Powers, Seraphic Potentates,
Crowned Saints, and Martyrs ranged in glorious Rows,
Attend his Chariot, and his State compose.
The dazzling Pomp stretches across the Sky,
From utmost East to West, and passing by
The Heavenly Orbs, comes on descending flow,
Into the Airy Region here below.
Over all the Sky, Heaven's mighty Army shines,
And here it halts in deep embartel'd Lines.
In bright Celestial Armor Clad, they stand,
Their Swords of tempered Flame drawn in their hand.
They mark a Camp of spacious Circuit out,
And cast up Crystal Ramparts round about.
On some fit Eminence, they raise on high
Their Lord's August Pavilion in the Sky.
His bright, sublime Tribunal here they place,
On which he sits, with awful, God-like Grace.
Such Flames of Fire, wheeling in Clouds of Smoke,
Issue from thence, as from Mount Sinai broke.
Arrayed with Majesty, and clothed with Light,
He Glory darts too fierce for Angels Sight.
In Hallelujahs they his Greatness sing,
And the shook Spears, with loud Hosannahs Ring.
Thus on the Throne, the Savior sits prepared,
To Judge the World, to punish and reward.
And now the unnumber'd Armies ready stand,
Grasping revenging Firebrands in their Hand,
And only wait their Leader's high Command.
The Signal given, a general Shout, shall shake
The Heaven's around, greater than Armies make
Rushing to Battle, or was heard in Rome,
When Conquering Caesar came in Triumph home.
Their furious Arms, devouring Tempests throw
On all the guilty, trembling World below.
They pour down mighty, fiery Cataracts,
Flaming Bitumen, and Sulphurous Lakes;
Red showers of fiery Arrows hissing fly,
And flashing Lightning flames around the Sky.
Fires from above, combined with Fires below,
Over all the Earth in ruddy Torrents flow.
Vengeance Divine, wastes Nature's burning Store,
And drowns the Earth in Fire, all drowned in Guilt before.
The Heat dissolves the Fabric of the World,
The broken parts fall down, confusedly hurled:
Chaos restored does in wild Triumph reign,
And ruined Worlds his hideous Throne sustain.
Some great Archangel now springs forth on high,
And with the loudest Trumpet of the Sky,
Summons the astonished, gazing World to come
To Judgment, and the Universal Doom.
The dreadful Noise shakes Heaven's Etherial Mounds,
And in loud Echoes from the Spears rebounds.
In Echoes terrible, and piercing Shrill,
That the low World with dire Amazement fill.
The guilty Fiends shreek out at these Alarms,
That in the Air fly thick in murmuring Swarms.
Their Prince himself trembles, and dares not stay,
But spreads his broad, dun Wings, and shoots away.
They sink confounded to the Infernal Deep,
Or into Clefts, and hollow Mountains creep.
They find the fatal Hour's arrived at last,
That shall revenge their bold Rebellions past.
When to their Torments they shall be Restrained,
And lie beneath, on flaming Billows chained.
When Hell no more its Prisoners shall release,
And Sin's black Empire must for ever cease.
No less the dreadful Sound, and awful Sight,
Confound proud Tyrants, and their Guards affright.
What Horror now distracts each guilty Soul,
In their sad Breasts, what Storms of Vengeance roll.
How will they bear this dismal Scene of Woe,
Where will they stay secure, or whither go?
Terror, Distraction, Anguish, fierce Despair
Drink up their Vitals, and their Heart Strings tear.
Ten Thousand poisoned Darts strike through their Reins,
And wound them with unsufferable Pains.
The Vulture bred within their Bowels gnaws,
And Conscience gripes them with her Harpys Claws.
Such Wounds, such Stings, such Pangs must now be born,
Of everlasting Death, the sad Forlorn.
What strange Confusion in their Looks appears,
What wild Amazement, Guilt and deadly Fears.
What howling Lamentation, what dire Cries,
What doleful Shreeks, and Yellings fill the Skies?
Besides, the Trumpet shakes the trembling ground,
The startled Dead awaken at the Sound.
The Grave resigns its ancient Spoils, and all
Death's Adamantine Prisons burst, and fall.
The Souls that did their forced Departure mourn,
To the same Bodies with swift Flight return.
Whose scattered Parts God calls together, they
To their appointed Meeting have away.
The crowding Atoms reunite apace,
All without tumult, know, and take their place.
The assembled Bones leap quick into their Frame,
And the warm Blood renews a brighter Flame.
The quickened Dust feels fresh and youthful Heats,
While its old Task, the beating Heart repeats.
The Eyes enlivened with new Vital Light,
Open, admiting whence they had their sight.
The Veins too, twine their bloody Arms around
The Limbs, and with red, leaping Life abound.
Hard twisted Nerves new brace, and faster bind
The close knit Joints, no more to be disjoined.
Strong, new-spun Threads Immortal Muscles make,
That justly fixed, their ancient Figure take.
Brisk Spirits take their upper Seats, and dart
Through their known Channels thence, to every part.
The Men now draw their long forgotten Breath,
And striving break the unweildy Chains of Death.
Victorious Life to every Grave resorts,
And rifles Death's unhospitable Courts.
Its Vigor through those dark Dominions spread,
From all their gloomy Mansions frees the Dead.
Now ripe Conceptions through the Earth abound,
And new sprung Men stand thick on all the ground.
The Sepulchers are quick, and every Tomb
Labors with Life, and grows a fruitful Womb.
But how the Dead are changed, their Bodies more
Unlike each other, than their Souls before!
How monstrous foul the guilty Dead arise,
Each struck with Horror from his Neighbor flies!
How much deformed they look, all stained with Sin,
Black and mis-shap'd without, but more within.
Ugly and Fiend-like, from their Graves they Crawl,
And on the ground, like bloated Vermin, sprawl.
And like them too, their Bodies have their Birth,
From putred Damps and Vapors in the Earth.
So Serpents that entangled lay asleep,
From out their Beds disturbed, and wakened creep.
They hiss, and cast their fiery Eyes around,
And with their loathsome Bellies mark the ground.
For flight their poisonous Volumes they display,
And urged with Fear and Anguish, have away.
So this foul Brood are forced their Graves to leave,
And to the Ground their groveling Bellies cleave.
Earthy and Black, confined so long to Night,
They dread the Horrors of the cheerful Light.
Amazing change! see, some of these were they,
Whose Heads were Crowned, whose Hands did Scepters sway.
These did rich Purple, and fine Linen wear,
And every Meal fed on delicious Fare.
That hideous Thing, that for a Covert seeks,
With hollow Eyes, fallen Jaws, and ghastly Cheeks,
That monstrous Thing, was once, when kept with Care,
Proud of its Beauty, and looked wondrous Fair.
Set off with all the Ornaments that please
The Eye, and pampered with Luxurious Ease.
But how the guilty Crowd, wreckt with Despair,
With dismal Cries fill all the Ecchoing Air;
When they the Trumpet's dreadful Summons hear,
And find the Universal Judgment near!
Back to their Graves, the ugly Monsters fly,
And in those Coverts would for ever ly.
They call aloud for Death, and wish they might
Melt to thin Air, be drowned, and lost in Night.
But when Blessed Minds their Bodies meet, no Pair
Can look more Beautiful, and charming Fair.
The happy Souls shoot swiftly through the Sky,
And to the Graves and Sepulchers they fly.
Where they their long forsaken Bodies greet,
Which, like old Friends, they with fresh Pleasure meet*
Bodies, that seem, they are so Pure and Bright,
All thickened Glory, close compacted Light;
Purged and refined from all that is course and gross,
As melted Gold throws off the baser Dross.
Smiling they rise, such Charms, so sweet a Grace
They show, as dwell not on a Mortal Face.
These rising Stars their Heavenly Beams display,
Bright Harbingers of Everlasting Day.
Such Beauties, such mild Glories shall we see,
In the glad Spring of Immortality.
Yet these blessed Sons of Light, that Angel-like,
Would mortal Eyes, with deadly Luster strike,
Were those, that once their Excellence disguised,
Lived here oppressed, and like their Lord, despised.
Welcome to them this long expected Hour,
Safe by their Judge's Favor, from his Power.
High Tides of Joy into their Bosoms run,
And Everlasting Life they feel begun.
This shall past Griefs in deep Oblivion drown,
Complete their Triumphs, and their Virtues Crown.
These in the Spring, great Care and Toil bestowed,
And watered with their Tears, the Seed they sowed.
The Harvest now their happy Hours employs,
In reaping Pleasures and Immortal Joys.
Bright Cherubims descending through the Air
To these blessed Men with speedy Flight Repair,
Then to the general Doom aloft they fly,
And on their Wings convey them through the Sky.
In all the way encouraging their Charge,
Telling of all the Joys of Heaven at large.
Placed in the Presence of their Lord they stand
In their appointed Seats, at his Right Hand.
Whilst other Angels from the Deep of Hell,
Drive up the Fiends that in those Regions dwell.
With Swords of keenest Flame compelling some,
And dragging others to the general Doom.
In Anguish and Despair the yelling Fiends
Curse, Gnash, and Bite the Eternal Chain that binds
So close, and strait, then turn their Heads away,
From the fierce Terror of so bright a Day.
And impious Men in no less Horror fly
To all the Shades, and Coverts they descry.
Mountains and Rocks their fruitless Cries invite,
To fall, and hide them from the Judge's Sight.
For rise they must, and lose their vain Desire,
Caught up in Whirlwinds, and in Storms of Fire.
Before the Judge the Prisoners stand in Sight,
And take the Left Hand, as the Just the Right.
The Eternal Books before the Judge are brought,
Where all Men's long forgotten Deeds are wrote.
And first are read the Virtues of the Just,
Their Zeal for Heaven, their Courage, Hope, and Trust.
The Prayers, the Tears, the Alms themselves concealed,
Before applauding Angels are revealed.
The righteous Judge their Innocence declared,
Allots the glorious Kingdom he prepared
For pure and holy Minds a blessed Reward.
Their Guardian Angels at their Lord's Command,
Crown the glad Saints with an Officious Hand.
Who now in perfect Bliss their time employ
Discoursing, to promote their mutual Joy,
How first they left the pleasurable way,
Where wanton Streams of soft Delights convey
Charmed Souls, that with the treacherous Tide must go,
To the dead Lake of Pain and endless VVo.
How first they liked the dark and lonesom Road
That leads to Bliss, and the blessed Minds Abode.
How when in Shades they mourned, a Heavenly Ray
Darted a welcome, tho imperfect Day.
How Virtue's guidance they implored and gained,
And what blessed Converse with her they maintained.
How through dark Paths she did their Feet conduct,
Correct the wanderers, and the rest instruct.
How by her Aids they bore tempestuous Shocks,
Climbed over opposing Hills, and hanging Rocks.
Till they at length the Peaceful Realms did gain,
Where Joys Divine, and endless Transports Reign.
How sweet and fair Crowned Innocence appears,
No more tossed on the Waves of Hopes and Fears?
On mortal Face such Beauties never shone,
Like those of Virtue, seated on her Throne.
Next this, the Apostate Angels are accused,
That open Force, or secret Arts they used
To set their Leader on the Eternal's Throne,
Subvert Christ's Empire, and advance their own.
That Man by them seduced, did first Rebel,
Relinquished Heaven, and to their Party fell.
That they the cursed Defection did support,
And new Born Men, to new Rebellions Court.
That they, with indefatigable Care,
Fresh Heats fomented, and renewed the War.
Whence Plagues and Desolation wide, and vast,
And uncontrolled Destruction laid all wast.
Hence Noah's universal Deluge came,
And hence the World lies now overwhelmed in Flame.
For these black Crimes they are sentenced to the pains,
Of fiercer Fire, and doomed to heavier Chains.
Next Cain's Rebellious Offspring are accused,
As Heaven's inveterate Foes, that long abused
Goodness Divine, whom Everlasting Love
And Life Eternal, had no Charms to move.
They would no reconciling Terms embrace,
Alike by Threats unchanged, or Acts of Grace.
They did with Wine and Noise the Method find,
To Calm a Conscious, self-revenging Mind.
To lay asleep the uneasy Judge within,
Till they with Care and Pains, grew bold in Sin.
For when the sacred Spirit did convey
Into their Breasts, a secret Heavenly Ray,
That did, where cherished, soon bring on the Day:
With hasty Care they choked the new sprung Light,
Calling to Aid the Shades of Hell, and Night.
Divine Compassion's Force they never felt,
Nor would in Flames of Love Eternal melt.
Their Hearts untouched did all Heaven's strokes repel,
Tempered, and hardened in the Forge of Hell.
No Overtures of Peace, no Offers made,
Though of an endless Kingdom, could persuade
The unrelenting Rebels to lay down
Their impious Arms, to take a Heavenly Crown.
They still asserted with their latest Breath,
Their fixed Confed'racy with Hell, and Death.
It Is on them charged, that others too that fell,
Drawn by their Arts, embarked for Death and Hell.
They led them to the flowery Banks, and showed
The flattering Tide, where smiling Pleasures flowed.
Where the charmed Voyagers did careless ride,
Bewitching Syren's singing on their side.
Till the false Flood betrayed them thither, where
It falls into the Gulf of black Despair.
Here secret Crimes are published, and his Name
That loved the Sin, but feared the attendant Shame.
The sly Adulterer, that til the late
Approach of Night, and silent Shades did wait,
For the Caresses of the Harlot's Fed,
And at the early dawn of Twilight fled;
Is here upbraided for his careful flight
Of Men's, whilst he contemned the Almighty's sight.
The audacious Wretch that did Heaven's Laws deride,
And all its Thunder and dire Threats defied;
That did cloyed Nature to fresh Guilt excite,
Beyond her own even Vicious Appetite:
Anti-Platonic that could pleasure take
In naked Vice, and sinned for sinning's sake;
That could abstracted from Enjoyment, sport
With Guilt, and Vice even in Idea court.
That did himself, so much he loved the Fame,
The secret Triumphs of his Lusts proclaim,
Strives in the Crowd to hide his guilty Head,
Whilst his high Charge, and black Indictment's read.
The astonished Wretch Sinks, Trembles, Dies to see
Enraged Omnipotence, and frowning Majesty.
Such deadly Torments on his Bowels feed,
Such Agonies he feels, as far exceed
All Shapes of Horror, Mortals ever saw,
Poets invent, or troubled Fancies draw.
That there is a God, he gives a full Assent,
On the most sure, but saddest Argument.
He can his Being, and his Power attest,
From the Almighty Vengeance in his Breast.
Thus he at last believes, and trembles too,
On the same grounds that tortured Spirits do.
The Droll'ry that derided Heaven's just Cause,
He hears repeated, but without Applause.
His Jests and bold Discourses will not fit
This place, nor pass, even with his Friends, for Wit.
Will he his feeble Arguments produce,
And make them here, renew their former Use?
Will he assert his Innocence, and plead
'Twas only harmless Nature he obeyed?
That he to Vice did not his Mind enslave,
But only pleased the Appetites Heaven gave.
Will he inform the Judge, it cannot be
A Being Good, and Merciful, as He,
Can so much Rigor to his Errors show,
And make a Creature for Eternal Woe?
The Wretch's bold Objections will appear,
His wanton Fancy's wild Capriches here.
Able no more to stifle with their Night,
The Natural Dictates of his inbred Light.
They cannot the deadly Stings within control,
Nor ease the Horrors of his tortured Soul.
And now less hardy Prisoners are Arraigned,
That had not this obdurate temper gained.
Of such a Pendulous, Distracted Mind,
That often to Heaven, and often to Hell inclined.
To make up Peace, they would with neither part,
But shared between them a divided Heart.
These traveled on so long the happy Way,
That leads to Life, and pure Etherial Day:
Till they reached Heaven's bright Confines, could descry
The Peaceful World of Immortality.
But then discouraged at the steep Ascent,
And the strait Gate, through which the Trav'llers went,
Gave back, and did of their past Toil repent.
But how they now abhor the Cowardice,
That made them almost Conquerors, miss the Prize:
Made them desert a prosperous Cause as lost,
That could so many Spoils, and Triumphs boast.
Cursed Sloth, that could persuade them to forsake
Christ's Camp, when such a Kingdom was at Stake.
Each hears his aggravated Crimes at large,
Devils accuse, and Conscience backs the Charge.
They cannot excuse, or hide their Crimes, nor fly,
Nor what is the Refuge of the wretched, die.
Now let their past Enjoyments Succor give,
Let Wit, and Wine their deadly Fears relieve.
Let their dear Riches their Assistance lend,
Honor and Pomp the ambitious Man defend.
Let them solicit with their loudest Cries,
Those Gods, they served, to save their Votaries.
Blessed Heaven, that Man with such a swift Career,
Pursues those Toys, that are so useless here.
The Judge will all his Terrors now assume,
And thus pronounce the Prisoners dreadful Doom.
For ever cursed Souls from me depart,
As you did often my Cause, I you desert.
Go, burn in Everlasting Fire prepared
For Devils, take that sad, but just Reward.
Sink to the Bottomless Abyss of Hell,
Where Agonies, and endless Sorrow dwell.
Go to those Mansions of Despair, and lie
In never ceasing Torments, go, and die.
The Rebels this expected Sentence past,
With Thunder and Tempestuous Fire are chased,
To Hell's black Gulf, through all the Etherial Wast.
Where they shall see no cheerful Ray of Light,
Doomed to the Horrors of Eternal Night.
The Almighty's Arrows Fester in their Heart,
Drink up their Blood, and gall with deadly Smart.
His Wrath consumes the wretch, his Power sustains,
And like fierce Poison over their Vitals, Reigns.
They wast their Souls in Cries, and howling Moans,
And spend Eternity in fruitless Groans.
Now the abstrusest Paths of Providence,
That gave the wisest Men so great Offense,
Are so unriddl'd, and made easy here;
The Night dispelled, they shine as Noonday, clear.
Justice that did till now her Graces shroud,
And walked on Earth, encircled with a Cloud;
That did such by, and uncouth Ways frequent,
Perplexed with Windings, frightful for Ascent;
See this bright Goddess to her Throne restored,
Unveils her Majesty to be adored.
Her Cloud thrown off, her Form is all Divine,
No Luster now, her Glory can outshine.
Such are the Beauties of her Charming Face,
Fair Mercy's Self, looks not with sweeter Grace.
Rivals no longer, they are here combined,
And in so strict a Bond of Friendship joined;
They seem distinguished only by their Name,
Their Charms alike, their Votaries the same,
And both are Worshipped with an equal Flame.
Justice to all in such due measures shown,
The Judge returns to his Celestial Throne.
And as he goes, crowned Saints, and Seraphs sing
Loud Songs of Praise to their Triumphant King.
He enters Heaven attended with his Train,
That in the new Jerusalem shall Reign.
The City stands on pure expanded Fields
Of rising Either, that wide Prospect yields
Over all the Gulf, and outstretcht Vales below,
Over all the Inferior, spacious Orbs can show.
The Walls are Marble of the richest Vein,
And their high Towers o'erlook the Azure Plain.
Of polished Gold the glorious Structures rise,
With gilded Spires, and Turrets in the Skies.
From Heavenly Quarries on their Front appear
Rich Stones, like Winter Stars, but far more clear.
Immortal Rubies, Diamonds, Saphirs meet,
In beauteous Mixture, and bright Orders set
Rare Works, where Cost immense, and Art combine,
Built and adorned by the Architect Divine,
To be for holy Minds a blessed Abode,
The Imperial Seat, and Residence of God.
The Streets are all of fine, Etherial Glass,
Pure, like the spotless Minds, that through them pass.
Through these Eternal, living Rivers flow,
Trees on their Banks, in goodly Ranges grow,
That with their golden Fruit, immortal Health bestow.
Twelve Gates of Orient Pearl unshaken stand,
Shut, and unbarr'd by the Almighty's Hand.
A Steepy Gulf is placed beneath the Walls,
And down as low as Hell's Abyss, it falls;
Lest Hostile Fiends should leave their burning Lake,
And bold Excursions to these Regions make.
The Air's Serene, and fit for happy Minds,
Secure from Thunder, and the Assaults of Winds.
No Clouds, but those of curling Incense rise,
By playing Zephirs tossed about the Skies;
That with their gentle Breath sweet Odours blow,
That from Blessed Woods, and Heavenly Gardens flow.
No noxious Damps, the Region's so sublime,
From Hell's Infernal Caves, can hither Climb.
No foul terrestrial Steams pollute the Air,
No Breaths ascend, but those of Praise, and Prayer.
Essential Glory from the Almighty's Face,
With its resplendent Efflux, lights the Place.
All Heaven's fair Orbs, thin'd and beat out in Light,
Would not spread out a Day, so pure and bright,
As that, the Saints Illustrious Order sheds,
From the encircling Glory round their Heads.
The vanquished Sun would there seem Dark, his Light
Whence our course Day proceeds, would there make Night.
So Glorious are the Dwellings of the Saints,
Outdone by nothing, but the Inhabitants.
On lofty Thrones the Heavenly Princes sit,
In Robes as white, as new fallen Snow, and writ
In Golden Characters, their Foreheads bear
Their Savior's Name, their Breasts his Image wear.
Immortal Vigor shines on every Face,
They look with Mild, but with Majestic Grace.
Thick Beams of Light stream out from every Head,
Each Saint does his own Heaven about him spread,
His radiant Feet on pointed Glory tread.
Safe on the Shore with Pleasure they behold,
How the thick Waves are on each other rolled,
What Dangers of a strange amazing Shape,
What fatal Rocks, they scarcely did escape.
They hear the Winds grow loud and turbulent,
See Clouds swollen big, with Thunder in 'em pent,
With which the lowering Sky is over-cast,
Hang down upon the Seas that they have past.
Viewing these Woes themselves did once endure,
They stand surpised, as if not yet secure.
Amazed at all the Glory they possess,
Wonder almost suspends their Happiness.
They on so sweet, and rich a Climate thrown,
Forget their Dangers, now for ever gone.
The Almighty they enjoy, at whose Right Hand
Fullness of Joy, and Life Eternal stand.
Down from his Throne, as Light does from the Sun,
Rivers of fresh Delight for ever run.
With ravished Eyes they drink in Heavenly Beams,
That from his Face flow down in Glorious Streams.
They gaze so on the Beatifick Sight,
Till they become all Intellectual Light.
So long they his substantial Brightness view,
Till they all grow Divine, and God-like too.
So quick they feel the mighty Influx come,
The most Capacious, thirsty Souls want room.
They widen and extend themselves to hold
Those Floods of Joys, that to their Breasts are rolled;
Till they a vast, unmeasured Bliss possess,
And strive beneath the unweildy Happiness.
If but a Glimpse of Heaven whose Glory streams
Through the thick Clouds in weak, refracted Beams,
Can please so much, what Joys have those above
Where perfect Knowledge kindles perfect Love?
Transports Ineffable their Minds employ
Deluged in Glory, lost in Tides of Joy.
Here Innocence will all its Luster show,
The mournful Looks thrown off, it wore below.
Sorrows for ever banished hence repair
To the low, Guilty Regions of the Air.
There no black Clouds of Discontent appear,
That spread themselves over these dark Valleys here.
No Groans are heard, no Tears fall down the Face,
To interrupt the Joy, of this blessed Place.
No crossing Arms, or sad dejected Eyes,
Seek out the secret Corners of the Skies.
If Course, Terrestrial Pleasures, court the Sense
With such strong Charms, that few can make Defense,
When backward Nature's forced by Wit, and Art,
All her delicious Treasures to impart.
When the short Days in all Delights are spent,
That soft, Luxurious Asia can invent.
What are the Nobler Pleasures, that transport
The blessed that reign in this Celestial Court?
That no Decay, or Intermission know,
Debased, when liken'd to the best below.
The Clouds all broke, the Tempest chased away,
The Smiling Skies disclose a cheerful Day.
They Have changed the Defart's dry and barren Sand,
For all the Riches of a fruitful Land.
Where with Immortal Food they ever fed,
And drink pure Pleasures at the Fountain's Head.
Hatred, Distress, and Grief, are banished hence;
The sad Companions once, of Innocence.
No dying Martyrs Flames, or private Cries
Of Innocents oppressed, disturb the Skies.
Here our Delights are mixed with base Allay,
We have at best but a Tempestuous Day.
Our Sweets are still attended with a Sting.
And great Enjoyments, greater Sorrows bring
Delights, those Beautiful, Illustrious play
Around us, and when grasped, they glide away.
Here tempting Joys, our fond Embraces fly,
Choice, Foreign Flowers, they only Blow, and Die.
They show themselves, but will not with us dwell,
But, like hot Gleams, approaching Storms foretell.
Pure unmixt Pleasures on us never flowed,
But Stream like watery Sunbeams, through a Cloud.
But those above, see no unlovely day,
Their Joys no mixture know, nor fear Decay.
In those blessed Realms they know no thoughtful Care,
Ever to Triumph is the Employment there.
There no Vicissitude of Day, and Night,
No Years, or Ages, measure Heaven's Delight;
Time has quite finished, and gone through its Round,
It did their Grief, but cannot their Pleasure Bound.
Its Streams here disembogued for ever ly
Lost in the Abyss of Immortality.
They no sad fears of future Sorrows know,
Completely Happy, and for ever so.
For Ever!
We strive in vain to hold this Boundless Space;
Too wide and vast, for Mortals to Embrace.
Our Arms may clasp the Earth with greater Ease,
And spread themselves ashore round all the Seas.
When Ages have their widest Circle run,
Heaven wears not, still its Joys are but begun.
The Heroes here forget their toil and pain,
And in Eternal Peace, and Triumph reign.
No more the Scoffer mocks their pious Care,
As Native Dullness, and ungrounded Fear.
How different Fate he and the Impious Kind,
Chained in the dark Infernal Prisons, find?
Near the wild Deep where restless Atoms fight,
And the unfrequented Coasts of ancient Night,
Where Nature never on Pregnant Matter fate,
To hatch warm Life, and its straight Bounds dilate.
There stands the vast, unbottom'd Gulf of Hell,
Where Sin and Death, in all their Terrors dwell.
Beyond the Verge of Day, these Regions ly,
As low and black, as Heaven is bright and high.
Horror, and Night hang dismal over the place,
And grisly Forms fill all the gloomy space.
Dead Seas of ponderous Darkness lie around,
And the sad Realms from Light's gray Frontiers bound.
Darkness that blunts the sharpest pointed Ray,
And unannoy'd, repels the Invading Day.
The sluggish Air is choked with soultry Gleams,
With poisonous Damps, and suffocating Steams;
That from wide Lakes of boiling Sulphur rise,
Laden with Groans, and Everlasting Cries.
No such malignant Breaths, such deadly Reeks,
The delving Miner that hid Treasure seeks,
Ever let out from a Subterranean Cell,
As those that break from the black mouth of Hell.
A fiery Sea burns fiercely all beneath,
Blown up, and kindled by the Almighty's Breath.
In flaming Heaps the livid Ocean rolls,
And scalding Waves involve despairing Souls.
The boiling Floods terrific Colors show,
Some deeply Red, and others faintly Blue.
These with the Shades contend, but cannot dispel
The Darkness that surrounds the burning Cell.
Or if they do, they dart pale, dismal Light,
Worse than the Horrors of the blackest Night.
The troubled Whirlpool belches Burnings out,
And throws red Seas of Sulphur round about.
Columns of Smoke, with spiral Flames of Fire
Inwreatch'd, from wide-mouthed Furnaces aspire.
Hence the black Region is annoyed with Fumes,
Stench, Reeks, and Flame, that kills, but not consumes.
So when a Mount, hot with metallic Seeds,
In its rich Sides a secret Burning feeds;
Soultring within, it casts up Pitchy Smoke,
And the dead Air ascending Vapors choke.
In mighty Floods, the wide Volcano's throw
Their melted Treasures out, and overflow
With glowing Torrents all the Neighboring ground,
That lies beneath a burning Deluge drowned.
Through all the Air the liquid Riches fly,
And Floods of Fire dash thick against the Sky.
All Hope for ever banished flies this place,
And fixed Despair sits Pale on every Face.
Grief, Anguish, Terror, Shame, Confusion here,
In Forms more terrible than Death, appear.
Here hateful Sin throws off its flattering Charms,
And shows a Monster in the Sinner's Arms.
It now no more can please awakened Eyes,
Stripped of stolen Beauties, and the fair Disguise
Of promised Good, it does it is self disclose
Its hideous Shape, and ghastly Visage shows.
The affrighted sinner seeing, faign would fly
The Embraces of such foul Deformity.
He would forget their past Endearments now,
And from the Monster strives in have to go.
But 'twill not be; those Friends on Earth must dwell
For ever, sad Companions too, in Hell.
This fiery Gulf, was as their just reward,
For Lucifer, and his black Host prepared;
Where now the Fiends, once fairest Sons of Light,
Lie plunged in Flame, chained in Eternal Night.
These wretched Minds, once pure and free from Stain,
In the brightest Palaces of Heaven did Reign.
Arrayed with dazzling Brightness, there they dwelt,
Blessed with their great Creator's sight, and felt
The beaming Influx breaking from his Face,
And shared the Pleasures of that Blissful Place.
Till with the task of blessed Obedience tired,
They to the Eternal's Sacred Throne aspired.
Incensed with such ambitious Aims, their Lord
Strikes through the Rebels with his flaming Sword.
Headlong he casts them from the Seats above,
No longer now, the Creatures of his Love.
Flaming, and Thunderstruck, the Traitors fell,
And sunk down to the fiery Jaws of Hell.
As when strong rising Flames Resistance find,
Beat downwards, by a fierce, impetuous Wind.
The liquid Pyramids with labor bend
Their tops, and sink still struggling to ascend.
So did these Beings of a Heavenly Race,
Fall from the Regions of their Native Place.
Still working up, they sunk in Pain and Toil,
For downwards thrown, their Natures still recoil.
So difficult's an Angel's Fall, and thus
Sinking's to them, what rising is to us.
But who has Strength to oppose the Almighty's Hand,
Who can against his deadly Terrors stand?
He with a single Word, an angry Frown,
Subdued this Host, and cast them headlong down.
Confounded, and amazed they sink, and all
Heaven's Plagues, and Wrath, pursued them in their Fall.
Here they must lie far from the Coasts of Bliss,
Chained in the Dungeons of the dark Abyss.
Where now they feel what Guilt's Demerits are,
Weltring in Fire, and tortured with Despair.
How much they curse the sad Exchange, black Night,
And endless Death, for Heavenly Joy and Light.
Sunk deep in liquid Fire they list their Eyes,
Red both with Heat and Anguish, to the Skies.
Then rave aloud, to think what Joys they have lost,
To think how dear their bold Rebellion cost.
Nor is the Change of these two Dwellings such,
So great, but they themselves, are changed as much.
See how deformed they are, to what before,
Stripped of the Glory that in Heaven they wore.
How much they look too like their guilty State,
How foul, and how unlike themselves of late.
Such fatal Changes one bold Crime can make,
Heaven's lost, nay more left for a burning Lake.
Man's Crime the Infernal Gates did open lay,
And raised, and paved, a broad and easy Way;
Leading across the Gulf from Earth to Hell,
Where now, lost Men, with impious Spirits dwell.
A Way that is thronged with mighty Crowds of those,
That for Delight and Ease, this Passage chose.
In Sports and Mirth they journey on, and find
All the Delights that please a Vicious Mind.
The Way's so wondrous smooth, so prone and broad,
They rather fall, than travel down this Road.
But how surprising is their Journey's End,
To what dire Seats does this smooth Passage tend?
Down to the Infernal Gulf they sporting glide,
Born on enchanting Pleasures wanton Tide.
A sad Exchange they meet, outrageous Seas
Of Sulphurous Fire, for Luxury and Ease.
In Darkness chained, on flaming Billows tossed,
Too late they find themselves for ever lost,
Hopeless they rave, and Curse the easy Way,
That did their Feet to these sad Realms betray.
Hither the damned, the final Sentence past,
With Cherubs bright, revenging Swords are chased.
Pursued with everlasting Wrath, they take
Their woeful Refuge, in the burning Lake.
Transfixt on unextinguish'd Fire they ly,
Burn without Wast, without expiring die.
Those Agonies, those Terrors here they know,
That from a self-revenging Conscience flow.
Gripped with the sad Remembrance of their Sin,
They feel the Stygian Viper gnaw within.
With deadly Stings, the Almighty wounds their Hearts,
And in their Breasts sticks deep his Fiery Darts.
Along their Veins tempestuous Vengeance rolls,
Pouring Despair, and Horror on their Souls.
Who can with everlasting Burnings dwell,
And bear the Guilt, and Punishment of Hell?
What Strength or Courage can support the Load
Of Wrath inflicted by the Almighty God?
Hear how the Damned devoured with Plagues, begin
To Curse aloud their Judge, Themselves, their Sin.
Transported with their Anguish, Grief, and Shame,
They gnash their Teeth, and bite the raging Flame.
Then sunk in deep Despair, such Sighs they breath,
Such dismal Groans, that but to hear, is Death.
A secret Fire their Breasts, like Aetna, feed,
And like that too, do their own Thunder breed.
Their Hellish Nature its own punishment,
Is a worse Plague, than Furies can invent.
Their Lusts, like Vultures, tear their inward parts,
And never-ceasing Torments, rend their Hearts.
Their vicious Appetites, not yet destroyed,
Still crave the Pleasures, they on Earth enjoyed.
Though those are gone, the fierce, untamed Desire
Remains, and burns worse than their Lake of Fire.
But what is the most afflicting Plague of Hell,
With all these Woes, they must for ever dwell.
For Ever! fatal State, for Ever! who
Can bear the Doom of Everlasting Woe?
What deadly Pangs, what fierce Convulsions rend
Their Breasts, who know their Pains shall never end.
How the despairing Damned cry out, is this
The place we chose, instead of Heavenly Bliss?
Is this black Prison, these tormenting Chains,
This Lake of Fire, and these Eternal Pains,
The dismal Recompense our Crimes afford,
And must we thus cursed, tortured, and abhorred,
In these consuming Flames, these Torments ly,
To all the Ages of Eternity?
Cursed be the fatal Crimes, that we obeyed,
That stole our Hearts, and have our Lives betrayed.
Cursed be the transient false Delights that showed
The Charms, that we so greedily pursued;
Till down the steepy Precipice, we fell
Into this deep Abyss of Death, and Hell;
Cursed be the treacherous Joys, that leave us now
Doomed to Despair, lost in Eternal Woe.
He ended, Hoel highly pleased, expressed
The grateful Sense, that filled his joyful Breast.
Methinks he cried, I view the Infernal Caves,
And see the damned float on the raging Waves
In the dire Lake, where flaming Brimstone rolls,
And hear the dismal Groans of tortured Souls.
Then looking up, I see the Blessed above,
Dissolved in Raptures of Eternal Love.
I seem to view their bright, triumphant Throngs,
And hear their Harps, and sweet Harmonious Songs.
Then he the Briton various questions asks,
Who with great Joy performs the pious Tasks,
He teaches sacred Myst'ries yet behind,
And stamps the Christian Image on his Mind.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK IV.
IN such divine Discourse, on things sublime,
The Royal Pair with Pleasure passed their Time.
Now the day wears, the Sunbeams faintly bound,
And taller Shadows stretch along the ground.
Advanced, the rising Eminence they gain,
That gave full prospect over the fertile Plain,
Where the Imperial Seat of Hoel stands,
And all the Soil and Towns around, commands.
Fair Liger the Armoric Region's Pride,
Does through the Vale in smooth Meanders glide,
And rolls his Silver Volumes by its side.
Here the Nannetian Heroes did of old,
For Arms and Wisdom famed, the Scepter hold.
Arthur the Structures height, and Pomp admires,
The lofty Walls, strong Towers, and glittering Spires.
He views the rich and fruitful Region round,
Where wanton Nature sat in pleasure crowned,
Scattering with lavish Bounty on the Soil,
Riches and Joys, without the Owner's Toil.
To Martial Sports by thirst of Honor led,
The active Youth over all the Fields are spread.
Some of robuster Limbs advance their Name
In wrestling Rings, the famed Olympic Game.
Some rein their managed Steeds with manly grace,
Some swift in running strain to win the Race.
Some hurling ponderous Balls their Fellows brave,
Some twang the Bow, and some the Colors wave.
But all desert their Games, and Warlike sport,
And round the Kings, run shouting to the Court.
Which was an ancient, stately Pile, that stood
On the sweet Banks of Liger's peaceful Flood.
Alighted here, the Armoric Prince expressed,
All signs of welcome to his Royal Guest.
He leads him to a fair and spacious Room,
Hung with rich Pieces, from the finest Loom.
Rare Workmanship, where famed Sydonian Art
Did all her Force, and happy Strokes impart.
Each piece fresh Pleasure, and new Wonder feeds,
Filled with the Armoric Kings Heroic Deeds.
Their great Exploits in single Combat done;
The Towns they conquered, and the Fields they won.
Pleased with the Skill, and Story, Arthur stands,
And much of this, and much of that, demands.
Mean time, within a Supper they prepare,
With great Magnificence, and Regal Fare.
Strong, brawny Servants sweat, and panting strode,
O'erburden'd with the Meats unweildy Load.
The Ivory Tables groan beneath the weight
Of high pil'd Dishes, all of massy Plate,
In decent Order set, and Princely State.
All things appear, that curious search can find,
Or in the Finny, or the Feathered Kind:
That Hills, or ransacked Forests can impart,
Profusely heaped, set off with costly Art.
Of Polished Gold Capacious Goblets shine,
With sparkling Stones enriched, and sparkling Wine.
Delicious Fruit crowned with fresh Laurel stood
In lofty Pyramids, a golden Wood.
Great Lights in silver Sconces placed on high,
Shine round the Room, and more than Day supply.
The Kings both sat, the Britons take their place,
The other side the Armoric Captains grace.
Cheerful and highly pleased they Sit, and Eat,
And now the Art they praise, and now the Meat.
Choice Instruments, some Strung, and some of Wind
Were heard, in sweet melodious Consort joined
The lively Hoboy, and the sweet-mouth'd Flute,
The sprigtly Violin, and warbling Lute;
With the sonorous Viol, mingling sound,
Soft Airs, and Heavenly Harmony compound.
But that which Arthur with most pleasure heard,
Were noble Strains, by Mopas sung the Bard,
Who to his Harp in lofty Verse began;
And through the secret Maze of Nature ran.
He the great Spirit sung, that all things filled,
That the tumultuous Waves of Chaos stilled.
Whose Nod disposed the jarring Seeds to Peace,
And made the Wars of hostile Atoms cease.
All Beings we in fruitful Nature find,
Proceeded from the great Eternal Mind;
Streams of his unexhausted Spring of Power,
And cherished with his Influence, endure.
He spread the pure Cerulean Fields on high,
And Arched the Chambers of the Vaulted Sky.
Which he, to suit their Glory with their height,
Adorned with Globes, that reel, as drunk with Light.
His Hand directed all the rolling Spears,
He turned their Orbs, and polished all the Stars.
He filled the Sun's vast Lamp with golden Light,
And bid the silver Moon, adorn the Night.
He spread the Airy Ocean without Shores,
Where Birds are wafted with their feathered Oars.
Through the transparent Deep light Vapors rise
From the warm Earth, and cloud the smiling Skies.
He sung how some chilled in their Airy flight,
Fall scattered down in pearly Dew by Night.
How some raised higher, sit in secret Steams
On the reflected points of bounding Beams;
Till chilled with Cold, they Shade the Etherial Plain,
Then on the thirsty Earth descend in Rain.
How some, whose parts a slight Contexture show,
Sink hovering through the Air, in fleecy Snow.
How part is spun in silken Threads, and Clings
Entangled in the Grass in glewy Strings.
How others stamped to Stones, with rushing sound
Fall from their Crystal Quarries, to the ground.
How some are laid in Trains, that kindled fly
In harmless Fires by Night, about the Sky.
How some in Winds blow with impetuous Force,
And carry Ruin where they bend their Course.
While some conspire to form a gentle Breez,
To fan the Air, and play among the Trees.
How some enraged grow turbulent, and loud,
Pent in the Bowels of a frowning Cloud;
That cracks, as if the Axis of the World
Was broke, and Heaven's bright Towers were downwards hurled.
He sung how Earth's wide Ball at Jove's Command,
Did in the midst on Airy Columns stand.
And how the Soul of Plants, in Prison held,
And bound with sluggish Fetters lies concealed,
Till with the Spring's warm Beams almost releast
From the dull weight, with which it lay oppressed,
Its Vigor spreads, and makes the teeming Earth
Heave up, and labor with the sprouting Birth:
The active Spirit freedom seeks in vain,
It only works and twists a stronger Chain.
Urging its Prison's sides to break away,
It makes that wider, where it is forced to stay.
Till having formed its living House, it rears
Its Head, and in a tender Plant appears.
Hence springs the Oak, the Beauty of the Grove,
Whose stately Trunk, fierce Storms can scarcely move.
Hence grows the Cedar, hence the swelling Vine
Does round the Elm its purple Clusters twine.
Hence painted Flowers the smiling Gardens bless,
Both with their fragrant Scent, and gaudy Dress.
Hence the white Lilly in full Beauty grows,
Hence the blue Violet, and blushing Rose.
He sung how Sunbeams brood upon the Earth,
And in the Glebe hatch such a numerous Birth.
Which way the genial warmth in Summer Storms,
Turns putrid Vapors, to a Bed of Worms.
How Rain transformed by this prolifick Power,
Falls from the Clouds, an animated Shower.
He sung the Embryo's growth within the Womb,
And how the Parts their various Shapes assume.
With what rare Art the wondrous Structure's wrought,
From one crude Mass to such Perfection brought,
That no part useless, none misplaced we see,
None are forgot, and more would Monstrous be.
Such was the Splendour of King Hoel's Feast,
Which ended, Arthur straight retires to rest.
Hoel not so, but with the Britons sat,
Asking of Albion's past, and present State.
Much he inquires of their intestine Jars,
Much of the Picts, and of the Saxon Wars.
At last, requested Lucius to relate,
Prince Arthur's Story, and King Uter's Fate.
Lucius began, the rest attentive wait.
How sad a task do your Commands impose,
That must renew unsufferable Woes?
That must our Grief with fresh Affliction feed,
And make your generous Heart with pity bleed.
Whilst I the dismal Scene of Ills disclose,
And bleeding Albion's ghastly Wounds expose.
The cruel Foes in telling would relent,
And with their Tears, the Spoils they caused, lament.
Pity would Picts and Saxon Breasts invade,
And make them mourn, over the dire Wounds they made.
But since you're pleased to hear our Country's Fate,
I Will pay Obedience, and our Woes relate.
Great Empires, like their Founders, Mortal are,
And the sad marks of Age, and Sickness bear.
Their strong Foundations mouldring wear away,
And sap'd by Time's devouring Teeth, decay.
Triumphant Rome, with Pomp and Grandeur crowned,
Proudly surveyed the Conquered World around.
The Cold and Burning Zone obeyed her Arms,
And either Pole trembled at her Alarms.
Where Storms can beat, or angry Billows foam,
Where Sails can fly, or savage Beasts can roam,
Proud Tyber's swelling Tide no Banks withstood,
That over the Globe rolled her Victorious Flood.
To so sublime a pitch of Power and Fame,
Rome's wise and valiant Sons advanced her Name.
Sons, that she bore when vigorous Youth did crown
Her Limbs with Beauty, and with Strength full grown.
Enervated with Age and Vice at last,
She found her Strength, and Youthful Vigor wast.
Decrepit grown, a puny withered Race
Feeble of Head and Arms, her Womb disgrace.
Of all her Romans, Rome remains bereft,
Old Names alone, with modern Vices left.
The Noble Scipios, and brave Caesar's gone,
A starv'ling Brood puts their great Titles on.
Her Legions now can no new Triumphs sing,
Her molting Eagles hang their sickly VVing.
To break her Yoke the Provinces rebel,
Those she invaded, now she cannot repel.
Fierce Northern Storms chastise old Tyber's Pride,
And to its Banks chase the retreating Tide;
Loud, foaming Torrents, from high Scythian Hills,
From bleaky Continents, and frozen Isles,
In one vast Sea combined, come pouring down
And Rome's fair Cities, and rich Valleys drown.
A barbarous Flood of Vandals, Goths, and Hunns,
Their Banks broke down, the Provinces o'er-runs.
As a tall Oak that Young and Verdant, stood
Above the Grove, it self a Nobler VVood.
His wide extended Limbs the Forest drowned,
Shading its Trees, as much, as they, the Ground.
Young, murmuring Tempests in his Boughs are bred,
And gathering Clouds frown round his lofty Head.
Outrageous Thunder, stormy Winds, and Rain
Discharge their Fury, on his Head, in vain.
Earthquakes below, and Lightning from above
Rend not his Trunk, nor his fixed Root remove:
But then his Strength worn by destructive Age
He can no more his angry Foes engage,
He spreads to Heaven his naked, withered Arms
As Aid imploring, from invading Harms.
From his dishonored Head the slightest Storm
Can tear its Beauties, and his Limbs deform.
He rocks with every Wind, while on the ground
Dry Leaves, and broken Arms lie scattered round.
So Rome decayed.
Britannia's warlike Youth on this pretense,
Is called off from her own, to Rome's defense.
Till the exhausted, weak, deserted Isle,
Tempted fierce Neighbors, to an easy Spoil.
Britannia of her Valiant Son's bereft,
Exposed to every Ravisher is left.
The savage Foes, that did her Anger dread,
And from her Arms, to Wilds and Mountains fled,
Now leave the Coverts, where they sculking staid,
And roaring out, the unguarded Land invade.
A cruel Rout of Northern Scots, and Picts,
The direful marks of barbarous Rage inflicts.
Their Arms from Blood and Ravage never cease,
Where once they basely crouch'd, and fawned for Peace.
Wide Ruin, Desolation, Rapine, Spoil
Rage in the Bowels of the unhappy Isle.
So Wolves, the faithful Mastiffs gone, grow bold,
And fiercely leap into the unguarded Fold.
The trembling Flock they seize with eager Claws,
And tear their mangled Limbs with ravening Jaws.
Till they stand panting with the uneasy load,
O'ercloy'd with Carnage, and oppressed with Blood.
Britannia thus dishonored, spoiled, distressed,
And by her proud, insulting Foes oppressed,
Is forced of stronger Neighbors to implore
That Aid and Help, she used to lend before.
Urged by her Fate, and hard Necessity,
She dreads the Expedient, that she is forced to try.
Hard fate of Princes, that to prop their State
Oppressed and sinking, heap on greater weight!
Fatal Distemper, where we seek for Ease
From Drugs, more dangerous than the sharp Disease.
A Warlike Race in frozen Climates bred,
Leaving their Wilds, by Valiant Captains led,
A fertile Soil, and milder Regions sought,
And won the happy Seats for which they fought.
Bold by Success, that waited on their Arms,
They still advanced in thick, Victorious Swarms.
Till Seas as wild, opposed their Torrent's Force,
And watery Banks restrained their rapid Course.
They stretched their Seats along the Belgian Coast,
No Soil, can more of Nature's Favor boast.
No Region's blessed with more Indulgent Beams,
With fatter Glebe, with more, or sweeter Streams.
The Warlike Saxons here their Empire reer'd,
With Plenty crowned, and by their Neighbors feared.
King Vortigern unable to oppose
The barbarous Picts, and fierce Albanian Foes,
With humble Language, and rich Presents prayed
This mighty Nation, to afford him Aid.
The Saxon Princes with his prayer complied,
Britannia was too fair, to be denied.
As Friends they landed on our naked Coasts,
And still poured on their fresh, unnumber'd Hosts.
They chased indeed the barbarous Picts away,
But seized, themselves, the Kingdom as their Prey.
The Lyon's Title to the Crown they plead,
As Friends received, as Conquerors obeyed.
No more let States vexed with Intestine Wars,
Call in great Princes to compose their Jars.
What Britons by their sad Deliverance won,
Was by a stronger Foe, to be undone.
It Is true, oppressed, they did their Wrongs resent,
But 'twas too late, their Counsels to repent.
Britannia's weak, precarious King obey
The proud Protector's Arbitrary Sway.
Our Forts, and Navies, and the chief Commands,
Were, on Pretense of Caution, in their Hands.
The insatiate Leeches do for ever crave,
And for their Service, ask us, all we have.
Our strength is spent, and barbarous Avarice
Draws all our Wealth into her deep Abyss.
Rapine and Murder all our Cities fill,
Our haughty Friends take leave to Spoil and Kill.
These dire Protectors armed with Lawless Power,
The Plowman's Hopes, and Merchant's Gains devour.
What we prepare, the ravenous Harpys eat,
And from our frighted Children tear their Meat.
We starve and dye, while they possess our Food,
Grow Sleek with Ease, and Fat with Spoil and Blood.
Villains dishonor Virgins in our sight;
And bloody Ruffians break our Doors by Night.
To seek redress, and of our wrongs complain,
Was but to add Derision to our Pain.
How bitter then were sad Britannia's Moans,
What deep fetched Sighs were heard, what deadly Groans?
Betrayed and ruined by a treacherous Friend,
We saw the Error that we could not mend.
We cursed our Folly, but we cursed too late,
And all that our mistake should imitate.
We wished ten Thousands Woes and Plagues might light
On their cursed Heads, that should again invite
Victorious Kings, with Foreign Arms to bless
Their Native Country, and their Wrongs redress,
They Will readily assist your Cause, and fight
To do, to injured States, and Princes, Right.
But still they keep, what by their Arms, is won,
Great Monarchs conquer for themselves alone.
They want a fair Pretente to seize the Prey,
They come as Friends, but will as Masters stay.
Thus Albion fared, may Heaven her Sons restrain,
From splitting on this fatal Rock again.
In vain we strove to break the servile Yoke,
Our impotent Attempts new Wrongs provoke.
At last, no greater Evils left to fear,
We took fresh Hope, and Courage from Despair.
Fury from Ruin sprung raged in our Veins,
And Death's seemed lighter than the Saxon Chains.
Each freeborn Briton thought the Choice more brave,
To die their Victim, than to live their Slave.
We that could never the Tyrant's Yoke endure,
Boil with Revenge, now Slaves to Foreign Power.
King Uter's Breast swells with distracting Rage;
Whose wounded Soul, no Language could assuage.
Ashamed his Country's Freedom to outlive,
He takes the Councils, Grief and Fury give.
His Knights together called attentive wait,
While Uter sits on his high Chair of State.
His troubled Looks revealed his inward Wound,
And Storms of Fury on his Forehead frowned.
Who thus began, you see what Tides of woe,
What angry Seas over all your Country flow.
The insulting Saxon claims our Land, and draws
From greater power, the Justice of his Cause.
Through all our Towns our Foes triumphant ride,
Wearing their awful Title by their side.
They shed your Blood, and helpless Maids deflower,
Exhaust your Treasure, and your Land devour.
A faithless Nation, that no Rule of Right
Reveres as Sacred, but superior Might.
We often our Fate in bloody Fields have tried,
But Heaven has Victory, to our Arms denied.
Egyptian Plagues lay wast our ruined Land,
No Moses here, holds his controlling Wand.
Humbly invoked Heaven will perhaps relent,
And of its fierce, accustomed wrath repent.
Perhaps the Saxons Crimes with louder Cries,
For greater Vengeance importune the Skies.
Let us however make one strong Effort more,
Our Country's Peace, and Freedom to restore.
We'll take the Field, 'twill gain us greater Fame,
To perish there, then here, with Grief and Shame.
My British Heart cannot brook the Inglorious Chain,
I Will fall with Honor, or with Honor reign.
Tumultuous Passions, Wrath, Revenge, and Shame
Invade our Breasts, and our galled Souls inflame.
Strait, with one Voice we all for Arms declare,
And every Breast already feels the War.
Resolved to make the vanquished Saxons fly,
Or in the just and brave Attempt to die.
With Fury urged, we part from Uter's sight,
Resolved for Freedom, and our Native Right.
Through all the Towns we spread the loud Alarm,
And animated all our Men to Arm,
To vindicate their ravished Country's cause,
To banish Foreign Gods, and Foreign Laws.
It Is strange, how soon the Britons Blood was fired,
What Life and Hope their drooping Hearts inspired.
They saw fair Liberty extended ly,
The Saxon Whips and Torments lying by.
They view her squallid Face, exhausted Veins,
And beauteous Limbs eat in, with rusty Chains.
They heard her mournful Groans, and piercing Cries,
Her interrupted Sobs, and dying Sighs.
They saw from gaping Wounds the gushing Blood
Enrich the Pavement, with a noble Flood.
While Pity, Mercy, Hope in Sorrow drowned
To finish the sad Scene, stood weeping round.
The Britons rave, resolving her defense,
And vow her Rescue at their Blood's expense.
In Albion this fair Emp'ress still obeyed,
An uncontested Scepter ever swayed.
As Universal Soul she Life diffused,
And Warmth to all the heaving Mass infused.
She ever gave to all true Britons Hearts
More Vigor, than their own warm Blood imparts.
It Is quickening Liberty, that gives us Breath,
Her Absence more, than that of Life, is Death.
Such love to Liberty the Britons show,
Such were her Charms, and may they still be so.
May never Briton ceasing to be Brave,
Submit his Neck, content to be a Slave.
May those be doubly cursed that would betray
Their Country's Freedom, to a Foreign Sway.
Our Men enraged, in numerous Bodies meet,
Arm, Arm, was heard the Cry in every Street:
The Ploughman hastens to a nobler Toil,
Unyokes his Ox, and leaves untilled the Soil.
Abandons all his Hopes, and rustic Care,
Lays down his Goad, and shakes the warlike Spear.
The Tradesman quits his Shop, and takes the Field,
And makes his thirst of Gain, to thirst of Honor yield.
Armed Tenants crowd about their Valiant Lords,
And full of Courage, wave their threatening Swords.
Near Sorbiodunum's stately Walls, a Town
For Strength and Beauty, of the first Renown,
Whose spacious Plains rich Seas of waving Corn,
And lowing Herds, and woolly Flocks adorn;
Our Universal Rendezvous was set,
Where all our Squadrons, and Battalions met.
Mean time the Cautious Saxon was alarmed,
And to dispel the gathering Tempest, armed.
Octa the famous Hengist's Son, a bold
And warlike Prince, did then the Scepter hold.
Hengist that did the first our Land invade,
And brought to Albion his destructive Aid.
The Fifth from mighty Odin, whose great Name,
Had tired the flaggy Wings of weary Fame.
The Stock, from which a Race Illustrious springs
Of numerous Hero's, and Victorious Kings.
That founded Empires, and that living led
Their Conquering Armies, and their God, when dead.
They soon the Hills by their long Marches gain,
And with their Troops overspread the spacious Plain.
We with their hasty March alarmed, prepare
To guard our Camp, and wait the approaching War.
Our Parties now in rude Rencounters tried
Their Courage, still the advantage on our side.
The advancing Host at last appeared in sight,
But Toil and wearing Day, deferred the Fight.
Now Night advancing, draws her Sable Train
Along the Air, and Shades the Etherial Plain.
King Uter with his Lords in Council sat,
Things of the important Juncture to debate.
Where Measures were concerted to oppose
With warlike Arts, and Force, the impending Foes.
Their Provinces the great Commanders share,
And from the Council to their Posts repair.
Where they their Troops dispose, and Orders give,
How the Invading Saxon to receive.
Encampt we lay on advantageous Ground,
With strong Entrenchments, and high Works around.
Our cheerful Troops great Joy and Courage show,
And from the Works defy the powerful Foe.
All things disposed with Military Care,
We wait in Arms, the approach of Day and War.
Now did the Morn disclose her smiling Ray,
And from the East let forth the important Day.
To bloody Labor all things did invite,
And sounding Trumpets Martial Heat excite.
Heaven's starry Roof resounds with warlike Noise,
With Horses Thunder, and their Riders Voice.
The Saxons and the Britons stand prepared,
Those to Attack, and these, their Posts to Guard.
King Octa leads his numerous Army on,
And at their Head in dazzling Armor shone.
Drawn on the Right our ranged Battalions stood,
Our Left a River Guards, the Rear, a Wood.
Octa here makes his warlike Columns halt,
Detaching Horsa to begin the Assault.
Whose chosen Troops a furious Onset make,
With no less Brav'ry, ours sustained the Attack.
They mount our Works, and our high Ramparts Scale,
And with projected Fires our Men Assail.
Our Troops unbroken stout Resistance make,
And always forced the Invading Saxon back.
As when a Mold repels the Invading Seas,
Protects the Ships, and gives the Harbor Peace.
The foaming Tempest on high Billows rides,
And Storms with watty Troops, it is lofty Sides.
The unshaken Structure all their Fury braves,
And stops the Current of the Insulting Waves,
The angry Seas break on the Opposing Shore,
And beaten back with Indignation roar.
No less unmoved our Valiant Britons stood,
Against the Insults of the Saxon Flood.
Fresh Bodies still poured on, their loss supply,
But still Repulsed, they from our Trenches fly.
Enraged, about our Lines King Octa flew,
To find where best he might the Assault renew.
To see what place lay most exposed, and where
Our Troops did on the Works but thin appear.
As when a Wolf pinched by Nocturnal Cold,
And Hunger-starved, scours round the lofty Fold.
He licks his rabid Jaws, and seems possessed
Already of his Prey, and bloody Feast.
He offers often to enter, while the Lambs
Affrighted, tremble round their bleating Dams.
So Octa thirsts for Blood, and scouring round,
Surveys our Lines, and well observes the Ground.
Now with fresh Rage his Troops our Walls ascend,
Which we with Showers of Darts and Stones defend.
What Shouts, what noise of Arms the Air confound?
What Ruin, what slain Heaps deform the ground?
The Earth grows slippery all distained with Blood,
Which fills the Ditches with a Crimson Flood.
The Dead make Bulwarks, which the living Climb,
That in the Air, rise like our Walls, sublime.
O'erpower'd and weakened by the Men they lost,
And Faint with Toil, the Britons quit their Post.
Thrice the Invading Saxon forced our Lines,
And to their Arms, thrice Victory inclines.
The Valiant Uter that had still withstood
Their fiercest Troops, all smeared with Dust and Blood.
Who still to Posts of greatest danger flew,
And with unerring Arms their Squadrons slew.
Who spread fresh Life and Vigor where he came,
And in our Breasts renewed the Martial Flame.
For where we saw his shining Arms appear,
Our Men revived, and straight forgot to fear;
Observing his disordered Troops retired,
His boiling Soul distracting Passion fired.
He spurs his furious Steed, and Thundering through
The thickest Ranks of the Victorious Foe,
Stay, foolish Britons, stay, he cries from far,
Save yet your Country, and renew the War.
Come follow me your King, I Will lead you on,
And chase the Saxons from the Posts they have won.
The Britons Hearts were touched with generous shame,
Love to their Country, and to Martial Fame,
With noble Ardor does their Souls inflame.
Their Leaders Rally all the Troops that fled,
And Charge the Foe, King Uter at their Head.
With unresisted Fury they Attack
The Saxon Troops, resolved to force them back.
Now what Destruction, what wide Ruin reign,
What heaps of slaughtered Saxons load the Plain?
Now armed with hissing Death thick Arrows flew,
And outstretcht Arms as fatal Iavelins threw.
Then what vast Havoc did the Sword employ?
What Troops did Uter's single Hand destroy?
What severed Limbs lay scattered on the ground,
What Streams of Blood gush from each ghastly wound,
What Shields and Spears in the red Deluge drowned?
Here first brave Arthur did his Courage prove,
His Age then fitter, for the Field of Love.
God-like his Face, and God-like was his Mind,
To virtuous Deeds, and warlike Games inclined.
The Down-of-Manhood on his Face appears,
And blooming Beauty graced his youthful years.
Yet wise and manly, far beyond his Age,
His early Deeds the Hero did presage.
Till now the Woods and Forests were his Joy,
Where he the Savage Kind strove to destroy,
That did the Herds, and bleating Flocks annoy.
He chased the Fox, the ravenous Wolf and Bear
His Country's Pest, died by his fatal Spear.
The People blessed him, as a Savior sent,
And thought kind Heaven, some great Deliv'rer meant.
He never before had braced the Helmet on,
Nor in the Field in polished Armor shone.
His Sword had never been stained with humane Gore,
Nor had he gripped the Shield, or Gauntlet wore
His Country's Cause, and Military Fame,
Invite the Youth to chase a nobler Game.
No more his thoughts his rural Sports pursue,
Tyrants and savage Men he will now subdue.
For warlike Toil he leaves the gameful Wood,
And flesht his Courage first in Saxon Blood.
The greatest Captains the brave Youth esteemed,
He fought like Mars, though Mercury he seemed.
Like some fair Cherub, or the Beamy God,
He waved his flaming Sword, and through their Squadrons rode.
His youthful Veins Heroic Ardor fired,
And more than humane Force his Breast inspired,
For the great Deeds his fatal Arms archiev'd,
Were by the amazed Spectators scarce believed.
At last amidst the Foe advanced too far
Alone he long sustained the unequal War.
Surrounding Throngs the fainting Youth oppressed,
And Showers of Death flew pointed at his Breast.
His weary Arm supports his Shield with Pain,
And his bruised Armor Streams of Blood distain.
Here the young Hero had been crushed, and all
Our Hopes and Joy had perished in his Fall;
Had not brave Malgo a Dimetian Chief,
Forced the thick Foes, and flown to his Relief.
Then, when the warlike Youth was most distressed,
And Elfrick's Sword was falling on his Crest
With dreadful Sway, Malgo its Fury broke,
And on his Shield received the mighty Stroke.
The Prince thus guarded from the fatal Blow,
Bold Malgo's Spear transfixt the audacious Foe.
Grovelling in Death he murmured on the Ground,
And poured his Life out, from his gaping Wound.
Here Vortipor advancing did attack
Their plying Troops, and forced the Saxon back.
While Octa's wavering Men began to yield,
And to pursuing Uter quit the Field.
As when a Lion, that with Fury ran
To seize by Night, some weary Caravan,
That lay encampt on an Arabian wild,
Repulsed by Fires, and of his Prey beguiled,
With hideous Roar he raves at his Defeat,
Often stands, looks back, and makes a sour Retreat.
King Octa's Soul like Indignation fired,
That raving with his vanquished Men retired.
But, oh, how soon was this serener Day
By Clouds, and rising Tempests chased away?
How short a space could we our Conquest boast,
How soon were all our Hopes of Freedom lost?
Won by the potent Charms of Saxon Gold,
Carvil his Prince, and Native Country sold.
He in Indulgent Uter's Bosom lay,
And did the Secrets of his Breast betray.
He on his Conduct, and his Faith relied,
In Peace and War alike his treacherous Guide.
He held the most important Trusts of State,
Nor could his Treasons Uter's Love abate.
Unhappy Prince, that still his Foes believed,
Only by Ruin to be undeceived!
To Friends ingrate, his Foes be entertained,
Thus lost the one, but not the other gained.
Wisely undone, he knew his Friends too late,
By his own Prudence managed to his Fate.
Our Prayers and Warnings tired his Ears in vain,
Persidious Councils only could obtain.
Rough Truth, and loyal Bluntness galled his Ear,
That only soft, melodious Sounds could bear.
His firm and loyal Friends, though hardly used,
Looked on enraged, to see their Prince abused.
Though some grown cold, ceased to lament his Fate,
For Will and Choice, Compassion still abate.
Pity a Prince whose Virtues shone so bright,
Should let so dark a Cloud obscure their Light!
To him and us this Weakness fatal proved,
That Men suspected were employed and loved.
So Carvil was.
Who labored after Octa's late Retreat,
To more than balance his, with our Defeat.
The Traitor during all the bloody Day,
Found not the Means, our Army to betray.
But when the Sun drew off his radiant Train,
And left the Empress of the Night to reign.
Then Carvil opened his black Scene of Guilt,
Wherein such Seas of British Blood were spilt.
He by confiding Hands to Octa sent,
To let the Saxon know his dire Intent
To give him Entrance to our Camp by Night,
Whither his Arms he did with speed invite.
Octa whose Arts and purchased Treasons won,
More Towns and Battles, then his Sword had done.
So fair a Season offered, not delayed,
But straightway marched our Army to invade.
Carvil mean time his Creatures had prepared,
To yield the Posts, their Duty was to guard.
Revolving Cynthia with her doubtful Light,
Had now o'erpass'd the Noon of wearing Night.
When Octa's chosen Troops approached the Gate,
Where to admit their Arms the Traitors wait.
The furious Saxon straight our Camp invades,
Beneath the Covert of the silent Shades.
Their unexpected Arms our Men assail,
Dissolved in Sleep, and wearied with their Toil.
What Carnage now the raging Saxons make,
Our Camp converted to a bloody Lake.
They first the brave Dunwallo resting found,
His Cuirass, Helm, and Iavelin lying round,
And with their Spears transfixt him on the ground.
His generous Soul flew upwards with Disdain,
To be massacred, not in Battle slain.
Morisso next with clattering Swords alarmed
Waked with the Noise, but naked and unarmed
His Side pierced through by Horsa's Javelin, fell
Enraged he should his Life, so cheaply sell.
Then Offa's Spear pierced Capor's Bosom through,
His Soul to Heaven through the wide Passage flew,
Leaving his Body drowned in purple Gore,
None served his Prince, or loved his Country more.
Edwal a Leader of unblemished Fame,
Who from the Banks of fair Sabrina came
Fell by Morino's Spear, and by his Side
Brave Adomar, by Balda's Javelin died.
Then Meirick in his Breast a fatal Wound
Received, and lay extended on the Ground.
Next Catel who excelled in youthful Charms;
Was slain by great Romondo's conquering Arms,
The glittering Steel did through his Bowels pass,
The Youth expired, and with him Amel's Race.
And now what Slaughter reigned, what Heaps of dead,
What Ruin over the blood Camp was spread?
Through the brown Shades at last, they found the way
To the Pavilion, where King Uter lay.
Who soon awakened with the Clamor, rose,
And formed his Troops the Invaders to oppose.
Long their unequal Force he did repel,
Till pierced by Cerdick's fatal Spear, he fell.
Urged to retire, Arthur our Prayer withstood,
Though faint with Labor, Wounds and Loss of Blood:
We pressed him our remaining Hopes to spare,
And not of Albion's Fortune to despair.
He does at last to our entreaties yield,
And with Reluctant Steps forsakes the Field.
We through the Wood retreated, where the shade
With Cynthia's Rays, uncertain Twilight made.
When the succeeding Day declined, we came
To Alda's Gates, a Port of ancient Fame.
Where we the Night in various Sorrows spent,
Now Uter, now our Country we Lament.
Just Catel's now, now great Dunwallo's Fate,
And faithful Edwal's fall, fresh Grief create.
While our sad Minds endured so rude a Storm,
Entering the Room great Gabriel's God-like Form,
Mild Glory, and Celestial day diffused,
Advanced, he these kind words to Arthur used.
Now Albion sinks beneath the Saxon weight,
So Heaven Decrees, it is so ordained by Fate.
But after ten times the Revolving Sun,
His Crooked Race, has through the Zodiac run,
The Clouds dispelled, propitious Heaven shall smile,
On Uter's House, and this reviving Isle.
Octa shall feel just Heaven's revenging Stroke,
And Albion's Youth shall break the Saxon Yoke.
Mean time, brave Prince, whom universal Love
Attends beneath, and Grace Divine above.
To Neustrian Odar's Court with speed repair,
Go, Albion's Hopes, and my great Trust and Care.
Go, Albion's Hopes with Triumph to return,
And Rescue those, that shall your absence mourn.
That said, his Heavenly Glory he withdrew,
And to the Immortal Seats of Happy Spirits flew.
Now the fair Morn smiles with a Purple Ray,
Clearing before the Sun the Eastern Way.
Whose radiant Train pours from the Gates of Light,
And the new Day does to new Toil invite.
We the Celestial Message to obey,
On a stout Ship, that in the Haven lay
Ready to Sail, embark and have away.
The Sky serene, a fresh and prosperous Gale,
Sprang from the Shore, and swelled out every Sail.
Albion's white Cliffs and Towers we quickly lost,
Standing our Course strait to the Neustrian Coast.
Where when the Sun twice starting from the East,
Had ran his Race, and reached the falling West.
We safe arrived at fair Cartinia's Port,
And took our way from thence to Odar's Court.
Odar, a Prince indulgent, valiant, good,
Allied to Uter by the Mother's Blood,
The barbarous Goths Incursions, then withstood.
His beauteous Queen with Joy the Prince received,
Her Words our Grief, her Gifts our Wants relieved.
Here we to ease our troubled Minds remained,
Till Arthur perfect Strength and Vigor gained.
Then taking leave we straight direct our way
Unto the Camp, where Odar's Forces lay.
And as we passed to mitigate our Grief,
And to our Woes to give Divine Relief.
From his blessed Tongue such Heavenly Language flows,
As did the greatness of his Mind disclose.
We thought some God-like Cherub to us spoke,
When from his Lips these high Expressions broke.
Heaven's Offspring with divine Contentment blessed,
Enjoy the Empire of a guiltless Breast.
Though spoiled by prosperous Robbers, still they find,
The large Possessions of a peaceful Mind.
Content alone can all their wrongs redress,
Content, that other name for Happiness.
Free from Desire, they are as free from want,
And from the Cares, that envied Greatness haunt.
It Is equal, if our Fortunes should augment,
And stretch themselves to the same vast Extent
With our Desires, or those Desires abate,
Shrink, and Contract themselves, to fit our State.
Poised on their own unshaken Base they view,
All the Vicissitudes, that Time can show.
They, like tall Mountains, are advanced so high,
That the low Clouds do all beneath them fly.
Hence while loud Storm's inferior Seats molest,
They undisturbed, enjoy soft Peace and Rest.
These Men that suit their wishes to their State,
And pleased still with themselves, enjoy their Fate:
Whose modest Passions Reason's Nod obey,
Are greater Kings, than those who Scepters sway.
They can the Triumphs of a Court despise,
And the rich Toys, that charm deluded Eyes.
They rather choose to tame their Thirst, than have
All the Supplies their Feverish Drought can crave.
Desires for Freedom first make humble Suit,
And modestly demand the unlawful Fruit.
But when set loose, they know not where to stay,
But lawless through the World's Dominions stray.
So subterranean Vapors, that contained
In some close Cavern, are with Ease restrained,
When once released, ungovernable grow,
And prove fierce Storms, that no Resistance know.
The unhappy Man slave to his wild Desire,
By feeding it, foments the raging Fire.
His Gains augment his unextinguish'd Thirst,
With Plenty Poor, and with Abundance Cursed.
But greater Minds, that can themselves subdue,
Preserve their Peace, and still their Joys renew.
They never by a Vile, or Impious Course,
Protect their Wealth, from rising Tempests force.
They face the Storm, and stand its fiercest Shocks;
Bold as the Winds, unshaken as the Rocks.
No Tempest that invades the ambitious Breast,
Can the calm Region of their Mind molest.
So Winds, that Rivulets disturb, will play
In harmless Breezes, on the wider Sea.
Sour Discontent that quarrels with our Fate,
May give fresh smart, but not the old abate.
Envenomed with its Sting each harmless loss,
Grows wondrous sharp, and proves a deadly cross.
The uneasy Passion's disingenious Wit
The Ill reveals, but hides the Benefit.
It makes a Toy press with prodigious weight,
And swells a Molehill, to a Mountain's height.
So melancholy Men lie down, and groan,
Pressed with the burden of themselves alone.
Crushed with Fantastic Mountains they despair,
Their Heads are grown vast Globes too big to bear.
A little Spark becomes a raging Flame,
And each weak Blast, a Storm too fierce to tame.
So peevish is the quarrelsome Disease,
No prosperous Fortune can procure it Ease.
Their Breasts are never from inbred Tempests free,
Restless as Winds, and troubled as the Sea:
The Pleasure now they seek would bring Content;
But when enjoyed, 'twas somewhat else, they meant.
Some absent Happiness they still pursue,
Dislike the present Good, and long for New.
The Man now thinks he sees his Bliss, and flies
With greedy Arms to grasp the gaudy Prize.
But then enquiring what his Hopes have won,
Vain Man, he finds the cheating Shadow gone.
Often does the fair Illusion by him stand,
But when pursued gives back, and mocks his hand.
Sometimes he sees the beck'ning Phantome here,
That, when he follows, does elsewhere appear.
The Wretch though Tantalized, and always crossed,
Yet still pursues, though still that Labor's lost.
The God-like Arthur with such pious words,
Divine Instruction, and Delight affords.
And while his Language with a Heavenly Flame
Thus warmed our Breasts, to Odar's Camp we came;
Where to the Neustrian King the Prince addressed,
Who all the highest Signs of Love expressed.
The Royal Exile he embraced with Tears,
And by these tender words himself endears.
King Uter's Fall, your loss, and Albion's Fate,
Wound me with Grief too mighty to relate.
Long to Misfortunes, and great Wrongs inured,
I pity those, that have like Ills endured.
You are a Stranger here, but not your Name,
Your early Worth is told aloud by Fame.
Arthur's preserved to be the Saxons dread,
And Rear oppressed Britannia's drooping Head.
While you are safe, Britannia must revive,
And Uter still in Valiant Arthur live.
While you survive, King Octa's Fears remain,
And Albion hopes to break her ponderous Chain.
Heroes are for Heroic Deeds designed,
And noble Work, attends a noble Mind
Mean time, while here your Choice is to reside,
No Succors, no Supplies shall be denied.
And if your Britons banished from their home,
Drawn by their Prince's Fame, shall hither come;
Briton and Neustrian shall like Treatment find,
I Will be to both, without Distinction, kind.
And when mild Days shall your Return invite,
My Arms shall Aid you, to assert your Right.
The Prince replied:
Divine Compassion melts your Royal Breast,
And makes your Bounty flow on all distressed.
Like Heaven, you Succors to the Afflicted grant,
Comfort their Sorrows, and supply their Want.
You Crush Oppressors, to the Oppressed are kind,
Such generous Deeds reveal a God-like Mind.
Over Uter's House the Saxon Power prevails,
And sad Britannia her dire Fate bewails.
The World's supreme Director so ordains,
Hence in my Soul no murmuring Passion reigns.
Pleased or Contented still I meet my Fate,
Would not be Impious, though Unfortunate.
Your generous Offer of Protection here,
With such engaging Language, such an Air,
As Love and Friendship seek out to Endear;
Persuade, that here my Refuge is designed,
Till Albion grows more Just, and Heaven more Kind.
Here your Example shall my Mind prepare,
For all the high Concerns of Peace and War.
Till Albion call us back, I Will here remain,
And in your Service shall grow fit to Reign:
Here in the Camp the pious Briton staid,
To whom the Neustrian Chiefs great Honor paid.
For his high Merit could not be concealed,
His Valiant Deeds the Hero soon revealed.
Loud Fame his God-like Virtues did proclaim,
And either Camp resounds with Arthur's Name.
He still the Posts of highest Danger sought,
And Death and Victory followed, where he fought.
When he advanced, the Goths unnumber'd Swarms
Fled from the Terror of his fatal Arms.
Like Love and Wonder, Camp and Court express,
That did the Hero, this the Saint confess.
His Sword still won fresh Laurels in the Field,
And to his Virtues even Court Vices yield.
And it is more easy to reduce a Fort,
Or win a Battle, then reform a Court.
He the fixed Mounds of trembling Europe stood,
And still repelled the Goths impetuous Flood.
When he appeared, their Men, though fierce and bold,
Grow Chill with Fear, as when at home with Cold.
Through the admiring World his Fame was spread,
The Christians Joy, and barbarous Nations Dread.
Where gagged with Ice the Waves no longer roar,
But with stiff Arms embrace the silent Shore.
Where naked Hills in frozen Armor stand,
Where raging Sirius Fries the thirsty Land,
And rich Pactolus rolls his golden Sand;
Thither his Triumphs and Illustrious Name,
His generous Deeds, and loud Applauses came.
His wondrous Virtues, wondrous Love engage,
That reached Perfection, long before his Age.
Odar embraced him, as an Angel sent
To guard his Throne, and threatened Fall prevent.
He owned his bright Example did support,
The esteem of Virtue in the Neustrian Court.
Their Peace at home proceeded from his Care,
And from his Courage their Success in War.
When we, our hopes of sinking Albion lost,
Made by Divine Command the Neustrian Coast,
The Gothic Arms that Kingdom had o'errun,
Surpised their Forts, and fairest Cities won.
All Banks born down, so high the Deluge rose,
Before King Odar could its Course oppose.
'Twas then the young Deliverer Arthur came,
To drive the Goths, and win Immortal Fame.
He soon reduced the Cities, and restored
A peaceful Country, to its peaceful Lord.
Mean time the British Knights oppressed at home,
Drawn by his Fame, to find a Leader come.
So thick they Land, our Troops were numerous grown,
And Arthur led an Army of his own.
Ten times the Sun had passed his oblique way,
By turns contracting, and increasing Day,
Darting to either Pole a warmer Ray.
And now the British Lords, who though oppressed
The Western Region of their Isle possessed.
Whither retreating they remained secure,
And from their Hills defied the Saxon Power;
Encouraged by his warlike Fame, invite
The Valiant Arthur to assert his Right.
To make a bold Descent upon their Coast,
And win the Regions back that Uter lost.
Ten chosen Orators were straight dispatched,
The chief whose charming Tongue was never matched,
Was the great Tylon, whose Immortal Worth,
Raises to Heaven the Isle that gave him Birth.
A sacred Man, a venerable Priest,
Who never spoke, and Admiration mist.
Of Good and Kind he the just Standard seemed,
Dear to the Best, and by the worst esteemed.
A generous Love diffused to Humane Kind,
Divine Compassion, Mercy unconfined,
Still reigned Triumphant in his God-like Mind?
Greatness and Modesty their Wars compose,
Between them here a perfect Friendship grows.
His Wit, his Judgment, Learning, equal rise,
Divinely humble, yet Divinely Wise.
He seemed Express on Heaven's high Errand sent,
As Moses Meek, as Aaron Eloquent.
Nectar Divine flows from his Heavenly Tongue,
And on his Lips charming Persuasion hung.
When he the sacred Oracles revealed,
Our ravished Souls in blessed Enchantments held,
Seemed lost in Transports of Immortal Bliss,
No simple Man could ever speak like this.
Armed with Celestial Fire his sacred Darts
Glide through our Breasts, and melt our yielding Hearts.
So Southern Breezes, and the Spring's mild Ray,
Unbind the Glebe, and thaw the Frozen Clay.
He triumphed over our Souls, and at his Will
Bid this touched Passion rise, and that be still.
Wolves, Tigers, grisly Lions did admire,
As Poets feign, Orpheus's melodious Lyre.
Charmed with sweet Tylon's Voice, a Kind more wild,
More fierce and savage, grow divinely Mild.
Lord of our Passions he with wondrous Art,
Can strike the secret movements of our Heart;
Release our Souls, and make them soar above,
Winged with Divine Desires, and Flames of Heavenly Love.
He still conveyed sublime, Seraphick Sense,
In unaffected Strains of Eloquence.
Easy and wonderful is all he says,
Does both Delight, and Admiration raise.
His pious Soul did in sad Accents mourn
Britannia's Chains, and Pagan Gods return.
But hoped, kind Heaven would free, by Arthur's hand
Of Barbarous Laws, and Gods, the afflicted Land.
With the great Tylon young Pollandor went,
Famed for his Valor, and of high Descent.
With these wise Galbut and Mordennan join,
Whose Virtues vye with their Illustrious Line.
Valiant Giralden worn with War and Age,
Does in the Important Embassy engage.
Gisan was added, a Dobunian Knight,
Bold in the Senate, and as Brave in Fight.
Hobar, Mansellan, Cadel, Milo, Skilled
In Arms and Eloquence, the number filled.
Such Orators they chose, fit to excite
The Pious Arthur, and his Arms invite.
Thus Tylon to the pious Prince addressed,
And found the passage open to his Breast.
Britannia crushed beneath the Saxon Yoke,
Does with her mournful Prayer your Arms invoke.
Enslaved by Foreign Power, Distressed, Undone,
She sues for Aid to you, her Valiant Son,
And hopes for Succor from your Sword alone.
Octa all Right, and ancient Law subverts,
And uncontrolled Tyrannick Power asserts.
His Lawless Will grasps Arbitrary Sway,
And British Slaves, without Reserve, Obey.
The sacred Bounds and Lines, which Right and Law
Round all those just and happy Kingdoms draw;
Which from the Wast of Tyranny they gain,
Where Uproar, Rage, and wild Confusion reign,
These broken down, Octa does open lay,
And throw the goodly Island up a Prey
To Furies, that in lawless Kingdoms stray.
Britannia by the Conqueror ravished first,
Then given to Priests, and Soldiers raging Lust;
Wretched Britannia, sunk in deep Despair,
Beats her white Breasts, and tears her golden Hair.
Dying with Anger, Shame and Grief, she lies,
And Floods of Tears gush from her beauteous Eyes.
Which swell the silver Tide of mournful Thames,
And grieve old Ocean with the troubled Srreams.
Hear, pious Prince, how to the Neustrian Shore,
Complaining Waves roll the sad Treasure over.
How murmuring Winds wast over Britannia's Sighs,
Can Arthur disregard his Countries Cries?
With words like these, and such a moving Art
As cannot be told, he touched the Prince's Heart.
With so much Life, he spoke sad Albion's Moans,
We thought we felt her smart, and heard her Groans.
Nor did the pious Prince their Prayer oppose,
But soon resolved to ease Britannia's Woes.
To Odar he revealed his high Intent,
Who Ships, and Men, and Arms rejoicing lent:
Supplying all things our Descent required,
And heaping Gifts, more than our selves desired.
Our Ships prepared, with cheerful Zeal and Care,
We went on Board, and soon embarked the War.
Our Anchors weighed, and Topsails loosed a Gale
Sprang up, and swelled the Womb of every Sail.
Old Ocean pleased our bounding Vessels laves,
That with sharp Keels cut through the foaming Waves.
The astonished Saxons see, and fear from far,
The long Succession of the Sailing War.
They spread through all the Isle the loud Alarm,
And trembling Octa hasts his Men to Arm.
We Sailed not long before the Sea ran high,
And gathering Clouds deformed the lowering Sky.
The fearful Storm arose, wherein we lost
The extinguished Day, and on the Billows tossed,
We drove, till forced upon the Armoric Coast.
He ceased, and now the Shades of wearing Night,
Did the pleased Audience to their Rest invite.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK V.
LOvely Aurora makes a mild Essay
With glimmering Dawn, to introduce the Day:
Her rosy Steps the Sun pursues, and Spreads
His smiling Glories on the Mountains Heads.
The Princes rose, and Hoel thus expressed
His friendly Passion, to his Royal Guest.
Your Virtues show you are by Heaven designed
A great Deliv'rer of oppressed Mankind.
You give to Realms with Wars molested, Peace,
And from their Chains tormented Slaves release.
Fair Liberty's and blessed Religion's Cause
Reviving Hopes from your Protection draws.
Your prosperous Arms invading Plagues repel,
And monstrous Gods, and monstrous Tyrants quell.
King Odar's Realm and mine you save, in his
You settle Peace, and Truth divine in this.
And now compassion arms your valiant Hand
To free from barbarous Rage, your native Land.
To vanquish Pagan Darkness, and display
Immortal Light, and pure Etherial Day.
My self will here abide, and Succors lend
Over all the Realm Christ's Empire to extend.
Conan my Son shall on your Triumphs wait,
And when returned, your glorious Deeds relate.
I Will now command that with incessant Care,
My Men assist, your Losses to repair.
Then I Will conduct you to the Druids Grove,
Which Men of heavenly Contemplation love.
Where solemn Walks and awful shade invite
Composed Devotion, and Divine Delight,
Exclude the Sun's, to let in purer Light.
There with your pious Conversation blessed,
New Light will fill my Mind, new Joy my Breast.
The Orders given the Navy's Wants required
The Princes to the Druids Grove retired.
Where Arthur's Language did the King inspire,
With holy Transports, and Seraphick Fire.
Mean time the Armoricans and Britons meet,
All Zealous to Equip the shattered Fleet.
Part to the Groves and woody Hills repair,
And with loud Labor fill the ecchoing Air.
Axes high raised by brawny Arms descend
With mighty Sway, and make the Forest bend.
The Mountains murmur, and the nodding Oaks,
Groan with their Wounds, from thick redoubled Strokes.
The falling Trees desert the neighboring Sky,
Where now the Clouds may unmolested fly.
A shady Harvest lies dispersed around,
And lofty Ruin loads the encumbered Ground.
Part, the hewn Trees draw down with wondrous Toil,
TO enrich the Ocean with the Mountains Spoil.
So fast they came, and in such Order stood,
As Orpheus Lyre had called the obsequious Wood
From their fixed Seats to dance upon the Flood.
Part raise the Masts, now to be shaken more
With furious Winds, then on their Hills before.
Part shape new Ribs, and with industrious Care,
Ships broken Backs, and ghastly Wounds repair.
Part their bruised Sides anoint with unctious Pitch,
Part the carved Sterns, with Paint and Gold enrich.
Part Cables twist, part smeared with Smoke and Sweat,
With vast Cyclopian Strokes huge Anchors beat.
While thus the Britons did their Ships repair,
The Infernal Prince enraged and wreckt with Care,
Swift, as exploded Lightning from the Skies,
A second time to Lapland Mountains flies.
Where the rough Monarch's noisy Palace stands,
Whose awful Nod, the raging Winds commands.
To him thus Lucifer, kind Prince, to you
A second time I for Assistance sue.
The cursed Prince that by your high Command
Your furious Subjects drove on Hoel's Land;
Aided by Hoel does his Fleet repair,
Ready to Albion to transport the War.
Let adverse Winds blow on the troubled Main,
Retard their Project, and their Ships detain.
Till Octa has prepared his warlike Fleet,
The proud Invader on the Seas to meet.
He ceased, the Emperor of the Winds replies,
When you shall ask what rebel Power denies.
Your Realms you rule with uncontested Sway,
Your Post is to command, mine to obey.
That said, he calls his wandering Subjects home,
Eurus and Notus straight obedient come.
Last sluggish Auster to his Den with wet
And flabby Wings, does heavily retreat,
To whom their Prince, let now your Labors cease,
Indulge your Wings, be reconciled to Peace.
Close in your Darksome Prisons sleeping lie,
To gain more Breath to blow, more Strength to fly.
Then down their howling Throats black Sops he threw,
Of Poppies and cold Nightshade made, that grew
On the dark Banks, where Lethe's lazy Deep
Does its black Stores, and drousie Treasure keep,
Rolls its slow Flood, and rocks the nodding Waves asleep.
The strong Enchantments quick Admission find,
And the wild Rout benumming Fetters bind.
They murmur in their Sleep, and strive in vain
To spurn away the unweildy leaden Chain.
Then calling Boreas, says, fly Boreas, fly,
Blow over the Lands and on the Billows lie.
Make have, and to the Armoric Coast repair,
Be thine the spacious Empire of the Air.
Unrivaled, unmolested Reign alone,
Till all thy Force is spent, and all thy Breath is gone.
No Hostile, windy Powers contest thy Reign,
And uncontrolled Dominion of the Main.
Scarce had he ended, when up Boreas springs,
And through the Air spreads out his furious Wings.
He over warm Climes diffuses Northern Spoils,
And the cold Treasures of the frozen Isles.
With blustering War he frights old Ocean's Court,
Buffets the Waves, and raises Storms in Sport.
In vain the impatient Britons spread their Sails,
Loud Boreas keeps them back with adverse Gales.
Proud Lucifer urged with his Rage and Spite,
Back to Britannia takes his airy Flight.
To find the Saxon Monarch, and inspire
His trembling Soul with fresh Infernal Fire.
And now the Night does her black Throne ascend,
And dusky Shades her silent State attend.
While pale-faced Cynthia with her starry Train,
Dart down their trembling Luster on the Main.
The weary Lab'rers their stiff Limbs repose,
And Sleep's soft Hand their drowsy Eyelids close.
All Rest enjoy, but Octa anxious lay,
Wakeful, and longing for returning Day.
His dreadful Crimes affright his startled Soul,
And in his Breast black Tides of Horror roll.
Dire Shapes, and staring Ghosts pass threatening by.
And Streaks of Fire across the Apartment fly.
He hears the Shreaks of those his bloody Hand
Had murdered, or that died by his Command.
He hears the Widows Sighs, and Orphans Moans,
Himself had made, and tortured Prisoners Groans.
The Grounds of pale Despair he sometimes draws,
From Arthur's Valor, and his Righteous Cause.
Sometimes he fears his injured Subjects Rage,
Their vengeful Arms against him will engage.
Then starts, and thinks he hears Prince Arthur's Fleet
Is on the Coast, proclaimed in every Street.
Then Lucifer does Odin's Shape assume,
And with Stern Grace enters King Octa's Room.
His vigorous Limbs had dazzling Armor on,
And round his Head his polished Helmet shone.
His conquering Sword hung down with awful Grace,
And Scars of Honor seam'd his manly Face.
His warlike Hand gripped his Vulcanian Shield,
With rare Devices portrayed on the Field.
With Martial State he strides along the Room,
And shakes at every Step his lofty Plume.
Advancing to the Bed where Octa lay,
He spoke, Son Octa, from celestial Day,
From the blessed Groves, and mild, Elysian Seats,
Thy Father Odin to thy Aid retreats.
To ease thy restless Mind of anxious Cares,
Support thy Hopes, and dissipate thy Fears.
Stand thou unmoved at Arthur's proud Alarms,
Conquest attends thine, and thy Saxons Arms.
He Will sink beneath the Sea's insulting Wave,
Or Landing, find on Shore a surer Grave.
Think on the Spoils and Trophies you have born,
And spreading Laurels on your Temples worn.
Let none that is sprung from my Victorious Race,
At Danger shrink, and my great Stock debase.
Go, have thy Royal Navy to prepare,
Let Ships with Ships encounter, War with War.
On the wide Main th'Invader's Fleet oppose,
Better to meet, than here expect your Foes.
Go Chase their scattered Navy over the Deep,
And thus in Peace, thy envied Empire keep.
He ceased, and with Majestic Pace retired,
And left King Octa with fresh Life inspired.
Who with the Sun arose, resolved to meet
With all his Naval Power, Prince Arthur's Fleet.
He gave Command, the Captains straight resort
To their tall Ships, and leave the wanton Court.
A forward Zeal the busy Sailors show,
Some mend old Ships, and some Equip the new.
With flaming Reeds some their pitched Bellies fry,
Some hoist the Yards, and Canvas Wings apply.
Some from its Cradle launch a rocking Hull,
Some at the Cables strain, and howling pull
Vast Anchors up, some Stores and Arms entomb,
And stow with hidden War the Ship's dark Womb.
The Shores around, and all the Oazy Soil
Resound with Clamor, and the Sailors Toil.
Well Rigged and Manned, the Ships from every Port
To their appointed Rendezvous resort.
The Rivers disembogue, besides their Flood,
Into the Seas a lofty, painted Wood.
And now the Moon had twice the silver Field
Of her fair Orb, with borrowed Glory filled.
Since the uneasy Britons had remained
By adverse Winds, within their Port detained.
Boreas that had his Blasts profusely blown,
His Storms all spent, and bleaky Treasures gone,
With tired and flaggy Pinions now retreats,
To fetch Recruits from wild Laplandian Seats.
Auster does next with milder Blasts prevail,
And for the Britons blows a prosperous Gale.
Now each rough Hero of the Ocean stands
On the high Deck, giving Austere Commands.
Prince Arthur to Embark approached the Shore,
Where the reposing Seas no longer Roar.
But at his Feet obsequious Billows lay,
As Conscious of the Power they must Obey.
Then their broad Backs, subsiding they submit,
Proud to sustain their future Monarch's Fleet.
The lofty Ships on rolling Billows bound,
The Waves in soft Embraces clinging round.
As when the Trojans, in the Mantuan Song
From Africa Sands, to Latium sailed along.
Old Ocean rose up from his rocky Throne,
A Crystal Scepter, and a reedy Crown
His Power confessed, his dewy Head he reer'd
Above the Flood, and smiling on the Waves appeared.
New gathered Banks of Quicksands he removed,
And kindly through the Deep, the Navy should.
So the calm Ocean seemed with equal care,
On its pleased Waves, the British Fleet to bear.
Huge, rolling Porpoisses spout Seas away,
And friendly Dolphins round the Squadrons play.
The floating Castles dance upon the Tide,
And on its foaming Ridge Triumphant ride.
In glorious Lines the painted Squadrons move,
As if the Poets Gods lapsed from above,
In gilded Clouds, were dancing on the Seas
In Masquerade, with the green Deities.
Twice the great Ruler of the Day had hurled
His flaming Orb, around the enlightened World.
When at the early Dawning of the Day,
The Navies in each others Prospect lay.
The Saxon Squadrons cover all the Main,
And with their Prows divide the liquid Plain,
Plying to Windward, Arthur's Men prepare
Their Navy, to receive the advancing War.
Down on their Feet King Octa bravely bore,
Whose long-wing'd Navy strercht, from Shore to Shore.
Both Fleets in Lines of War stood cross the Deep,
And ready to Engage, just Order keep.
They hoist their bloody Flags on either side,
And Death her Jaws does for her Feast provide.
Now the shrill Trumpets sprightly Voice, and all
The Harmony of War, to Combat call.
The Saxon Sailors with a hideous Cry,
Affright the Deep, and rend the Eachoing Sky.
The barbarous Yellings and outrageous Sound
From Rock to Rock, and Shore to Shore rebound.
A furious Fight between the Fleets began,
And bold Selingbert first Attacks their Van.
Now bearded Darts, and fatal Javelins fly,
And Balls of Fire hiss through the enlightened Sky.
Each on his Foe missive Destruction pours,
And Death receives, and gives in feathered Showers.
Thus milder Fate at distance sparing slew,
Till to a closer Fight Selingbert flew,
And on his Foe his massy Grapples threw.
Which clenching fast their ponderous, griping Claws,
The rude Embrace, both Ships together draws.
The Saxons flew on Board with furious Arms,
And on the Decks appear in numerous swarms.
Vogan enraged, did fatal Wounds dispense,
With lavish Hand, and made a brave Defense.
With Battle-Axes, Swords, unweildy Crows,
They clear the Decks of the insulting Foes.
Beat down with ghastly Wounds, some gaspingly,
Others their Arms cast down, for Mercy cry.
Into the Waves some their pale Bodies throw,
And fly from Death above, to Death below.
Down the Ships sides Torrents of Saxon Blood,
With unknown Crimson Dye the astonished Flood.
Upon the Decks, that slaughtered Heaps deform,
Enraged Selingbert pours a second Storm,
Which like a Summers Shower soon disappeared,
By Valiant Vogan and his Britons cleared.
Selingbert thus defeated, boils with Rage,
But forced at last, his Ship to disengage;
He bears away, and quits the unequal Fight,
Providing for his safety, by his Flight.
Octa mean time his Men for Fight prepares,
And fiercely down, on Arthur's Squadron bears.
The spacious sides of his high Ship consumed
Whole Forests, and whole Mountains Spoils entombed.
It self a Fleet across the Billows stood,
Engrossed the Winds, and pressed the laboring Flood.
The lofty, gilded Palace shone from far,
Presenting to the Foe a glorious War.
Bold Octa, and the Valiant Arthur meet,
Which struck a vast Concern through either Fleet.
On this important Action seemed to wait
The British Hero's, and Britannia's Fate.
Both sides with Shouts their fatal Weapons fling,
And winged with Death thick Showers of Arrows sing.
Unerring Darts in hissing Tempest fly,
And carry swift Destruction through the Sky.
Ships rush to Battle with enormous Shocks,
As Towers with Towers encountered, Rocks with Rocks,
So in the Northern Seas when Storms arise
High Rocks of Snow, and sailing Hills of Ice
Against each other with a mighty Crash,
Driven by the Winds, in rude Rencounter dash.
The Sea afflicted foams, the Waves on high,
Tossed by the batt'ring Islands, lave the Sky.
The Crystal Towers break with a fearful Crack,
And on the Billows spread their foaming Wreck.
Vast Sheets of rocky Ice, and broken Isles,
Oppress the laboring Ocean with their Spoils.
On both sides now they call forth all their Rage,
Resolved in closer Combat to engage.
Then Death and Slaughter in sad Triumph reigned,
And Seas of Blood the slippery Decks distained.
Some the Pale Dead into the Ocean heave,
Some in the Ships low Caves the wounded leave.
Prodigious Numbers fell on either Side,
Thin on the Decks they looked, but thick upon the Tide.
For neither Chief ever met a greater Foe,
Both wondrous Skill, and wondrous Courage show.
While Victory poising equal Hope and Fear,
With doubtful Wings hung hovering in the Air.
The wise Prince Arthur whilst on Shore equips,
Their use till then unknown, a sort of Ships,
That since the Deeds of that Important Day,
Among lost Arts in deep Olivion lay.
Till Captains that in after Ages lived,
The long forgotten Stratagem revived.
Bitumen, Sulphur, and Vulcanian Spoils,
From laboring Mountains, and from unctious Soils.
Naptha and Pitch with Skill and Labor wrought,
With hidden Stores of Flame the Vessel fraught.
Like rolling Clouds where Lightning's Seeds remain,
Their swelling Wounds a fiery Birth contain.
Arthur so strange a Ship to Octa sent,
With such Infernal Treasures in it pent.
Which with its grappling Engines fixed, and fired,
The bold Commander to his Friends retired.
The Fire with unextinguish'd Rage, consumes,
The Subterranean Wealth the Ship intombs.
Vast sheets of Flame, and Pitchy Clouds arise,
And burning Vomit, spouts against the Skies.
Tempests of Fire the astonished Heavens annoy,
Fierce, as those Storms, that from their Clouds destroy;
As Aetna from its glowing Roots was torn,
And by its own wild Hurricanes was born
From its old Seat, to float upon the Waves,
With Vulcan's Magazins, and Cyclop's smoking Caves.
The burning Plague adhered to Octa's side,
And the scorcht Ribs the hot Contagion fried.
The spreading Mischief's growth no Force restrains,
The Plague resisted more severely Reigns.
To the tall Masts the raging Flame aspires,
And neighbor sits to Heaven's contiguous Fires.
Octa at last his flaming Ship forsakes,
And in stout Horsa's Vessel Refuge takes.
Here he once more his Royal Standard Rears,
Where on the Deck undaunted he appears,
With cheerful Looks dissembling inward Fears.
He strives the Saxons Courage to excite,
To press the Foe, and still maintain the Fight.
But strives in vain, assisted by the Wind,
The spreading Burnings no Resistance find.
Resistless Flames advance with lawless Power
From Ship to Ship, and through the Fleet devour.
Naked, and half-burnt Hulls with hideous Wreck,
Affright the Skies, and fry the Ocean's back.
Scorcht Bodies, broken Masts, and smoking Beams,
Promiscuous Ruin, float along the Streams.
Deformed Destruction, and wild Horror ride
In fearful Pomp, upon the Crimson Tide.
At last King Octa, dreading longer stay,
Commanding all to follow, tows away;
The Saxon Captains cheerfully obey.
But Lucifer enraged at this Defeat,
Plots to protect, and cover their Retreat.
Summoned to his Pavilion, straight repair
The Demons, that infest the Inferior Air.
With bloated Fiends, that in dark Caves abide,
And over the Subterranean Damps preside.
Last the flow Powers come from their misty Dens,
That rule the Marshes, Lakes, and stagnant Fens.
To whom their Prince, see, how King Octa tows
His shattered Ships, pressed by Victorious Foes.
Go, and protect him from the fierce Pursuit,
And give him time, his Navy to recruit.
Let all your Damps, and lazy Fogs arise,
And with your sluggish Treasures cloud the Skies.
Let your thick Mists repel the unwelcome Light,
And over the Ocean spread a friendly Night.
The humble Powers their haughty Prince obey,
Some from dark Caverns far remote from Day,
From each embowell'd Mount, and hollow Vault
Crude Exhalations, and raw Vapors brought.
Some from deep Quagmires, Ponds, and sedgy Moors,
Drive the dull Reeks, and shove the haizy Stores.
To their appointed Station all repair,
And with their heavy Wings encumber all the Air.
The ponderous Night's impenetrable Steems,
Exclude the Sun, and choke his brightest Beams.
The hovering Clouds the Saxon Fleet embrace,
And wondrous Darkness stops the Briton's Chase.
Octa, Aeneas like, a misty Night
Around him cast, escapes the Briton's Sight.
Now had the Sun diffused the early Day,
From his bright Orb, and chased the Fogs away.
To their known Shore the Saxon Navy flies,
And in their Ports and Rivers safely lies.
Arthur, who while the Shades prevailed, had lain
Under an easy Sail, upon the Main;
Discovering that the Saxon Fleet was lost,
Tacked, and directly stood for Albion's Coast.
He sailed not long, before his Joyful Men
Could from the Masts, their native Country ken.
First the Bolerian Promontory rears
His Head, and as a lofty Wedge appears,
That down into the Deep, had from the Shore,
Run from Danmonian Mines and melted Oar.
Here when the Oazy Shore by ebbing Tides,
Is naked left, around its glittering Sides,
Pale Tinny Oar, and Copper's brighter Vein,
Casts Glimmering Luster over the liquid Plain.
Next they discover the aspiring Hills,
Whose Precious Sides Metallic Treasure fills.
In their dark Caves Cyclopian Lab'rers sweat,
And their vast Blows the ecchoing Hills repeat.
With ghastly Wounds they rend the groaning Earth,
And from its Bowels wrest the massy Birth.
By racking Engines, and redoubled Blows,
She Is forced her hidden Riches to disclose.
Under wide Caldrons, some whole Forest pile,
And melt in purging Flames the wealthy Spoil.
Some in their hot Aetnean Forges sweat,
And glowing Wedges on huge Anvils beat.
Their mighty strokes shake all the bellowing ground,
The neighboring Mountains, and the Vales around,
With subterranean Toil and Noise resound.
They pass the crooked Shore, which Fame of old
Enriched with ponderous Pearl, and scattered Gold.
They view the Rocks with Gems and Treasure blessed,
In verdant Samphire, and Eringo dressed.
Danmonian Crows leaving the Neighboring Hills,
In numerous, noisy Flights, their Feet and Bills
With Native Crimson died, overspread the Sky,
And over the Fleet in Ominous Circles fly.
Not far removed, it is sides a Mountain shows,
Where winding Shores a spacious Bay enclose.
His lofty Head, that flying Clouds invades,
From Shore to Shore the dusky Ocean shades.
Long this wild Seat, as ancient Fame obtained,
A fierce Gigantick Race of Men maintained;
Tall as the Hill, on which the Monsters dwelt,
Whose groaning sides their striding motion felt:
Torn from wild Beasts raw Skins, and grisly Hydes,
A horrid Dress, adorned their hideous sides.
Half roasted Swine their savage Jaws devour,
That stain their squallid Chins with flowing Gore.
In thorny Dens the outstretcht Monsters ly,
Half eaten Limbs, and mangled Bodies by.
With Rapes and Thefts, and endless Murders cloyed,
A fearful Plague, the Region they destroyed.
Weathering the Point with favorable Gales,
Along the Shore the Conquering Navy Sails.
Into the rough Hibernian Seas they came,
That howling Monsters, and dire Gulphs defame.
Which to avoid, close to the Shore they keep,
Where fair Sabrina to her Parent Deep,
Drawing her silver Train along does glide,
Diluting with fresh Streams the Briny Tide.
Lovely Sabrina that for refluent Tides,
Fair Cities, verdant Meadows, flowery Sides,
For Finn'd Inhabitants, and pleasant Streams,
Yields only to her fairer Sister Thames.
Passing these Seas, they view the fertile Soil,
Tilled by Silurian Farmers skilful Toil:
Where the vexed Sea fair Clamorgania laves,
And rolls along the Sand its foaming Waves.
Here Rhemnius gliding by Carphilli's Walls,
Proud of its Roman strength, into the Ocean falls.
Then Ratostibium from the hilly Lands,
Rolls down its rapid Tide, and troubled Sands.
Next they descry an isle of wondrous Fame.
Which the succeeding Ages Barry name.
In its high sides that to the Sea appear,
Dreadful to tell, the astonished Saylors hear
Aetnean Labor, where the bellowing Rocks
Shake with Gigantick Toil, and Thundering Strokes
Of groaning Smiths, sometimes a mighty sledge
On a vast Anvil, beats a flaming wedge.
Now Bellows formed of vast, capacious Hydes,
All Boreas blow from their Aeolian sides.
Now the resisting Flames and Fiery Store,
By Winds assaulted, in wide Forges roar,
And raging Seas flow down of melted Oar.
Sometimes they hear long Iron Bars removed,
And to the sides, huge heaps of Cynders should.
As we advanced the Coast in Prospect lay,
Which the Dimetian Lords did then obey.
Here the opening Land invites with outstretcht Arms,
The troubled Seas, free from the loud Alarms
Of the rough, windy Powers, to take their Ease,
And on its Bosom lie diffused in Peace.
The flowing Waters smooth their surrow'd Face,
And gently roll into the Land's Embrace.
To secret Creeks the weary Billows creep,
And stretched on Oazy Beds securely sleep.
No happy Land along the European Coast,
Can such a fair and spacious Haven boast.
In this wide Station, the Dimetians pride,
The biggest Ships, and greatest Fleets may ride,
Safe from the Insults of the Winds and Tide.
Two lofty Castles with their gilded Towers,
Inlighten, and defend the subject Shores.
Here the Victorious Britons safe arrive,
With all the Joy, long-wish'd for Harbors give.
In frequent Throngs the glad Dimetians stand
Upon the Coast, thick as the unnumber'd Sand.
Their Acclamations and loud Shouts rebound,
From trembling Hills, and shake the Shores around.
The Ships lay rocking, and their Masts bend more
With Britons Breath, than with the Winds before.
The joyful Britons and their Friends debark,
And near the Shore a spacious Camp they mark.
The pious Prince at a fair Castle staid,
That Malgo the Dimetian Lord obeyed.
Now her brown Wings the silent Night displays
Light sprinkled over with Cynthia's silver Rays.
Silence and Darkness all to Rest invite,
And sleep's soft Chains make fast the Gates of Light.
Prince Arthur sleeps, by Summons from on high,
From trembling Joints his active Spirits fly
To the round Palace of the Immortal Soul,
And through the Rooms and dark Apartments roll.
The busy Crowd fills all the laboring Brain,
Bright Fancy's Workhouse, where close Cells contain
Of Forms and Images an endless Train,
Which thither through the waking Senses glide,
And in fair Mem'ry's Magazine abide.
Composed of these, light Scenes and Shows appear,
That still employ the restless Theater.
Divinely moved the Airy Figures take
Their several Ranks, and this bright Vision make.
Prince Arthur on a verdant Eminence
Conversing with King Uter stood, from whence
He views with wondering Eyes, great Lords and States,
Crowned Heads, Victorious Princes, Potentates,
Heroes and Heroines, a glorious Train,
That in long Order filled the subject Plain.
Prince Arthur on the Royal Scene intent,
Demands what this August Assembly meant.
For what end thither come, and who they were
That at the Illustrious Congress did appear.
King Uter then replied: Know pious Son,
That after various bloody Battles won,
You Beauteous Ethelina shall espouse,
The fairest Branch of all King Octa's house.
A Christian Princess of a Pagan Line,
Whose Virtues equal with her Beauty shine.
You shall Triumphant mount the British Throne,
Which has not yet, so great a Monarch known.
Swell not with Pride, the Imperial Seat you gain,
Brings envied Honor, but unenvied Pain.
Your People rule with equal Laws, and know
You're happy, when you make your Subjects so.
Let them a Good, Indulgent Father find,
Be mercifully Just, severely Kind.
Let your bright Virtues Imitators draw,
Glorious Examples have more Force, then Law.
Seek not an uncontrolled and lawless Sway,
Subjects from Love, but Slaves from Fear obey.
And whom the People fear, they quickly hate,
Which Passions in their Prince the like Create.
Hence mutual Jealousies, and deep Designs,
Hence strong Distrust the mouldering State disjoyns.
Diffusing good on all Mankind, you will show
You imitate Heaven's Government below.
The Benefactor will most Honor bring,
And the Deliverer's greater than the King.
Believe no Foreign hostile Power can move
Your Throne, supported by your Subjects Love.
The bright Assembly that surrounds the Hill,
And with their Numbers all the Valley fill,
Are Albion's Hero's, who in future days
Their own, and Albion's Name, to Heaven shall raise.
The Regal Orders that the rest outshine
With glittering Crowns, are the Imperial Line,
That after you, on Albion's Throne shall sit,
Their Names in Fate's Eternal Volumes writ.
The Kings that in the foremost Rank appear,
Who frowning and unpleasant Aspects were;
Whose waning Crowns with faded Luster shine,
Shall after you succeed, first Constantine
Conanus, and the rest of British Line.
These look not with their Native Splendor bright,
But dimly shine, with delegated Light.
Heroic Deeds by great Forefathers done,
Cast all their Glory on them, not their own.
To narrow Bounds their scanty Empire shrinks,
And Britons Grandeur, with their Virtue sinks.
At last their Crimes, offended Heaven provoke,
To Crush their Nation with the Saxon Yoke.
Here Arthur sighed, that his degenerate Race,
Should with inglorious Deeds their Stock debase.
When Uter cried, Observe the Saxon Line,
Where mighty Kings the British Rank outshine.
Crowns on their Heads, and Scepters in their Hand,
All great in War, and born for high Command.
Their Arms the British Empire shall Assail,
And aided by the Britons Crimes prevail.
This mighty Nation quickly shall believe
The Christians God, and Heavenly Light receive.
That Is Ethelbert the first of Saxon Race,
That shall pure Faith, and Truth Divine embrace.
He shall destroy in their own Temples Flames,
Their senseless Gods, of barbarous, Northern Names.
In vain their Priests on helpless Idols call,
They, and their Groves by the same Axes fall.
Fragments of broken Altars, and the spoil
Of ruined Gods, fill all the applauding Isle.
All shall adore the great mysterious King,
And of his Cross the glorious Triumphs sing.
The Spring of Life gilded with Heavenly Beams
Purge guilty Minds, with pure Baptismal Streams.
From hence the Light shall break that shall dispell
The Pagan Shades, that on the Saxons dwell.
Proud Lucifer subdued, flies in despair,
With all the Infernal Powers about the Air,
That with their broad, extended Wings retreat,
To seek a safe, and unmolested Seat:
To fix on Scythian Hills their gloomy Throne,
Or on the Sands fried by the burning Zone.
As when the Storks prepare to change their Clime,
The long-neck'd Nation in the Air sublime
Wheeling, and towering up in Circles fly,
And with their cackling Cries disturb the Sky.
In lingering Clouds they hang, and Leisure give,
For all their feathered People to arrive.
To the Airy Rendezvous all have away,
And their known Leaders noisy Call obey.
Then through the Heavens their trackless Flight they take,
And for new Worlds, their present Seats forsake.
So here the Fiends assembled in the Air,
Quit Albion's Soil, and to wild Lands repair.
Remark that Prince, that in the midst appears,
Seven bright imperial Diadems he wears;
That Is the great Egbert, whose heroic Might,
Shall the dismembered Island reunite.
His Arms shall give him universal Sway,
And all the Saxons shall his Power obey.
See there the great Northumberian Monarch stands,
Edwine his Name that all the Isle commands.
A happy Prince, if his good Angel's Art
Diverts the Mercian Ruffian's bloody Dart.
Saxons and Britons shall obey his Arms,
Himself, the lovely Ethelburga Charms.
Her beauteous Eyes the mighty Monarch fire
Her Words, his Soul with Christian Flames inspire.
Blessed Ethelburga of unrivaled Worth,
That plants Religion in the barren North.
See Alfred there, all shall his Praises sing,
A pious Soldier, and an humble King.
Hero and Bard, able in lofty Verse
His own great Deeds, and Triumphs to rehearse.
Obeyed by all his unresisted Arms,
Shall to their Coasts repel the Danish Swarms.
Into the Seas swept by his potent Hand,
Those Northern Locusts leave the afflicted Land.
The People his wife Laws shall cultivate,
Form their rude Minds, and smooth the unpolished State.
Upon the Verdant Plain where Isis Streams
Have to the Embraces of her Sister Thames.
This mighty Prince shall a famed Empire Found,
Where Learning sits with branching Laurels Crowned.
Where sacred Arts with all their Lettered Train,
In lofty Schools shall unmolested Reign.
Banished from Greece and Rome, no safe Retreat
They Will find, till settled in this Peaceful Seat.
Ages to come, this Seat will Oxford name,
Of which no Time, or Place, shall bound the Fame.
Remotest Nations shall her Wonders know,
Far as Great Britain's potent Navies go.
Learning, her Native growth shall Strangers fetch,
And taught by her, their own rude Countries teach.
The admiring World shall Albion then adore,
Revere her Armies, but her Learning more.
As when the Wisdom of the Eternal Mind,
Rude Chaos labored, and the Mass refined;
The scattered Rays that wandered in the Air,
Did to the Sun's capacious Orb repair;
The shining Colonies poured thick around
Here fixed, and did a glorious Empire Found.
So here the broken Beams of glimmering Arts,
Assembling all their Light from distant parts,
To make bright Oxford's Luminary stay,
That over the World shall spread Celestial Day.
Remark Elfeda there, a Martial Dame,
That by her Arms shall win Immortal Fame.
At last the Princes of the Saxon Line,
From Heavenly Love and Purity decline.
Their Christian Virtues, and pure Zeal abate,
And with them sickens their decaying State.
With Christian Names, their Pagan Crimes they keep,
And deaf to Heaven's loud Threats securely sleep.
Till the fierce Dane sent by supreme Command,
A vengeful Scourge does on their Borders Land.
The Saxon's Guardian Angels called away,
Leave them to hostile Arms, an easy Prey.
Thus Heaven afflicts a Land, when Impious grown,
And from their Throne pulls haughty Monarchs down.
This dreadful Curse, shall by relenting Heaven,
Be soon from sad Britannia's Empire driven.
The Cruel, slothful Dane shall soon decline,
To make way for a nobler Norman Line.
That Prince observe, that moves with so much Grace,
Is the great William of the Norman Race.
A mighty Prince, a Leader Brave, and Wise,
Whose towering Fame shall soar above the Skies.
Heaven does for him Britannia's Crown design,
From which great Stock shall branch a numerous Line
Of mighty Princes, that shall Rule this Isle,
Enriching it with Conquered Nations Spoil.
The Valiant second Henry, see him there,
What Majesty does in his Looks appear?
Through wild Hibernia he shall force his way,
And add four Kingdoms to the British Sway.
Brave Richard see, who from the sacred Coast,
Shall drive the Barbarous, Unbelieving Host.
In Gaul this Monarch's Arms shall be renowned,
Dreaded in Battle, and with Conquest Crowned,
Long time in Peace his Crown might be enjoyed.
Could he the Arrow at Chaluz, avoid.
Now, Son, your Eye to that brave Warrior turn,
Whose Beams so much the Norman Line adorn.
How great a Presence, what a Port he bears?
How much a mighty Conq'rour he appears?
That Prince is Edward, whose Victorious Arms
Judea save from Pagan Foes Alarms.
How he returns through the Trinacrian Isle,
Through high Parthenope's delicious Soil,
Through loud Applauses of admiring Rome,
Reeking in hostile Blood triumphant home!
The beauteous Person next that Monarch seen,
Is Eleonora his Illustrious Queen.
In Storms she is with him on the Ocean tossed,
To seek out horrid War on Asia's Coast.
Midst barbarous Arms his Wife, Adviser, Friend,
She his prodigious Labors shall attend.
And when her Lord, so Heaven permits, shall feel
Within his Veins, the Murd'rer's poisoned Steel.
She to the spreading Plague her Lips applies,
And gives that Ease, which Asia's Balm denies.
Invading Death her healing Kisses charm,
And with new Life the sinking Monarch warm.
No other Prince that in this Age shall reign,
Shall equal Honor to brave Edward's Gain,
But great Adolphus of the Illustrious Race
Of Heroes, which the House of Nassau Grace.
This mighty Prince shall gain the Imperial Sway,
And wide Germania shall his Laws obey.
The God-like Virtues, and Heroic Fire,
That shall the brave Nassovian House inspire,
Shall make Adolphus shine in this high Sphere,
Preluding to the great Deliverer
The pious William; yonder he is in Sight,
In whom Nassovian Blood, and ours unite.
There warlike Edward stands, that with his Host,
Shall cross the Ocean to the Gallick Coast.
Where he his Conquering Ensigns shall display,
And make the haughty Franks his Laws obey.
There Queen Philippa shines, the Albanians Dread,
Worthy of Britain's Crown, and Edward's Bed.
While Foreign Kingdoms Edward's Arms subdue;
Hers through the North the vanquished Seats pursue.
See the Black Prince in Armor by her side,
Proud Gallia's Terror, and fair Albion's Pride.
What Triumphs wait him in Pictavian Fields?
What never-fading Laurels Croissy yields?
That Henry mark, the glorious Conqueror,
That Gallia shall reduce by Albion's Power.
Immortal Prince, if Arms can make thee so,
For thee in Norman Fields what Laurels grow?
How great he will seem his Arms distained with Blood,
Chasing the Franks over Sein's affrighted Flood.
At Agencourt what Wonders shall be done,
What Towns of Force, what Battles shall be won,
Before in Triumph he ascends their Throne?
Our Blood the Royal Channel now regains,
Derived through Tudor our brave Offspring's Veins;
Which with the Norman joined, the Confluent Tide
As long, as that of Time, shall downward glide.
From their Embrace to rule Britannia springs,
A glorious Race of Queens, and potent Kings.
See, the first Tudor that ascends the Throne,
After the glorious Field at Bosworth won.
The Scepter he shall sway with great Applause,
And Rule the Isle with Wise and Equal Laws.
Young Edward there, Albion's Delight appears
Learned, Pious, Manly Wise above his years.
Then Liberty in all her lovely Charms,
Shall sit secure from Tyranny's Alarms.
Religion purged from Rome's Adulterous Stain,
Shall in her pure, and Native Splendour Reign.
No greater Mind to Albion's Crown succeeds,
Revered for Brave, and loved for Pious Deeds.
Blessed Albion, if kind Heaven would long permit
So great a Monarch, on thy Throne to sit.
But, oh, how short Delights attend him here,
Such Heavenly Guests are shown, and disappear.
Dear both to Earth and Heaven, he will soon remove
His Throne from hence, to Reign in Bliss above.
With what Complaints, with what despairing Cries,
Shall sad Britannia Mourn his Obsequies?
There, see, the bright Elizabetha rise,
Inlightning with her Rays the British Skies.
The Indulgent Parent of her People, she
Loves, Feeds, and Guards Britannia's Family.
Heaven's and her People's Rights she shall protect,
And for Britannia's Ease, her own neglect.
Her Sons she shall embrace with pious Care,
And from her Coasts send back the Iberian War.
Blessed times, when she that wears the Imperial Crown,
Regards her Peoples Safety, as her own.
Intently now on that great Monarch gaze,
So much distinguished by his brighter Rays.
This is the Man, the brave Nassovian, whom
I named, the great Deliverer to come.
Succeeding Prophets under your great Name,
This our great Offspring shall aloud proclaim;
Raised from a noble Branch of Tudor's Line,
From Thamisis transplanted to the Rhine.
Amazed Posterity, will scarce believe
The wondrous Deeds this Hero shall atchieve.
The European World by Rome and Gaul oppressed,
By his long-wish'd-for Arms shall be releast.
He Will far outshine his own Heroic Race,
Europe's Protectors, who shall Tyrants chase,
And Monsters vanquish with Herculean Toil,
And rescue from their bloody Jaws, their Spoil.
The beardless Hero's first victorious Arms,
Shall free his Country from the Gauls Alarms.
As he advances, Seas of Gallick Blood
Shall with red Streams swell Mosa's wondering Flood.
Their slaughtered Ranks shall lie along the Rhine,
And with strange Purple stain the astonished Vine.
For in this Age
Just Heaven shall cause a haughty Prince to rise,
Cruel, as Lucifer, and like him wise.
Heaven's Laws, and Power, the Tyrant shall deride,
Breaking in Sport, the Oaths wherewith he is tide.
The insatiate Monster pleased with humane Gore,
And urged with Hellish Rage, shall first devour
His Gallick Slaves, and with a merc'less Hand,
Spread fearful Ruin over his fruitful Land.
Raging with Fire and Sword he shall invade
His Neighbor's Cities, to his Gold betrayed.
No Spoil, no Carnage, shall his Fury cloy,
But drunk with Blood, he shall around destroy,
Like spreading Fires, or Torrents roaring down,
From melting Snows, that all the Valley drown.
Like Hell, he shall derive his chiefest Joy,
From the divine Permission to destroy.
Mischief and Ruin, he shall Conquest name,
And from Destruction raise a dismal Fame.
Regions laid wast, Orphans and Widows Cries,
Proclaim his Power, and barbarous Victories.
So dire a Plague, shall Heaven permit to reign,
To scourge the impious World, but to restrain
The savage Spoiler, shall this Prince employ;
Monsters grow up, for Heroes to destroy.
The valiant Youth sinking Batavia saves,
Their surest Digue against the Gallick Waves.
After oppressed Britannia shall invite,
The famed Deliverer to assert her Right.
His Arms the lowering Tempest shall dispel,
That threatening Albion, rolls from Rome and Hell.
Fair Liberty her drooping Head shall rear,
And blessed Religion on her Throne appear.
His Reign fresh Life to Albion shall impart,
And teach her Sons War's long-forgotten Art.
Britons dissolved in soft, inglorious Ease,
In courtly Vices, and luxurious Peace,
He shall inspire with a new martial Flame,
And lead them on, to gain their Ancient Fame.
Now Albion's Youth polish their rusty Arms,
And once more, Gallia dreads their loud Alarms.
Victorious Britons, as of old, shall come
Laden with Spoils, and crowned with Laurels, home.
He ceased; but near the great Nassovian stood
A Heroine, by mien of Royal Blood.
Her Form Divine, and Seraph-like her Face
Where Heavenly Sweetness, strove with Princely Grace.
But a black Cloud on her fair Temples lies,
And on the ground she fixed her beauteous Eyes.
Prince Arthur on the Illustrious Form Intent,
Asked who she was, and what the Sadness meant,
That her dejected Eyes did overspread,
What the thick Mist that hovered round her Head.
King Uter with Reluctance thus replies,
While flowing Tears gushed from his mournful Eyes,
Ah, Son, demand no more their Fates to know,
That must produce such universal Woe.
Telling that Offspring's Story, I reveal
A Scene of Grief, I labored to conceal.
This Wonder to the World, as soon as shown,
Is taken up to her Celestial Throne.
Ah! what sad Accents, what a mournful Cry,
What lamentable Sounds will fill the Sky,
When her high Hearse shall from her Palace go
Through weeping Throngs, in all the Pomp of Woe.
So sad a Cry did wondering Nile affright,
When Egypt's firstborn Youth were slain by Night.
What Strains of Sorrow will Augusta show?
What Floods of Tears, sad Thamisis, will flow
Into thy Stream, while gliding by the Dome,
Where fresh erected stands her lofty Tomb.
Son, mind her Presence, what a God-like Air?
What Throngs of Graces in her Eyes appear?
No nobler Genius, no well fashioned Mind
Ever took a Turn more happily designed,
From an Etherial Mould more labored and refined.
Mild as the blessed above, without serene
As Eden's Air, and calm as Heaven within.
No lovelyer Star adorns the British Sphere,
Ah! might she longer in her Orb appear,
That her Celestial Influence might Flow
In chearing Streams on all the Isle below!
New warmth to Albion her kind Beams afford,
To Albion guarded, as before restored,
By the Nassovian Angel's flaming Sword.
My fairest Offspring! ah, her rigid Doom!
She shall Maria be: Come, quickly come,
Bring me white Lillies, Roses newly blown,
Lillies and Roses, like Maria's own.
These on her Hearse I Will scatter, and perfume
With odorous Herbs and Flowers the precious Tomb.
Let me my Sorrow thus express, it is true,
A fruitless Deed, but all that Love can do.
The Tides of Grief that here swelled Arthur's Breast,
Broke Sleeps soft Fetters, and dissolved his Rest.
The Airy Objects, that without did wait,
Now rush in by the Senses open Gate.
His waking Thought, the wondrous Scene reviews,
And various Passions in his Mind renews.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK VI.
NOw in the East the Saffron Morn arose,
And called the Lab'rer from his soft repose.
Through all the Region flew Loquacious Fame;
And the glad tidings spread, wherever she came.
Prince Arthur's Landed, is the general Cry,
Straight to their Arms the cheerful Britons fly.
The great Restorer all prepare to meet,
And warlike Noise resounds in every Street.
His eager Friends impatient of delay,
Had long expected this Auspicious Day.
They knew he was Embarked to bring them Aid,
And for his quick, and safe Arrival prayed.
Often on the Rocks and highest Hills they stood,
And all around the Subject Ocean viewed
With longing Eyes, hoping the sight to gain
Of Arthur's Conquering Navy on the Main.
And when no Fleet, no Arthur they descried,
They chid the Winds, and interposing Tide.
With less impatience staid the Ithacian Dame,
Till to her Arms her wished Ulysses came.
The Sestian Maid not with such Passion stood,
To spy her Lover cutting through the Flood.
The Zealous Men while adverse Boreas reigned,
And from the Coasts Prince Arthur's Fleet detained,
When mild Aurora with her rosy Light,
Began to streak the dusky Face of Night,
Often from their Beds, up to the Windows flew,
And thence the Fanes and flying Clouds would view,
To see if yet more favorable Gales
Rose from the South, to swell Prince Arthur's Sails.
Anxious they look around, but when they find
Their hopes retarded by an adverse Wind,
Their Sorrow in repeated Sighs expressed,
They to their Beds return, but not to Rest.
Thus they expected Arthur's powerful Aid,
And such their Sorrow was, their Hopes delayed.
But now, at last the Prince's Fleet arrived,
Raises their Courage, and their Hopes revived.
The joyful Throngs Prince Arthur's Praise proclaim,
This every Tongue employs, even Children aim,
That scarce have learned to speak, to lisp his Name.
Some praise his Stature, and his God-like Face,
His awful Presence, and Majestic Grace,
His Courage some, and Conduct in the Field,
And think great Caesar's Fame to his, must yield.
His Clemency and Pity some admire,
And all the Virtues, that his Mind inspire.
The Actions of his Childhood some repeat,
In which they still discovered something Great.
And now, what they expected he appears,
The Hero promised in his tender years.
Others relate the ancient Prophecies,
Wherein was told a Monarch should arise
Of mighty Power, and Universal Fame,
That should to Heaven advance the British Name.
Things weighed, and well compared, they all consent
Arthur's the Conq'rour, that the Prophets meant.
Some tell their Friends, their Courage to support,
What mighty Guards surround the Prince's Court.
What Succors hired were from Germania brought,
Succors, as often Victorious, as they fought.
Fierce Alpine Allobrogs with slaughter fed,
In Snows and everlasting Winter bred.
Men of stupendous Bulk, pampered and cloyed
With Blood of Nations, which their Arms destroyed.
Armed with broad, flaming Swords, and mighty Spears;
Their Caps were Wolves, their Coats rough Skins of Bears.
Who stretched on Beds did never their Limbs repose,
But from the naked ground still vigorous rose.
Of Aspect terrible, their squallid Face
Thick, matted Beards with bristly Terror grace.
None ever escaped, that did their Arms provoke,
They Mow whole Squadrons with a single stroke.
This monstrous Kind of Men did Fame invent,
And Arthur's Troops so dreadful represent,
To raise the Britons Hearts before deprest,
And strike a Terror through the Saxon's Breast.
With Joy transported all for Arms declare,
And all the Accoutrements of War prepare.
The Shepherds on the Hills forsake their Flocks,
And leave their brouzing Goats upon the Rocks.
Instead of Crooks, that did their Flocks command,
Long warlike Spears they brandish in their Hand.
The British Youth their Courage raised, rejoice
To see the Banners fly, and hear the Trumpet's Voice.
The Farmers leave the Hopes their Field afford,
To reap fresh Laurels with their Conquering Sword.
The noise of War does from the Hills rebound,
And midst the Miners Eccho's under ground.
Who straight alarmed, at nobler Labor Sweat,
And into Swords their glowing Metal beat.
Their Forges, Anvils and wide Bellows breath,
Are all employed in various kinds of Death.
Some shape the Halbert, and broad Fauchion's Blade,
And Darts by some, and Arrows Heads are made.
Some forming Battle-Axes heave the Sledge,
Some into Shields strike out a flaming Wedge.
To fashion Helmets some the Hammer ply,
Some labor, Pieces for the Leg and Thigh.
With Lances armed, some their hot Coursers rein,
And to the War Curvet along the Plain.
Some with their clenching Gauntlets grasp the Shield,
Shake their long Spears, and rush into the Field.
Across their Shoulders some their Quivers hung,
Their Arrows trimmed, and Bows for Death new strung.
As when black Clouds dark'ning the Summer Sky,
Loaded with Crystal Tempests slowly fly,
The Artillery discharged with mighty Sound
The exploded Hailstones, leap upon the ground,
Thunder amidst the Woods, and from the Hills rebound.
So with the Britons all the Region swarms,
So thick their Troops, so loud the noise of Arms.
The groaning Earth complains, and trembling feels
The trampling Hoofs, and Chariots fervid Wheels.
In order now, Celestial Muse, declare
What Troops, and who those ancient Britons were,
Who for their Country's Liberty combined,
And their Brigades with Arthur's Forces joined.
From Time's dark Prisons set the Hero's free,
And may their glorious Names Immortal be,
First warlike Cadwall the Dimetians Head,
His Forces from the neighboring Region led.
Their Troops advance from the bleak Northern Shore,
On which the Hybernian Sea's loud Billows roar.
And where Octopitarum through the Waves
Wedging his Way, the opposing Ocean braves.
Fair Maridunum pours her Squadrons forth,
Where the famed Sorc'rer Merlin had his Birth.
They came who dwelt round high Plinlimmon's Sides,
Where Stuccia flows, and swift Turobius glides.
King Meridoe the Oordovican leads
Down from the British Alps, whose snowy Heads
Imaus like, stand towering in the Air,
And midst the Stars eternal Winter bear.
And from the Soil lav'd by Conovius Flood,
And Menai's Banks, where then Segontium stood.
Great Numbers swarmed from Mona's noble Isle,
Deformed for Aspect, but of fertile Soil.
Where once in shady Groves erected stood,
The Druids Altars stained with humane Blood.
The Troops their March from Mediolanum take,
From Helen's Way, and the Tegeian Lake.
Through which fair Deva's Streams so swiftly pass,
They uncorrupted shun the impure Embrace.
Here the sublime Mervinian Mountains rise,
And with sharp-pointed Tops transfix the Skies.
Next Morogan the bold, Silures brought,
None for their Country's Freedom better fought.
They bravely Valens and his Troops withstood,
And died Sabrina's Streams with Roman Blood.
With like Success Veranius they defeat,
And forced his vanquished Eagles to retreat.
This cause, as much their Courage did provoke,
To free their Country from the Saxon Yoke.
They take in have their Swords and Bucklers down,
And march to meet the Prince from every Town.
From all the Cities on the verdant side
Of Nidus, and on Loghor's Crystal Tide.
They march from Bovium, and the neighboring Shore,
Thick, as the Waves, that there insulting roar.
Down from the Hilly Lands the Britons came,
Which now the Inhabitants Brechinia name.
Where the black Mount stands lofty in the Air,
And forky Peak, since called great Arthur's Chair.
They march from Bulleum, Haga, and the Lake,
Where when broad Sheets of Ice dissolving crack,
The rattling Noise rebounds from Neighboring Hills,
And with loud Thunder all the Region fills.
From Ariconium, and the flowery Space,
Which wanton Vaga's winding Arms embrace.
Where Lugus his transparent Bosom spreads,
And where Liddenus murmurs through the Meads.
Where thick Hesperian Woods with Apples crowned,
Of golden Hue, enrich the Fields around.
Which the most generous British Wine produce,
Ausonia scarce affords a nobler Juice.
They leave the Fields famed for the purest Corn,
And the rich Plains that Wooly Flocks adorn,
Which bless the Farmer with a nobler Fleece,
Than what Apulia boasts, or fertile Greece.
They leave the golden Vale, and happy Ground
Which Dorus laves, and lofty Woods surround,
The warlike Youth from Venta came and those
That Muno's Flood and Isca's Streams enclose.
With those that round the Oazy Moor are bred,
And near the Golden Rocks refulgent Head.
Out from her Gates her Youth fair Isca pours.
Crowned with gilt Spires, rich Domes, and lofty Towers.
Where Golden Roofs, and checkered Floors abound,
Deep Vaults, and spacious Chambers under ground.
A stately Theater the Town o'erlooks,
And noble Works convey the neighboring Brooks,
By Conquering Romans built, that far from home
They might enjoy the Sports and Pomp of Rome.
Such was the ample City's ancient Fame,
Now worn by time it scarce preserves its Name.
Those from Gobanium march, a Town that stood
On Isca's and Gevini's confluent Flood.
In cheerful Troops the stout Cornavians came,
From the rich Soil we now Salopia name.
From either side of fair Sabrina's Tide,
Whose silver Streams the fruitful Land divide.
From Usocona, end the Towns that lay
On the famed Roman Military way.
From Uriconium, yet a Noble Town,
And old Rutunium, then of good Renown.
Galbut their Leader at their Head appears
A lovely Youth, and Wise above his Years:
Descended from a Noble ancient Race
Of Heroes, who the British Annals grace.
He by Forefathers Beams Illustrious shone,
Great by their Deeds, but greater by his own.
Zeal for his Country, and the British Cause,
The generous Youth to glorious Danger draws.
For this he crossed the Ocean, to implore
Prince Arthur's Arms, their Freedom to restore.
The Prince embraced him, as his Favorite Friend,
And did his Zeal and Vigilance commend.
He staid the dear Companion of his Toil,
Both on the Seas, and on the Armorick Soil.
And when the Saxon, and the British Fleet,
(A dreadful day) did on the Ocean meet,
By Arthur's side upon the Deck, he stood
Distained with scattered Brains, and reeking Blood.
The Youth at danger unconcerned appeared,
And nothing but his Country's Sufferings feared.
He leaped out first on the Dimetian Strand,
And welcomed Arthur to his Native Land.
Where taking leave, he to his Country came,
To Head his Men, and win yet greater Fame.
Devana sends brave Troops, a noble Town,
For lofty Works, and splendid Structures known.
Where once the Roman Conquerours did reside,
And envied not Italia's Wealth and Pride.
The bold Inhabitants on Deva's Bank,
And they who Danus, and Merseia drank;
With those that had their Seats, along the Soil
Which Briny Riches gives with easy Toil;
Draw out and Muster on the Neighboring Plain,
Resolved the British Honor to regain.
Bothan their Captain was a Warlike Knight,
A brave Asserter of his Country's Right.
A noble, but ungovernable Fire,
(Such is the Hero's) did his Breast inspire.
His honest Rage, his Friends could scarcely Rule,
Hot for the Camp, but not for Counsel Cool.
Fit to assist to pull a Tyrant down,
But not to please the Prince that mounts the Throne.
Impatient of Oppression, still he stood
His Country's Mounds, against the invading Flood.
Impetuous, as a Tempest in its Course,
He not to Conduct trusted, but to Force.
Unskilled in Court Intreagues, on which the wise
And crafty Statesman, as his strength, relies;
He still expected that a loud Applause,
Should follow Brav'ry, and a Righteous Cause,
His Country praised him; no Britannick Lord,
Was as his People's Patron more adored.
And Now in Arms they throng about their Head,
None to the Prince such numerous Forces led.
The Coritanians, that the Soil possessed,
By fair Darventio's fruitful Waters blessed,
And Repandunum, where clear Trenta's Tide
Does into Dovo's silver Bosom glide.
Those near high Peak, in heavenly Waters drowned,
And in the Dale, which craggy Rocks surround;
Their Zeal and Courage raised by loud Alarms,
Forsook their Seats, and Fields, and flew to Arms.
These valiant Men that Fame and Freedom sought,
To join the Prince's Arms Canvallo brought.
Noble Canvallo, who did with him bring
The Majesty, and Presence of a King.
Of lofty Stature, and a graceful Air,
By's own Sex feared, and favored by the Fair.
The Inglorious Pleasures of the wanton Court,
That drained his Wealth, did not the Patriot hurt,
Fit for the Camp, or Business of the State,
But soft Enjoyments Love to both abate.
Alarmed with Public Danger, he arose
Like a roused Lion, from his long Repose.
Armed, and equipped with gaeat Magnificence,
He mounts his fiery Turk, bought at a vast Expense.
His princely Train, and splendid Equipage,
Wher'ere he past the Eyes of all engaged.
The Atrebatians From the happy Land,
Which then sublime Gallena did command.
Where winding Thamisis does bless the Soil,
The Wealth and Glory of the British Isle.
In Warlike Bands advance to Arthur's Aid,
And rich Bertudor, as their Head obeyed,
Who still against the Pagan Interest strove,
Rich in Possessions, and his People's Love.
His happy Tenants, and the Farmers round,
His Hospitable House still open found.
Each Week ten Oxen from the Stall he drew,
A hundred Sheep, and forty Swine he slew;
Fat Venison, Fowl, and Fish, an endless Store,
To feed his Guests, his Servants, and the Poor.
He to the Woods, and Forests was inclined,
To hunt the Fox, and chase the flying Hind.
Pleased with his Friends, and with his rural Sport,
He wisely shunned, the Dangers of the Court.
But for the Christian Cause, and public Peace,
He quits the Forests, and his Wealth and Ease.
His Helmet braced, and on his Arm his Shield,
He marched before his Troops into the Field.
And that my Verse may to his Name be just,
Of all the Lords Bertudor was the first,
That to the Camp, his valiant Forces brought,
Though not inured to War, and though remote.
The Durotriges from the western Coast,
Where the Britannick Ocean's Waves are tossed.
Their Troops assembled, for the Prince declare,
And march from all the Towns, to meet the War.
From Dornavaria, and the Seats that stand
On Froma's Stream, and wealthy Blackmoor Land:
From Vendogladia, and the Towers that rose
On the fat Glebe, where pleasant Stourus flows.
Sakil their Leader, an Illustrious Peer,
Was to his Prince, and to his Country dear.
He their Maecenas cheers the British Bards,
Learns them to Sing, and then their Songs rewards.
So Heaven to makes Men good, does Grace bestow,
And then rewards them for their being so.
Him as their Head the Athenian Sons adore,
The Muses Favorite, but the People's more.
To form great Men, his Palace was the School,
His Life good Breeding's, and good Nature's Rule.
To him the needy Men of Wit resort,
And find a Friend in an unlettered Court.
The Poets Nation, did Obsequious wait
For the kind Dole, divided at his Gate.
Laurus amidst the meagre Crowd appeared,
An old, revolted, unbelieving Bard,
Who thronged, and should, and pressed, and would be heard.
Distinguished by his louder craving Tone,
So well to all the Muses Patrons known,
He did the Voice of modest Poets drown.
Sakil's high Roof, the Muses Palace rung
With endless Cries, and endless Songs he sung.
To bless good Sakil Laurus would be first,
But Sakil's Prince, and Sakil's God he cursed.
Sakil without distinction threw his Bread,
Despised the Flatt'rer, but the Poet fed.
His Sword the Muses great Defender draws,
TO assert Britannia's, and Religion's Cause.
Orson their Head, the bold Brigantes brings,
Subject of late, to the North-Saxon Kings.
Now for their Liberty they boldly speak,
And through the Foe, to join Prince Arthur, break.
Osron's Example all the Region fired,
With noble Heats, and Martial Thoughts inspired.
None in the Field did greater Courage show,
Whither he charged, or else sustained the Foe.
Yet none more fit in Council to preside,
And in a Storm, the laboring State to guide.
A mighty Genius of uncommon Mould,
As Caesar Eloquent, as Caesar Bold.
He could the unstable People's Tumults stop,
And a declining Kingdom underprop.
Matur'd by Age, and business of the State,
The hoary Oracle in Council sat.
Where he the British Nestor was esteemed,
And all his Language, Inspiration seemed.
This finished Statesman did the Prince persuade
To pass the Seas, the Saxon to invade.
And at his Landing quick Assistance brought,
And for his Country none more bravely fought.
The farthest Western Soil, which with their Wave
The British, and Hibernian Oceans lave.
From Isca's Noble Stream, far as the Shore
Where round Bolerium's Head the Billows roar,
By the Danmonian Britons was possessed,
And with King Cador's, temperate Empire blessed,
This warlike People, at their King's Command,
Now take up Arms, and muster through the Land.
The good King Cador worn with War and Age,
No longer does the Foe in Arms engage.
Macor his Son supplied the Father's Place,
Whose Virtues equaled his Illustrious Race.
To serve Prince Arthur, and his righteous Cause,
His Sword the brave Danmonian Hero draws.
A beauteous Youth, whose Breast a strong desire
Of Fame, and Martial Glory did inspire.
Eager of War, he the Danmonians led,
And shone in splendid Armor at their Head.
His coming, Joy to all the Britons gives,
And in his Arms, the Prince his Friend receives.
To whom to be endeared, he always strove,
By all expressions of Respect and Love.
The Valiant Youth he did with Honors grace,
To his high Merit due, and noble Race.
Macor, mean time, Prince Arthur did adore,
None served his Cause, or sought his Favor more.
Tracar, and Ormes in the Camp arrive,
Whose Presence to the rest, fresh Courage give.
Their Wisdom was by Fame aloud proclaimed,
The Britons none with greater Honor named.
Both fit about a Monarch to abide,
To aid his Counsels, and the State to guide.
None more admired for clear, unerring Sense,
For Piercing Sight, and charming Eloquence.
Great Spirits both, but of a different Mould,
Ormes impetuous, Turbulent, and Bold;
But Tracar was composed, sedate, and cool,
His Passions subject to a stricter Rule.
Ormes was haughty, inaccessible,
And knew his Riches, and his Sense too well.
Tracar was courteous, easy of Access,
Of great Humanity, and mild Address.
Ormes was therefore honored not desired,
Tracar beloved, and equally admired.
Ormes would still advance unbounded Power,
Tracar his Country's Liberty secure.
Tracar had Letters, Ormes Native Fire:
Both had by Birth, what Labor cannot acquire.
Arthur to neither Rival Wit inclines,
But used them both, to serve his wise Designs.
Such Love the Britons to the Prince expressed,
Who when he found his Numbers thus encreast,
Advanced his Ensigns, and to Isca came,
Where the Silures dwelt, the chief for Fame.
Hither fresh Squadrons to the Prince resort,
Which from that time is called great Arthur's Court
Five times the Sun had his Diurnal Race
Completed, when from this delightful place
The pious Prince his Ensigns moved, and came
To Glevum, seated on Sabrina's Stream.
Decamping hence, his armed Battalions gain
Prince Arthur at their Head, the fertile Plain
By easy Marches, where Gallena stood,
Which Thamisis laves with its noble Flood.
Thus stood the Britons, after his Defeat,
Octa with Grief did to his Coasts Retreat.
As when by chance a Royal Eagle spies,
From some high Mountains Top, amidst the Skies;
A flight of Swans, obscuring all the Air,
Swift as the Lightning, which he is said to bear,
Upon the Prey his Airy Flight he takes,
And with sharp Pounces vast Destruction makes.
Some fall struck dead, some wounded slowly fly,
While Snowy Clouds of Feathers fill the Sky.
Those that the fierce Invader's Strokes survive,
With all the speed, Fear to their Wings can give;
To their beloved Cayster's Banks return,
And in their reedy Seats, their Wounds and Losses mourn.
So fared the Saxons, and their shattered Fleet,
Octa forthwith Commands his Lords to meet
In Council, where they in long order sat
TO advise what best might save their threatened State.
Cissa first spoke, an able Counselor
Let us assemble all our present power,
And straight advance the Britons to Attack,
Who to our Arms can small Resistance make.
Sore with their Wounds, and weary with their Toil,
They tempt the Saxons to an easy Spoil.
Boldly fall on, before their Troops are eased,
With Food and Rest, and with Recruits increased.
Your Wisdom thus, and Courage will appear,
Who tho defeated, have not learned to fear.
The Foe surpised must to your Mercy yield,
Or to their Ships Retreating, quit the Field.
He ceased, then Osred, who had always won
By his wise Counsel great Applause, begun:
Our late Defeat has too much Terror struck,
Through all our Troops, too much our Empire shook,
And too much fleshed the Foe, to let me join
In this Advice, my Counsels more incline
To draw into the Field our utmost Power
From all the Saxon States, and to secure
Our Empire, let us labor to persuade
The Pict, and Scottish King, to give us Aid.
The Cause and Interest is the same of all,
They and their Gods, if we are crushed, must fall.
Our Arms united in a numerous Host,
We may before of certain Conquest boast.
The trembling Foe unable to withstand
Such mighty Armies, will forsake the Land.
But if supported with vain hopes they stay,
They fall into our hands an easy Prey.
Pascentius next, a wise Nestorian head,
Whose Looks, and Words profound Attention bred:
Thus spoke -- it is true our Troops while thus dismayed,
And of Prince Arthur's Fame, and Arms afraid,
From present Action justly may dissuade.
Seeking the Foe we too great Danger run,
Emboldened by his Victory lately won.
And thus far Osred's Thoughts and mine you see
Conspire, as in the rest they disagree.
If with our utmost Force we meet our Foes,
To too much hazard we our State expose.
The uncertain Game of War they little know,
That Stake an Empire on a single Throw.
While we delay to gather all our Force,
And to the Picts and Scots, shall have recourse;
Prince Arthur will advance, and mightier grow,
Like rolling Balls, that gather up the Snow,
Or Rivers taking Streams in, as they flow.
The Britons led by ancient Prophecies,
Expect that near this time, a Prince shall rise
Heroic, Wise, a mighty Conqueror,
That all their lost Dominions shall restore,
And over the World, extend their Naval Power.
Something like this, our Augurs seem to fear,
From Prodigies, and Signs that often appear.
Those hopes they all of Arthur now express,
Drawn by his Fame abroad, and late Success.
While this Belief, though false, the Briton warms,
He grows less fearful of the Saxon Arms.
He Will be more bold in Fight, while thus inspired,
And with such Zeal, and Expectation fired.
Intoxicated thus Men Wonders do,
And by bold Deeds, make their vain Fancies true.
He therefore serves King Octa, that creates,
An Understanding first, between the States.
An Embassy may to the Prince be sent,
To treat how Blood and ruin to prevent,
They may propose the Kingdom to divide,
And offer Octa's Daughter for his Bride,
Fair, Ethelina, whose perverted Mind,
To Christian Worship is too much inclined.
He ceased, and his Advice did chiefly please,
And of the Council most declared for Peace.
The Lords dispersed, King Octa unresolved,
Long in his Mind his troubled Thoughts revolved.
With strong contending Tides of Passion pressed,
Now War he looks on, now on Peace, as best.
Long he appeared on Osred's Counsel bent,
And to the Neighboring Saxon Princes sent,
That all, the strong Necessity might know
Of joining Arms, against the Common Foe.
At the same time an Embassy he sends,
To make the Pict, and Scottish King his Friends.
That of their powerful Aid he might not fail,
If Arthur, and his Britons should prevail.
But when he heard, that Arthur had as far
As Glevum's Walls, advanced the threatening War,
Observing that the Saxons were dismayed,
And not yet strengthened by his Neighbors Aid,
He now declared, it was his settled Sense,
A Treaty with the Briton to Commence.
Then Orators he sent without delay,
Who to the Britons Camp direct their way.
Titullan, Selred, and wise Theocles
For this Negotiation chieflly please.
Heldured of the Embassy was one,
Osrick and Thedred noble Ormar's Son.
Arriving at the Prince's Camp, they found
The British Youth in Crowds dispersed around.
For then with various Sports, and manly Play,
The Britons solemnized, the auspicious Day,
Of Arthur's Birth, over all the Fields they spread,
To different Games, by different Passions led.
Here Chariots raising Clouds of Dust appear,
And run with smoking Wheels their swift Career.
Here the robust Danmonian Nation swarms,
Hurling their massy Balls with vigorous Arms.
Here the Dobunians to advance their Fame,
Toil at their Country's old laborious Game.
Long Ashen Staves across their Shoulders lie,
Then swayed with both their Hands, strike through the Sky.
A mounting Orb of Thongs, or well sowed Hide,
While at due distance ranged, on the other Side
The Foe inclining stands, to wait its Fall,
And with like Force, strike Back the bounding Ball.
Incircled Wrestlers here their Manhood try,
And with loud Shouts, that rend the laboring Sky,
The standing Ring proclaims the Victory.
Some to a Cudgel prize their Fellows dare,
Who strait spring out to meet the wooden War.
They brandish in the Air their threatening Staves,
Their Hands, a woven Guard of Osier saves,
In which they fix their Hazel Weapon's End,
Thus armed, the nimble Combatants contend
For Conquest, giving and receiving Blows,
And down their Heads a crimson River flows.
Here flowery Garlands their proud Temples crown,
Whose airy Feet the Race had newly won.
Such were the Britons Sports, as through the Throng
The Saxon Orators passed slow along.
Who strait were to the August Pavilion led,
Where Arthur sat, his Lords around him spread.
To whom Edburga thus,
The Saxon King, whose ardent wishes are
To save Britannia, from Destructive War.
Who rather seeks to enjoy the Fruits of Peace,
Then by his Arms his Empire to increase.
Makes such Advances for these glorious Ends,
As may the Britons make his lasting Friends.
The Saxons, and the Britons shall command
Their equal Shares, of the divided Land.
Such Barrier shall be fixed, as shall secure
The Britons, jealous of the Saxon Power.
To give Britannia Peace, we condescend
To yield up what our Arms can well defend.
Such steps King Octa makes for Peace, beside
That both may yet with closer Bonds be tied,
Bright Ethelina, Octa's chief Delight,
Shall be the Link, the Nations to unite.
This so much envied Favorite of Fame,
Whom all with Love, and Admiration name.
Octa consents shall be your beauteous Bride,
To you already, in her Faith Allied.
These Measures all Contentions may adjust,
Friendship confirm, and fix a mutual Trust.
But if rejected, Octa does declare
He Is guiltless of the dire effects of War.
Upon the Christians Head, will rest the Guilt
Of all the Blood, that by the Sword is spilt.
The Prince replied,
Affairs of that Importance to the State,
Require our thoughtful Care and calm Debate.
The two Proposals by King Octa made,
For lasting Friendship, shall be duly weighed.
Twice had the Sun broke from the Purple East,
Twice was he seen dilated in the West.
When Arthur seated on his Chair of State,
Thus spoke, the Saxons with Attention wait.
An honorable Peace my Thoughts prefer,
To all the Triumphs of a Bloody War.
I, and my Britons, those just Terms approve,
King Octa makes to establish Peace and Love,
To spare each Nation's Blood, and save the Isle
From Desolation, and destructive Spoil.
Indulgent Heaven is to both Nations kind,
That has your King to peaceful Thoughts inclined.
Ten Lords of Saxon, ten of British Blood,
May meet at Spina near Cunetio's Flood
TO adjust the Limits of each Nation's Power,
And Barriers fix, that may their Peace secure.
You for an Interview, the place will name,
Where I may see the beauteous Saxon Dame.
He ceased, and all the Audience poured around,
To this assented with a murmuring Sound.
A sudden Joy did in their Eyes appear,
While smiling Peace, triumphed over vanquished War.
Mean time the Infernal Monarch wings his Flight,
To the White Hills, whence his Angelick Sight
Might all the Fields, and subject plains survey,
Where in their Camp, the hateful Britons lay.
While with malicious Eyes around he viewed,
The Christian Army filled with Joy, he stood
With Rage dilated, and with Envy blown,
Like glowing Aetna, on Plinlimon thrown.
Flashes of Fire from his red Eyeballs flowed,
Like Lightning breaking from a lowering Cloud.
So when a Toad, squat on a Border spies,
The Gardner passing by, his bloodshot Eyes
With Spite, and Rage inflamed, dart Fire around
The verdant Walks, and on the flowery Ground,
The bloated Vermin loathsome Poison spits,
And swollen and bursting with his Malice sits.
So the fallen Angel sat, and thus begun,
Am I, and all the infernal Powers outdone?
And must this Briton still pursue his Course,
And thus elude my Arts, and all my Force?
What Christian Towns, and States have I destroyed,
Forced by my Power, or by my Arts decoyed?
How few remaining Christian Regions are,
Where no deep Marks of my Revenge appear?
What glorious Ruin did my Romans spread
Over Asia's Christians; I the Lombards led,
And furious Huns, to rich Ausonia's Soil;
And filled the Land with Blood, and Christian Spoil,
My Maxamin's, and Nero's, mighty Names,
What Desolation, by devouring Flames,
What Slaughter by the Sword, these Heroes made,
With what Success did they the Saints invade?
And if the Fame be true that spreads in Hell,
In Gaul a Prince shall arise, that shall excel
All these, and more in Blood and Spoil delight,
And all Hell's Furies to his Aid invite.
Let that great Prince arise, and may his Birth,
Be honored with Convulsions of the Earth,
Eclipses, Comets, Meteors, Lightnings, Storms,
Murders, and Monsters of tremendous Forms.
Not are there Triumphs of my Power alone,
Much weaker Spirits, have great Conquests won.
Spirits of Lower Order, small renown,
In Hell of little Figure, scarcely known.
Inferior, subaltern Divinities,
Could often their just Fury to appease,
To wreck their Rage, and honest Malice cloy,
Whole Armies of this hateful Sect destroy:
First tempt the ungrateful Murmurers to Rebel,
And then with Plagues and Darts invisible,
With Fire, and Earthquakes lay all wast, disseize
Their God, and ruin all his Votaries.
And shall this Briton all my Force defy,
And introduce his banished Deity?
High States of Hell, ye mighty Gods below,
In your August Assemblies who will Bow,
Who Acclamations make when I appear,
Who dread my Power, my Greatness who revere?
If still this Briton shall resist my Power,
And all my Arts eluded, rest secure?
But if by irresistible Deceree
Pronounced by Fate, and unchanged Destiny;
Arthur at last must mount the British Throne,
Beat down our Altars, and erect his own.
At least new hardships shall obstruct his Way,
And my Revenge his Triumphs shall delay.
That said he Flew, his Snakie Wings displayed,
Down to his Palace midst the Infernal Shade.
From all their gloomy Regions to his Court,
At his Command, the Infernal Lords resort.
To whom their Monarch from his glowing Throne,
Thus with a haughty, troubled Look begun.
Thus far in vain all our Attempts are made,
To crush the Britons that our State invade.
At Sea, they Triumph over King Octa's Fleet,
At Land, Success above their Hopes, they meet.
Octa defeated, dreads Prince Arthur's Arms,
And sues for Peace, by Ethelina's Charms.
If this should once prevail, Britannia's lost,
We, and our Priests, must fly this impious Coast.
Helped by the Almighty Enemy of Hell,
They yet our Arms escape, our Power repel.
Then Monarch's War with vast advantage wage,
When Heaven its Power does on their part Engage.
This sure Expedient's left us to annoy
The Britons, and their towering Hopes destroy.
Let us provoke them to some dire Offense,
Which may against their Armies, Heaven incense.
Then the Seraphick Guards, that round them ly,
Or else patroling through the Region fly,
Scowring the Hills and Vales; with flaming Arms,
The Christians to protect from our Alarms;
These will displeased, withdraw their powerful Aid,
And we with Safety may their Camp invade.
What subtle Spirit of seducing Art,
And skill in tempting, will perform this part?
Then filthy Asmodai who Men inspires
With wanton Passions, and unclean Desires,
Whose lewd Adorers stand before his Shrine,
Transformed to lustful Goats, and loathsome Swine,
Thus spoke: This grateful Province I embrace,
I from their Minds will virtuous Passions chase.
My stronger Force shall all chaste Thoughts expel,
And Heaven's weak Flames, shall yield to those of Hell.
To solemn Groves, and lonesom Hermits Cells,
Where boasted Chastity in Triumph dwells,
To Cloistered Monks Admission I command,
And can a Camp my powerful Charms withstand?
On me such chosen Spirits shall attend,
Whose Skill and Power will most promote my End.
The Gods of Riot, Luxury, and Wine,
In this Attempt shall all their Forces join.
Doubt not great Prince, when we their Camp Assail,
Nature is on our side, we shall prevail.
The Infernal Diet with his Language moved,
With loud Applause the wise Design approved.
Straight Asmodai attended with a Train
Of soft Luxurious Spirits, to the Plain
Directs his Flight, where the glad Britons lay;
With laboring Wings he mounts the steepy Way,
And quickly reached the tender Verge of Day.
In Companies distinct the Britons sat,
Pleased with their wished Success, and prosperous Fate.
When to the Camp the Crew Infernal came,
Grasping in either hand Tartarean Flame.
About from Tent to Tent the Demons flew,
And midst the Troops their flaming Torches threw.
The wanton Fires about their Bosoms play,
And to their Hearts lascivious warmth convey.
The soft Contagion glides along their Veins,
And in their Breasts the pleasing Poison reigns.
Straight all in Riot and Debauches join,
Dissolve in Mirth, and sit inflamed with Wine.
The Captains Snore on Scarlet spread beneath,
And with their laboring Breasts contend for Breath.
Tables o'erturn'd and broken Swords betwixt,
And Dishes fallen, with Armor intermixed,
Helmets and Harness, and bruised Goblets by,
A mad Confusion, make of War, and Luxury:
Acted with lustful Fires, from Town to Town
Commanders and their Men promiscuous run.
With Outrages and ravished Virgins Spoils,
The vicious Army all the Land defiles.
Whoredoms in Pagan Cities they commit,
And at their Sacrifices feasting sit.
Heated with lewd Religion, Lust, and Wine
They in the Worship of their Idols join.
Then to the Camp the hot Adulterers lead
Their Pagan Women and avow the Deed.
The Angelick Guards the enormous vices saw,
And in Displeasure from their Camp withdraw,
All Hell with Shouts of Triumph did resound,
That Such Success had all their Wishes crowned
The Prince of Hell strait summons from beneath
The chief supporter of the Throne of Death,
Vengeful Megaera, she without Delay
From Hell's Abyss ascends, and in her Way
Gathers raw Damps and Steams from noisome Graves,
And putrid Reeks, from Subterranean Caves;
Where spotted Plagues first draw their poisonous Breath,
The Nurseries of Pain, and Magazines of Death.
These Seeds of Torment, and devouring Heats,
From whose Contagion vanquished Life retreats,
Megaera in compacted Hides dark Wombs,
For this infernal Purpose made, entombs.
In their distinct Repositories laid,
Sad choice of Death, she various Plagues conveyed.
Armed for Destruction thus the Fury Came,
And brought from Asmodai's, a different Flame.
Then Wolves were heard in neighboring Hills to howl,
The illboding Raven and the screaching Owl
Sung over the Camp by Night, the Sun by Day,
Distained with Blood, shone with a dismal Ray.
The cruel Fury strait her Flight did take
To find her Prince, to whom the Apostate spoke.
Go, glut thy Rage, and let the Britons know,
Hell's Monarch is not yet a vanquished Foe.
Pass through their Camp with thy accustomed Have,
And on them all thy deadly Treasures wast.
Strait did the vengeful Minister prepare,
TO infect the Camp, and poison all the Air.
Her Bottles turgid with imprisoned Death
She opened, and released the fatal Breath.
In livid Wheels the dire Contagion flies,
And putrid Exhalations taint the Skies.
The Region's choked with Pestilential Steams,
Malignant Reeks, raw Damps, and soultry Gleams.
Now with their Breath the hot Infection slides
Into their Breasts, and through their Vitals glides.
Their Laboring Hearts spout out the flowing Blood,
And fry the Limbs with an Aetnean Flood.
The raging Pest'lence chases through the Veins
Retreating Life, and dressed in purple Reigns.
While other Plagues run colder to the Heart,
And through their Breast strike like a poisoned Dart.
Racked with tormenting Pain some gasping lie,
Some only breath the envenomed Air, and die.
Their Hearts with chill, congealing Blood oppressed,
Throb a few moments in their panting Breast,
Then yield, and from their Vital Labor rest.
In vain for Help, in vain for Drugs they cry,
Friends and Physicians come, but with them die.
Through all the Camp the fierce Destruction's spread,
Deforming every Tent with Heaps of Dead.
Mean time the pious Arthur prostrate laid,
Thus in a Flood of Tears dissolving prayed:
Great King of Heaven, thy Arm thou make bare,
TO invade the Britons with resistless War.
Thy glittering Sword brandished with dreadful Sway,
Does through our Camp with wide Destruction Slay.
Why did thy Aids the Shipwreckt Britons save,
From Rocks and Tempests, and the insulting Wave,
If we must only see our Native Isle,
And with our Dead the encumbered Land defile?
The insulting Heathen will Blaspheme thy Name,
And in their Songs advance their Idols Fame.
To their vain Gods loud Praises they will return,
And Hecatombs upon their Altars burn.
Spare yet thy Britons, let some Relics live,
That may due Honors to thy Temples give.
Let the Destroyer cease at thy Command,
And Death at thy Rebuke arrested, stand.
And may the Crimes that Heaven provoke, be known,
That our deep Sorrows may its Wrath atone.
The pious Prince's humble Cries succeed,
And glorious Raphael with Angelick speed
Descends, his Sword of Flame drawn in his Hand,
To chase the fierce Destroyer from the Land.
A Crystal Vial full of Odorous Fumes,
Ambrosial Balm, and rich Etherial Gums;
His other hand poured out upon the Air,
To cure the Damps, and noxious Vapors there.
Megaera flies the bright Archangel's Sword,
The Plague was staid, and Health and Life restored.
Then to the room swift Raphael Wings his way,
Where Arthur still devoutly prostrate lay.
To whom the Seraph thus:
Heaven by the Britons daring Crimes incensed,
Almighty Wrath severely has dispensed!
Your unprotected Camp it did expose,
To the dire Rage of your Infernal Foes.
Who by Divine Permission soon overspread
Your guilty Camp, with putrid Heaps of Dead.
The Angelick Guards returned to Heaven, complained
That your flagitious Troops you never restrained.
Your Captains boldly VVhoredoms, Riots, Rapes
Commit, and yet each Criminal escapes.
Thus you avow the Ills, by others done,
And their unpunished Guilt, becomes your own.
Had your Vindictive Arm been first employed,
Heaven's had not thus your guilty Troops destroyed.
But now the Eternal yielding to your Prayer,
Has sent me from his Throne, with speedy Care
To stay the Plague, and make the Fiend retreat,
That spreads the Poison, to her Stygian Seat.
Heaven's now appeased, may never the Britons dare
By their Revolting, to renew the War.
The Seraph disappeared, and Arthur raised
Upon his Feet, the Eternal Goodness praised.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK VII.
THE Prince of Hell that on the Mountain staid,
And with Infernal Joy around surveyed
The Camp, where Death did in sad Triumph reign,
With wide Destruction, covering all the Plain.
Thus to himself: At last I have prevailed.
Against this Sect, tho other Arts have failed.
Their Troops half ruined with the Plague, afford
An easy Conquest, for King Octa's Sword;
I Will break the Peace, although advanced so far,
And finish their Destruction by new War.
Arthur, prepare against the Saxon Arms,
It Is time enough for Ethelina's Charms.
Heroes delayed, and disappointed, prize
The Crown, that got too cheaply, they despise.
Pleasures the farther off, the greater seem,
And Toil and Danger, best preserve Esteem.
That service I will do, by taking care
To give fresh Fuel to the expiring War.
That said, he leaves the Crystal Plains of Light,
And to the Infernal Regions takes his Flight.
There stands a Rock, dashed with the breaking Wave
Of troubled Styx, where was a gloomy Cave
Flowing with Gore, the fierce Bellona dwells,
And bound with Adamantine Fetters, Yells.
Around stand Heaps of mosly Sculls, and Bones,
Whence issue loud Laments, and dreadful Groans.
Torn Limbs, and mangled Bodies are her Food,
Her Drink whole Bowls of Wormwood, Gall, and Blood.
Long curling Snakes her Head with Horror crown,
And on he rsquallid Back hang lolling down.
This gripes a bloody Dart, the other Hand
Grasps of Infernal Fire, a flaming Brand.
Treason, and Usurpation near allied,
Haughty Ambition, and elated Pride,
And Cruelty, with bloody Garlands crowned,
Rapine, and Desolation stand around.
With these Injustice, Violence, Rage remain,
And ghastly Famine, with her meagre Train.
This Savage Rout to Gallia now resort,
Drawn by the Fame of proud Versallia's Court.
There these Attendants on their Master wait,
And with their odious Forms, compose his horrid State.
To this wild Den now did the Apostate fly,
Resolving all Bellona's Aid to try.
At his Approach the Monsters cease their Din,
And bow at distance with a dreadful Grin.
The Stygian Prince, the Fury soon unchains,
Strait double Rage boils in her swelling Veins.
Then thus he spoke, to Octa's Palace fly,
Attended with persidious Treachery,
And various Discord, let thy Arts persuade
That Prince, the ruined Britons to invade.
Go raise new Tumults, and dissolve the Peace,
For this high Task Bellona I release.
Charged with these dire Commands, she flies away,
To the Superior Regions, blessed with Day.
Near Peak's aspiring Mount, and spacious Wood,
And the green Banks of Dovus Crystal Flood.
A wide-mouthed Den, the admiring Traveller sees
With thorny Shrubs o'er-spread, and shady Trees;
That downward goes unfathomably deep,
Beneath the subterranean Vaults, that keep
Imprisoned Damps, and Winds tumultuous Store,
And the low Caves, where falling Waters roar.
It passes through the Bowels of the Earth,
And the rich Beds, where Metals have their Birth,
Till it reveals the gloomy Mouth of Hell,
Bellona freed from her infernal Cell,
Through this dire Gulf ascends with hasty Flight,
And soon emerges in the Fields of Light.
The Air grew dark, the Rocks, and Mountains struck
With Horror, at the Fury's Presence shook.
The Spears disordered roll, the starting Sun
Springs from the Heavenly Course he used to run.
The Moon all drowned in Blood, and blazing Stars,
Portended Tumults, and destructive Wars.
Straight to King Octa's Court the Fury comes,
And Acha Octa's Mother's Shape assumes.
Then thus she spoke.
From blessed Elysian Gardens I descend
To teach thee how to gain a glorious End
Of all thy Labors, and thy warlike Toil,
And fix thy Empire over the British Isle.
Heaven has decreed that here thy Race shall reign,
And therefore has the hateful Britons slain
With a destructive Plague, and poisoned Darts
Shot from above, into their impious Hearts.
Not half their Troops survive, make have my Son
Their Ruin to complete, by Heaven begun.
Run then to Triumph, have to certain Spoil,
And chase the cursed Nation from the Isle.
You see how much your League the Gods offend,
Let not their Enemy, be Octa's Friend.
They must not be to us by Blood allied,
Nor Ethelina be a Briton's Bride.
That said, a spotted Viper from her Head,
She to his Bosom secretly conveyed.
The poisonous Vermin, with infernal Art
Glides through his Breast, and twines about his Heart.
The secret Poison wanders through his Veins,
And warlike Fury over his Spirits reigns.
Hence straightway to the Picts and Scottish Court,
The Fury, and her hellish Train resort.
Where they to bloody Wars sound loud Alarms
And make the barbarous Nations fly to Arms.
Mean time, the Saxon Monarch raving flew
About the Court, and soon together drew
The chiefest Lords, and thus himself expressed,
It was resolved to give the Britons Rest;
The Land between the Nations to divide,
And that the Princess should be Arthur's Bride.
But Heaven against his Treaty does declare,
And singly with the Britons wages War.
In vain we offer what they cannot enjoy,
We spare the Men, Heaven labors to destroy.
Avenging Gods from their high Regions came,
Armed with bright Swords of keen, Etherial Flame,
And fatal Darts of pointed Lightnings made,
And with sure Death the British Camp invade.
Their trembling Relics fall our certain Prey,
Heaven sounds the Alarm, and we must Heaven obey.
Tho we by Sea their Power could not withstand,
Our Gods more potent are, then theirs by Land.
The unfinished Conquest we may soon complete
Or from this Isle oblige them to retreat.
This fair occasion let our Arms improve
To fix our Power, and all our Fears remove.
He ceased, and all his Captains War desired,
And sprang into the Field with Martial Heat inspired.
Straight Orders are dispacht for all to Arm,
And through the Cities sounds the loud Alarm.
The tremb'ling Husbandman his Toil forbears,
Fells his tall Ash, and shapes long Staves for Spears.
Some sighing over their Anvils forge the Blades
Of Swords, instead of Hooks, and rural Spades.
Huge Gauntlets some, some hollow Helmets beat,
And some over brazen Backs, and Breastplates sweat.
Some shape their Darts, and some their Javelins Points,
Or fit their pollish'd Armour's Manly Joints.
Shap'ning their Arrows Heads, some stand inclined,
Some on revolving Stones their Axes grind.
Some serve on foot, some take the Horseman's Lance,
And to the Field their foaming Coursers praunce.
In have, some from their high roof'd Halls hung round,
With all the horrid Pride of War, and crowned
With dusty Trophies, take their massy Shield,
And flaming Sword, and fly into the Field.
Some clasp their Helmets on, some snatch their Spear,
And polished Buckler, and in Arms appear.
Ensigns displayed, and Trumpets voice delight
The Saxon Youth, and martial Minds excite.
The lighted Beacons from the Hills declare,
As blazing Comets do, approaching War,
The flaming Signals given, the Regions round
With Hors'men, Arms, and warlike noise resound.
As when
In some great Town a Fire breaks out by Night,
And fills with crackling Flames, and dismal Light,
With Sparks, and Pitchy Smoke the astonished Sky,
The affrighted Guards, that first the Flame espy,
Straight giveth' Alarm, and spread the dreadful Cry.
The amazed Inhabitants the Signal take.
And run in Crowds half clothed, and half awake,
To stop the spreading Ruin, and to tame
With spouting Engines the destructive Flame.
So when the frightful Cry of War begun,
Into the Fields in Troops the Saxons run.
Now Muse relate, and in their Order name
The People, that from different Regions came.
What famed Commanders did their Squadrons head,
And what great Lords their valiant Subjects led,
First the stout Cantian Saxon, from the Land,
That bravely once did Caesar's Arms withstand,
Where Joyful Nature, sits in Plenty crowned,
Hesperian Woods, and Sylvan Scenes surround,
Her shady Throne, that with rich Fruit abound.
Of these some on the flowery Banks reside,
Of fair Medvaga, that with wanton Pride,
Forms silver Mazes with her crooked Tide.
The Durobrovian Youth of warlike Fame,
And bold Vagniacans, together came,
With those about the fruitful Region bred,
Where Durovernum, reers her stately Head.
They march from Thanotos, and from her Towers,
Her valiant Youth sublime Rutupia pours.
Rutupia, whose rich Gems, and Pearly Store
Enticed Victorious Caesar, to her Shore.
Their chief Commanders were great Amades,
Valiant Theodriek, Osred, and with these
Hengist, a splendid Youth, the Blood, and Name
Of the first Saxon, of Illustrious Fame,
That from the Belgic Shore, to Albion came.
From the fat Glebe they come, and flowery Land
Which the stout Trinobantes, did Command.
Augusta sends her warlike Youth, a Town
Of ancient Fame, to Foreign Merchants known,
Even then for Naval Power of great Renown.
But since her stately Head is raised so high,
Her glorious Towers surmount the wondering Sky.
Her Royal Fleets the watery World control,
Where the vast Ocean can his Billows roll,
Far as the Indies, and from Pole to Pole.
Her Power by trembling, Neighbor States is feared,
By distant Empires, and new Worlds revered.
Her bellowing Oaks, with louded Thunder roar,
Then what annoyed them, on their Hills before,
Shaking the Gallick, and the Belgian Shore.
Britannia's Head she reigns in Wealth and Ease,
Mart of the World, and Emp'ress of the Seas.
Edgar and Cissa, both Illustrious Names,
From the delightful Banks of famous Thames,
Into the Field, Augusta's Squadrons bring,
None fought more bravely for the Saxon King.
They from the Forests come, whose Sports invite
Augusta's Youth, that in the Woods delight.
From the sweet Gardens of the fruitful East,
With smiling Flowers, and odorous Saffron blessed.
From Camelodunum pop'lous once, and proud
Of its famed Colony of Roman Blood.
From round Canonium, armed with Swords and Shields,
The warlike People March, and from the Fields
Where Idumanum verdant Wealth bestows,
Whose wanton Tide in wreathing Volumes flows,
Still forming Reedy Islands, as it goes.
Brave Sebert led them, valiant Oga's Son,
Whose Arms had great Renown in Battle won.
The cheerful Youth from Verolamium came,
A Town of ancient, and illustrious Fame.
Where fortified with Trenches, Lakes and Wood,
The valiant Casibellan, once withstood
The Roman Arms, obliged at last to yield,
Where Caesar fights, who can maintain the Field?
Since cherished by the indulgent Conqueror,
The City was advanced in Wealth and Power.
Its Towers, gilt Fanes, and Palaces did rise,
Darting Terrestrial Glories through the Skies.
Now where the City stood, the Ploughman toils,
And as he works, turns up old Roman Spoils,
Medals and Coins, enrich the admiring Clown,
Pavements and Urns, by ancient Figures known.
From the rich Seats they came, from whence their Sword
The Coritanian chased, the rightful Lord.
From all the Towns, around the spacious Wood
Near which sublime Tripontium's Castles stood.
From Bannavenna well-arm'd Squadrons came,
And Durobrevis, on Aufona's Stream.
Their chief Commanders were brave Alopas,
And valiant Egbert, both of Horsa's Race.
They came, who dwelt along the Southern Coast,
On which the German Ocean's Waves are tossed.
The Soil the brave Icenian Britons blessed
With Peace, and envied Plenty, once possessed.
Venta they left, where Garienus Tide,
Does to the Bosom of Bardunus glide,
An ancient, wealthy Town that did abound,
With warlike Youth, and ruled the Soil around.
High Branodunum does her Squadrons send,
Where Roman Arms, did once the Coast defend.
They leave the Towns along fair Theta's Flood,
And happy Soil, where Gariononum stood.
Those from the Banks of winding Stourus came,
And the rich Town, that bore Faustinus name.
They come from Oza's Banks, and from the Land
Which lofty Combritonium did Command.
This numerous Saxon Youth, that then obeyed
King Ella's Laws, advance to Octa's Aid.
Ella their Valiant Prince, was at their Head,
And to the Field, his warlike People led.
From Camboritum, and the Neighboring Hills,
The cheerful Youth drawn out, the Region fills:
From Camboritum, then a warlike Town,
Since for the Muses Seat, much better known.
Her learned Sons have gained Immortal Fame,
And high as Heaven, have raised Britannia's Name.
Redwal, whose Lands a vast Revenue yield,
Led them, completely armed into the Field.
They leave the reedy Lakes, and marshy Soil,
Once happy by the British Farmers Toil.
Now the vexed Land a Foreign Master knows,
Which over the Country, like a Deluge flows,
That from the Sea, the Banks born down, is rolled,
And over their Fields advances uncontrolled.
The Valiant Youth from all the Region goes,
Which Trent and Lindis, confluent Streams, enclose.
High Margadunum, all her Squadrons lends,
And stately Lindum, which her Power extends
Over the wide Province, her Battalions sends.
Mighty Ebissa, from the Fenny Land
Into the Field, did lead this warlike Band.
Orla, and Imerick, a Valiant Lord,
Famed for his Strength, and vast unweildy Sword,
Drew all their Squadrons, and Battalions forth,
From all their Towns, that lay the farthest North.
King Cerdic from the West his Army brought,
Who for the Saxon Empire bravely fought.
He all the Saxon Heroes far excess'd,
Whose conquering Arms, were never yet repelled.
A great Commander, Brave and Fortunate,
That founded first the Western Saxon State.
Those seated on Halenus verdant Banks
Draw out, and Muster their Victorious Ranks.
They March from Tresantona's Crystal Flood,
From Venta's Downs, and Regnum's spacious Wood.
From rich Clusentum, and fair Vecta's Isle,
From Briga and Segontium's fertile Soil.
On Sorbiodunum's Plains armed Youth appears,
With nodding Plumes, and moving Groves of Spears.
The famous Captain, who had chief Command,
That with his Prince came to invade the Land,
Was Lothar, born on Belgic Mosa's Flood,
Whose noble Veins were filled with Royal Blood:
Him did fair Emme Cerdic's Sister bear,
And dying, left him to her Brother's Care.
With all this Strength King Octa takes the Field,
Nor doubts, but Arthur to his Arms must yield.
The Britons now a solemn Fast proclaim
To mourn their Guilt, and take the attendant Shame.
To own the dreadful Plague, their Crimes desert,
And by their Grief, like Judgments to avert.
That Heaven appeased, from its relenting Hand
May drop its Bolt, and spare the threatened Land.
Sorrow untaught on every Face appeared,
And only Sighs and sad Laments were heard.
They weep aloud, and mourn their impious Fall,
And with united Prayers for Mercy call.
The prostrate Penitents for Pardon Cry,
And from Heaven's Justice, to its Pity fly.
To Grief, and flowing Tears, no Bounds are given,
The Artillery alone, that Conquers Heaven.
Righteous Resolves fill every humble Mind,
And all in Vows of blessed Obedience joined.
The mournful Camp's a Scene of pious Woe
Where through their Eyes, their Hearts dissolving flow.
Their loud and fervent Supplications, rise
Above the Clouds, and penetrate the Skies.
Contending thus with Heaven they weep, and pray,
And strive to turn the impending Storm away,
That charged with Vengeance over their Camp appeared,
More Plagues they had deserved, and therefore feared.
Prince Arthur, that in Piety was chief,
And now chief mourner, thus expressed his Grief,
The attentive Britons hear, and hope Relief.
Of Wrath Divine, what Vials have been poured,
And emptied on our Heads, that has devoured
The guilty Britons, and our Camp consumed;
Where pil'd in Heaps, the Dead, the Dead entombed!
The Eternal's Sword around did widely wast,
And carried Death, and Ruin where it past.
It reek'd in Blood, and shone with Slaughter died
Red, as the Crimson Sins, that for its Vengeance cried.
This day we deprecate the Curse, and all
With wounded Souls, for Heaven's Compassion call.
To still the Storms of Wrath that on us beat,
And cause the fiery Torrent to retreat.
The God we Worship Jealous is, and Pure,
His Wrath advances slow, but reaches sure.
His threatening Arm does long extended stay,
But then descends with the more fearful Sway.
Who then can his consuming Fire withstand,
Who bear the strokes of his Revenging Hand?
There Is hope your Prayers have found Success above,
And Heaven atoned, will this fierce Plague remove.
May never our impious Crimes, his Arm provoke
To end our Ruin, by a second stroke.
He ceased. His Men their sacred Vows renew,
And for Devotion to their Tents withdrew.
Where while Celestial Warmth their Breasts extend,
The Day in Prayers, and Hymns of Praise they end.
Heaven the Returning Penitents embraced,
And far away the Infernal Legions chased.
Their Guardian Angels once more take their Post,
Drawn out in bright Array, around their Host.
Twice had the Sun with dawning Glories blessed
The World, and called the Lab'rer from his rest,
As often the Night her Sable Vesture, set
With pearly Dew, ascends her Throne of Jet.
When certain Tidings Arthur's Camp alarmed,
That Octa's Men against the Britons armed,
Believing that the Britons thus distressed,
By Saxon Arms, might be with Ease oppressed.
With Octa Leagues, and Overtures of Peace,
When War shall offer more advantage, cease.
The Tidings soon through all the Army ran,
Whence in their Minds tormenting Fears began.
They thought their weakened Troops, could not oppose
The fierce Attack, of their insulting Foes.
The trouble spreads, all, their sad State bewail,
That those the Plague had spared, the Sword should now assail.
The pious Prince with heavy Grief oppressed,
To Heaven thus vents the trouble of his Breast.
Thou that from dark Egyptian Prisons freed,
As Shepherds do their Flocks, did Israel lead.
Who from between the Cherubs, did display
Thy Heavenly Glories, to direct their Way.
Whose mighty Arm extended, did secure
Their trembling Host, pursued by Pharoah's Power.
Shine forth, and with thy Beams dispel this Night,
Whose horrid Shades, my laboring Soul affright.
Stir up thy Strength, thy Foes, and ours invade,
And bring thy shining Myriads to our Aid.
Thou God of Light, reveal thy glorious Face,
Thy Rays will from the Sky, this Tempest chase.
Thee, all the unnumber'd Hosts of Heaven obey,
Drawn in embattl'd Lines, and bright Array
Along the Etherial Plains, and here below
Monarchs to thee, precarious Empires owe.
Pressed by our Enemies, to thee we fly,
How long will thou neglect thy People's Cry?
Bathed in our Tears, and pleased with Grief, we moan
Our solitary State, for God is gone.
Our Foes around, despise our Mournful State,
And on those Loads that press us, heap more Weight.
Our Enemies enraged, no Mounds between,
On us, like rising Waves, come roaring in.
Against the Relics thy fierce Wrath has spared,
The Foe's Inexorable Sword's prepared.
On me with Scorn the insulting Scoffers look,
As one, whom Heaven displeased has now forsook.
The Pagans make my Woes their sportful Theme.
Reproach thy Vot'ries, and thy Name blaspheme.
Stir up thy Power, thy glittering Arms assume,
Bowing the Heavens, to our Deliverance come.
As from the aspiring Mountains, raised around
Jerusalem, while it stood, Protection found.
So let a Guard, from thy bright Host detached,
TO encamp about our Army be dispatched.
Thou God of Truth arise, let the Heathen see,
Thy Wrath pursues perfidious Treachery.
While thus Prince Arthur Heavens Protection sought,
The God-like Raphael, this kind Message brought.
Thy Prayer prevails, O Prince, be not dismayed,
The Almighty's Arm is strecht out for your Aid.
Highly your Crimes Heaven's Majesty displeased,
But your Repentance has his Wrath appeased.
His People's Faults do but his Rod employ,
But his fierce Vengeance shall his Foes destroy.
Let not the Saxon's Numbers be their Pride,
You're stronger far, for God is on your Side
Abundantly your Loss is thus Supplied.
Arise, and let the Britons Courage take,
Their Arms shall drive the advancing Saxon back.
The Prince with Raphael's heavenly Message cheered,
Octa's unequal Force, no longer feared.
His cheerful Looks the drooping Britons saw,
And thence reviving Warmth, and Courage draw.
His God-like Language calms their troubled Minds,
And with its Charms reluctant Passions binds.
He to their frozen Veins new Life procures,
Dispels their Doubts, and fainting Hopes assures.
The Britons that before did scarcely dare
TO expect it, now resolve to meet the War.
They now no more the Fears of Danger own,
While Heaven assists, and Arthur leads them on.
Mean time illboding Prodigies affright
King Octa, and dissuade his Men from Fight,
The Birds of Heaven the gazing Augurs scare,
Crossing with inauspicious Flights the Air!
The Fowl as sacred kept, projected Meat,
Coldly regard, and sullenly retreat.
From hollow Oaks, obscene Night Ravens sung,
And clustring Bees upon their Ensigns hung.
Bullocks with Garlands crowned reluctant come,
Break from the Altar, and run lowing home.
Near silver Thamisis sweet Banks, there stood
Awful for solemn Shade, a lofty Wood.
Where they adored their God Irmansul named,
A warlike Idol, through Germania famed.
His Right Hand did a flowery Garland bear,
His Left held up a Balance in the Air.
His Breast a grisly Bear's fierce Figure bore,
And in his Shield a Lion seemed to roar.
Fresh gathered Flowers dispersed in Heaps around,
Gay Superstition, paint their sacred Ground.
Hither the Saxons, and their Priests repair,
TO atone their God, with Victims and with Prayer.
His Aid against the Britons to invoke,
While the tall Oaks with Clouds of Incense smoke.
The Priests the Wood to burn the Victim lay,
And a crowned Bullock at the Altar slay.
Their reeking Hands, ransack in vain the Breast,
To find the Heart of the prodigious Beast.
The Priests grow pale, and from their Altars start,
Finding a Victim slain without a Heart.
But that which most the gazing Saxons scare,
Are Armies seen engaging in the Air.
The highest ground of all the heavenly Way,
The Sun had gained, darting a downright Ray.
When two black Clouds appeared, one from the East
Threatening arose, the other from the West.
They stretched their lowering Fronts across the Sky,
And frowning, seemed each other to defy.
Between a Glade of free and open Air,
Did, as betwixt two spacious Woods, appear.
Then issuing from the Womb of either Cloud,
Two Armies met, and drawn in Battle stood.
The sickening Sun shone with a gloomy Ray,
Scared with the bloody Business of the Day.
Between them straight began a furious Fight,
And glittering Arms supplied the want of Light.
Eager of Glory from Heroic Deeds,
The Airy Knights spur on their foaming Steeds.
They rush to Battle with a full Career,
And tilting break their Lances in the Air.
Swords clashing Swords, and Shields rencountring Shields,
Fill with the Din of War the Etherial Fields.
Vaulting the Air, thick Showers of Arrows fly,
And warlike Labor troubles all the Sky.
A Bloody Field was fought, and Heaps of Slain
Seemed to overspread the wide Etherial Plain.
Chariots o'erturn'd, and scattered Harness by,
Steeds, and dismounted Riders, mingled ly.
From gaping Wounds, a Crimson Sea of Blood,
Along the Heavenly Pavement reeking flowed.
At last the Squadrons, in the Eastern Sky
Fell in Disorder, and began to fly.
The Conquerours hung upon their Backs, and chased
Their Troops, with mighty Rout through all the Wast.
Into the Clouds and Heavenly Wilds they fled,
And left upon the Bloody Field their Dead.
Next off the Theater the Victors go,
And into shapeless Air dissolving flow.
The laboring Scene, and Actors disappeared,
And of the War the Airy Stage was cleared.
Octa that viewed the important Prodigy,
Trembled to see the Eastern Army fly.
He wisely hid his Fears within his Breast,
And to his Captains thus himself expressed.
Let not vain Prodigies the Saxons scare,
Formed by the wanton Demons of the Air.
Wrapped in dark Clouds, the Will of Heaven's concealed,
To Mortals only by the Event revealed.
Think not fantastic Portents can declare
The Fate of Kingdoms, and Results of War.
These only weak, and vulgar Minds affright,
Like Phantoms, borrowing Horror from the Night.
Which, as capricious Nature's Play, the wise
From timorous Superstition free, despise.
The valiant on their Arms make Fortune wait,
And carve out to themselves propitious Fate.
Neglect these Dreams, the Gods are ever kind
To the best Troops, and to the undaunted Mind.
Great Caesar thus contemned his Augurs Tales,
Fights, and over Foes, and Portents too, prevails.
Thus Octa strove their Passion to appease,
And give them what himself enjoyed not, Ease.
At a small Village now unknown by Name,
There dwelt a Sorcerer of wondrous Fame.
The Pagan Briton Merlin, that of late
For his dire Art, driven from the British State;
Did with the Pagan Saxons safely dwell,
And kept his Correspondence up with Hell.
With potent Juices, and infernal Charms,
The black Magician, Plagues, and Mortal Harms,
And various Kinds of Mischiefs did inflict
On those, whom Heaven was pleased he should afflict.
He in the silent Night while Mortals sleep,
By Hedg-rows, Lakes, or over the Hills would creep.
To gather baleful Herbs, with which he drew
Familiar Fiends, that round, like Ravens, flew.
Mounting his Magic Wand, he through the Air
To rich Nocturnal Feasts would often repair,
Spread on green Hills, or near some shady Wood,
Or Grassy Banks of some sweet River's Flood;
Where when the infernal Company are met,
Rich Meats, and Wines on stately Tables set
They seem to taste, and by the Moon's pale Light,
Spend in Fantastic Luxury, the Night.
But from the imaginary Banquet come,
At the gray Dawning, lank and meagre, home.
King Octa's Servants at their Lord's Command,
With their unrighteous Wages in their Hand,
To Merlin come, and soon prevaild to bring
The famed Magician, to their anxious King.
Whom Octa thus bespoke,
The Miracles, your sacred Art has shown,
Make you through all the wondering Island known.
Let your prodigious Power my Army Guard,
Honor and Riches shall be your Reward.
The Foe we'll now engage but let him first
Be here by you, and your Enchantments cursed.
Curse then this impious Enemy your Breath
Will blast their Strength, and fatal prove as Death.
Your Curse and that of Fate, is deemed the same,
And whom you bless the World does blessed proclaim.
Assault their Camp with all your magic Powers,
You Will curse your mortal Foes, as well, as ours.
Revenge your Wrongs, and by your potent Charms,
Draw off the Guardian Gods, that help their Arms.
Come with me then, I will a Mountain show,
From whose high Top you may their Army view.
There we'll atone the Gods with Prayer and thence
You shall your Curses on the Foe dispense.
Then Octa to a Mount the Sorc'rer led,
Whence through the Vale he saw the Britons spread.
Seven Altars they erect, and in the Flames,
Seven Bullocks sacrifice, and seven Rams.
Here Octa and his Lords, their Gods adored,
And kneeling round the Flames, their Aid implored.
At last, the Night advancing to her Noon,
Merlin conducted by the silver Moon,
From Octa, to a neighboring Hill withdraws,
TO observe infernal Rites, and magic Laws.
He seeks out noxious Plants, whose powerful Juice,
Magicians for their strong Enchantments use.
Green Henbane, Wormwood, Hemlock, Savine Top
In whose pressed Juice he dipped his magic Sops,
With Plants that to the Moon their Virtue owe,
And Toadstools, that from Storms of Thunder grow.
Which mixed with humane Fat, red Hair, and Blood,
He offers up cast on the Burning Wood.
Then with his potent Wand, he walks around,
And with dire Circles, marks the enchanted ground.
Then did he with a mutt'ring Voice rehearse
Wondrous, mysterious Words, and potent Verse.
The infernal Charms all Nature did affright,
The waning Moon straight sickned at the Sight.
The Hill with Horror trembled, and around
With howling Wolves the neighboring Woods resound.
Then Storms of Rain ensue, swift Lightnings fly,
And dreadful Thunderclaps torment the Sky.
Specter, and Ghosts break from their hollow Tomb,
And glaring round the Necromancer come.
All Hell was moved, the Powers drawn from their Seats
Arise, while Merlin his dire words repeats.
Whom with his Charms he labors to engage
Against the Britons, and excites their Rage.
His powerful Arts incline them to employ
United force, their Army to destroy.
But Hell and all its Friends, vain Rage express,
And Curse in vain, when Heaven desires to Bless.
Merlin his impious Ceremonies done,
Returns to Octa with the rising Sun.
Before the Saxon Lords he stood, prepared
To Curse their Foes, and merit his Reward.
When the Magician's Breast an unknown Fire
Lapsed from above did suddenly inspire.
A warmth Divine his Spirits did invade,
And once a Sorcerer, a Prophet made.
The Heavenly Fury Merlin did constrain
To Bless, whom he to Curse designed in vain.
How Beautiful the Briton's Tents appear?
What goodly Heads his Tabernacles Rear?
As the rich Vales they spread their verdant Pride,
Or flowery Gardens by the Rivers side.
As shady Aloes in the Arabian Woods,
Or lofty Cedars planted by the Floods.
Indulgent Heaven upon the Briton pours
Prolifick Dews, and sweet refreshing Showers.
His Seed shall flourish midst surrounding Streams,
Blessed with mild Air, and pure reviving Beams.
His Prince's Glory, shall his People's Love,
And Neighbor Monarchs Fear, and Envy, move.
He, like a fearless Unicorn shall stand
Sure of his strength, and all the Fields command.
Those hostile Nations who oppose his Power,
He with resistless Fury shall devour.
He Will break their crashing Bones, his Bow he will bend,
And through their Flesh, his piercing Arrows send.
He couches like a Lion on the Sand,
Like a vast Lion in a Desert Land.
Stretching his fearful Limbs at Ease he lies,
What Creature dares provoke him to arise?
Bless him, and be of happy Men the first,
Curse him, and thou thy self shall be accursed.
He ceased. King Octa tho incensed, suppressed
His Trouble and Displeasure in his Breast,
And to the Sorcerer, thus himself addressed.
By solemn Execrations, to devote
The Britons to Destruction, you were sought.
But, you this impious Nation choose to Bless,
And all your Words presage their Arms success.
Withdraw a second time, perhaps you will find
The Gods, by your Enchantments more inclined.
Perhaps some Error might at first displease,
A second Essay will the Powers appease.
The Sorcerer a second time retreats,
And all his potent Charms with Care repeats.
He added every poisonous Juice, and Spell
He knew had force to shake the Realms of Hell.
Merlin his impious Rites performed, returns,
And acted by Satanick Fury burns.
All Hell within shook the Magician's Breast,
But by a Power Divine straight dispossessed;
The affrighted Demons fled, and in their stead
A pure Celestial Spirit did succeed.
Transports Divine, his laboring Soul engage,
And thus he spoke, moved with Prophetic Rage.
In vain with Divination, we assail
The Christian Arms, where all Enchantments fail.
Our Curses by the powerful Breath of Heaven,
Back on our Heads, with fatal Force are driven.
Those God has blessed, no Guards nor Bulwarks need,
Nor can their Arms, whom he has cursed, succeed.
Unchangeably he is on his Purpose bent,
Nor does he, like unstable Man, repent.
The Christian Army will prevail, that said,
Observing Octa's Fury rise, he fled.
The King incensed, cried, cursed Magician fly,
Spite of thy Charms, and thee, shall Victory,
And Triumph, on the Saxon Arms attend,
Against such Troops what Signs can ill portend?
Thy impious Tongue Propitious Heaven belies;
And for the Britons forges Prophecies.
Thy self of British Blood, the British Cause
Stronger than Wrongs, or even Religion draws.
So often poor Slaves, who to a neighbr'ing State
Fly for Protection from a Tyrants Hate,
If he does War against those Neighbors wage,
And with his Arms, upon their Frontiers rage.
Joy at the Oppressor's Conquests and Success,
Against their own Protector's, they express.
Octa at this Defeat with Fury burned,
And to his Army with his Lords returned.
Amidst his Troops he rode, and thus he spoke,
His Voice high raised their Courage to provoke.
Saxons, you now to certain Conquest go,
To glean the Relics of a ruined Foe.
The Gods do loudly for your cause declare,
And call you, but to finish their own War.
Think on the Deeds by your great Nation done
The Towns they took, their glorious Battles won,
And the Rich Countries by their Arms over run,
From this fair Island shall the Britons chase,
From these sweet Fields, great Odin's warlike Race?
From these sweet Fields, for which our Leaders fought,
Which with the noblest Saxon Blood were bought.
Shall we with ignominious Flight retreat,
Over the rough Main, to seek some milder Seat?
Or shall we back to our cold Region go,
To hide in Caves, and dwell in Hills of Snow?
Can my victorious Friends the Britons dread,
Who from your conquering Arms so often have fled,
A vanquished Nation, by an Exile led?
Appear like Saxons, add this Conquest more,
To all the immortal Laurels won before.
Thus you will the Grounds of lasting Empire lay,
And still the Briton shall your Laws obey.
Vain with Success at Sea, they draw their Swords,
And for Dominion strive with us, their Lords.
Let now your Arms chastise their wanton Pride,
And then in unmolested Peace abide.
He said, and brandished high his threatening Lance,
And springing forward, bids his Men advance.
Now from the Hills the embattel'd Saxon Swarms,
And covers all the Plain with hostile Arms.
As when the great Commanders, Orders give
To quit the straight Dominions of their Hive,
The Bees pour out a numerous Colony;
From their sweet Cells, the busy Youth on high
Wheel in the Air, and darken all the Sky.
While brazen Pans charm and compose their Heat,
In some tall neighboring Tree they fix their Seat.
Thither the unnumber'd Vulgar straight resort,
And clustring Crowds, surround their Monarch's Court.
So thick the Saxons on the Field appear,
Following their Leader with an endless Rear.
The gloomy Throngs look terrible from far,
Disclosing slow, the horrid Face, of War.
The thick Battalions move in dreadful Form,
As lowering Clouds advance before a Storm.
So when the Sea grown black, the hazy Sky,
And rising Winds, foretell a Tempest nigh.
The experienced Mariners with hasty care
Furl their spread Sails, and for a Storm prepare.
Straight in the black Horizon, to the Skies
The dusky Billows threatening Heads arise.
The unnumber'd Troops upon each others throng,
And with a gloomy Aspect march along.
Advancing, they their boundless Front extend
Over all the Main, and fearful Wreck portend.
The Saxon Host thus in its March appears,
And where it came, thick Groves of bristling Spears,
Broad Iron Backs, and Breast-plates, brazen Shields,
Mail-Coats, and burnished Helms overspread the Fields.
Chariots of War in Clouds of Dust advance,
And tossing up their Foam, the thundering Coursers Prance.
Their Army's Wings stretched out, they to the Foes
A long extended Ridge of War oppose.
The British Squadrons tho outnumber'd far,
Run boldly on the horrid Edge of War.
To make their Front, the thin Battalions ran,
But stretched not equal to the Saxon Van.
Both Armies thus, ranged in Battalia stood,
And Death prepared her thirsty Jaws for Blood.
From the Celestial Host, a glorious Band
Of Seraphs was detached by high Command.
Hither the shining Warriors did repair,
And drawn in long Array, stood in the Air.
Their Blades divinely tempered flamed on high,
And blazing Shields inlighten all the Sky;
Impenetrable Shields, drawn from the Towers
Of Heaven's high Ars'nal, filled with warlike Stores.
The Angelick Cuirassiers, in Armor shone
Of Adamant, from Rocks Empyreal hewn.
High milk white Plumes, like Snowy Clouds arise,
From their bright Crests, and Nod against the Skies.
Rich Helmets, of Immortal beaten Gold
Adorn their Heads, Brass of Etherial mould
Refined above, their joynted Gauntlets made;
Brass, that the Teeth of Time can never invade.
Broad silver Belts richly embroidered over,
Rare Seraphs work, their shining Shoulders bore
And round them Sky-dy'd Purple Scarfs they wore.
Michael a Prince in Heaven of first renown,
Who, like a Sun, high in his Chariot shone;
This bright Detachment did in Chief Command,
Charged to maintain strict Guard, and to withstand
The Attempts, that might by Hellish Fiends be made,
Sent by their Prince the Christian to invade.
While Lucifer on the white Mountain's Head,
His black, Infernal Crew about him spread;
With Malice, Rage, and Pride extended sat
High on his dusky Throne, resolved to wait,
And see, if this important 'Day's Event,
Would answer with success, his cursed intent.
In glittering Arms the dazzling Prince appears,
Before his Troops, the Saxon sees, and fears.
His Helm of polished Steel braced round his Head,
Did over the Field, a glorious Terror spread.
Bright Stones, and high raised Needle Work adorn
The shining Belt across his Shoulders worn.
His fatal Sword. the Bane of Gothic Pride,
With fearful Grace hung by his warlike Side.
Odar the Neustrian of this famous Blade
Inured to Victory, a Present made
To Arthur, when from Albion first he came,
To Odar's Camp, to win Heroic Fame.
Lodar did with this Gift King Odar grace,
A valiant Hero of the Neustrian Race.
His radiant Shield, of Brass its outmost Fold,
The inmost tempered Steel, the midst of Gold,
Was the rare Work of Lycon's skilful Toil,
From which unpeirc'd, the sharpest Darts recoil.
Bright, like a Sun, it did fierce Glory dart,
Where might be seen portrayed with wondrous Art,
Strong Towns besieged, and famous Battles won,
And great Exploits by ancient Heroes done;
Who to defend their Country, bravely fought,
By Men inspired, in sacred Volumes wrote.
Here the Israelites, kind Heaven's peculiar Care,
Their famous General Joshua leads to War.
The Rocky Desert past with wondrous Toil,
With Marches worn, and heavy with the Spoil
From vanquished Baashan and King Sihon won,
Where their illustrious Triumphs first begun,
Advance their Ensigns, Canaan to invade,
Ripe by their full grown Sins for Conquest made.
To Iordan's Streams they come, straight to his Head
His Waves rolled back, obsequious Jordan fled.
The naked Channel shows his sandy Face,
And gives the Favorite Nation leave to pass.
The astonished Canaanites, like Jordan, fly,
And weep to see their Guardian River dry.
Here valiant Gideon, with his Troop by Night,
Marched out to attack the haughty Midianite.
The Foe, like Locusts, numberless was poured
Around the Vale, and all its Fruits devoured.
But dreading Gideon's Arms, the Spoilers fly,
And by his Sword, and by their own, they die.
King Zeba, and Zalmunna, with a throng
Of Captive Princes, draw their Chains along.
Here in the plain, stretched like some spacious Wood,
In long Array, the thronged Philistines stood.
Goliath issuing from their opening Files,
Of Bulk stupendous, hideous with the Spoils
Of yellow Lions slain, and shaggy Bears,
Towering before their shouting Host, appears.
With haughty Air, the wondrous Figure strode,
His Sword his Trust, and his right Hand his God.
Beneath his Weight the Valley seemed to shake,
But his pale Foes did more than seem to quake
Gnashing his Teeth the grinning Monster stood,
Himself an Army, and his Spear a Wood.
Sufficient Stores whole Mines could scarcely yield,
For his wide Cuirass, and prodigious Shield.
Where Figures portrayed of fierce Monsters shone,
But none so fierce, and monstrous as his own.
High in the Clouds his brazen Helm did show
Like some vast Temple's gilded Cupilo.
His mighty Legs, that brazen Boots embraced,
Tall Pillars seemed, with Corinth Metal cased.
Thus armed he stood, and by his Mein did seem
To curse aloud, to threaten and blaspheme.
His beck'ning Hand held proudly up, invites
To combat, all the trembling Hebrew Knights.
Tho vast of Bulk he bigger swells with Pride,
He cursed their Army, and their Gods defied.
Here, God-like David, in the flowery Bloom
Of Youth, and Beauty, brings the Monster's Doom.
To kindle Love, or Pity fitter far,
Then the rough Passions, that attend on War.
And likelier by his Youth's engaging Charms
To wound the Anakite, then with his Arms.
Yet bravely he embraced the unequal War,
And scorned his Rage that cursed him from afar.
The fatal Stone by the young Hero flung,
Cut through the Air, and sure of Triumph sung.
It pierced the Cyclops Head, his Carcass fell
Swift to the Ground, his Soul, as swift to Hell.
Fallen on his Face, he bites the trembling Ground.
And Brains, and Gore break through the gaping Wound.
Wallowing he lay a vast extended Load,
Like a great Island, in a Sea of Blood.
His ghastly Eye Balls strive with parting Light,
And swim, and roll into eternal Night.
Here Saul received the charming conquering Boy,
The Captains blushed for Shame, and wept for Joy.
His Brothers grieved to see the glorious Day,
Prompted with Pride, and Envy shrunk away.
Here Judah's Daughter flowery Garlands bring,
They crown young David, and presage him King.
In Songs and Dances they his Deeds proclaim,
And Readiness is lessened, to advance his Fame.
Here mighty Sampson, hot with Martial Rage,
A numerous Army does alone engage.
His Sword high waved, reeking in Sweat and Blood,
Over slaughtered Heaps, the invading Conqueror strode
His fatal Arms, his Foes no longer bear,
But their whole Host flies from his single Spear.
Confusedly over the Field lay spread about,
Wide Ruin, Spoils, and ignominious Rout.
Here valiant David's Troops victorious come,
From their Assyrian Expedition home.
Vast were the Spoils, that from the glorious Day
Won on Damascus's Plains, they bore away.
King Hadadezer's Arms in Triumph born,
And Purple Robes by their soft Princes worn,
And sparkling Gems, that did their Ears adorn.
Rich Collars, Chains, and blazing Shields of Gold,
Vast Silver Bowls, that richer Metal hold.
High gilded Dishes, graven or embossed,
Treasure immense, that Syria had engrossed.
Purple Pavilions once in lofty Rows,
And Crimson Beds, where Monarchs did repose.
Unnumber'd Camels, laden and oppressed,
With all the Luxury of the wanton East,
Beneath the Booty groaned along the Road,
Themselves a Prey, as was their precious Load.
Here ran gilt Chariots drawn by generous Steeds,
Such as the noble Soil of Asia breeds.
Here Royal Captives, and chained Lords appear,
And vulgar Slaves, pressed with an endless Rear.
Here the great Constantine of British Race,
Over Tyber's Bridge, does fierce Maxentius chase.
With Roman Blood the swelling Rivers died,
And Helms, and Shields roll down the Crimsom Tide.
Spears, broken Armor, Men, and Coursers slain,
The Streams encumber, and the Flood detain.
Great Constantine in glittering Armor shines,
And pressing on, breaks through the Roman Lines.
Maxentius Hopes are blasted in the Bloom,
He flies, and opens wide the Gates of Rome,
To the Victorious Christian, and his God,
Where for a while, he made his blessed abode.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK VIII.
THus in resplendent Arms Prince Arthur shines,
Darting bright Terror through the Saxon Lines.
All at his fearful Presence were amazed,
And on the glorious Foe with Wonder gazed.
Confusion seized them, and a chilling Damp
Went to their Hearts through all the trembling Camp.
And now the vaulted Sky rings with the Noise
Of Soldiers Shoutings, and shrill Trumpets Voice.
The British Prince waving his flaming Blade,
The Saxon's strong Battalions did invade.
First Baldred fell a bold and daring Knight,
That rushing forward did his Fate invite.
The Javelin through his Shield of treble Hide,
And Coat of Mail, pierced deep into his Side.
Eska the second Triumph did afford,
His Head struck off by Arthur's conquering Sword.
Next grovelling on the Ground great Ina lies,
And the brave Orla of stupendous Size.
Whose Clubs like that Alcides used to weild,
Laid whole Brigades, on Heaps upon the Field.
Neither their Arms, nor Stature, nor Descent,
From mighty Osca could their Fate prevent.
As Pharo boasted loud, and threatened Death,
The Javelin pierced his Throat, and stopped his Breath.
Kinullar next the conquering Prince withstood,
A valiant Captain, and of noble Blood.
Resisted by his Shield the Saxon's Spear
Flew off, and passed obliquely through the Air.
Here on the Prince Cissa exclaiming loud,
Rushed in, and pres'd him with a numerous Crowd.
Thick showers of Javelins with a mighty Sound,
Like Storms of Hail, from his bright Shield rebound.
The Prince enraged caught up his Spear in have,
Which he at Cissa with such Fury cast
It pierced his famous Buckler's seventh Fold,
And his Rich Coat daubed thick with ponderous Gold.
Then deep between the Paps the Weapon went,
And its last Force in his warm Bosom spent.
Flat on his Face the Bleeding Saxon lies,
And rat'ling in his Throat stretched out, and dies.
Mollo rushed in and with his hand did wrest
The bloody Weapon from his Brother's Breast,
And boldly to attack the Prince advanced,
But from his shield the unprosperous Weapon glanced.
The Prince's spear through Mollo's Shield of Brass
Through His Habergion, and his Breast did pass.
Mollo of Sense bereaved fell to the Ground,
And spewed black Blood, both for his Mouth and Wound,
Striving the invading Hero to repel,
Alcinor, Peda, and Darontes fell,
Three Men of wondrous Strength and warlike Fame,
Who from the farthest Snows of Scythia came;
Descended all from Otha's noble Line,
Whose glorious Deeds in Saxon Records shine.
He was victorious Odin's constant Friend,
And all his Toils, and Conquests did attend,
Then Cerdic with his Troops the Prince withstands,
Sustained by Sebert, and the East Saxon Bands.
Now these, now those, the British Prince attack,
And press on every side, to force him back.
As when two adverse Hurricanes arise,
Must'ring their stormy Forces in the Skies.
Of equal Fury, and of equal Force,
Against each other bend their rapid Course.
The Clouds their Lines extend in black Array,
And Front to Front a fearful War display.
Exploded Flames against each other fly,
And fiery Arches Vault the inlighten'd Sky.
Conflicting Billows, against Billows dash,
Thunder against Thunder roars, Lightnings against Lightnings flash.
Nor Flames, nor Winds, nor Waves, nor Clouds will yield,
But equal strength maintains a doubtful Field.
Britons and Saxons thus in Battle strove,
And neither from their Ground the Foe remove.
Then Valiant Cadwal threatening from afar
High in his Chariot, plunged into the War.
His strong, extended Arm his Javelin flung;
Cutting the Air, the hissing Weapon sung.
Falling on Kingills Shield it pierced the Hide
Of treble Fold, and entered deep his Side.
Fainting and stagg'ring Kingill backwards reeled
Then fell with sounding Arms upon the Field.
Gasping he lay, and from his ghastly Wound,
His Crimson Life ebbed out upon the Ground.
And next his fatal Shaft at Bertac flew
With mighty Force, and pierced his Breastplate through.
The secret Springs of Life the pointed Dart.
Broke open, and transfixt his generous Heart.
His Wound from gaping Channels inward bled,
And on his Shoulder hung his lolling Head.
He fell, and Shivering gasp'd his latest Breath,
And fainting sunk into the Arms of Death:
A noble Youth worthy of milder Fate,
But Death's blind Strokes distinguish not the great.
At last the Saxon Troops in Throngs surround,
The valiant King, Thus far with Conquest crowned.
Thick Showers of Darts from every Side invade,
And in his Shield a bristling Harvest staid.
The undaunted Hero long their Force sustained,
And held at Bay; the unequal War maintained:
Like a chafed Boar that in a sheltring Wood,
The clamorous Dogs surround King Cadwall stood.
A noble Rage did in his Breast arise,
And Streaks of Fire break from his burning Eyes.
So when by Night the Islandian Ocean roars,
And rolls its angry Waters to the Shores.
Flashes of Light, and fiery Luster glance
From raging Waves, that in bright Troops advance.
With his refulgent Sword the Warrior flew,
Upon the Crowd, and cut his Passage through.
Soga and Kenrick from the Hilly Land
Where Sorbiodunum's lofty Castles stand;
Two constant Friends, whom Fate could not divide,
Together by the Britons Weapon died.
Then Redburg Alfry and Theodrick fell,
Striving in vain the Victor to repel.
Great Numbers more he slew, whose vulgar Name
To those, in after Ages never came.
As a high Rock, which the vast Ocean laves,
Exposed to stormy Winds, and raging Waves,
On its fixed Base unshaken does defy
The united Fury of the Seas, and Sky.
So 'midst surrounding Foes, brave Cadwall stood,
About him flowed a Sea of Hostile Blood.
He slew Rovennar, with his mighty Sword,
And Saradan a great west Saxon Lord.
Valiant Elmunor, to his Country dear,
And Osith died, by his projected Spear.
Octa enraged to see the numerous Spoils
Round Cadwall spread, sprung through the thronging Files.
Rushing with Fury on, and threatening high
He thus aloud, did to the Briton cry.
Cadwall on me let all your Force be spent,
Hither be all your pointed Javelins sent.
Here see a Foe that will your Pride abate,
Or in the glorious Combat meet his Fate:
At this his massy Spear with Vigor sent,
Through valiant Cadwalls shining Buckler went.
Through all the Plates of Brass, and all the Plies
Of thick Bull's Hide, the impetuous Weapon flies.
Which bruised his Thigh, and springing from his Veins
A crimson Stream his polished Armor Stains.
Cadwall incensed his Spear at Octa flung,
Which in his tempered Shield arrested hung.
A second hissing Weapon Octa cast,
Which the interposing Buckler never past.
But glancing on the Steel, away it flew
And with an oblique Stroke, Idwallo slew.
Then Cadwall chafed, exerting all his Force,
His second sends, with unresisted Course.
Through Octa's brazen Shield it Passage found,
Inflicting on his Side, a painful Wound.
Their missive Weapons spent with equal Chance,
To closer Fight the Combatants advance.
Equal in Strength, alike in Combat brave,
Their Swords on high, like circ'ling Flames they wave.
Both traversing the Ground for Fight prepare,
And with Heroic Ardor meet the War.
And Octa first discharged a noble Stroke
On Cadwalls Crest, which through his Helmet broke:
Cadwall amazed, recoyl'd, and backwards reeled,
And scarce his Spear his tottering Limbs upheld.
A loud Applause rang through the shouting Host;
The Britons raged, and thought their Hero lost;
But he recov'ring from the amazing Blow,
Collects his Strength to meet the insulting Foe.
His brandished Blade fell with prodigious Sway,
And through the yielding Cuirasse, forced its Way.
The gaping Wound poured out a Vital Tide,
And Crimson Streams his burnished Armor died.
Octa his wounded Body wreaths in Pain,
And viewing on his Limbs the Bloody Stain,
With angry Eyes calls back his Life again.
And then assaults the Foe with doubled Rage,
Who meets his Arms, as eager to engage.
Fresh Strokes, fresh Wounds, they give on either side,
While Victory does for neither Sword decide.
VVeak with their VVounds, and with bruised Armor pained
An equal, noble Combat they maintained.
Feeble and Breathless still they keep the Field,
Unable more their blunted Arms to wield.
And now the Throng rushed in, the Combat done
By neither Hero lost, by neither won.
And rending with their Shouts the tortured Air,
Back to their Files, the Combatants they bear.
So when two valiant Cocks in Albion bred,
That from the insulting Conqueror never fled.
A Match in Strength, in Courage, and in Age,
And with keen Weapons armed alike Engage;
Each other they assault with furious Beaks,
And their trimmed Plumes distain with bloody Streaks.
Each nimble Warrior from the Pavement bounds,
And winged with Death, their Heels deal ghastly Wounds.
By turns they take, by turns fierce Strokes they give,
And with like Hopes and Fears, for Conquest strive.
Both obstinate maintain the Bloody Field,
Both can in Combat dye, but neither yield.
Till with their bleeding Wounds grown weak and faint,
And choked with flowing Gore they gasp, and pant.
Disabled on the Crimson Floor they ly,
Both Honor win, but neither Victory.
Then Morogan, his Javelin in his Hand,
Charged the fierce Troops where Ella did Command.
Wigmunda, first his deadly Weapon felt,
Who on the flowery Banks of Oza dwelt,
Fallen on the ground, the Saxon groaned aloud,
And dying, lay deformed with Dust and Blood.
Next Ethelbright he slew, the Javelin past,
Through the brave Leader's Hand, where sticking fast
He from the Battle fled, and through the throng
Complaining loud, trail'd his huge Spear along.
To fight the Briton, Thedred did advance
And in his Buckler broke his pondrous Lance.
High in the Air the scattered pieces flew,
When Morogan, his ample Fauchion drew;
He mist the mighty stroke aimed at his Crest,
But cleft his Shoulder down into his Chest:
Through the prodigious Wound, a Sea of Blood
Spouts from his Veins, and down his Armor flowed,
Weltring in Gore, upon the Ground he stretched,
And his last Breath in thick Convulsions fetched.
Next he his Spear at great Merthellan throws,
Through Breast, and Back, the deadly Weapon goes.
Then warlike Ella, with excessive Rage
All fired, advanced the Briton to engage.
As two chafed Lions on a Lybian Plain,
Contending which shall over the Desert reign,
With raging Eyes, and fierce erected Hair,
Scowr over the Sands, to meet the horrid War;
So furious Ella, and great Morogan,
Eager of Conquest, to the Combat ran.
The Saxon first his massy Javelin flung,
With the vast Stroke, the Briton's Target rung,
The Tempered Steel the Weapon did repel,
Which flew aside, and at a Distance fell.
The Briton next, did his bright Javelin throw,
Ella his Head inclined, eludes the Blow.
Ella with all his Might his second cast,
Which mist, but stroke the Plume off, as it past
The Briton stopped, and lifted from the Field
A ponderous Stone, which both his Hands did weild,
So vast, that two in our degenerate Days,
Tho Men of Strength, the like can scarcely raise;
With all his Strength he throws the craggy Stone,
Which through King Ella's Leg-piece, crushed the Bone.
The wounded Warrior fell upon the Plain,
Adda advanced, the Conqueror to Sustain;
While Gomel with his Men did Ella bear
From the hot Place of Action, to the Rear,
Where Charioteer, and Steeds, and Chariot stay,
Waiting his coming from the Bloody Day.
Mean time great Morogan, had Adda slain,
The Spear had through his Forehead pierced his Brain.
Biting the Ground, the expiring Saxon lies,
And Death's unwelcome shade o'erspreads his Eyes.
And with like Courage, and with like Success,
The brave Prince Conan did the Saxons press,
Which Osred led, great Numbers he destroyed,
Whose putrid Blood, the slippery Field annoyed.
Sefred, Carantes, Molinoc he slew,
And Ethelfrid, in Arms surpassed by few.
Oswy, and Bassa, all of warlike Fame,
And many more, of unrecorded Name.
Thus Valiant Conan, triumphed in the Field,
And all he met, did to his Courage yield.
Until a sculking, unknown hand, at last
Did unperceived, a pointed Javelin cast:
Deep in his Arm, the inglorious Weapon goes,
His Wound the Blood upon his Armor shows,
He drew the Steel out, from his bleeding Veins,
And from the Field, retired in torturing Pains.
Mean time, out-number'd in another part,
Macor's Danmonian Troops began to start.
Macor to stop their ignominious Flight,
And give them Spirit to renew the Fight;
Now sharp Reproaches used, and bitter Threats,
And now with Prayers he earnestly entreats.
Enraged, ashamed, and fearing open Rout,
Exclaiming loud, he wildly flew about.
He stays them with his Hands, and Voice, and Eyes,
And to confirm their sinking Courage, cries,
Whither will my Danmonians madly run,
And leave behind a Victory almost won?
What pannick Fear does my brave Friends invade?
Till now, you never knew to be afraid.
Think on the Brav'ry you have always shown,
And Laurels you and your great Fathers won.
By their great Deeds, and yours, by Cador's Name,
By all my Hopes and yours which are the same.
By the Danmonian Fame, I all conjure
Trust not to Flight, your Arms must you secure.
Who will maintain their Ground, if you recoil?
Thus do you mean to guard your Native Soil?
To what new Seats will you from Albion fly?
Or will you in the Rocks and Mountains ly?
Britons return from your inglorious Flight,
Rally your Forces, and renew the Fight.
To Safety, and to Fame the way I Will show,
See, here it lies, across the thickest Foe.
He said, and straight amidst the Troops he flew,
Osher the first he met, the first he slew.
He pierced his Belly through the yielding Shield,
And out his Bowels gushed upon the Field.
To aid his Friend, constant Eballan flies,
But wounded by the Briton, with him dies.
Then while Adulphas, Bertham's Offspring stands,
Poising a pondrous Stone in both his Hands,
The mighty Fragment of a craggy Rock,
And aimed at Macor's Head, a deadly Stroke.
Through his pierced Side the Javelin made its Way,
And buried, in his bleeding Liver lay.
Then you brave Youths, Egbert, and Alopas,
Both noble Branches of great Horsa's Race,
Their Age the same, the same their youthful Charms,
Fell in the British Fields by Macor's Arms.
This 'twixt the Ribs received the fatal Dart,
Where transverse Bounds the Breast and Belly part.
Lopt from the Shoulder with a fearful Wound,
TO other's Right Arm lay quivering on the Ground.
Now the Danmonians who began to run,
Seeing the Wonders by their Leader done,
With Shame and generous Indignation burn,
And to the War with doubled Rage return.
Then Macor let his Spear at Redwall fly
In his bright Chariot, passing swiftly by.
It passed his Shield, and went into his Reins,
A Purple Flood, springs from his wounded Veins,
And mixed with Dust, the fervid Wheels detains.
Projected headlong on the Ground he lay,
Fetched a deep Groan, and gasp'd his Life away.
With like Success his Men no more afraid,
Of Saxon Arms, their thickest Files invade.
So when dissolved by Summer Rays, the Snow
Does down the Sides of Alpine Mountains flow,
Below the several Rills, and Currents join,
And different Streams in one great Flood combine.
Then does the Deluge rear its foaming Head,
O'er-flow the Banks, and over the Meadows spread.
No lofty Mounds arrest the insulting Tide,
But over the flowery Vale, the Waves triumphant ride,
So the Danmonian scattered Troops unite,
And with associate Arms, revive the Fight.
Here to restrain Macor's victorious Course,
Bartha, opposed a fresh collected Force.
From his strong Arm his singing Javelin flew,
And passing through his Neck Guitardan slew.
He hurled his Ball of Iron at the Head
Of stout Gomallador, and struck him dead.
His Helm in Pieces flew, his Bones were crash'd.
And from his Scull his Blood and Brains were dashed.
Macor incensed, advances to the Fight,
And prayed to Heaven, to guide his Weapon right.
Nor did he pray in vain, the unerring Dart
Transfixt his Breast, and sunk into his Heart.
Strong Bartha fell, the Blood his Armor stains,
And shivering Death crept cold along his Veins.
But to revenge so great a Captain's Fall,
Lothar aloud does on his Saxons call.
First Lodoic he slew, who stood the Shock,
Of War before unshaken as a Rock.
Strong Mandubrace, of whom the Britons tell
Such mighty Deeds, by the brave Saxon fell.
Beauteous Codunan the Silurians Pride,
And warlike Hanomer together died.
Their Leaders brave alike, alike enraged
The Britons, and the Saxon close engaged
An obstinate, and bloody Fight maintain,
And Heaps of Dead, ly thick upon the Plain.
Dark Clouds of Dust through the airy Region fly,
And warlike Noise bounds from the vaulted Sky.
Helms mixed with Helms, and Arms with Arms unite
Their bright Reflection, to oppress the Sight.
Now Man at Man, Squadrons at Squadrons rush,
And Files at Files with Spears protended push.
Swords clash with Swords, Bucklers on Bucklers bray,
And through the Field a horrid Din convey.
Slaughter and Death in dreadful Pomp appear,
And Brains, and Gore, the slippery Field besmear:
So when two adverse Tides their Waves advance,
With equal Fury, and with equal Chance;
The foaming Forces, doubtful Fight maintain,
Where both by Turns loose, what by Turns they gain.
On this Side now retreats the vanquished Tide,
And on its back the insulting Billows ride.
Rallying its roaring Troops with swift Career,
It soon returns, and reassumes the War.
The Conqueror before is forced to yield,
And rolling back its Waves deserts the Field.
Alternate Conquest, and alternate Flight,
Between the Foes prolong a doubtful Fight.
So thick the Troops, so fast and close were pressed,
The wedged Batalions standing Breast to Breast,
They scarce have space their Hands or Arms to move
But like contending Waves each other shove.
Here Macor urges, presses, and invades,
Here Lothur stops him with his strong Brigades.
Equal in Arms, in Beauty, and in Age,
But not allowed each other to engage,
On both the valiant Youths a different Fate,
From a far greater Foe does shortly wait.
King Cerdick then advanced exclaiming loud
And with his rapid Chariot cuts the Crowd.
And to the Troops that stopped his way, he cried
Open to right and left, your Ranks divide,
Macor and I this Contest will decide.
Nor did the Saxon Troops his Will oppose,
But open, and an Ample Space disclose.
Then leaping to the Ground his pondrous Oak,
Pointed with polished Steel, he threatening shook.
At such a Sight the amazed Danmonians start,
And their chill Blood congealed about their Heart.
Macor undaunted, traverses the Ground,
And at the Saxon aims a fatal Wound.
Then through the Air his Spear projected flew,
And from its Sheath his slaming Sword he drew.
The Buckler's Brims the glancing Weapons razed
And flying off, on the right Shoulder grazed.
Then Cerdick's Javelin poised, and aimed with Care,
Flew from his Arm, and hissing cut the Air.
Who cried out as it went, go swiftly fly,
And the hard Metal of his Armor try.
While Cerdick thus insults the impetuous Oak,
Through Buckler, Coat of Mail and Cuirass broke,
And pierced his Breast where the deep Springs abide,
Whence Life leaps out upon its circ'ling Tide.
The Vital Streams through his bruised Armor spout,
While he in vain wrests the warm Weapon out.
After the parting Dart, together crowd
From the wide Wound, his Soul, and Life, and Blood.
He fell, his Arms upon his Armor rung,
And Death in cold Embraces round him clung.
Thus fell the brave Danmonian who had slain,
Such Numbers pil'd on Heaps upon the Plain.
His Friends with Sighs, and Tears upon a Shield,
Bear his pale Corpse off from the bloody Field.
Cerdick his Weapon warm with Macor's Blood,
Advanced with Fury not to be withstood.
With his drawn Sword he does the Foe invade,
And midst their Ranks prodigious Havoc made.
The Britons all enraged at Macor's Fall,
With Showers of Darts the raging Saxon gaul.
On every Side the Monarch they assail,
With thick Brigades, but cannot yet prevail.
As when a mighty Stag, that long had stood,
The unmolested Monarch of the Wood,
Safe in its Coverts, and protecting Shade,
Against the Foe, that would his Peace invade:
If at an ancient Oak he stands at last
At Bay, by furious Dogs too closely chased;
Fearless he looks and to his clamorous Foes,
Does his thick Grove of Native Arms oppose
The Dogs with distant Cries infest the Ears,
And from a far the Huntsmen cast their Spears.
None daring to approach the generous Beast,
Project aloof their Darts against his Breast,
Thus Cerdick stood, nor dared the boldest Knight,
Advance to undertake a closer Fight.
They cast their Darts at distance, and from far
Shower on his Brazen Shield a rattling War.
With their loud Cries the ambient Air they rend,
And raging, all their missive Weapons, spend.
Mean time around, King Cerdick's Jav'lins flew,
And Arthurs Men, with vast Destruction slew.
Cadwan he killed, whose Arms great Fame had won,
And Vortiger great Ganumara's Son.
Then Vogan fell and Ottocar who trace
Their high Descent from Hoel's ancient Race.
Great Numbers died where the chafed Saxon flew,
And with his Sword cut his wide Passage through
So when a generous Bull for Clowns Delight,
Stands with his Line restrained, prepared for Fight.
Hearing the Youths loud Clamours, and the Rage,
Of barking Mastives eager to engage.
He snuffs the Air, and paws the trembling Ground,
Views all the Ring, and proudly walks it round.
Defiance lowering on his brinded Brows,
Around disdainful Looks, the grisly Warrior throws.
His haughty Head inclined with easy Scorn,
The invading Foe high in the Air is born,
Tossed from the Combatant's victorious Horn.
Raised to the Clouds, the sprawling Mastives fly,
And add new Monsters to the affrighted Sky.
The clamorous Youth, to aid each other call,
On their broad Backs to break their Fav'rite's fall.
Some stretched out on the Field lie dead and some
Dragging their Entrails on, run howling Home.
But if at last on all Sides he is engaged,
By fresh and fiercer Foes, strait all enraged
He flies about, some with his Horns He gores,
Some strikes, and moved with Indignation roars.
With Disproportioned Numbers pressed at length,
He breaks his Chain collecting all his Strength.
Then Dogs and Masters scared promiscuous fly,
And fallen in Heaps, the pale Spectators ly.
He walks in Triumph, nods his conquering Head,
And proudly views the Spoils about him spread.
Hyalca fell, a Lord of Neustrian Birth,
Struggling with Death, he bites the hostile Earth.
Rivollan dies, the brave Armorican,
Who swifter than a driving Tempest ran.
Mador, not daring Cerdick to engage
Fled from his Post to escape the Conquerors Rage.
Cerdick pursued him close, exclaiming loud,
And to overtake him, breaks the opposing Crowd.
As when a Lion on the Mountains spies,
A well grown Stag, his furious Bristles rise,
And yawning horribly, with Hunger pressed,
Away he flies to tear the trembling Beast.
He leaps upon him with his dreadful Paws,
And buries in his Sides his fearful Jaws.
So raging Cerdick flew fallen Mador dies,
And everlasting Night shuts up his Eyes.
Ludvalla, from the high Silurian Hills
Eldubert slew, Poel Edella kills,
Chelrick Adarc, Tudor pierced Alwy through,
Oswoll Pricarden, Oven Kensey slew.
Bladoc kills Athelmar in single Fight
Of goodly Stature, and a valiant Knight.
Edwin gave Vortimer his fatal Wound,
Who from his Steed, fell headlong to the Ground,
Lovellines Blood the great Barnulfa spills
Kentwin Rodollan, Pricel Ussa kills.
Now equal Ruin raged on either Side,
And Victory mutual Favors did divide,
Flowing, and Ebbing with an equal Tide.
With like Success, by turns the doubtful Field
The Victors and the vanquished, win and yield.
Such was the bloody Labor of the Day,
And in such even Scales their Fortune lay.
Now certain Fame had reached Prince Arthur's Ear,
That his loved Macor died by Cerdick's Spear.
No Tidings more his Fury could provoke,
Or strike into his Breast a deeper Stroke.
His Looks revealed his Wound, and Grief, and Rage,
His conquering Arms in deep Revenge engage.
With his refulgent Sword he hewed his way,
Like grass mown down the slaughtered Saxons lay.
His Strokes are all as sure, as those of Fate,
And Death and Victory on his Progress wait.
His Arms the Field with vast Destruction clear.
Wide Lanes made by his Sword and spacious Voids appear.
Through their thick Ranks the raging Tempest flies,
And fearful Ruin all around him lies.
In vain his fatal Javelin never flew,
Ebissa, Edgar, Ethelburg he slew.
And Ethelwoll who fled the Conquerors Sight,
But the swift Dart over took him in his Flight.
His deadly Spear at Kenfred was designed,
Who stooping down the hissing Death declined.
Then at the Conq'rour's Feet he prostrate falls,
And in sad Accents for Compassion calls.
Spare, God-like Briton, and let Kenfred live,
Me to my Father and my Children give.
Treasures immense of Silver and of Gold,
My Iron Chests, and buried Coffers hold.
These Riches from the Sun, so long concealed
Shall to discharge my Ransom be revealed.
Mine Is but a single Life, if that be spared,
It cant the Progress of your Arms retard,
On this does not depend your Empire's Fate,
Nor can my Life or Death affect your State,
He said to whom the British Prince replied,
The Silver and the Gold your Cellars hide,
You to your Sons and Daughters must bequeath,
Expect your self, the present Stroke of Death.
That said, he took his Helmet by the Crest,
And drawing back his Head, into his Breast
Up to the Hilts, he plunged his fatal Sword,
And from the Wound a crimson River poured.
Colmar hard by Odin's and Frea's Priest,
Distinguished by his Dress, from all the rest,
And by the Garland round his Temples known,
In glittering Arms, and splendid Garments shone.
Up flew his Heels while from the Field he fled,
Nazaleod set his Foot, upon his Head,
And stroke into the Ground quite through his Breast
His pointed Spear, and his rich Spoils possessed.
Then Arthur with his Spear, pierced Rufa through,
Then Osmor, Seward Ethellar he flew
Osa Beorno, Kendred, Ediswall,
Penda, Kenelmar, Osbert, Ethelbal.
Pale Oswald fled, the Conq'rour to prevent,
But through his Back the swifter Javelin went.
His flaming Sword, did never in vain descend
But sure Destruction did its Sway attend.
The reeking Conqueror in Triumph reigned,
Glutted with Slaughter, and with Blood distained.
The unnumber'd Dead, that round the Briton lay
More then their living Troops, obstruct his way.
To reach their Men, that from his Fury fled,
He climbs their slaughtered piles, and scales the Dead.
Sometimes the Saxons with new Fury burn,
And rallying Squadrons to the War return:
They pour around the Prince their numerous Swarms,
And strive to crush him with unequal Arms.
As when Tempestuous Storms overspread the Skies,
In whose dark Bowels in born Thunder lies.
The watery Vapors numberless conspire,
To smother, and oppress the imprisoned Fire.
Which thus collected gathers greater Force,
Breaks out in Flames, and with impetuous Course
From the Cloud's gaping Womb in Lightenings flies,
Flashing in ruddy Streaks, along the Skies.
So Arthur's flaming Sword cuts through the Cloud,
Around him spread, and rends the opposing Crowd.
With daz'ling Arms, he flies upon the Foe,
Flashes amidst the throngs, and terribly Thunders through.
Authum and Alfrid, with fresh Troops sustain,
Their stagg'ring Squadrons, and the War maintain,
To these Prince Arthur winged with Fury flew,
And first stout Alfrid with his Spear he slew.
Through the left Groin, the Weapon made its Way,
And stretched along the Ground, the bleeding Saxon lay.
At Authum's Crest he dealt a furious Stroke,
The Saxon tottered at the amazing Shock,
And fell upon his Knee, and while he prayed
And for his Life would many Things have said,
His severed Head off, from his Shoulder flies,
And bounded on the Field, his Body lies
At a great Distance, quivering on the Ground,
And Streams of Blood spring from his ghastly Wound.
As when the Summers Soultry Heats draw forth,
The exhaling Moisture from the thirsty Earth,
When scorching Rays the gaping Plains have fried,
And from their Banks contracted Streams subside.
If then a Fire invades a spaeious Wood,
Where Ancient Oaks have long securely stood;
The conquering Flames advance with lawless Power,
And with contagious Heat the Trees devour.
The spreading Burning lays the Forest waste,
And sooty Spoils lie smoking where it past.
So Arthur with resistless Rage around,
Destroys and loads with slaughtered Heaps the Ground.
Next did the Prince at bold Edburga aim,
Who from the fertile Banks of Abum came
Prince Unna's Son to vast Possessions born,
Broad Flowers of Gold his shining Coat adorn,
The piercing Steel deep in his Bosom sunk,
And Life's pure Stream at the warm Fountain drunk,
His Arms did next valiant Titullan meet,
Who fell and quiver'd at the Conquerour's Feet.
Osrick and beauteous Hengist next appear,
The first his Fauchion slew, the last his Spear.
Next stout Eldanor did his Fate provoke,
And off his Head flew, at a single Stroke.
And next he threw at Labert, as he fled
The Weapon struck him, as he turned his Head.
In Gore and Brains the glittering Javelin reeks,
And from his Veins a Purple Torrent breaks.
Mean time King Cerdic did around destroy,
And with thick Deaths his massy Fauchion cloy.
Him from afar the British Hero spies,
And winged with Fury to assault him flies.
Cerdic mean time undaunted did appear,
And forward stepped, shaking his dreadful Spear.
Like one of Anak's mighty Sons he stalked,
Or some tall Oak, that after Orpheus walked.
Fixed like a vast Colossus by his Weight,
He stood, expecting his approaching Fate.
Lowering, like rising Tempests from a far,
He rages, and invites the advanc'ing War.
Now the Britannic Hero did appear,
Within the Reach of his prodigious Spear.
King Cerdic cursed, and by his Gods defied
The Briton, and aloud to Odin cried;
The glittering Arms, by this gay Robber worn,
Great Odin soon thy Temple shall adorn.
Assist great Founder of our State the Dart
I cast, and guide it to his impious Heart.
Then from his vigorous Arm his massy Spear
Projected sung, and hissed along the Air.
Off from the tempered Shield the Weapon flew,
Wounded Glendoran, and Alantor flew.
Then his long Spear the pious Briton cast,
The impetuous Steel through all the Thickness past
Of Brazen Plates, rolled Linen, tough Bulls Hide,
And entering deep, did in his Groin abide.
The fainting Saxon fell upon his Knees,
Pained with his ghastly Wound, and trembling fees
The Conquering Prince advancing to assuage,
By striking off his Head, his veng'ful Rage.
Here the brave Lothar that had Wonders done,
And by his Arms Immortal Praises won,
For through the Host, the loud Applauses rung
Of mighty Deeds achieved by one so young.
Transported with his pious Care, to bring
Assistance to his Uncle, and his King;
Spurred his hot Courser on, and forwards pressed
Offering to Arthur's Arms; his valiant Breast.
He bravely undertook the unequal Foe,
To ward from Cerdic's Head, the fatal Blow.
Then his long Spear he threw, with Manly Force,
But Arthur's Buckler stopped the impetuous Course.
The applauding Saxons gave a Shout to see
The Noble Youth's excessive Bravery.
But to his Prince's Aid in vain he flies,
Who by his former Wound expiring lies,
And everlasting Sleep shuts up his Eyes.
But then the British Hero's Javelin fled
At Lothar, but it pierced his Courser's Head.
Raised in the Air upright, the generous Beast,
Gathered his shivering Feet up to his Breast,
Then springing struck them out, and stagg'ring round
Fell headlong with his Rider to the Ground.
A mighty Groan the dying Courser fetched,
And on the Ground a breathless Carcass stretched.
And here Immortal Elda shall my Verse
Thy unexampled Deed of Love rehearse.
Love which will universal Wonder raise,
And scarcely find Belief in future Days.
For whilst the British Hero stepped with Speed,
To take off, with his Fauchion, Lothar's Head,
Who with his Steed oppressed, and wounded lies,
Fair Elda rushed between, and thus she cries,
Before your fatal Sword takes Lothar's Life,
Victorious Prince, hear his unhappy Wife.
Fallen on her Knees she did her Helm unlace,
And showed the charming Beauties of her Face.
The blooming Looks of Spring, and lovely Red
Of opening Roses on her Cheeks were spread.
Her Eyes, that sparkled like the Stars above,
Appeared both the Armory, and Throne of Love.
Where thousands of alluring Graces wait,
And mingling Charms form Love's triumphal State.
Bright Ethelina her, and all excelled,
She the next Place in Beauty's Empire held.
Nor did her Looks, less Admiration move,
While mild Confusion, Sorrow, Fear and Love,
With Beauteous Conflict, for the Victory strove.
A Shower of Tears flowed down her lovely Face,
Which from her Grief, received yet sweeter Grace.
At the great Conq'rour's feet she threw her Charms,
And lifting up to Heaven, her snowy Arms
Aloud she spoke, a wretched Woman's Prayer
Great Briton here, and my dear Lothar spare.
Since first his Bride within his Arms I lay,
Scarce two full Golden Months are stolen away,
Which in Love's Calendar scarce make a Day.
With Prayers, and Tears, and tender Words I strove,
And all the engaging Arts of mournful Love;
To keep him from the Dangers of the Field,
And when the obdurate Man refused to yield,
About him my despairing Arms I flung,
And on his Neck, overwhelmed with Grief I hung.
I then conjured him, to avoid with Care
Your fatal Arms, so much renowned in War.
Away he goes, and as he said, adieu,
He touched my Life, and my stretched Heart Strings drew.
For still I feared that the heroic Fire
And thirst of Fame, that did his Soul inspire,
Would make him think no Dangers were too great,
Till rushing on your Arms, he urged his Fate.
My conscious Fears, this sad Event presaged
If ever with you, in Combat he engaged.
Therefore in Arms I did my Limbs disguise,
And undertook this dangerous Enterprise,
That if he rashly sought, so great a Foe,
I might between him, and your fatal Blow,
My Bosom interpose, and in my Heart
To save his dearer Life, receive the Dart.
Or if Occasion were, to intercede,
As now I do, and for his Safety plead.
I pray by all that is to Mortals dear,
By all the Gods that you, and we revere.
Let this sad Object your Compassion move,
Regard his Valor, and regard my Love.
Oh! Let his hapless Fate your Soul incline,
Pity his glooming Youth, or pity mine.
Oh, melt beneath divine Compassion's Charms,
Let not your Breast be harder then your Arms.
Save his dear Life, he of his Noble Line
The only Branch remains, as I, of mine.
Christians profess Compassion, Mercy, Love,
Sure such Distress should those kind Passions move.
Sheath in my Breast the Sword, and take my Breath,
But Oh, preserve this wondrous Youth from Death.
My self will to my Veins the Sword apply,
And to prolong his Life will gladly die.
Hear pious Prince, his aged Father hear
Who thus entreats, or would if he were here.
Oh, spare the spring of all my Hopes and Fears,
The only Prop of my declining Years.
Your fatal Sword deep in my Bowels sheath
And for the Son's accepts the Father's Death.
If great Possessions, or if Gold would buy,
His far more precious Life, he shall not die.
His Father will a mighty Ransom give,
And mine as much, say but the Youth shall live.
Let us your Prisoners be in Chains confined,
The Chains of Love will make those softer bind.
There his dear presence I may still enjoy,
And for his Ease my thoughtful Cares employ.
Free from the Noise of War, and anxious Fears,
I Will kiss his Wounds, and wash them with my Tears.
I Will watch his midnight Slumbers, and by Day,
My Love shall Solace to his Grief convey.
Let him be banished from the British Isle;
I Will go, and share the lovely Wand'rer's Toil.
I Will follow through the swarthy burning, Zone,
No Flames can scorch me, fiercer than my own.
Our tender Words the savage kind will move,
They Will stand, and gaze, and wonder at our Love.
The inhospitable Desert will appear,
A flowery Paradise, when he is there.
Over Snows with him and Hills of Ice I Will stray,
I know not how, but Love will find the way.
If his sharp Keel shall cut the Foaming Tide,
In the same Bark I Will on the Billows ride.
No stormy Winds my stable Soul shall move,
Or shake the strong Foundations of my Love.
But hurried with distracting Fears away,
And wild with Grief I know not where to stay,
And in a Maze of Thought I lose my Way.
Oh! let your generous Pity calm the strife
In my tossed Soul, and save his precious Life.
Thus you will not only Triumph over your Foe,
But over your self, and your own Victory too.
Thus Elda prayed, nor did she pray in vain,
Her tender Accents did Admission gain
To the relenting, generous Prince's Breast,
Who thus the beauteous Supplicant addressed.
This unexampled Effort of your Love,
Does equal Wonder and Compassion move.
True Christian Captains are both brave and good,
Victory pursue, but not with Thirst of Blood.
Revenge and Cruelty we disavow,
And only just and generous Arms allow.
Go, to your Tears your Lothar's Life I give,
Pleased with each others Love together live.
Then Cerdick slain on whom they trusted most,
A shivering Fear ran through the Saxon Host.
The Britons now believed the Battle won,
And sure of Conquest on their Squadrons run.
Prince Arthur at their Head breaks through their Files
And covers all the Plain with hostile Spoils.
The Saxon Troops dismayed, began to yield,
And to the raging Conqueror leave the Field.
Mean time the Prince of Hell who anxious stood,
And from his Hill the bloody Labor viewed.
Seeing the Saxon Troops at last give way,
Resolves the Britons Progress to delay.
That through the Angelick Guards he might escape,
His Form he changed to a fair Seraph's Shape.
A mild Celestial Youth, he did appear,
Dressed in pure Robes of white Empyreal Air.
What once he was, the Fiend seemed charming bright,
Concealed in Beauty, and disguised in Light.
Assuming meek and Heavenly Looks he strove,
To imitate the loveliest Face above.
Then taking from the Mountain's Top his Flight,
Did straitway at the Angelick Camp alight.
And thus transformed through the bright Camp he went,
As an Express from Heaven to Michael sent.
Along he marched, and slily looking round,
While unobserved, a fair Occasion found
Of passing through their Lines, without Delay,
Swift as a Ray of Light, he shot away.
He mingles with the fighting Armies, where
He moulds to various Shapes, the thickn'd Air.
In Sebert's warlike Form he did appear,
With Arthur's gasping Head upon his Spear.
Which newly severed from his Body seems,
So fresh the Wound, so red the bloody Streams.
Britons he cried, learn hence your wretched State,
See your Destruction in your Leader's Fate.
The towering Hopes, you vainly once conceived
Are sunk, nor can your Ruin be retreiv'd.
Whose Arms can guard your State now Arthur's dead?
His Life, and with it, all your Strength is fled.
Fly Britons hence, and to your Hills repair,
Fly to your Woods, and in your Caves despair.
Protected in your Fastnesses remain,
Stay not to increase the Number of the Slain.
Cold to their Hearts this Sight and Language went,
And through their Veins a shivering Horror sent.
Confusion and Despair their Souls oppressed,
And their sad Looks their inward Wound confessed.
Urged with their Fear, their Troops began to fly,
And leave behind the unfinished Victory.
Prince Arthur's Breast with Indignation burned,
Who from the fierce Pursuit reluctant turned,
To stop his Army's Flight, stay, Britons, stay,
He cried, and blemish not this glorious Day.
Whence this Distraction, whence the ungrounded Fear
And wild Despair, that in your Looks appear.
The Battel's won, the Saxons quit the Field,
And to your Arms a perfect Conquest yield.
Let not the vanquished Foe escape Pursuit,
Ths Vict'ry's yours, stay but to reap the Fruit.
While thus he spoke, the Britons stood amazed,
And on their Prince with Joy and Wonder gazed.
Their Grief dispelled, their dying Hopes revive,
And joyful Shouts proclaim the Prince alive.
Mean time the Sun declines, and dusky Night
Covers the Saxons, and protects their Flight.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK IX.
NOw did the beauteous Morn begin to rise,
Streaking with Rosy Light the smiling Skies.
Prince Arthur rose, and solemn Thanks addressed
To Heaven, that had his Arms with Conquest blessed.
Then rode amidst his Troops, and one by one,
Their Bravery praised, and Conduct lately shown.
Dispensing great Rewards through all the Host,
To those whose Courage was distinguished most.
The Britons in their turn express their Zeal,
And to the Prince the highest Love reveal.
The Heaven's around with Acclamations rung,
And loud Applauses of the shouting Throng.
Then to the sacred Temples they repair,
In joyful Crowds to offer Praise and Prayer.
In low Prostration they the Sovereign Lord
Of Hosts Exalt, and future Aid implored.
Soon as their Hymns of Heavenly Praise were sung,
High in the Temples they their Trophies hung.
Bruised Armor, broken Shields, and Standards torn
From the fierce Foe, the gilded Roofs adorn.
This Honor to the Almighty Savior done,
Prince Arthur to his Britons thus begun.
Thus far Success and Triumph on us wait,
And to our Arms, presage a prosperous Fate.
Propitious Heaven is to your Part inclined,
And still more glorious Vict'ries Crowd behind.
The vanquished Foe cannot long maintain the Field,
But must your ravished Lands and Cities yield.
Chase anxious Thoughts far from your Valiant Breast,
And on your Cause, and Heaven's Protection rest.
A perfect Conquest shall your Labors Crown,
And your Victorious Arms, regain your own.
Fear not the Relics of a Conquered Foe,
Their tottering State, falls with another Blow.
Now let no Funeral Honors be denied,
To these brave Men, that for their Country died.
Let us with Sighs and Tears lament their Fate,
Who fell, while striving to support our State,
Ages to come shall their great Virtue praise;
Viewing the Tombs that on their Graves you raise.
And first the Prince to the Pavilion went,
Whither brave Macor's breathless Corpse was sent.
He lay extended on a Purple Bed,
With high raised Pillows, placed beneath his Head.
His Servants standing round their Grief expressed,
With old Pendarvan sad above the rest.
Cador to him as to his faithful Friend,
For wise Instructions, did his Son commend,
His Counsels formed his Youth, and did prepare
His Mind for all concerns of Peace, and War.
Now in his Face the deepest Grief appears,
He beats his Breast, and baths it with his Tears.
He wrings his Hands, and in his mournful Rage,
Tears off the hoary Honors of his Age.
Immoderate Grief in lamentable Sounds,
As Arthur entered, through the Room rebounds.
The pious Prince with heavy Sorrow pressed,
Burst out in Tears, and thus his Grief expressed.
Inexorable Death at every Heart
Without distinction, shoots her fatal Dart.
Could Beauty, Courage, Virtue, youthful Age
Move her Compassion, or divert her Rage;
Brave Youth, thou had escaped, and lived to see
Our Triumphs, for a Victory due to thee:
But all thy Charms by stronger Fate overcome,
Could not reverse the Irrevocable Doom.
Oh! thy sad Sire, what swelling Grief will roll
Its stormy Tide over his afflicted Soul?
Can he the News of Macor's Death survive,
Or me, with whom he trusted him, forgive?
T'allay the smart may the Danmonians tell,
How bravely Macor fought, how Great he fell.
And how my own with Cador's Grief contends,
He mourns the best of Sons, and I the best of Friends.
Our Hopes are gone, may the Danmonians Cry,
And what Britannia can thy Loss supply?
Then to Embalm the Prince he gave Command,
That he might send him to his Native Land.
Straight with hot Streams, they wash his Body over,
And purge his Skin from Dust and putrid Gore.
Then in Arabian Spices, fragrant Gums,
Rare Aromatic Oils, and rich Perfumes,
They lay his Snowy Body, which they fold
In Bands of Linen, round him often rolled.
Then from his Troops a Thousand Youths he chose,
That might a solemn Equipage compose.
That might accompany the Funeral State,
To the unhappy Father's Palace Gate.
Small Comfort for so great a loss, yet due
To the sad Sire, and all the Prince could show.
Forthwith the Britons weave with bending Sprigs
Of Willow Trees, and tender Oaken Twigs,
An easy Bier, and with soft Rushes spread,
Sweet Flowers, and fragrant Herbs, the lofty Bed.
The Roof on high fresh spreading Branches shade,
And here sublime the hapless Youth was laid.
Such on the Ground the fading Rose we see,
By some rude Blast, torn from the Parent Tree.
The Daffodil so leans his languid Head,
Newly mown down, upon his grassy Bed.
Tho from the Earth no more Supplies they gain,
Their splendid Form in part, and lovely Hue remain.
Then a rich Garment, glorious to behold,
Ponderous with Orient Pearl, and stiff with Gold;
A noble Present from King Odar's Hand,
Received when Arthur left the Neustrian Land.
Upon the Bier his Royal Bounty threw,
The last Respect, that a sad Friend could show.
A noble Portion of the wealthy Prey,
And Spoils gained from the Foe, on Cars they lay.
With Arms, and Standards, that himself had won,
The Trophies of the Wonders he had done.
Now the magnificent, and pompous Woe,
Does from the Camp, in sad Procession go.
The laboring Axle mourns along the Road,
And groans beneath the uncomfortable Load.
The Horses slowly March, and mournful look,
As they their share of public Sorrow took.
Pendarvan follows stooping with his years,
But more with Grief, and deluged in his Tears.
Then Macor's Chariot rolls, distained with Blood,
On which sublime amidst the War he rode.
His War-horse Rapa, with black Trappings spread,
And he too seemed to weep, is after led.
His Arms and polished Armor others bear,
His Golden Spurs, his Helmet, Shield, and Spear,
Then in long Order the Danmonians mourned;
Their Spears turned backwards and their Bucklers turned.
Then Arthur stood, and with sad Accent spoke;
Thus far I mourn the Fate I cannot revoke.
Back I am called where Arms and bloody Strife,
With more sad Objects, must renew my Grief.
Farewell brave Youth, farewell, till we above,
Meet in the peaceful Realms, of Light, and Love.
He said no more, but turned and took his way;
Back to the Camp, which lofty Works survey.
Mean time ten Orators from Octa sent,
Arrived, and waited at the Prince's Tent.
Their Embassy a Truce was to obtain,
To clear the Field, and to inter the slain.
They urged that all Hostilities should cease,
Against the Dead, who ought to rest in Peace.
That all Heroic Conquerors ever gave,
To those, from whom they took their Lives, a Grave.
The Saxons Prayer seemed just, and ten days Truce,
Prince Arthur granted for this pious Use.
To Cador's Court the heavy Tidings came,
Born swiftly thither on the Wings of Fame.
Loud Lamentation through the Palace went,
And bitter Cries, give their strong Passion vent.
Officious Fame the dismal News relates,
And universal Sorrow propagates.
Pale Faces, crossing Arms, dejected Eyes,
Overflowing Tears, and deep, despairing Sighs,
Compose a finished Scene of Blackest Woe,
The Tragic place does all sad Figures show.
The Men like pallid Ghosts pass silent by,
Women outrageous in their Sorrow cry
Macor is dead, our Hopes too with him die.
Through all the Streets prodigious Numbers flow,
And poured out from the Gates promiscuous go
To meet their Hero's Hearse, with flaming Brands,
And Pitchy Torches lighted in their Hands.
Which in long Order shone along the way,
Disclosed the Fields, and called back banished Day.
Soon as they spied the lofty Hearse from far,
Attended with the Pomp of mournful War;
A lamentable Cry the Valley fills,
Echo repeats it louder in the Hills.
Wild with their Grief, distracted with Despair,
They strike their throbing Breasts, tear off their Hair,
And with their piercing Screams disturb the Air.
Both Troops unite Rivals in Love and Grief,
And the sad Conquest seek with equal Strife,
As Cador's Love no bounds his Sorrow knew,
Who from their Arms and Prayers distracted flew.
Close in his Arms he did the Corpse embrace,
Kissed his cold Lips, and bathed with Tears his Face.
A Scene so tender, such a moving Sight,
Melts all their Hearts, and does fresh Grief invite,
Touched with Compassion to the afflicted King,
From their exhausted Eyes fresh Torrents spring.
When the fierce Tempest had its Fury broke,
With a deep Sigh the unhappy Monarch spoke.
Oh, my dear Son! how mild had been my Doom,
Had thou escaped, I suffered in thy Room.
This Sight kills worse than Death, Oh that the Dart
Had mist thy Breast, and pierced thy Father's Heart!
Oh, that to see this fatal Hour I live!
And thee, and all that is dear in Life survive!
Oh, how I wish Life's tedious Journey done,
The empty Name remains, the thing is gone!
But sure I shall not long thy Absence mourn,
I Will have to thee, thou wilt not to me return.
My hoary Head with Sorrow to the Grave,
Makes have, the best Repose my Troubles crave.
Thrice happy Wife removed from us below,
You have no share in this sad Scene of Woe.
My ill presaging Fears are now fulfilled,
I started in my Sleep, and cried my Son is killed.
I knew too well warm Blood and youthful Age,
Eager with Fame, and fier'd with Martial Rage,
His Arms in greatest Danger would engage.
I prayed, and often conjured him to beware,
Not rashly to provoke unequal War.
He promised me while on his Neck I wept,
But oh, how ill has he his Promise kept?
I cannot reproach the pious Arthur's Name,
Nor on his Friendship sworn reflect the Blame.
If by divine, unchangeable Decree,
Untimely Fate, Macor, attended thee;
It Is best that thou art fallen with such Applause,
Asserting Albion's and the Christian Cause,
But why do my Complaints thus endless grow,
And why thus tedious my loquacious Woe?
Why from new Laurels should I thus detain
These valiant Troops, to hear my Sighs in vain?
Go, Britons, to your Prince, at your Return,
Tell him I live, but only live to mourn.
I groan beneath the heaviest Load of Grief,
And spend, in Tears my sad Remains of Life.
May Heaven his Arms with greater Triumph bless,
Great as his Virtues, let him meet Success.
Mean time must we this last kind Office pay,
And Macor's Body to the Dome convey;
Where his illustrious Fathers lie interred
Who reigned by Subjects loved, by Neighbors feared.
Soon as the Sun had with his early Ray
Deposed the Shades, and re-enthron'd the Day.
The pious Britons their slain Friends inter,
And on their Graves new Honors do confer.
Some with their Spades, and with sharp Axes wound
The groaning Earth, and casting up the Ground,
They form deep Vaults, and subterranean Caves,
Then fill up with their Dead, the gaping Graves.
Some cast up hilly heaps, and Mounts of Sand,
That for their Tombs, and Monuments might stand.
And to the admiring Britons might declare,
In future Ages what their Fathers were.
Some Stones erect of a prodigious Size,
That bear the Hero's Glory to the Skies.
Mean time the Saxons bear away their Dead,
Whose putrid Heaps, the bloody Field overspread.
Inumerable Piles they raise on high,
Which kindled fill with Smoke and flames the Sky.
With uncouth Cries, around the Fires they mourn,
Where vulgar Dead, in Heaps promiscuous Burn.
The Lords, and Officers of high Command,
They send attended with a warlike Band
Each to his City, there to be interred,
Where greater funeral Pomp might be conferred,
But fair Augusta chiefly flowed with Tears,
Where Grief in all her mournful Looks appears.
Distracted with ungovernable Woe,
Into the Streets in Crowds the Matrons flow.
Confusion in their Looks, and wild Despair,
They wring their Hands, and tear their flowing Hair
Parents on Children, Wives on Husbands call,
Sons mourn their Fathers, Maids their Lovers fall.
For their dear Brothers, Sisters, Tears are spent,
Servants their Masters, Friends their Friends lament.
All mingle Tears, their Cries together flow,
And form a hideous Harmony of Woe.
Pale Consternation sat on every Face,
They feared the Prince would soon invest the Place.
They often reproached their Monarch's Breach of Word,
That had exposed them to the Conquerour's Sword.
They wished that this destructive War might cease,
And Ethelina be the Bond of Peace.
Octa's Affairs in this ill State appear,
Such was their public Grief, and such their Fear.
Mean time the Briton joyful Sports ordained,
For the great Victory by their Arms obtained.
For Horsemanship the Britons always famed,
To run a Course his generous Gifts inflamed.
Desire both of the Prize, and loud Applause,
The British Youth to mount their Coursers draws.
A neighboring Hill ascending high, but slow,
Surveyed the Valleys, with his lofty Brow.
Upon the flowery Top a spacious Down,
Extended lay, which shady Woods did crown.
The grassy Plains, and rising Groves appear,
Like a rich furnished, native Theater.
Where Sylvan Scenes, their verdant Pomp display,
And charming Prospects to the Eye convey.
Soon as the Sun, had with his Rosy Light,
From the cold Air, dispelled the dewy Night.
The British Hero with a numerous Train,
Directs his Steps, to this delightful Plain.
Where high amidst his Friends he takes his Place,
Who swarmed around to view the noble Race.
Britons, Armoricans, and Neustrians stood
Mingled below, the foremost of the Crowd
Stood Eddelin in all his Youthful Pride,
His Purple Boots were of Iberian Hide,
Which fast with Golden Buttons held, and graced
With Silver Spurs, his comely Legs embraced.
A flaming Ruban of Sydonian Die,
In a close Knot, his curling Locks did ty.
Which playing on his Shoulders flew behind,
Danced in the Air, and sported with the VVind.
Close to his well shaped VVast, he wore his Coat,
Of Silk and Silver, by his Mother wrought.
A Cap of Crimson did his Head equip,
And as he walked, he slashed his breaded Whip.
His swarthy Groom his generous Courser leads,
That scarcely marks the Ground, so light he treads.
Swift as a Dove pursued, or Mountain Hind,
His nimbler Feet could overtake the VVind,
Leave flying Darts, and swifter storms behind.
Illustrious Blood he Boasts with equal Pride,
Transmitted to his Veins on either side.
The Mother Mare was of Eborac Race,
The Sire Augusta's Merchants, brought from Thrace.
His inward Fire through his wide Nostrils flies,
And noble Ardor sparkles in his Eyes.
His well turned Limbs did Admiration move,
Where Strength, and Beauty for the Conquest strove.
His matchless Speed the Prize did ever gain,
From all the Rival Coursers of the Plain.
Next Blanadoc upon the Plain advanced
And led behind his fiery Courser pranc'd.
Lightly equipped, and ready for the Race,
He marches to the Base with Manly Grace.
The gazing Crowd admire his comely Steed,
Nobly descended from the famous Breed,
That on the Mauritanian Mountains feed.
And famed for Swiftness in the Dusty Course,
Of wondrous Beauty, and of wondrous Force.
And next to him the gay Lanvallo came
Eager to win the Prize, and raise his Name.
His dapled Courser to the Base advanced,
And neighing wantonly along the Champain danced.
His high Descent he did from Draco trace,
The swiftest Courser of the Iberian Race.
A Race so famous for their speedy Feet,
Eurus himself, was not esteemed more fleet.
So swift they run, that vulgar Fame declares,
The Western Winds, impregnated the Mares.
Next the fierce Tudor comes into the Field,
That did to none for Art or Courage yield.
A Velvet Bonnet on his Head, and dressed
For Lightness, in a thin embroidered Vest.
Thirsty of Honor to the Base he flies,
And with his greedy Wishes grasps the Prize.
His well-train'd Courser was admired for Speed,
Sprung from Calabrian, mixed with British Breed.
Lightning flew from his Eyes, and Clouds of Smoak'
Dark'ning the Air, from his large Nostrils broke.
None of the Rival Steeds arrived before,
More Wonder raised, or promised Conquest more.
Next Trebor came upon a noble Horse,
And often Victorious in the rapid Course.
He gently strok'd his Mane, and bid him show
On this great Day, the Feet he used to do.
With many more, whose long forgotten Name,
Was never enrolled in the Records of Fame.
While round the Base the wanton Coursers play,
The ambitious Riders in just Scales they weigh.
And those that by their Rules were found too light,
Quilt Lead into their Belts, to give them weight.
All things adjusted, and the Laws agreed,
Each eager Rival mounts his generous Steed.
To whom the indulgent Prince himself addressed,
And to inflame their Zeal these Words expressed.
Let no brave Youth despair of his Reward,
Due Gifts, and Honors are for all prepared.
Whoever are Rivals of the rapid Race,
Two costly Spears shall win, their plated Base
Glitters in Silver Sockets finely wrought
By rare Engravers, from Germania brought.
Their Points are gilt, illustrious to behold,
Whence a deep Fring depends of Silk and Gold.
Besides a Back-sword whose well tempered Blade,
Is of the famed Iberian Metal made.
The happy Youth that smeared with Sweat, and Dust,
Shall reach the Goal, midst loud Applauses first,
This Golden Goblet his Reward shall boast,
By Damon wrought, with Figures high embost.
The second Conq'rour shall in Triumph wear,
In a rich Belt, this Persian Scimiter.
The Haft's a costly Stone that Nature stains
With various Figures, and with Bloody Veins.
The chiefest Workmen of the curious East
Have in the inlaid Blade, their Art expressed.
The third shall win a noble polished Shield,
Three Coursers rarely portrayed on the Field.
The Signal given by the shrill Trumpet's Sound,
The Coursers start, and scowr along the Ground.
So Boreas starting from his Northern Goal,
Sweeps over the Mountains to the adverse Pole.
His furious Wings the flying Clouds remove,
From the Blue Plains, and spacious Wilds above.
Insulting over the Seas he loudly roars,
And shoves the tumbling Billows to the Shores.
While for the Palm the straining Steeds contend,
Beneath their Hoofs the Grass does scarcely bend.
So long and smooth their Strokes, so swift they pass,
That the Spectators of the noble Race,
Can scarce distinguish by their doubtful Eye,
If on the Ground they run, or in the Air they fly.
So when the Earth smiles with a Summers Ray,
And wanton swallows over the Valleys play.
In Sport each other they so swiftly chase,
Sweeping with easy Wings, the Meadow's Face,
They seemed upon the Ground to fly a Race.
Over Hills, and Dales, the speedy Coursers fly,
And with thick Clouds of Dust obscure the Sky.
With clashing Whips, the furious Riders tear
Their Coursers sides, and wound the afflicted Air.
Never Epirean, or Arabian Steed,
Flew over the Olympic Plains, with greater speed.
On their thick Manes the stooping Riders ly,
Press forwards, and would fain their steeds outfly.
By Turns they are behind, by Turns before,
Their Flanks and Sides, all bathed in Sweat, and Gore
Such speed the Steeds, such Zeal the Riders show,
To reach bright Fame, that swift before them flew.
Upon the last with spurning Heels the first
Casts storms of sand, and smothering Clouds of Dust.
The hindmost strain their Nerves, and snore, and blow,
And their white Foam upon the Foremost throw.
Eager of Fame, and of the promised Prize
The Riders seize the Mark with greedy Eyes.
Now Hopes dilate, now Fears contract their Breast,
Alternately with Joy, and Grief possessed.
Thus far with equal Fate the Riders pass
Uncertain who should conquer in the Race.
But now the Goal appearing does excite
New warmth, and calls out all their youthful Might.
They lash their Courser's Flanks with Crimson died,
And stick their goring Spurs into their side.
Their Native Courage, and the Riders stroke,
TO exert their Force, the generous Kind provoke.
Each springs out to the Goal with loosened Reins,
Works all his Nerves, and staring Eye Balls strains.
In this fierce Strife, Tudor's the best for wind,
Shot forth, and left the panting Steeds behind.
Eddelin the other Rivals overpast,
Trebor came next, Lanvallo was the last.
Draco, his Steed, had once unrivaled Fame,
When in the Pride, and Pomp of Youth he came;
Curvetting over the Plain, to win the Course,
All yielded to his Swiftness, and his Force.
Siff Limbs now show his Age, with drudging Pace
He sweats behind, and labors through the Race.
Now Tudor whips, and spurs his Courser on,
And near the Goal believed the Goblet won.
When running over a naked, chauky Place,
Slippery with nightly Dew, and bare of Grass,
Up flew the Courser's Heels, and to the Ground
He, and the Rider, fell with mighty Sound.
The sudden Danger could not be declined
By Eddelin, that followed close behind.
For stumbling on young Tudor's hapless Horse,
His Floundring fell, and lost the hopeful Course.
The mean time Trebor spurred, and forwards sprung.
While all the Field with Acclamations rung.
First to the Goal his reeking Courser came,
Next Blanadoc, Lanvallo third in Fame.
The Victors by the Goal triumphant stood,
Surrounded by the thick applauding Crowd.
When Tudor rushing in, cries out of wrong,
And challenging the Prize, broke through the Throng.
The Judges overruled the Youth's Demand,
Urging the first established Rules should stand.
The Prince confirmed their Sentence, and declared
Who first arrived, should have the first Reward*
But on the two, that by ill Fortune crossed,
The Victory almost in Possession, lost,
Rich Marks of Royal Bounty he conferred,
And with his Smiles, their drooping Spirits cheered.
A famous Quiver wrought by Didon's Hand,
With Thracian Arrows stored, at his Commad
Was first on Tudor, as a Gift conferred;
And cross his Shoulders hung the bright Reward,
Eddelin that never hoped so mild a Doom,
Receives a silver Helm, and milk white Plume.
This Kindness to the unfortunate expressed,
He gives the promised Prizes to the rest.
Arthur rose up, and all their Footsteps bend
Back to their Camp, which lofty Works defend.
And now the Britons all their Hands employ,
To fetch Materials in, for Fires of Joy.
All to the Mountains, and the Woods repair,
And with their Labor fill the ecchoing Air.
They raise their Axes, and with toilsome Strokes;
Fell the tall Elms, and lop the spreading Oaks.
They bear the nodding Trees to every Town,
And from the Mountains, draw the Forests down.
In every City with the shady Spoils,
The joyful Youth erected lofty Piles.
Nearer the Skies they raise the aspiring Wood,
Than when before, upon the Hills it stood.
Soon as the Sun his Beamy Light withdrew,
And the brown Air grew moist with Evening Dew:
The shouting Britons, set the Piles on fire,
And towering Flames to Heaven's high Roof aspire.
Up the steep Air the ruddy Columns play,
And to the Stars their Rival Light convey.
Around the burning Piles the Crowds rejoice,
And mingle Shouts, with the shrill Trumpet's Voice.
Heaven's starry Arch with Acclamations rings,
While the glad Throng, Arthur's loud Praises sings.
Let Arthur live, the Towns and Fields resound,
Let Arthur live, the ecchoing Hills rebound
The Evening thus in Mirth and Triumph past,
The Britons to their Rest retired at last.
Mean time four Lords arrived from Tollo, crave
Audience of Octa, which the Saxon gave.
To hear their Embassy, in regal State
High on his Throne, the Saxon Monarch sat.
Duncan the chief broke Silence thus, we bring
This Message from the great Albanian King;
He is advanced, to give that powerful Aid,
Which by his Orator's King Octa prayed.
A valiant Host obeying his Command,
Whose conquering Swords, no force could yet withstand,
Who laid the Caledonian Forest wast.
And from their Forts the fierce Meatian chased;
Halts on a Plain, three Leagues removed from hence,
Ready to engage their Arms in your Defense.
But then our Leader prays, that when you come,
The Britons all subdued, in Triumph home,
Fair Ethelina may be then his own,
The bright Reward, that shall his Labors crown.
If to these happy Nuptials you incline,
He Will straight with yours, his valiant Forces join.
Let not the Saxons doubt great Tollo's Arms,
Will free your Kingdom from the Foes Alarms
He said, forthwith Octa in counsel sat,
A matter so important to debate.
When Osred thus began,
Great Exigencies of our State persuade,
That we comply with this Proposal made;
We are compelled by hard Affairs, to court
The Albanian Arms, our Kingdom to support.
You know too well, how much the Saxons Host,
Is weakened, by the Numbers we have lost,
When matchless Arthur did our Troops invade,
What Havoc his victorious Progress made.
What wide Destruction in our Army raged,
Wherever his fatal Weapons were engaged.
Our frighted Troops, when he advances, fly
Swift as the Clouds, the Winds chase through the Sky.
But valiant Tollo, rivals Arthur's Fame,
Equal their Courage, and their Strength the same.
Against the Briton He Will the Field maintain,
And on his Buckler his vast Strokes sustain.
No stronger Champion traversed yet the Field,
To him or none the British Prince must yield.
Kind Heaven has sent a Man so great, and Brave,
From Arthur's Arms, our threatened State to save.
I would not then his just Desire withstand,
But let him know, you grant him his Demand.
This Grant to such a Prince we must allow,
Was always fit, but necessary now.
He ceased, and next Pascentius silence broke,
And wisely thus the attentive Peers bespoke.
I once advised that to preserve the State,
We should strict Friendship with Prince Arthur make.
That we Britannia should between us share,
And with the Princess Nuptials end the War.
The Terms proposed the British Hero please,
And all things seemed to promise lasting Peace.
But when we were informed the British Host
Had half their Force, by raging Sickness lost.
Thinking we might with Ease, the Foe defeat,
We from the Terms our selves proposed, retreat.
I wish that Rupture May not Heaven provoke,
To bring our Necks beneath the British Yoke.
With all our Force the Britons we assail,
But Arthur's unresisted Arms prevail.
How great a Loss the Saxons undergo,
Our bleeding Wounds and endless Funerals show.
What Hero can be found to guard our State,
Against Prince Arthur's Arms, and prosperous Fate.
True, Tollo's Deeds give him a warlike Name,
But much inferior to the Briton's Fame.
If we confiding in the Albanian's Sword,
Fresh Triumphs to the Briton should afford:
Who after, shall controuling Bounds oppose,
To the victorious Progress of our Foes?
Who then against the Torrent can contend,
And from the overflowing Flood, our Towns defend.
We shall in vain our former Conquests boast,
The Saxon sinks, and all Britannia's lost.
All things well weighed, Prince Arthur looks to me
As one supported by divine Decree,
To Empire raised, by unchanged Destiny.
If so in vain all our Attempts are made,
In vain we build our Hopes on Tollo's Aid.
We shall oppose inevitable Fate,
And in our Ruin learn our Fault, too late.
I would Prince Arthur's Temper sound, and strive
Once more, the former Treaty to revive.
This way we may control the Conquerors' Arms,
And Arthur bind by Ethelina's Charms.
This way perhaps you will stem the rapid Tide,
And gain a Conquest to your Arms denied.
Pascentius ceased, Crida with Choler burned,
And with an Air disturbed these Words returned:
We all well know Pascentius Tongue, was made
Smooth, soft, and fluent fitted to persuade.
For courtly Arts, and fine Intreagues of State,
No Saxon Genius can Pascentius mate.
All to his Eloquence at home must yield,
As he to all, for Courage in the Field.
Men of the Cabinet take no Delight,
In bloody War, they are too wise to fight.
The Briton's Strength, and Arthur's Arms I find,
Strike fiercely on a Prudent timorous Mind.
A brave Heroic Spirit cannot despair,
That minds the Turns and doubtful Chance of War.
Joined by the Pict and Albanian Horse,
We'er much superior to the British Force.
Tollo and Mordred, both for Arms are famed,
Whose Deeds with greater Wonder are proclaimed?
We too have Heroes left that dare engage
The Briton's Arm, and can sustain his Rage.
My self will meet him in the Field, and stand
Unmoved against the Fury of his Hand.
Shall we at last a conquered Nation fear,
And long inured to Victory despair.
Let not our vile Submission stain our Name,
And lessen through the World the Saxon Fame.
No, let the King with Tollo's Prayer comply,
Our Forces joined must make the Britons fly.
He ceased, the Council murmured their Applause,
And pleased with this Advice King Octa rose.
He straight dispatched the Albanian Orators,
By whom the valiant Tollo he assures,
That he the Britons by his Aid subdued,
Shall Ethelina wed for whom he sued.
Withal he added that Affairs required,
Their Troops should join, before the Truce expired.
His Orators returned, to Tollo bring,
The pleasing Answer of the Saxon King.
Tollo transported with excessive Joy,
Believes no Rival could his Hopes destroy.
As if the Battle were already won,
He thinks the Beauteous Princess is his own.
Glittering in Arms, like a refulgent Star,
He leads his Scottish Nation to the War.
A Nation fierce and haughty by Success,
Which Albion's Northern Soil did then posess.
For a rude, cruel People, bred to Spoil,
To Blood, and Rapine, from the Hibernian Isle,
Did in this Age, infest the Albanian Coast,
And landed there at last their barbarous Host.
Scots they were called, from their wild Island's Name,
For Scotia, and Hibernia were the same.
Here their new Seats the prosperous Pirates, fix,
And their course Blood, with the old Britons mix.
These their Albanian Seats, new Scotia style,
Leaving Hibernia, to their native Isle.
The Calidonian Britons dispossessed
And by a hard tirannick Yoke oppressed;
Did these Hibernian, Scottish Lords obey,
And felt the Curses of a foreign Sway.
This Nation then obeyed King Tollo's Laws,
And now in Arms asserts the Saxon Cause.
The mighty Donald, of the Northern Isles,
Of Visage fierce, and dreadful with the Spoils
Of grisly Bears, and of the foaming Boar,
Which hideous Pride he over his Shoulders wore,
Marches his vigorous Troops into the Field,
Whose thundering Swords, themselves could only weild.
By their rough Captains led, they left the land,
Where once the old Meatians did command.
And where the Walls from Sea to Sea extend,
By Romans built, their Province to defend.
Stupendous Bulwarks whose unnumber'd Towers,
Repel'd the Incursions of the Northern Powers.
But when proud Rome was weak and feeble grown,
The insulting Foe broke the high Fences down.
Now Ruins show where the chief Fabric stood,
Between wide Tinna's and Itunna's Flood.
The Youth from all the Towns that did obey
In ancient times, the mild Normantian Sway.
Such as possessed the Elgovian Seats, and those
Who tilled the Land where silver Devia flows.
Who on the wild and bleaky Shore reside,
Insulted by the rough Hibernian Tide.
To aid the Saxon from their Country came,
By Dongal led, a Lord of Martial Fame.
Those where Verdera rears her lofty Towers,
And Glotta's Tide into the Ocean pours.
And where the Orestian Princes heretofore,
And Attacottian Lords the Scepter bore.
Those where the Otadenian Cities stood,
Between Alanus, and fair Vedra's Flood.
They march from Castralata and the Shore,
Where wide Boderia's noisy Billows roar.
Then those from Vindolana and the Land
Where Aelians Bridge and high Cilurnum stand.
Mackbeth a great Commander of the North,
And rocky Highlands, draws his Nation forth.
Loose Mantles over their brawny Shoulders flung,
With careless Pride beneath their midleg hung.
Cerulean Bonnets on their Heads they wore,
And for their Arms, broad Swords and Targets bore.
The Youth poured out from fair Victoria's Gates,
From Orrea and the old Gadenian Seats.
And from the spacious Caledonian Wood,
And where Cebinus rolls his rapid Flood.
These Troops were by the fierce Congellar led,
Of Malcol's Royal Stock the famous Head.
Who first from wild Ierne wasted over,
His barbarous Engines to the Albanian Shore.
Those from the Vicomagians Cities came,
From high Banatia, and from ancient Tame.
And they who dwelt on either verdant Bank
Of Longo's Stream, and those that Itys drank.
With those that stretched along the western Coast,
To whom the old Creonian Towns were lost,
Where high Epidium midst the Hibernian Waves,
Protrudes his Head, and all their Monsters braves.
Those from the Towns along the flowery Side
Of Northern Tinna, and fair Tava's Tide.
Where once the happy Venicontes dwelt,
Before the foreign Conquerours Yoke was felt.
There was a northern Nation fierce and bold
On whose died Bodies, fearful to behold,
Wild Beasts inscribed, and ravenous Birds were born,
Which their vast Limbs did dreadfully adorn.
So fierce they seemed, as ready to devour,
The naked Limbs, that the wild Monsters bore.
Their Hieroglyphick Armies, stained and smeared
With various Colors, and strange Forms appeared
In Pageant Armor, and in painted State,
Like Troops of Heralds, who on Triumphs wait.
This Nation Picts were called, who wafted over
From Scandinavia, and the bleaky Shore
Of Southern Scythia, did these Seas infest,
And with their Fleets, the British Coast molest.
Their Pyracy's by Sea, and Thefts by Land,
The exhausted Britons did in vain withstand.
No more of Rome's declining Power afraid,
They did the weak, defenseless Isle invade.
The affrighted Briton from the Shore retreats,
And leaves the Conqueror his abandoned Seats.
Their King at Pleasure, this fierce Nation made,
And Mordred now the imperial Scepter swayed.
He to King Tollo by his Queen allied,
And now by closer Bonds of Interest tied.
Commands his Men to take their Shield and Lance,
And with the Scottish Army to advance.
They marched, who then possessed the Hilly Land,
Which the ancient Carnonatian did command.
From Ricine, and the frozen Hebudes,
Lav'd by the loud Deucaledonian Seas.
From all the Towns whence their victorious Sword,
Forced the Carenian Prince, the rightful Lord.
Where the wild Hiperborean Ocean raves,
And on the Rocks breaks his tempestuous Waves.
They came who then the Mertian Cities filled,
And held the Lands that once the Logian tilled.
They left the Soil where swift Tuesis flows,
Where Grampius stands in everlasting Snows,
Which like the famed Riphean Hills appears,
And with his Head divides the neighboring Spheres.
From all the Land where Loxa's Current flows,
Which Vara's, and Tuesis streams enclose.
Where once the bold Decantians did reside,
And from their Hills the Power of Rome defied.
These with the Saxon Troops their Arms unite
Who so well reinforced prepare for Fight,
While wounded in his Tent King Octa staid,
King Tollo, as their Leader, all obeyed.
Prince Arthur.
BOOK X.
AUrora's Beams now on the Mountains smiled,
And adverse Clouds with Purple Edgings gild,
Boiling with Martial Rage King Tollo stands,
And his high Chariot, and his Steeds demands.
Steeds, whiter than the purest Alpine Snows,
And fleeter than the Gales that Boreas blows.
He triumphed when his noble Breed appeared,
Their Harness thick with Gold and Silver smeared.
When he their thundering Neighings heard, and saw
Their wanton Hoofs the trembling Valley paw.
The Grooms and Charioteers about him stand,
Reining the snorting Coursers in their Hand.
Stroking their Backs, they their hot Spirits soothed,
And their high Manes with Combs, and Spunges smoothed.
Tollo mean time, puts on his mighty Arms,
And all the Field resounds with loud Alarms.
Each Army does for Bloody Toil prepare,
And draw their Troops out, to renew the War.
The thundering Coursers shake the trampled Ground,
And warlike Clamours from the Hills rebound.
Across the Plain the rapid Chariots fly,
And with thick Clouds of Dust annoy the Sky.
An Iron Harvest on the Field appears,
Of Lances, burnished Shields, and bristling Spears.
Thronged Heads in long embattl'd Ranks disposed,
The lowering Front of horrid War disclosed.
First furious Tollo springs out from the Lines,
And on the Plain in radiant Armor shines.
His polished Helm oppressed the dazzled Sight,
And shone on high, like a huge Globe of Light.
The Golden Shield his mighty Arm did bear,
Hung, like a blazing Meteor, in the Air.
His Coat of Mail was on his Shoulders cast,
And Golden Pieces his vast Thighs encas'd.
The Pieces round his Legs, Gold Buttons tied,
And his broad sword hung dreadful by his side.
Which when drawn out, like a destructive Flame
Of Lightning, from the ample Scabbard came.
In such illustrious Arms King Tollo shone,
And thought no Strength superior to his own.
Then shaking in his Hand his massy Spear,
He cried aloud, that all his Threats might hear.
This Spear never yet deceived its Master's Hand,
Nor could the bravest Knight its Force withstand.
Witness Albodian, and great Locrine slain
In single Combats, on the Albanian Plain.
Witness ye Caledonian Princes, you,
Whom with vast spoil on Tava's Banks I slew.
Now, by this faithful spear shall Arthur die,
If his just Fears persuade him not to fly.
TO Augusta's Gates I Will bring his severed Head,
And in his spoils, fair Ethelina wed.
Thus Tollo boasts, thus did his Fury rise,
And streaks of Fire flashed from his raging Eyes.
So when a tawny Lion, from the side
Of some high Lybian Mountain, has descried.
A spotted Leopard, or a foaming Boar,
To rouse his Courage he begins to roar,
He shakes his hideous Sides, his Bristles rise
And fiercely round he rowls his fiery Eyes.
Again he roars, his Paws the Mountains tear,
A fearful Preface to the ensuing War.
High in his Chariot Tollo then advanced,
And from his Arms amazing Luster glanced.
A Martial Ardour sparkled in his Eyes,
And hot with Choler he the Foe defies.
So when the Spring's warm Breath, and chearing Ray
Calls from his Cave the awakened Snake, that lay
Folded to Rest, while Winter Snows concealed
The Mountains Heads, and Frosts the Lakes congealed*
The sloughy Spoils from his sleek Back deposed,
And the gay Pride of his new Skin disclosed,
He views himself with Youthful Beauties crowned,
Elated casts his haughty Eyes around,
And rolls his speckled spires along the Ground.
Fresh Colors die his Sides, and through his Veins
Turgid with Life, reviving Vigor reigns.
The sprightly Beast unfolds upon the Plain
The glossy Honors of his Summer Train.
His Crest erected high, and forky Tongue
Shot out, he hisses, bounds, and leaps along.
Such Life and Vigor valiant Tollo shows,
Marching with eager Haste to meet his Foes.
And now the British Host advanced in sight,
With cheerful Looks, and eager of the Fight.
Prince Arthur in refulgent Arms appeared,
High in the midst, the Saxons saw, and feared.
As when a Merchant richly laden spies,
A lowering storm far in the Horizon rise,
A deadly Fear over all his Vitals reigns,
And his chill Blood hangs curdled in his Veins.
He furls his sails, and fits his ship to bear
The dreadful Hurricane ascending through the Air.
Now both the embattled Hosts advancing near
King Tollo shakes his long, outrageous Spear.
And crying out, and threatening from afar,
In his swift Chariot flew amidst the War.
His rapid Wheels cut through the thickest Files
With fearful Ruin, and prodigious Spoils.
Hapless Vodinar first his Arm did feel,
And in his Breast received the pointed steel.
Next Byron on the Sand expiring lies,
Orpes flies to his Aid, and with him dies.
Kentwin, Morosten, Caradoc he slew,
And with his Javelin pierced stout Mervin through.
Then you brave Youths, Risan, and Tudor fell
Who did in strength, and martial skill excel.
His fatal spear transfixt bold Arnon's sides,
And from his Neck, his Sword the Head divides.
As Udas fled, the hissing Dart he sent
Entered his Back, and through his Navel went,
He fell, and on the Dust, sad to behold,
His Bowels issuing from his Belly rolled.
Runo's right Knee his Javelin did invade,
And in the Bone the glittering Weapon staid.
Strong Runo fell, and as he wildly star'd,
And many moving Words in have prepared
To beg his Life, the insulting Conqueror flew,
And with his Spear pierced his pale Body through.
Groaning he lay, and fetched long double Sighs
While in thick Mists Death swims upon his Eyes.
Next Leoline, King Cadwall's Son he killed,
A beauteous Youth, and not in War unskilled.
His Head the Fauchion to the Shoulders cleft,
And on the Dust his grovelling Body left.
Ouenar felt within a sudden Dread,
And turning round his Chariot, would have fled.
When his long Spear the fierce Albanian threw,
Which crasht the Bones, and through the Temples flew.
Headlong Ouenar fell, and on the Ground
Lay welt'ring in his Blood, poured from his Wound.
His fatal Weapons vast Destruction made,
And where he passed, the slain in Heaps were laid.
So when a Flood from the Hyperborean Hills,
Rolls thundering down, and all the Valley fills,
Where the high Snows dissolved by Summer Beams,
In one vast Deluge join their various Streams:
The roaring Tide with its impetuous Course,
Overflows the Banks, and with resistless Force
Sweeps Houses, Harvest, Herds, and Flocks away,
Nor can the loftiest Mounds its Progress stay.
With equal Rage, with such impetuous Have,
Great Tollo through the thick Battalions past.
The rapid Wheels of his swift Chariot burn,
And in their Course the thronged Brigades o'erturn.
Over scattered Arms, bright Helms, broad Shields of Brass,
And broken Spears, his raging Axles pass.
Over Heaps of Dead the furious Warrior flies,
And fills with Dust, and rattling Noise, the Skies.
The squallid Field, a Crimson Torrent choaks,
And mingled Dust, and Blood oppress his Chariot's spoakes.
The trembling Ground the outrageous Coursers tear,
And snoring, brow their Foam into the Air.
Their fervid Nostrils breath out Clouds of Smoke,
And Flames of Fire from their hot Eyeballs broke.
With furious Hoofs over slaughtered Heaps they fly,
And dash up Bloody Rain amidst the Sky.
Reeking in sweat, and smeared with Dust and Gore
They spurn the Sand, and through the Battle roar.
Then valiant Malgo with a fresh Brigade,
Advanced the mighty Warrior to invade.
While from another Part his Warlike Band,
Bothan led up, and made a noble Stand.
Now Showers of Darts, and feathered Arrows fly
At Tollo's Breast, that darkened all the Sky.
When valiant Marodan approaching near,
With all his Strength, casts his impetuous Spear.
It passed the Buckler's Plates, and folded Hide,
And through his Armor slightly razed his Side.
Tollo incensed, collecting all his Might,
Broke through their Ranks, and put the Foe to Flight.
Now dire Destruction reigns amidsts their Files,
And all the Field was spread with warlike Spoils.
So when Battavian Harpooniers assail,
With their sharp Lances, some prodigious Whale,
That like a floating Mountain, lies at Ease,
Vastly extended on the frozen Seas.
When the Leviathan begins to feel,
Within his wounded side, the bearded steel;
And looking round, sees all the ambient Flood,
Deeply distained with its old Monarch's Blood.
Straight all enraged, he throws himself about,
And through the Air does Crimson Rivers spout.
Swift, as a storm, he does the Foe assail,
With his expanded Fins, and hideous Tail.
Some Barks are crushed, as with a falling Rock,
And some o'erturn'd, sink with the dreadful Shock.
The rest ply all their Oars, and frighted row,
Through Fields of Ice, to shun the unequal Foe.
Canvallo then brought up a stronger Force,
Whom Galbut joined to stop the Albanian's Course.
The fainting Britons these fresh Troops protect,
And with their Arms great Tollo's Triumphs checked.
And now their thick Brigades were close engaged,
And through the bloody Field Destruction raged.
Now Man to Man stood close, and Spear to Spear,
Helms mixed with Helms, and Shields with Shields appear.
Arrows aloft in feathered Tempests fly,
Darts hiss at Darts, encountering in the Sky.
A dreadful Noise distracting all the Air,
Came from the hoarce Cerberean Throat of War.
While Arms on Arms, Bucklers on Bucklers ring,
Swords clash with Swords, and flying Javelins sing.
Some threaten loud, while some for Quarter cry,
And some insult, while some in Torment die.
As when a Torrent down some Mountain's Side,
To the low Valleys rolls its rapid Tide,
Where mighty Stones and rocky Fragments, high
Within the rude, unfashion'd Channels ly.
Over abrupt Tracks its Course the Deluge bends,
And roaring down with mighty Falls, descends.
Prodigious Noise the Aerial Region fills,
The Shepherds hear, and tremble on their Hills.
Or as
When high Vesuvius stowed with wealthy Stores,
Preluding to some dire Irruption, roars,
While horrible Convulsions shake its Womb,
And laboring Sides, which hidden War entomb.
The imprisoned Thunder bellows under Ground,
And the loud Noise fill all the Heavens around.
August Parthenope's gilt Turrets shake,
And fair Campania's wealthy Farmers quake.
Such was the loud distracting Noise of War,
Such horrid Clamours tore the aflicted Air,
While the fierce Foes against each other raged,
And for Britannia's Empire were engaged.
The neighing Steeds, and wounded Warriors cries,
And rising Clouds of Dust confound the Skies.
Mordred mean time the mighty Pictan King,
Does to the Charge, his threatening Squadrons bring.
Sticking his Golden Rowels in the Sides
Of his huge Steed, amidst the Ranks he rides.
The British Horse unshaken as a Rock,
Bravely sustained the Invaders thundering Shock.
King Meridoc who did the Horse command
Confirmed his Men, to make so brave a stand.
Yet many valiant Britons Mordred slew,
First with his Spear he pierced brave Jasper through.
The valiant Giffith by unhappy Chance,
Came in his Way, and felt his fatal Lance.
Beneath his Ear the Weapon pierced his Head,
He fell, and in a Moment stretched out dead.
His furious Arm noble Lodanar felt
On whose high Crest so fierce a stroke he dealt,
The Briton stunned with the prodigious Blow,
Drops the loosed Reins, and lets his Weapons go.
The frighted Courser through the Battle Flies,
Lodanor in the Dust dismounted lies.
The Horses Hoofs in pieces crush his Head,
And deep into the Mire his Bowels tread.
Then with great Fury he at Adel flew,
And gripped him with his furious Hand, and drew
The Briton from his Seat, his fiery Steed
Scours over the Field, from his lost Rider freed.
Wrigling and spurning in his Arms the Prey
Midst loud Applauses Mordred bears away.
So when an Eagle from some Mountain's Top,
To truss a timorous Leveret makes a stoop,
And in his crooked Pounces takes him up.
Struggling he mounts, and squeaks amidst the Skies,
And faster than he ran before, he flies.
To fight the Pict straight Guinan did advance
But in his Shield broke his projected Lance.
Then at the Briton Mordred's Javelin flew
It mist the Rider, but the Courser slew.
Extended on the Ground the groaning Beast,
The unhappy Rider with his Weight oppressed.
Mordred dismounts, and with his glittering Dart
Loudly insulting, stabs him to the Heart.
Guinan a Friend to Meridoc was dear
Who at his Death enraged caught up his Spear,
And shaking it from far, with mighty Rage,
Spurs through their Ranks King Mordred to engage.
The Pictan Monarch who elated stood,
Like some tall Oak, that overlooks the Wood,
Or some high Tower, which with its lofty Head
Surveys the Towns beneath, around it spread,
Lifts his Gigantick Spear, and cried aloud,
To Meridoc advancing through the Crowd,
Briton come on, and but a Moment stand,
A glorious Fate expect from Mordred's Hand.
Let not thy Fears persuade thee hence to fly,
Heavens give thee Courage to come up, and die.
King Meridoc his Spear in Answer sent,
Which in the Shield's third Ply its Fury spent.
Then Mordred threw, aloft the Weapon hist,
Ludar it slew, but Meridoc it mist.
Brave Ludar was a Lord of Neustrian Blood,
Who long in vain the fair Marinda wooed.
To bless him with her Smiles, and heal his Wound,
But from the scornful Maid no Pity found:
Lost in Despair, he left his native Soil,
His Torments to beguile with Martial Toil.
Now wounded by an erring Spear, he lies
Cried out Marinda, cruel Fate! and dies.
Then did the Briton's second Weapon fly
Which through his Armor, pierced King Mordred's Thigh.
Which from the Flesh he strove to draw in vain,
Then flew about wreckt with Tormenting Pain.
Wildly he star'd, and turned his Courser's Head,
Aloud he roared, and from the Combat fled.
So when a Sword-Fish, urged with generous Rage,
Does a vast Whale, in Northern Seas engage.
The Finny Warriors with a furious Course
To Battle rush, and meet with wondrous Force.
A noble Fight ensues, and dreadful Strokes
Afflict the Main, and shake the neighboring Rocks.
As they advance, they drive high Seas before,
The Monsters bellow, and the Billows roar.
The boiling Sea, with greater Fury raves,
Then when incumbent Storms press on its Waves.
The Surges raging with intestine War,
With high, curled Heads, look terrible from far.
The Foam of breaking Waves, in pointed Sleet
Like driven Snow does on the Ocean beat.
At every Shock the dashing Waters fly,
And clouds of Liquid dust obscure the Sky.
At last the Whale his shining Belly goar'd,
By his fierce Enemy's invading Sword;
Wild with his Rage and Pain whole Seas does spout,
And like a floating Island, rolls about.
The wounded Monster does the Seas out roar,
And tumbles through the Billows to the Shore,
Leaving behind broad Tracks of Purple Gore.
Thus strove the Pictan and the British Horse,
While pious Arthur with resistless Force;
In radiant Arms, bright as the autumnal Star,
Flies through the Foe, himself a fearful War.
With his victorious Sword, which waved on high,
Made flaming Bows, and Arches in the Sky.
The Body of their Battle he invades,
And through a Sea of Blood victorious wades.
Wherever the Conq'rour did his progress bend,
Ruin and wide Destruction did attend.
Prodigious Numbers by his Weapons fall,
And on their Gods in vain the Saxons call.
He made his way, like an impetuous Flood,
Or furious Burning, raging through the Wood
Wherever he passed the Dead lay thick behind,
As sapless Leaves, spread by a boistrous Wind.
Uffina first a valiant Lord did feel
In his left Side, the Briton's piercing steel.
Next Godred fell from valiant Ingulf sprung,
And as he fell, his Arms upon him rung.
Next fell the famous Ethelbert betwixt,
The Head and Shoulders with a Dart transfixt.
Nothing his Courage, or illustrious Blood,
That to his Veins from mighty Odin's stowed;
Nothing his well proved Armor when assailed
By Arthur's hand, the noble Youth availed.
Struggling he lay, and wallow'd on the Ground
In the warm Streams that rushed out from his Wound.
A gloomy Night o'erwhelms his dying Eyes,
And his disdainful Soul, from his pale Bosom flies.
Then Imerick he slew a valiant Chief,
And Lodocan that rushed to his Relief:
One with his Fauchion, the other with his Spear,
That cleft the Head, this pierced from Ear to Ear.
Next from his Arm a singing Javelin sent,
Through the left Groin of mighty Crida went.
The wounded Chief retires in torturing Pain,
And Tracks of Blood his halting Leg distain.
Then Sigebert a noble Youth he slew,
The fatal Weapon pierced his Temples through.
His furious Dart did next at Ebald fly,
Which through his Shield pierced deep into his Thigh:
Inflamed with Rage, and roaring out with Pain,
He strove to pull the Weapon out in vain.
His Javelin next transfixt Congellars's Reins,
And out his Life gushed from his opened Veins.
Then Edbert fell
Through the Bright Helmet which his Head encas'd,
Through Bones, and Brains the furious Javelin passed;
And his left Eye from out its Circle struck,
On the sharp Point, a ghastly Prospect stuck.
Then Ethelrick a stout west Saxon Lord,
And Ida fell, by his victorious Sword.
The first his Head down to his Shoulders cleft,
Fell to the Ground, of Breath and sense bereft.
The heavy Blade falling with oblique Sway,
Half through the other's Neck, did make its way.
The Head half severed on his Shoulders hung,
And from the Wound a bloody Torrent sprung.
Rolling in Gore upon the Field he lay,
Wildly he star'd, and groaned his life away,
As when a mighty Tempest from the East,
The Sea assailed, and on the Billows pressed
By Heaven's Command, that Jacob's Favorite Race,
Might Pharaoh's Arms escape, and safely pass.
The astonished Ocean did its Force obey,
Opened his watery Files, and cleared the pathless way.
The Waves retreated, and erected stood,
As fear and wonder had benumbed the Flood.
Then Front to Front they kept their Line unmoved,
And those that crowd behind, they backwards should.
Like a long Ridge of Crystal Hills they rose,
And the low Wonders of the deep disclose.
So valiant Arthur pressed upon the Foe,
And so their Troops retired, and let the Conqueror through.
Now he advanced to Tollo's foremost Band,
Where mighty Fingal and Dolavian stand;
Both which he slew, next valiant Duncan falls,
While he in vain for Help on Tollo calls.
And now on every side the Saxon Host
Began to fly, and yield the Battle lost.
Only King Tollo with enormous Rage
Breaks through the Troops, Prince Arthur to engage.
Mean time the Prince of Hell stood full of Care,
And feared the Event of this unequal War.
To save the Saxon Squadrons which remain,
Whereof such Numbers lay already slain,
And to prevent Tollo's impending Fate,
Whose Arms the British Hero's could not mate.
The conquering Britons fierce pursuit to stay,
And once more Arthur's Triumphs to Delay,
By Heaven's Permission, causes to arise
A dreadful Tempest in the troubled Skies.
The blustering Powers, and Demons of the Air,
Straight at his Summons to their Prince repair.
To whom thus Lucifer:
Aerial Powers, who my Commands obey,
And in these Regions own my sovereign Sway;
Know, I intend to end this bloody Strife,
To part the Hosts, and guard King Tollo's Life.
Go hasten then, each to his known Employ,
And let your loudest Storms the Heavens annoy.
Swift, as your own projected Lightnings fly,
And in a Moment trouble all the Sky.
The dusky Fiends obedient fly away,
Some fetch up misty Stores to choke the Day.
Some Pitchy Clouds of Stygian Fleeces made,
And in their Bowels Trains of Brimstone laid,
Some ram in Seeds of unripe Thunder some,
With mighty Hailstones charge their hollow Womb.
Some fetch strong Winds, which on their Wings may bear
The heavy Tempest laboring through the Air.
O'erspreading mists the extinguished sunbeams drown
Dark Clouds over all the Black Horrizon frown,
And hang their deep Hydropick Bellies down.
Hoarse Thunder rolls, and Murmuring try's its Voice,
Preluding to the Tempest's dreadful Noise.
Infernal Torches now the Fiends apply,
And light the fiery Seeds that hidden lie.
The Heaven's wide Frame outrageous Thunder shocks,
Loud, as the mighty Crack of falling Rocks.
The Cloudy Machines burst amidst the Skies,
And from their yawning Wounds exploded Lightning flies.
Confusion fills the Air, Fire, Rain, and Hail
Now mingle Tempests, now by Turns prevail.
No more the Britons, and the Saxons strove,
For that below, yields to the War above.
The conquering Britons, to the Camp return,
Their Loss in theirs, the vanquished Saxons mourn.
So when a summer Cloud the Sky o'erspreads,
The Bees that wander over the flowery Meads,
Or to the Tops of lofty Mountains climb,
To fetch the yellow spoils of odorous Thyme,
Forsake their Toil, and laboring through the Air,
To their known Hives, with hasty Flight repair.
All to their Cells returning from abroad,
Depose their luscious Dew, and strutting Thighs unload.
Perplexed, and sad, the Saxon Troops appear,
And horribly they cursed Prince Arthur's spear.
They saw no Saxon could his Arm withstand,
And doubt Deliverance from King Tollo's Hand.
When half of this uneasy Night was spent,
To all the great Commanders Octa sent,
To bring them quickly to his royal Tent.
And first the Summons they to Tollo bear,
Who to equip himself did straight prepare.
A Wolf grin'd horribly upon his Head,
And over his brawny Back a Leopard's Hide was spread.
He girds his mighty Fauchion to his side,
Which hung across his Thigh, with fearful Pride.
Frowning, and on the great Affair Intent,
He straight to Octa's high Pavilion went.
Next Mordred halting with his Wound, and lame,
And by his massy spear supported, came.
A Beaver's Skin upon his Head he wore,
And a fierce Tyger's his wide shoulders bore.
A silver Belt, illustrious to behold,
Held his broad sword, adorned with studs of Gold.
Then Ella rose newly laid down to Rest,
And buttoned on his rich embroidered Vest.
Over which a pompous scarlet Cloak he threw,
Fastened with Golden Clasps, and lined with costly Blue.
Then putting on his mighty sword, in Have
Tho lame, he to the Counsel sternly past.
Then valiant Amades, and Chuline went
With wife Pascentius to their Monarch's Tent
Followed by Osred, Sebert, and the rest
Of their chief Lords, who great Concern expressed:
And now the august Assembly filled apace,
Where all the Leaders took their proper Place.
Then their Attention Octa did demand,
And leaning on his Scepter with his Hand,
He thus began, Princes, you see the Field
To the victorious Britons still we yield.
By Sea, and Land we have felt their fatal Arms,
And all our Realm trembles at their Alarms.
Our Heaps of Dead the Field with Horror crown,
And Seas of Saxon Blood the Valley drown.
All Albion's Isle resounds with dying Groans,
White with her Rocks, but whiter with our Bones.
Prince Arthur's Sword the Field with Ruin spreads,
Like Storms, which from the Trees dishonored Heads
Their shady Leaves, and spreading Branches tear,
Cover the Ground, and leave the Forest bare.
On us the offended Gods severely frown,
But on the British Arms look smiling down.
While we oppose the rapid Tide of Fate,
We think to stop what we precipitate,
And learn our Error, at too dear a Rate.
He said, the Saxon Chiefs, who found their Host
Feeble, and sunk by frequent Battles lost:
Thinking their Arms unable to oppose,
The rapid Course of their victorious Foes:
Upon Pascentius straightway cast their Eyes,
As one above the rest accounted wise,
And who the King to Peace did still advise.
Pascentius then began.
Octa, the Counsel which at first I gave
From Arthur's Arms our threatened State to save;
What since has happened, shows was just and right:
For who can meet the British Prince in Fight?
Our sinking State, and hard Affairs demand
A Remedy of Force, and near at Hand.
He that in such a Storm, would safely steer,
Must have a Head that is steady, cool, and clear.
'The laboring ship on all sides feels dire shocks,
Charybdis shunned, she is dashed on Scylla's Rocks.
It Is hard to give a Monarch Counsel where
On either Hand such frightful shelves appear.
Statesmen, in such a Case as this debate
How best to save themselves, and not the state.
But if my Judgment still I must declare,
I would at any Price compose the War.
And till a more effectual can be found,
This as a safe Expedient I propound.
Sore with their Wounds, and sunk with ill success,
The Saxons strong Desires for Peace express.
This to obtain, we must to Arthur sue,
And the first Treaty, which we broke, renew.
The Princess Ethelina's Heavenly Charms,
Are only stronger, than the Briton's Arms.
She must be offered, as the Prince's Bride,
This once prevailed, and must again be tried.
But then you break the Promise, that you made
To Tollo, who will complain he is betrayed.
Since hence to Peace, our chief Obstructions spring,
I move that Arthur, and the Albanian King,
May by their single Arms the strife decide,
And let the Princess be the Conquerour's Bride.
If over the Britons we the Advantage gain,
And Arthur by the Albanian King is slain.
The Britons shall repass Sabrina's Tide,
And in their Rocks, and Hilly Lands abide.
But all the Cities, Castles, and the Land,
That lie on this side, Octa shall command.
But if King Tollo slain by Arthur's Sword,
New Triumphs to the Briton shall afford;
We'll meet no more their Armies in the Field,
But all our Towns, and conquered Places yield.
Those who shall ask it, shall be wasted over,
To our old seats along the German shore:
The Cantian Kingdom still we will retain,
And in its Limits circumscribed remain.
This, as the best Expedient, I propose,
He said, the Saxons murmured their Applause.
Then Tollo answered with a haughty Air,
Pleased with my Fate, I undertake the War.
My Sword and Arthur's shall the Strife decide,
And let the Princess be the Victor's Bride.
This conquering Arm the Saxon Realm shall guard,
Repel the Foe, and win the bright Reward,
For if the Foe does not my Sword decline.
The War is ended, with his Fall or mine.
The Assembly rose, and back the Captains went,
Praising King Tollo much, but feared the Event.
At the first opening of the tender Day,
Six Orators King Octa sent away
To Arthur's Camp, who introduced declare,
The Measures taken to compose the War.
The Challenge Arthur heard with great Delight,
And readily accepts the single Fight.
Straight to the sacred Temples all repair,
Heaven to solicit with united Prayer,
That Arthur in the Combat might succeed,
And vanquished Tollo, by his Weapon bleed.
With warmer Zeal and with more earnest Cries,
The Britons never importuned the Skies.
A deep Concern at Heart they all expressed,
And mighty Passions struggled in their Breast.
For if the Prince fell in the Combat, all
Well knew their unsupported State must fall.
Soon as the Sun had streaked the Skies with Light,
Prince Arthur rose; and Armed himself for fight.
Pieces with silver Studs his Legs encas'd,
And Plates of Gold his warlike Thighs embraced.
And on his Head he laced his burnished Helm,
Whence flashing Brightness did the Sight overwhelm.
Like some Celestial Orb his blazing Shield,
Darted amazing Luster through the Field.
And then he girded to his Martial Side,
His faithful Sword, so often in Battle tried.
Thus armed the Hero mounts his thundering Steed,
Nor Thrace, nor Greece can boast a nobler Breed.
With his strong Arm he gripped his trembling Spear,
His very Friends, tho pleased, yet seemed to fear.
And as he spurred his Courser, and advanced,
Unsufferable Splendor from his Armor glanced.
As glorious Michael, when the Foe alarms
The blissful Realms, clad in Celestial Arms,
Bright as the Sun, leads forth the Angelick Host,
To chase the Invaders from the Heavenly Coast,
In such illustrious Arms the Prince was seen,
His warlike Grace was such, and such his Godlike Mien.
Mean time King Octa from his Camp proceeds,
High in his Chariot drawn by milk white Steeds.
And by his Side Tollo, appeared in sight,
Completely armed, and coveting the Fight.
His Coat of Mail was over his Shoulders flung,
And by his side his dreadful Fauchion hung.
Like a high Beacon lighted in the Air,
His Buckler flamed, denouncing horrid War.
In his right Hand he shakes his pondrous Lance,
And on his Steed did to the Lists advance.
The Marshals of the Field had marked our Ground
Fit for the Fight, and fixed high Pales around.
Which with armed Troops, on either side were lined,
Their Spears stuck in the Ground, their Shields reclined.
On either Side the Armies stood in sight,
Drawn up, as they two were designed for Fight.
Attended with his Heralds on the Place,
Prince Arthur first appeared with Martial Grace.
When Octa and his Priests advancing near,
Raising his Voice that those around might hear.
His Hand devoutly on his Breast, his Eyes
Fixed in a solemn Manner on the Skies;
To ratify the Treaty, thus he swore,
Th 'Eternal Mind whom Christians do adore,
The God of Truth I here to witness call,
That if this Day by Tollo's Arms I fall,
We will no more Hostilities repeat,
But over Sabrina's Waters will retreat.
We will no more the Saxon State molest,
But in our Hills and snowy Mountains rest.
But if we find this an auspicious Day,
And by Heaven's Aid, my Arms shall Tollo slay;
Then if the vanquished Saxons shall restore
The Towns and Lands, which we possessed before,
They in the Cantian Kingdom shall reside,
And unmolested in those Bounds abide.
Then did King Octa by an Altar stand,
Raised with Green Turf, and on it laid his Hand.
And thus his Idols he invoked.
Irmansul God of Arms, and mighty Jove,
Tuisco, Odin, all ye Powers above,
And you green Gods, and blew-ey'd Goddesses,
Who rule the spacious Empire of the Seas.
And you tremendous Powers, who all resort,
At Pluto's Summons, to the Infernal Court:
Ye rural Gods, who rule the Hills and Woods,
Ye watery Powers, who dive beneath the Floods.
By gloomy Styx I swear, bear witness all,
That if King Tollo does in Combat fall,
The Treaty now agreed to, shall be kept,
The Cantian Kingdom only we except,
All other Lands, our once victorious Sword,
Won from the British Kings, shall be restored.
He who shall Conqueror in the Field remain,
Shall for his Bride fair Ethelina gain.
He said, and to confirm the Oath he swore,
He drew his Sword, that by his Side he wore:
And with its Point did his full Veins divide,
And let out from his Arm, the Crimson Tide.
A golden Bowl received the vital Flood,
Which Octa took, and drank the flowing Blood.
Arthur and Tollo now themselves prepare,
By a brave Combat to decide the War.
The Martials, Heralds, and the Fecial Priests
The Ceremonies finished, clear the Lifts.
Then the loud Trumpet's Clangour did invite,
The mighty Warriors to begin the Fight.
Both in their Hands grasping their pointed Lance,
Spur their hot Steeds, and to the War advance.
And now the Combatants approached so near,
Their Voices raised, they might each other hear.
Then Tollo cried aloud
Till now distressed without a Friend or Home,
In foreign Lands, you did an Exile roam,
Here stop your Course, your Soul mean time shall go,
A wandering Exile to the Shades below.
I Will take off with this Sword your gasping Head,
And in your Spoils, fair Ethelina wed.
Were you brave Hector, or his braver Foe,
Or Godlike Hercules, I Would stand your Blow.
Did you advance, with Thunder in your Hand,
Against your Bolts I would undaunted stand.
But such a mighty Foe I need not fear,
You bear not such a Shield, nor such a Spear.
Oh! that bright Ethelina now stood by,
To see her Lover, and my Rival die.
Thus boastful Tollo did his Choler vent,
And thus in Air his empty Threats were spent.
The pious Prince enraged, without Reply,
Shakes his long Spear, and hastes to Victory.
As when a roaming Lion from a far,
Sees a strong Bull stand threatening furious War,
Who flourishes his Horns, looks sowrly round,
And hoarcely bellowing, traverses the Ground.
For want of Foes, he does the Wood provoke,
Runs his curled Head against the next tall Oak,
Wishing a nobler Object of his Stroke.
The Lion fired, regards him with Disdain,
And to insult him scowrs along the Plain.
So Arthur boiling with Heroic Rage,
Springs with a full Carrier, King Tollo to engage.
Collected in himself the Albanian stood,
Like some tall, shady Pine, it self a Wood,
Or a vast Cyclops wading through the Flood.
Then Tollo first, Arthur advancing near,
With all his Force casts his long Ashen Spear.
Which Arthur on his tempered Buckler took,
While with the vast concern the Britons shook.
Through the first Plate of Brass the Weapon went,
But in the next its dying Force was spent.
Then from his valiant Arm the Briton threw,
His Javelin, singing through the Air it flew.
The yielding Buckler did its Force obey,
And through the Plates, and Hide it made its Way.
Through the thin Joints of Steel the Spear did fly,
And wounded, as it past, his mighty Thigh.
The Blood sprung through his Armor, from the Wound,
And trickling down the Plate, distained the Ground.
Then did King Tollo's second Weapon fly,
Which broke within the Buckler's second Ply.
The British Prince another Weapon threw,
Which, Tollo stooping, over his Shoulders flew.
And falling went so deep upon the Ground,
No Arm, of Force to draw it out, was found.
These Weapons spent, to end the noble Fight,
The furious Warriors from their Steeds alight.
And as they nimbly leapt unto the Ground,
The most undaunted Chiefs that stood around,
So fearful was the Chinck their Armor made,
Started, as Men surpised, and looked afraid.
Then furious Strokes on either Side they deal,
The ecchoing Air rings with the dreadful Peal.
Pale with the vast Concern both Armies look,
And for their Champion's Life with Terror shook.
So when two vigorous Stags, each of his Herd
The haughty Lord, through all the Forest feared,
Resolved to try which must in Combat yield,
In all their Might advance across the Field;
They nod their lofty Heads, and from a far
Flourish their Horns, preluding to the War.
The Combatants their threatening Head incline,
And with their clashing Horns in Battle join.
They rush to combat with amazing Strokes,
And their high Antlets meet with dreadful Shocks.
The mighty Sound runs rattling over the Hills,
And Echo with the Fight the Valley fills.
Retiring often, the Warriors cease to push,
But then with fiercer Rage to Battle rush.
The trembling Herds at Distance gaze, and stay
To know the Conqueror, whom they must obey.
No less concerned Saxons, and Britons stand
To see the Victor, who must both command.
Now Tollo backwards shrinks, and panting stood
Faint with his Labor, and his Loss of Blood.
The British Prince enraged to see the Fight
So far prolonged, collecting all his Might,
With double Fury on the Albanian pressed,
And his bright Sword high raised, upon his Crest
Descended with so horrible a Sway,
It stunned the Foe, and took his Sense away.
He dropped his Arms, and giddy reeled about,
The joyful Britons raise a mighty Shout.
Arthur on fire, lets not the Advantage go,
But stepping forward with a back hand Blow
Drawn with prodigious Strength, from side to side
Did his wide Throat, and spouting Veins divide.
A crimson River gushing from the Wound,
Ran down his burnished Armor to the Ground.
Reeling and tottering for a While he stood,
And from his Stomach vomits clotted Blood.
Then down he fell, the Field beneath, and all
The Saxon Army tremble at his Fall:
Grovelling in Death, and smeared with Gore he lay,
And his dim Eyes scarcely admit the Day.
Rolling in Dust his wounded Body bled,
Away his Soul with Indignation fled.
Convulsed and quivering for a while he fetched
A dreadful Groan, and breathless out he stretched.
As when a Whirlwind with outrageous Force
O'erturns a lofty Oak, that stops its Course,
Its Roots torn up, the Tree's caught from the Ground,
And with the furious Eddy carried round:
Then falling from the Sky, his stately Head,
And shady Limbs, the groaning Hill overspread.
So by Prince Arthur's Arms, King Tollo slain,
Fell down, and lay extended on the Plain.
FINIS

