YET ONE WARNING MORE. OR, The Tender of the Lords Love To the

Lawyers Judges Rulers of these Nations.

By GEORGE BISHOPE.

And I charged your Judges at that time, saying, Hear the Causes between your
Brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his Brother, and the
stranger that is with him: Ye, shall not respect persons in Judgment; but you
shall hear the small as well as the great, and shall not be afraid of the face
of man; for, the Judgment is Gods. And the Cause that is too hard for you,
bring it unto me, and I will hear it, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. LONDON. Printed for
Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread. Eagle and Windmill in Martine Le Grand,
1661.

Yet One Warning more, etc. to the Lawyers, Judges, and Rulers of these Nations.
Friends,
YOu had need to look to it what manner of Judgment ye give; for, the Judgment
is not Man's, but the Lords, who is with you in the Judgment; and look with what
Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what Measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again from the hand of the Lord.

And this I am moved of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to write unto you. Who
bind heavy Burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's shoulders,
but ye your selves will not move them with one of your Fingers; who afflict the
Just, and take a Bribe, and turn aside the Poor in the Gate from their Right;
Who turn Judgment away backward, and Justice stands afarr off, and Equity
cannot enter; who make a man an Offender for a word, and lay snares for him who
reproves in the Gate, and turn aside the Just for a thing of naught; who pant
after the Dust of the Earth upon the head of the Poor, and turn aside the way
of the Meek; who sell the Righteous for Silver, and the Poor for a pair of
Shoes; whose treading is upon the Poor, and who take from him Burdens of
Wheat; who abhor Judgment, and pervert all Equity; who turn Judgment into
Gall, and the fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock. The Lord God of Heaven and
Earth will be avenged on you: As truly as I live, says the Lord, will I visit
you, and my hand shall be upon you; and I will do unto you, as you have done:
and all the Earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord, and he will make
you an Execration, and an hissing, and an Astonishment, and a Curse upon the
face of the Earth; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, says the Lord, the
Mighty God of Jacob; and his King who lives for ever, to whom is the Glory,
and the Praise, and the Dominion for ever and ever.

Therefore, my Dear Friends, my very Bowels are even turned within me for you,
that you may not be found among the number of those whom the Lord will so
visit; upon whom he will be so avenged, and his hand will be thus upon; For
this thing I have heard from the Lord, and this thing will assuredly be to
those whom the Lord shall find so doing in the Day wherein he will Judge the
Earth in Righteousness, and render unto every man according to his Deeds; The
Lord has sworn it, who is with you in the Judgment, and takes notice how ye
proceed, upon what ground ye go, and how ye move, and what ye do, and will give
unto you according to your Works.

And so, my Friends, heed that in you which tells you it is so; That is near
you, and with you: that searches your hearts, and tries your reins, and
knows the very thoughts of your heart; that in his eyesight, (in the sight
of that of him in you) which shows ye this and all that ye do. Ye may do every
thing, and so be accepted of the Lord, in the day wherein he shall judge every
man according to his Works, at his Appearing and Kingdom, to whom be Glory,
and Praise, and Dominion everlasting.

For, this know assuredly, That the Lord is not slack concerning his Promise
(as some men count slackness) but is long-suffering to us wards, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come unto Repentance. And his Fan
is in his hand who will thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather the Wheat into
the Garner, and burn up the Chaff with unquenchable fire.

Therefore, it concerns ye to mind what ye do, because ye must be accountable
unto him who is Judge of heaven and earth; who will judge the World in
Righteousness, and the People with Equity; who is no Respecter or persons, but
will render unto every man according to his Deeds. From whose eye none can be
hid, who sees in secret, who is privy to all you do ( his Witness in you) who
knows the Compass and End of all your Actions, and the thoughts of your hearts
as ye lie upon your Beds; who searches the heart and tries the reins; before
whom all things are naked and hare, even before him with whom we have to do;
whose Judgment cannot be avoided; who does none Iniquity, neither can sin come
near his Dwelling; Who is a GOD of Judgment; Blessed are all they that put
their trust in Him.

So I have poured forth the Bosom of my love to you in the Movings of the
Lord; Whose Love is to his seed in you; who would have none of you to perish,
but that all of you might have Eternal life. His bowels move in me to
you-wards; He would have none of you to die, but rather that ye might every
one of you return and live. There is something of him near you, and in you,
which tells you this, and shows you the place of Understanding, which he has
therefore placed in you to Direct you, that ye may know the Path of Wisdom, and
the place of Understanding; and when matters are too hard for you; that thither
ye might bring them, and have Counsel, and find Wisdom. And this ye have need
of to know, and to repair unto, and to be guided by it above all other men;
because you stand in the place of judgment, and sit in the Seat thereof, and
are Counselors thereunto; that you may wrong no man, nor oppress, nor deny to
any, nor defer Justice and Judgment: For (as I have said) the Judgment is not
man's, but the Lords, who sees, and will require; who stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty, and, judges among the gods.

But where shall Wisdom be found? And where is the place of Understanding?
Seeing man knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the Land of the
Living: The Depth says, It is not in me; and the Sea says, It is not with me:
It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be weighed for the Price
thereof: It cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onix, or
the Sapphire: The Gold and the Crystal cannot equal it; and the exchange of it
shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold: No mention shall be made of Coral, or of
Pearls, for the price of Wisdom is above Rubies. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall
not equal it, Neither shall it be valued with pure Gold. Whence then comes
Wisdom? And where is the place of Understanding? Seeing it is hid from the eyes
of all living, and kept close from the Fowls of the Air: Destruction and Death
say, We have heard the fame thereof with our Ears. God understands the Way
thereof, and he knows the Place thereof: For, he looks to the ends of the
Earth, and sees under the whole Heaven, to make the weight for the Winds; and
he weighs the Waters by Measure, when he made a Decree for the Rain, and away
for the Lightning of the Thunder. Then did he see it, and declare it; he
prepared it, yea and searched it out; And unto man he said, Behold, the Fear of
the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil is Understanding.

So Friends, here you have it, viz. the Place of Understanding from whence
comes Wisdom, which is above the Price of all things here below, and hid from
the eyes of all living, (who know not the Lord) and kept close from the Fowls
of the Air. Behold, the Fear of the Lord that is Wisdom; and to depart from
Evil is Understanding; And this the Lord says, who understands the Way
thereof, and knows the Place thereof.

To this, then, come; hitherto resort for Wisdom in the time of need; to the
place of Understanding, that ye may judge for God, and give Counsel for the
Most High, that Truth may spring out of the Earth, and Righteouness may look
down from Heaven; so the Lord may give that which is good, and our Land may
yield her increase: For, for the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof, but by a man of Understanding and Knowledge, the state thereof shall
be prolonged.

So my Friends, the Way is plain, and the Path easy, and you know it, it
concerns you to walk therein. The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom. and to
depart from Evil, that is Understanding: and that which shows ye this, is the
Way to God, and there is no Other; if ye know it, then are ye to walk therein;
For, that Servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. And, if you were
blind, you should have no sin (says Christ, John 9.41) but now ye say, We see,
therefore your sin rem^i^e^h.

Therefore it concerns you, seeing you know these things, to do them. Now if ye
know these things (said Christ to his Disciples) happy are ye if ye do them.
For, the Lord God will require an account of ye and ye may not pretend
ignorance, or plead it, seeing you know where is the place of Understanding,
from whence Wisdom comes: The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to Repent; because he has appointed a Day
wherein he will judge the world in Righteousness by that man whom he has
ordained; whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he h^th raised
him from the Dead; That which shows you the fear of the Lord, gives you this
Assurance; For, that is risen from the Dead, which bids you fear the Lord; And
fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come; and
worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of
waters, was the everlasting Gospel which John heard the Angel preach, who flew
through the midst of Heaven, to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and
People After whom followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her Fornication, Rev. 14. And he is Wisdom and Counsel, wonderful Counselor,
the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, who shows ye this; of the Increase
of whose Government and Peace there shall be no end; Upon the Throne of David,
and upon his Kingdom, to Order it, and Establish it with Justice and with
Judgment, from henceforth even for ever.

And here ye may be supplied, and here ye may be furnished. If any of you lack
wisdom (said James to the Twelve Tribes which were scattered abroad, Chap. 1.5,
6, 7 8.) let him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him; but let him ask in Faith, nothing
wavering; for he that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the Wind,
and tossed; for let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord: A Double-minded man is unstable in all his ways: For, he is the fountain
of wisdom, who is the Son of God, Christ Jesus the Wisdom of God, and the Power
of God.

To Him come; to Him repair; wait at Wisdoms gate; blessed are they that find
it, and enter therein, and receive of its Treasure, and follow its Steps. Now,
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; (here is the gate) A good
Understanding (here is the place) have all they that Do thereafter; The Praise
of it (here is the Crown) endures for ever.

And now, My Dear Friends; to the seed of God in you all, am I moved of the
Lord to write this, that ye may see your state, and where you are; and how your
Actions are weighed; and on what Foundation your Judgment stands; and at what
you enter. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Is it there you
enter in every Matter, in every Cause you have to do with? Have you recourse to
Wisdom for Counsel, through this Gate of Understanding, The fear of the L^^^?
Open ye the Gates that the Righteous Nation that keeps the Truth may enter
in: This will search you all; this will be a Candle; this is the Candle of the
Lord that searches the innermost parts of the Belly: This will quickly tell
you how it is with you: It Is very near you, it is in you; it is as ready to let
you see, as ye are to mind; yea it calls upon you when ye mind not; and as
ready (...) it is to let you see, and to mind you, so will it be as ready to
judge, if you mind it not. For the Judge stands at the Door, the Gate of
Wisdom, the Fear of the Lord. In this let all your Actions be weighed; In this
let all your Judgments begin; with this finish, and so the blessing of God
will be upon you; Otherwise you must sink. It Is the Word of the Lord to you,
whether you will hear or forbear, through His Servant,

Bristol 3d. 10th. Month, 1661. GEO. BISHOPE.

THE END.

