THE Warnings of the Lord TO THE King of England AND HIS Parliament.

As they were Wrote, and Sent, By his Servant, George Bishope.

Shall thou Reign because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Did not thy Father
Eat, and Drink, and do Judgment and Justice, and then it was well with him? He
Judged the Cause of the Poor and Needy; then it was well with him. Was not this
to know me says the Lord? Jer. 22. 15, 16. London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

The Warnings of the Lord, etc.
To thee CHARLES STUART King of England, am I moved of the Lord to write; and
to Thee it is the Visitation of his Love through him, whose travel has been
for Thee, in the depth of my spirit, that Thy Soul may be saved in the Day of
the Lord; Therefore hear, that thy Soul may live, and thy Days be prolonged in
the Days of thy Pilgrimage.
FRIEND,
THou have been a man of Sufferings, and deep sorrows have passed over thee;
the Lord (at length) has brought Thee into a Land of Peace, and set thee upon
thy Fathers Throne, and bowed the hearts of the People under thee; so, and
after such a manner, as was beyond the thoughts of thee, or any, that thus it
should be. And now what remains, but that thou love the Lord, and fear before
him all thy days; that it may be well with thee, and thy posterity after thee;
and for this purpose, that thou heed his Principle in thee, which shows the
Evil, the End and Compass of all thy Actions, the thoughts of thy heart, and
thy secrets upon thy Bed, that so out of, and from Transgression thou may
come, and be led into the Kingdom of God, which consists in Righteousness and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and the Blessing of God may be on Thee, and
peace and rest within thy Borders. For, of this thou art not ignorant, as
having largely tasted of the Cup, that man suffers for sin, and that
Promotion comes neither from the East nor from the West, nor from the North
nor from the South; but God is Judge; he puts down one, and sets up
another; who is come to set his King upon his holy Hill of Sion; his P^inciple
in Man to reign for ever; Unto which men shall bring the force of the Gentiles;
and their Kings shall be brought, and the glory of Lebanon shall come; the
Fir Tree, and the Pine Tree, and the Box-tree (men of all sorts) together, to
beautify the place of his Sanctuary, who will make the place of his feet
glorious: and the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve, it shall perish; yea,
those Nations shall be utterly wasted, and the Sons of those that afflicted it
shall come bending unto it, and all those that despised it shall bow themselves
down at the soles of its feet; and they shall call it The City of the Lord, the
Sion of the Holy One of Israel; and whereas it has been forsaken and hated, so
that no man passed through it, he will make it an Eternal Excellency, a Joy of
many Generations, it shall also suck the Milk of the Gentiles; and the Breasts
of Kings, and it shall know that the Lord is its Savior and Redeemer, the
Mighty One of Jacob. In its days Judah shall be saved, and Israel dwell
safely, and the Name by which it shall be called, is The Lord our
Righteousness; and it shall no more be said, The Lord lives which brought the
children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, but The Lord lives which brought
up, and which led the Seed of the house of Israel out of the North-Country, and
from all Countries whither the Lord had driven them; and they shall dwell in
their own Land, the Lord has spoken it. And the day is come wherein the Lord
has raised unto David a Righteous Branch, and a King reigns and prospers
that executes Justice and Judgment in the Earth, whose Dominion is an
Everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom that which shall not pass away, in which
Thou may Reign and Live for Ever. Moved of the Lord God Almighty, the maker
of Heaven and Earth, who has seen thine Affliction and Adversity, and
delivered thee in much Bowels of Love, am I thus to write, whom the world in
scorn calls, Quaker, but am known by the Name.

George Bishope.
Bristol, the 27th of the 4th Month, 1660. Give this to the King. The Original
of this was delivered into the Kings Hand at White Hall by Mary Saunderson.



To the King of England, these are from the Movings of the Lord, in Love and
Pity to warn him to take heed how he has to do in Banishing the Friends of
Truth, called Quakers, or in making Laws against them, or in Suffering such as
do, or in Signing such Bills, or Yielding to them, or suffering them to Pass,
or to become Laws, or to be Executed upon them, so as that they are Banished
this Land, or Removed out of this Nation, or Caused so to be, or otherwise to
Suffer,
FRom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, the Almighty, am I moved to write, and
to Thee it is the Word of the Lord, Sign them not, nor Consent unto them; For
thou knew the heart of a Stranger, when thou wast an Exile in other
Countries, and wanderedst from one Nation to another People, seeking rest and
finding none; and thine Enemies were great and many, and thou wast disappointed
in all thou undertookest, and thou could not prosper, nor was there a
reasonable ground of Hope as to Man, that ever thy Exilement should return,
especially so as it is now, and so soon as now, and so great and large as now,
even beyond the Glory of thy Progenitors; yet this the Lord did for thee when
thou wast low, and little in thine own Eyes, and when, of Thy People, there
were none to deliver Thee; and he heard thy Cries, and thy Groans, and thy
Sighs, who wast a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and Delivered
thee, and placed thee upon the Throne of these Nations, and bowed them unto
thee, and has kept them under; so that no evil occurrent that could hurt thee
has fallen out unto thee, since thou first put'st thy foot on the English
Shore upon thy Return, and on thy bended knees spakest unto the Lord, and
gave thanks unto him that had done this for Thee.

Now in the sense of this, it is good for thee to abide and remain always; so
the remembrance of the Lord will be near thee, who has done all this for thee,
and thy heart will be still tender to those who are in such a condition as thou
wast, and so far from putting others there (even the Innocent, of whom thou
have a Witness in thee, that they are Innocent as to thee, viz. the People of
the Lord called Quakers, to Banish, and to do otherwise unto whom, thou art now
called upon) which can never be blotted out, that thou will not be at rest till
thou have relieved such as are in the condition of these; and so the Blessing
of God will be upon thee, as thou continuest to do to others as he has done to
thee; and increase of kindness, and largeness of Love will thou receive of him,
as thou measurest back again unto others, unto his People, as he has measured
unto thee; and so thou remembrest the Lord.

And this (as I have said) will be good for thee to do, that it may be well
with thee as to the Lord, who is able to pull thee down as he has set thee up,
and by a fire unblown to consume thee; should thou forget the Lord, and all
his Benefits which he has showed unto thee, and his large loving kindness
beyond all that have gone before thee?

Now as to us, Behold! we are in the hand of the Lord, and we feel his Arm and
Power with us, who will never leave us, nor forsake us, who put our trust in
him, and his Presence will be enough for us, wherever he suffers us to be
sent or put, or however to suffer, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, whom we
have proved and tried, and found so to us all our days, since we were a
People, and he has born us through all hitherto, and will do to the end, all
that abide with him; and so we are not in consultation, nor is this sent to
bespeak any thing from thee besides the Will and Purpose of the Lord, whose
Will we are come to do, and to glorify his Name in the world, and to show that
he is with us, as we shall be put to it, to glorify his Name, who has
delivered our Souls from the Pit, and our Lives from destruction, and has
caused us to hear the Voice of Joy and Gladness, so that the Bones that he has
broken do rejoice, and we rejoice to do his Will, in doing or suffering
whatsoever is his Will we should do or suffer, without whose sufferance we know
nothing can be done unto us; and we feel him who is the Rock of Ages, who is
able yea and will uphold us who trust in him. But it is for thy sake I write,
and in Love to thee, and tender Compassion as I am moved of the Lord, that thou
may not do the thing that may make him repent of all his kindness to
thee-wards, and provoke him to undo thee, as he has made thee up. For
certainly, if thou shall do this thing, and seek to remove and root out, and
otherwise to suffer such a Body of many thousands of Families in these Nations,
of us who fear the Lord, who are Natural English, and have a Natural Right, as
much as any to reside and be in our Native Country, and to enjoy our Liberties
and Estates, as to the Lord, free; whom thou foundest here, when thou came
in, thy Friends, and suffering by them who were thy Enemies, and who have not
been (nor are) in Thought, in Word, or in Deed otherwise since thy coming in;
but desiring the welfare of thy Soul and Body (which we do desire) and of thy
Dominions, and are Peaceable in the Land, as the Lord is Witness, and that of
him in thy Conscience: this the Lord will take ill at thy hands, and he has
moved me to tell thee so, and will prove thy Ruin; and it is better for thee
to have all the World, than the Lord thine Enemy, and upon such an account, as
in the behalf of an Innocent People, Suffering so by Thee. And this we would
not have on any hand as to thee, may it so stand in the will of God, and
therefore has he moved me to write thus unto thee, whose pity is to thee,
that thou may not do that which will cause his hand to be against thee.

And so in the Bowels of the Lord, and even in Tears of Compassion to thy Soul
and Body, to thy Dominions and People do I write, who have my Witness with the
Lord, and shall have in Thee, that I seek thy welfare, and that in this thing,
which will leave thee without Excuse in the Day of the Lord, if thou hearken
not. For which cause, even that it may be well with thee, it is written in the
Movings of the Lord, through

His Servant and Thy Friend, who truly desires the Welfare of thy Soul and
Body in this World, and that which is to come. George Bishope.
Bristol, the 2d of the 1st* Month, 1661/2: The Original of this was delivered
into the Kings Hand, by Mary Saunderson aforesaid.



To the King of England.
FRIEND,
THink it not enough for thee, or sufficient, or that it will excuse thee
before the Lord, that thou have not Signed the Bill for the Banishment of his
People Thy Self, but have appointed Commissioners; for what they have done,
they did it by Authority of Thee, and by thy Commission; so what thy
Commissioners have done Thou have done, and what Thou have done, thy
Commissioners have done, and so the Lord God looks upon it, and will require it
of Thee.

And now, Friend, let me a little reason with thee, and give the Sufferers
leave to speak concerning this matter. What have the People called Quakers done
unto Thee, thy Soul or Body, thy Crown or Dignity since they were a People, and
since thou have had footing lately in this Nation, that thou thus dealest with
them? What is their Offense, what is their Crime, that they should be thus
dispoiled of their Natural Right to reside and be in their Native Country, and
be thus dealt with contrary to Nature?

Have thou not proved them and tried them? and upon proof and trial, have thou
found the least Spot or Iota in them of Rebellion, as to Thee, of Disaffection,
of Offense? Have not Times tried them? Have not Prisons? Have not Sufferings?
Have not great and sor^ Sufferings tried them when they so suffered and yet
were without Offense as to God and Man? Had a Spirit of Rebellion lodged in
them, a spirit of Revenge or Dissatisfaction as to Thee; Alas! what could be
expected, but that, as Men, who perfectly understand their own Liberty, and
knew how, as Men, to engage for it, they should rather dye, and put all to the
hazard at one Shock to end their Sufferings either on or in the Earth, then to
be continually Offered up, as it were, They, their Wives, Children and
Relations, Estates and Families, to the unlimitted rage and wickedness of Men,
and to the changableness of Days (which has always hung over them after this
manner) to do with them what they pleased?

And yet they have a Witness with the Lord, and also among Men, that had they
stood it out as men (as they might have done) unto which they were courted, and
that not a little; Thou had hardly, if at all (at least, with more
difficulty) have set foot on this Nation; but they refused, choosing rather to
leave the issue to the Lord (as to their Liberty, which seemed, as to men, more
then probably gone) as to what should befall them, then to take part with thine
Enemies against thee; and to appear (as indeed they did) rather in the naked
simplicity of their Innocence, as to thee, as their Sword and Buckler, then
with a Created Weapon, or such like Provision, to bespeak, or cover them; and
how they have always appeared after this manner to this day before thee, thou
know; and they have a Witness in thee which can never be blotted out, viz.
That they are Innocent, and have, and do desire really in their hearts as much
Good will to thee, thy Prosperity and Welfare, thy Soul and Body, thy Crown
and Dignity, as thou can wish.

The sense whereof, and the Witness of which in thee, is that which has made
thee so to them as thou have been, and to speak so freely to them of their
Liberty, and to Promise them in the Word of a King; And, Ye have the Word of a
King for it -- You shall not suffer for your Opinion, -- or words to that
purpose, which without any pre-desire of theirs, thou have spoken to them.

And for this (as they certainly know, and it has been sealed upon them by the
Spirit of the Lord, unto whom they give the Praise and Glory) thou have not
been without a Reward from the hand of the Lord, who has covered thee, and
preserved thee so, as no Enemy has been able indeed to put thee to it, or so
as considerably to trouble thee, though thou came in on such a ticklish foot as
thou know, and though the matter of so many hundreds of thousands (who in
their hearts think themselves aggrieved by thee, and in the capacity of Ruin,
or are already so) within these Nations, might have put thee to it; so as thou
have hid his Outcasts, and been a hiding place for them, and a Covert from the
face of the Spoiler, and have let his Outcasts dwell with thee, he has been a
hiding-p^^^^ to thee, and a Covert from the face of them who would r^^^ up
against thee, and spoil thee, whom he has bound under, and not hitherto
suffered to rise up against thee, so as to hurt thee, or to put so much as a
divertisement from that Refreshing which the Lord has given thee from all thy
Troubles.

And indeed, this they could desire (in the Will of the Lord, or if the Lord so
please) That this might be thy portion for ever; Viz. Peace within thy Walls,
and Prosperity within thy Palaces in this World, and in that which is to come,
Life Everlasting. For on this foot they are, and have been, and shall be ever
found to be (through the grace of the Lord) viz. To pray for their Enemies
(much more for Thee, who have been so friendly to them) to do good to those
that hate them; to bless them that Persecute them, -- That so they may appear
to be the Children of their heavenly Father; who causes his Rain to rain, and
his Sun to shine, on the Just and the Unjust: and that his Dominion also may be
made manifest in them, in being Vnmovable in all their Sufferings.

This was, and is their state as to thee, and from this have they not declined,
to the Right hand or to the Left, or swerved in the least, God is Witness, and
his Witness in Thee will testify to them* How is it then (if I may so Reason
with thee, and suffer me to do it, for I am moved to it of the Lord) that thou
now thus dealest with them? What Is their Crime? What is their Offense (as I
have said) more now then heretofore? (who were, and are without Offense or
Fault, as to thee) Wherein are they changed? (as thou think, if so be yet
thou do so think, and they are not apt to believe that thou think so, upon
whatsoever grounds thou have done this, because the Witness of God, they
believe, in thee is otherwise) or, are they at all changed from what they were
as to thee, that thou art so changed from what thou wast unto them? Or wherein
have they given thee Cause to be Otherwise to them then thou have been, or to
Break thy Promises and Free Engagements to them? They would willingly
understand, and it concerns them to seek it, and they desire it of thee, if
there be any such thing, or if it be so supposed by thee; that they might make
their Defense, and not suffer as Evil Doers, who are Innocent; and if they are
not Evildoers, why are they made to Suffer? At least in the understanding of
People, who hear of their Banishment, they will be supposed so to be, because
so great a Suffering supposes an Offense proportionable to the Suffering, or
that deserves such a Suffering; therefore it is but Equal and Right what they
desire, and not to be denied by thee.

If they are not changed, but are the same still in thy Judgment, and that
they are guilty of no other thing, or are no otherwise guilty then they
appeared at first, and have all along unto thee; that is to say, That they are
the same persons in Judgment and Practice as they were at first, and have been
still, because of which (that is to say) as Innocent as to thee, and their
Liberty consisting in thy Understanding with thy Rule and Government (why else
did thou so promise them? why else have thou been so unto them?) thou so
promised'st, and have been so unto them. If these things be so (and so they
are) how then comes this to be?

Think thou that the Lord does not see? that the God of Jacob does not
regard? He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the Eye,
shall he not see? He that Chastises the Heathen, shall he not Correct? He that
teaches man knowledge, shall he not know? Is it a small matter thus to deal
with an Innnocent People? Will not the Lord regard it? Will not he consider it?
Can he look upon it (who is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil and cannot look
upon Iniquity) and not require it? Did he require it of this Generation, who
turned from the Lord, what they did to Thee; and will he not require of Thee
what thou do to them who are turned to the Lord? Shall not the Judge of the
whole Earth do right? Can the Judge of the whole Earth do otherwise then Right?
Will he not Judge the Earth with Righteousness, and the People with Truth? And
comes he not to do it, and to render unto every man according to his Deeds?
And will not this be heavy for thee in the Day of Account, wherein every one
shall be rewarded as his work shall be?

In the fear of God, mind and consider, for he has done much for thee, and
much will he require of thee. Thy welfare I desire, and for that cause do I
write, not to remove Sufferings from those People in the Will of God (for they
are made willing to serve his Will in doing or suffering, as I have written to
thee) or to bespeak them, as to thee, free from suffering otherwise then in the
Will of God, whom they reverence and fear; or for any thing of that Nature: I
say again, do I thus write, but in tenderness to thee; For when the Lord comes
to reckon, this will be hard for thee. And this I know assuredly from the Lord,
and I have his Word for it, who has moved me to write, and he has moved me
to write, that thou may yet withold the Execution of Suffering upon them,
which if thou do not, but shall suffer these things to be, the Lord will be
thine Enemy; and he will withdraw from thee, as he has been with thee, and
will let loose that against thee, which he has hitherto kept from thee, and
thou will be made desolate.

George Bishope.
Bristol, the 6th of the 3d Month, 1662.
To the King of England, these.
To the KING of England, these.
FRIEND,
THere is but a Minute between thee, and the breaking forth of the fierce Anger
of the Lord against thee, if thou Release not presently his People, who sorely
suffer by thee in noisome Goals, and that unto Death. Moved of the Lord I am to
write this to Thee, who am

Thy Friend who truly Loves Thee. George Bishope.
Bristol, the 5th. of the 10th. Month, 1662. This was wrote when multitudes of
Friends were Imprisoned, especially in Newgate London, where many died through
the Inhumanities of the Goal; being so many put together, that there was not
room to lodge one by another on the Ground, and Infection grew through want of
Room and Liberty; Shortly after the Delivery of which, an Order was granted, by
which these in Newgate London had their Liberty.



To the King and his both Houses of Parliament, This is the Word of the Lord.
Friends,
YE stand in a slippery place, whilst ye take upon ye to meddle with his
Dominion who lives for Ever. For the Conscience he has placed in Man as his
particular Witness, and his Seat through all Generations, who has given the
Earth unto the Children of Men. So see what ye do in this particular, for if ye
set free that which only can be bound by him, and not make Men to suffer for
their freedom of Conscience, you are upon a ^oot which will preserve you for
ever, and perpetuate your station to all Generations; for herein the Lord will
be with you, and preserve your station; whilst you stand with him; and he
being with you, who can be against you? For his Presence makes the Earth to
tremble, and the Isles to be afraid; and the Mountains to leap, and the little
Hills to skip, and the Sea to be driven back, whilst he makes a way for his
Ransomed to pass over. Therefore fear and tremble before the Lord God of Hosts,
who divides the Sea, and it is driven back; who makes the Waters to stand as
upon heaps, who declares to man his thought; The Lord of Hosts is his Name.
And let his Dread be upon you, so you will be kept, and his particular Rule
will be in your Conscience, and his Dominion set up, who is Lord of all; and so
ye will be preserved from intrenching on his Sovereignty, when he as Sovereign
rules in you, and from encroaching on his Prerogative, when it is your
Prerogative to rule with the Lord; and from being at a stand what is his Will,
when in you his Will Rules; and the Blessing of God will be upon you, whilst
you Rule with God, and your Rule is his Will. For here has been the Undoing of
Men in all Generations, and that which has Ruined Kingdoms and Nations.
Another thing then the Will of God has been their Rule, which God being
against, and that thing against God, a War has been, and God being the
stronger, they have come to naught. For, Who would set the Briars and Thorns
against me in Battle? (says the Lord) I would go through them, I would burn
them together. So then the Interest of Kings and Nations, of Governments, and
Rulers of Kingdoms and People, and their Peace and Prosperity, is the Will of
God, and to do that which is well-pleasing to him; that so it may be well with
them, and their Posterity after them, and the Earth may give forth its
increase, and God even our God may bless us, and give us every good thing. And
so your Prosperity I wish, who am moved of the Lord thus to write unto you, and
whose Word it is.

George Bishope.
Bristol, the 14th of the 12th Month, 1662. The Contents of this was Printed,
and Delivered at the Door of each House of Parliament to tbe Members, and also
to the King.



To the King of England, These.
FRIEND,
BY thy late Declaration thou have set thy self upon the Stage of the World,
and all Eyes are upon thee to see what thou will do, and it concerns thee to
endeavor the uttermost of what thou have spoken; and if thou will, who shall
let thee? For Liberty of Conscience being allowed to all Professions of
Religion without restriction, as it is a thing most Natural, so it will prove
most conducing to the Peace and safety of thy Dominions, and in order to the
Preservation of thy Renown to all Generations, and thy Welfare for ever. And
this I am moved of the Lord to write unto thee, that he expects this at thy
hands, seeing that through all Professions of Religions (which kept thee out)
he brought thee in upon thy Declaration from Breda, of Liberty of Conscience to
all Professions of Religion, which on thy part thou have enjoyed, that is to
say, Thy full settlement on the Throne of thy Fathers, beyond that of thy
Progenitors, and should be on theirs; besides it is the due homage, and
subjection thou owe to him who is Lord of all; whose is Conscience, as his
particular Dominion, who is Lord of Conscience. And this I have further to say
to thee from the Lord; That on this foot stands thy Welfare, and Prosperity for
ever; for under the deepest Obligation that can be, thou art to God, and Man in
this Particular; To God, who has done all this for thee, beyond thy hopes,
whose Lordship it is; To Man, who has suffered it to be, in hope of this, and
upon thy Promise, whose is the Right. Now for thee to vary or decline from
this, to both, or either, will render thee the most miserable of Men, as to
God, who sees in secret the thoughts and intents of thy heart, who will give
unto thee according to thy Deeds; as to Man, who will not believe thee; and thy
Faith and Reputation being lost, in such a weighty matter as this, what will thou do in the day when sorrows and distress shall attend thee every where, and
Despairation lead the forlorn of all thy Undertakings? And this I would not
have, the Lord is my Witness, for my Love is truly to thee, and therefore as
moved of the Lord, do I write; for such will be the Concomitants of thy
Variation from this; It is the Word of the Lord, And so the Lord God Eternal
open thine Eyes, and let thee see in this thy Day the things that belong unto
thy Peace. It is the Prayer of him who is in due sense of thy Condition, and of
what is near, for the hour is great. And so I am clear of thee thus far in the
sight of the Lord, whose Prosperity I wish.

George Bishop.
Bristol, the 22th of the 11th Month 1662. The Original, of which this is a
Copy, was delivered into the hand of the King at White Hall, by Elizabeth
Baily, it being wrote and sent upon his Second Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, which was after he came from Breda into England.



To the King and his both Houses of Parliament once more am I moved of the Lord
to write, and indeed bear with me, and let it not seem grievous unto you, what
I have to say, for it is in Love.
FRIENDS,
THe Lord has determined to keep his Throne in the Consciences of Men, and
whosoever they are that shall seek to put him out there, those will the Lord
put out, and they that endeavor to Justle him there, them will he Justle, and
they shall know that he is The Lord. Therefore, my Dear Friends, in Bowels of
Love I beseech you have not a hand in any such thing, lest his wrath break out
against you, and his fury take hold of you, and there be no Remedy. For from
the Lord God of Hoasts have I received it, and whatsoever may come of it as to
me for so doing, which I leave to the Lord, I must be faithful unto you, and
testify it; yea, woe would be unto me if I did it not; if you do so, so it
will be; it is the Word of the Lord. Therefore my Dear Friends, I again beseech
you in the tenderest expression of Love that possible can flow from a heart
that is well affected to you (whose welfare I desire) strike not at the Rock of
Ages in this, lest he dash you to pieces. It is the Word of the Lord. And so I
have finished what I have to say to you in the name of the Lord.

George Bishope.
Bristol, the 14th of the 1st. Month, 1662/^. Copies of the Original of this,
word for word, were delivered the King, and the Speakers of both Houses,
written and Sealed by Mary Jones.



To the King and both Houses of Parliament, Thus says the Lord.
MEddle not with my People because of their Conscience to me, and Banish them
not out of the Nation because of their Conscience, for if you do, I will send
my Plagues upon you, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Written in Obedience to the Lord, by his Servant George Bishope.
Bristol, the 25th of the 9th Month, 1664. The very Day that the next were
sent out of Newgate, London, in order to Banishment, the long sore Plague brake
out in London, over against the House of one of those who that day was sent
from Newgate aforesaid, into Banishment, whose Name is Edward Brush, who was
sent to Jamaico.



To the King of England; These.
FRIEND,
THou go the wrong way to work, and that which in the End will prove thy
Ruin. Thou should not deal thus with us who are not thine Enemies, but in
thought and deed desire thy welfare. How many Women (in a manner) art thou
making Widows, and their Children Fatherless? How art thou shipping them off
their Native Country, and rendering them as the worst of Men, and the most
miserable of Mankind? who in no other thing are offensive to thee, or do
transgress thy Laws, then as to their Conscience to God, in relation to his
Worship, who will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and such Worshippers
the Father seeks to worship him. How art thou going to undo thousands of
Families in this Nation, because of their Obedience to him, who dare not do
otherwise lest they should displease him that gives them their Being? How art
thou rendering thy Dominion Monstrous, and thy Rule among men very unreasonable,
who wilt not do unto other men, what thou would be done unto thy self; who
would not be so done unto, as thou do to others thy self? Thou know the
heart of a Stranger, and have been an Exile thy self; Thou know what it cost
thee, and how ill thou tookest it at their hand that thus did to thee, though
they pretended a Cause wherefore they so did it; How comes it to pass that thou
have so soon forgotten thine Old Estate, which not long since thou wast so
displeased with, that thou art putting Innocent Men, and thy Friends without a
Cause (as to God) on that which Thou and thy Laws call Transportation and
Banishment? I am grieved in my heart for thee, because I have loved thee, and
desired in my heart thy welfare, I could weep for thee day and night, if so be
thereby thou might be made sensible; I am under a deep load of affliction,
and am even ready to sink for thy sake, in consideration of what is coming upon
thee; I am in great bitterness for thy Day, I am even distressed with sorrow,
because the Mighty God is coming against thee, and he whose is Conscience, and
the dominion thereof, who will be worshipped as he pleases, not as thou will,
is brandishing his Sword against thee, and will lay thee desolate. Therefore
yet let my words have entrance into thine Ears, and what I speak unto thee
prove of Effect; stay thy Steps, and withdraw thine hand from us, meddle not
with us, lest the Anger of the Lord break forth upon thee and there be no
remedy. I am not as those who hide things in corners, and withhold from thee
what are the thoughts of my heart, but as one who would have it as well with
thee as thou can desire thy self, who would have all evil turned from thee,
and that length of Days and Prosperity might attend thee for Ever. So have I
written, and in nothing could I prove my faithfulness so unto thee then in so
doing; for I am sensible of the Lords Anger against thee for this thing, and
his Fury, which will take hold of thee if thou shall not desist; and therefore,
as at all other times since thy Return, I have taken the Opportunity both by
Writing and otherwise, to signify unto thee what I have seen from the Lord, as
to this thing, which (for ought I ever heard, thou have friendly received, so
in this, being weighed in my spirit, and in deed distress and sorrow for thee,
I could no less, being moved of the Lord, and required of him) then to
discharge my self once more to thee, desiring for thy sake, that what I have
here written may have place with thee, that the Anger of the Lord burn not so
against thee that there be none to quench it. And so I commit what I have said
to the Lord, to do by it and me, whatever may seem good in his sight; who have
no other end in all this, but in Obedience to the Lord to clear my Conscience
as to thee, who know nothing of an outward Sword, or any such thing, when I so
speak, but only the displeasure of the Lord, which I am sure is near thee; who
can create thee trouble as he thinks fit, which I would not have upon thee, and
therefore have I written, who am,

Thy Friend, though a Sufferer at thy hands. George Bishope.
Bristol, the 23d. of the 2d. Month, 1665. The Original of this was delivered
into the Kings Own Hand by Mary Jones.



To the King of England these.
To the King of England, This is the Word of the Lord.
THink not because I have given thee dominion over the Dutch, that thou shall
escape my hand, if thou continue to send away my People, whom thy Laws have
condemned to be Banished their Native Country. For, if thou do, I will send
my Plagues on thee, and thou shall know, that I am the Lord.

Written in Obedience to the Lord by his Servant, George Bishope.
Bristol, 16th. 4th. Month, 1665. This was wrote a little after the first
Engagement with the Dutch, wherein Opdam their Admiral was blown up, and the
Original thereof the King received in James Park, from the the hand of
Elizabeth Baily.



THE END.

