TO THE KING AND HIS Both Houses of Parliament;
This is the WORD of the LORD.
FRIENDS,
YE stand in a slippery place, whilst ye take upon ye to meddle with His
Dominion who lives for ever; For the Conscience he has placed in Man as his
Particular Witness, and his Seat throughout all Generations, who has given the
Earth unto the Children of Men. So see what you do in this particular; for, if
you set free that which only can be bound by Him, and not make men to suffer
for their freedom of Conscience; you are upon a foot which will preserve you for
ever, a^^ perpetuate your Station to all Generations; for herein the Lord will
be with you, and preserve your station whilst you stand with him; and he being
with you, who can be against you? For, his Presence makes the Earth to tremble,
and the Isles to be afraid, the Mountains to leap, and the little Hills to
skip, and the Sea to be driven back, whilst he makes a way for his ransomed to
pass over. Therefore fear and tremble before the Lord God of Hosts, Who
divides the Sea and it is driven back, who makes the Waters to stand as upon
heaps, who declares to man his thought; The Lord of Hosts is his Name: and let
his dread be upon you, so you will be kept, and his particular Rule will be in
your Conscience, and his Dominion set up, who is Lord of all, and so ye will be
preserved from entrenching upon his Sovereignty, when he as Sovereign rules in
you; and encroaching on his Prerogative, when it is your Prerogative to Rule
with the Lord; and from being at a stand what is his Will, when in you his Will
rules; and the Blessing of God will be upon you whilst you Rule with God, and
your Rule is his Will. For, here has been the undoing of men in all
Generations, and that which has ruined Kingdoms and Nations: Another thing
than the Will of God has been their Rule, which God being against, and that
thing against God, a War has been, and God being the stronger they have come
to naught. For, Who would set the Briars and Thorns against me in Battle?
(says the Lord) I would go through them, I would burn them together. So then,
the Interest of Kings and Nations, of Governments and Rulers, of Kingdoms and
People, and their Peace and Prosperity is the WILL of GOD, and to do that which
is well-pleasing to Him; that so it may be well with them, and their posterity
after them, and the Earth may give forth its increase, and God even our God may
bless us, and give us every good thing. And so your Prosperity I wish, who am
moved of the Lord thus to write unto you, and whose Word it is.

George Bishope.
Bristol, 14th. 12th. Month, 1662.

