LETTER OF ADVICE WRITTEN BY Sr. Francis Bacon To the Duke of Buckingham, When
he became Favorite to King James, Never before Printed.

London, Printed for R. H. and H. B. and are to be sold at Westminster and the
Royal Exchange, 1661.

A Letter of Advice, written by Sr. Francis Bacon, to the Duke of Buckingham,
when he became Favorite to King James.
My Noble Lord,
BEing overruled by your Lordships Command, first by word, and since by your
letters, I have chosen rather to show my Obedience, then to dispute the danger
of discovering my weakness in adventuring to give advice in a subject too high
for me. But, I know, I commit it to the hands of a noble friend, and to any
others, for the nature of the discourse, it is not communicable.e.

My Lord, When the blessing of God, (to whom in the first place, I know, you
ascribe your preferment) and the Kings favor (purchased by your noble parts,
promising as much as can be expected from a Gentleman) had brought you to this
high pitch of Honor, to be in the eye, and ear, and even in the bosom of
your gracious Master, and you had found by experience, the trouble of all men's
confluence, and for all matters to your self as a mediator between them and
their Sovereign, you were pleased to lay this Command upon me.

First in general, to give you my poor advice for your Carriage in so eminent a
Place, and of so much danger, if not wisely discharged. Next in particular, by
what means to give dispatches to Suitors of all sorts, for the Kings best
service, the Suitors satisfaction, and your own ease. I humbly return unto you
mine opinion in both these, such as an Hermit, rather then a Courtier can
render.

You are now the Kings Favorite, so voted, and so esteemed by all.

In the first place, then give me leave to tell you, what this signifies; and
next, what is the duty that lies upon you toward the King. That being done, in
a few words, I shall then come to the particulars, which you must insist upon,
to facilitate your dispatches. It is no new thing for Kings and Princes to have
their Privadoes, their favorites, their Friends. They have done it sometimes
out of their affection to the person of the man (for Kings have their
affections as well as private men) sometimes in contemplation of their
greatabilities (and that is a happy choice) and sometimes for their own ends, to
make them whom they so style, and are contented should be so styled, to be
interposed between the Prince and the People. Take it in either, or any of
those significations, let it be a caution unto you. If the King have made
choice of you out of his affection, or out of the opinion of your worth, to
communicate his bosom thoughts with you, or perhaps to debate them, and so
ripen his own Judgment; you are bound in gratitude to return so much as
possibly you can to advance your Masters service and honor. But were it, (as I
am confident it is not) to interpose you between himself and the envy of his
people in general, or of some discontented party in particular, then you are
bound for your own sake to watch over your Actions.

Remember then what your true condition is, the King himself is above the reach
of his people, but cannot be above their censures, and you are his shadow, if
either he commit an error, and is loath to avow it, but excuses it upon his
Ministers, of which you are the first in the eye: or you commit the fault, or
have willingly Permitted it, and must suffer for it; so perhaps you may be
offered as a sacrifice to appease the multitude. But admit you were in no such
danger, as I hope you are not, and that you are answerable only to God and the
King for your Actions, yet remember well the great trust you have undertaken,
you are as a continual Sentinel, always to stand upon your watch, to give him
true Intelligence; If you flatter him, you betray him, If you conceal the
truth of those things from him, which concern his Justice or his honor
(although not the safety of his Person,) you are as dangerous a Traitor to his
State, as he that rises in Arms against him. A false friend is more dangerous
than an open Enemy; Kings are styled Gods upon Earth, not absolute, but Dixi
dii estis, and the next words are, sed moriemini sunt homines, they shall dye
like men, and then their thoughts perish; they cannot possibly see all things
with their own eyes, nor hear all things with their own ears; they must commit
many great trusts to their Ministers; Kings must be answerable to God Almighty
(to whom they are but Vassals) for their actions, and for their negligent
Omissions. But the Ministers to Kings, whose eyes, ears, and hands, they are,
must be answerable to God and man, for the breach of their duties, in violation
of their trusts, whereby they betray them. For the general, I say no more but
apply my self to the particular wherein you desire satisfaction; in which my
answer shall be plain, and as clear as I can. And Sir, know this I beseech you,
that which I now write and recommend immediately to you, concerns also the
King, and much more then you, and because he cannot intend all things, and
ordinary Persons cannot have access unto him, or if they had, durst not speak
with that freedom, you are bound to supply it, and to be his Monitor, not in a
saucy male part way, which may not take with him, but at seasonable times,
which you may, nay which you must watch for.

It is true that the whole Kingdom has cast their eye upon you, as the new
rising Star, and no man thinks his business can prosper at Court, unless he
has you for his good Angel, or at least that you be not a Malus Genius against
him, this you cannot now avoid unless you will adventure a precipice, to fall
down faster than you rose. Opinion is a Master wheel in these cases. That
Courtier who obtained a boon of the Emperor, that he might every morning at
his coming into his Presence humbly whisper him in the ear, and say nothing,
asked no unprofitable suite for himself: but such a fancy raised only by an
opinion cannot be long lived, unless the man have sollid worth to uphold it,
otherwise when once discovered, it vanishes suddenly. But when a favorite in
court shall be raised upon the foundation of merits, and together with the care
of doing good service to the King, shall give good dispatches to the Suitors,
then can he not choose but prosper: Thus Sir I find is your uoble ambition, and
it is worthy the honor you possess: And that this may succeed according to
your desire, I shall humbly propound unto you these rules to be observed, and I
beseech you, if you approve of them, constantly to pursue them...

1. If the suit be either of Importance for value, or of difficulty, direct
that it be set down in writing, then appoint it to be left with you in writing,
and appoint the Suitor to attend for his answer so many days after, as may be
competent, of which time let a note be taken by your Secretary. So shall you be
eased of the Suitor in the mean time, and he rest quiet till the day appointed
in expectation of his dispatch.

2. To prepare your self for these answers in their times, set a part an hour
in a day or two to sort your Petitions, which will be easily done, if your
Secretary draw lines under the matter, which always lies in a narrow room.

3. Think not your self nor any one or two private friends or servants to be
able to comprehend the true reason of all things, there is no such omnisciency
to be looked for. But deviding the Petitions as they come to your hands into
several sorts, according to the nature of the matter, first, cause two or three
several Copies to be made of the Petition, or the substance of it.

4. Then make choice of several men well versed in these several professions or
qualities, whom you think you may trust, and to them severally send Copies,
desiring them within twenty days after to retun unto you in writing their
opinions of the Petition, and their reasons for it, or against it; and let not
one of them know what the other does.

5. Then set a part an hour or two twice in a week, to peruse these Petitions
again, and the Answers of the Referrees, out of which compared together, as out
of Responsa prudentium, you may collect such a judgment, as, within a short
time, you shall be able to judge of the fidelities and abilities of those you
trust, and return Answers to Petitions of all natures as an Oracle. And be
assured of this, that next to the granting of the Request, a reasonable and a
fair denial, (if the matter will not bear it to be otherwise) is most
acceptable.

That you may dispose of all these sorts of business, in a fit and a dexterous
way, I conceive that all matters of difficulty, which will be presented to you,
will be one of these eight sorts, either Concerning, 1. Religion and
Churchmen, or Church Matters. 2. The Laws and the Professors thereof. 3. The
Council Board, and matters of State: 4. Negotiation with foreign Princes or
States. 5. War by Sea or Land. 6. Foreign Plantations and Colonyes. 7. Matter
of Trade. 8. The Court or Curialitie.


What cannot be kauked under one of these heads, will not be worthy of your
thoughts, and you will find enough of these to take up your time.

But that you may not study your ease only, but chiefly your honor, and the
honor of your Master: I beseech you to take these materials, thus divided into
these eight Sections, into your more serious thoughts, and propound to your
self some Rules as Landmarks to guide your judgment in the examination of
every one of them, as shall come to your hand, wherein I shall adventure to
make an essay; please you to perfect it.

1. For Religion, if any thing be offered to you, touching it or touching the
Church or Churchmen, or Church Government, rely not only upon your self, but
take the opinion of some grave and eminent Divines; especially such as are sad
and discreet men, and exemplary for their Lives.

2. If any Question be moved concerning the Doctrine of the Church of England,
expressed in the 39. Articles, give not the least ear to the movers thereof,
that is so soundly, and so Orthodoxally settled as cannot be questioned,
without extreme danger to the honor and stability of our Religion, which has
been sealed with the blood of so many Martyrs and Confessors, as are famous
through the Christian World. The Enemies and underminers thereof are the Romish
Catholics (so stiling themselves) on the one hand, whose Tenants are
inconsistent with the truth of Religion, professed and protested by the Church
of England (whence we are called Protestants) and the Anabaptists and
Seperatists, and Sectaries on the other hand, whose Tenants are full of
Schism, and inconsistent with Monarchy: For the regulating of either, there
needs no other Cohertion than the due execution of the Laws already established
by Parliament.

3. If any attempt be made to alter the discipline of our Church, although it
be not an essential part of our Religion, yet it is so necessary, not to be
rashly altered, as the very substance of Religion will be interessed in it:
Therefore I desire you before any attempt be made of an Innovation by your
means, or by any Intercession to your Master, that you will first read over,
and his Majesty call to mind that wise and weighty Proclamation, which himself
penned, and caused to be published in the first Year of his Reign, and is
prefixed in Print before the Book of Common Prayer (of that Impression) in
which you will find so prudent, so weighty Reasons, not to hearken to
Innovations, as will fully satisfy you, that it is dangerous to give the least
ear to such Innovators, but it is desperate to be misled by them: But to settle
your judgment, mark but the admonition of the wisest of men King Solomon, Prove.
27. v. 21. My son fear God and the King, and meddle not with those, who are
given to change.

II. Next, touching the Laws (wherein I mean the Common Laws of England) I
shall be the more sparing to speak, because it is my profession, but thus much
I shall say with confidence, that if they be righty administered, they are the
best, the equallest in the world between the Prince and People; by which the
King has the justest Prerogative, and the People the best Liberty, and if at
any time, there be an unjust deviation, Hominis est vitium non professionis.
But that it may in all things have a fairer proceeding; Let the King take a
care, and as much as in you lies, do you take care for him, that the Judges of
the Law may be always chosen of the Learned of the Profession (for an
ignorant man cannot be a good Judge) and of the prudentest and discreetest,
because so great a part of the Civil Government lies upon their Charge; and
indeed little should be done in legal Consultations without them, and very
much may be done by their prudent advices, especially in their Circuits, if
right use were made of them: Believe me Sir, much assistance would be had from
them, besides the delivering of the Gaols, and trying of Causes between party
and party; if the King by himself (which were the best) or by his Chancellor,
did give them the Charge according to occurrences, at their going forth, and
receive a particular account from them at their return home: They would then be
the best Intelligencers of the true state of the Kingdom, and the surest means
to prevent, or remove all growing mischeifes within the body of the Realm. Next
to the Judges let care be taken that the Sergeants at Law be such as are most
probable to be made Judges in the next turn, and never to be advanced to that
state and degree. (For it is so styled) for favor or for reward, but only
with an eye upon the public good. For the Kings Council at Law, the Kings
particular interest will easily persuade him, and those who love his service,
to make choice of the most eminent, and most active; their experience in these
places will make them able for any employment in that profession afterward. In
the Laws we have a native Interest, it is our Birthright, and our Inheritance,
and I think the whole Kingdom will always continue that mind, which once the
two Houses of Parliament publicly professed, Nolimus Legem Angliae mutare:
under a Law we must live, and under a known Law, and not under an arbitrary Law
is our happiness that we do live; and the Justices of Peace, if a good choice
be made of them, are excellent Instruments to this State.

III. For matter of state and affairs proper for Council board, I dare not
take upon me to say much, they are Secrets and arcana, and are not fit to
descend to too low, to too petty matters, or private interests. Let the King be
president of this Council himself, not so much by personal presence, (but only
in great and weighty affairs) that may over^aw the board too much, where in
Councels there should be a freedom of discourse and of determination, but in
pursuing the acts of his Council table. And I do heartily wish, that the
Counselors themselves would be so advised in their resolutions, that they
should never be sudden, but that all things there propounded and debated one
day, should be revised the next, and then confirmed, or altered upon second
thoughts, such gravity in their proceedings would much become the honor of
that Board; and what is thus settled, should not be altered again but upon
great necessity.

In the choice of Privy Counselors, thus much only in the general, that
there may be some of the number, who are severally versed in all knowledges,
for their better assistance upon Councels of that nature; And although to some
persons of great Birth, the place of Princes Counselors may be bestowed as an
honor unto them; yet generally the motive should be the Parts of the man and
not his Person.

IV. The Negotiations of Ambassadors, and Treaties with Foreign Princes and
Estates, the subject matter of the Treaty must guide the Choice of the Persons
to be employed. But give me leave, I pray to remember unto you the constant
practice of that famous and wise Lady Q. Elizabeth (who was very happy, not so
much in a numerous as a wise Council to advise Her.) If it were an Embassy of
Gratulation of Triumph, she ever made choice of a person of Honor and Eminency
in his degree, who taking the employment as a work of favor was willing to
undertake it at an easy rate for the expense of the Crown (which has not
often been so of later times:) But if it were upon some matter of importance
from the State, there were always employed (at least joined in the Commission
some persons of great judgment and known experience, and in such Cases men
over-green in years were never the principal Agents; yet some younger men were
joined with the elder, to train them up in State Affairs.

V. For matter of War, either by Land or Sea, Your gracious Master so settled
in his judgment for Peace, as he has chosen for his Motto, that part of our
Saviors beatitudes, Beati pacifici; It is a happiness to this Nation to be in
this blessed condition, God send we surfeit not with it; yet I must tell you,
the best way to continue a secure peace, is to be prepared for a War. Security
is an ill guard for a Kingdom. But this Bul-Kingdome, where the Seas are our
Walls, and the Ships our works, where safety and plenty (by trade) are
concomitant, it were both a sin and a shame, to neglect the means to attain
into these ends; Let brave spirits that have fitted themselves for Command,
either by Sea or by Land, not to be laid by, as persons unnecessary for the
time; let Arms and Ammunition of all sorts be provided and stored up, as
against a day of Battle; let the Ports and Forts be fitted so, as if by the
next wind we should hear of an Allarum; such a known Providence is the surest
protection. But of all wars, let both Prince and people pray against a War in
our own bowels: The King by his Wisdom, Justice and Moderation must foresee
and stop such a storm, and if it fall must allay it, and the people by their
obedience must decline it. And for a Foreign War intended by an Invasion to
inlarg the bounds of your Empire, which are large enough, and are naturally
bounded with the Ocian, I have no opinion either of the justness or fitness
of it, and it were a very hard matter to attempt it with help of success,
seeing the subjects of this Kingdom believe it is not legal for them to be
enforced to go beyond the Seas, without their own consent, upon hope of an
unwarranted Conquest; But to resist an Invading Enemy, or to suppress Rebels,
the Subject may and must be commanded out of the Counties where they inhabit.
The whole Kingdom is but one entire body, else it will necessarily be
verified, which elsewhere was asserted. Dum singuli pugnamus, omnes vincimur.

VI. But in the next place for Foreign Plantations and Collonies abroad, that's
both honorable and profitable to disburthen the Land of such Inhabitants as
may well be spared, and to employ their labors in the Conquest of some
Foreign parts without injury to the Natives. Yet these cautions are to be
observed in these undertakings.

1. That no man be compelled to such an employment, for that were a banishment,
not a service fit for a freeman.

2. That if any transplant themselves into plantations abroad, who are known
Schismatics, outlaws, or criminal persons, that they be sent for back upon the
first notice, such persons are not fit to lay the foundation of a new Colony.

3. To make no extirpation of the Natives under pretense of planting Religion,
God surely will no way be pleased with such sacrifices.

4. That the people sent thither be Governed according to the Laws of this
Realm, whereof they are, and still must be Subjects.

5. To establish there the same purity of Religion, and the same discipline for
Church Government without any mixture of Popery or Anabaptisme, least they
should be drawn into Factions and Schisms, and that place receive them there
bad, and send them back worse.

6. To employ them in profitable trades and manifactures, such as the Clime
will best fit, and such as may be useful to this Kingdom, and return to them
an exchange of things necessary.

7. That they be furnished and instructed for the military part, as they may
defend themselves, least on a sudden, they be exposed as a prey to some other
Nation, when they have fitted the Colony for them.

8. To order a Trade thither, and thence, in such a manner as some few
Merchants and Tradesmen, under color of furnishing the Colony with
necessaries, may not grind them, so as shall always keep them in poverty.

9. To place over them such Governors as may be qualified in such manner as
may Govern the place, and lay the foundation of a new Kingdom.

10. That care be taken that when the industry of one man has settled the
work, a new man by insinuation or misinformation, may not supplant him without
a just Cause, which is the discouragement of all faithful endeavors.

11. That the King will appoint Commissioners in the nature of a Council, who
may superintend the works of this nature, and regulate what concerns the
Colonyes, and give an account thereof to the King or to his Council of State.

VII. For matter of Trade, I confess, it is out of my profession, yet in that
I shall make a Conjecture also, and propound some things to you, whereby (if I
am not much mistaken) you may advance the good of your Country and profit of
your Master.

1. Let the foundation of a profitable Trade be thus laid, that the exportation
of home Commodities be more in value, then the importation of Foreign, so we
shall be sure that the stocks of the Kingdom shall yearly increase, for then
the balance of Trade must be returned in money or bullion.

2. In the importation of Foreign Commodities, Let not the Merchant return
Toys and Vanities (as sometimes it was elsewhere Apes and Peacocks) but solid
Merchandise, first for necessity, next or pleasure, but not for Luxury.

3. Let the vanity of the times be restrained, which the neighborhood of other
Nations have induced, and we strive a pace to exceed our pattern; Let vanity
in apparel, and which is more vain, that of the fashion, be avoided. I have
heard, that in pain (a grave Nation, whom in this I wish we might imitate) they
do allow the^^ layers and Courtesans the vanity of rich and costly clothes,
but to sober men, and Matrons, they permit it not, upon pain of infamy (a
severer punishment upon ingenious natures then a pecuniarie Mulct.)

4. The excess of diet in costly meats and drinks set from beyond the Seas
would be avoided, wise men will do it without a Law, I would there might be a
Law to restrain fools. The excess of wine costs the Kingdom much, and returns
nothing but surfets and disseases, were we as wise as easily we might be,
within a year or two at the most, if we would needs be drun's with wines, we
might be drunk with half the cost.

5 If we must be vain and superfluous in laces and imbroyderies which are more
costly then either warm or comely, let the Curiosity be the Manifacture of the
Natives, then it should not be verifyed of us Nateriam superabat opus.

6. But instead of crying up all things, which are either brought from beyond
sea, or wrought here by the hands of strangers, let us advance the native
commodities of our own Kingdom, and employ our Countrymen before strangers,
let us turn the woolls of the Land into Clothes and Stuffs of our own grows,
and the Hemp and flax growing here into Linning cloth, and Cordage, it would
set many thousand hands on work, and thereby one shilling worth of the
materials, would by industry be multiplied to five, ten, and many times to
twenty times more in the value being wrought.

7. And of all sorts of Thrift for the Public good, I would above all others
Commend to your care the encouragement to be given to Husbandry, and the
improving of Lands for Tillage, there is no such Usury as this. The King cannot
enlarge the bounds of these Islands, which make up his Empire, the Ocian being
the unremoveable Wall, which incloseth them, but he may enlarge and multiply
the revenue thereof by this honest and harmless way of good Husbandry.

8. A very great help unto Trade are Navigable Rivers, they are so many
indrafts to attain Wealth, whereby Art and Industry let them be made, but let
them not be turned to private profit.

9. In the last place, I beseech you take into your serious consideration, that
Indian wealth, which this Island and the Seas thereof excel in, the hidden and
rich treasure of Fishing: Do we want an example to follow, I may truly say to
the English go to the Pismire thou sluggard. I need not expound the text half a
days sail with a good wind, will show the Mineriall, and the Miners.

10. To regulate all these it will be worthy the care of a subordinate
Council, to whom the ordering of these things may be committed, and they give
an account thereof to the State.

VIII. Lastly for the affairs of Court, you are much better able to instruct
your self then any man else can, muchlesse then my self, who have scarce steps
within the Court gates but as by chance and at the most as a stranger, yet in
this also I shall be bold to tell you my thoughts.

In the disposing of the Offices and Affairs of Court, the King has a
Latitude for his Affection, which in matters touching the Public, He must
deny to himself; Here he is more properly Paterfamili^s, in the other he is
(...) Patriae. There are many places in Court, which a mere formal m^n may
perform, because they are but as the Services of a private Family, and in which
the Public has little interest. And yet in these, the Choice had need be of
honest and faithful Servants, as well as of comely outsides, who can bow the
knee and kiss the hand, and perform other services of small importance
compared to this of Public employment. King David, Psalm 121. propounded a
Rule to himself for the Choice of his Courtiers; he was a wise and a good King,
and a wise and a good King shall do well to follow such a good example, and if
he find any to be faulty (which perhaps cannot suddenly be (...);) Let him
take on his, this resolution as King David did, There shall ^o deceitful
person dwell in my house. But for such as shall bear Office in the Kings house,
and manage the expenses thereof, it is much more requisite to make a good
Choice of such Servants both for his thrift, and for his Honor.

For your part, I shall wish that you would not interpose your self much in
these things, which are properly for the Officers of the Household, that may
draw too much envy upon you, and this would be too low for your thoughts (who
will find enough to busy you about of a higher nature) Yet this will very
well become you, and your general trust not to suffer the King to be too much
abused, where your vigilance can prevent it. But then the way of doing it would
be thus, to advertise the King of the defects, and then himself to find them
out, rather as if it were by accident, then as prompted unto it.

In Court there are also some other Requisites, which in their seasons may be
thought upon; Besides the serious Affairs pertaining to Government, which are
many: Matter of Pastime and disport are fit in their seasons, but if they shall
be too common, they will loose their repute, and become Arguments of Lightness
rather then of Recreation. When there is a Queen and Lady of Honor attending
her Person, sometimes to entertain them with Revells and Masks, are ornaments
fit for a Court. Otherwise for a King of a young Prince, who are active (and to
be so, commends them) sports abroad, and of more manly and useful deportment,
as riding the great Horse, the T^^, the Barriers, the Tennis, etc. are more
commendable. But neither in jest or earnest must that be countenance or care
given to Flatterers or Sycophants, the bane of all Courts. They are Flies who
will not only buz about in every ear, but will blo^ and corrupt every plate
where they light.

Sir, I cannot flatter, I have dealt plainly and clearly with you, according to
the freedom you have been pleased to afford me. I have but a word or two more
to trouble you with.

You serve a gracious Master and a good, and there is a Noble and a hopeful
Prince, whom you must not disserve; Adore not him as the rising Sun in such a
measure, as that you put a jealousy into the Father, who raised you; Nor out
of the Confidence you have in the Fathers affections, make not your self
suspected of the Son; keep an equal and a fit distance, so may you be
serviceable to both, and deservedly be in the favor of both.

If you find in these, or in any other your Observations (which doubtless are
much better than these loose Collections) any thing which you would have either
the Father or the Son to take to heart, an Admonition from a dead Author, or a
Caveat from an impartial Pen, whose aim neither was, nor can be taken to be at
any particular by design, will prevail more, and take better impression, than
a down right advice, which may perhaps be mistaken, as if it were spoken
magisterially.

Thus may you long live a happy Instrument, for your King and Country, you
shall not be a Meteor, or a blasing Star, but stella fixa, happy here, and more
happy hereafter. Deus m^^^ sua te ducat, that's the hearty prayer of,

Your most obliged Servant,

