The LEARNED READING Of Sir Francis Bacon, One of her Majesty's learned
Counsel at Law, upon the Statute of USES: Being his double Reading to the
Honorable Society of GRAYES Inn.

Published for the Common good.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbancke, and Laurence Chapman. 1642.

The Learned Reading of Sir FRANCIS BACON, upon the Statute of Uses.
I Have chosen to Read upon the Law of Uses made 27. Hen. 8; a Law whereupon
the Inheritances of this Realm are tossed at this day like a Ship upon the
Sea, in such sort that it is hard to say which Bark will sink, and which will
get to the Haven, that is to say, what assurances will stand good, and what
will not; whether is this any lack or default, in the Pilots their grave and
learned Judges: but the Tides and Currents of received errors, and unwarranted
and abusive experience, have bin so strong, as they were not able to keep a
right course according to the Law, so as this Statute is in great part, as a
Law made in the Parliament, held 35. Reginae, for in 37. Reginae, by the
notable judgment upon solemn Arguments, of all the Judges assembled in the
Exchequet Chamber, in the famous case between Dillon and Fraeyne, concerning
an assurance by Chudley; this Law began to be reduced to a true and sound
Exposition, and the fall and perverted Exposition, which had continued for so
many years, but never countenanced by any rule or authority of weight, but
only entertained in a popular conceit, and in practice at adventure grew to
be controled, since which time (as it comes to pass always upon the first
reforming of inveterate errors) many doubts, and perplexed Questions have
risen, which are not yet resolved nor the Law thereupon settled: The
consideration whereof moved me to take the occasion of performing this
particular duty to the House, to see if I could by my travel, bring to a more
general good of the Common wealth.

Herein though I could not be ignorant of the difficulty of matter, which he
that takes in hand shall soon find, or much leffe of my own unablenesse,
which I had continual sense and feeling of; yet because I had more means of
absolution then the younger sort, and more leisure then the greater sort, I did
think it not impossible to work some profitable effect, the rather because
where an inferior wit is bent, and conversant upon one Subject, he shall many
times with patience and meditation dissolve, and undo many of the knots which
a greater wit, distracted with many matters would rather cut in two then
unknit, at the least if my intention or judgment be too barren, or too weak;
yet by the benefit of other Arts, I did hope to dispose or digest, the
authorities or Opinions which are in Cases of use in such order and method, as
they should take light one from another, though they took no light from me and
like to the matter of my Reading shall my manner be, for my meaning is to
revive and recontinue the ancient son of Reading which you may see in Mr.
Frowickes, upon the Prerogative, and all other Readings of ancient time, being
of less ostentation and more fruit, then the manner lately accustomed, for
the use then was substantially to expound the Statutes, by grounds and
diversities, as you shall find the Readings still to run upon case of the like
Law, and contrary Law, whereof the one includes the learning of a difference,
and not to stir concise and subtle doub^s, or to contrive tedious and
intricate Cases, whereof all saving one are buried, and the greater part of
that one case which is taken, is commonly nothing to the matter in hand, but my
labor shall be in the ancient course, to open the Law upon doubts, and not
doubts upon the Law.

Expositio Statuti.
THe Exposition of this Statute consists upon the matter, without the Statutes,
upon the matter within the Statute.

Three things concerning these Statutes, and all other Statutes which are
helps and inducements to the right understanding of my Statute, and yet are no
part of the Statute it self.

The consideration of the Statute at the Common Law. 1.


The consideration of the mischief which the Statute intends 2.
to redress, as any other mischief, which an Expositor of the Statute this
way or that way may breed.

Certain Maxims of the common Ley, touching Exposition of Statutes: having
therefore framed six divisions according 3.
to the number of Readings upon the Statute it self, I have likewise divided
the matter without the Statute into six Introductions or Discourses, so that
for every days Reading I have made triple proposition.

1. Un Preface, or Introduction. 2. Un Division upon the Law it self, 3 A few
brief Casas, for Exercise and Argument.
The last of which I would have forborne, and according to the ancient manner,
You should have taken some of my points upon my Divisions, one, two, or more as
you should have thought good, save that I had this regard, that the younger
sort of the Bar were not so conversant, upon matters upon the Statutes, and
for that Case I have interlaced some matters at the Common Law that are more
familiar within the books,

The first matter I will Discourse unto you, is the nature and 1.
definition of an use, and his Incession and Progression before the Statute.

The Second Discourse shall be of the second spring of this 2.
Tree of Uses since the Statute.

The Third Discourse shall be of the Estate of the assurance 3.
of this Realm at this day upon Uses, and what kind of them is convenient and
reasonable, and not fit to be touched, as far as sense of Law and natural
construction of the Statute will give leave, and what kind of them is
convenient and meet to be suppressed.

The Fourth Discourse shall be of certain Rules and Expositions 4.
of Laws applied to this present purpose.

The Fifth Discourse shall be of the best course to remedy 5.
the same inconveniences now a foot, by construction of the Statute,
withoutoftering violence to the letter or sense.

The Sixth and last Discourse shall be of the best course to remedy 6.
the same inconveniences, and to declare the Law by Act of Parliament, which
last I think good to reserve and not to publish.

The nature of a use is best discerned by considering what it is not, and then
what it is, for it is the nature of all humane Science, and knowledge to
proceed most safely by Negative and exclusive.

First, use is no right, title, or interest in Law, and therefore Master
Attorney who read upon this Statute said well, that there are but two rights.

Ius in Re.
Ius ad Rem.
The one is an Estate which is Ius in Re, the other a demand which is Ius ad
Rem, but a use is neither, so that in 24. H. 8. it is said that the saving of
the Statute of I. R. ^. which saves any right or interest of Intayle, must be
understood of Intayles of the possession, and not of the part of the use,
because a use is no right nor interest; so again, you see that Littletons
conceit, that an use should amount to a Tenancy at will, whereupon a release
might well inure, because of pravity is controled by 4. Et 5. H. 7. and diverse
other books, which said that Cesty que use is punishable in an Action of
Trespass toward the Feoffees only 5. H. 5. seems to be at some discord
with other Books where it is admitted for Law, that if there be Cesty que use
of an Advowson, and he be outlawed in a personal Action, the King should
have the presentment, which Case Master Evans in the argument of Chudleyes Case
did seem to reconcile this where Cesty que use being utlaird, had presented in
his own name, there the King should remove his incumbent, and no such thing
can be collected upon that Book, and therefore I conceive the error grew upon
this, that because it was generally thought, that a use was but a penancy of
profits, and then again because the Law is that upon Utlayers, upon personal
Actions, the King shall have the penancy of profits, they took that to be
one, and the self same thing which Cesty que use had, and which the King was
entitled unto which was not so, for the King had remedy in Law for his penancy
of profits, but Cesty que use had none, the Books go further and say, that a
use is nothing, as in 2. H. 7. Dett fuit Port, and counted Sur leas for years
rent etc. the Defendant pleaded in Bar, that the Plaintiff Nihil habuit
tempore divisionis, the Plaintiff made a special replication, and showed that
he had no use and issue joined upon that, wherefore it appears, that if he
had taken issue upon the defendants Plea, it should have bin found against him:
So again in 4. Reginae, in the Case of the Lord Sands, the truth of the case
was a Fine leavied by Cesty que use before the Statute, and this coming in
question since the Statute upon an averment by the Plaintiffes Quod parts
finis nihil habuerint, it is said that the Defendant may show the special
matter of ^ use, and it shall be no departure from the first pleading of the
same, and it is said further that the averment given in 4. H. 7. Quod parts
finis nihil habuerint, nec in possessione, nec in usu went out upon this
Statute of 27. Hen. 8. and was no more now to be accepted; but yet it appears,
that if issue had bin taken upon the general averment, without the special
matter showed, it should have bin found, for him that took the averment
because a use is nothing, but these books are not to be taken generally or
grossly, for we see in the same books, when an use is specially alleged, the
Law takes knowledge of it, but the sense of it is, that use is nothing for
which remedy is given by the course of the Common Law, so as the Law knows
it, but protects it not; and therefore when the question comes whether it
has any being in Nature and Conscience the Law accepts of it, and therefore
Littletons Case is good Law, that he which has but forty shillings Freehold
in use, shall be sworn in an inquest, for it is ruled Secundum dominium
laterale, and not Secundum deminium legitimum, nam natura dominus est quia
fructum ex re percipit. And some doubt upon Subsidies and Taxes Cesty que use
should be valued as an owner: So likewise if Cesty que use had resolved his use
unto the Feoffee for six pound, or contracted with a stranger for the like
some, there is no doubt but it is a good construction, whereon to ground an
Action upon the Case, for money for release of a Suite in the Chancery is a good
quid pro quo therefore to conclude, though a use be nothing in Law to yield
remedy by course of Law, yet it is somewhat in reputation of Law and
Conscience, for that may be somewhat in conscience which is nothing in Law,
like as that may be something in Law which is nothing in Conscience; as if the
Feoffees had made a feoffment over in Fee, Bona fide, upon good consideration,
and upon a Subpoena brought against them, he pleaded this matter in Chancery,
this had been nothing in Conscience, not as to discharge them of damages.

A second negative fit to be understood is, that a use is no Covin, nor it is
no collusion, as the word is now used, for it is to be noted, that where a man
does remove the state and possession of Land, or goods out of himself unto
another upon trust, it is either a special trust, or a general trust.

The special trust is either Lawful, Or Unlawful.

The special trust Unlawful, is according to the Case provided, for by
ancient Statutes of the profits, as where it is to defraud Creditors, or to get
men to maintain suites, or to defeat the tenancy to the precipe, or the
Statute of Mortmaine, or the Lords of their wardships or the like, and those
are termed Frauds, Covins, or Collusions.

The special trust Lawful is, as when I infeoffee some of my friends, because
I am to go beyond the Seas, or because I would free the Land from some
several Statute, or Bond which I am to enter, into or upon intent to be
infeoff'd, or intent to vouched, and so to suffer a common Recovery, or upon
intent that the Feoffees shall infeoffee over a Stranger, and infinite the like
intents and purposes, which fall out in men's dealings and occasions, and this
we call Confidence, and the Books do call them intents, but where the trust
is not special, nor transitory, but general and permanent, there it is a use;
and therefore these three are to be distinguished, and not confounded by Covin
Confidence, use.

So as now we are come by Negatives to the Affirmative, what a use is agreeable
to the definition in Plowden, 352. De Lamers Case, where it is said:

Use is a trust reposed by any person in the Terre-tenant, that he may suffer
him to take the profits, and he that will perform his intent. But it is a
shorter Speech to say, that Vsus est dommium fiduciarium: Use is an owners life
in trust:

So that Vsus est status, sive possessio totius, differ, secundum rationem fori
quam secundum naturam rei, for that one of them is in Court of Law, the other
in court of Conscience, and for a trust which is the way to an use, it is
exceeding well defined by a Civilian of great understanding: Fides est
obligatio Conscientiae unjus ad intentionem alterius.

And they have a good division likewise of Rights. Ius precarium, Ius
fiduciarium.Ius legitimum,

A right in courtesy, for the which there is no remedy at all. 1.


A right in trust for which there is a remedy, only but in 2.
Conscience.

A right in Law. 3.


So much of the nature and definition of an use.

It follows to consider the parts and properties of an use wherein by the
consent of all Books, and it was distinctly delivered by Justice Walmeley, in
36. Elizabeth.

That a trust consists upon three parts.

The First, that the Feoffee will suffer the Feoffer to take the profits.

The Second, that the Feoffee upon request of the Feoffer, or notice of his
Will, will execute the Estates to the Feoffer, or his Heirs, or any other by
his direction.

The Third, that if the Feoffee be disseised, and so the Feoffer disturbed, the
Feoffee will re-enter, or bring an action to re-continue the possession, so
that those three, pernancy of Profits, execution of Estates, and defense of the
Land, are the three points of trust.

The properties of an use they are exceeding well set forth, by former Justice
in the same Case, and they be three,

Uses (says he) are created by Confidence. 1.


Pressed by privity, which is nothing else but a continuance. 2.


Of the Confidence without interruption and ordered and guided by Conscience:
either by the private Conscience of the Feoffee; Or the general Conscience of
the Estate which is Chancery.

The two former of which (because they be matters more thoroughly beaten, and
we shall have occasion to handle them) we will not now debate upon.

But the third we will speak somewhat of both, because it is a key to open
many of true reasons, and termings of uses, and because it tends to decide
out great and principal doubts at this day.

Cook Soliciter entering into his Argument of Chudleyes Case, said sharply and
fitly, I will put never a Case but shall be of an use, for a use in Law has no
fellow; meaning that the learning of uses is not to be matched with other
Learnings: Anderson chief Justice in the Argument of the same Case, did truly
and profoundly control the Vulgar opinion collected upon the fifth E. 4. that
there might be Possessio fratris of a use, for he said that it was no more but
that the Chancelee would consult with the Rules of Law, where the intention of
the parties did not specially appear, and therefore the private conceit which
Glanvile Justice cited in the 42. Reginae in the case of Corbet, in the Common
Plea of one of Lincolnes Inn, whom he named not, but seemed to allow is not
sound, which was, that a use was but a limitation, and did ensue the nature of
a possession.

This very conceit was set on foot in 27. H. 8. in the Lord Darcies Case, in
which time they began to heave at uses, for there after the Realm had many
ages together put in ure the passage of uses by Will, they began to argue that
an use was not deviseable, but that it did ensue the nature of the Land, and
the same year after this Statute was made; so that this opinion seems ever
to be, and for ever to an Act of Parliament touching uses; and if it be so
meant, now meant I like it well: but in the mean time the Opinion it self is
to be recited, and because in the same Case of Corbet 3. reverent Judges of the
Court of Common Pleas, did deliver and publish their Opinion, though not
directly upon the point adjudged, yet obiter as one of the Reasons of their
judgment, that an use of Inheritance could not be limited to cease, and
again, that the limitation of a new use could not be to a Stranger, ruling
uses merely according to the ground of possession, it is worth the labor to
examine, that learning by 3. Hen. 7. You may collect that if the Feoffees had
bin disseised by the Common Law, and an Ancestor collateral of Cesty que use
had released unto the disseisor, and his warranty had attached upon Cesty que
use, yet the Chancellor upon this matter showed, would have not respect unto
it, to compel the Feoffees to execute the Estate unto the disseisor, for there
the case being that Cesty que use Intayle having made an assurance by fine and
recovery, and by warranty which descended upon his issue, two of the Judges
held that the use is not extinct, and Bryan and Hussy that held the contrary
said, that the Common Law is altered by the new Statute, whereby they admit,
that by the Common Law that warranty will not bind and extinct a right of a
use, as it will do a right of possession, and the reason is, because the Law
of Collateral garranty is a hard Law, and not to be considered in a Court of
Conscience, in 5. Edw. 4. It is said that if Cesty que use be attainted,
quaere, who shall have the Land, for the Lord shall not have the Land, so as
there the use does not imitate the possession, and the reason is, because the
Lord has a Tent is by Title, for that is nothing to the Subpoena, because the
Feoffees intent was never to advance the Lord, but only his own blood, and
therefore the quaere of the Book arises what the trust and confidence of the
Feoffee did tie him to do, as whether he should not sell the Land to the use
of the Feoffees Will, or in pious uses, so favorably they took the intent in
those days, as you find in 27. H. 6. that if a man had appointed his use to
one for life, the remainder in Fee to another, and Cesty que use for life had
refused, because the intent appeared not to advance the Heir at all, nor him
in reversion, presently the Feoffee should have the Estate for life of him that
refused some ways to the behoof of the Feoffer: But to proceed in some better
order toward the disproofe of this Opinion of limitation, there be four
points wherein we will examine the nature of uses.

The raising of them. 1.

The preserving of them. 2.

The transferring of them. 3.

The extinguishing of them. 4.

In all these Four, you shall see apparently that uses stand upon their own
reasons, utterly differing from Cases of possession, I would have one Case
showed by men learned by the Law, where there is a deed, and yet there need a
consideration, as for paroll, the Law adjudgeth it too light to give a use
without consideration, but a deed ever in Law imports a consideration, because
of the deliberation and Ceremony in the confession of it, and therefore in 8.
Reginae it is solemnly agreed, that in the Queens Case a false consideration
if it be of Record, will hurt the Patent, but want of consideration does never
hurt it, and yet they say that a Case is but a nimble and light thing, and now
contrariwise it seems to be weightier then any thing else, for you cannot
weigh it up to raise it, neither by deed, nor deed enrolled without the weight
of consideration, but you shall never find a reason of this, to the Worlds end,
but in the Law, but it is a reason of Chancery, and it is this:

That no Court of Conscience will enforce Omnium gratuitum, though the intent
appear never so clearly where it is not executed, or sufficiently passed by
Law, but if money had been paid, and so a person dampnified, or that it was for
the establishment of his House, then it is a good matter in the Chancery: so
again I would see in the Laws, a Case where a man shall take by a Conveyance,
be it by Deed, Livery, or Word that is not party to the grant, I do not say
that the delivery must be to him that takes by the Deed, for a Deed may be
delivered to one man to the use of another; neither do I say that he must be
party to the delivery of the Deed, for he in the remainder may take though he
be not party, but he must be party to the words of the grant; here again the
Case of the use goes single, and the reason is, because a conveyance in use is
nothing but a publication of the trust, and therefore so as the party trusted
be declared, it is material to whom the publication be so much for the
raising of uses.

There is no Case in the Common Law, wherein notice simply and nakedly is
material to make a Covin, or particeps Criminis, and therefore if the Heir
which is in by descent, infeoffee one which had notice of the disseisin, if he
were not a Disseisor de facto, it is nothing: so in 33. H. 6 if a Feoffment be
made upon collusion, and feoffee makes a feoffment over upon good
consideration, the collusion is discharged, and it is not material if they had
notice or no, so as it is put in 14. H, 8. if a sale be made in a Market over
upon consideration, although it be to one that has notice that they are
stolen goods, yet the property of a Stranger is bound, though in the Book
before remembered 35. Hen. 6 some opinion to the contrary, which is clearly no
Law, so in E. 3. if assets descend to the Heir, and he alien it upon good
consideration, although it be to one that had notice of the Debt, or of the
Warranty it is good enough. So if a man enter of purpose into my Lands, to the
end that a Stranger which has right, should bring his Praecipe and evict the
Land, I may enter notwithstanding any such recovery, but if he enter having
notice that the Stranger has right, and the Stranger likewise having notice of
his entry, yet if it were not upon Confederacy or collusion between them it is
nothing, and the reason of these Cases is, because the Common Lawlooketh no
furtherthen to see whether the Act were merely Actus fictus in fraudem legis,
and wheresoeverit finds consideration given it discharges the covin.

But come now to the Case of use, and there it is otherwise, as it is in 14. H.
8. and 28. H. 8. and diverse other Books, which prove that if the Feoffee sell
the Land for good consideration to one that has notice, the Purchaser shall
stand seized to the ancient use, and the reason is because the Chancery looks
further then the Common Law, to the corrupt Conscience of him that will deal
in the Land, knowing it in equity to be another, and therefore if there were
Radix Amaritudinis, the consideration purges it not, but it is at the peril
of him that gives it, so that consideration, or no consideration is an issue
at the Common Law, but notice on notice is an issue in the Chancery, and so
much for the preserving of uses.

For the transferring of uses there is no case in Law whereby an Action is
transferred but the Subpoena, in case of use was always assigneable, nay
further you find twice 27. H. 8. Fol. 10. Pla. 9. Fo. 30. and Pla. 21. that a
right of use may be transferred, for in the former case Montague makes the
objection and says, that a right of use cannot be given by Fine, but to him
that has the Possession, Fitz Herbert answers, Yes well enough; quaere the
reason says the book.

And in the latter Case where Cesty que use was infeoffed by the Disseisor of
the Feoffee, and made a Feoffment over: Englefield doubted whether the second
Feoffee should have the use, Fitz Herbert said, I marvel you will make a doubt
of it, for there is no doubt but the use passes by the Feoffment to the
Stranger, and therefore this Question needs not to have been made; so the
great difficulty in 10. Reginae, Delamers Case, where the case was in effect
Tenant in tail of an use, the remainder in Fee, Tenant in tail made a
Feoffment in Fee, Tenant, by the Statute of I. R. 3. and the Feoffee infeoffed
him in the remainder of the use, who made it over, and there question being
made whether the second Feoffee should have the use in remainder, it is said
that the second Feoffee must needs have the best right in Conscience, because
the first Feostee claimed nothing but in trust, and the rest que use cannot
claim it against his sale, but the reason is apparent (as was touched before)
that a use in Esse was but a thing in action, or in suite to be brought in
Court of Conscience, and where the Subpoena was to be brought against the
Feoffee out of possession to recontinue the Estate, always the Subpoena might
be transferred, for still the Action at the Common Law was not stirred, but
remained in the Feoffee, and so no mischief of maintenance or transferring
rights.

And if a use being but a right may be assigned, and passed over to a
Stranger, a multo fortiori, it may be limited to a Stranger upon the privity
of the first conveyance, as shall be handled in another place, and as Glanvile
Justice said, he could never find by any book, or evidence of antiquity, a
continge use limited over to a Stranger, I answer, First it is no marvel that
you find no Case before E. 4. time of contingent uses, where there be not six
of uses in all, and the reason I doubt was, men did choose well whom they
trusted, and trust was well observed, and at this day in Ireland, where uses be
in practice, Cases of uses come seldom in question, except it be sometimes
upon the alienations of Tenants in tail by Fine, that the Feoffees will not
be brought to execute Estates, to the dis-inheritance of ancient blood, but
for experience, and the conveyance there was nothing more usual in Obysts,
then to will the use of the Land to certain persons and their heirs, so long
as they shall pay the Chancery Priests their Wages, and in default of payment
to limit the use over to other persons and their Heirs, and so in case of
forfeiture, through many degrees, and such conveyances are as ancient as R. 2.
time.

Now for determining and extinguishing of uses, I put the case of collateral
garranty before, and to that the notable case of 14. H. 8. Hautsemmes Case,
where this very point was in the principal case, for a Rent out of Land, and
the Land it self in case of possession cannot stand together, but the rent
shall be extinct, but there the case is, that the use of the Land, and the use
of the Rent shall stand well enough together, for a Rent charge was granted by
the Feoffee to one, that notice of the use, had and ruled, that the Rent was to
the ancient use, and both uses were in Esse simulet semel, and though Brudnell
chief Justice urged the ground of possession to be otherwise, yet he was
overruled by the other three Justices, and Brook said unto him, he thought he
argued much for his pleasure; and to conclude, we see the thing may be avoided
and determined by the Ceremonies and Acts, like unto those by which are created
and raised, that which passes by Livery ought to be avoided by entry; that
which passes by Grant, by claim; that which passes by way of charge,
determines by way of discharge: and so a use which is raised but by a
declaration or limitation, may cease by words of Declaration or Limitation, as
the Civil Law says, in his magis consentaneum est, quam ut ijsdem modis res
dissolvantur a quibus constituantur: for the conception and progression of
uses, I have for a president in them other Laws, because States and
Commonwealths have common accidents, and I find in the Civil Law, that that
which comes nearest in name to the use, is nothing like in matter, which is
Vsus fructus, for Vsus fructus et dominium is with them, as with their
particular tenancy and inheritance, but that which resembles the use most is
fidei Commissio, and therefore you shall find in Ius Lib. 2. That they had a
form in Testaments, to give Inheritance to one to the use of another. Heredem
constituo Cajum rogo antem te Caie, ut hereditatem restituas, and the Text of
the Civilians says, that for a great time if the Heir did not as he was
required Cesty que use, had no remedy at all, until about the time of Augustus
Caesar, there grew in custom a flattering form of trust, for they penned it
thus: Rogo te per salutem Augusti, or, Per fortunam Augusti etc. whereupon
August us took the breach of trust to sound in derogation of himself, and
made a Commission to the Praetor to give remedy in such Cases, whereupon within
the space of a hundred years, these trusts did spring and speed so fast, as
they were forced to have a particular Chancellor only for uses, who was called
Praetor fidie Commissarius, and long after the inconvenience of them being
found, they resorted unto a Remedy much like unto this stature, for by two
Decrees of Senate, called Senatus consult. Frebesianum et Pegasianum, they made
Cesty que use to be Heir in substance. I have sought likewise, whether there
be any thing which makes with them in our Law, and I find the Persian chief
Barron in the Argument of Chudleyes Case compares them to Coppy-holders, and
aptly for many respects.

First, because an use seems to be an hereditament in the L. Court.

Secondly, this conceit of Limitation has been troublesome in Coppy-holders
as well as in Uses, for it has been of late days questioned, whether there
should be Tenancy by the Courtesy, dis-continuances, and recoveries of
Coppy-holders, in the nature of Inheritances at the Common Law, and still the
judgments have weighed, that you must have particular Customs in Coppy-holds,
as well as particular Reasons of Conscience in use, and the limitation recited.

And Thirdly, because they both grew to no remedy at all against the Lord, and
were as tenancy at will, afterward it grew to have remedy in Chancery, and
afterward against their Lords by Trespass, at the Common Law, and now lastly
the Law is taken by some, that they have remedy by Ejectione firma without a
special custom of leasing, do no doubt in uses, at the first the Chancery
made question to give remedy, until uses grew more general, and the Chancery
more eminent, and then they grew to have remedy in Conscience, but they could
never obtain any manner of Remedy at the Common Law, neither against the
Feoffee, nor against Strangers, but the Remedy against the Feoffee, was best by
Subpoena, and the remedy against Sttangers to the Feoffee.

Now for the Cases whereupon uses were but in practice, Cook in his Reading
does say well, that they were produced sometimes for fear, and many times for
fraud; but I hold that neither of these Cases were so much the reasons of uses,
as another reason in the beginning, which was, that Lands by the Common Law of
England were not Testamentary, or deviseable, and of late years since the
Statute, the Case of the conveyance for sparing of Purchases, and Execution of
Estates, and now last of all express liberty of Will in men's minds, affecting
to have the assurance of their Estate, and Possession to be revokeable in their
own times, and irrevocable after their own times.

Now for the Commencement and proceeding of them, I have considered what it
has been in course of Common Law, and what it has been in course of Statute
for the Common Law, the conceit of Shelly in 24. H. 8. and of Polard in 27. H,
8. seems to me to be without ground, which was that the use succeeded the
Tenure, for that the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, which was made 18. E.
1. had taken away the Tenure between the Feoffer and the Feoffce, and left it
to the Lord Paramount, they said that the Feoffment being then merely without
consideration, should therefore intend an use to the Feoffer, which cannot be,
for by that reason if the Feoffment before the Statute had been made Tenendum
de Capitalibus Dominis, as it must be; there should have been an Use unto the
Feoffer before that Statute. And again, if a Grant had been made of such
things as consists not in Tenure, as Advowsons, Rents, Villeins and the like,
there should have been a Use of them, wherein the Law was quite contrary; for
after the time that Uses grew common, it was nevertheless a great doubt
whether things that did lie in Grant, did not carry a consideration in
themselves because of the Deed.

And therefore I do judge that the intendment of a Use to the Feoffer where the
Feoffment was made without consideration grew long after when Uses waxed
general; and for this reason, because when Feoffments were made, and that it
rested doubtful whether it were in use or in Purchase, because Purchases were
things notorious, and Uses were things secret. The Chancellor thought it more
convenient to put the Purchasor to prove his consideration, then the Feoffer
and his Heirs to prove the trust, and so made the indentment toward the Use,
and put the proof upon the Purchasor.

And therefore as Uses were at the Common Law in reason, for whatsoever is not
by Statute, nor against Law may be said to be at the Common Law, and both the
general trust and the special, were things not prohibited by the Law, though
they were not remedied by the Law; so the Experience and practice of Uses were
not ancient, and my reasons why I think so, are these.

First, I cannot find in my Evidence before King R. 2. his time, the clause ad
opus et usum, and the very Latin phrase was much purer, as you may see by
Bractons Writing, and by ancient Patents and Deeds, and chiefly by the Register
of Writs, which is good Latin; wherein this phrase ( ad opus and usum) and the
Words ( ad opus) is a barbarous phrase, and like enough to be in the pennin of
some Chaplain that was not much past his Grammar, where he had found Opus and
usus, coupled together, and that they did govern an Ablative case, as they do
indeed since this Statute, for they take away the Land and put them into a
conveyance.

Secondly, I find in no private Act of Attainder in the clause of Forfeiture of
Lands (S) which he has in possession or in Use, until Ed. 4. his Reign.

Thirdly, I find the Word ( use) in no Statute until 7. Rich. 2. cap. 11. of
Provisoes, and in 15. Ric. 2. of Mortmame.

Fourthly, I collect out of Cooks speech in 8. Edw. 4. where he says that by
the advice of all the Judges, it was thought that the Subpoena did not lie
against the Heir of the Feoffee which was in by Law, but Cesty que use was
driven to his Bill in Parliament, that Uses even in that time were but in their
infancy; for no doubt but at the first the Chancery made difficulty to give
Remedy at all, but to leave it to the particular Conscience of the Feoffee: But
after the Chancery grew absolute, as may appear by the Statute of 15. Hen. 6.
that complaints in Chancery should enter into Bond to prove their suggestions,
which seems that the Chancery at that time began to embrace too far, and
was used for vexation; yet nevertheless it made scruple to give remedy against
the Heir being in by Act in Law though he were privy, so that it cannot be
that Uses had been of any great continuance when they made a question: As for
the Case of Matrimony, Prelomti, it has no affinity with Uses, for wheresoever
there was remedy at the Common Law by Action, it cannot be intended to be of
the nature of a Use.

And for the Book commonly vouched of Ass. where the Earl calls the
possession of a Conizee upon a Fine levied by consent an entry in Auterdroit
and 44. of E. 3. where there is mention of the Feoffors that sued by petition
to the King, they be but implications of no moment. So as it appears the
first practice of Uses was about Richard 2, his time, and the great multiplying
and over-spreading of them was partly during the Wars in France, which drew
most of the Nobility to be absent from their Possessions, and partly during the
time of the Trouble and Civil War between the two houses about the Title of
the Crown.

Now to conclude the Progression of Uses in course 1
of Statutes, I do note three special points.

That a Use had never any force at all, at the Common Law, 2
but by Statute Law.

That there was never any Statute made directly for the benefit of Cesty que
Use, as that the Descent of an Use should toll an Entry, or that a Release
should be good to the partner of the profits or the like; but always for the
benefit of Strangers and other persons against Cesty que use, and his Feoffees:
For though by the Statute of Richard 3. he might alter his Feoffees, yet that
was not the scope of the Statute, but to make good his assurance to other
persons, and the other came in Et obliquo.

That the special intent unlawful and covenous was 3
the Original of Uses, though after it induced to the lawful intent general
and special; For 5. Edward 3. is the first Statute I find, wherein mention is
made of the taking of profits by one, where the Estate in Law is another.

For as to the opinion in 27. Henr. 8. that in case of the Statute of
Marlebridge, the Feoffors took the profits, it is but a conceit; for the Law
is this day, that if a man infeoffee his Eldest Son within age, and without
consideration, although the profits be taken to the use of the Son; yet it is
a Feoffment within the Statute of Religiosis; and as for 7. Edward 1. which
prohibits generally that Religious persons should not purchase Art vel
ingenio, yet it makes no mention of a Use, but it says, Color donationis
termini vel alicusus tituli, reciting there three forms of conveyances, the
gift, the long Lease, and feigned Recovery, which gift cannot be understood of
a gift to a Stranger to their use, for that came to be helped by 15: Richard 2.
long after, but to proceed in 5. Edward 3. a Statute was made for the relief
of Creditors against such as made covin gifts of their Lands and goods, and
conveyed their bodies into Sanctuaries there living high upon others goods, and
therefore that Statute made their Lands liable to their Creditors Executions in
that particular Case, if they took the profits: In 5. Richard 2. a Statute was
made for relief of those as had right of Action, against those as had
renounced the tenancy of the Praecipe from them, sometimes by infeoffing great
persons, for maintenance, and sometimes by secret Feoffments to others, whereof
the Defendants could have no notice, and therefore the Statute makes the
recovery good in all Actions against the first Feoffees as they took the
profits, and see that the Defendants bring their Action within a year at their
expulsion 2. Richard 2. Cap. 3. Session 2. an imperfection of the Statute of
50. Edward 3. was helped, for whereas the statute took no place, but where the
Defendant appeared, and so was frustrated, the Statute gives upon
Proclamation, made at the Gate of the place privileged, that the Land should
be liable without appearance, in 7. R. 2.

A Statute was made for the restraint of Aliens, to take thy Benefices, or
dignities Ecclesiastical, or Farms of Administration to them, without the
Kings special License, upon pain of the Statute of Provisors, which being
remedied by a former Statute, where the Alien took it to his own use: it is
by that Statute remedied, where the Alien took it to the use of another, as it
is said in the Book, though I guess, that if the Record were searched, it
should be if any other purchased to the use of an Alien, and that the words (or
to the use of another) should be (or any other to his use) 15. Rich. 2. Cap. 5.
a Statute was made for the relief of Lords against Mortmayne, where Feoffments
were made to the use of Corporations, and an Ordinance made that for Feoffments
past, the Feoffees should before a day, either purchase License to amortise
them, or alien them to some other use, or other Feoffments to come, they should
be within the Statute of Mortmayne, 4. Hen. 4. Cap. 7. the Statute of 17.
Richard 2. is enlarged in the limitation of time, for whereas the statute did
limit the Action to be brought within the year of the Feoffment: This Statute
in Case of a Disseisin extends the time to the life of the Disseisor, and in
all other Actions, leaves it to the years, from the time of the Action grown
11. Henry 6. Cap. 3. that Statute of 4. Henry 4, is declared, because the
conceit was upon the Statute, that in Case of Disseisin the limitation of the
life of the Disseisor went only to the assise of Non et disseisin, and to no
other Action and therefore that Statute declares the former Law to extend to
all other Actions, grounded upon Novel disseisin 11. Henry 6. Cap. 5. A Statute
was made for relief of him in remainder against particular Tenants, for Lives,
or years, that Assigned over their Estates, and took the profits, and then
committed wast against them, therefore this Statute gives an Action of wast,
being provisors of the profits, in all this course of Statutes no relief is
given to Purchasors, that come in by the party, but to such as come in by Law,
as Defendants in Praecipes, whether they be Creditors, Disseisors, or Lessors,
and that only of Mortmayne, and note also that they be all in Cafes of
special Convenous intents, as to defeat Executions, tenancy to the Praecipe,
and the Statute of Mortmayne, as Provisors from 11. Henry 6. to 1. R. 3. being
the space of fifty years, there is a silence of Uses in the Statute Book,
which was at that time when no question they were favored most, in 1. Richard
3. Cap. 1. comes the great Statute for relief of those that come in by the
party, and at that time an use appears in his likeness, for there is not a
word spoken of taking the profits, to describe a use by, but of clayming to a
use, and this Statute ordained that all Gifts, Feoffments, Grants, etc. shall
be good against the Feoffors, Dowers and Grantors, and all other persons
clayming only to their use, so as here the Purchasor was fully relieved, and
Cesty que use was obiter enabled to charge his Feoffees, because there were no
words in the Statute of Feoffments, Grants, etc. upon good consideration, but
generally in Henry 7. time, new Statutes were made for further help and remedy
to those that came in by Act in Law, as first 11. Henry 7. Cap. 1. a Formedon
is given without limitation of time against Cesty que use, and obiter, because
they make him a Tenent, they give him advantage of a Tenant, as of age and
voucher, quaere 4. Henry 7. 17. the Ward-ship of the Heir of Cesty que use, is
dying, and no Will declared is given to the Lord, as if he had dyed seized in
Demeasne, and Action of wast given to the Heir against the Guardian, and
damages, if the Lord were barred in his writ of Ward, and relief is likewise
given unto the Lord, if the heir holding the Knights service, be of full age
19. Henry 7. Cap. 5. there is relief given in three Cases, first to the
Creditors upon matters of Record, as upon Recognizance, Statute, or Judgment,
whereof the two former were not aided at all by any Statute, and the last was
aided by a Statute of 50. E. 3. and 2. Richard 2. only in Case of Sanctuary
men. Secondly, to the Lords in foccage for their relief, and Herriots upon
death, which was omitted in the 4. Henry 7. and lastly to the Lords of
Villeyns, upon a purchase of their Villeyns in use, 13. Henry 8. Cap. 10. a
further Remedy was given in a Case, like unto the case of Mortmayne, for in the
Statute of 15. Richard 2. remedy was given where the use came, Ad manum mortuam
which was when it came to some Corporation: now when uses were limited to a
thing. Act, or work, and to a body, as to the reparation of a Church, or an
Abbot, or to a guild, or Fraternities, as are only in reputation, but not
incorporate, as to Parishes, or such guilds or Fraternities as are only in
reputation, but not incorporate that Case was omitted, which by this Statute is
remedied, not by way of giving entry unto the Lord, but by way of making the
use utterly void, neither does the Statute express to whose benefit the use
shall be made void, either the Feoffor, or Feoffee but leaves it to Law, and
adds a Provisoe, that uses may be limited twenty years from the gift, and
no longer.

This is the whole course of Statute Law before this Statute, touching Uses,
thus have I set forth unto you the nature and definition of an Use, the
differences and trust of an Use and the parts and qualities of it and by what
Rules and termings Uses shall be guided and ordered, by a President of them in
our Laws, the causes of the springing and spreading of Uses the continuance of
them, and the proceedings that they have had both in Common Law, and Statute
Law, whereby it may appear, that a Use is no more but a general trust, when
any one will trust the Conscience of another better then his own Estate and
Possession, which is accident or event of humane Society, which has bin, and
will be in all Laws, and therefore was at the Common Law, which is common
reason. Fitz Herbert says in the 14. Henry 8. common reason is Common Law, and
not Conscience; but common reasons does define that Uses should be remedied in
Conscience, and not in Courts of Law, and ordered by Rules in Conscience, and
not by straight Rules of Law; for the Common Law has a kind of a Rule and
survey over the Chancery, and therefore we may truly conclude, that the force
and strength that a Use had or has in Conscience, is by Common Law, and the
force that it had or has by Common Law is only by Statutes.

Now follows in time and matter, the consideration of this Statute of
principal labor, for those former considerations which we have handled serve
but for introduction.

This Statute (as it is the Statute which of all other has the greatest power
and operation over the Heritages of the Realm, so howsoever it has been by
the humor of the time perverted in exposition, yet in it self is most
perfectly and exactly conceived and penned of any Law in the Book, induced
with the most declaring and persuading Preamble, consisting and standing upon
the wisest and fittest Ordinances, and qualified with the most foreseeing and
circumspect savings and promises, and lastly the pondred in all the words and
clauses of it of any Statute that I find, but before I come to the Statute it
self, I will note unto you three matters of Circumstance.

The time of the Statute. 1.

The Title of it. 2.

The President or pattern of it. 3.

For the time of it was in 27. Henry 8. when the King was in full peace, and a
wealthy and flourishing Estate, in which nature of time men are most careful
of their Possessions, as well because Purchases are most stirring: as again,
because the Purchasor when he is full, is no less careful of his assurance
to his Children, and of disposing that which he has gotten, then he was of
his bargain for the compassing thereof.

About that time the Realm likewise began to be infranchised from the Tributes
of Rome, and the Possessions that had been in Mortmayne began to stir
abroad, for this year was the suppression of the sma^ler Houses of Religion,
all tending to plenty, and purchafing, and this Statute came in consort with
diverse excellent Statutes, made for the Kingdom in the same Parliament, as the
reduction of Wales to a more civil Government, the re-edifying of diverse
Cities and Towns, the suppressing of depopulation and enclosures.

For the Title, it has one Title in the Role, and another in course of
Pleading, the Title in the Role is no solemn Title, but an Act title (5) an
Act expressing an Order for Uses and Will, the Title in course of Pleading is,
Statutum de usibus, in Possessionem transferendis, wherein Walmsly Justice
noted well 4. Reginae, that if a man look to the working of the Statute, he
would think that it should be turned the other way, De possessionibus ad usus
transferendis, for that is the course of the Statute, to bring Possession to
the Use, but the Title is framed not according to the work of the Statute, but
according to the scope and intention of the Statute. Nam quod primum est in
intention, ultimum est in operatione, the intention of the Statute by carrying
the Possession to the use, is to turn the use to a Possession, for the words
are not De possessionibus ad usus transferendis, and as the Grammarian says,
Praepositio ad, denotat notam actionis, sed prepositio ( in) cum Accusativo
denotat notam alterationis, and therefore Kingsmill Justice in the same Case
says, that the meaning of the Statute was, to make a transsubstantiation of
the use unto a Possession; but it is to be noted, that Titles of Acts of
Parliament, severally came in, but in the 5. Henry 8. for before that time that
was but one Title of all the Act, made in one Parliament, and that was no Title
neither, but a general Preface of the good intent of the King, but now it is
parcel of the Record.

For the President of this Statute upon which it is drawn, I do find by the
first Richard 3. whereupon you may see the very mould whereon this Statute was
made, that the said King having been infeoffed (before he usurped) to Uses, as
it was ordained that the Land whereof he was jointly infeoffed as if he had
not been named, and where he was solely inseoffed, it should be in Cesty que
use, in Estate as he had the use.

Now to come to the Statute it self, the Statute consists as other Laws do
upon a Preamble, the Body of the Law, and certain saving, and Premises. The
Preamble sets forth the inconveniences, the Body of the Law gives the
Remedy, and the savings and Provisoes take away the inconveniences of the
remedy; for new Lands are like the Apothecaries Druggs, though they remedy the
Disease, yet they trouble the body, and therefore they use to correct with
Spices, so it is not possible to find a Remedy for any mischief in the Common
Wealth, but it will beget some new mischief, and therefore they spice their
Laws with Provisoes to correct and qualify them.

The Preamble of the Law was justly commended by Popham chief Justice in 36.
Regine, where he says, that there is little need to search and collect out of
Cases before the statute, what the mischief was, which the scope of the
Statute was to redress, because there is a shorter way offered us, by the
sufficiency and fullness of the Preamble, and therefore it is good to consider
it, and ponder it thoroughly.

The Preamble has three parts.

First a recital of the principal inconveniences, which 1.
is the root of all the rest.

Secondly, an ennumeration of diverse particular inconveniences 2.
as branches of the former.

Thirdly, a taste or brief note of the remedy that the 3.
Statute means to apply; the principal inconvenience which is Radix omnium
malorum, is the directing from the grounds and principalls of the Common Law,
by inventing a mean to transfer Lands and Inheritances without any solemnity,
or Act notorious, so as the whole Statute is to be expounded strongly toward
the extinguishment of all conveyances, whereby the Free hold, or Inheritance
may pass without any new confections of Deeds, Executions of Estate or
entryes, except it be where the Estate is of privity and dependence one
toward the other, in which Cases Mutatis mutandis, they might pass by the
Rules of the Common Law.

The particular inconveniences by the Law rehearsed may bereduced into four
heads.

First, that these conveyances in use are weak 1.
for consideration.

Secondly, that they are obscure and doubtful 2.
for trial.

Thirdly, that they are dangerous for want of notice 3.
and publication.

Fourthly, that they are exempted from all such Titles 4.
as the Law subjecteth Possessions unto.

The first inconvenience lights upon Heirs.

The second upon Jurors and Witnesses.

The third upon Purchasors.

The fourth upon such as come in by gift in Law.

All which are persons that the Law does principally respect and favor.

For the first of these are three impediments (to the judgment of man) in
disposing justly and advisedly of his Estate. (5)

First, trouble of mind. 1.


Secondly, want of time. 2.


Thirdly, of wise and faithful Counsel about him. 3.


And all theso three the Statute did find to be in the disposition of an Use
by Will, whereof followed the unjust dis-inheresin of Heirs, now the favor of
Law unto Heirs appears in many parts of the Law, as the Law of descent
priviledgeth the Possession of the Heir, against the entry of him that has
right by the Law, no man shall warrant against his Heir, except he warrant
against himself, and diverse other Cases too long to stand upon, and we see
the ancient Law in Glanvills time was, that the Ancestor could not dis-inherit
his Heir by Grant, or other Act executed in time of sickness, neither could
he alien Land which had descended unto him, except it were for consideration of
money or service, but not to advance any younger Brother without the consent of
the Heir.

For trials, no Law ever took a streighter course, that Evidence should not
be perplexed, nor Juries inveigled, then the Common Law of England, as on the
other side, never Law took a more precise and straight course with Juries,
that they should give a direct verdict, for whereas in manner all Laws do
give the Tryers, or Jurors (which in other Laws are called Judges De facto) to
give no liquet, that is, to give no verdict at all, and so the Case to stand
abated; our Law enforces them to a direct verdict, general or special, and
whereas other Laws except of Plurality of voices, to make a verdict, our Law
enforces them all to agree in one, and whereas other Laws leave them to their
own time and ease, and to part, and to meet again; our Law duresse and
imprison them in the hardest manner, without light or comfort, until they be
agreed, in consideration of straightness and cohersion; it is consonant, that
the Law do require in all matters brought to issue, that there be full proof
and evidence, and therefore if the matter in it self be of that surety as in
simple Contracts, which are made by paroll, without writing, it allows wager
of Law.

In issue upon the mere right (which is a thing hardly to discern (it
allows wager of Battle to spare Jurors, if time have wore out the marks
and badges of truth: from time to time there have been Statutes of limitation,
where you shall find this mischief of Perjuries often recited; and lastly
which is the matter in hand, all Inheritances could not pass but by Acts overt
and notorious, as by Deeds, Livery, and Records.

For Purchasors ( Bona fide) it may appear that they were ever favored in our
Law, as first by the great favor of Warranties, which were ever for the help
of Purchasors, as whereby the Law in 5. Edw. 3. time, the Disseisor could not
enter upon the Feoffee in regard of the Warranty, so again the Collateral
garranty which otherwise as a hard Law, grew in doubt only upon favor of
Purchasors, so was the binding of Fines at the Common Law, the invention and
practice of Recoveries, to defeat the Statute of intayles, and many more
grounds and learnings are to be found, respect the quiet of the Possession of
Purchasors, and therefore though the Statute of 1 Richard 3. had provided for
the Purchasor in some sort; by enabling the Acts and conveyances of Cesty que
use, yet nevertheless the State did not at all disable the Acts or charges of
the Feoffees, and so as Walmesly Justice said 42. Regine, they played at double
hand, for Cesty que use might sell, and the Feoffee might sell, which was a
very great uncertainty to the Purchasor.

For the fourth Inconvenience toward those that come in by Law, conveyances in
Uses were like privilege places or liberties, for as there the Law does not
run, so upon such conveyances the Law could take no hold, but they were
exempted from all Titles in Law, no man is so absolute Owner of his
Possessions, but that the wisdom of the Law does reserve certain Titles unto
others, and such persons come not in by the pleasure and disposition of the
party, but by the Justice and consideration of Law, and therefore of all others
they are most favored, and also they are principally three.

The Kings and Lords who lost the benefit of 1.
Attaindors, Fines for alienations, Escheates, Aids, Herreots, Reliefes, etc.

The Defendants in Praecipes either real or personal, 2.
for Debt and Damages, who lost the benefit of their Recoveries and Executions.

Tenants in Dower, and by the Courtesy, who lost 3.
their Estates and Tithes.

First for the King, no Law does endow the King or Sovereign with more from
Suites and Actions, his Possessions from interuption and disturbance, his Right
from limitation of time, his Pattents and Gifts from all deceites and false
suggestions: Next the King is the Lord, whose duties and rights the Law does
much favor, because the Law supposes the Land did Originally come from him,
for until the Statute of Quia emptores terrararum, the Lords was not forced to
distruct or dismember his Signiory or service, so until 15. Henry 7. the Law
was taken that the Lord upon his Title of Wardship should be put to a conizee
of a Statute or a Termor, so again we see, that the Statute of Mortmaine was
made to preserve the Lords Escheats and Wards: the Tenant in Dower is so much
favored, as that it is the common by word in the Law, that the Law favors
three things.

1. Life. 2. Liberty. 3. Dower.
So in Case of Voucher, the Feme shall not be delayed, but shall recover
against the Heir incontinent; so likewise of Tenant by courtesy it is called
Tenancy by the Law of England, and therefore specially favored, as a proper
conceit and invention of our Law, so as again the Law does favor such, as
have ancient Rights, and therefore it tells us it is commonly said, that a
Right cannot dye: and that ground of Law, that a Free hold cannot be in
suspense shows it well, insomuch that the Law will rather give the Land to
the first commer, which we call an Occupant, then want a Tenant to a Strangers
Action.

And again, the other ancient ground of Law of Remitter, shows that where
the Tenant fails without folly in the Defendant, the Law executes the
ancient Right: To conclude therefore this point, when this practice of
Feoffments in use did prejudice and dampnifie all those persons that the
ancient Common Law favored, and did absolutely cross the wisdom of the Law,
to have conveyances considerate, and not odious, and to have Trial thereupon
clear and not inveighed, it is no marvel that the Statute concludes, that
their subtle imaginations and abuses, tended to the utter subversion of the
ancient Common Laws of this Realm.

The third part of the Preamble gives a touch of the Remedy which the Statute
intends to minister, consisting in two parts.

First, the expiration of Feoffments. 1.


Secondly, the taking away of the hurt, damage, and 2.
deceit of the Uses, out of which have bin gathered two extremities of
opinions.

The first Opinion is, that the intention of the Statute was to discontinue,
and banish all conveyances in Use, grounding themselves both upon the words,
that the Statute does not speak of the extinguishment or extirpation of the
Use viz. by an unity of Possession, but of an extinguishment or extirpation of
the Feoffment etc. which is the conveyance it self.

Secondly, out of the words (abuse and errors) heretofore used and accustomed,
as if Uses had not been at the Common Law, but had only an erroneous device
or practice.

To both which I answer.

To the former, that the extirpation which the Statute meant was plain, to be
of the Feoffees Estate, and not to the form of conveyances.

To the latter I say, that for words (Abuse) that may be an abuse of the Law
which is not against Law, as the taking long Leases at this day of Land in
Capite, to defraud Wardships is an abuse of the Law, which is not against Law,
and by the words (Error) the Statute meant by it, not a mistaking of the Law,
but wandering or going astray or digressing from the ancient practice of the Law
unto a buy course, as when we say ( Erravimus cum patribus juris) it is not
meant of ignorance only, but of perversity, but to prove that the Statute
meant not to suppress the form of conveyances, there be 3. Reasons which are
not answerable.

The first is, that the Statute in the very Branch thereof has words, De
futuro (s.) (that are seized, or hereafter shall be seized) and whereas it may
be faid that these words were put in, in regard of Uses suspended, by
disseisins, and so no present seisin to the use, until a regresse of the
Feoffees, that intendment is very particular, for commonly such Cases are
brought in by Provisoes, or special Branches, and not intermixed in the body
of a Statute, and it had been easy for the Statute to have, or hereafter
shall be seized upon any Feoffment etc. heretofore had or made.

The second Reason is upon the words of the Statute of Inrolements, which
says, that no hereditaments shall pass, etc. of any Use thereof, etc. whereby
it is manifest, that the Statute meant to leave the form of conveyance with
the addition of a further Ceremony.

The third Reason I make is cut of the words of the Provisor, where it is said,
that no primer Seisin, Livery, no Fine, nor Alienation, shall be taken for any
Estate executed, by force of the Statute of 27. before the first of May 1536.
but they shall be paid for Uses, made and executed in Possession for the time
after, where the word (made) directly goes to conveyances in use, made after
the Statute, and can have no other understanding for the words (executed in
Possession) would have served for the Case of regresse, and lastly which is
more then all, if they have had any such intent, the Case being so general and
so plain, they would have had words express, that every limitation of use
made after the Statute, should have been void, and this was the Exposition, as
tradition goes, that a Reader of Grayes Inn, which Read soon after the
Statute, was in trouble for, and worthily, who as I suppose was Boy, whose
Reading I could never see; but I do now insist upon it, because now again
some in an immoderate invective against Uses, do relaps to the same opinion.

The second Opinion which I called a contrary extremity is, that the Statute
meant only to remedy the mischiefs in the Preamble, recited as they grew by
reason of divided Uses; and although the like mischief may grow upon the
contingent Uses, yet the Statute had no foresight of them at that time, and so
it was merely a new Case not comprised. Whereunto I answer, that it is the
work of the Statute to execute the divided Use, and therefore to make an Use
void by this Statute which was good before, though it does participate of the
mischief recited in the Statute, where to make a Law upon a Preamble without a
perview, which were grossly absurd. But upon the question what Uses are
executed, and what not; and whether out of Possessions of a disseisor, or other
Possessions out of privity or not, there you shall guide your Exposition
according to the Preamble, as shall be handled in my next days Discourse, and
so much touching the Preamble of this Law.

For the Body of the Law, I would wish all Readers that expound Statutes to do
as Scholars are willed to do, that is, first to seek out the principal
Verb, that is to note and single out the material words, whereupon the
Statute is framed, for there are in every Statute certain words, which are as
veins where the life and blood of the Statute comes, and where all doubts
do arise, and the rest are Literae mortuae fulfilling words.

The Body of the Statute consists upon two Parts.

First, a Supposition, or Case put, as Anderson 361. Reginae calls it.

Secondly, a Perview or Ordinance thereupon.

The Cases of the Statute are three and every one has his purview.

The general Case.

The Case of Cofeoffees to the use of some of them.

And the general Case of Feoffees to the Use or percemans of Rents or profits.

The general Case is built upon Eight material words.

Four on the part of the Feoffees.

Three on the part of Cesty que use, and one common to them both.

The first material word on the part of the Feoffees is the word (Person) This
excludes all aliances, for there can be no trust reposed but in a person
certain, it excludes again all Corporations, for they are evalled to a Use
certain, for note on the part of the Feoffer over the Statutc insists upon the
word (Person) and in the part of Cesty que use, that added body Politic.

The second word material is the word (Seized) this excludes Chattells, the
reason is, that the Statute meant to remit the Common Law, and not the
Chattells might ever pass by Testament or by paroll, therefore the Use did not
pervert them, it excludes Rights, for it is against the Rules of the Common Law
to Grant, or Transfer Rights, and therefore the Statute would execute them.

Thirdly, it excludes contingent Uses, because the seisin cannot be but to a
Fee-simple of a Use, and when that is limited, the seism of the Feoffee is
spent, for Littleton tells us that there are but two seisins, one in Dominio ut
de feodo, the other Vt de feodo et jure, and the Feoffee by the Common Law
could execute, but the Feesimple to Uses present, and not Post Uses, and
therefore the Statute meant not to execute them.

The third material word is (Hereafter) that brings in Conveyances made
after the Statute, it brings in again conveyances made before, and disturbed
by disseisin, and recontinued after, for it is not said infeofted to Use
hereafter seized.

The fourth word is (Hereditament) which is to be understood of those things
whereof an Inheritance is in Esse, for if I grant a Rent charge de novo for
life to a Use, this is good enough, yet there is no Inheritance in being of
this Rent, this word likewise excludes Annuities and Uses themselves, so that a
Use cannot be to a use.

The first word on the part of Cesty que use, is the word (Use, Confidence or
Trust) whereby it is plain that the Statute meant to remedy the matter, and
not words, and in all the Clauses it still carries the words.

The second word is the word (Person) again which excludes all aliances, it
excludes also alldent Uses which are not to Bodies, lively and natural, as
the building of a Church, the making of a Bridge, but here (as noted before) it
is ever coupled with body Politic.

The third word is the word (Other) for the Statute meant not to cross the
Common Law, now at this time Uses were grown to such a familiarity, as men
could not think of Possession, but in course of Use, and so every man was
seized to his own Use, as well as to the Use of others; therefore because
Statutes would not stir nor turmoyle possessions settled at the Common Law, it
puts in precisely this word (Other) meaning the divided Use, and not the
communed Use, and this causes the Clause of joint Feoffees to follow in a
branch by it self, for else that Case had been doubtful upon this word
(Other.)

The words that are common to both, are words expressing the conveyance whereby
the Use arises, of which words, those that bred any question are (Agreement,
Will, otherwise) whereby some have inferred that Uses might be raised by
agreement paroll, so there were a consideration of money, or other matter
valuable, for it is expressed in the words before (Bargains, Sale, and
Contract) but of blood, or linned; the error of which Collection appears in
the word immediately following (s. Will) whereby they might as well include,
that a man seized of Land might raise an Use by Will, especially to any of his
Sons or Kindred, where there is a real consideration, and by that reason
mean betwixt this Statute, and the Statute of 32. of Wills, Lands, were
deviseable, especially to any man's Kindred, which was clearly otherwise, and
therefore those words were put in, nor in regard of Uses raised by those
conveniences, or without, or likewise by Will might be transferred, and there
was a person seized to a Use, by force of that agreement or Will (s.) to the
Use of the Assign, and for the word (Otherwise) it should by the generality of
the word, include a Disseisin to a Use, but the whole scope of the Statute
crosses that which was to execute such Uses as were confidences and trust,
which could not be in Case of Disseisin, for if there were a commandment
precedent, then the Land was vested in Cesty que use upon the entry, and if the
Disseisin were of the Disseisors own head then no trust, and thus much for the
case of Supposition of this Statute, here follow the ordinance and purview
thereupon.

The Purview has two parts, the first Operatio Statuti, the effect that the
Statute works, and there is Modus operandi, a fiction, or explanation how the
Statute does work that effect. The effect is, that Cesty que use shall be in
possession of like Estate as he has in the Use, the fiction quomodo is, that
the Statute will have the Possession of Cesty que use, as a new body compounded
of matter and form, and that the Feoffees shall give matter and substance, and
the Use shall give form and quality, the material words in the first part of
the purview are four.

The first words are (Remainder) and Reverture, the Statute having spoken
before of Uses in Fee-simple, in Tail, for life, or years adds, or
otherwise (in Remainder reverture) whereby it is manifest, that the first words
are to be understood of Uses in Possession, for there are two substantial and
essential differences of Estates, the one limiting the times, (for all Estates
are but times of their continuantes) the former makes little difference of
Fee-simple, Fee Tail for life or years, and the other makes difference of
Possession as remainder, all other differences of Estate are but accidents, as
shall be said hereafter, these two the Statute meant to take hold of, and at
the words, Remainder, and Reverture it stopps, it adds not words, (Right,
Title, or possibility) nor it has not general words (or otherwise) it is most
plain, that the Statute meant to execute no inferior Uses to Remainder or
Reverture, that is to say, no possibility or contingences, but Estates, only,
such as the Feoffees might have executed by Conscience made: note also the very
Letter of the Statute does take notice of a difference between an Use in
Remainder, and an Use in Reverture, which though it cannot properly, because it
does not depend upon particular Estates, as Remainders do, neither did then
before the Statute draw any Tenures as Reversions do, yet the Statute intends
that there is a difference when the particular Use, and the Use limited upon
the particular Use are both new Uses, in which Case it is a Use in Remainder,
and where the particular Use is a new Use, and the remnant of the use is the
old use, in which Case it is a use in Reverter.

The next material word is (from henceforth) which does exclude all conceit
of relation that Cesty que use shall not come in, as from the time of the first
Feoffments, to use as Bradnells conceit was in 14. Henry 8. that is, the
Feoffee had granted a Rent charge, and Cesty que use had made a Feoffment in
Fee, by the Statute of 1. Richard 3. the Feoffee should have held it
discharged, because the Act of Cesty que use shall put the Feoffee in, as if
Cesty que use had been seized in from the time of the first Use limited, and
therefore the Statute does take away all such ambiguities, and expresses that
Cesty que use shall be in Possession from henceforth, that is, from the time
of the Parliament for Uses then in being, and from the time of the execution
for Uses limited after the Parliament.

The third material words are (Lawful seisin state and Possession) not a
Possession in Law only, but a seisin in Tail, not a Title to enter into the
Land, but an actual estate.

The fourth words are of and in such Estates as they had in the Use; that is to
say, little Estates, Fee-simple, Fee Tail, life for years at Will and
Possession, and Reversion, which are the substantial differences of Estates,
as was said before, but both their latter Clauses are more fully perfected and
expounded, by the branch of the fiction of the Statute which follows.

This branch of Fiction has three material words or Clauses: the first
material Clause is, that the Estate, Right, Title, and Possession that was in
such person etc. shall be in Cesty que use, for that the matter and substance
of the Estate of Cesty que use is the Estate of the Feoffee; and more he
cannot have, so as if the Use were limited to Cesty que use and his Heirs, and
the Estate out of which it was limited was but an Estate for life, Cesty que
use can have no Inheritance so if when the Statute came the Heir of the
Feoffee had not entered after the death of his Ancestor, but had only a
Possession in Law, Cesty que use in that Case should not bring an Assize before
entry, because the Heir of the Feoffee could not, so that the matter whereupon
the Use must work is the Feoffees Estate: but note here, whereas before when
the Statute speaks of the Uses, it spoke only of Uses in Possession,
Remainder and Treverter, but not in Title or Right, now when the Statute
speaks what shall be taken from the Feoffee, it speaks of Title and Right,
so that the Statute takes more from the Feoffee then it executes presently in
Case, where there are uses in contingence which are but Titles.

The second word is (Clearly) which seems properly and directly to meet with
the conceit of Scintilla Iuris as well as the words in the Preamble of
extirping and extinguishing such Feoffments, so is their Estates is clearly
extinct.

The third material Clause is after such quality, manners, form and condition
as they had in the Use; so as now as the Feoffees Estate gives matter, so the
Use gives form; and as in the first Clause the Use was endowed with the
Possession in points of Estate, so there it is endowed with the Possession in
all accidents and Circumstances of Estate, wherein first note that it is gross
and absurd to expound the form of the Use any whit to destroy the substance of
the Estate as to make a doubt, (because the use gave no Dower or Tenancy by the
courtesy) that therefore the Possession when it is transferred would do so
likewise: no, but the Statute meant such quality, manner, form and condition,
as it is not repugnant to the corporal prefence and possession of the Estate.

Next for the word (Condition) I do not hold it to be put in for Uses upon
condition, though it be also comprised within the general words; but because I
would have things stood upon learnedly, and according to the true sense, I hold
it but for an explaining or word of the effect, as it is in the Statute of 26.
of Treasons, where it is said, that the Offender shall be attainded of the
evert Fact by men of their condition (in this place) that is to say, of their
degree or sort, and so the word Condition in this place is no more, but in like
quality, manner, form, and degree or sort, so as all these words amount, but
to ( modo et forma.) Hence therefore all circumstances of Estate are
comprehended as sole seisin, or jointly seisin, by intierties, or by moyties, a
circumstance of Estate to have age as coming in by Descent, or not age as
Purchasor, or circumstance of Estate discendable to the Heir of the part of
the Father, or of the part of the Mother. A circumstance of Estate conditional
or absolute, remitted or not remitted with a condition of inter-marriage, or
without all these are accidents and circumstances of Estate, in all which the
Possession shall ensue the nature and quality of the Use, and this much of the
first Case which is the general case.

The second Case of the joint Feoffees needs no Exposition, for it peruseth the
penning of the general case, only this I will note, that although it had
been omitted, yet the Law upon the first Case would have been taken as the
case provided, so that it rather in explanation than an addition, for turn
that Case the other way, that one were infeoffed to the Use of himself, I hold
the Law to be, that in the former Case they shall be seized jointly, and so
in the latter Case Cesty que use shall be seized solely; for the word (Other)
it shall be qualified by the construction of Cases, as shall appear when I
come to my Division; but because this Case of Cofeoftees to the use of one of
them was a general Case in the Realm, therefore they foresaw it, oppressed
it precisely, and passed over the case E converso, which was but especial; and
care, and they were loath to bring in this Case, by incerting the word only
unto the first Case (S) to have penned it to the use only of other persons,
for they had experience what doubt the word only bred upon the Statute of 1.
Richard 3. after this third Case, and before the third Case of Rents comes in
the second saving, and the reason of it is worth the noting, why the savings
are interlaced before the third Case, the reason of it is, because the third
case needs no saving, and the first two Cases did need savings, and that is
the reason of that again.

It is a generhll ground, that where an Act of Parliament is Donor, if it be
penned with an ( ac si) it is not a saving, for it is a special gift, and not
a general gift, which includes all Rights, and therefore in 11 Henry 7.
whereupon the alienation of Women, the Statute intitles the Heir of him in
remainder to enter, you find never a Stranger, because the Statute gives entry
not ( Simpliciter) but within an ( ac si) as if no Alienation had been made,
or if the feme had been naturally dead, Strangers that had right might have
entered, and therefore no saving needs, so in the Statute of 32. of Leases, the
Statute enacts, that the Leases shall be good and effectual in Law, as if the
lessor had been seized of a good and perfect Estate in Fee-simple, and
therefore you find no saving in the Statute, and so likewise of diverse other
Statutes do likewise, where a Statute does make a gift or Title good,
specially against certain persons there needs no saving, except it be to
exempt some of those persons, as in the Statute of 1. R. 3. now to apply this
to case of Rents, which is penned with an ( ac si) (s.) as if a sufficient
grant, or lawful conveyance had been made, or executed by such as were
seized, why if such a grant of a Rent had been made, one that had an ancient
Right might have entered and have avoided the charge, and therefore no saving
needs, but the second first Cases are not penned with an ( ac si) but
absolute, that Cesty que use shall be adjudged in Estate and Possession, which
is a Judgment of Parliament stronger then any Fine, to bind all Rights, nay it
has further words (s.) in lawful Estate and Possession, which makes it the
stronger then any in the first Clause, for if the words only had stood upon
the second Clause (s.) that the Estate of the Feoffee should be in Cesty que
use, then perhaps the gift should have been special, and so the saving
superfluous, and this note is material in regard of the great question,
whether the Feoffees may make any regresse, which Opinion (I mean that no
regresse is left unto them) is principally to be argued out of the saving; as
shall be now declared: for the savings are two in number, the first saves all
Strangers Rights, with an exception of the Feoffees: the second is a saving out
of the exception of thefirst saving (s.) of the Feoffees in case where they
claim totheir own proper use: it had been easy in the first saving out of
the Statute) other then such persons as are seized, or hereafter should be
seized to any use) to have added to these words (executed by this Statute) or
in the second saving to have added unto the words (clayming to their proper
use) these words (or to the use of any other, and executed by this Statute, but
the regresse of the Feoffee is shut out between the two savings, for it is the
right of a Person clayming to an Use, and not unto his own proper use, but it
is to be added, that the first saving is not to be understood as the letter
implies, that Feoffees to use shall be barred of their regresse, in Case that
it be of another Feoffment then that whereupon the Statute has wrought, but
upon the same Feoffment, as if the Feoffee before the Statute had been
diseised, and the disseis'd had made a Feoffment in Fee to I. D. his use, and
then the Statute came, this executes the Use of the second Feoffment, but the
first Feoffees may make a regresse, and they yet claim to an Use, but not by
that Feoffment upon which the Statute has wrought.

NOw follows the third Case of the Statute touching execution of Rents,
wherein the material words are four:

First, whereas diverse persons are seized, which has bred a doubt that it
should only go to Rents in Use, at the time of the Statute; but it is
Explained in the Clause following (S) as if a grant had been made to them by
such as, are, or shall be seized.

The second word is ( Profit) for in the putting of the Case, the Statute
speaks of a Rent; but after in the Purview is added these words (or profit.)

The third word is ( ac si) (S) that they shall have the (S) as if a sufficient
grant or lawful conveyance had bin made and made unto them.

The fourth words are the words of Liberty and Remedies attending upon such
Rent (S) that he shall distraine etc. and have such Suits Entries, and
Remedies relying again with an ( ac si) as if the grant had been made with
such collateral penalties and advantages.

Now for the Provisoes, the Makers of this Law did so abound with policy and
discerning, as they did not only foresee such mischiefs as were incident to
this new Law immediately, but likewise such as were consequent in a remote
degree, and therefore besides the express Provisoes, they did add three new
Provisoes which are in themselves substractive Laws, for foreseeing that by
the Execution of Uses, Wills formerly made should be over-throwne: They made an
ordinance for Wills, foreseeing likewise, that by execution of Uses, women
should be doubly advanced: They made an ordinance for Dowers and Jointures,
foreseeing again, that the execution of Uses would make franktenement pass by
Contracts paroll. They made an ordinance for inrollments of Bargains and
Sales, the two former they inserted into this Law, and the third they
distinguished into a Law apart, but without any preamble as may appear, being
but a Proviso to this Statute, besides all these provisionall Laws; and
besides five Provisors, whereof three attend upon the Law of Jointure, and two
borne in Wales, which are not material to the purpose in hand. There are six
provisoes which are natural and true members and limbs of the Statute, whereof
four concern the part of Cesty que use, and two concern the part of the
Feoffees: The sour which concern the part of Cesty que use, tend all to save
him from prejudice by the execution of the estate.

The first saves him from the extinguishment of any Statute or Recognizance,
as if a man had an Extent of a hundred Acres, and an Use of the inheritance of
one. Now the Statute executing the possession to that one, would have
extinguished his Extent being entire in all the rest: or as if the Commissioner
of a Statute having ten Acres liable to the Statute had made a Feoffment in Fce
to a Stranger of two, and after had made a Feoffment in Fce to the use of the
Conuzec and his Heirs: And upon this Proviso there arise three Questions:
First, whether this Proviso were not superfluous, in regard that Cesty que use
was comprehended in the general, saving though the Feoffees be excluded.

Secondly, whether this Proviso does save Statutes or Executions, with an
apportionment and Entire.

Thirdly, because it is penned indefinitively, in point of time, whether it
shall go to Uses limited after the Statute, as well as to those that were in
being all the time of the Statute, which doubt is rather enforced by this
Reason, because there was for Uses at the time of the Statute, for that the
Execution of the Statute might be wayved, but both possession and Use since the
Statute, may be wayved.

The second proviso saves Cesty que use from the charge of primer Seisin
liveries Ouster le maines, and such other duties to the King, with an express
limitation of Time that he shall be discharged for the time past, and charged for
the time to come in a King S: May 1536. to be communis terminus.

The third proviso does the like for Fines, Reliefes, and Herriots, discharging
them for the time past, and speaking nothing of the Time to come.

The fourth proviso gives to Cesty que use all collateral benefits of
Vouchers, Aides, priers, Actions of wast, Trespass, conditions broken, and
which the Feoffees might have had; and this is expressly limited for Estates
executed before 1. May 1536. and this proviso gives occasion to intend that
none of these benefits would have been carried to Cesty que use by the
general words in the body of the Law (S) that the Feoffees estate, right,
Title, and possession, etc.

For the two provisoes on the part of the Tertenant, they both concern the
saving of strangers from prejudice, etc.

The first saves Actions depending against the Feoffees, that they shall not
abate.

The second saves Wardships, Liveries, and Ouster Le maines, whereof Title was
vested in regard of the Heir of the Feoffee, and this in case of the King only.

What Persons may be seized to an Use, and what not.
What persons may be Cesty que use, and what not.
What Persons may declare an use, and what not.
THough I have opened the Statute in order of words, yet I will make my
Division in order of matter, viz.

1. The raising of Uses. 2. The interruption of Uses. 3. The Executing of Uses.
Again, The raising of Uses does easily divide it self into three parts.

The persons that are Actors to the Conveyance to Use.

The Use it self.

The form of the Conveyance.

Then it is first to be seen what persons may be seized to an Use, and what
not, and what persons may be Cesty que use; and what not.

The King cannot be seized to an Use; no not where he takes in his natural
body and to some purpose as a common person, and therefore if Land be given to
the King, and I. D. per term de lour vies, this Use is void for a moity.

Like Law is, if the King be seized of Land in the right of his Duchy of
Lancaster, and covenanteth by his letters Pattents under the Duchy Seal to
stand seized to the use of his Son, nothing passes.

Like Law, if King R. 3. who was Feoster to diverse uses before he took upon him
the Crown, had after he was King by his Letters pattents granted the Land
over, the uses had not bin renewed.

The Queen (speaking not of an Imperial Queen by marriage) cannot be seized
to an use, though she be a body enabled to grant and purchase without the King:
Yet in regard of the government and interest the King has in her possession
she cannot be seized to an use.

A Corporation cannot be seized to an use, because their capacity is to a use
certain; again, because they cannot Execute an Estate without doing wrong to
their Corporation or Founder; but chiefly because of the letter of this Statute
which (in any clause when it speaks of the Feoffee) rests only upon the
word (person.) but when it speaks of Cefty que use, it adds person, or body
politic.

If a Bishop bargain or sell Lands whereof he is seized in the right of his
Sea; this is good during his life; otherwise it is where a Bishop is infeoffed
to him and his Successors to the use of I. D. and his heirs, that is not good,
no not for the Bishops life, but the use is merely void.

Contrary Law, of Tenant in Tail, for if I give Land in Tail by Deed since
the Statute to A. to the use of B. and his heirs; B. has a fee-simple
determinable upon the death of A without issue. And like Law, though doubtful
before the Statute was, for the chief reason which bred the doubt before the
Statute was, because Tenant in Tail could not Execute an Estate without wrong;
but that since the Statute is quite taken away, because the Statute saves no
right of intayle, as the Statute of 1. R. 3. did, and that reason likewise
might have bin answered before the Statute, in regard of the common recovery.

A feme Covert and an Infant, though under years of discretion, may be seized
to an use; for as well as Land might descend unto them from a Feoffee to use; so
may they originally be infeoffed to an use; yet if it be before the Statute,
and they had (upon a Subpoena brought) executed their Estate during the
coverture or infancy they might have defeated the same, and when they should
have been seized again to the Use, and not to their own use, but since the
Statute, no right is saved unto them.

If a feme Covert or an Infant be enfeoffed to an Use precedent since the
Statute, the Infant or Baron come too late to discharge or root up the
Feoffment; but if an Infant be infeoffed to the Use of himself and his Heirs,
and I. D. pay such a sum of money to the Use of I. G. and his Heirs, the
Infant may disagree and overthrow the contingent Use.

Contrary Law if an Infant be infeoffed to the Use of himself for life, the
remainder to the Use of I. S. and his Heirs, he may disagree to the feoffment,
as to his own Estate, but not to divest the remainder, but it shall remain to
the benefit of him in remainder.

And yet if an Attainded person be infeoffed to an Use, the Kings Title after
Office found, shall prevent the Use, and Relate above it but until office the
Cesty que use is seized of the Land.

Like Law of an Alien, for if Land be given to an Alien to an Use, the Use is
not void ab initio: Yet neither Alien or Attainded person can maintain an
Action to defend the Land.

The Kings Villeine if he be infeoffed to an Use, the Kings Title shall relate
above the Use, otherwise in Case of a common person.

But if the Lord be infeoffed to the Use of his Villeine, the Use neither
rises, but the Lord is in by the Common Law, and not by the Statute discharged
of the use.

But if the husband be infeoffed to the use of his wife for years, if he die,
the wife shall have the Term, and it shall not inure by way of discharge,
although the Husband may dispose of the wives Term.

So if the Lord of whom the Land is held be infeoffed to the Use of a person
Attainded, the Lord shall not hold by way of discharge of the Use, because of
the Kings Title, An. diem and vastum.

A person uncertain is not within the Statute, nor any Estate in nutibus or
suspense executed, as if I give Land to I. S. the remainder to the right Heirs
of I. D. to the use of I. N. and his Heir, I. N. is not seized of the
Fee-simple of an Estate per vit. of I. S. till I. D. be dead, and then in
Fee-simple.

Liker Law if before the Statute, I give Land to I. S. per auter vie to an Use,
and I. S. dies, leaving Cesty que use, whereby the freehold is in Suspense,
the Statute comes, and no occupant enters; the Use is not executed out of
the freehold in suspense. For the occupant the Disseissor the Lord by
Escheate: The Feoffee upon consideration, not having notice, and all other
persons which shall be seized to Use, not in regard of their persons but of their
Title. I refer them to my division touching disturbance and interruption
ofUses.

It follows now to see what person may be a Cesty que use, the King may be
Cesty que use; but it behooves both the declaration of the Use and the
conveyance it self, to be matter of Record, because the Kings Title is
compounded of both, I say, not appearing of Record, but by conveyance of
Record. And therefore if I covenant with I. S. to leavy a Fine to him to the
Kings use, which I do accordingly: And this deed of Covenant be not inrol'd,
and the Deed be found by office the use vesteth not, Econverso inrol'd. If I
covenant with I. S. to infeoffe him to the Kings use, and the Deed be inrol'd
and the feoffment also be found by office, the use vesteth.

But if I leavy a fine, or suffer a Recovery to the Kings use, and declare the
use by Deed of Covenant Enrol'd, though the King be not party, yet it is good
enough.

A Corporation may take an Use, and yet it is not material whether the
feoffment or the Declaration be by deed; but I may infeoffee I. S. to the use
of a Corporation and this use may be averred.

A Use to a person incertaine is not void in the first limitation, but
executes not till the person be in (esse,) so that this is positive, than an
Use shall never be in Obeyance, as a Remainder may be, but ever in a person
certain upon the words of the Statute, and the Estate of the Feeoffees shall
be in him or them which have the Use: The reason is because no confidence can
be reposed in a person unknown and uncertain; and therefore if I make a
feoffment to the use of I. S. for life, and then to the use of the right Heirs
of I. D. the remainder is not in Obeyance, but the Reversion is in the Feoffer,
(quousque.) So that upon the matter all persons uncertain in Use, are like
conditions or limitations precedent.

Like Law if I Enfeoffee one to the use of I. S. for years, the remainder to
the right Herres of I. D. This is not executed obeyance, and therefore not void.

Like Law, if I make a Feoffment to the use of my wife that shall be, or to
such persons as I shall maintain, though I limit no particular Estate at all;
yet the use is good, and shall in the interim return to the Feoffor.

Contrary Law, if I once limit the whole Fee-simple of the Use out of Land, and
part thereof to a person incertaine, it shall never return to the Feoffer by
way of fraction of the Use; but look how it should have gone unto the Feoffer;
if I begin with a contingent Use, so it shall go to the remainder; if I intaile
a contingent Use, both Estates are alike subject to the contingent Use when it
falls; as when I make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of my wife for life the
remainder to my first begotten son; I having no Son at that time the
remainder to my brother and his heirs if my wife dye before I have any son,
the Use shall not be in me, but in my brother. And yet if I marry again and
have a Son, it shall divest from my brother, and be in my Son, which is the
skipping they talk so much of.

So if I limit an Use jointly to two persons; not in (Esse) and the one comes
to be in esse, he shall take the entire Use, and yet if the other afterward
come in esse, he shall take jointly with the former, as if I make a Feoffment
to the use of my Wife that shall be, and my first begotten Son for their
Lives, and I marry my Wise takes the whole Use, and if I afterward have a
Son, he takes jointly with my Wife.

But yet where words of obeyance work to an Estate, executed in course of
Possession, it shall do the like in Use, as if I infeoffee A. to the use of B.
for life, the remainder to C. for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of B.
this is a good remainder executed.

So if I enfeoffee A. to the use of his right Heirs A. is in the Fee-simple,
not by the Statute, but by the Common Law.

Now are we to examine a special point of the disability of persons as to
take by the Statute, and that upon the words of the Statute, where diverse
persons are seized to the use of other persons, so that by the letter of the
Statute, no use is contained, but where the Feoffor is one, and Cesty que use
is another.

Therefore it is to be seen in what Cases the same persons shall be both
seized to the use and Cesty a que use, and yet in by the Statute, and in what
Cases they shall be diverse persons, and yet in by the Common Law, wherein I
observe unto you three things: First, that the letter is full in the point.
Secondly, that it is strongly urged by the Clause of joint Estates following.
Thirdly, that the whole scope of the Statute was to remit the Common Law, and
never to intermeddle where the Common Law executed an Estate, therefore the
Statute ought to be expounded, that where the party seized to the use, and the
Cesty que use is one person, he never takes by the Statute except there be a
direct impossibiltie or impertinency for the use, to take effect by the Common
Law.

And if I give Land to I. S. to the use of himself and his Heirs, and if I.
D. pay a sum of money, then to the use of I. D. and his Heirs, I. S. is in of
an Estate for life, or for years, by way of abridgment of Estate in course of
Possession, and I. D. in of the Fee-simple by the Statute.

So if I bargain and sell my Land after seven years, the Inheritance of the
Use only passes, and there remains an Estate for years by a kind of
substraction of the Inheritance or occupyer of my Estate, but merely at the
Common Law.

But if I enfeoffee I. S. to the use of himself intayle, and then to the use
of I. D. in Fee, or Covenant to stand seisd to the use of my self in tail,
and to the use of my Wife in Fee, in both these Cases the Estate tail is
executed by this Statute, because an Estate tail cannot be reoccupied out of a
Fee-simple being a new Estate, and not like a particular Estate, for life or
years, which are but portions of the absolute Fee, and therefore if I bargain
and sell my Land to I. S. after my death without Issue, it does not leave an
Estate tail in me, nor vesteth any present Fee in the bargains, but is an
use expectant.

So if I enfeoffee I. S. to the use of I. D. for life, and then to the use of
himself and his Heirs, he is in of the Fee-simple merely in course of
Possession, and as of a Reversion, and not of a remainder.

Contrary Law, if I enfeoffee I. S. to the use of I. D. for life, then to the
use of himself for life, the remainder to the use of I. N. in Fee, now the Law
will not admit fraction of Estates, but I. S. is in with the ^est by the
Statute.

So if I infeoffee I. S, to the use of himself, and a Stranger, they shall be
both in by the Statute, because they could not take jointly taking by several
Titles.

Like Law if I infeoffee a Bishop and his Heirs to the use of himself, and
his successors, he is in by the Statute in the right of his Sea.

And as I cannot raise a present use to one out of his own seisin, so if I
limit a contingent or future use to one being at the time of limitation not
seized, but after become seized at the, time of the execution of contingent
use, there is the same reason and the same Law, and upon the same difference
which I have put before.

As if I covenant with my Son, that after his Marriage I will stand seized of
Land to the use of himself and his Heirs, and before Marriage I enfeoffee him
to the use of himself and his Heirs, and then he marryeth, he is in by the
Common Law, and not by the Statute, like Law of a bargain and sale.

But if I had let to him for life only, then he should have been in for life
only by the Common Law, and of the Fee-simple by Statute. Now let me advise
you of this, that it is not a matter of subtilty or conceit to take the Law
right, when a man comes in by the Law in course of Possession, and where he
comes in by the Statute in course of Possession, but it is material for the
deciding of many Causes and Questions, as for Warranties, Actions, Conditions,
Wayners, Suspicions, and diverse other Provisoes.

For example, a man's Farmer committed wast, after he in the Reversion
covenanteth to stand seized to the use of his Wife for life, and after to the
use of himself and his Heirs, his Wife dies, if he be in his Fee untouched
he shall punish the wast, if he be in by the Statute he shall not punish it.

So if I be infeoffed with Warranty, and I covenant with my Son to stand
seized to the use of my self for life, and after to him and his Heirs; if I
be in by the Statute, it is clear my Warranty is gone, but if I be in by the
Common Law it is doubtful.

So if I have an eigne Right, and be infeoffed to the use of I. S. for life,
then to the use of my self for life, then to the use of I. D. in Fee, I. S.
dies, if I be in by the Common Law, I cannot wayve my Estate having agreed to
the Feoffment: but if I am in by the Statute, yet I am not remitted, because I
come in by my own Act, but I may wayve my Use, and bring an Action presently,
for my Right is saved unto me by one of the savings in the Statute. Now on the
other side it is to be seen, where there is a seisin to the use of another
person, and yet it is out of the Statute which is in special Cases upon the
ground wheresoever Cesty que use had remedy, for the Possession by course of
Common Law, there the Statute never works, and therefore if a diffeisin were
committed to an Use, it is in him by the Common Law upon agreement, so if one
enter as occupant to the Use of another, it is in him till disagreement.

So if a feme infeoffe a man ( Causa matrimonij pralocuti) she has remedy for
the Land again by course of the Law, and therefore in those special Cases the
Statute works not, and yet the words of the Statute are general, (where any
person stands seized by force of any Fine, Recovery, Peostment, bargain and
sale, agreement or otherwise) but yet the feme is to be restrained for the
reason aforesaid.

It remains to show what persons may limit and declare an Use, wherein we
must distinguish, for there are two kinds of Declarations of Uses, the one of a
present Use upon the first conveyance, the other upon a power of revocation or
new declaration, the latter of which I refer to the division of revocation,
now for the former.

The King upon his Letters Pattents may declare an Use, though the Pattent it
self implies an Use, if none be declared.

If the King gives Lands by his Letters to I. S. and his Heirs to the use of
I. S. for life, the King has the Inheritance of the use by impliation of the
Pattent, and no Office needs for impliation out of matter of Record,
amounts ever to matter of Record.

If the Queen give Land to I. S. and his Heirs to the use of all the
Churchwardens of the Church of Dale, the Pattentee is seized to his own use,
upon that confidence or intent, but if a common person had given Land in that
manner, the use had bin void by the Stat. of 23. H. 8. and the use had returned
to the feoffor and his heirs, A Corporation may take an Use without deed as
has bin said before, but can limit no Use without Deed.

An Infant may limit an Use upon a Feoffment, Fine, or Recovery, and he cannot
Countermand or avoid the Use, except he avoid the conveyance, contrary if an
Infant covenant in consideration of blood or Marriage to stand seized to an
Use, the Use is merely void.

If an infant bargain and sell his Land for money, for Commons, or Teaching, it
is good with averment, if for money otherwise, if it be proved it is avoydable,
if for money recited and not paid it is void, and yet in the case of a man of
full age the recital suffices.

If Barron and feme be seized in the right of the feme, or by joint Purchase
during the Coverture, and they join in a Fine, the Barron cannot declare the
Use for longer time then the Coverture, and the feme cannot declare alone, but
the Use goes according to the limitation of Law, unto the feme and her Heirs,
but they may both join in Declaration of the Use in Fee, and if they sever,
then it is good for so much of the Inheritance as they concurred in, for the
Law avoucheth all one as if they joined, as if the Baron declare an Use to I.
S. and his Heirs, and the Feme another to I. D. for life, and then to J. S.
and his Heirs, the Use is good to I. S. in Fee.

And if upon examination the Feme will declare the Use to the Judge, and her
Husband agree not to it, it is void, and the Barons Use is only good, the rest
of the Use goes according to the limitation of Law.

FINIS.

