The New PRAYERS FOR K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY; And Prosperity to their Arms both
by Sea and Land, Against the French King. Used by the People called QUAKERS.
A Prayer, against the French another Foreign Enemies.
O Omnipotent, and Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker and
Preserver both of Heaven and Earth, together with thy Coeternal Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

We have sinned, O Lord, with our Fathers, we have committed Iniquity, and done
Wickedly.

Therefore we do openly confess, that by thy Rigoteous Judgment we are justly
Punished; and rightly deserve that barbarous and ungodly Nations, should spoil
us of our Goods, overthrow our Schools, Churches, and Commonwealths; make
unmerciful Havoc of the Promiseuous Multitude, and carry miserable Men from
the sweet Bosoms of thy dear Friends into a slavery more grievous than Death.

O God, it is thou which repellest us, yet we beseech thee confound us not
before the Nations for our sins, nor suffer us to turn our Backs upon our
Enemies, so that they which hate us, spoil our Goods.

Neither suffer us to be eaten up like Sheep, nor scatter us aamong the Heathen.

Let us not become an open shame to our Enemies, nor a scorn and byword unto
them that are round about us.

Wherefore in these mischievous Wars, and in the midst of our fatal Punishment,
we fly unto Thee, saying, Help us, O God of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy
Name; O deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins for thy Name sake.

O deal not with us after our sins, neither reward us after our iniquities.

Pour o^t thine Indignation upon the Heathen that know Thee not, and upon the
Kingdoms which call not upon thy Name: That all Nations may know the Vengeance
of the Blood of thy Seryants that is shed

Consider the mortal Threatenings of our Enemier, that they may be hindered from
exercising their Tyranny upon us.

Keep from our Necks the grievous Yoke of Antichristian bondage, and repress
the furiousn^^^ of all (...) labor to spoil and make Havoc of thy Church; to
abolish time Doctrine, Prayers, and pure Religion; and to bring in Idolatry,
Errors and Blasphemous Ceremonies.

Defend our Church, Policies, and dwelling Places.

Suffer not our Towns to be reduced into Dens for Tyrants, and other Bloody
Nations which hate both thee, and us extremely.

Arm the right Arm of our Gracious King and Queen, and their Nobles, that they
may light for our Laws, Lives and Liberties*

Teach their Hands to Fight and their Fingers to Battle; ^ncre^se in them an
invincible Courage of Mind, that enflamed through the Zeal of thy Religion,
they may valiantly withstand their, even thine, Enemies.

Guide thou the Hands of such as fight in the Cause of Religion, and grant them
a happy success over all their Enemies. For a King is not saved by the
multitude of an Host, neither is the mighty Man delivered by great strength,
but the Victory comes from Heaven.

At thy rebuke, O Lord, both the Chariot and Horse fall down.

Thou will take away the Courage of Princes, and are Terrible to the Kings of
the Earth.

O be thou our help in trouble, for vain is the help of Men. Through thee we
shall do valiantly; for thou will tread our Enemies under our Feet, and make
them come to naught, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Daily Prayer for the Perpetual Happiness of Our Most Gracious King and Queen:
King William and Queen Mary
O Almighty God, King of King, and Lord of Lords, in thine Hands is all Power
both in Heaven and Earth, thou confirmest Kingdoms, and again do alter them
according to thine Heavenly Pleasure, We Praise thee, We Magnify thee, We
Extol thine Holy Name, for that it has pleased thee to appoint over us, a good
and gracious King and Queen which does govern with Counsel, and rule with
Wisdom.

Grant them, We beseech thee, continual (...), Long Life, and much Happiness:
And deliver not their Majesty's into the hands of their Enemies.

Rule thou their Minds and Wills, that they may serve thee always in Fear, and
rejoice in Trembling.

Let them maintain and embrace pure Religion, and defend their People in the
Profession of Christ's Gospel against all Errors and Supperstition whasoever.

Give them Wisdom and Understanding to do such things as are grateful in thy
sight, prof^able for us their Subjects, and hurtful to none.

O God, eternal Father, hear the Petitions of our King and Queen in all their
troubles; the Name of Christ our Savior glorify them, and the comfortable
aid of the Holy Spirit uphold them now and for evermore.

Be mindful of them for their good, give to them according to their Hearts
desire, and prosper all t^eir Purposes, that we may rejoice in thy Salvation,
and Trivmph in the Name of God.

Bless them, Lord, evermore, tha^ we may know that their Protector is the
Clouds.

Hearken unto them from thine Holy Heavens by thy mighty right hand which
brings Salvation.

For though some trust in Horses, and others in Chariots: Yet will we remember
the Name of our God.

They shall fall, and be overcome, but we courageously will presist.

O Lord, protect their Majesty's, hear us when we call upon thee

Save our King and Queen, O merciful God, in despite of al their Enemies, which
either secretly or openly go about to bring Lives to the Grave, and their Glory
to the Dust.

Banish from their Court all their private Enemies, and preserve them evermore
from dissembling Friends.

Give them loving and loyal Subjectss and suppress their open and secret
Enemies both by Sea and Land.

Grant this, O most merciful Father, for thy eear Son our Savior Christ his
sake, Amen.

So Prays Jone Bleming,

FINIS.
London, Printed for J. Bunch in Holywell-lane, 1693.


