A true and exact RELATION OF The chief passages in IRELAND, Since the first
rising of the Rebels. Sent by an Alderman of Dublin to his Son now resident
in London, dated 14. of January, 1641. As also a Letter of the Rebels,
subscribed with diverse of their hands, written to the Lady Offalia, mother to
the Lord Digby, to deliver up her Castle of Geshel, she with the Lord Digby's
children and others being therein. With her resolute and modest Answer
thereunto.

London, printed by T. H. for Rich. Royston, 1642.

A true and exact relation of the chief passages in Ireland, since the first
rising of the Rebels, sent by an Alderman of Dublin, to his son now resident in
London.
Son:
I Have received your Letter by Mr. Portington, whereby I see you do not as
yet understand how the case stands with us in this poor Kingdom of Ireland,
which that you may the better do, I will relate in brief, beginning from the
discovery of the plot to take the Castle and City of Dublin, which should have
been the 23. of October, 1641. upon which day the Rebels came to Master Arthur
Champions house, some 60. miles from Dublin, where one of his own tenants came
^o him very early in the morning, desiring to speak with him about some
serious business as he pretended, only to betray him; when he had drawn him
without the walls of his house, (for he had a very strong house, and well
fitted for defense, had he known of their divellish treachery) presently there
came a company with two rogues which were pinioned as thieves, for stealing of
his cattle; Master Champion bid them that brought them, to carry them before
the next Justice, for he would not meddle with them; whereupon these rebels set
them loose, and fell upon the good man, stabbed him with their Skeanes to death
presently, before he could give the least warning to those in his house. His
brother seeing many people there, went to see what the matter was, he was
served in the same manner, and a third likewise: and then the Rebels went into
his house, and killed two more: his wife, and her sister, and her brother in
law, with two others that were in the house, they took and keep prisoners to
this day, taking possession of all they had, both within the house and without.
She was down upon her knees to beg a sheet to put her husband in for his
burial, and another Gentleman which came but over night, with some other
friends, in love to visit him, and the next morning lost their lives. And this
they have done to many in those parts, robbing all the English Protestants,
stripping them stark naked, and so turning them out to the fields and
mountains, in the frost and snow, whereof many hundreds are perished to death.
They spare none, Ministers nor people, of what sort soever, they are so
maliciously bent against us and our profession, that they will not spare our
Ministers books, but burn and tear them in pieces. They destroy our English
breed of cattle and sheep in detestation of us, although one of ours is
better then four of theirs; and they have vowed to root out the name of the
English out of this Kingdom, and thus they go on from the beginning almost
all this Kingdom over. And if the Lord in mercy prevent them not, it is like
to be so, for we hear daily new rising of them in other places, which at
first were quiet; as the County of Wicklow, all the pale are out, not
withstanding their protestation in the Parliament there last meeting, which was
since this rebellion begunn^ Kings County and Queens County rob and spoil
all. The good Lady the Lady Offalia, and the Lord Digby's children and your
brother, are besieged in the Castle of (...), having robbed them and all
thereabouts without the Castle. These Rebels have turned all the Protestants
out of Kilkeny, only with the clothes on their backs by the Lord Mongarat,
and keep the Countess of Ormond prisoner. This Lord promised them a convoy to
Waterford, which went with them some 8. miles out of town, and then left them,
and a company of rogues met them, and stripped them. When these poor people
came to Waterford, hoping for succor, the town would not suffer them to come
in, but keep them starving without the town; all the favor they showed them,
they threw them some bread over the wall, so that you may see how Waterford
stands affected. These Rebels have great advantage of us, for they have their
spies daily with us, that nothing is said or done but they have notice
presently sent to them; but we can have none to inform us of any particulars,
for they meet with our spies, and hang them up with the rest of any English
they meet with; and for that purpose have set up gallows 5. miles distant one
from another. At the first they spared the Scots, telling them their Commission
was only to root out the English, but now they rob and kill the Scots, not
sparing any. One hundred and twenty they stripped stark naked, and drove them
upon a bridge, and forced them into the water, drowned those which could not
swim, and those which could swim they knocked in the head when they came to
land. Their cruel murdering of men before their wives to increase their
grief. Your brother writ unto me, that a Rebel in those parts took an infant
out of the mothers arms, and cast it into the fire before her face; but the
just judgment of God fell upon him, before he went from the same place he
brake his neck.

The last week a Minister which came to this City, left some goods with a
supposed friend, sent for them, the goods could not be delivered, unless he or
his wife came for them; he would not go; she went, and when she came where the
goods were, they hanged her for her pains.

They rob close to this City; Beggatrath, Cullen wood, Ramynes, Phoenix,
Ashtowne, Newtowne, Finglese, Sauntry, Drumconran, Clantarffe, Hoth, all which
border upon our City. Sir Charles Coote, our noble and brave governor in this
City, sallied out one night, and drove them from Clantarffe, and set it on
fire. Another night to Sauntree and another village, and set them on fire: and
the Earl of Ormond and Colonel Crafford, with Sir Charles Coote, drive them
from Finglese and set it on fire.

Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Simon Harcotte sallied out to Swords, six miles
from Dublin, where the enemy had their Camp and ^here had entrenched
themselves. By break of day our men set upon them, drove them out of their
Trenches, and put them to rout, they ran away, about 120. were slain (...)
taken prisoners, four of their Colors, Drums, and Arms our men brought
away, who are safely come again, blessed be God, only we lost 4. men; whereof
the chief was Sir Lorenzo Carry, brother to the Lord Faulkland, shot in the
head, as it is thought, by one of his soldiers; he was brought to Dublin on
horseback, his footeman behind him holding him up in the saddle, which an
Irishwoman on the Key seeing, said it was pity that no more were served so,
which the soldiers hearing, in a rage threw the woman into the river where she
was drowned.

The Rebels have burned all the plantation Towns in the County of London Derry,
but Derry and Coltaine stand out stoutly.

The last night they went out toward the Mountains beyond Tallow, and burnt
two or three Villages, whereby those Rebels should not have any shelter so
near us, (...) when our men came, they ran away, and would not abide above
two (...), so that till we have supply from England and Scotland no good is to
be done with them, whereby we may follow them to the full; notwithstanding many
Papists (...) the Jesuits, Priests and Friars, and say in plain terms they
have been the cause of all this, and no question to the contrary, the Lord in
mercy convert or confound them.

We are all much bound to God for our Gracious King, the Honorable Parliament
of England, the merciful and pious City of London, and the whole Kingdoms of
England and Scotland for their care and pity upon us, although as yet we have
but little help to this great work, but of that which we have received we are
much comforted, and we do not doubt of the rest, which does not a little
strike to the hearts of our enemies as we hear, by this you may see in part
our calamities; but blessed be God, our Lords Justices and Council have
provided for this City, that under God we hope to be as safe as you in London,
and so we hope of Drohedah where a worthy Governor Sir Henry Tichborne holds
out valiantly, although the Rebels have made many asssaults upon the Town.
Provision is sent by sea to Drohedah, and we trust in God it will be safely
delivered to them, but if not, they will be hard besteed, but if it please God
to send us more strength, we make no question by Gods assistance but to clear
the passage by land to succor them.

These miseries are great the Lord be merciful unto us; but this is not all,
the most of our rich men and great men are fled from us into England, and have
carried their estates with them, they have not left one penny to succor the
poor distressed stripped people who are come hither for relief, whereof we have
at this present near three thousand, besides many hundreds are starved to death
since they came only with want, for we are not able to do more then we do,
we do relieve them far beyond our abilities; for my own part, I pay much weekly
for billiting money, besides what I give to the poor; the rich being gone,
lest their houses without any help at all unto us, not so much as common
charges for the safety of this City, but all lies upon the poorer sort: The
Lord in mercy forgive them this sin, this great sin, that the blood of so
many hundreds which have perished by want be not required at their hands: Thus
with my prayers to God to bless you I rest,

Your loving Father, W. Bladen.
IF you think fit you may have this Relation Printed, for I have written
nothing but (...) so many false Pamphlets (...) printed at London.



The Rebels Letter to the Lady Offalia, in her Castle at Geshel.
To the Honorable and thrice virtuous Lady, the Lady Digby these give.
Honorable,
WE his Majesty's loyal subjects being at the present employed in his
Highness Service for the taking of this your Castle, you are therefore to
deliver unto us free possession of your said Castle, promising faithfully, that
your Ladyship, together with the rest in the said Castle restant shall have a
reasonable composition; otherwise upon the not yielding of the Castle, we do
assure you that we will burn the whole Town, kill all the Protestants, and
spare neither man, woman nor child upon taking the Castle: consider (Madam) of
this our offer, and impute not the blame of your own folly unto us, think not
that here we brag, your Ladysship upon submission shall have a safe convoy to
secure you from the hands of your enemies, and to lead you where you please, a
speedy reply is desired with all expedition, and thus we surcease:

Henry Dempsy. Charles Dempsy. Andrew fitz Patrick. Conn Dempsy. Phelim Dempsy.
John Vicars. James m' Donel.


The Lady Offalia her answer to the Rebels.
For my Cousin Henry Dempsy and the rest.
I Received your Letter, wherein you threaten to sack this my Castle by his
Majesty's authority; I am and ever have been a loyal subject, and a good
neighbor amongst you, and therefore cannot but wonder at such an assault; I
thank you for your offer of a convoy, wherein I hold little safety, and
therefore my resolution is, that being free from offending his Majesty, or
doing wrong to any of you, I will live and dye innocently, and will do my best
to defend my own, leaving the issue to God; and though I have been and still
am desirous to avoid the shedding of Christian blood, yet being provoked your
threats shall no whit dismay me.

Lettice Offalia.


