VINDICIAE FOEDERIS; OR, A TREATISE OF THE Covenant of God ENTERED WITH
MANKIND, In the several Kinds and Degrees of it, IN WHICH The agreement and
respective differences of the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace, of
the Old and New Covenant are discust.

The Conditions of the Covenant of Grace on man's part, are assigned and
asserted.

The just latitude and extent clearly held forth, and fully vindicated.

Several Corollaries containing many heads of Divinity, now controverted, and
practical points singularly useful, inferred.

In particular the necessity of a constant settled Ministry (to bring men into
Covenant, and to bring them up to the terms of it,) and of Schools, and
Nurseries of Learning, and an orderly call in tendency to it.

Infant Baptism in that latitude, as now in use in reformed Churches
maintained.

Newly corrected and much enlarged, and in many places cleared by its Author.

Thomas Blake, late Minister of the Gospel, at Tamworth in the Counties of
Stafford and Warwick.

Whereunto is annexed, a Sermon preached at his Funeral by Mr. Anthony
Burgess, and a Funeral Oration made at his death by Mr. Samuel Shaw.

The second Edition.

All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in the Covenant, Psalm. 44. 17. London, Printed for Abel Roper, at
the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1658.

To his Reverend, and much Honored Friend, Mr. SAMVEL HILDERSAM, Bachelar in
Divinity, and Pastor of West-Felton in the County of Salop; Together with Mrs.
MARY HILDERSAM, his pious Consort.
NO time can wear out the memory of those favors which I have received from
your hands; You were of the first that gave me a visit, when few durst
adventure themselves under the same roof, being by the good providence of God,
necessitated to leave a place sorely afflicted with the Pestilence; and
laboring under a Fever, wherewith presently on my departure God pleased to
afflict me: and were eyewitnesses of the mean accommodations, which in those
straits could be provided for me and my reverend brother, with both our wives
and families, all cast upon the same condition at that time; and you made it
appear that your eyes affected your hearts, in giving a free invitation to me,
and those that had dependence upon me, to your house, as soon as with security
we durst adventure over any man's threshold, where for many months we had free
and liberal entertainment. If Paul in an Epistle did remember the like from
Onesiphorus (with special observation, that he was not ashamed of his chain)
my heart must needs have checked me, if having opportunity of Epistling
according to received custom, you should have been forgotten. I shall not be
ashamed of the language of beggars, if they have learnt it from such a hand;
The Lord grant unto you, that ye may find mercy from the Lord in that day. In
your house I had not only leisure to make a good progress in this Work, but
singular accommodation from your accomplished Library. So that you have not only
a deserved interest in the Author, but in the Work it self; upon sight of one
part, you have often called upon me for publication of the whole. So that if
the Reader reap any benefit, he may see how large a share in the thanks is
yours. I know you affect not Panegyricks, neither am I fitted for them, nor was
ever accustomed to them. There is much published to the world of one of you in
the life of your reverend Father, to whom I have often in my thoughts applied
that of Doctor Hall concerning learned Whittaker; Who ever saw him without
reverence, or heard him without wonder? Having led the Reader through his
glory, they add: And yet his name with the lively picture of his person lives,
in his worthy son, Master Samuel Hildersam; whose learning Cambridge knew,
when he was Fellow of Emmanuel College; and whose present Ministerial labors,
and pious conversation at West-Felton in Shropshire, do perpetuate the honor
of his Reverend Father; whose memory he does much reverence; and whose rich
virtues both personal and ministerial he does happily imitate. And it is not
little that is said of the other, where it is remembered, that you were
propounded by him, for a meet wife for his dearest son; and recorded that he
was heard with affection to ingeminate these words; Never man had a kinder
daughter in Law. To be a follower of such a precident, and to be found worthy
of such a Testimony, is a greater glory, than all the noble blood that ran
through the veins of the greatest of either of your Ancestors. Let this small
piece find a room in your Study and Closet, and testify to the world that
gratitude lives in the breast of

From my study in Tamworth, November. 4. 1652. Your most affectionate friend and
servant, THO. BLAKE.

READER,
THe Reverend Author of this Treatise is already known to the Press by his
former Labors, which do give so fair a character of his worth, and bespeak of
thee so ready an entertainment of this excellent piece, that were it not, that
in this glut of books wherewith the world is cloyed, it might be unhappily
buried out of thy sight; We neither need, nor should prefix these few lines,
tanquam digitum indicem, to point thee to it. The subject about which it is
conversant, is of noblest rank; viz. The Covenant of Almighty God with
Mankind, which is distinguished into its kinds; of Works, of Grace. And this
again, according to the several forms or modes thereof, Old and New, which
how they respectively take hands and agree, wherein they shake hands, and part.
What the terms of the Covenant of Grace are, as propounded by God, and what the
conditions on man's part, whereupon he (being thereunto responsal) becomes
truly a consederate, what is the amplitude and comprehensivenesse thereof in
respect of the persons that have right to claim to the privileges or interests
of it, are all set forth in their various colors, and so drawn to the life,
that thy spirit is not like to be tired with reading; but led on with an
appetite so sharp and quick, that when thou arrivest at the end, thou will
complain of the shortness of the way. For in the doctrine of the Covenant
truly stated, an Orthodox Faith has sure foundation; thence practick
godliness receives powerful influence and obligation. Thereby very many
errors of several sorts of Erronists, as by a test or standard are rectified,
or discovered; from thence our Sacraments do as it were receive a soul, and
those pertinent and seasonable digressions following in this book, concerning
the necessity of a settled Ministry, etc. do by consequence receive both
strength and usefulness. As concerning the remains of a former controversy
about Paedobaptisme, which are presented to thee in this Book, they are not out
of their own place in a Treatise of the Covenant. We shall not adventure to say
any more thereabout, but in imitation of that of Mr. Hooker in the Preface to
his Ecclesiastical Polity, shall crave leave to re-minde all agitatours of
that or any other controversy. That the time will come, when a few words
delivered with meekness of wisdom, shall afford them more comfort, than great
volumes written with scornefulnesse, and in the ferment of a sower and angry
spirit; for it is an honor to any man to be a Slave to another man's reason, and
Master of his own passions, vale.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Richard Vines. Sam* Fisher.


A Preface to the READER.
BEing by the good providence of God heretofore engaged, in the vindication of
several truths, which were of concernment to his Church, especially, the
Birth-priviledge and Covenant-holinesse of the issue of believers, I was
unwilling to be silent, when a spirit of opposition prevailed, lest the truth
(for which I had stood, and make it may glory ever to own) should suffer. In a
design of this nature, the greatest question with me was how to proceed to the
best advantage of truth* personal conflicts are highly wearisome, and
ungrateful, there is much time spent with very little satisfaction to the
Reader, even where most satisfaction is given to an adversary He must be
followed in such paths that he goes, which often are not very acceptable to the
Reader to accompany. And for the business in hand, viz. the vindication of a
believers faederall holiness till the ground work be right laid, and well
understood, the superstructure in any such dispute (managed in the most
dextrous way that is conceivable) will scarce settle those that are weak, and
not yet well informed or established. I judged it therefore a way most
satisfactory, and of greatest and most probable hopes, for the clearing, not
only of this Controversy, but many more now in agitation, to adventure upon a
full Treatise of the Covenant, which God has entered with man, and the various
dispensations, and diversifications of it; whether such as were occasioned by
man's fall, or that God according to his Sovereignty, by his just Prerogative
has been pleased to order; where this is not in some measure clear, many
truths of great weight must needs lie obscure. Master Baxters words in his
Preface to the Reader before his Aphorisms of Justification are very
remarkable: It is not in studies (says he) as it is in manifactures, that one
man may begin where another left; but every man must fetch it from the very
principles himself, neither can we take the words of those that have studied it
before us for that is neither a sound nor satisfactory knowledge (quoting Mr.
Pemble,) thence it comes to pass that while we are busy in examining our fore
fathers inventions, and posterity employed in trying our Examinations, neither
we nor they have much time to add any thing for the increase of learned
knowledge. Now the Covenant must needs be the principle where we must begin to
get knowledge of the seals of the Covenant; This way therefore (resting on
divine assistance) I have chosen, quickened to it as by the excellency and
great concernment of the subject, so also by the desires of many that this
thing in a just Treatise might be handled; And when my thoughts were most full
of it, and busiest about it, and some preparations made for the work; the
Stationer by letter solicited, that I would enlarge my Birth-priviledge, and
sit it to these present times, and he would see it published; Hereupon I went
on in the work (a Scheme of which follows here in an Analytical Table) in which
I have received help from many (as my slender furniture, and strength with
leisure to attend the perusal of them would give leave) yet I have tied my self
to follow none; I think there is scarce any thing in which I am singular, I
have so much childish fear as scarce to dare to wall in public where I am
alone, yet in several things I shall be found to dissent from others, and those
of eminent name with whom I should blush to have any thoughts of comparison:
There are dissentings among those that are of highest repute. In such case no
inferior can agree with both parties, and therefore it must not be deemed any
piece of arrogance or singularity, to leave the one: where I am put to it to
differ, the Reader shall find my reason, together with my opinoin. If better
light lead him another way, I shall never desire that he shall go with me
blindfold, or leave the truth to have me his companion, yet least in leaving
me, he should let go the truth it self, I shall only request an unprejudiced
and unbiased judgment; If he bring a blood-shot eye, all will appear of a
wrong color. It cannot be hoped but that wading through so many particulars, I
shall meet with opposition from some hands; I would only let such know first,
that I have made no man my adversary out of will, The Authors dissent from
some. ^
as desirous to be a man of contentions. I sometimes close with my greatest
adversaries, and sometimes dissent from my most honored, and admired friends:
I think I have as strong an antipathy against quarrels, as Luthers against
covetousness: I only leave where that light that for present I enjoy, leads me
another way. 2. That I have wrote nothing but that which as I believe, so I
resolve (God assisti^g) to hold, till a more clear light detect my error.
There are few things that have vented, but many years have held my thoughts,
words or shows, will not work me out of them. 3. That I am not yet so wedded to
an opinion, but am ready to yield up my self to be overruled by reason; He is
the happiest man that lies under the conquest of truth. 4. That no man shall
displease me that will deal argumentatively with me either by the clear
immediate testimony of Scripture, or arguments by just consequence derived from
them; but in case I shall meet with such dealing as I have found, to have my
words by enterchange made not mine, but the adversaries own, my Arguments
misrepresented, and held out to the halves; I shall give those leave to hold up
and pursue quarrels with their own fancies. My years and employments, together
with my weaknesses, will be a sufficient Apology to hold me back from
intermedling in such trifles. And for the Reader that would read for
satisfaction, I would acquaint him,

First, Advertiseme^^s to the Reader concerning the present work.
that I have made it my business to cast the whole mould and Series of the
work; that he may find method and order in it, and if at any time through
inadvertency or otherwise, he be at loss, and especially if he take not the
whole work before him (as I should desire) he may soon have recourse to the
Analytical Table, and see in what order that which in present his eye is upon,
stands in the whole discourse; If he gain no advantage by the method into
which it is cast, much pains and industry of mine is lost.

Scondly, That I have made it my study to leave out no piece or part, which
may be fairly looked for within this Verge, but have endeavored to take the
whole into consideration, studying to avoid two extremes, the one much
prejudicial to the Reader in Treatises of this nature, to give us a bare
skeleton of bones and sinews, leaving their Readers to clothe them with skin
and flesh: These serve better to help their memories that are already seen in
the subject, then to help those with satisfaction that are not already verst in
it, Memoriae matter ingenii noverca. I would learned Amesius in his Medulla
Theologiae, Cases of Conscience, and other learned Works, had not, affecting
brevity, herein been defective. Sure I am, the Reader might well wish, that
learned Camero's work De triplici foedere had by his own hand been more
enlarged, and that he had spoken more fully; where his Reader may see cause
justly to close with him, and given in his Reasons especially in several
differences (which he assigns beteewn the Old (which he calls the subservient
Covenant) and the Covenant of Grace, where many suppose they have cause to
dissent from him. The other extreme might be the Readers benefit, but would
have been my burden, and that is an enlarged full discourse on every
particular Divinity-head, that may occur in the handling of this Subject, a way
which reverend Master Ball intended, I have heard it from those that received
it from his own mouth, that his purpose was to speak on this Subject of the
Covenant, all that he had to say in all the whole body of Divinity; a work that
the whole Church might wish (had not Divine providence determined otherwise)
that he had enjoyed life to finish. That which he has left behind gives us a
taste of it, and the advantage the Church might have received by it. I have
thought it enough to handle each particular, so as might well answer
expectation in reference to the present subject: To speak of Christ as a
Mediator of the Covenant, and to set forth the distinct parts of his work in
such mediation without handling the whole of the work, and all the Offices
incident to his Mediatorship: To speak of his death ratifying the Covenant of
grace, waving the controversy of the extent of it, in the intention of God, or
purpose of Christ; It is sufficient to me to assert Faith to be a condition of
the Covenant necessary to be put in by us to attain the mercies in the
Covenant, to speak of it so far as is here concerned without a large Treatise
of the nature, requisites, and life of it; so I may say of godly sorrow,
cessation from sin, sincerity of obedience, and the like.

Thirdly, Those particulars relating to this subject, which are most
controverted, and in this age disputed, I have spoke to more at large; to
instance in some. The conditions of the Covenant of Grace, as well to the an
sint? whether there be any such conditions at all? which in our times by
several hands out of several Principles is denied; Or the Quae sint? what these
conditions be? laying down rules and helps for the better discovery of them.
The supposed differences between the old and new, Whether such that offer
injury to the Covenant, under which the Fathers lived, under Moses his
administration, or before his days, making it a mere carnal Covenant,
consisting of temporal promises, as the possession of the Land of Canaan, and
protection there, or at the least a mixed Covenant, and no pure Gospel Covenant,
and the seals suitable? Or such that put too great a limit to the Covenant in
Gospel Times vesting it only in the elect regenerate, excluding all professed
ones not yet regenerate, not only from Covenant-mercies, but all
Covenant-terms, not admitting any to stand in any relation to God, but those
only whom his Spirit has changed, making the call of God in the largest sense
convertible with Election, and the seal of Baptism to be of no greater latitude
(unless by mistake mis-applied) than the seal of the Spirit, and determining
it in the persons of the elect (about which the mere congregational men and the
Antipoedobaptists agreeing in the former, do differ) that they excluding the
seed, and leaving them in the same condition (hope of education excepted) with
the Heathens: In these and some others, as the Reader may meet withal, I have
been more large, in such things where all agree, or where it much skills not,
whether we agree or differ (as in what place, whether on earth, or heaven, man
had enjoyed immortality in case he had not sinned) what need we to administer
matter of contention, our work is to make up breaches (were it possible, so far
as it may stand with truth) and not to widen them.

Fourthly, I have not so tied up my self to the express immediate doctrine of
the covenant, but that I have occasionally drawn Corollaries or Inferences
leading to other things of near relation to, and necessary dependence upon this
of the Covenant; I shall not need to give instance, the Reader all along will
meet with them, such as I thought would be useful, and to the judicious not
ungrateful, some of them practical, that the whole of the Book might not be
found to be Polemical, aiming at least at that which the Poet so cries up --
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile d^lci.

Fifthly, For that part in which Infant Baptism and its grounds are
particularly vindicated from Antipoedobaptists, the Reader may see their
arguments and corrupt glosses are examined, only as (according to my method
laid down) I have been necessitated, and so, that the Covenant had not been
vindicated according to my duty, in case that had been neglected; And here
those that please to heed may see; First, the dependence that this Controversy
about Infant Baptism has on the doctrine of the Covenant; that a Scripture
Covenant cannot be asserted, but Infant-Member-ship, Infant Baptism in the
latitude, as now generally used by Pastors in their Congregations, must be
upheld. Secondly, the order in which this controversy is here carried, may so
much the rather invite the Reader to it, seeing what is in opposite Authors
laid down scatteringly, without regard to any head of doctrine in the Covenant
to which it does relate, here it is reduced to its proper place, and carried on
in that manner as an orderly Treatise, and not a personal conflict; following
adversaries no farther than as they stand in the way, to cloud the truth that
is there prosecuted* and though many advantages are hereby neglected, that
might have been taken, which adversaries use to prosecute to the uttermost, and
these adversaries would to the height have improved; yet I am very well
pleased, making it my business, that my Reader may not be troubled, but
edified. Thirdly, the Scriptures that are produced, and ordinarily agitated in
this controversy of Infant Baptism, are not only urged, but a just Analysis of
the context opened, the full scope and drift laid down, so that it may appear
that the words are not enforced, but of themselves in their native strength
commend that doctrine to us; that of Jerome, Apol. adversus Jovinian much takes
with me, Commentatoris officium est, non quod ipse velit, sed quid sentiat ille
quem interpretatur exponere; Alioqui si contraria dixerit, non tam interpres
erit quam adversarius ejus quem nititur explanare; And let the impartial and
learned judge whether somewhat more clear light is not here added to their
full meaning and the adversaries* Sophismes more clearly detected. Fourthly.
The least blow which Mr. Tombs received (purposely intended for him) was from
Mr. Baxters hand, which work contains many irrefragable Arguments to assert
Infants Church Membership, and Baptism from several Scripture-Texts, if not of
themselves plain, yet made plain, so that he needs not blush at his Title; but
he does not make it: his business fully to answer Arguments on the contrary,
where he is most full, I have been most brief; where he is most brief, I have
been more large; he has satisfied his Reader, I hope the Reader will say that
I have in that part done somewhat for satisfaction of my adversary.

Sixthly, The last part of this Treatise (as the advice on the top of the leaf
may signify) is no more than a new Edition of, with an ample addition to my
Birth-priviledge, which above my expectation found so good acceptance, only
handling it there Sermon-wise, as fixed on a proper Text, and here by way of
Treatise, as a branch of this doctrine of the Covenant, I was put to it in a
great part to change the methodand texture of it, so that it may rather seem to
those that compare them, a new frame, with much borrowed from it, than the same
reprinted and enlarged; and there I have endeavored satisfaction to that which
some have said in the way, admitting Infants not according to their
Parents-priviledges, but qualification: not as they stand in relation to God,
but as they fill up their relation, which new limit I hope I have discovered to
be unwarrantably put, casting those out which the Church (according to the mind
of God) from Abraham to this time has received, to the disquiet of our
Congregations, and multiplication of our sad, and deplorable differences.

Seventhly, I have made it my business to avoid all impertinencies and
unnecessary dilatations, being ambitious to speak multa in paucis, and not to
put the Reader to pains to find out a little which may serve his purpose in
much, affecting brevity so far as may be without obscurity: In all which, I
shall only request two things of the Reader, and both of them such that God
himself commands.

First, A double request made to the Reader.
Not to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory with respect
of persons, that he do not take an estimate of doctrinal points, or
controverted opinions, according to the outward garb in which men appear, by
reason of any dignity, relation power, or any such circumstance whatsoever; If
this once prevail, opinions will be taken up, not according to the strength of
truth, that is seen in them, but according to the quality of him that vents
them; they will judge of the faith by the men, not of the men by the faith, and
upon this account on all hands truth is in danger: And as men in their
reputations ebb and flow, their judgments of things must hold up or fall.
Truths sometimes will be cast off, barely on the low repute, and mean
condition of such that do deliver them: Though Christ spoke as never man spoke,
and al treasures of wisdom were hid in him, yet it was enough against him that
he was a Carpenters son, Matthew. 13. 55: that none of the Pharisees and Rulers
believed in him, or sided with him, John 7. 48. A poor man may save a City, and
never the less his wisdom despised, Eccles. 9. 16. sometimes because they are
not men of our interests that hold it, they make not up a party for us. The
more considerable the interest is, the greater the hazard (in these cases)
truth runs. Paul being brought before a Council, Acts 23. had not a man of
whom we can read for him, but all against him, for this reason, because it did
not appear that his opinions served any of their Interests; when he observed
this, and saw their Interests divided, and that his adversaries made two
parties, he declares himself to be for the Interest of the one against the
other, and in point of the Resurrection to be for the Pharisees against the
Sadduces, bred up in that way, and so persisted; hereupon having not a friend
before, now he has many: There arose a great cry, and the Scribes that were of
the Pharisees part arose, and strove, saying, We find no fault in this man, but
if a spirit, or an Angel has spoken to him, let us not fight against God,
Verse 9. now and not before he must be heard. Upon the same terms that truth is
cast off, error is received and taken in, nothing must be gainsaid, that men
of name, and men of Interest will appear to own; yea, relations, kindred, and
affections this way gained, are mightily prevalent, to work into Faction and
take up Tenants. As diseases many times run in a blood; so also opinions where
they take in a kindred, often very few escape. Twenty Sermons, were Paul, yea,
Jesus Christ in the Pulpit, would not so take to settle men in the truth, as
one poor Letter, or simple senseless three-pennie Pamphlet from the hand of a
child, a brother, or sister will work to draw into Error. I will not here
undertake to determine who are meant by children in that speech of our Savior
Christ, Matthew 12. 27. It appears that it spoke some relation, that drew
affections, and therefore whereas Christ is censured to cast out Devils by
Beelzebub the chief of Devils, when any of these do such a work, they are cried
up in another manner. It was a true Observation of him that said, Omnia diota
tan^^ astimantur, quantum est ipse qui dixerii, nectam dictionis vim, atque
virtutem, quam dictatoris cogitent dignitatem.

The second request of mine is, that men take heed of having men's persons in
admiration, because of advantage; we have seen the mischief that respect of
persons works, and advantages will work men in the height of it. That way that
men can either save themselves from danger, and hold where they are, or rise up
to a greater height, the world is apt to take, and the Religion of that side
shall be theirs. Hence it is, that when godliness ought to be the chiefest
gain, gain with these is their whole godliness; and state Religion is almost
the faith of every man. Those of that party still (...) for (...) depart the
least from the very height of their own principles for it, but they will have
all others upon account of their prevalency come into it: so that self is no
other than their unity paraphrased, and so long as providence holds them up,
they are not much mistaken: Re^sians will become Jews, when Mordecai a Jew is
the man that rules. Saul saw that that was a mighty motive to draw a party in
war, to have the gift of vineyards, and oliveyards, to be the fountain of
honor, able to make Captains over thousands, hundreds, fifties. It is no
less to draw on a party in Religion, as every turn of State respective to
Religion is a clear evidence: If these stumble upon truth, they yet, hold it
upon such carnal motives, that they are neither true to it, nor receive the
comfort of it: Make truth then the greatest advantage, there is glory enough in
it, without any farther garb to have it in admiration: own it though with a
scracht face where you find it; though you be otherwise at loss, it will bring
an hundredfold with it. If I can but gain these things at thy hands, I shall
not fear that this piece shall run the hazard of thy censure; spare no error
in it, so that thou will gladly take up, and rest satisfied in all the truths
that thou find. That truth may have the first place in thy soul, is the
desire and prayers of him that can do nothing against, but for the truth,

Thomas Blake
November 27. 1652
Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.

An Advertisement to the Reader touching this second Edition.
READER,
IT was once the sad complaint of Reverend Davenant, Dissertatio. de morti
Christi. Cap. 1. page 1.
that, Religionis nostrae mysteria, quae sunt ad parem and solatium animarum
promulgata, in solam pene litigandi and pugnandi materiam vertantur. The great
mysteries of Religion, those precious Beamings of the Sun of righteousness
which were shed abroad, for the begetting of spiritual heat and life in the
believing heart, were often eclipsed, and their influence much debilitated,
through the intervening body of cloudy Controversies. This way Satan gained
upon the Church in its Infancy, which gave occasion to that good admonition, we
have upon record from the blessed Apostle, Heb. 13. 9. Be not carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines, for it is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace; What these diverse and strange doctrines were,
Interpreters have their different thoughts, which I shall wholly wave; the
Reader may yet observe the Apostle hinting at, and tacitly reproving, the
pronenesse that was in men eagerly to pursue, studiously to sweat, and tug
about empty notions, whilst the spiritual sense, and feeling of truth in the
heart, was little heeded. The same Apostle traces Satan in the same design
among the Colossians, Cap. 2. Which puts him upon that pathetical exhortation,
Cap. 3. To seek the things that are above, to lay out their zeal, and center
their affections upon things of a more solid, sublime, and spiritual nature,
viz. the application of Christ in the power of his death, and precious in-comes
of his Spirit for the mortification of lust. What unspeakable advantage this
continued enemy of a believers life and comfort has gained in our age (not to
mention the spoils made in the intervening) our present breaches, sad decays,
two fully evidence; yea, so fully, that did not a graciory word uphold, and
everlasting arms fix themselves underneath, our ruins had been incapable, of
any further breach. In the midst of these astonishing providence, and terrible
dispensations, the Lord (such is his infinite wisdom, and goodness) has
brought forth meat out of the strong, and honey, out of the destroyer. These
windy storms have through rich grace more deeply rooted some, whilst others
have been tossed to, and fro; these Controversal collissions have brought forth
much light; thus Satan lies bleeding under his own weapons. Among other
precious treasures which the Church through mercy does enjoy, here thou may
see truths of the greatest concernment to believers polemically vindicated,
practically improved, that men's judgments might be balanced, and their hearts
feel the weight of truth, both which necessarily make up a believers
acquaintance with the truths of Christ as they are in him. The Covenant of
grace both in its sure mercies, and distinguishing privileges, is a truth of
the greatest magnitude, appearing rather as a glorious constellation, than
shining with the light of a single star; It is a rich Cabinet of Diamonds,
rather than any single jewel. How far the Reverend Author (my ever Honored
and endeared Father) has been serviceable in the hands of Christ for the
unsealing of this rich Cabinet, the abundant acceptance which this Treatise
found from men eminently judicious, when it was wrapped up in the swaddling
bands of blurred papers, before it went abroad, does fully speak. I need not
add those many special acknowledgments from some of the ablest pens in the
Nation, which after the Authors death were found upon the file in his study;
much might be spoken by me, did not my relation to him command a silence; the
Lydian Princes tongue would break no bonds; when violence was offered to his
father; give me leave to apply that to the Reverend Author, which sometimes was
observed of the Athenian Orator, that in his public discourses, he did not
only (...), but aculeos in animis auditorum relinquere; And if I may without
envy add holy Melancthons pythy verse upon Luthers picture, Fulmina erant
linguae singula verba tuae. But I shall forbear, craving only thy patience, in
receiving an account, how far thy gain will be doubled, in this second Edition:
In the first, the Learned Author was necessitated to take notice of several
controversies, which were then started, these afterward growing more personal
(and therefore only beautiful in their season) are in this wholly waved, and
truths asserted in Thesi. In the first, several expressions (through the
natural brevity of the Authors style) were obscure, and occasioned the readers
stumbling, In this they receive an additional light, what passages might seem
abstruse, now are enlarged. In the first the method was unavoidably clouded in
several places through digressions, and appendices, In this each head is
digested in its proper place. In the first, several things were omitted which
now upon second thoughts, and deeper wading into the controversies herein
handled, are by the learned Author in this inserted; And the whole of this don
by the Authors own hand, which he had no sooner taken off, and sent it to the
Press, but the Lord dispatched a fiery chariot for him, which took him away to
the enjoyment of Truth it self; what thou read of him now, was sealed with
his death. They that were acquainted with his state, and frame of spirit in
that juncture of time when it was finished, must needs testify, there was no
room for any carnal end to byasse, or self-interest to steer his notions.
Respective to the doctrine here asserted, I shall assure thee from the mouth of
this blessed Author, that as he sweetly laid down his life, in clear, and
unspeakable assurance of glory, so he dyed without the least Scruple in any of
the truths here vindicated. I shall no longer entertain thee in the porch, but
give thee possession of the house, craving only thy Candor in the perusal of
it; orphane children though under the eye and care of endearing friends, yet
sometimes may feel the want of a parental wing, I am not without fears that
this Orphane Treatise, may complain of some Errata's, through the Authors
unexpected death, the slow progress of the Press, and my great distance from
it. The God of truth teach thee how to profit, break every shell, that thou
may taste of the kernel, clear up truths to thy apprehension, and imprint
them upon thy heart, so prays he, who beggs thy prayers for him, because he is

Thine in our Lord Jesus Samuel Beresford.

A Scheme of the whole.
This Treatise contains 1. An Introduction. 2. The body of the Treatise.

The Introduction does contain 1. The figurative acceptions of the word,
Covenant. 2. Requisites in a Covenant; properly so called. Chap. 1. 3. A
distribution of Covenants into the in several kinds. 4. Seven Reasons of Gods
dealing with men in a Covenant way. 5. The Covenant between God, and man
defined.

The body of the Treatise contains a distribution of the Covenant into the
Covenant of Works. Chap. 2. Covenant of Grace.

The Covenant of Grace is considered, 1. In the general nature of a Covenant.
2. Jointly with the Covenant of Works.

1. As considered in the general nature of a Covenant, we may observe 1. A
Covenant in the proper nature of it between God and fallen man asserted. Chap.
3. 2. This explained in several propositions.

1. The Covenant of Grace is between God and man, and not between God and
Christ. Chap. 4. 2. The outward, and not the inward Covenant is a Covenant
properly so called, 1. Asserted and argued. Chapter 5. 2. Cleared in 6 positions.
Chapter 6
3. The conditionality of the Covenant of Grace 1. In five arguments proved.
Chapter 7. 2. Objections answered. Chapter 8. Chapter 9.

4. God keeps up his sovereign y, 1. In the power and authority of his Law. Chapter
10, 11, 12. 2. In exercise of Discipline and correction for sin. Chapter 13.

2. Consider jointly with the Covenant of Works, we see 1. Their agreement in
eight particulars. Chap. 14. 2. Their differences 1. In the Covenants
themselves. 2. In the Conditions annexed.


Differences in the Covenants are 1. Primae. The Covenant of Works was entered
in man's integrity. Chap. 15. The Covenant of Grace was entered in man's fallen
condition.
2. A prima ortae.

Differences, a prima ortae The Covenant of Works was for man's preservation. of
Grace for man's restitution. Ibid.
The Covenant of Works had its precedence in time. of Grace followed after.
Asserted. Objections answered.

The Covenant of Works was of small time in use. of Grace is of everlasting
continuance. chap. 16.
The Covenant of Works had no Mediator. Asserted. Objections answered.
of Grace was in and by a Mediator Asserted. Works incumbent on the Mediator
held forth.



1. To bring men into a capacity of Covenanting. 2. To bring men within the
verge of the Covenant. 1. By his tender of it. 2. Shaping the heart for it.
3. To bring the soul up to the terms of the Covenant. 4. To crown those that
come up to the terms of it. chap. 17.
Differences in the conditions. 1. Supposed on Gods part. Death threatened. Life
promised. The same in both Asserted. Objections answered chap. 18.


2. Real on man's part.

2 Differences asserted. 1. In the Covenant of Works, the conditions were in
man's power. of Grace, they are not performed without special grace. Asserted in
6. Reasons. chap. 18 Objections answered. chap. 19

2. In the Covenant of Works, the conditions kept man within himself of
righteousness. chap. 20 of Grace, the conditions carry man out of himself to
be righteous by another righteousness.
3. In the Covenant of Works, conditions were for man's preservation. Ibid. of
Grace, conditions were for man's reparation.

3. Conditions discovered. 1. Serviceable for man's return to God which is
Faith. 1. Explained, the sense of it given, and reasons evincing it. Chap. 21
2. In 4. Propositions cleared. 1. God will not justify a wicked person. 2. Man
has no righteousness of his own for justification. 3. Man has a
righteousness of grace tendered. Ibid. 4. This righteousness is made ours by
Faith. Asserted. Explained. 1. Faith in the Sovereignty of God does not
justify. 2. Faith justifies as an instrument.


3. Objections answe^ed. chap 22. 1. Asserted. Ib. 2. Object. answ.
4. Corollary drawn, A justified man is fitted for every duty. Ibid.
2. Serviceable for man's reparation in his qualifications to hold up communion
with God, which is repentance 1. Objection a prevented. It is not the same with
faith. Chap. 23. 2. Duty explained. In the pre-requisite godly sorrow Asserted
in six particulars limited. Ibid.
In the essentials. Privative, Cessation from sin. Ibid. Positive. Return to
God.

3. Objections answered. 1. Jointly against Faith and Repentance. They are man's
conditions, not Gods. chap. 24. 2. Particularly against repentance it self. 1.
It is not hereby made a Covenant of Works. 2. Repentance necessarily flowing
from Faith, is not thereby diserabled Ibid. from being a condition in the
Covenant of Grace.

4. Degree of obedience required in our return.

1. Perfection of degrees not called for of God in Covenant, 2. Covenant of
Grace does not call for perfection, and accept sincerity. Asserted. Objections
answered.
3. Our Evangelical righteousness is imperfect. Chap. 25. 4. Covenant of Grace
requires and accepts sincerity.
4. Corollaries drawn. 1. Necess^^y of a constant standing Ministry to bring
men into Covevenant with God, and to bring them up to the terms of it. 1.
Explained. 2. Asserted. 1. In seven reasons evincing that such a Ministry is
established. 2. In reasons evincing such a Ministry to be thus established.
3. Objections answered. Joel 2. 28, 29. Vindicated. chapter 26 Jer. 31. 31. etc.
Vindicated.

2. Schools and Nurseries of learning in order to a gifted Ministry.
Asserted. Chap. 27. Objections answered.
3. Orderly way of admission of men into a Ministerial function necessary. 1.
Asserted by several reasons, Chap. 28. 2. Explained by distinguishing of
Callings. 3. Ordination defined, in the parts of it explained.
4. Ministers of Christ must bring their people up to the terms of the
Covenant. 1. Explained. 2. Asserted. Chap. 29. Objections answered.
5. People in Covenant must come up to the terms of the Covenant. Chap. 30.


The Covenant of Grace is either the Old or New Covenant. In which observe 1.
Agreement in 6 particulars. Chap. 31. 2. Differences. Chap. 32.


Differences. 1. Real in six particulars. 2. Supposed or imaginary. Nine
Positions premised for a right understanding of the Old Covenant. Chap. 33.
Differences themselves assigned.


Differences assigned are 1. Laying the Old Covenant too low. 2. Putting too
great a restrain^ on the New.

I. Laying the Old Covenant too low. 1. Supposing it to consist of mere carnal
promises, 1. Interests to which this deives. Popish. Socinian.
Antipaedobaptistical. Chap. 34.
2. Contrary asserted, and the spiritualty of the Old Covenant maintained.
2. Supposing it to be a mixed and no pure Gospel Covenant. Chap. 35.

1. Meaning enquired into. 2. Grounds. Examined. Enervated.

II. Putting too great a restraint on the New Covenant. 1. Limitting it alone
to the Regenerate. 1. To which something is spoke. 1. By way of concession,
that sundry Divines seem to speak to that purpose. 2. By way of Avoidance,
from their own words.
2. Contrary asserted. 1. In Old Testament-times. 1. By confession of the
advesarie. 2. By Scripture-testimony. 36

2. In New Testament times. 1. by New Testament Scriptures Mat. 28. 19 Mat. 22.
24 Heb. 10. 29 1 Pet. 2. 9 37

2. By Arguments of sundry sorts. chapter 38 3. Objections answered. chapter 39 4.
Corollaries drawn.

1. Professed Believers are under a Covenant of Grace, and not a Covenant of
Works. chap. 40 2. Interest in a Church State, is of equal atiude with the
Covenant. c. 41 3. Such Covenant Interest is sufficient to give access to, and
interest in particular visible Churches. chap. 42 4. Dogmatical Faith entitles
to Baptism. chap. 43 5. Impenitence and unbelief in professed Christians is a
breach of Covenant. chap. 44
Five Positions concerning particular Churches 1. Where nothing is wanting to
the being of a Church, yet much may be wanting for the wel-ordering. 2. A
people in a vicinity ought to associate themselves. 3. Professing Christians
upon tender, ought to be received. 4. Reformation of abuses is the work of
Christians, rather than separation. 7. Rules concerning separation. 5. Together
Churches out of Churches unwarrantable.
2. Terminating it only in the person actually entering and excluding the
issue, in which 1. Question stated as to Abraham's natural issue Chap. 45 2.
Arguments concluding the natural issue of Abraham to be in Covenant. Chap. 46
3. New Testament Testimonies evincing it. Ibid. 4. Objections from Romans 9. 6,
7, 8. answered. Chap. 47 5. The extent of it to the issue of Believers in
New Testament times. 1. Asserted. Chap 48 2 Proved.
1. By Scripture testimonies Romans 11. 16. Chap. 49. and 50 1 Cor. 7. 14. Chap.
51 Galat. 4. 29 Chap. 52. Matthew. 19. 14. Mark 10* 14 Luke 18. 16. Chap. 53

2. By several arguments. Chap. 54. 6. Corollary for Infant-Eaptisme. Chap. 55
1. By Arguments asserted, objections answered. 2. The reality of connection
between the Covenant and the Seal vindicated. Chap 56
3. Sin of Sacrilege upon the repulse charged. Chapter 57 4. The title of all
infants of professing parents asserted. Chap. 58
7. Practical uses concerning parent and issue inserred. Ch 60 1. All possible
engagements to holiness of life. Ibid. 2. Parents must see that their
childrens breeding answer their birth. 3. There is great danger in opposing
Gods Vovenant People 4. Consolation from this Birth-priviledge, 1. In reference
to Nations. 2. In reference to single persons. 1. Themselves. 2. Their
posterity.






The Analytical Table being chiefly intended for, and suited to learned
capacities, the vulgar Reader may here see the whole of the following Treatise,
as it is digested into Chapters, and these easily found by the pages opposite
to them.
Chap. 1. AN Introduction into the whole. page 1 Chap. 2. The Covenant of God
entered with mankind distinguished. page 8 Chap. 3. A Covenant between God and
fallen man in the proper nature of it asserted. page 10 Chap. 4. The Covenant
of grace is between God and man, and not between God and Christ. page 13 Chap.
5. The Outward, and not the Inward Covenant, is a Covenant, properly so called.
page 19 Chap. 6. Six positions tending to clear the thing in question. page 24
Chap. 7. The Covenant of Grace calls for conditions from man. page 33 Chap. 8.
A grand Objection against this Doctrine answered. page 36 Chap. 9. Further
Objectious against the former Doctrine answered. page 48 Chap. 10. God in the
days of the Gospel, keeps up the power and authority of his Law. The
obligation of it is still enforce, to bind the consciences of Believers. page
53 Chap. 11. The Moral Law is a perfect rule of righteousness. page 62 Chap.
12. The Moral Law binds as it was delivered by the hand of Moses. page 73
Chap. 13. God entering a Covenant of Grace with his people, keeps up his
Sovereignty in exercise of Discipline, in the correction and chastisement of
his people for sin. page 77 Chap. 14. (...) between the Covenant of Works,
and the Covenant of Grace. page 86 Chap. 15. Differences between the Covenant
of Works, and the Covenant of Grace. page 87 Chap. 16. A further difference
between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace. page 91 Chap. 17.
Works incumbent upon the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace. page 93 Chap. 18.
Further differences between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace.
page 99 Chap. 19. Objections against the former Doctrine answered. page 113
Chap. 20. Further differences in the conditions in the Covenant of Works, and
the conditions in the Covenant of Grace. page 115 Chap. 21. Faith is a
condition of the Covenant of Grace. page 118 Chap. 22. Objections against the
conditionality of Faith answered. page 130 Chap. 23. Repentance is a condition
of the Covenant of Grace. page 136 Chap. 24. Objections against the
conditionality of repentance answered. page 144 Chap. 25. What degree of
obedience, the Covenant of Grace calls for from Christians. page 148 Chap. 26.
The necessity of a Ministry to bring men into Covenant with God, and to bring
them up to the terms of it. page 160 Chap. 27. Schools, and Nurseries of
learning, in order to a gifted Ministry necessary. page 173 Chap. 28. An
orderly way of admission of men into the Ministerial function, necessary. page
180 Chap. 29. Ministers of Christ must bring their people up to the terms of
the Covenant, pressing the necessity of faith and repentance. page 188 Chap.
30. A people in Covenant must come up to the terms of the Covenant, being
engaged to God they must answer their engagements. page 190 Chap. 31. The
distribution of the Covenant of Grace into the Old, and New Covenant, with the
harmony and agreement, that is found between them. page 202 Chap. 32.
Differences assigned between the Old and New Covenant. page 205 Chap. 33.
Positions tending to clear the first Covenant, under Old
Testament-dispensations. page 210 Chap. 34. The Old Covenant was not made up of
mere carnal promises, but contained New Govenant-promises, that were spiritual
and saving. page 219 Chap. 35. The Old Covenant was a pure Gospel Covenant, and
not mixed. page 224 Chap. 36. The Covenant of Grace, admits Christians in
Gospeltimes in a state of unregeneration, and is not limited in the bounds of
it to the elect regenerate. page 231 Chap. 37. New Testament-Scriptures
asserting the latitude of the Covenant of Grace in Gospel times. page 235 Chap.
38. Arguments evincing the Covenant of Grace in Gospeltimes in that latitude as
before is asserted. page 248 Chap. 39. Objections against this latitude of the
Covenant answered. page 257 Chap. 40. Professed believers are under a Covenant
of Grace, and not a Covenant of Works. page 262 Chap. 41. Interest in a
Church State is of equal latitude with the Covenant. page 267 Chap. 42. A man
in Covenant with God, and recieved into the universal Church visible, needs no
more to give him access to, and interest in particular visible Churches. page
270 Chap. 43. A dogmatical faith entitles to Baptism. page 289 Chap. 44.
Impenitence and unbelief in professed Christians is a breach of Covenant. page
294 Chap. 45. The question stated concerning the birth-priviledge of the issue
of believers. page 295 Chap. 46. Arguments concluding the natural issue of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to be taken into Covenant. page 301 Chap. 47. Romans
Chap. 9. Verse 6, 7, 8, vindicated. page 309 Chap. 48. The Covenant in New
Testament times takes in parents, with their children. page 316 Chap. 49. Romans
11. 16. vindicated. page 323 Chap. 50. Arguments from a late hand for
ingraffing into the Church invisible, and breaking off from it, answered. page
330 Chap. 51. 1 Corinthians. 7. 14. vindicated. page 349 Chap. 52. Galat. 4. 29.
vindicated. page 366 Chap. 53. Mat. 19. 14 Mark. 10. 14. Luke 18. 16.
vindicated. page 393 Chap. 54. Reasons evincing the birth-priviledge and
covenant-holinesse of Believers and their issue. page 401 Chap. 55. A Corollary
for Infant Baptism Infant Baptism by arguments asserted. page 410 Chap. 56.
The reality of connection between the Cavenant and initial seal asserted. page
422 Chap. 57. The withholding Infants of Christian parents from baptism, is
the sin of Sacrilege. page 437 Chap. 58. The children of all that are
Christians in profession, are by virtue of Covenant Interest, to be recieved
into the Church by baptism. page 448 Chap. 59. A defense of the former
Doctrine respective to the latitude of Infant Baptism. 468, page 458 Chap. 60.
The application of the whole in several inferences. page 478
A TREATISE OF THE Covenant OF WORKS, AND OF THE Covenant OF GRACE.
CHAP. I.
An Introduction into the whole.
I Shall not make it my business, for an Introduction into this Work, to
enquire after the derivation of the word. Etymologies are known to be no
definitions; The denomination being usually given, from some adjuncts,
variable, according to times and places, and not from any thing that is of the
essence of that which is enquired after, in which those are highest in
Criticismes, in giving their judgments of them, can yet ordinarily go no
higher then conjecture; The common acception of the word in Scripture is that
which will give the greatest light, in finding out the nature of Scripture
covenants, which as most other words is variously used. Sometimes is used
Properly, implying a covenant in deed and truth, strictly so called, and
containing all the requisites of a Covenant in it. Sometimes Tropically, for
that which contains some parts and adjuncts of a covenant, and so carries some
resemblance to, and stands in some affinity with it. This Tropical figurative,
and the native proper sense must be carefully distinguished, and may by no
means be confounded, by those that will understand the true nature of a
covenant, and avoid those manifold mistakes, into which some upon this a lone
account have been carried: Figurative acceptions of the word Covenant.
The figurative acceptions of the word, are diverse, sometimes the homage
required, or duty covenanted for, is called a covenant by way of Synechdoche,
seeing a covenant between a Superior and Inferior does comprize it, so Jerem.
34. 13. I made a Covenant with your fathers, in the day that I brought them out
of the Land of Egypt, which Covenant is no other then the Law that he gave
them, Exodus 21. 2. Sometimes the promise annexed, is called by the name of a
covenant, by a like Synechdoche, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations for an
everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, Genesis
9. 11. Sometimes the Seal is called by the name of a Covenant, by way of
Metonymy of the adjunct, serving to ratify and confirm a covenant, Genesis 17.
10. This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed
after thee, every man-child among you shall be circumcised. Sometimes Christ
the Mediator of the covenant is called by a like figure, the covenant, Isa.
42. 6, 7. I will give thee for a covenant of the people, and light unto the
Gentiles. Sometimes the Lord Christ's undertaking, to work the graces covenanted
for, in the hearts of his people, in the way of his power, exerted in the
conversion of sinners, is called by the name of a covenant, Jerem. 31. 33. This
is the covenant that I will make with the whole house of Israel, after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts; of which more in its own place. Sometimes a covenant is taken for
that peace, which usually follows upon covenants, Job 5. 23. Thou shall be in
league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at
peace with thee, Hos. 2. 18. In that day I will make a covenant for them with
the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping
things of the ground; and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle
out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely. When yet neither a
Law, nor a Promise, nor Seal annexed, nor yet the Mediator, or any undertaking
of his, can be a covenant properly so called. A Law from God with a Promise
annexed, assented to by man, is a covenant; and when a Seal is added, there is a
condescension to our weakness, for the more abundant ratification and
confirmation of Gods stability in his Promises. In our enquiry after such
covenants, which God in his gracious condescension is pleased to enter with man
the general nature of a covenant must be held, every species must partake of
its Genus; We must not make Gods covenant with man, so far to differ, from
covenants between man and man, as to make it no covenant at all; we must also
observe that which differences it from covenants merely humane, that covenants
divine and humane be not confounded together. In order to which we must know
that in every covenant properly so called, these requisites must concur.

First, Requisites in a Covenant.
it must not be of one alone, but at least of two parties, one can make no
bargain or agreement. Secondly, there must be a mutual consent of these
parties. When Nahash the Ammonite, offered to make a Covenant with Israel, on
condition that he might thrust out all their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11. 2. the
Israelites refusing and running the hazard of a fight, rather then undergo it,
here was no covenant. Thirdly, each party must engage themselves one to
another, for performance of somewhat covenanted for, whether debt, duty, or
promise. When Abraham agreed with the Hittites for a burial place for four
hundred Shekels, Genesis 23. 15, 16. There was a covenant properly so called,
having apparently in it all requisites of a covenant. So also in Jeremies
purchase, Jer. 32. 10. and the Levites hiring of himself to do the office of a
Priest, Judge. 17. 10. Micah and he mutually agree, he is to do the office of a
Priest, and Micah is to pay his covenant-wages; so that he hit right of the
nature of a covenant, that defined it to be A mutual agreement between parties
upon Articles or Propositions on both sides, so that each party is tied and
bound to perform his own conditions. This holds forth the general nature of a
covenant, and is common to all covenants, public and private, divine or
humane, differencing it first from a Law or Precept, where there is a command
out of sovereignty propounded, without any obligation or engagement on the
Lawgiver or Commander. Secondly, from a single promise, where there is a
signification of the will of him that makes the promise, touching some good to
him to whom the promise is made, without any restipulation, from him; And to
let pass several Divisions of covenants, little pertinent to our purpose
(which may be seen in Civilians and Politians, particularly in Grotius lib. 2.
De Jure Belli and Pacis, cap. 15.) and to speak to such, which may give some
light to the present work. Covenans of this nature properly so called, are
either between equals, where either party may indifferently indent with other,
Distinctions of Covenants.
neither standing engaged to other, otherwise then by covenant, as in the
instances before, mentioned. The Priest was not engaged to officiate for Micah,
nor Micah to give money or raiment to the Priest, but by, virtue of contract,
one was the others equal, in regard of any dependence one upon the other. Or
else they are between Superior and Inferior, the Superior condescending to
the Inferior, to deal by way of covenant, when yet the whole that is required
by him, is of debt, and might without agreement or stipulation be required and
exacted. This superiority and inferiority, is either mixed and imperfect, or
else it is absolute and sovereigne: Mixed and imperfect superiority, and
inferiority, is, between parent and child, master and servant, equal in being,
but Superior and Inferior in relation; Of this nature was that of Isaac with
Esau, Genesis 27. 34. Take I pray thee thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and
go out to the field to take me some venison, and make me savoury meat, such as
I love, that my soul may bless thee before I die; Esau was tied as a child to
do what Isaac required, though he had hinted or promised no blessing;
Superiority and Inferiority, absolute and sovereigne, is only between God and
his creature, no other is an absolute Superior; and such is the covenant, when
God enters covenant. It is of sovereignty that God makes a Law; It is of
condescension and goodness that he enters covenant, in which man may not
indent, but must accept, professedly accepting, and in sincerity of heart
performing, what God in covenant demands; yet it is a covenant, and properly so
called, that he enters with his creature, especially that which he enters with
mankind, having all the ingredients, and forenamed requisites of a covenant,
as in the sequel (God willing) shall be demonstrated. God is engaged to
retribution, and man to fealty, and either of both by consent. Covenants
between any parties, whether Superior and Inferior, or equals among
themselves, are either simply and nakedly such without any farther solemnity,
or ceremony, or any thing more then is essentially necessary in a Covenant, a
mutual engagement between each other on such terms and propositions as are
mutually agreed. Or else they are covenants with addition of ceremonies,
solemnities, ways of ratification and confirmation; as instances might be
given in covenants, both humane and divine; As the committing the words of the
Covenant to writing Jer. 32. 10. Calling in witnesses, in the same place, and
Ruth 4. 10, 11. giving of the hand, making oath, Ezekiel. 17. 18. or any other
National custom in use, for confirmation, as the setting up of a stone,
Joshuah 24. 26, 27. the division of a Calf, and passage between the parts of
it, Jerem. 34. 18. laying upon themselves by way of imprecation, such a
judgment that then befell that beast, in case of falsification, so that some
making definition of a covenant, over and above what is essential, make
addition of such ways of ratification; so Ravanellus defines a Covenant to be,
A mutual agreement of two parties, Mutus pactio disarum partium, qua altera
alterise ecritis conditionibus obligar ad aliquid faciendum, dandum aut
accipiendum, adhibitis signis and Symbolis externis, ad solennem
testificationem confirmationis causa, ut promissio sit inviolabilis, Sic and
Ursinus.
in which either ties himself to other upon certain conditions in the use of
some outward signs and tokens, for attestation and confirmation, that the
promise may be inviolable. The covenant which God pleases to enter with man,
especially with fallen man, under which we are, and our fathers in old
Testament-administrations were, is not a bare naked covenant, but in the
highest way of solemnity, committed to writing, John 20. 31. confirmed by
witnesses with miracles, Heb. 2. 4. by oath, Heb. 6. 13. 17. by seals, Matthew.
28. 19. Matthew. 26. 28. compared with Romans 4. 11. And when he might have dealt
with man, by way of sovereignty, ruling solely by prerogative and command, not
letting man know any reward for his service, or at all to have understood the
issue and event; yet he is pleased to wave such right, and to deal by way of
covenant, and that in this way here mentioned.

First, Reasons why God deals with man in a Covenant-way.
That his people might be willing in the day of his power, Psalm 110. 3.
Obedience extorted, contributes not that honor to him, whom we obey, we
confess a necessity in our selves to yield, but scarce acknowledge any worth
in such a Superior to command; serving no otherwise then Israel did Pharaoh,
as a bond man serves his master, one volunteer that goes out of choice, more
honors an expedition, then ten that are pressed by power for service, only
waiting an opportunity by slealth, out of dislike, as David's soldiers out of
shame, to quit the service, I Sam. 19. 3.

Secondly, to vanquish all temptations, and overcome all assaults that may
occur in man's way of obedience; Adam in innocence was foiled by a temptation,
which he had overcome, in case he had heeded the terms of the covenant, the
curse that was threatened, and the promise that was contained in it; man in his
fallen estate undergoes many trials, and is encountered with variety of
temptations, had he not a word on which he might hope, a word of promise in way
of covenant from God; he could not stand, but of necessity must perish.

Thirdly, that love rather then fear might principle man in his obedience, as
seeing more of goodness to induce, then of wrath to scare him into it; God
will have his servants, sons. The free honor of a child to his father, rather
then the compulsory fear of a servant, pleases him.

Fourthly, for the aggravation of sin; The more of condescension, goodness,
bounty, and love appears, in Gods way of dealing; the more of equity is seen,
and the more ingratitude and folly appears in man's disobedience.

Fifthly, for man's greater consolation; An up-right-hearted man finds
abundance of peace, in his covenant entered with God; when he prays and seeks
the greatest mercy in prayer, he is able to say, In thy faithfulness answer
me, and in thy righteousness, Psalm. 143. 1. Paul can say, that God the
righteous Judge shall give him a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Having
engaged by covenant, righteousness ties him to make good his engagements; This
is Gods end, in his entrance of covenant, and ratification of it by oath,
consequently, in committing it to writing, and confirming it by seal; That by
two immuntable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us, Heb. 6. 18. These strong consolations were the end of God, in
ratifying his Covenant, They are the support, and Spirit reviving cordials to
his people in Covenant; See the result of the Psalmists meditations, In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm 94.
19. I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for thou, Lord, only make me
dwell in safety, Psalm 4. 8. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall
I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm.
27. 1.

Sixthly, for the greater terror of the adversaries of his people, when they
see themselves engaged against them, and God stands in a covenant unviolable
engaged for them; when they see, that their work is to ruinate and destroy him
that God will save. Hence it is while their Rock sells them not, one of them
chases a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 32. 30. Paul in
bonds can make Felix tremble on his Throne, Acts 24. 25. Hamans wisemen, and
Zeresh his wife spoke words of terror, upon experiment made, If Mordecai be of
the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not
prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him, Ester 6. 13.

Seventhly, the Lord hereby puts a name, and an honor upon his people. David
took it to be an honor to be related to Saul, and, so to become the son of a
King, much more then, is it an honor to be brought into this relation to God.
This honor have all the Saints, and they are taken into covenant for honor
sake, The Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he
has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his Commandments; and to
make thee high above all Nations which he has made, in praise, and in honor,
and that thou may be an holy people to the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19.
They are, the portion, the inheritance, the children, the espoused ones, and
whatsoever else that speaks a near relation is theirs.

This was Gods way of dealing (I doubt not) with the Angels though (we being
not interested in it) there is no necessity that it should be written for our
learning: Sure we are, it was his way of dealing with man, as well before his
fall, (as presently shall be shown) as out of more abundant grace and
condescension for his restitution. And not mentioning for present any more,
then that which is essential in the covenant, of God with man, I suppose it may
be thus held out to us: The Covenant between God and Man defined.
A mutual compact or agreement between God and man upon just and equal terms
prescribed by himself, in which God promises true happiness to man, and man
engages himself by promise for performance of what God requires. This
description here laid down, comprizes the way of God, in every one of his
covenants with man both before and after his fall, under Old and New
Testament-revelations, all that is essential in any covenant that he enters;
Equals covenanting do either of them article and indent, but God condescending
to a covenant, man must not article, but must assent, and engage for
performance of what is prescribed, otherwise it will hear the nature of a Law,
but not of a Covenant. It is true, all men are bound upon tender from God, to
accept; It was the sin of Jewish and heathenish people, to stand out whenever
the Gospel was preached; but they were no vovenant people till they gave their
assent, and then they were received as a vovenant people, and baptized.
Exceptions cannot be taken against, or challenge made of this definition of
covenants in general, nor of the covenant which God in particular enters with
man; and these standing, they will give us light, and afford us singular help
for a right understanding of the covenant of God, entered with man in the
several species, and distinct ways of administration of it.

CHAP. II.
The Covenant of God entered with mankind, distinguished.
THere is a twofold covenant, which God out of his gracious condescension,
has vouchsafed to enter with man. The first immediately upon the creation of
man, when man yet stood right in his eye, and bore his image, the alone
creature on earth, that was in a capacity to enter covenant. We have not indeed
the word covenant, till after man was fallen, nor yet in any place of
Scripture, God entered Covenant with man in his estate of integrity.
in reference to the transactions past between God and man in his state of
integrity, neither have we such expressions that fully and explicitly hold out
a covenant to us, but we find it implied, and so much expressed, from whence a
covenant with the conditions of it is evinced. That Law, with the penalty
annexed, given to our first parents ( Genesis 2. 17. Of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil thou shall not ^at; for in the day that thou eatest, thou shall
surely die;) plainly implies in it, a covenant entered; man was in present
possession of life (that is according to Scripture. phrase, happiness) in his
whole person full and complete according to his present capacity, This is to be
continued (a^ is there evidently implied) till sin dispossess him of it;
Till he sin he shall not die; As long as he persists in his integrity, his life
is to be continued, of which the Tree of Life (as is not to be doubted) was a
Sacrament. The second, God was pleased to enter with man upon his fall, Grace
is the fountain and first rise of every Covenant of God with man:
which was a covenant of reconciliation, the most unhappy variance between
earth and heaven having intervened. The former, is, usually called a ^ovenant
of Works, the latter, is, called a covenant of Grace, though indeed, the
fountain, and first rise of either, was the free grace, and favor of God. For
howsoever the first covenant was on condition of obedience, and engaged to the
reward of Works, yet it was of Grace, that God made any such promise, of reward
to any work of man, when man had done all (even in that estate) which was
commanded, he was still an unprofitable servant, he had done no more then duty,
and no emolument did thence accrue to his Maker. It was enough that he was
upheld, and sustained of God in the work, to live in him, and upon him, when
the work was done he might have been justly annihilated. If merit be taken in a
proper sense, Adam in innocence was too low for it, all his work being an
homage due, no profit redounding to God, and the work bearing no proportion to
the reward. But a more superabundant measure of Grace is seen in Gods entrance
into covenant with man in his fallen condition, and infinitely more savor is
shown in his reconciliation, then in his preservation* Therefore this by way of
eminency has the honor to be styled the covenant of Grace, the other retains
the name of the covenant of Works. These two bearing these denominations have
their respective agreement, and differences, which are to be enquired into: but
before I reach those, it is necessary that somewhat be spoken to assert a
covenant of grace, in Gospel Times, and to give us some further light for a
right understanding of it.

CHAP. III.
A Covenant in the proper nature of it, between God, and fallen man, asserted.
BEfore I proceed any further in this work; one great rub that lies in the way,
is to be removed, otherwise, not only, all that which I have said; but also,
all that which I shall speak on this subject, will fall to the ground, and that
is their objection that say, that God has not entered any covenant, properly so
called, with fallen man. He has by way of Sovereignty, laid commands upon man;
Of free grace has made rich and large promises, by way of legacy bequeathed
life and salvation to him, but has entered no covenant properly so called (as
these say) with him, which is purposely done to avoid those conditions, which
are asserted in this covenant. If this stand, the division before laid down, of
a Covenant into a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace necessarily falls,
such a division must not be suffered, where any one member of the division is
not, If therefore there be no covenant of God with fallen man, nor no such
thing as the covenant of Grace, there can be no such division of the covenant,
and all agreement or differences assigned; will be between an entity, and a
nonentity; between that which has a reality, and a mere Chimaera. A covenant
therefore in the proper nature of it, is to be asserted and the speed^est way
to make this good, is to prove from Scripture the name and the thing, that the
word Covenant is there, and the thing, in the proper nature of it, which the
words hold out; and all of this respective to the transactions between God and
fallen man. The word we find in places without number, it were a needless
labor to give instances, when every Reader is able to furnish himself with
such multitudes. But when this cannot be denied, the impropriety of the speech
is objected. It is called by the name of a Covenant (as is said) when in strict
propriety of speech, it is no covenant; But to avoid this, the thing it self
may be as easily proved as the word, and when we have nomen, and nominis
rationem, then we have a covenant, not equivocally not yet analogically, but
properly so called. And here I may deal liberally with any adversary, and
undertake to make proof, not only of all the essentials of such a covenant in
Scripture, but the usual adjuncts, not only of all, that makes up the nature,
but all accessories usually added to the solemnity of covenants. The essentials
or real properties of a covenant, are contained in the usual definitions which
afterward we shall see laid down from several hands, all of which are in short
comprised in these words, A mutual consent of parties with stipulation on both
sides. Parties, consent, and mutual engagement is all that is required to the
same being of a covenant; when two parties agree, and either of them both, have
their conditions to make good, there is a covenant or bargain; see it
exemplified in several instances given, Chap. 1. All of these we find in that
one place, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18, 19. in the covenant that God enters with his
people, Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his
ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and
to hearken to his voice: And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
Commandments; And to make thee high above all Nations which he has made, in
praise, and in name, and in honor; and that thou may be an holy people unto
the Lord thy God, as he has spoken. There are the Covenanters, God and his
people; There is consent on both parties, Thou have avouched, the Lord has
avouched; And there is a stipulation on both sides; On Gods part, To make them
high above all Nations; which he has made, in praise, and in name, and in
honor: On the peoples part, To keep all his Commandments, to be an holy
people. There are covenant-mercies from God to his people, unto which of grace
he engages himself; and there are covenant-duties unto which man stands
engaged, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens
children; to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his
Commandments.

The usual solemnities of a covenant, In the usual accessories on solemnities.
are also found, in the transactions between God and his people, as well as the
essentials of it. 1. Covenants used to be written* for memorial for posterity,
and so is the covenant, between God and man, as in Old, so in New
Testament-times. These things are written that you might believe, and that
believing you may have everlasting life, John 20. 31. 2. Covenants used to be
confirmed with outward visible signs, as the killing of beasts, Genesis 15. Jer.
34. this was done in the old administration, Exodus 24. Half of the blood was
sprinkled upon the Altar, to denote Gods entering of Covenant, verse. 6. The
people also were sprinkled with blood, to show their voluntary entering into
covenant, verse. 8. And in the new dispensation, a new and unheard of
ratification was used, the blood of the Mediator of the Covenant, Math. 26.
27, 28. This Cup is my blood in the New Testament, which was shed for you, and
for many, for the remission of sins. This latter is a plain allusion to the
former, in which you may find. 1. A threefold agreement. Either of both these
were covenants. 2. Either of both these, had their ratifications and
confirmations. 3. Either of both were confirmed with blood. 2. A threefold
difference. 1. The former was the Old covenant, which was antiquated; This is
the New. 2. The former was ratified, and sanctified with the blood of beasts:
This is ratified and sanctified, in the blood of Christ. 3. That blood could
never take away sin, Heb. 10. This was shed for many, for remission of sins.

Thirdly, covenants use to be confirmed by seal: so, is, this covenant, between
God and his people, which is to be spoken to elsewhere.

As the being of a covenant is thus plentifully proved by Scripture-testimony,
so we might as amply prove it by arguments drawn from thence. Arguments
evincing a Covenant in the proper nature of it.
The Churches of Christ are espoused unto Christ, Hos. 2. 19, 20. And I will
betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; I
will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.
2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you to
Christ; and Spouses are in covenant with their Bridegroom. The Churches of
Christ are married to Christ: Isa. 54. 5. Thy Maker is thine Husband, the Lord
of hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer the holy One of Israel, the God of the
whole earth shall he be called. And wives are in covenant with their husbands.
Their sins against God are branded with the names of Adulteries, Whoredoms;
and these are not barely dis-obedience of a Command, or neglect of a favor,
but breaches of covenant. The Churches of Christ are servants of Christ, Levit.
25. household servants, Ephesians. 2. 19. and servants are their Masters by
covenant. Their sins in this relation are not barely obstinacy, stubbornness,
or ingratitude, but they are charged with treachery, falsehood, dealing falsely
in covenant, and their hearts being not steadfast in covenant. It is above me to
conceive, how man can be a covenant-breaker, (not alone respective to man, but
God, as he is frequently charged) when there has past no covenant between God
and him. They may question, whether there were ever any such thing, as a
covenant in the world, that deny this to be a covenant, in the proper nature of
it; some objections raised in their due place will be answered.

CHAP. IV.
The Covenant of Grace is between God and man; and not between God and Christ.
HAving asserted a covenant in the proper nature of it, it is necessary, before
I proceed further on, to give differences between this covenant of Works, and
the covenant of Grace, to speak something by way of Explication, covenant being
taken in so various and ambiguous senses, or at least so many senses put upon
it, which I take to be a misunderstanding of the Scripture-covenant, I shall
lay down certain Explicatory Propositions for clearing of the thing in
question. And the leading on shall be this. The Covenant of grace is between
God and man, between God, and those of fallen mankind, that he pleases to take
into covenant, God and man are the two parties in the covenant; It is not made
between God and Christ. This is so plain, that a man might think there needed
no words about it, but that there are some that will have man to be no party in
it, and that it is entered only with Christ on behalf of those that God has
chosen in Christ to himself. To this I shall speak first by way of concession,
yielding to them of this opinion, these three things that follow. 1. That there
is such a covenant of which they speak, which was entered between God and
Christ, containing the transactions which pass between the Father and the
Son, the tenor of which covenant we find laid down by the Prophet, Esaias 53.
10, etc. and commented upon by the Apostle, Phil. 2. 6. There we see, first the
work that Christ by covenant was to undergo, To make his soul an offering for
sin, that is, as elsewhere is expressed, to give his life a ransom for many,
and as he covenanted, so he did, He became obedient to death, even the death of
the cross, Phil. 2. 8. and that, upon account of this covenant entered, Christ
himself speaking to it, and of his work in it, says, John 10. 18. This
Commandment have I received of my Father. Secondly, the reward that he was to
receive, which is laid down by the Prophet in many words. 1. He shall see his
seed, ver. 10. As Isaac being received from the dead in a figure, saw a seed,
had an innumerable posterity; so the Lord Christ who was received from the dead
in truth; has his seed in like manner, believers innumerable, which are called
his seed in resemblance to the seed of man. 2. He shall prolong his days, not
the days of his seed, as some would have it, making this one with the former,
and rendering the words videbit semen longaevum, being delivered from death, he
shall live and reign eternally, Revel. 1. 18. 3. The pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand; he shall irresistibly do whatsoever is the Fathers
pleasure to be done in the work of man's salvation. 4. He shall see the travel
of his soul, and shall be satisfied; upon this work done, he fully enjoys the
whole of all his desires. 5. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong. He obtains a perfect
victory, has a plenary and full conquest over every adversary. 2. We yield
that the whole of these covenant-transactions; between God and Christ, was on
our behalf. Making his soul an offering for sin, he offers it for those that
are fallen by iniquity; All is, (as is there said) for the justification of
many. Whatsoeve it is, that upon the work done redounds to himself, yet the
reason of undertaking was for us, Unto us he was borne, unto us he was given,
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, he
was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification; He
endured the mulct, and we reap the benefit. 3. We confess that it is the work
of Christ that we enjoy a being in covenant, as it is his gift that we enjoy
the blessing of Ordinances. But when all these are yielded, the truth must be
asserted, that there is a covenant to which Scripture constantly speaks, which
is entered of God with man, and not with Christ, which me thinks with much ease
might be made to appear.

1. There are frequent testimonies of Gods entry of covenant with his people.
1. With the leading persons in the covenant, which stand as the root of many
thousand branches, which are their offspring in covenant. He entered covenant
with Abraham, Genesis 15. 18. Genesis 17. 2. The like he enters with Isaac, Genesis 26.
3. with Jacob, Genesis 35. 11. and therefore he is so frequently called the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And the covenant of God is alike known by the name
of the covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 2. He enters covenant with the
whole body of the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 2. Hear O Israel, the statutes,
and judgments, which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them,
and keep them, and do them. The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb,
the Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us who are
all of us alive this day; And this whole visible body of Israel was not Christ.

2. There are testimonies of Isreal's entrance into covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29.
10, 11, 12. Ye stand this day, all of you before the Lord your God; your
Captains of your Tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of
Israel, your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in thy Camp,
from the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water, that thou should
enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath which the Lord thy
God makes with thee this day, Psalm 50. 5. Gather my Saints together unto me,
those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways.

3. The particular time, and place of Gods entrance into covenant with his
people, is, in Seripture noted likewise. In Horeb as we have heard, which was
the first year of their coming out of Egypt, the third month, Exodus 19. 1.
Again, in the fourth year, the eleventh month, the first day, Deuteronomy. 1. 3.
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. compared. This day says the text. Now, there was no day,
in which the covenant of God, with Christ, was entered, no day, when it was not
entered, but it was from all eternity, as, all the works of the Trinity are, ad
intra.

4. Covenant duties are imposed, to walk before the Lord, to be perfect, to be
an holy, peculiar people, Genesis 17. 1. Exodus 19. 6. These are not imposed upon
Christ, but upon Christians.

5. The people of God have the praise of keeping, and are under the blame of
covenant breaking, which praise of faithfulness, and blame of perfidiousnesse
is ascribed to them, and not to Christ Jesus.

6. They that have the seals of the covenant given them, are in covenant; but
man receives the Seals, both of Baptism and the Lords Supper; as, the people
of God of old, did Circumcision, and the Passover, therefore, man is in
covenant.

7. If the covenant were made, with Christ, and not with man, then he is a
Mediator between God and himself, and not between God and man. This is plain,
in that he is the Mediator of the covenant, viz. between persons in covenant;
But he is not a Mediatiour between God and himself, which were absurd to
imagine, but between God and man, There is one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

There is only I think that one difficult text of the Apostle to be objected
against this thing, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed, were the promises
made. He says not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed,
which is Christ, from whence some conclude, that the covenant was entered of
God, with no other of Abraham's seed, but with Christ, consequently not with
man, but with Christ only. As this was not in my thoughts in my first Edition,
so, I shall not now (as I soon might) weary my self, and reader, in wading into
all the difficulties about it, being such as have occasioned, not only the
Jews to insult, as Calvin observes but Hierom (the greatest Linguist among the
ancients) to speak words unworthy of such an Apostle, which I shall spare to
repeat, and, all, upon the occasion of the Apostles words, That the promises,
were not made to Abraham, and his seeds, as of many, but his seed, as of one,
on which the forenamed father says, Running over the whole Scripture, both with
his eye, and memory; he does not find the word seed ever used in the plural
number, but always in the singular, whether it be in the better, or worse
sense. But Gomarus on the words takes him up as being too short in his memory,
and quotes Samuels speech, 1. Sam. 8. 15. to the contrary, where the word is
used plurally, Rivet indeed, Exercit 108. in Genes. seems to help him out,
though he do not mention him, affirming, that the word [seed] is never used in
the plural number, for the posterity of men; but always collectively used in
the singular number. The place objected in Samuel speaking of the seed of the
earth, but Ravanellus on the Apostles behalf, pleads, That it is uncertain,
whether the word be only used of the Hebrews in the singular number, for though
it be not used plurally, in the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, yet it cannot
thence be gathered, that the word has only the singular number, and wants the
plural; when it is without all doubt, that all the words which have been in use
with the Hebrews, are not to be found in the Old Testament. Howsoever, I am not
the man, from whom a satisfying Comment on these words may be expected; others
more able, that have traveled in it, may be consulted, yet I doubt not, but
enough may be easily said, to vindicate it from this gloss that is here put
upon it, and to make it appear that this text will not bear this doctrine, that
the covenant of grace is not entered with fallen man, but with Christ only,
which may appear by these following Reasons. 1. There is no safe opposing any
one difficult text (about which Expositors are at so much difference among
themselves) against, so many that are full, and clear against it. The texts
that are against it are (as I may say) without number, and this, I think,
stands alone, with any color for it. Thus the Papists have adventured to
fasten their purgatory on 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14 and some few like difficult places.
2. The word covenant is not in the text, neither under the more proper word
(...), nor yet (...), but (...); promises, in the plural number, repeated
again, verse 19. in the singular, and a promise, and a covenant (as Paraeus on
the words observes) much differ. 3. If they will needs understand by promises
to, a covenant with, as every covenant is a promise, though every promise be
not a covenant, they differ as the Genus and the Species, yet there is that in
the text, (as Master Bulkley in his Treatise of the covenant observes) which
makes against them, they say this covenant is made with Christ, and with none
but Christ; but in the text, it is otherwise, Abraham is made a party in the
covenant, as well as Christ, which serves to overthrow their exclusive
particle. 4. [Christ] here in this place may be taken collectively, as [seed]
is usually taken, and so the word is taken, 1 Cor. 12. 12. As the body is one,
and has many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are
one body; so also is Christ. And so Mr. Bulkely, Diodati, Rivet, Gomarus, and
our last Annotations upon the words expound it. 5. Being understood of Christ
personally (which with submission to better judgments, I confess most
satisfies me) it must not be understood of Christ, as a party in Covenant, for
blessedness; but as a Mediator making blessed. There are many promises in
Scripture made to Abraham, and the seed of Abraham, and there is much
difference among interpreters, to which of these promises this text refers; The
Reader, if he please, may consult Paraeus on the words, and Junius in his
parallels, but to what text soever it is, that these words do refer, I am
confident that the Apostle speaks not, of any blessedness received by
covenant; but a promise of making Nations blessed, and this is not indeed to
[seeds] as of many, but to [seed] as of one, which is Christ; which I gather by
comparing the words in hand with v. 8. of the same chapter, and the Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen, through faith, preached before
the Gospel to Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. This is
the promise that this Text holds out, which is not a covenant for blessedness,
but a promise to make blessed repeated again, verse 19. The Law was added,
because of transgressions till the seed should come, to whom the promise was
made, which is not Christ, collectively, or mystically, but personally
considered, not entering covenant but as Mediator of the covenant. So that this
text serves nothing for this purpose. A learned Writer indeed says, It is
beyond my brain to conceive that God should immediately make a Covenant with
us, who were children of disobedience, and of wrath, who could not be capable
of any such covenant and conditions. That Christ has a hand to bring us into
covenant, before was yielded, and how far he has a hand further to carry on;
the covenant may be yet further considered, but man is a party in covenant, and
as God may make promises, and give good things to fallen man, so he may enter
covenant with him likewise.

CHAP. V.
The outward, and not the inward Covenant, is a covenant, properly so called.
WHereas there is an usual distinction (almost in all that write or speak of
the covenant) of a double covenant between God and his people, one external,
and the other internal; one passing outwardly, and the other inwardly kept and
observed. Or (as Dr. Preston expresses it) a single and double covenant, which
I shall forbear to examine, seeing I know there is a right meaning; though I
much doubt whether there be in the Reader a right understanding. My second
Proposition shall be, that it is the external Covenant, not the inward, that
exactly and properly is called by the name of a Covenant: and to which
privileges of Ordinances and title to Sacraments are annexed. This Proposition,
occasioned by this received distinction, is, of three heads, which in case the
Reader please, he may subdivide into three distinct Positions.

1. The outward, The outward and not the inward Covenant, is properly a
Covenant.
and not the inward Covenant, is, most exactly and properly called by the name
of a Covenant, which I thus make good: 1. That covenant to which the definition
of a covenant does belong, has exactly and properly the nature of a covenant,
this none can deny: The definition sets out the nature of the thing defined;
But the definition most actly belongs, to the outward covenant, not to the
inward; This is plain; An agreement of parties, on terms and Propositions is
the definition of a covenant: Now the outward covenant, is an agreement on
terms and Propositions, as I have abundantly declared, in that covenant God
engages himself to man for his happiness; and man engages to faith and
obedience. The inward covenant has no terms or Propositions at all, for man
to make good, upon account of his covenanting: seeing the performance of the
conditions of the Scripture-covenant, is his very entrance into the inward
covenant. He that believes and repents keeps covenant, nothing more is expected
of God, or promised by man: But believing, and repenting, is the first closing
with God in covenant, according to them that speak of an inward covenant. 2. A
covenant to perform conditions is a covenant properly so called; But the
outward covenant, not the inward, is a covenant to perform conditions, This is
plain: The conditions in the inward covenant, are the covenant. 3. That which
confounds entrance into covenant, and keeping of covenant, is no covenant
properly so called; In a covenant properly so called these are distinct: But
the inward covenant confounds entrance into covenant and keeping of covenant,
and therefore in exact propriety of speech is no covenant.

2. The outward, The outward Covenant is most usually in Scripture called by
the name of Covenant.
and not the inward Covenant, is, most usually in Scripture, called by the name
of a Covenant; which is plain, in that, they that have no part, or portion, in
the inward covenant, are, yet still spoken of, in Scripture, as people in
covenant; God calls all Israel his people, and that upon covenant terms; Deuteronomy.
29. 10* 11, 12, 13. Al of those, that thus covenanted with God, were not in the
inward covenant. This people at their worst, and the wrost among them, are
called the people of God, as by those that were strangers to this covenant:
These are the people of the Lord, (say the men of Babylon) and are gone forth
out of his land, Ezekiel. 36. 20. so, also by the Lord himself Jer. 2. 32. Can a
Bride forget her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number.
How often does God own Israel as his people, when he yet brands them as a
rebellious, revolting, stiff-necked, treacherous, and adulterous people. They
that forsake the covenant of God, that break covenant, that deal falsely in
it, upon whom God brings a sword to avenge the quarrel of his covenant, are in
the outward, not in the inward covenant: But such there be among Gods
vovenant people, as he frequently complains, that break covenant, etc. These,
are not then, in his inward, but outward covenant.

The great objection is, (and all that carries color against this) Jer. 31.
32, 33. where the Lord differencing the Old and New covenant, says, This is
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah:
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant
they brake, although I was an husband to them, says the Lord: But this shall
be my Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. That is alone the
inward covenant, and the elect regenerate are alone within it. The inward
covenant then is called in Scripture a covenant, and is in exact propriety of
speech a covenant.

For answer, I shall have further occasion to speak to this Text. In this place
I shall only put some Queries.

1. Whether those that carry this Text to an unconditionate covenant, and
restrain it alone to that which they call the inward covenant, do not make the
covenant in the time of the Law, and that in Gospel Times essentially
different, and consequently, either make two covenants of grace, distinct, in
kind; or thrust all that were under the Old covenant, out of all hope of
salvation, contrary to all Interpreters, who make these covenants, one in
substance? See the last larger Annotations on the words.

2. Whether such an Interpretation, do not utterly contradict,
New-Testament-light, which holds out the New covenant in like latitude with the
former, in which many are called, but few are chosen; and where conditions are
as explicitly, and fully required, as in Old Testament dispensations?

3. Whether, when Scripture speaks of things, in opposition to men's erroneous
conceits, (for a further Explanation of them, and rectifying men's judgments in
them) it do usually lay down a full, complete, and formal definition, to which
nothing is to be added? or whether it does not, usually supply that, in which
men through mistake were defective and short? And whether those Texts, Esaias 58
6, 7. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that
thou bring the poor that are cast out into thy house, when thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh?
Jer. 22. 15, 16. Did not thy father eat and drink, and do justice and
judgment, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and
needy, and then it was well with him; was not this to know me, says the Lord?
Jam. 1. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world, are not parallel to this text in their way of
delivery. And in case we cannot find a full definition of a religious Fast in
that of Esaias, nor the whole of it that makes up saving knowledge in that of
Jeremy, nor the whole that makes Religion complete in that of James; why is it
that we should earnestly contend, that the full nature of a covenant is in this
text expressed, being fully parallel in the way of delivery to those other texts.
Men enjoy privileges of ordinances and interest in Sacraments upon account of
the outward Covenant.


Thirdly, it is upon the account of the outward Covenant, and not the inward,
that men enjoy privileges of Ordinances, and interest in Sacraments; Men that
are so far honored as to enjoy an outward covenant, have just title to these
privileges. It is in behalf of the Jew outwardly that the Apostle having so
decryed his condition, respective to the approbation of God, puts the question,
What advantage has the Jew? what profit is there of Circumcision? Romans 3. 1.
The Jew and Circumcision are there one; A Jew outwardly, and circumcision in
the flesh, go there in equal latitude. He that by nature is a Jew (as Paul
speaks, Gal. 2. 15.) is of the circumcision; And to these, the Oracles of God
are committed; The instruments, deeds and evidences of the covenants, say the
last Annotations. It was the privilege of Israel, Psalm. 147. 19. Romans 3. and
then, the privilege of no other Nation; Now it is, the privilege of all,
ingraffed in their stead. This is confessed, even by a great part of those, that
understand the inward covenant, (or covenant keeping to acceptance,) almost
whenever they mention a covenant, in that, they baptize infants, upon
covenant grounds, even all their infants that make a covenant profession, and
that upon just warranty. It is further plain in reason, The outward covenant
must have privileges suitable to it self, otherwise there is no manner of
benefit, or advantage of it. This privilege of the Sacrament is suitable,
being outward, as the covenant is outward; This is elsewhere spoken to at
large, and therefore I shall hear forbear.

I have indeed been challenged for this distinction of an outward and inward
covenant, as though I had been the sole Author of it, when all know that it is
a distinction, that of a long time, among Divines has been in common use; and
in case it had not been commonly received, I should have forborne the use of
it. As, I heard Mr. Ball, once in discourse, say, that he denied any such
distinction, of an outward, and an inward call to the Ministry, all calling
being external, unless the man called were a Prophet, that which men term, an
inward call, being only qualifications fitting for the work: So that I deny,
in exact propriety of speech, the inward covenant, is any covenant, but the
answer of the soul, unto that which the covenant requires. And whereas it is
said of me by way of conjecture. It is probable that he thus distributes them,
from the blessings promised, whereof some are inward, and some outward; for
though he explain not himself fully, yet I know no other sense that it will
bear. To this I say, that I thus distinguish them, to apply my self to the
Readers understanding, that has been accumstomed, so to call them; and further
I say, that men, that barely covenant, and keep not covenant, have only
privileges that are outward, They are visible Church Members, and they have
visible Church Priviledges, and those, who answer to covenant engagements
(which usually is called the inward covenant) have privileges both outward and
inward. A Jew outwardly had outward privileges, A Jew inwardly (that is, he
that answered to his outward profession, that worshipped God in spirit) has
both those that were outward and inward. It is further said, It is evident that
his outward Covenant has no seal; for it is a Covenant de sigillis
conferendis; If therefore it have a seal, it is either the same which is
promised, or some other. What this Author means, when he says, it is a
covenant de sigillis conferendis, I am to learn; If he mean that the seal
follows the covenant, and is put to, after the covenant, so it is in all
covenants whatsoever. He says, they no where tell us, what is the seal of
their outward covenant; me thinks, we had no need to tell, what the seal of
that covenant was, that the Jew entered; was it not circumcision? and did there
not another follow, viz. the Passover? Now I tell him that Circumcision and
the Passover, were, and Baptism and the Lords Supper, are, seals of this
covenant. The Nation of the Jews were in covenant, as our Author (though he
would, yet) must not deny; They were not all in the inward covenant; and yet
they had these seals. He says, we are bound to give the seals to such,
Vocation which is effectual only to bring men to an outward profession of
saving faith, is larger then election, and makes men such, whom we are bound to
baptize; And such we say have right to them. And to help him a little further.
Those men, that he says the Church must baptize, though without right, we say,
are truly in covenant, and have right; when he knows, what a child he is to
baptize, he knows, who we say, are in covenant, and have covenant-right to
baptism; so that a second covenant, of which he speaks, to give right to a
first, is a strange fancy. But seeing I am no better understood, I shall
endeavor (if it may be) to clear my meaning in certain positions which here
follow.

CHAP. VI.
Positions tending to clear the thing in question.
1. THose that take upon themselves a Christian profession, being separate for
God, calling him by the Name of Lord, that have Ordinances of God as their
inheritance, that acknowledge a Deity, and no other but the true Deity; a
necessity of worship, and none but the Christian worship, these with me are in
Covenant with God, as was the whole state of the Church of the Jews, and the
whole face of the visible Church of the Gentiles, that were ingraffed in their
stead. This to me is plain, in that they are the Church or Churches of God,
Act. 7. 8. Gal. 1. 2. The called of God, Matthew. 22. 14. The people of God, Isa.
1. 2. Psalm. 90. 7. They sacrificed to the true God, Psalm. 50. 7. Are the sons
of God, Genesis 6. 1. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Romans 9. 4. Are a people nigh unto the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Psalm. 148. ult. God professing himself to be their God, Psalm. 90.
7. Are children of the Covenant, Acts 3. 35. Saints, Psalm 90. 5. Acts 26. 10.
1 Cor. 14. 33. Believers, Act. 8. 12, 13. Acts 21. 20. Luke 8. 13. Disciples,
Matthew. 10. 1, 4. Acts 9. 1. and 15. 10. Christians, Acts 11. 26. That all of
these imply a covenant-state; and that unregenerate men, have in Scripture, all
this honor, is clear; These therefore with me are in covenant. I know, that as
to all of these elogies, it is answered in a word, that they are equivocal. An
answer that I can scarce take into my thoughts without horror; as though Gods
Oracles were all over, from one end of the Bible to the other, like those of
Apollo, and there were no reality, either in their separation for God, or gifts
that they receive from God, (as illumination, conviction, faith) or privileges
that they enjoy; When there can be no plain denial, that all of this here
mentioned, argues a covenant-state, yet exceptions are taken. It seems (says
one) he takes all to be in Covenant that bear the name, [Christian.] And then
questions; What? Though they know not what Christ or Christianity is? Is taking
a name, entering into Cevenant? The poor Indians that by thousands are forced
by the Spaniard to be baptized, are said to know so little what they do, that
some of them forget the name of [a Christian] which they assumed. And does not
our Author think that a man may take as plausible exceptions against his
words, (where he says, The rule is, That a serious professor of the faith is
to be taken for a true believer, if he would travel as far as India for it,) as
he does here against Gods Word? Do not we know, that force may make, these poor
Indians, to appear serious in their profession? And it is wonder, that it
should be so strange with him, that taking a name, should be entering covenant,
or at least that it should imply a covenant-state: Let him consult Isa. 4. 1.
In that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, we will eat our own
bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name to take
away our reproach; and those manifold Scripture-Texts, which express the
relation of Gods vovenant people to him, in these words, A people called by his
Name; or on whom the Name of God is called. Distinction should be put, between
children of the covenant, by descent from parents in covenant, whether Jews or
Christians, (who continue their covenant relation, till they professedly cast
it off, notwithstanding their ignorance) and such that of mere aliens are to be
received, having no other title then their own present qualification. This
ought to be voluntary, as well, in renouncing their old false way, as embracing
the present, as we see it was, in those coverts through the Acts of the
Apostles, and, is not to be, without some competency of knowledge, discerning
the evil of their former course, and the happiness attainable in the present.
And, I am easily induced to believe, that more knowledge by the industry of
teachers, is now required, then was in the primitive times, seeing there is not
so much of God, by miracle to persuade, and as it were to overruled: So that it
is not a naked taking of a name that is intended, but that which together with
it still attends upon it: As a wife is called by her husbands name, and
withal, makes her abode in his house; so it is with a Covenant people, and was
with Israel; They bore the name of God, and they made abode in the Church of
God, enjoying his Ordinances as their inheritance. It is objected, God often
bestows his Word on Infidels, and in England there are men that deride the
truth of Scripture, and esteem it a fiction, and yet for credit of men come
ordinarily to the Congregation. These have the Word given, and so have other
unregenerate men, but not by Covenant that I know of, That God does bestow his
Word on Infidels, to me is strange: It is true that he often tenders it to
them, but in case they remain Infidels, they put it away from them, and
bestowing implies not only a tender but an acceptance. It was the great
advantage of Israel, above other Nations, that to them was committed the
Oracles of God, when others had not that honor. And to speak, of Gods giving
his Word by Covenant, is a most improper speech, seeing the Word is the very
Covenant draughts; as though we should say, he gives his Word, by his Word. And
these sure are no open deriders that for the credit ofmen, make such a public
profession: this would work restraint, on the one hand, as it puts upon
profession on the other. And in case any such thing be, though the Covenant is
perfidiously broke, yet (as I conceive) it is not totally cast off, as long as
an open profession is continued. What shall we say of those, that take their
sons, and daughters, to give them to Moloch? this can be no low crime, and is
an high departure from the true God, yet these bring forth children unto God;
and they are Gods children, that they thus sacrifice, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. So
also, Psalm. 106. 35, etc. Israel was mingled among the Heathen, and learned
their works, and they served their Idols, which were a snare to them; yea, they
sacrificed their sons and daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent blood, even
the blood of their sons and daughters; Yet this, as appears cast them not out
of Covenant; God notwithstanding remembered for them his Cavenant, ver. 45. This
was therefore doubtless but a partial apostasy; Taking in the worship of
Idols, they did not totally cast off the worship of God: God was not totally
cast off in Judah, neither did God cast off Judah: Ahaz was of the worst of
Kings, and yet his posterity was reckoned among the people of the Lord. Had the
Jews at that time been, as severe disputants against a covenant-state, as are
risen up now, the Church of God had wanted an Hezekiah, He had never lived,
(much less wrought so happy a Reformation) in the Church of God.

2. Those that are looked upon by men, Posit. 2.
as in Covenant with God, and so ordinarily judged (as the people of Israel
were) by the Name that they bear, their abode in the Church, the profession
that they make, and so accordingly styled, are truly, and really in Covenant.
A man may know a man, to appertain to such, or such a person, because he sees
him in his family, hears him call him Master, sees him, sometimes at least, in
his work, and knows, him to have the repute of his servant; Though to know him
to be a faithful servant, requires more diligence of enquiry, and a stricter
scrutiny: So, a man may be as easily known, to appertain to Jesus Christ; The
same Characters make him known, all that is required, to being in covenant, is,
visible, open, evident: but sincerity of heart in covenanting is invisible, and
secret. And therefore the Jew outwardly, Romans 2. 28. is called by the Vulgar,
Vatablus, Tremelius, Arias Montanus, and Castalio, Judaeus in manifesto; by
Calvin, Judaeus in aperto; by Beza, Judaeus in propatulo: The Jew inwardly, is
called Judaeus in abscondito, or occulto: Their Church, or covenant-station,
giving them those great advantages after mentioned, was open and manifest.
Those that say, Lord, Lord, as, Mat. 7. 21. are of those that avouch God to be
their God, and God avoucheth them to be his people. And therefore when they
come with their sacrifices, though in their sins, and God upon that account
testifies against them; yet he says, I am God, even thy God. It is confessed
by an eminent adversary, that we must judge those that make profession, to be
in Covenant with God: we must give them the name of Christians, and men in
covenant with God, and we must use them as Christians in works of Charity and
Ordinances, and Church Communion, and so must use their children as Christians
children. And seeing reason to judge so, according to Scripture-character of
men in covenant, they are so. Either in this we judge right, or else we proceed
upon mistake, If we judge aright, then all is well: If we mistake, then, all in
these proceedings is null. Water has been applied to the child of such an one,
but no Sacrament dispensed; and according to a man's hopes, thoughts or fears
of his fathers regeneration, are his hopes, thoughts and fears of his own
baptism, and consequently of his interest in Church Communion; for this,
stands, or falls according to his fathers interest, or noninterest in the
covenant. A grand Rule is laid down by the said Author, That a serious
Professor of the faith is to be taken for a true Believer: and this being laid
down, more are added. If this Proposition were a Scripture-Maxime then it would
have borne a farther superstruction, but, being neither found there, nor any
proof made, that it is any way deduced thence, mother and daughters, may all
justly be called into question, and seeing he cannot but know, that very many
(as to the thing for which it is produced (which in order to admission to
Ordinances) will utterly deny it, he might have dome well to have made some
essay to have proved it. I do yield that charity is to hope the best, but but
that we should put our charity to it, or our reason either, for probability or
certainty, when we no where so taught, and have a more sure rule for our
proceeding, I see no reason. I can scarce meet with a Minister that says, (and
I have put the question to many of the most eminent that I know) that he
baptizeth any infant upon this ground of hope that the parent is regenerate,
but still with earnest vehemence professes the contrary. I desire the Reader to
consider Master Cobbets third and fourth Conclusions in his just Vindication,
page 46. 52. There is a bare external being in the Covenant of Grace, says he,
of persons who possibly never shall be saved. Concl. 3d. The Church in
dispensing ^n enjoined initiatory seal of the Covenant of Grace lo^keth unto
visibility of interest in the Covenant, to guide her in the application
thereof. Nor is it the saving interest, of the persons in view, which is her
rule, by which she is therein to proceed. Concl. 4th. Visibility of interest,
and saving interest are there opposed. See also Master Huds^n, page 249. John
Baptist did not in his conscience think they had all actually, really and
completely repented and reformed themselves, whom he baptized, but he baptized
them unto repentance, Matthew. 3. 11. and they by receiving the same bound
themselves to endeavor the practice thereof. It were a sad case for Ministers,
if they were bound to admit none, or administer the Lords Supper to none, but
such as were truly godly; or that they judged in their conscience to be so, or
were bound to eject all that they judged were not so.

3. Man's obligation of himself in covenant unto God, Posit. 3.
upon the terms by him proposed, necessarily implies Gods obligation to man.
Where God makes tender of the Gospel, by his Ministers to any one out of
covenant, there he makes tender of the Covenant; and where a person, or people,
professedly accept, that is, engage themselves, (as myriads of thousands did
through the Acts of the Apostles) this person, this people, each man of them is
in covenant. As Scripture calls them by the name of Saints, Disciples,
Believers, Christians, so we may call them Covenanters. They have all a
sanctity of separation, which Camero says, is real, and arguments are drawn
from thence to a right in Baptism, There is in most of them, if not in all,
some graces that are real; either common or saving, and a covenant does not
wait, till the terms be kept, and the conditions made good, before it has the
being of a covenant. And whether these be every way sincere, or any way
dissembling, yet it is acknowledged, that they really oblige themselves: And
God howsoever dissembles not, but is bound by himself, upon his own terms,
which they profedly accept, to confer all that the covenant holds forth, so
that, wheresoever man is obliged, there a complete covenant is made up, for
Gods tender goes before, and man is the last party, and compleats the Covenant.

4. Sinceri^y, Posit. 4.
and integrity of heart; or fully reality, in a man's intentions, to stand to
the whole of a Covenant, is not of the offense, and being of it. Both parties
stand engaged, upon their respective terms, though one part should have
unsincere intentions. A wife is a wise, and the marriage is complete, when both
parties have publicly expressed consent though she hold a resolution to be
stubborn, refractory, profuse, etc. A man consenting to serve, whether in bare
words, or taking earnest, as is most usual, or by hand and seal, as in the case
of apprentices, is a servant although he intend with Onesimus to purloyn, or
take his opportunity to be gone. Some thinks it makes for their advantage, to
say, that unregenerate men are unsincere in covenant; but that concession,
utterly destroys them. If they be unsincere, or as the Psalmist speaks, not
steadfast in covenant, then they are in covenant, A propositione secundi
adjacentis, ad propositionem primi adjacentis, valet argumentum. If it be true
that Catiline is a seditious man, then it is true, that he is a man: that
Peribomius is a vicious man, then he is a man; that Judas is treacherous and
perfidious in covenant, then he is in covenant: A man's conviction, that he is
an unjust steward, or an unfaithful servant, does not conclude him to be no
servant, or no steward, but the contrary. And whereas it is said, The
differences must be taken notice of, between humane Covenants, and ours with
God; or else all will be marred. Men know not one another hearts, and therefore
make not laws for hearts, nor impose conditions on hearts: and therefore if
both parties do confess consent, though dissembledly, they are both obliged,
and the Covenant is mutual. But God offers to consent only on condition that
our hearts consent to his terms, and therefore if we profess, consent, and do
not consent, God consents not, nor is, as it were, obliged. This were
somewhat to purpose, in case it could be made to appear that Scripture denies
all being of a covenant between God and man, where the all-seeing eye of God
sees not all integrity and sincerity. But Scripture Language which is the
fasest for us to follow, being (as we have heard) far otherwise, there is
nothing marred in nonobservance of any such supposed difference; See Psalm. 78.
34, 35, 36. When he slew them, then they sought him; and they returned, and
enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the
High God their Redeemer. Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth:
and they lied unto him with their tongues.

5. There is a real and serious purpose in many unregenerate persons to serve
the Lord, Posit. 5.
and to come up to as much as they think he in covenant requires, though with
Austin they have a great mind to delay, and often to put off, the thought of,
their more exact, and serious service; and too ordinarily think that they keep
covenant, when they break it, having not as yet any right knowledge, either of
their own hearts, or Gods commands, and in this posture, in which they thus
stand, before they come up any higher, yea, though they never come higher, they
reach unto graces in themselves real, true, and good, and all do, the works
which God commands; There is a common grace which is not saving, yet real, and
so true, and good, and so true grace, as well as special grace which is saving,
says Master Baxter Saints everlasting Rest, Part. 3. Sect. 6. Which may be a
fair answer to that which is objected against me, that in my explication of
Dogmatical faith, I add by way of exclusion [though not affecting the heart to
a full choice of Christ] where he seems (says my adversary) to imply, though
he express it not, that the faith that he means does affect the heart to a
choice of Christ which is not full. But if so, then, 1. It is much more then
assent, or a mere Historical, Dogmatical Faith. 2. But is the choice, which he
intimates real as to the act, and suited to the object? That is, the real
choice of such a Christ as is offered, and on such terms? If so, it is
justifying faith: If not, either it is counterfeit, as to the act, or but
nominal, as to the object, and is indeed no choosing of Christ. That which is
real and true, is neither counterfeit nor merely nominal, so far as they know,
either Christ or their own hearts, they undissembledly choose, and take to him,
as expecting to be happy in him, and not in any other object; though too often
it is upon misinformation, and when they come to a right understanding of the
terms, they are in danger to quit the way in which they might enjoy him. It is
further said That, I think that there may be an undissembled profession, which
yet may not be of a saving faith; But then I conceive, says one, it is not an
entire profession of the whole essential object of Christian faith, viz. of
assent and consent. In which he does but cast dust in his Readers eyes, in
confounding the entireness of the object, and the integrity of the subject.
There may be an entire profession of the whole essential object of faith, where
the will is brought in to make no more full choice, or consent then has been
said, and the desired integrity of the subject wanting; I am told, It will be
an hard saying to many honest Christians, to say that a man not justified may
believe every fundamental article, and withal truly profess repentance of all
his sins, and to take God for his Sovereign to rule him, and his chief good
to be enjoyed to his happiness, and to take Christ for his Lord, and only
Savior, and his Word for his Law and Rule, and the Holy Ghost for his guide
and Sanctifer, and the rest which is essential to Christianity. I think it will
be nothing hard for any honest Christian to say, that a man not justified, may
believe every fundamental article, as to assent, and that he may be convinced
of the necessity of such repentance, and accordingly to make profession of it,
as John's converts (who were not all justified) did, and were baptized into it,
or that such an one may freely yield, that God has right of Sovereignty and
rule, and that he is the chief good to be enjoyed for happiness, and that he
ought to take Christ for his Lord, and Savior, etc. and that this may be done
truly, not only as to reality of assent, but as to reality of purpose to make
this choice, so far as the man knows his own heart, or the mind of God in
this work, though there be not that integrity, to yield up himself wholly,
which yet by the power of Ordinances through the Spirit, in Gods time may be
done, and through grace perfected.

Lastly, Posit. 6.
God setting up a visible Church upon earth, in order to that which is
invisible, will have those admitted, that give assent to Scripture-doctrine,
and accordingly wake profession: And this, of it self in fero Dei, brings them
into covenant-right, and visible Church Membership. And therefore according to
the mind of God (and, as Apollonius speaks, jure Dei in this estate) are to be
received, Though they shall hit, or miss of the mercy of the covenant,
accordingly, as by grace they come up to, or by sin fall short of the
Propositions contained in it. A Scholar ( says Mr. Hudson) that is admitted
into a School, is not admitted because he is doctus, but, ut sit doctus; and if
he will submit to the rules of the School, and apply himself to learn, it is
enough for his admission. The like may be said of the Church-visible which is
Christ's School; Vindicat. page 248. The door of the visible Church, ( says
Master Baxter, Saints Rest. Part. 4. Sect. 3.) is incomparably wider then the
door of heaven; and Christ is so tender, so bountiful, and forward to convey
his grace, and the Gospel so free an offer, and invitation to all, that surely
Christ will keep no man off: if they will come quite over in spirit to Christ,
they shall be welcome: if they will come but only to a visible profession, he
will not deny them admittance. This seems to me to speak the mind of Jesus
Christ for their admittance, and that in foro Dei, as well as in foro
Ecclesiae, they stand in covenant relation, and have title to
Church Membership. Thus the Reader may see my thoughts in this thing; and
though I doubt not, but that some will question much that I have said; yet now
at last, I hope, my meaning may be understood.

CHAP. VII.
The Covenant of Grace calls for Conditions from Man.
A Third Proposition which I shall here lay down, The Covenant of Grace calls
for conditions from man.
is, that Gods covenant with man has its restipulation from man, when God
engages to man, to confer happiness upon him, he requires conditions from
him. This I know has strong opposition by men of two sorts, and they of
different stamps, and for different ends. The first deny all Gospel-conditions,
all covenant-termes on man's part, to the end they may assert justification
before, and without Faith, Salvation without Repentance, and Obedience, which
though it be contradicted by abundant testimonies of Scripture (placing
unbeleeving, impenitent and disobedient ones in hell: under the wrath of God,
yea such unbeleeving, impenitent ones that have laid highest claim to Christ,
Matthew. 7. 23.) yet it seems wholly to follow, and necessarily to be evinced
from this absolute unconditionate covenant. If Christ have wholly finished, not
only the work of man's redemption, but also of his salvation upon the cross,
without farther work of application (as one in a distinct Treatise has made it
his endeavor to prove) then we may, as he there does, decry, both our faith in
Christ, and Christ's intercession for us. Herein one of late (according to his
wonted weakness) is very industrious, and whereas the Scripture tells us,
Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. he would prove, that Christ
enters into us, without us, dwells in the unbeleeving, and in reference to this
opinion of his, he makes it his business, as, to deny Faith, in reference to
Justification, so, all Gospel-covenant-conditions. All other covenants besides
this were (says he) upon a stipulation, and the promise was altogether upon
conditions on both sides. But in this covenant of Grace, viz. the new covenant,
it is far otherwise, there is not any condition in this covenant, I say the new
covenant is without any condition whatsoever. And he further tells his hearers,
that he is on a nice point, Faith is not the condition of the covenant. Others,
utterly distasting the aforenamed opinions, of Justification without faith, or
salvation without obedience, or repentance (which seem to be the natural issue
and necessary consequents of an unconditional covenant,) yet, with great
resolution do affirm; the covenant to be without conditions, joining in the
premises with these heterodox teachers, but peremptorily denying the
conclusion. Arguments for a conditional Covenant.
Against both of these that oppose it, either more desperately, or more
innocently, I affirm (and might quote a cloud of witnesses) that the covenant
of grace has its conditions; which to me is clear.

First, by the definition of a covenant, given in, by the Author before named,
a few pages before his assertion before mentioned. It is a mutual agreement,
between parties, upon certain Articles or Propositions, on both sides, so that
each party is bound and tied to perform his own conditions. It is in the
definition and of the essence of a covenant in general (according to him) to
have conditions, yet this covenant in particular, with him, is without
condition; Here is a species, that partakes not of the nature of the genus, a
particular covenant that wants the essence of a covenant, which is the same as
though he should find us a man that is no living creature, a Vine or Fig Tree
that is no plant, a piece of scarlet of no color; such a thing is this
unconditional covenant. If the essence of a covenant require it, then this
covenant is not without it.

Secondly by the express Texts of Scripture, which lay down conditions of the
covenant, either in express words, or those that of necessity imply a
condition. See John 8. 51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my
saying, he shall never see death. Who sees not there; First, a Privilege
granted by way of covenant. Secondly, the condition on which it is to be
obtained. John 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your
sins. Heb. 3. 6. Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Who knows not, If, to be a
conditional particle? All pardon and justification (if Scripture may be heard)
is suspended on men's not believing, John 3. 16. For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned.

Thirdly, by Analogy with the covenant of Works, entered of God with Adam in
innocence, Genesis 2. 17. This, on all hands that (I know), is granted to have
been conditional, and who sees not in the Texts mentioned, conditions as
express in the Gospel, as not eating of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, to man in Paradise? either, both, or neither, must be conditional.

Fourthly, from the nature of conditions in covenants. A condition in a
covenant, is somewhat agreed upon by the Parties in covenant, upon performance
of which the benefit of the covenant is obtained, and upon the failing of it,
the whole benefit is lost, and the penalty, whatsoever it is, incurred. In
covenants between equals, either indent, and article what those conditions
shall be upon defaylance of which the benefit is lost, and the penalty
incurred. In covenants between superior and inferior, the superior does
prescribe, and the inferior does yield. In all covenants there are such
conditions, that upon performance or failing of them, the covenant does stand
or fall: such there are in the Gospel Covenant. There we are enjoined to
believe and repent, upon obedience to and performance of these, we reap the
benefit of the covenant. Upon failing in them the benefit is lost, and the
penalty incurred. He that believes not, shall be damned. Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. There are then conditions in this covenant.

Fifthly, from the absurdities that will follow upon the denial of conditions
on man's part in the covenant. First, then man is out of danger of being faulty
in the covenant, he can be no covenant-breaker* He cannot be charged that his
heart is unsteady in it. This of it self is plain, He that is tied to nothing,
fails in nothing; he that is engaged to no servce, neglects no service; As God
has that glory that he keeps covenant, so man has that Privilege, that he is
not in a capacity of breaking of it. The Church might have spared that Apology
for themselves, that they had not dealt falsely in the covenant, Psalm. 44. 17.
seeing they were under no such engagement, that they could falsify, or in any
such capacity of being false; but we find God complaining against his People
for breach of covenant, Jerem. 11. 10. Isa. 24. 5. Psalm. 78. 10, 37. we find
him giving out his threats to avenge the quarrel of his covenant, Levit. 26.
25. Master Baxters Questionist (who seems contrarily minded) thought it an
exception of validity, That it follows from his doctrine, that the New covenant
is never violated by any. I am sure it follows from this doctrine, that it is
not in any capacity of violation. Secondly, then we may say (as the Apostle in
another case) Our preaching is in vain, at least to salvation vain, the Gospel
in man's mouth is no power of God to salvation. In faith or unbelief, in a
penitent or unrepentant condition, in holiness or disobedience, God will save;
he looks neither at faith, uprightness, or any qualification, when in a
covenant-way he engages himself to confer salvation. In case God does not
regard it, to what end is there any pains to work a people to it? This I know
some Assertours of this doctrine will disclaim, but let them show how they
will avoid it.

CHAP. VIII.
A grand Objection against this doctrine answered.
HEre an objection of weight; A grand objection against the conditionality of
the Covenant of Grace answered.
by reason of the difficulty of some Scripture-Texts, on which it is grounded,
is to be taken into consideration, It is true ( says one) that in covevenants
usually there is a mutual contract, and there are mutual performances, to which
persons are engaged thereby. But for the thing it is certain, that however the
words of foedus pactum, in Latin, (...) in Greek, covenant in English be used,
the Hebrew Berith, and the Greek (...), used in the Old and New Testament, do
not always import a mutual contract and mutual performances. God is said to
establish a Covenant with all living, Genesis 9. 9, 10. between whom and God,
there neither is, nor can be a mutual contract and performance. And the term
rendered covenant, is not only rendered Testament; but also the holy Writers do
illustrate the New covenant, rather by the metaphor of a Testament, then of a
covenant, 1 Corinthians. 11. 25. Gal. 3. 15. Heb. 9. 16, 17. and where the Promises
are set down without any reciprocal contract or duty expressed, Heb. 8. 10, 11,
12. and 10. 16, 17. Romans 11. 26, 27.

This argument, is against all being of covenants, as well as the
conditionality of them, as indeed, if conditions be denied, all being of a
covenant is destroyed, and therefore it might have been well brought in, where
the covenant it self was asserted, as militating against the very being of it.
But it cannot conveniently be held out in both places, and therefore it must be
considered here, and for answer, let us first take what is granted, that
usually in covenants there is a mutual contract, and that these words, Latin,
and Greek, be used to imply such covenants, in which there are mutual
contracts, and mutual performances, and to which persons are engaged on both
sides; and then let us examine what is affirmed concerning those two words,
Berith and (...), for the contrary.

And for the first, who does not know, that the word is sometimes used for a
covenant improperly so called? A bare command, Jer. 34. 13. A bare Seal, Genesis
17. 10. is (as we have heard) called a covenant. And, so a bare promise here in
the place quoted is called a covenant likewise; Not that beasts and birds can
covenant, but they shall be as secure from the judgment there mentioned, as
though there had past a mutual contract in the strongest engagements, Eliphaz
showing the privileges of the godly, says; Job 5. 23. They shall be in league
with the stones of the field, the same word is in both places; shall we now
say, that a league or covenant is no act of reason, because man is in league
and covenant with stones, which are unreasonable creatures? or rather shall we
say with Master Caryl in his Exposition, To be in League with stones is an
improper and allusive speech, stones are not capable of the formalities of a
League? So we say, for God to make a covenant with unreasonable creatures, with
beasts, birds, and creeping things, is an improper and allusive speech
likewise. Birds, Beasts, and creeping things are in an incapacity of covenant.
Gomarus handling that question of Universal Redemption in his Comment on Gal.
1. (a Patron of the Lutherans, as he calls him, disputing for it from the form
of the covenant of Grace as that Disputant styles it, Genesis 3. 17. where the
seed of the woman is promised to break the Serpents head, Antecedens falsa
^ititur hypothesi, qu^si verbis illis formula foederis gratiae contineretur. --
Contra vero foedus proprie obligation^^ dua^um partium certis utrinque
conditionibus complecti certum est, qualem hoc loco extare probare non potest:
ideoque nec foedus proprie est.
) denies that those words contain the form of a covenant; because it is
certain (as he says) that a Covenant properly so called, contains an
obligation of two parties, with conditions on both sides; which cannot be
proved (says he) in those words, and therefore it is not a covenant properly
so called. From which learned hand we see 1. That a covenant properly so called
is of two parties. 2. That both parts have their conditions. 3. That there is a
covenant between God and man properly so called, in which God and man are both
obliged. 4. That no Scripture-expression holds out this covenant* that holds
not out these conditions.

This is the proper acception for which we contend, and improper acceptions as
they do not hold forth the nature of a covenant, so we confess they do not
imply mutual contracts, or mutual performances. So that the Argument is brought
to this, A covenant sometimes in an improper sense is said to be made with
those that cannot make mutual contracts; therefore a covenant is no mutal
contract, nor has any mutual engagements. We might as well argue, that because
a stone is called a witness, Josh. 24. 27. a heap of stones is so called, Genesis
31. 48. ( which have neither eyes, nor ears, to see or hear, what is done or
said, nor yet a tongue to utter it) therefore there is no use of eyes, or ears,
or of a tongue, in any one that is brought for a witness. As the Hebrew word
Berith is improperly used, or at least used in a sense, more large then to
denote a covenant, wheresoever it does not hold out an agreement of two parties
with engagements on both hands. So the word (...), whenever it is used in
that sense, seems to be taken improperly, Seeing in its received signification
(according to good Interpreters) it does denote not a covenant, but a man's last
Will and Testament, which never is of force, but by the death of the Testator,
Heb. 9. 16, 17. which is not true of a Covenanter, his death is not required to
make the covenant valid. Testamentum Grace (...) sumitur,

1. Proprie, pro suprema animi seu voluntatis nostrae (...) de eo, quod post
mortem nostram fieri cupimus, sic Testamentum morte testatoris ratum est,
nondum enim valet cum (...) testator.

2 Improprie, pr^ paectione (...) foedere, quod viventes inter seiuire solent.


So Ravanellus, Testament ( says he) in Greek (...) is taken, 1. Properly, for
the declaration of a man's Will concerning that which he would have done after
his death, and is ratified by the death of the Testator; for it is not of force
while the Testator lives, Heb. 9. 16, 17. 2. Improperly, for a covenant, which
living men enter among themselves. Rivet, also Exercit. 103. in Genesis speaking
of those words of the Apostle, Gal. 4. 24. These are two Testaments. Nomen
Testamenti, sumi non debet i^ proprie (...), pro eo quod fit ab (...) sed pro
foedere, (...), ut been animadvertis Pererius.
Testament there ( he says) is not to be taken, in a proper signification for
that which is done by a dying man, and ratified by his death, but, for a
covenant-agreement, or order as Pererius has well observed. Alsted in his
Lexicon Theologicum having spoken to the sense in which translatours of the
Bible sometimes use it, as the same with (...), resolves, Aliquid dandum est
consuetudini. Testamentum proprie justam voluntatis (...), de eo, quod quis
post mortem de (...) suis fieri velit, Graeci proprie (...) vocant.
We must yield somewhat to custom. After says. Testament properly signifies a
just declaration of a man's Will, concerning that which he would have done with
his goods after his death. The Greeks properly call it (...). Estius is very
Quamvi^ enim (...), si vocis e^ymo^ attendas, non plus sonet quam dispositionem
and apud authors Graecos, Baeudaeo test in commentariis Gracae linguae,
significet in genere pactum, conventum, pollicitationem: consta^ tamen vulgarem
and (...) ejus significationem esse, qua denotes idem quod apud Latinos
Testamentum, id est, voluntatis decretum, de co quod quis post mortem sua^fier^
velit.
full, setting out the Original denotation of the word, together with the
received signification of it. For though (...) ( says he) if you look to the
Etymology of the word, holds out no more then a disposing, and with Greek
Authors (as Budaeus witnesses in his Comme^t on the Greek tongue), signifies
in general a covenant-agreement or promise; yet the common and most received
signification is the same, as Testamentum in the Latin, which is the
declaration of a man's Will concerning that whith he would have done after his
death. The Apostles Application of a Testament properly so called to the
covenant of God, Heb. 9. 16, 17. has troubled many Interpreters. Erasmus on
this acount questions the Authors skill in the Hebrew tongue, and Cajetan calls
into question the authority of the Epistle. Most conclude from hence, that the
Original of the Epistle was Greek, in that there is not Hebrew words to hold
out such expressions, and the Syriack translator was put to it, to keep the
Greek word, and put it into a Syriack Character. For the clearing of this
doubt, it is not enough to say, that these words are sometimes promi^^uously
used. Berith for a Testament, (...) for a Covenant, as Camerarius notes out of
Aristophanes, a Greek Poet, as Rivet observes, Seeing the Apostle applies a
[Testament] in the proper received sense to that which signifies a mutual
agreement. For the salving of which Estius reckons up several opinions which he
rejects, some of which, others of good note follow, and afterward acquaints
the Reader with his own thoughts, in words drawn out to such a length, that I
shall refer the Reader (if he please) to the Author himself. Dixon on the
words, says, The Articles of the covenant also evince it to be a Testament,
and the promiser bound to make his word good, and so to die. For Jer. 31. The
Lord Christ promises to reconcile his people to God, to take away their
sins, and to be their God. Justice required satisfaction of them before they
could be reconciled, satisfaction they could not make themselves, therefore he
who promised to make the reconciliation with God, was found to make the
satisfaction for them to God: and if satisfaction for them, then to under-lie
the curse of the Law for them, and so to die. Foedus N. T. and foedus est,
(quia est mutuum inter Deum, and homines salutis promissae, and obedientiae
fidei ab hominibus debitae pactum) and simul Testamentum est; quia hoc foedus
promissa filii Dei morte, and per eam haereditate crelesti a Deo sancitum est:
adeo ut non i^^merio ut foedus Testamentarium, and Testamentum foederis ob
concursum utriusque queat appellari. Inde constat simpliciter quidem esse
foedus, ratione pacti mutui Dei and fidelium, sed secundum quid esse
Testamentum, ratione modi, partis ac potioris in foedere nempe promissionis
gratiae, qua Deus nobis promittit se fore Deum nostrum propitium and vitam
aeternam daturum tanquam haeredita^em, merito obedicntiae mortis Filii sui.
Gomarus says, The covenant of the New Testament, is both a covenant and a
Testament. It is a covenant because it is an agreement between God and man
concerning salvation promised, and faith owing by man: And a Testament, because
it is established upon the promised death of the Son of God, and an heavenly
inheritance by it, so that it may not unworthily be called a Testamentary
covenant, or a Testament-covenant, by reason of the concurrence of both in one.
And after concludes, Simply it is a covenant by reason of the mutual agreement
between God and believers; Respectively a Testament, by reason of the way, and
manner of the chief and most eminent part in the covenant, that is the promise
of grace, whereby God promises to be our God propitious to us, and to give us
everlasting life, as an inheritance by the death of his Son.

Circumscriptionem hujus nominis ex typis atque umbraculis legis demonstrat
paulo pust, ver. 15. and sequentibus Apostolus. Cum omnino statuit, Dei gratiam
eo luculentiorem heminibus explicatam esse: quod suis non foedus, sed
Testamentum dederit: Quia foedus conditiones mutuas fuisset habiturum, quas si
altera pars non praestet, foedus est irritum: Testamentum vero, liberalitatis
and gratiae citra ullam conditionem instrumentum est, ex quo hoeredes vocantur
and instituu^tur citra contemplationem ullius officii quod ab ipsis proficisci
possit*
Junius in his parallels undertaking to give satisfaction, has a remedy (with
me) worse then the disease, though learned Mr. Grayle endeavors his
Vindication. After a large discourse in what latitude the word Berith is taken:
The Apostle (he says) shows the limitation of it out of the Types and shadows
of the Law in the fifteenth, and following verses when he shows that the grace
of God, was herein more eminent and conspicuous, in that he gave unto his, not
a covenant, but a Testament, giving in his reasons; because a covenant must
have contained mutual conditions, which if either part did not perform, the
covenant were void; but a Testament is an instrument of liberality and bounty,
by which men are called and made heirs without eying of any duty that is to be
done by them. Here by the way we see that in case it be a covenant (according
to him) it has mutual conditions, and therefore he is (together with
Ravanellus, Gomarus, Vrsinus before quoted, to whom may be added Peter Martyr
on Judge. 2. giving the like definition) wholly against those who make this
inference; That it cannot be proved to be of the general nature of covenants,
that there should be such a convertibility, as that both must seal or contract
or perform. But for his position that God has not given a covenant to his
people, I wonder how it slipped from him; Such unwary expressions (in a seeming
tendency to advance grace from pious persons) have made way for strange
superstructions. He might have said, that those Types and Shadows of the Law,
did argue it to be more then a bare and common covenant, being ratified by
blood, which led to the blood of the Mediator. And so Rivet (as I understand
him) answers, Non hoc voluit Paulus in Epistola ad Hebraeos, cap. 9. ex
simplici vocis significatione arguere, sed ex ipsius foederis circumstantiis.
Paul in his Epistle to the Hebr. (says he) chap. 9. does not argue from the
simple signification of the word, but from the circumstances of the covenant.
But his denying it to be a covenant, is that which I must oppose. He is large
indeed to show in what latitude the word Berith in some Old Testament Texts is
used, as also the Latin word Foedus in profane Authors; All of which, shows
no more but that the word in the exact denotation and largest sense of it
imports no more then an ordination or disposition, yet that hinders not, but
that as, Interpreters generally render it, so, the received and accustomed use
of it, is, to hold out a covenant, bargain, or agreement. As the word (...),
in its largest sense, comprizes any Assembly, even for civil uses, Acts 19. 39.
yea, rude congregated routs, verse 41. yet in the generally received sense, it
is taken for holy Assemblies; So, it is with Berith; the word may admit of a
large sense, but the received sense is with more restriction. The Jews had
their covenants, man with man, Abraham with Abimelech, Genesis 21. 72. Isaac with
Abimelech, Genesis 26. 28. Laban with Jacob, Genesis 31. 44. And this was the word
whereby they did express their covenants, And as, the word Church is sometimes
used improperly, for Church Members that make not up a whole Church, The Church
in Aquila and Priscilla 's house, Romans 16. 5. Sometimes for Church Officers,
Matthew. 18. 17. Tell it to the Church, who could not be the whole Church whereof
infants are a part, or (as all must confess) women, who yet are no competent
judges: so, there are improper acceptions of the word covenant, when the proper
sense is that, which has been held out, which is a mutual compact or agreement
on terms and Propositions. The learned observe that (...) properly answers to
the word Berith; Ravanellus observes out of Hierome, that Aquila and Symmachus,
did so translate it; and Rivet on Genes. Exercit. 135. says, Quod Lxx. and
Theodotio (...) dixerunt Symmachus (...), hoc est pactum, vel foedus vertit,
quae est propria significatio Hebraicae vocis Berith. Quae vox non legitur in
V. T^ pro dispositione Testamentaria.
That which the Septuagint and Theodotio call (...), that, Symmachus translates
(...), pactum, foedus, which (says he) is the proper signification of the
Hebrew word Berith, which word is not read in the Old Testament, for the
ordering of a man's Will or Testament. Now it is not denied, but the word foedus
and pactum in Latin, (...) in Greek, covenant in English, do signify mutual
contracts, in which there are mutual performances; and so the Hebrew word
Berith in like manner; this being according to the learned the genuine
signification of it. And if this were not the received signification of it, how
did the Objection before mentioned ever come into any man's head, that the
Apostle did bewray ignorance in the Scripture-use of the word, in applying it
to a man's Will or Testament, and what needed so much pains for his defense in
it? Hierome on those words, Gal 3. 17. This I say, that the Testament confirmed
of God, says, If any compare the Hebrew volumes and other Editions with the
translation of the Septuagint, he shall find, that, where Testament is written,
it does not signify a Testament, but a Covenant, which in the Hebrew tongue is
called Berith. And in case Gods whole dispensations and Gospel-communications
(as Junius would have it) be a Testament only, and no covenant; why is the
world so abused with the word foedus, pactum in Latin, covenant in English? By
which all men understand that which we call a covenant, no man understands a
Testament; why do we say covenant of Works, covenant of grace, if the former
only were a covenant properly, and the other a Testament? as though we should
call, an Eagle, and a Lion both by the common name of a bird, persuading that a
Lion were a bird, as well as an Eagle? yet if it were a Testament properly so
called, it would not overthrow the conditionality, as Mr. Grayl out of Swynborn
shows. Testaments have their conditions, How comes it to pass that Scripture
holds out so frequently that similitude of a marriage, Is. 54. 5. Hos. 2. 19. 2
Cor. 11. 2. Ephesians. 5. 32. to set out this transaction? A marriage contract is not
a man's Testament: has a wife barely a Legacy, and does she enter no covenant
with her husband? How comes it to pass that turning aside from God, after
other lovers, is called in Scripture by the name of whoredoms, adulteries,
which is the breach of a marriage-covenant? and how is sin against God, called
a dealing falsely with God? we cannot deal falsely in the covenant, if it be
not a covenant, but a Testament; men may carry themselves unthankfully, but
falsehood argues an engagement. How is it that we find, in Old and New
Testament-Scriptures, mutual engagements, between God and his people; of God
to them, of them to him, in case God has vouchsafed them a Legacy by
Testament, in the death of his Son, and left them out of covenant? And how is
that, without Covenant, without Christ, without God, without Hope, with the
Apostle are one and the same, when yet all people that have hope in Christ are
out of covenant? There be that say, The holy Writers do illustrate the New
covenant, rather by the Metaphor of a Testament, then a covenant. These seem
to make it neither a Covenant nor a Testament. Every one knows that a Metaphor
is a figure, whereby a word is carried out of its proper signification into
some other that carries resemblance with it. In case there be a metaphor in
that expression, then it is not proper, but borrowed; But as I believe that
Abraham spoke not by a Metaphor to God, when he said, Genesis 18. 25. Shall not
the Judge of all the world do right? God absolving and and condemning the sons
of men, giving rewards, and inflicting penalties, is a Judge properly so
called; so I do not think that God spoke in any Metaphor to Abraham, when in
the chapter before, Genesis 17. 7. he says, I will establish my covenant between
me and thee, and thy seed after thee. God is a Judge of all the earth, properly
so called, and he has entered a covenant with his people, properly so called
likewise. It is true, that we understand, that relation of God to his people,
more clearly by the Analogy that it bears to Judges, that are set up among men,
for absolution of the innocent, and condemning of the guilty, And so we are
helped in our understandings of the covenant of God entered with his people, by
Analogy with the covenants, that are among men; but, in neither of both of
these, is the word taken out of its proper sense, and applied to any other,
that it will not properly bear. I find indeed an eminent Divine affirming,
That a covenant is not so properly said, to be with God and man, as between man
and man, not denying the duty, which man owes to God, nor the engagement by
which he is obliged, but freely yielding both; and sticking only at the consent
on man's part, which among men (he says) is requisite, and does mutually concur
to make the covenant valid. But neither in the covenant of nature, or grace, is
this consent anteceding the validity of the covenant required in man. This I
confess I am not able to reach. Nothing with me is more plain, then that,
consent is pre-required in both these covenants: Adam, I confess, (as it is
objected) was bound to consent, yea, I will yield more, that it is no more
possible to conceive Adam to deny consent, then the Sun to be without light;
seeing in his natural motion he was carried in that way of full conformity to
God, that the Sun may as well be dark, as Adam averse from the will or tender
of God; yet if we could conceive a dark Sun; it could not be a light to rule
the day; so if we could conceive Adam denying consent to God, in the tender of
covenant, Adam had not been in covenant. For fallen man it is clear; what held
the Pharisees out of the New covenant, but their non-consent? rejecting the
counsel of God against themselves, Luk 7. 30. as also those Jews, Act. 13. who
contradicting and blaspheming, judged themselves unworthy of eternal life.

The covenant was tendered to all those Gentile Nations, and Cities where the
Gospel was preached, and all were bound to yield assent, but where there was
assent of faith, there the covenant was entered; where assent is denied, there
they remained, strangers from the covenants of promise; in the same way of
Gentilisme, as though the Gospel had never been tendered, or the Name of Christ
held forth. So that these things considered, I doubt not but I have made it
appear, That there is a mutual contract, and mutual performances to which
persons are engaged, not only usually in covenants, but in all covenants. And
that it is of the general nature of covenants, that there should be such a
convertibility, as that both must, if not seal, (some contracts are without
seals) yet contract, or perform, and where a seal is vouchsafed, must accept
of it: and that the definition of the covenant in the general is vindicated,
That God has entered a covenant properly so called, with man, with fallen man,
in which there is a contract of this nature, and engagements to mutual
performances, God condescending to it of grace, and man obliged to it by duty,
yet accepting voluntarily. Which (as the former) might be confirmed by the
authority of Divines of eminency. Mr. Ball speaking of the covenant of God in
the general entered with man, says, It may be thus described. A mutual compact
or agreement betwixt God and man, whereby God promises all good things,
specially eternal happiness unto man, upon just, equal, and favorable
conditions: and man does promise to walk before God in all acceptable, free,
and willing obedience, expecting all good from God, and happiness in God,
according to his promise, for the praise and glory of his great Name. And Vrsin
in his Catechism, page 91. defining a covenant in the general nature of it as
before, he says, it is Foedus Dei est mutua pactio inter Deum and homines, qua
Deus confirmat hominibus se futurum eis propitium, remissurum peccata,
donaturum justitiam novam, Spiritum Sanctum, and vitam aeternam per and propter
Filium Mediatorem; vicissim homines se obligant Deo ad fidem and poenetentiam,
hoc est, ad recepiendum vera fide hoc tantum beneficium, and ad praestandam Deo
veram obedientiam.
A mutual agreement between God and man, whereby God confirms to man that he
will be merciful, forgive their sins, give them a new righteousness, his
holy Spirit and everlasting life, in and by his son the Mediator: In like
manner men tie themselves to God for faith and repentance, that is, by a lively
faith to receive this mercy alone, and to yield true obedience to God. And
Lucas Trelcatius in loco de foedere thus defines it. Foedus est pactum Dei cum
homine, de foelicitate aeterna, certa condition ci communicanda ad Dei
gloriam. Pactum cum dicimus, intelligimus mutuam Dei and hominis obligationem,
ex stipulatione intervenientem, ut utrimque reddatur quod promissum est. Duae
ergo sunt parts foederis. 1. Promissio Dei de vita aeterna. 2. Obligatio
hominis ad observationem conditionis a Deo praescriptae. Prima est libera;
secunda est necessaria.
The covenant is an agreement to God with man, concerning eternal happiness to
be communicated to man, upon a certain condition, to the glory of God. And then
explaining himself he says, When we say an agreement, we understand a mutual
obligation of God and man, by a stipulation intervening, that what is promised
on both parts, may be performed. And farther says, There are two parties of
the covenant. 1. The promise of God concerning everlasting life. 2. The
obligation of man for performance of the condition prescribed of God; the first
is free, the second is necessary. And in conclusion, such a bottom I believe
is laid in the Introduction, that will bear the whole fabric that follows
after. Junius and Gomarus, are as opposite as may be, one to the other in this
dispute about the covenant, as may be seen in the Appendix to the first
chapter: But they both agree in this, that every covenant of necessity is to
have mutual engagements and performances. Gomarus denies that the promise, Genesis
3. 15. contains the covenant of grace, because no conditions are there
mentioned. And Junius to avoid conditions, denies that there is any such thing
as a covenant between God and man, for if it were a covenant, he says it must
have conditions. Therefore according to them both, if we grant a covenant, we
must grant conditions, and the full nature of the covenant, is in no Scripture
laid down, where we have not these engagements, or conditions, laid down
likewise. Some think to reconcile all this by the various acception of the
word. Sometimes it is soused in Scripture, that the free promise of God is
thereby signified, and the restipulation of our duty withit, God requiring man
to engage by covenant to that which he might require, did there no promise
intervene; yet sometimes in Scripture, covenant does signify the absolute
promise of God, without any restipulation, and of this kind is that covenant
in which God promises to give to his elect faith and perseverance, to which
promise there cannot be conceived any condition to be annexed, which is not
comprehended in the promise it self. So Learned Camero de triplici foedere,
These. 1. 2. For this absolute covenant here spoke to, I desire the Reader to
observe what the same learned Author has farther in his third Thesis. This
distinction of the Covenant, does depend upon the distinction of the love of
God; for there is a love of God to the Creature, from whence every thing that
is good in the creature has wholly flowed; and there is the acquiescent love
of God in the creature, and this the creature has received, not for any thing
from it self, but from God, as it was loved with that first love of God: that
love, for better understanding, we call Gods primary or antecedent; this Gods
secondary or consequent love: from that we say, does depend both the paction,
and fulfilling of the absolute covenant, from this depends the fulfilling of
that covenant; to which is annexed a restipulation, not so the paction, for
that we say depends on the first love. This antecedent love is wont to be
called Amor benevolentiae, which can be no more then a purpose or resolution in
God for good to man. The second is wont to be called Amor complacentiae, a love
of delight, or content. How the former can be a covenant, or any covenant
properly so called depend upon it, as preceding the latter, I do not see.

First, this goes before the giving of Christ; the gift of Christ is an effect
of it, Joh. 3. 16. Now God covenants not with man, without the Mediator as
Camero himself acknowledges; and therefore this that precedes, can be no
covenant made.

Secondly, a covenant plainly argues an agreement, at least in tender from one,
and professed acceptance from the other party. A covenant of parties at a
distance, either party holding his distance, respective to that where the
distance is held, is the greatest absurdity. Now in this absolute covenant (as
it is called) there is not so much as a tender from God, much less an
acceptance from man, and so, as yet a distance held, and therefore no covenant
or agreement.

Thirdly, this supposed absolute covenant, Jer. 31, 33. Heb. 8. 10. has
mercies of two sorts; graces, privileges; And though men contend that the
promise of grace is absolute, seeing there is nothing pre-required of us, for
the writing of this Law in our hearts, yet the privilege of remission of sins
has its conditions, Act. 10. 43. Act. 13. 38, 39. Act. 3. 19.

Fourthly, none can claim any interest in, or take any comfort from, this
absolute covenant, depending on the antecedent love of God, preceding the
conditional covenant, depending on the consequent love of God: before he has
entered the second which is conditional, and performed the conditions, and
knows that he has performed them. This is clear, it is made, all say, with the
Elect; now none can claim his interest till he knows his Election, which is
made sure only, by our says, and new obedience, by the knowledge that we have
of our faith and new obedience. But it is enough to me that a covenant
comprizing a restipulation of our duty, is here confessed, which is the Gospel
way to salvation, without which, the acquiescent love of God is not attained.
As to that Text, Heb. 8. 10. the Reader may see more elsewhere.

CHAP. IX.
Further Objections against the former doctrine Answered.
THe covenant of grace entered with fallen man ( says one) is called an
everlasting covenant, Further obctions against the conditionality of the
Covenant answered.
and Heb. 8. 12. God says, I will be merciful to your iniquities, and your
sins will I remember no more. Now suppose there were conditions for man to
perform, and man did fail in those conditions, what were become of the
covenant?

Ans. The conditions failing of the covenant is broke, the everlasting covenant
is broke, which though it seem a contradiction to some, yet it is not so to
the Prophet, Is. 24. 5. They have transgressed the Law, changed the Ordinances,
and broken the everlasting Covenant. It is said to be everlasting, because it
shall not be antiquated for another to succeed it, or at least that man is not
to put a period to it, so Circumcision and the Passover are Ordinances for
ever, not that non-entring into it never break or transgress it; The Elect of
God Regenerate, do indeed keep covenant; so do not all that enter into it.
There are frequent Scripture-complaints of Breach of covenant.

Secondly, It is said, Man has no tie upon him, to perform any thing
whatsoever with covenant, as, a condition that must be observed on his part,
let the covenant it self be judge in this case; mark it in Jeremy, Ezekiel, or
in Heb. 8.

Answ. In those Texts there are graces mentioned; as Gods work on the soul,
and privileges promised to be enjoyed. Whatsoever is there set forth, as Gods
work upon the soul, is also required of man as duty, namely to be renewed in the
spirit of his mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. To make him a new heart, and a new spirit,
Ezekiel. 18. 31. That the Word of Christ dwell in him richly in all wisdom, Col.
3. 16. It will be hard for any to point out a promise of this nature, but it
may be answered with a command, as an obligation unto duty; As the precepts
must not thrust out the promise, nor duty shoulder out free grace, So, the
promise must not destroy the precept; In that of Jeremy, conditions on man's
part are included, so as by the assistance of grace to be performed. The tie
lies upon us, on pain of loss of all that the covenant promises, and bearing
all that-it threatens.

Thirdly, Suppose ( says one) there should be a fault, of performing in this
Covenant, whose were the fault?

Answ. The fault is his; who is chidden in Scripture, and beaten for it, namely
those that did flatter God with their mouth, and lied unto him with their
tongues, whose heart was not right with him, nor were sledfast in his covenant,
Ps. 78. 36, 37. They, upon whom he will bring a sword to avenge the quarrel of
his covenant, Lev. 26. 25. are in the fault.

Fourthly, if there be conditions, then the covenant is not free, gifts must be
of absolute grace and bounty, if a condition be required, the freedom of the
gift is destroyed.

Answ. This is true of such conditions, where there is merit in the condition,
whereby benefit accrues to him, that engages by promise, holding proportion
with the reward; But, here is nothing indented by way of covenant, but that
homage which is naturally due, which God may challenge from us as creatures;
without either engagement unto, or exhibition of any reward at all for their
pains, and what he may require without reward, when he covenants for it, the
reward is free. If Abraham had made Eliezer of Damascus his heir, upon his
faithful service, the inheritance had yet been a free gift, and of grace
conferred upon him. Make the Proposition universal, All conditions in promises
destroy the nature of a gift in the thing promised, and then it is to be
denied, A covenant of grace would then be a contradiction, seeing it is no
covenant, (as has been demonstrated) without a condition. Then the Prophet
does contradict himself in the tender of a covenant, in the most free manner as
is possible, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Ho, every one that thirsts, etc. even their
conditions are required; Incline your ear, and come unto me, Hear and your soul
shall live; Let the wicked for sake his way, the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and unto our
God, for he will abundantly pardon, Here are free promises with conditions;
Men, who have not that sovereignty, account their gifts free, and yet require
conditions from them on whom they are conferred. An Almshouse is founded, and
endowed with revenue, conditions are put upon the Almes-people, to reside in
such an house assigned, to wear clothes of the color and form prescribed, or
whatsoever else the Founder please, and yet the gift is free. Finally, God
cannot covenant with man, and keep up his sovereignty, if we leave out
obedience in the Articles of the covenant. The covenant is upon equal terms,
if subjection be excluded; to be a God in covenant, and not require subjection,
is the highest of contradictions.

A Learned Writer, after a large discourse held of the right that Redeemed ones
have to the death of Christ before believing, says, Here may be observed the
mistake of those, who wind up the merit of Christ, as affecting God (as I may
so speak;) unto a conditional engagement, viz. that we shall be made partakers
of the fruits of it, upon such and such conditions to be by us fulfilled* It
will be worth our labor to enquire what is meant by the conditional
engagement, unto which he says some wind up the merit of Christ, as affecting
God with it; does he mean such conditions, that as causes or impulsive motives
take with God to enter such engagement? If this be the meaning, I shall freely
yield that there is no such conditional covenant, that there is no such
condition in any Covenant of God with man. In this sense Master Culverwell in
his Treatise of Faith, page 143. takes it, Having mentioned several conditional
promises, (in which faith is expressly required, and such wherein it is
necessarily understood) he says, In all which, faith is necessarily
understood, for the obtaining of the benefit promised. But yet in all these,
faith, is no condition properly so called, moving God to promise life. But
taking it, in this restrained sense, as moving God to promise life, he much
mistakes himself, where he says, That it confounds the Law and the Gospel,
taking away a chief difference between the covenant of works and the covenant
of grace, page 141. Seeing there was no condition, thus understood in the
covenant of works; There was not any such good, accruing to God by any thing
that Adam was to do, that upon it, or for it, God should make the promise of
life. God has no motives out of himself, to confer his rewards, Conditions
taken in such a sense; will make the covenant of grace, and the covenant of
works all unconditional. But taking the word [condition] in the sense, as, it
is in ordinary use, and as it properly signifies, for duty in covenant
indented, agreed upon, and assented to, on performance, or neglect of which,
the promise stands or falls, it is plain that there are such conditions in both
covenants, equally, in one as the other. The necessity of the concurrence of
grace to the work of faith, will as soon make it no duty as no condition, and
many denying the one, have learnt to deny either of both, as well duties, as
conditions. Mr. Culverwel therefore consesseth, that, faith in some sort may be
called a condition, because the promise of life is made to persons qualified
with faith, page 143. and this conditional promise well understood (says he)
page 141. may be born. And if understood, with such a restraint as the word
will not suffer (we confess) Christians must not acknowledge it. This being
premised, let us look into the reasons brought to back the former assertion.

First, All such conditions, if spiritual blessings, are part of the purchase
of the death of Christ, and if not, are no way fit to be conditions of such an
attainment.

Answ. They are so parts of his purchase, that they are also our act, The act
of man by the power of God; God gives faith and gives repentance, yet we
believe and we repent, we may as easily reconcile Christ's purchase, with the
nature of a condition, as Gods free gift of grace with our duty, If the gift
were of grace and no duty required, then there were force in the argument. This
ridgidly followed, will disingage man from all obedience to God, seeing all
power to obey, is part of the purchase of Christ.

Secondly, It cannot be made apparent, how any such conditional stipulation can
be ascribed to God.

Answ. We find such a one in Scripture ascribed to God, no condition can in
more plain terms be held our. In case we cannot see how it can be, it were
safer to lay our hands on our mouths; and acknowledge our weakness, then to
withstand so clear evidence. He is pleased to give his Reasons.

First, says he, It leaves no proper place for he merit of Christ.

Answ. This reason I can by no means reach. Christ may merit, and upon what
terms he pleases, confer what he has merited; Duty in us excludes merit in
Christ, as well as conditions imposed upon u^. See Ball on the covenant, page
133.

Secondly, It is very improperly ascribed to God, etc. Stipulation, or
engagements upon conditions, that are properly so, do suppose him that makes
the engagement, to be altogether uncertain of the event thereof, for which the
authority of Lawyers is quoted.

If conditions among men be of such uncertainty, it does not thence follow,
that it is so in those conditions which God imposes, on performance of which he
conferres the mercies which he gives in promise. If there be so much difference
between moral hope, and that Christian grace which is wrought by the Spirit,
that the one is only possible, conjectural, uncertain and doubtful, the other
assured and never failing; The one often ending in shame, The other never
making ashamed; Then there may be a like difference in the conditions assigned
by man, and those assigned by God, Men may be still uncertain, yet God may be
assured, the event being not left to contingency or the freedom of man's will,
(which is supposed to stand in aequilibrio,) but determined by the act of grace
which is not hid from him, whose hand works it in the hearts of his people.
This might seem to carry far rather force against all conditions in the first
covenant, which is yet granted to be conditional, which for performance was
merely suspended on man's will, but has no color against the conditions of the
second covenant, which God works of grace as he requires of sovereignty.

One is pleased to say, Surely they are wide (if not very wild) who affirm
that all the stipulations on the part of God, upon the death of Christ are upon
a condition, which himself knows to be impossible for them to perform, to whom
they are made, which among Wise men are always accounted nugatory and null. And
may not the like be said of exhortations, promises, threats, commands? God as
well knows our disability to answer these, as to fulfill conditions, yet they
are neither wide, nor wild, that acknowledge such exhortations, promises,
threats, commands, without abilities in fallen man to answer them, farther then
the concurrence of grace that is in Christ Jesus strengthens them; There are
many more Objections raised by others which the Reader may see brought in, by
Mr. Grayl and Mr. Woodbridge, and fully answered.

CHAP. X.
God in the days of the Gospel keeps up the power and authority of his Law,
The obligation of it is still in force to bind the consciences of believers.
THe last Position that I shall premise, is, That God in his entry of covenant
with man in sin, does so manifest his free grace, that he still keeps up his
Sovereignty; so exalts mercy, that he loses nothing of his rule and authority;
His chief aim is to exalt the glory of his free grace, and to set out the
riches of his great mercy, that so noble a species, as that of mankind might
not for ever perish, yet he quits not man of his subjection and obedience. When
the Angels fell, some stood, (whether the fallen or persevering number be
greater, cannot be determined) but when man fell, mankind wholly was lost, and
unless grace save, must everlastingly perish. As some, with the lost Angels
must be objects on whom God will glorify his justice, Matthew. 25. 41. So
others, must be vessels of mercy, on whom his free grace shall be seen, to make
them as the Angels of heaven. Therefore love is assigned as the alone impulsory
motive; God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, John 3.
16. God who is rich in mercy, according to the great love, wherewith he loved
us, when we were dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 5. Of this, Man's fall by sin was no
disobligation to obedience.
all that expect to be saved by grace, must be tender, that it be not obscured;
Gods design being to advance it, our care must be that it be not lessened. In
this exercise of free grace, God yet keeps up authority and rule, power and
dominion still is his. Man was made of God subject to a Law and under dominion,
having the law written in his heart from the Creation, and he was not divested
of it by Adams fall, nor yet delivered from it by Christ's Redemption. Corvinus
indeed in his Reply to Moulin (cap. 8. sect. 7.) says, Cum itaque homo jaceret
sub maledictione, ad obedientiam amplius non obligabatur quia coli ab eo Deus
ampliu^ non volebat.
That men under an obligation to punishment are not under any obligation to
obedience. God will not be served by that man that has violated his Covenant,
giving his reason of this assertion, To Nam quod coli a creature sua De^^ vult
fav^r^is est.
be admitted to serve is a to token of favor, which is not vouchsafed (as he
says) to menunder guilt and wrath. But this is a manifest error, Man's guilt
can never rob God of his Sovereignty, nor yet disingage man from his duty,
Standing right with God, he is bound to homage; Under guilt, he is bound both
to homage and punishment; and to be admitted to serve is not merely of favor,
but of dominion and power. It was no great favor, that Israel in Egypt found,
in the service of Pharaoh; to serve with acceptance is indeed a favor; but
necessity, and duty ties all that are under Sovereignty. As man fallen, in
right is a subject, though in his demeanor a rebel; So in his regenerate
estate still he ows subjection. When God became a Savior to the Elect of
mankind, he did not cease to be a Sovereigne. The children of a King and
Emperor know their father to be their Sovereign, as by one is well observed.
The child of God knows God in Christ to be his Lord; We are redeemed not to
licentiousness, not to a state of manumission from the command of God, but to
serve in righteousness and true holiness all the days of our life, Luke 1.
74. It can be no part of our Christian freedom to be from under the
Sovereignty of heaven. The Sovereignty of God is held up.
This Sovereignty of God is two ways held forth unto us. First, in keeping up
his commandments, the power and vigor of his precepts. Secondly, 1. In keeping
up his commandments.
in his exercise of discipline in chastisement, and correction. Here I shall
assert three things; First, God in the days of the Gospel, keeps up the power
and authority of his Law; the Obligation of it is still in force to bind the
consciences of believers. Secondly, That this Law which God thus keeps up in
force, is a perfect and complete rule to those to whom it is given. Thirdly,
That this Law binds, as given by the hand of Moses. As to the first, when I
speak thus, of the Obligation of the Law, I hope I scarce need to tell in what
sense; I do take the Law, Not in the largest sense, for any doctrine,
instruction, or Ordinance of any kind whatsoever, Men have their Laws and
Directories: but I have to deal with the Law of God: Neither do I take it for
the whole of the Word of God, all his will revealed in his Word, as it is
taken, Isa. 2. 3. The Law shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Nor yet as it is taken for all the Scripture of the Old Testament,
as in that Text of the Apostle, In the Law it is written by men of other
tongues, and by other languages I will speak to this people, 1 Cor. 14. 21. Nor
yet for the five books of Moses, as it is taken in the words of Christ, All
must be fulfilled that was written in the Law of Moses, Luke 24. 44. Neither do
I here understand the Ceremonial Law, which stood up as a partition between Jew
and Gentile, Ephesians. 2. 14. All that did bind the Jews, and was not of force
from God with the Gentiles, is taken off from Christians; There was a
confession of guilt; a beast needed not to have been slain, if they had been
innocent; this held them under hopes that there was sacrifice to take away
sin, imposed on the Jews till the time of reformation, Heb. 9. 10. as an
Appendix to the first Table; fitted to the Jews state and condition, as a
shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10. 1. Nor yet the judicial Law, given to
order the Commonwealth or State of that people, farther then so much of it, as
was of nature, and then did bind the Gentiles. It is the Moral-Law that I
mean, that Law which was obligatory, not only to the Jews, but Gentiles, for
breach of which they suffered, Levit. 18. 27, 28. Neither do I understand the
Moral Law, as a covenant, upon observation of which life was expected and might
be claimed. This is utterly inconsistent with the Gospel. If there had been a
Law that could have given life, verily righteousness had been by the Law, Gal.
3. 21. And this righteousness giving life, utterly overthrows the Gospel. If
righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2. 21. In
which sense I deny that the Jews were ever under the Law. The Law was not
given as such a covenant as shall God willing be shown. So the Moral Law and
Ceremonial Law should militate one against another. The Moral Law holding them
in themselves, looking for a righteousness of works, and the Ceremonial Law
leading them out of themselves, unto a sacrifice for remission of sin. The
Law has a commanding power over beleeevers.
Abraham was under no such covenant, he had the Gospel preached to him, Gal. 3.
8. and so had the seed of Abraham. But it still has the nature of a Law
binding to obedience, it is for ever a rule, for the guide of our ways. That
it was once of force, is without question; and above all contradiction, and
therefore I need not to multiply Old Testament^ Scriptures for it; There is no
repeal of it, it was never antiquated and abolished; therefore it is of force;
Though a Law be urged, yet if a repeal may be pleaded, there is a discharge.
That it is not repealed, I shall show, and further that it is not capable of
any repeal. If it be repealed, then either by Christ, at his coming in the
flesh; or else by his Apostles, by commission from him, after the Spirit was
given; But neither Christ in person, nor the Apostles by any commission from
him did repeal it; but instead of a repeal, did put a new sanction upon it;
Christ indeed as soon as he publicly appeared in the work of redemption, was
charged that he came to destroy the Law; But this he did utterly disavow, and
men of faith in Christ should believe him, professing that he came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Yea, that there is a greater stability in
the Law in every tittle of it in regard of the permanency, then is in heaven
and earth, then is in the whole frabrick of the world; And whereas the Scribes
and Pharisees were then thought to be the only strict observers of the rule of
the Law, and the alone men that kept up the honor of it, Christ asserts a
necessity of a higher degree of obedience then the Scribes and Pharisees ever
taught or practiced, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. which must be understood of righteousness
inherent, in conformity to the Law, as appears in the precedent words, where
Christ holds discourse about the Law, and is more fully confirmed in the words
that follow; Christ on this occasion opens the commandments of the Law,
showing how far Scribes and Pharisees went in their righteousness, how far
we must transcend them if ever we come to the Kingdom of heaven. Neither did
the Apostles by any Commission from Christ repeal it, but they add the same
sanction to it. Paul foreseeing that this very thing would be charged upon him,
as it was upon Christ, says, Do we make void the Law through faith? yea, we
establish (says he) the Law, Rom 3. 31. Our doctrine is a confirmation, and no
abolition of it. And both he, and other Apostles frequently in their Epistles,
urge precepts of the Moral Law, as in force, and having power and command over
men in covenant. Paul laying a charge upon children to obey their parents,
Ephesians. 6. 1. urges it from the fifth Commandment; which he there sets out with
a mark of honor, as the first Commandment with promise, and paraphraseth upon
the promise, annexed to it, against which children might enter their challenge,
if in Gospel Times the Law had lost its commanding power. And requiring
obedience from wives to husbands, the Law is quoted for it, 1 Cor. 14. 34.
Having proved the equity of Ministers maintenance by an argument drawn from
civil right, and common rules of equity in three particulars, he adds, Say I
these things, or says not the Law, also the same? And so quotes a Text of the
Law, the Law as delivered by Moses, for it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou
shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn, 1 Cor. 9. 9. and then
clears it from an exception that might be taken against it. So James 2. 8. If
ye fulfill the royal Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well.
The Law is of force in that grand duty, so in other precepts there mentioned,
Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, verse 11. yea, it is of force in the least
duties, ver. 10. He that shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
is guilty of all, 1 These. 47, 8. We have the seventh and eighth Commandment
quoted as of force with Christians. As also, Romans 12. 19. Avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine,
I will repay, says the Lord, quoting the Law, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.

Neither is it capable of any repeal, being the Law of nature written in the
hearts of heathens, Romans 2. 15. more clearly therefore in the heart of Adam.
These are of those things that are prohibita, quia mala; The transgression of
them was forbidden, because evil of their own nature, The Creation standing,
the Law could be no other: If no Law had ever been promulged, or given of God
to man, yet murder and adultery had been sin, Christ not changing the Law of
Creation, but taking to himself the nature of man, (the same as it was first
created) when he came to save man, must of necessity keep on foot that law that
was from the beginning stamped upon him; So that we see it is not abolished, but
ratified, neither is it in a capacity of abolition. It is confessed by a great
party, of those, that in this appear as adversaries, that there is no liberty
to sin in the days of the Gospel. There be not many that will avouch the
contrary, if they do, they must know that they have the Gospel against them,
that has in a readiness to avenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 6. 10. The Apostle
writes to believers, that they sin not, 1 John 2. 1. And this is the
definition of sin, 1 John 3. 4. Sin is a transgression of the Law. As for
those that (...) believers have no sin, cannot sin, it is to little purpose
to speak to them, or having any thing to deal with them. If they believe not
John, they will not believe me telling them that that there is no truth in
them, 1 John 1. 8. He that pleases may see a large confirmation of this truth
in Mr. Burg, Vindiciae Legis, and Master Boltons Treatise of the true bounds of
Christian freedom, page 77. to 88. Therefore one much forgets himself, who in
a Treatise of the two covenants, bespeaks his Reader in these words: Consider
this seriously, that if you be believers, and married to Christ, the Law has
no more power over you then a dead husband has over his relict and living
wife, which he presently interprets of a commanding power, and denies, that the
Law has any commanding power over a believer. Which assertion of his, that it
may be the more observed, he puts into his Index: The Law has no commanding
power over a believer.

The same Author yet says, that the Law is a discoverer of, and convincer of
sin to believers, It is a curb to the pride and presumption of believers as
well as of unbeleevers; But if a husband cannot by reason of death command his
wife, how can be convince her of her faults, or be a curb or restraint to her?
Job was in right of command over his wife, as long as he had power of reproof,
to tell her of her folly, and to endavour to put a stop to it. In his answer of
an objection he yields, that though the Law should be dead to a believer, and a
believer dead to the Law, yet it does not thence follow that they should sin,
must sin, or will sin; Upon this supposition I say, there is not in them a
capacity of sin, or possibility of sinning. He further says, There would be
no sin (were it not for a Law) for the Law gives (if I may so term it) a
being to sin, and therefore is called the strength of sin, for if a man
should swear, covet, or kill, and there should be no Law prohibiting the same,
doubtless it would not be evil, for the Law makes it evil. And if the Law has
lost its commanding power, then it can give sin no more being, yea, it has
lost its own being, power of command being of the essence of it. If the Law,
Thou shall not kill, have no power of command, then, I sin not, if I kill. If
that Law, Swear not at all, have no power of commanding, then, our RANTERS
high oaths, are no more sins, then our eating of swines flesh, or (...) not
observing the Feast of the Passover, Where there is (...), there is no
transgression: and a Law antiquated and repealed, that the power of command is
gone (as in the Laws before mentioned) is no Law. If he still pr^sse that
similitude of the Apostle, that a dead husband has now power of command, But
the Law to a believer is a dead husband. First, I say, if he will be pleased to
inform me, how a dead husband rips up his wives faults, how he curbs and keeps
her in, (which he confesses is the Laws office to a believer) then I shall
speedily give an account, how this dead husband retains power of command. The
Argument is as well of force, The dead husband has no power to discover his
wives faults, to restrain, curb, or keep her in: But the Law is a dead husband
to believers; Therefore the Law has no such power. It lies upon him to answer
this argument to free himself from self-contradiction. And I would feign see
this answered, and the other maintained. Secondly, for more full satisfaction,
Romans 7. 1, etc. vindicated.
I say that some learned Expositors make the husband in that similitude not to
be the Law, but sin, which has its power from the Law. So Diodati in his
Notes upon the place. Man signifies sin, which has power from the Law, the
woman is our humane nature, and of these two, are begotten the depraved errors
of sin; So also Doctor Reynolds in his Treatise of Divorce, page 37. setting
out the scope of this similitude, thus expresses it, As a wife her husband
being dead, does lawfully take another, and is not an adulteress; in having
his company, to bring forth fruit of her body to him; so regenerate persons,
their natural corruption (provoked by the Law to sin) and flesh being
mortified, and joined to Christ as to a second husband. Master Burges Vindiciae
Degis, page 218. says, Sin which by the Law does irritate and provoke our
corruption, that is the former husband the soul had, and lusts they are the
children thereof, and this the rather is to be received, because the Apostle in
his reddition does not say the Law is dead, but we are dead. But if he will
still contend that the Law is the husband in that place; which by reason of
corruption has so much power for irritation and condemnation over an
unregenerate man; I shall only give him that advice which Doctor Reynolds in
the place quoted, gives Bellarmine, upon occasion of his interpretation of this
similitude. Let Bellarmine acknowledge that similitudes must (...) be set on
the rack, nor the drift thereof be streched in such sort (...) ^f they ought,
just in length, breadth, and depth, to match and sit that whereunto they are
^^^^mbled And when he confesses power in the Law notwithstanding this death to
perform diverse offices in the souls of beleever^ (...) cannot affirm that
the law is wholly dead, nor deny but that it may have this office of command
likewise. The power which the Law loses, is that which corruption gave it,
which is irritation and condemnation; Corruption never gave command to the Law,
and the death of corruption, through the Spirit, can never exempt the soul from
obedience, or take the power of command from it. Let it be granted that the Law
is the husband here mentioned, the similitude is this. That as the Law through
our corruption was fruitful in man's nature to the bringing forth of sin and
condemnation, So Christ by the Spirit is to be fruitful in our nature to bring
forth works of grace to salvation, and so the death of the Law is merely in
respect of irritation, or inflaming to sin; and binding over to condemnation,
not in respect of command. That this is the full and clear scope of this
similitude, beyond which it must not be stretched, plainly appears, verse 5.
For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins which were by the Law, did
work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. So that here is nothing
against the commanding power of the Law: God still keeps up his Sovereignty,
and by this Law he rules the regenerate. I wish our Author would sadly reflect
upon that reason of his, The Law is not authorized by Christ to reign and rule
in the consciences of his people, For his Fathers peace, his own
righteousness, and his Spirits joy. There is none that speaks of the reign of
the Law in the consciences of the people of God, but God in Christ reigns, and
by his Moral Law rules, for all these reasons, So far are these from
excluding his rule, by his Law in his peoples hearts. If this rule of the Law
be destructive to Christ's righteousness, then Christ's coming for
righteousness must needs be to destroy the Law, which Christ disclaimes. And
the rule of the peace of God in our hearts, is so far from excluding his rule
by his Law, that without it, it can never be attained, Great peace have they
that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm 119. 165. This is the
confidence that we have in God, that whatsoever we ask according to his will,
we shall receive, because we keep his commandments, 1 John 3. 22. A Commandment
has a command^^^ power, and only they that keep them have this peace ruling in
their hearts. The Spirits joy, and the power of the Law to command, are so
far from opposing one the other, that the Spirit gives testimony of Gods
abode in no other but such as confess and yield to this power. He that keeps
his Commandments dwells in him, and he in him: and hereby we know that be
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3. 24. And of like
nature is that which he further has, Though the Law (the former husband) be
dead to a believer, yet a believer is no widow, much less an harlot; for he is
married to Christ, and is under the Law of Christ, which is love. If the moral
Law respective to the power of command be dead, then love is dead with it.
Jesus Christ reduces the ten Commandments into two: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. If
then the Law be dead, this love from the heart is dead, and so a believer is
either a widow or an harlot. Master Burges, Vindiciae Legis, page 12. shows at
large that to do a thing out of obedience to the Law, and yet by love and
delight, do not oppose one another, which if the Reader consult with his
enlargement of it, he shall need to go no farther for refutation, nor his own
satisfaction. Men are wont to expect in children and servants (much more in
wives) both love and obedience: If this rule hold, they must quit the one, and
cleave to the other; Either they must take to love, without obedience, or
obedience without love. These two which cannot be severed (if ye love and keep
my Commandments) this Divinity makes inconsistent. God gave Laws (says our
Author) to man to declare his own Sovereignty, and his creatures duty. And we
must tell him, that to keep up his Sovereignty, and his creatures duty, he
continues his Law. They that take power of command from it, divest him of his
Sovereignty, and exempt the creature from duty. I know there are many evasions,
if it might be to shuffle off, and evade this doctrine; if not wholly denying
the Law, yet weakening the power of it in Gospel-time.

Some say, that it binds us as creatures, but not as Christians. And then it
is to be feared, that they taking themselves to be above creatures in that they
are Christians, being raised in a nearer relation to God, then mere creatures,
they will take themselves to be disobliged* But if the creature be cast into
hell, for transgression; as a drunkard, an adulterer, a covetous person, what
will become of the Christian? But it binds both as creatures and Christians,
Christ having put his sanction upon it.

Others say, The Law binds the whole of man.
that it binds the unregenerate part of man, but not the regenerate part, that
is free. Paul delighted in the Law of God after the inward man, Romans 7. 22.
That is, as Interpreters understand, so f^rre as regenerate; How could he
delight in it as a Law, and not subject to it? It seems these think that only
wicked ones are bound, or rather wickedness to be alone obliged; It will
shortly be a mark of unregeneration (as it seems it is with some already) to
be subject to it; They that urge it upon men, and press it as their duty, have
the name of legal Preachers, and stranger, from Gospel-mysteries put upon them.
It is a wearisome thing to rake further in this puddle; I hope it is plain in
that which has been said, that God holds up this part of his Sovereignty in
keeping up his commandment, the authority of his Moral Precepts in the hearts
of his people.

CHAP. XI.
The Moral Law is a perfect Rule of Righteousness.
AS God keeps up his Law for a Rule to his people, so it is a perfect and a
complete Rule to those to whom it is given. This is a doctrine unanimously,
heretofore maintained by Protestant Writers, but opposed by Papists, Arminians,
and Socinians. Papists have their traditions, added as well to the Law, as to
the Gospel, which is an accusation of the written Law, as imperfect: They have
also their Evangelical counsels, which though they are not commanded, yet (as
Bellarmine speaks) are commended, as raising Christians to an higher
perfection, then ever the Law required. Socimans ( with whom many Arminians
join) affirm, that Christ has instituted new precepts of obedience in the
Gospel; and added them to the commands of the Law, such as transcend and exceed
all that were delivered in Old Testament times. Gerrard having disputed for the
perfection of the Law against Papists, cap. 14. De Evangelio, says, The Popish
opinion of new Laws promulgated by Christ, the Pho^inians (which is an other
name of Socinians) greedily embrace; making a fair way for Mahometisme, seeing
that in the Alcoran it is in like manner said, That Moses gave a Law, less
perfect, Christ more perfect, and Mahomet most perfect of all. Gerrard quotes
this passage out of the Cracovian Chatechisme in the same chapter. Christ came
not only to fulfill the Law for us, but added new precepts to it. These new
precepts, ( the same Author says) they make twofold^ Some of which do
appertain to manners, some to ceremonies, or outward rites in worship. He names
three that appertain to manners: To deny a man's self; take up his Cross, and
follow Christ: Which three precepts my Author in way of opposition says,
belong to the first commandment. Peltius in his Harmony of Arminians and
Socinians, chap. 4, 5, 6. shows their combination against the Orthodox party,
as in many other things, so in this proposition now controverted. He there
quotes from Socinians these positions: That Christ in the New Testament did not
only abrogate the Ceremonial and Judicial Law, but did much increase and add
unto the Moral Law: That he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it;
which fulfilling ( says he) is nothing else but a perfecting of it, and
addition of what was wanting: That we ought not only to observe those things
that are given us of God, and not abrogated by Christ, but those precepts in
like manner that are added by Christ. Much more from many Socinians, and
Arminians, may be seen in that Author to that purpose. Dr. Hammond in his
Practical Catechism, speaking of Christ's Sermon in the Mount, agrees indeed
with the Papists, against the Protestants, That Christ does not here expound
Moses, and vindicate the Law from false glosses, but that he adds to the Law,
and names many additions to the sixth, seventh, and other Commandments, but
dissents from them, in that they make these Evangelical Counsels, and makes
them precepts, not precepts of Moses, but of Christ, added by him to the Law:
but, this with much modesty, as though he would not be peremptory in his
opinion. So that Authorities vouchsafed for the perfection of the Moral Law as
a Rule.
Mr. Burges, page 166. handling controversies about the Law, says, I shall now
handle the perfection of it, and labor to show that Christ has instituted no
new duty, which was not commanded before by the Law of Moses. And this
question, ( says he) will be profitable, partly against the Arminians, partly
the Papists, and lastly, the Socinians. He further says, page 169. That Christ
did not add, new duties which were not commanded in the Law, because the Law
is perfect, and they were bound not to add to it, or detract from it, Therefore
we are not to conceive a more excellent way of duty, then that prescribed.
Further, if we speak of holy and spiritual duties, there cannot be a more
excellent way of holiness this being an Idaea, and representation of the
glorious nature of God. Dr. Ames in his Sciagraphia, handling the Decalogue,
makes this, his first doctrine, Lex ista Dei quae in Decalogo continetur est
perfectissima regula ad vitam hominis dirigendam.
The Law of God contained in the Decalogue is a most perfect Rule for guidance
of the life of man. He gives four reasons, with an use of information, Ut
legem istam Dei eo loco habeamus quo debemus, i.e. ut non aliter de eadem
cogitemus quam ut de vitae nostra unica forma and tanquam de illa norma quae
nullum habet defectum sed perfecta est in sese and perfectionem omnem a nobis
requirit
That we esteem this Law as it ought to be esteemed, and that, as the only Rule
of our lives, and such a Rule that has no defect, but is perfect in it self,
and requires all perfection in it. Davenant de Justit. actual. cap. 40. page
463. says, Ipsa lex Christi est exactissima and perfectissima regula
Sanctitatis and justitiae
The Law of God it self, is a most exact and perfect Rule of Holiness and
Righteousness: And in the proof of it says, Passim in Scripturis confirmatur
quae perfectionem legis divinae mirifice extollunt.
This is every where confirmed in Scripture, which wonderfully extols the
perfection of the divine Law. Downham in the preface of his Tables of the
Commandments says, that, The Law of God is perfect, requiring perfect
obedience both inward and outward, not only in respect of the parts, but of the
degrees. The Leyden Professors say, Tam perfecta est haec lex ut nihil ei in
praeceptis moralibus aut a Christo aut ab Apostolis ipsius additum fuerit quoad
exactionem bonorum operum normam sub novo Testamento sit adducta.
The Law is so perfect, that nothing in Moral precepts, either by Christ or his
Apostles, as any more exact rule of good works has been added under the New
Testament. Disp. 18.. 39. Vrsinus in his definition of the Moral Law inserts
this, Obligans omnes creaturas rationales ad perfectam obedientiam internam and
externam.
Binding all reasonable creatures to perfect obedience both inward and outward,
page 681. Chemnitius entitles his third Chapter de Lege, De perfect a
obedientia quam Lex requirit.
Of the perfect obedience which the Law requires, and presently lays down
these words, Variis autem corruptelis omnibus temporibus, and olim, and nunc
depravata est doctrina de perfect a obedientia, quam Lex Dei requirit.
This Doctrine of the perfect obedience which the Law requires, in all ages
past has been, and is now depraved. Bucan in his common places, page 188. thus
defines the Moral Law; Est praeceptio divina continens pie justeque coram Deo
vivendi regulam, requirens ab omni homine perfectam and perpetuam obedientiam.
A divine injunction, containing a rule to live piously and justly before God,
requiring of all men perfect and perpetual obedience toward God. I shall
conclude with the Confession presented to both houses of Parliament, by the
Assembly of Divines, chap. 19. 2. The Law after his ( i.e. Adams) fall,
continued to be a perfect Rule of Righteousness, and as such was delivered by
God on mount Sinai in ten Commandments; To these more might be added, but these
are sufficient to show the great consent of Protestant Writers.

But I shall not rest barely upon the authority of these testimonies, but also
offer to consideration these following Reasons. Arguments evincing the
perfection of the Moral Law.


1. If the Law be not a fully perfect, and complete Rule of our lives, then
there is some sin against God which is not condemned in the Law, This is
clear; Deviation from any rule given of God, is a sin: Deviation from that,
supposed additional rule, is a sin; But there is no sin which the Law does not
condemn; Sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3, 4. He that sins,
transgresses the Law.

2. If the Law alone discovers and makes sin known, then it is a perfect,
full, and complete Rule; this is plain: Omne rectum index est obliqui. But the
Law alone discovers sin, Romans 3. 20. This office is ascribed there to the
Law, which is no other but the Moral Law. Had not the light of that Rule guided
the Apostle in this work, he had never made any such discovery: And it is the
moral Law written in the decalogue that he means, as appears in the quotation;
I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.

3. That which alone works wrath, is the alone Rule and guide of our lives.
This is clear, in what sense soever it is, that we take working of wrath:
whether we understand it of working of wrath in man against God, as some do;
Man's heart being apt to rise against him that will exercise Sovereignty over
him, Or of the wrath of God kindled against man; upon transgression of the Law.
But it is the Law that works wrath: it is ascribed to it, and it alone, Romans 4.
15.

4. That which being removed will take away all possibility of sinning, that is
alone the Rule of our obedience: This is plain; were there any Rule, the
transgression of it would be still our sin. But the Law being removed, all
possibility of sin is taken away: Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, Romans 4. 15.

5. If the Law only adds strength to sin, viz. for condemnation, then the
Law is the alone rule of obedience: This is plain; Any other Rule whatsoever
adds like strength to sin, and upon transgression will condemn. But the Law
only adds strength to sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. The strength of sin is the Law.

6. Either the epithet [moral] is not justly given to the Law; or else it is a
perfect Rule of manners, that is, of obedience: This is plain, for moral
denotes, as Amesius observes, that use of it. But this epithet given to the
Law, and appropriated to it, was never (as I think) upon any such account
challenged. Ergo.

7. Either this new Rule does transcend the old Rule of the Moral Law;
requiring a more exact degree of perfection, as Papists speak of their
evangelical counsels, and Socinians of their additional Gospel precepts, or
else it falls short and admits of obedience in a degree more low. If it require
obedience more high, then even the doers of the Law, in the greatest height and
possible supposed perfection; though equal to the Angels, are sinners: The Law
might be fulfilled, and yet disobedience charged. If it fall short of the old
Rule (which it seems is the opinion of some who confess an imperfection in
our personal righteousness, as it refers to the old Rule; and assert a
perfection, as it relates to the new Rule) then the new Rule allows that which
the old Rule condemns, and so they bring in a discrepancy between them and
find an allowance for transgression. So that I think, I have sufficient
authourity, divine and humane, with reasons that are cogent, to conclude that
which I have asserted, That the old Rule, the Rule of the Moral Law, is a
perfect Rule, and the only Rule.

Six several exceptions are taken against the Exceptions taken against the
perfection of the Law.
perfection of this Law, or singularity of it, as a rule by a learned hand.

1. It is demanded, What say you for matter of duty, to the positive 1.
Exception.
precepts for the Gospel? of Baptism; the Lords day; the Officers and
government of the Church, etc? Is the Law of nature: the only rule for those?
And foreseeing what would be answered as well he might, he adds, If you say,
they are reducible to the second commandment, I demand, 1. What is the second
commandment, for the affirmative part, but a general precept to worship God,
according to his positive institution? 2. Do ye take the precept de genere to
be equivalent to the precepts de speciebus? etc. To this I think I may answer
out of his own mouth, where he says, The neglect of Sacraments is a breach of
the second commandment. In case we break the commandments in the neglect of
them, then the commandment requires the observation of them. For which Master
Burges Vindiciae Legis page 149. Balls Catechism, Amesius his Sciographia, Dod
on the commandments, Downhams Tables, Zanchy, each of them on this commandment;
and Cawdry and Palmer on the Sabbath, Part. 2. Page 176. may be consulted. For
further clearing of this point, we must consider of the preceptive part of the
Moral Law, which alone in this place is our business to enquire after, 1. As
it is epitomized in the Decalogue, those ten words, as Moses calls them, Exodus
34. 28. Or else, as commented upon, and more amply delivered in the whole Book
of the Law, Prophets, and Scriptures of the New Testament. 2. We must
distinguish of the manner how the Law prescribes, or commands any thing as
duty, which is either expressly, or Synecdochically, either directly, or else
interpretatively, virtually, and reductively; I very well know, that the Law is
not in all particulars so explicitly, and expressly delivered, but that, 1. The
use, and best improvement of reason is required to know, what pro hic and nunc
is called for at our hands for duty. The Law lays down rules in affirmative
precepts, in an indefinite way, which we must bring home by particular
application, discerning by general Scripture Rules, with the help of reason
(which sometimes is not so easy to be done) when it speaks to us in a way of
concernment, as to present practical observation. 2. That hints of providence
are to be observed, to know what in present is duty, as to the affirmative part
of the commandment of God. If that man, that fell among thieves, between
Jerusalem and Jericho, had sat by the way, on the green grass, without any
appearance of harm, or present need of help, the Samaritane that passed that
way, had not offended, in case he had taken no more notice, then the Priest and
Levite did: But discerning him that case, as he then was, the sixth commandment
called for that, which he then did, as a present office of love to his
neighbor, according to the interpretation of this commandment given by our
Savior, Mark 3. 4. When the Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal the
man with the withered hand on the Sabbath day, He demands of them, Is it lawful
to do good on the Sabbath day, or to do evil, To save life, or to destroy? It
was not their mind that Christ should kill the man, only they would not have
had him, then to have cured him: But not to cure when it is in our power,
according to Christ's interpretation, is to kill. If diligent observation be not
made, the commandment may be soon transgressed. 3. Skill in Sciences, and
professions is to be improved by men of skill, that the commandment may be
kept. The Samaritane poured wine and oil into the travelers wounds, knowing
that to be of use, to supple and refresh them. Had he known any other thing
more sovereigne, which might have been had, at hand; he was to have used it. As
skill in medicines is to be used for preservation of men's lives, so also skill
in the Laws, by those that are versed in them, for the help of their neighbor,
in exigents; concerning his estate and livelihood. 4. We must listen to Gods
mouth, to learn when he shall be pleased at any time further to manifest his
mind for the clearing of our way in any of his precepts. There was a command,
concerning the place of public, and solemn worship, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Unto the
place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your Tribes to put his
Name there, even to his habitation shall ye seek, and thither shall thou come,
Now thou must depend on the mouth of God, to observe what place in any of the
Tribes; he would choose for his habitation. When God commands, that all
instituted worship shall be according to his prescript; This is a perfect Rule
implicit, and virtual; tying us to heed the Lord at any time, more
particularly discovering his will, and clearing this duty to us. Was not the
Law of worship perfect, to Abraham, unless it explicitly told him that he
must sacrifice his Son? And if any take themselves to be so acute, as to set
up a new Rule, as some are pleased to style it, then they antiquate and abolish
the old Rule, and singularly gratify the Antinomian party. Two Rules will no
more stand together then two covenants; calling it a new Rule, men make the
first old: Now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away,
Heb. 8. 17. It is added moreover, does not the Scripture call Christ our
Lawgiver, and say the Law shall go out of Zion, etc. Isa. 2. 3. And was not the
old Law his? Saint Paul, I am sure, quotes that which belongs to the preceptive
part of the Moral Law, and calls it the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. His Laws were
delivered in the wilderness, whom the people of Israel there tempted and
provoked; This is plain, for they sinned against the Lawgiver, and from his
hands they suffered. And who they tempted in the wilderness, see from the
Apostles hand, 1 Cor. 10. 9. And as to the Scripture quoted, the words are
exegetically set down in those that follow them. The Law shall go out of Zion,
and the Word of the Lord out of Jerusalem: Which is no more, but that the Name
of the Lord, which was then known in Judah, shall be great from the rising of
the Sun, to the going down thereof. It is further demanded, And is he not the
anointed King of the Church, and therefore has legislative power? For answer, I
desire to know what King the Church had, when the old Law was, before Christ
came in the flesh? The Kingdom was one and the same, and the King one and the
same then, and now, as I take it. Many shall come from the East, and West, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. The
Gentiles coming in at the Gospel-call, are under the same King, and in the same
Kingdom. And if all this were granted which is here pleaded for, it is no more
then a change in some positive, circumstantial Rites, and what is this to the
question handled by our Author; That our righteousness which is imperfect
according to the old Rule, is perfect according to the new? when old and new in
that which is naturally Moral, is one and the same. When the Law required
heart-service, and love with the whole heart, upon spiritual ends and motives,
upon which account all fell short in their obedience, and performance, shall we
say that Christ did dispense with any of this, that so the Rule being lower,
our obedience now may answer. Others that make Moses and Christ two distinct
Lawgivers and agents for God, in holding out distinct precepts, give the
pre-eminence to Christ, and account his Law to be of more eminent perfection.
This Author on the contrary seems to make the Laws of Christ to stoop far
beneath those of Moses.

2. For Justification of this accusation of the Moral Law of imperfection, 2.
Exception.
it is added, the Moral, taken either for the Law given to Adam, or written in
Tables of stone, is not a sufficient rule for us now, for believing in Jesus
Christ, no nor the same Law of nature as still in force under Christ. For a
general command of believing all that God reveals, is not the only rule of
our faith, but the particular revelation and precept are part, etc. To this I
say,

1. As before, I think I may answer out of his own mouth, where he says,
Neglect of Sacraments is a breach of the second commandment, and unbelief is a
breach of the first. If we break the commandment in unbelief, then the
Commandment binds us to believe.

2. Much of that which I have spoke by way of answer to the former, may be
applied to this likewise.

3. I shall hereafter speak to this, that faith is a duty of the Moral Law,
where the Reader may have further satisfaction.

4. If Adam had no command for faith, then he was not in any capacity to
believe, and by his fall lost not power of believing: And consequently it will
not stand with the Justice of God to exact it at our hands, having never had
power for the performance of it.

5. I say, there was power in Adam, for that faith that justified, but not to
act for justification. Adam had that habit, and the Law calls for it, from all
that are under the command of it: But the Gospel discovers the object by which
a sinner through faith is justified.

3. The same answer may serve to the third exception, which indeed is the same
with the former, 3. Exception.
only a great deal of flourishing is bestowed, in discourse of the
understanding and will, paralleling them with the Prefaces, grounds and
occasions of Laws, not needful to be repeated. And at last bringing all to the
Articles of the Creed, to which enough already is spoken.

4. It is said, 4, Exception.
But what if all this had been left out, and you had proved the Moral Law the
only Rule of duty? does it follow therefore that it is the only Rule? Answ. If
the Moral Law be the only Rule of duty, then I take it to be the only Rule; for
I enquire after nothing but duty, and I take righteousness to be matter of
duty, and then the only Rule of duty, is the only Rule of righteousness. It is
further said, Sure it is not the only Rule of rewarding. And I say, Rewarding
is none of our work, but Gods, and I look for a Rule of that work which is
ours, and that we are to make our business, I confess an imperfection in it,
to give life, but assert a perfection as the Rule of our lives, It justifies no
man, but it orders and regulates every justified man.

5. It is further said, 5. Exception.
The same I may say of the Rule of punishment. To which I give the same answer:
It is not our work, but Gods, either to reward or punish. And here he speaks of
a part of the penalty of the new Law, And I know no penalty properly distinct
from the penalty of the old. He is wont to compare it to an Act of Oblivion,
and Acts of Oblivion are not wont to inflict penalties, but serve to remove
them when another Law imposes them. That of the Parable is instanced, None of
them that were bidden shall taste of the Supper; when the sin for which they
there suffer is a breach of a Moral command.

6. It is said, 6. Exception.
The principal thing intended is, that the Moral Law is not the only Rule, what
shall be the condition of Life or Death, and therefore not the only Rule
according to which we must now be denominated, and hereafter sentenced, Just or
Unjust. To this I have already given a sufficient answer, and if I had not, our
Author answers fully for me, where he says, The precepts of the Covenant, as
mere precepts, must be distinguished from the same precepts considered as
conditions, upon performance of which we must live, or die for nonperformance?
And I speak of them as mere precepts, and so they are our Rule of
righteousness, and not as they are conditions either of the covenant of works
or grace. And a man may be denominated righteous, by the Laws Rule, when he
cannot stand before the sentence of it as a covenant, of which we have heard
sufficient. After a long discourse against all possibility of justification by
the Law of works, as though I were therein an adversary; or that the Antinomian
fancy were above all answer; that a man cannot make the Law his Rule, but he
makes it withal his Justification, he goes about to prevent an objection, and
says, If you should say, this is the covenant and not the Law, he will reply.
1. Then the Law is not the only Rule. To which I say, When my work is to make
it good, that the Law is our only Rule, I marvel that he will so much as
imagine, that I will say that which makes it not the only Rule. But perhaps, he
thinks I do not see, how it cannot follow, as indeed I do not, neither can I
see any color for it. 2. He replies, It is the same thing in several respects,
that we call a Law and a Covenant (except you mean it of our covenant-act to
God, of which we speak not) who knows not that praemiare, and punire are Acts
of a Law? And that an Act of Oblivion or general pardon on certain terms is a
Law, and that the promise is the principal part of the Law of Grace. To which I
say, that praemiare and punire are essential in a Law. Some have power of
command, so that their words in just things is to be a Law, where most deny any
power of punishment; as an Husband over the Wife. Some parents have Authority
to command children, (children remaining under the obligation of the fifth
commandment as long as the relation of a child continues) when they have
neither power to reward or punish. Jacob took himself to be in power, to
command Joseph (among the rest of his Sons, as appears in the charge concerning
his burial, Genesis 47. 29, 30. and chap. 49. 29. So compared) and yet he was not
in power either to reward or punish him. And though they be acts of a law where
he that gives the Law is in power; Yet they are no parts of a Rule, nor any
directory of life to him to whom they are proposed. I know that an Act of
Oblivion or general pardon may be called a Law, as many other things are,
catachrestice and abusive; but that it should be a Law properly so called, I
know not. The Romans defined a Law, whilst that a Democratie was in force
among them, to be Generale jussum populi, aut plebis rogante magistratu.
Afterward when the State was changed, and the Legislative power was in other
hands, they defined it to be, Jussum Regis aut Imperatoris. And Tully's
definition of a Law is, that it is, Ratio summa insita in natura, quae recta
suadet, prohibetque contraria. Here jussio, suasio, and prohibitio are
expressed, which are not found in Acts of Oblivion. That every man, who is
within the verge of such an Act, may be said to be acquit by Law, I willingly
grant; seeing that act takes off the force of the Law condemning him: But that
it is a Law, strictly so taken, I know not.

CHAP. XII.
The Moral Law binds, as it was delivered by the hand of Moses.
A Third branch of the general Proposition before delivered follows, which is,
that the Moral Law, as delivered by the hand of Moses, is obligatory to
Christians; This I confess is more disputable, then either of the former
before spoken to; In those, we had to deal with Antinomians, on the one hand;
Papists, Arminians, Socinians, on the other hand, with some few others that are
pleased in those points alone to strike in, with Arminians and Socinians, and
in other things to oppose them: But in this Papists agree not among themselves,
but one is against another; neither is there that agreement amongst Protestant
Writers that might be desired, which must not be concealed; some are for the
affirmative, and some for the negative, and some seem to stand in a neutral
indifferency. Bellarmine among the Papists, is for the affirmative, lib. 4. de
justificatione, cap. 6. and takes up Soto for the contrary tenent, who affirms
(as he quotes him) that Christians are not only delivered from the Ceremonial
Law, and the guilt and terror, of the moral Law, but from the whole Law, as
written in the books of Moses, with this caution (as he reports him) that we
are to keep the Law of Moses as it is natural, and as it is in the Gospel, and
in the Epistles of the Apostles, but not as it was written by Moses; for Moses
(says he) could not bind us, but it is Christ that binds us, for we are
Christians and not Jews. Soto has Suarez, and Medina (as Master Burges
observes) with him, and among the Protestants, Zanchius de redemptione lib. 1.
cap. 12. and Musculus in his common places go the same way, affirming, that the
Moral Laws which go under the name of the decalogue, as they were delivered by
Moses to the Israelites, do not concern Christians, but as they are agreeable
to the Law of nature, and confirmed by Christ. Paraeus (as is observed by Rivet
in his Explication, of the Decalogue, page 11.) giving in his judgment of the
differing opinions of Bellarmine and Soto, affirms that the opinion of
Bellarmine is most safe to be followed. Rivet himself, in the place quoted,
takes it to be a strife of words, and the difference to be inconsiderable; and
in case the authority be granted, there seems indeed less danger, though the
Minister be waved. The Antinomian (as others have observed) is by both parties
opposed; Some may think, that the Law, thus gains in its authority, in as
much, as Christ is, of much more excellency then Moses, when the Master of the
Vineyard, saw his servant neglected; he said, They will reverence my Son,
Mat. 21. 37. But if the servant be once despised, and set so light by, as we
read from some hands, Away with stammering Moses, it may be feared, that the
Son will not long remain in honor, when servants fared so ill, we find
that the Son had little better entertainment; And, in my thoughts, there is
scarce a readier way then this, to strip us of the whole of the Law of God.
Keeping up to their own principles, they can look on no more, of the Law, as
binding Christians, then that which is held out to us, in New
Testament-Scriptures. If this be granted, we must have a New Testament Text,
for every Moral duty; yet to gratify adversaries in this particular, we may
safely yield, that the Law concerns not Christians, as it was delivered by
Moses, only to the Israelites, and so Zanchy's Position, keeping strictly to
the terms may happily be defended. The Moral Laws as delivered by Moses to the
Israelites do not appertain to Christians; so, neither does Lukes Gospel, or
the history of the Acts, as from him to Theophilus, nor yet, any of Paul's
Epistles, as from him, to any particular Church, or to Timothy, Titus, or
Philemon. But looking on Moses as employed of God, with his Church, with which
he was in the Wilderness, Acts 7. 38. and upon his writings as a depositum,
left with the Church, they are of equal concernment, to us, as they were to the
Jews, if we be as the Church of the Jews was, a Church of God. This to me is
plain, not only by those Texts of Moses quoted in New Testament-Scriptures, as
we heard before, but quoted also as from Moses. The Apostle pleading for
Ministers maintenance, says, For it is written in the Law of Moses, 1 Cor. 9.
9. How were this argument of force, if Moses his writings were not of use? That
of Peter is convincing, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. But as he which has called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, be ye
holy for I am holy; This was written by Moses, Lev. 11. 44. Lev. 19. 2. Lev.
20. 7. and why should we be engaged to holiness, eo nomine, because Moses writ
it, and gave it in charge, in case Moses his writings do not bind Christians?
This also to me is plain, in reason, Christ was King then, as now, his Church
is the same, now, as then, we, and they make up one Kingdom, Matthew. 8. 11. The
Laws of Christ therefore (unless they appear to be repealed) are now, in
force as in former times. There is not a temporal Obligation (says Master
Burges Vindiciae Legis, page 162.) laid upon a perpetual duty. The duties are
confessed, to be perpetual, why should Moses then deliver them to be only of
temporal permanency? Neither is there any thing brought by Soto, or any other
hand to evince the contrary. In the close of the words already quoted, he
says, Mose-could not bind us, but Christ, for we are not Jews, but
Christians, To this we say, He could not bind us, authoritatively, but
ministerially, and because Christ binds, therefore Moses binds; seeing, Moses
was a servant, in that house, where Christ was a Son, Christ was King of his
Church, in Moses his days, Israel tempted Christ in disobeying Moses, 1 Cor.
10. 9. He commanded for Christ, when he gave command to the Israelites, and
these commands are of concernment unto Christians, who are their fellow
subjects. The Arguments produced by Soto are satisfyingly answered by
Bellarmine. Soto says, that the Preface of the law leads to the Israelites
only, I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and
out of the house of bondage. But it was the Jews, and not Christians, that were
in Egypt. This is false, as one of these Jesuits truly answers the other, we
were in Egypt as well as the Nation of the Jews; They were our fathers, and we
their children, 1 Cor. 10. 1. It was once indeed otherwise with us, being
branches of the wild Olive; But the natural branches, being cut off, we are
grafted into their stead, that mercy of deliverance from Egypt, being a
Church-mercy, is our mercy. He further objects that of Luke 16. 16. The Law and
the Prophets were until John, and is answered, that, that is understood of the
Law, prophesying by figures, and not instructing in manners, which is further
explained, Matthew. 11. 13. For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until
John, that is, all the prophesies of the Messiah to come, whether delivered in
words by the Prophets, or by signs and Law-ceremonies did not reach beyond
John, who was the last of the Prophets, who did bear witness of Christ. Some
say, that in case the Law bind, as it was delivered by Moses; then all that
Moses did deliver, is obligatory to Christians, Quatale, is, omne, and so the
ceremonial Law, binds, as does the Moral, and we shall bring our necks under
that yoke. To this answer, all that Moses did deliver does bind, unless we
have a release, or discharge from the same authority, by which he spoke, and
hence an argument is drawn, for proof of that which we have in hand, If the
ceremonial Law had bound Christians to this day, had it not been revoked, and
abolished, then the moral Law, which is no where revoked, or abolished (as has
been shown) does still bind Christians. This is plain, there is no reason,
that the ceremonial Law should be obligatory, above the Moral; But the
ceremonial Law had bound Christians to this day, had it not been revoked and
abolished; This is as plain, when the great question was, in the primitive
times, whether the ceremonial Law did bind Christians, whether they were to
circumcise their children, after the manner of Moses; and consequently to
observe other Rites. This is decided, in making it appear, that these were
abolished, as being shadows of good things to come, and an end put to their
obligation. It may be further objected, that if all be of force, that Moses
wrote, as from him, then that of divorce of the wife, on any cause is of force
likewise. That was commanded by Moses, as the Pharisees, Mat. 19. 7. tell the
Lord Christ from Deuteronomy. 24. 1. To this Chemnitius has answered, that Moses
delivered this, Tanquam legislator, as one, that gave orders to that people,
as, to their political estate; not, Tanquam Theologus, as a Prophet, raised up
to deliver the mind and will of God unto them. Moses his writings therefore
are in force, not only ratione materiae, as containing such precepts upon
which Christ in the New Testament has put a divine sanction; but by virtue of
a sanction from heaven put upon them, as delivered by him, and the obligation
still remaining. If Moses once be neglected, I shall fear, that Peter and Paul
will not long be honored, Moses being a servant in the same house, with them,
and the rest of the Apostles, and penmen of New Testament-Scriptures.

CHAP. XIII.
God entering a Covenant of Grace with his people, keeps up his Sovereignty in
exercise of discipline, in the correction and chastisement of his people for
sin.
AS God holds up his Sovereignty, under the covenant of grace; in keeping on
foot his commandments; so, also in his exercise of discipline, upon those, with
whom he is in covenant. He neither suffers them to be without Law, nor to go on
in transgression of his Law, with impunity and freedom. As they have his
precept, to keep from sin, so they are in danger, of his hand, in case of
sin; Those that are against us in the former, are our adversaries in this
likewise. As they plead a manumission, of Christians from the mandatory power
of the Law, so, they will also have them exempted from all chastisement or
correction. Against these we maintain that the people of God in covenant, even
those, whose hearts are steadfast, in covenant; do suffer under the covenant of
grace, in case of sin, and that for sin; For proof of this, I shall bring
Scripture of three sorts.

1. Giving instances, of the Church and people of God; under sore and great
afflictions for sin, and these places are even without number, Esaias 42. 24.
Lam. 1. 8. 3. 39. 5. 16. Micah 1. 5. Yea, they lie under sufferings, till they
acknowledge sin, till their stomachs are brought down, and they humble
themselves for sin, Lev. 26. 41. Against this, is objected, that among these
afflicted ones, there were reprobates, as well as elected ones; and Elect ones
in the state of unconversion, and they might suffer for sin, which the child
of God does not, nor can not; To this I answer; 1. There were true converts
among these, or else the whole world had no converts in it. 2. These, in their
confessions, and humiliations, involved themselves among the rest; and make
themselves, of the number of those, that by sin draw down sufferings; as we
have Ezra, Daniel, and others for examples.

2. Instances of the most precious Saints sinning and suffering for sin; 1.
Moses and Aaron, Numb. 20. 12. The Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because, ye
believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel,
therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the land which I have given
them; Both their sin and their sufferings, are noted there, which Moses seems
never to have done with, Deuteronomy. 1. 37. Deuteronomy. 3 26. Deuteronomy. 4. 21. Deuteronomy. 34. 4. 2.
David, his sin we find, 1 Samuel 11. at large related, his sufferings, in the
next chapter, he suffers in all his relations, 1. As, a father, his child
dies. 2. As, an husband, his bed is defiled. 3. As, a Prince, the sword is
brought upon his land. 3. Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 11. For as much, as this is done
of thee, and thou have not kept my Covenant and my statutes, which I have
commanded thee, I will surely rend the Kingdom from thee, and I will give it to
thy servant. 4. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. 26. But Hezekiah rendered not again
according to the benefit done unto him, for his heart was lifted up, therefore
there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. Notwithstanding,
Hezekiah humbled himself, for the pride of his heart, both, he, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the Lord, came not upon them, in
the days of Hezekiah. In which words we see, his sin, his suffering for
sin, and his humiliation upon account of his sin. Here also exception is
taken; These here mentioned say some, lived under Old Testament dispentations;
To this I answer. 1. We may take up Paul's words in behalf of these, 2. Cor. 10.
7. If any man trust to himself, that he is Christ's, let him of himself, think
this again, that, as he is Christ's, so they were Christ's. Moses, that suffered
(as we have heard) upon the account of sin, esteemed the reproach of Christ
greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. And David that
suffered in like sort, in spirit called him Lord, Matthew. 22. 43. 2. That we may
not lose Old Testament-Scriptures, for if we lose them here, we shall hold them
no where, let us look upon Prove. 3. 11, 12. My son, despise not the
chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction, for, whom the Lord
loves, he corrects, even as the father the son, in whom he delights. In
which words we see, 1. The sufferings of the people of God thrice repeated. 2.
The impulsive cause, employed in the word [chastisement] which ever is for some
fault, Psalm 39. 11. 3. The hand that inflicts [the Lord] 4. His way of
dealing as a [Father] in love and not in vengeance. Now turn to Heb. 12. 5, 6,
7. and there we shall see the Apostle. 1. Quoting this Scripture. 2. Checking
them for not heeding it. 3. Commenting upon it; Ye have forgotten the
exhortation, which speaks unto you, as unto children, My son despise not
thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; For
whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives;
If ye endure chastening, God deals with you, as with sons, for what son
is he whom the Father chasteneth not? These words of the Apostle, confirm all
the Old Testament proofs before mentioned, give a shrewd check, to all those
that would cast them off, and are a full New Testament-proof of the point in
hand, our aversaries tell us, that the children of God, in New Testament-times,
have that great and happy privilege, to be free from all chastisements for
sin, The Apostle, on the other hand says, that, it is their happiness to be
chastised, and would be their sorrow, if they were without chastisement. For
this cause (says the Apostle) many are weak, and sickly among you, and many
sleep, 1 Cor. 11. 30. There, we see, judgments inflicted, the persons
suffering, and the cause of suffering assigned. The judgments are set out. 1.
By the quality or kind, such as were visible on the outward man; as, their
sin was open, so was their suffering. 2. By their several degrees, in which
they suffered; some weak, languishing, under infirmities; some sick, taken with
diseases; some fallen asleep, surprised with death. The persons suffering are
set out. 1. By their multitude [ many]. 2. By the application of the stroke,
Corinthians had sinned, and Corinthians suffered. The cause is employed in the
illative particle [For] and expressed in the foregoing words, their unworthy
addresses unto the Lords Table, sinfully eating and drinking, they eat and
drink their own judgment, and though it cannot be said, that all were in
grace, that thus suffered, yet there were some at least in grace among them, in
that the Lord chastened them in the world, that they might not be condemned
with the world. The Lord Christ speaks fully to this in his letter from heaven
to Laodicea the Church of, Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten.

As Scripture, expressly holds out this truth, so, it is also clear in reason,
if God should not hold up his Sovereignty, in this way of exercise of
discipline; upon his children, his love could not be continued to them, but
would be withdrawn from them, as we see in Christ's words but now mentioned,
Rev. 3. 19. as, also in those words of Solomon and the Apostle, Pro. 3. 11.
Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7. The love of God is such to his children, and such a league of
friendship is past between them (say our adversaries) that it will not suffer
him to strike them. We say, his love is such, that he cannot forbear to strike,
and will not suffer that they should sin, and carry it with impunity. There
are indeed some such parents, that are so indulgent, that, children must
neither have, check, nor stroke from them, what course soever they take, they
scarce hear words, much less do they suffer stripes. These, call this love,
but a wiser then they, calls it by the name of hatred, Prove. 13. 24. He that
spares the rod, hates his son, but he that loves him, chasteneth him
betimes. Pity, will not suffer, to make children smart; But it is greater pity,
that the want of smart, should bring them to the condemnation of hell, Prove.
23. 13, 14. Withold not correction from the child, for, if thou beatest him
with the rod, he shall not die; Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall
deliver his soul from hell. A child in sin, must either be beaten, or
spared; Beating will not be his death, but sparing tends to his condemnation.
The similitude is not ours, but the Holy Ghosts. One of the most terrible texts
in all the Bible may be found (as one says) Hoses 4. 14. I will not punish
your daughters, when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit
adultery, He spares not some, that he may for ever spare them, chastening them
in the world, that he may not condemn them with the world; He spares some, and
everlastingly destroys them.

2. Otherwise, God would be reconciled to the sin of his people, and in
league, not only with their persons, but with their wickedness, which is most
abhorrent to his holiness. We read of Gods reconciliation to the world, but
never to the wickedness of the world; God may be at peace with those that have
sinned, not imputing their trespasses, but he will never be at peace with sin.

3. It will not stand with his honor to suffer his to go on in impunity in
these ways. Their wickedness will be said to be by his allowance. Men in sin,
are ready to say (as the Psalmist observe) that God is such a one as
themselves; Psalm 50. 21. and that because they sin, and he keeps silence.
And men of the world will say the same, if his people go on in sin, and
prosper. This, the Lord sees and takes care, this way to prevent, Ezekiel. 39. 23.
And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for
their iniquity, because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face
from them. He will make it appear, that he is no patron to them in that which
is evil.

4. God has given in charge, to Magistrates, his vicegerents for to punish.
They are revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil, Romans 13. 4. they
are sent of God for the punishment of evil doers, 1. Pet. 2. 14. They have no
commission to spare, upon supposal of any interest, in God or grace, when they
are found in any acts that are wicked. What they do, God does, they acting by
his command, and by virtue of his commission.

For further clearing of this point, and, if it may be, to work a right
understanding, I shall lay down several Positions.

1. God considered in his absolute Sovereignty, may inflict sufferings, without
injustice on his innocent creatures, there is no absolute necessity, that sin
should go before all manner of trouble; Punishment cannot be without a fault;
that, always implies guilt, where justice is followed. Yet, such is Gods
Sovereignty, that he may lay affliction where there is no transgression. We do
it upon our fellow creatures, we tread upon worms that never did offend us;
God may much more do it upon his creatures, yea, God does it. How much do bruit
creatures suffer in the world, and unwillingly suffer? as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 8. 20. and that from Gods hand, that has made them subject to these
suffering; that, which God does unto one creature, he may do unto any creature;
that which he does to the meanest, he may do to the most noble creature. As a
potter may make vessels, some to honor, and some to dishonor; so God having
more transcendent Sovereignty, may make some creatures, ever blessed; and
others during pleasure, to remain in misery.

2. It stands not yet with Gods ordinate justice, to strike his people, where
there is no fault. The terms of the covenant being pre-supposed; none can
suffer that have not offended. every one, upon engagement from God, must be
happy, that is innocent. This is plainly employed in those words, In the day
that thou eatest, thou shall surely die, sin not, and suffer not, and more
explicitly held out in those words, do this, and live, under death is
comprised all evil, from which man upon covenant is free, that does not sin:
Under life is comprised, all bliss, which, upon covenant, all are to enjoy
that yield full obedience; So; that the inlet of suffering, is from sin, Romans
5. 12. God having, (as I may say) tied himself, not out of Sovereignty, to
afflict, when man has not offended.

3. When way is made by sin, to divine justice, to bring evil upon man, yet
the reason why, this, or that evil, is inflicted, on this or that man; is not
always man's provocation by sin; All afflictions are not punishments; nor yet
corrections, or chastisements. There are often other ends and motives.
Sometimes, God looks solely at himself, alone at his own glory, in his
strokes; of this we have many instances, John 9. 1, 2. John 11. 4. The same we
may say of the viper upon Paul's hand, Acts 28. 4, 5. Sometimes he looks at his
people in the sufferings that he inflicts.

1. The patients themselves, laying afflictions upon them, not as corrections
respecting bypast faults, but trials for discovery of their graces. That which
God laid upon Job, was not for his sin, but to make it appear, that Satan
had formed a false charge against him, that his whole service of God, was upon
byends, and base accounts, and that sufferings (God appearing against him in
contrary providence) would presently draw him into all wickednesses. It was a
sore affliction to Abraham, to leave his country, and his fathers house, to
offer up his son Isaac, yet these were no corrections, or chastisements, that
we know, but temptations.

2. He looks upon others, that are no sufferers, to bring about mercy to one,
by the sufferings of another; so it was in Joseph's sufferings, Genesis 50. 20.

4. The corrections that God lays upon the godly, are far different from those
that he lays upon the wicked. His hand upon his own children, differs much
from his hand upon his enemies. God deals otherwise with a Nation, that is a
stranger to him, then he deals with a people that are his own, Jerem. 30. 11.
Though I make a full end of all Nations whither I have scattered thee; yet will
I not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure, and will not
leave thee altogether unpunished. Though both suffer, yet they do not equally,
and alike suffer. So, it is with the Elect, and reprobate, both suffer from the
hand of God; but there is great difference in their sufferings. 1. They differ
in the cause from whence their sufferings respectively do arise: The sufferings
of the wicked, are out of pure wrath, wicked men, being under a state of wrath.
The sufferings of the people of God, are out of present displeasure, but yet
out of love, Prove. 13. 11. Heb. 12. 6, 7. 2. They differ in the end of their
sufferings. A piece of silver is trod upon, with the feet to scour and
brighten it, but a worm or spider, to crush or spoil it. 3. They differ in
the respective improvement, that either make of them, the godly are are
bettered by their afflictions, their sufferings are their purges, and
purifications, Psalm 119. 67. Their ears are thereby opened for discipline,
Job 36. 10. the wicked are more and more hardened by them, and grow more and
more wicked under them, Esaias 1. 5. 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. The Sun hardens the
earth, but softens the butter and the wax.

The sufferings of the people of God many times proceed from as high
displeasure in God, as can stand with love, and the more high the sin is, the
greater and sorer is his displeasure: They work in God as great a dislike as
can stand with his purpose, not utterly to leave and cast them off. When David
had sinned, in that high manner as he did, the Text says, The thing that David
did displeased the Lord, 2 Samuel 11. ult. Few men have had more of Gods heart
then he, yet we see, his heart rises in sore displeasure, against his
wickedness. We may see how he takes him up for it, we can scarce see, in all
the Scriptures, a man so chidden. The Prophet reckons up the courtesies and
high favors that he had received from God, I anointed thee King over Israel,
and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy Masters
house, and thy Masters wives into thy bosom, and g^ve thee the house of
Israel, and of Judah, and if that had been too little, I would more-over have
given thee such and such things. And as he had before aggravated his
wickedness, in a parable; so in express terms, he further lays it open.
Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord; in doing evil in his
sight, thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his
wife to be thy wife. Then he falls to threatenings, three great evils (as we may
there see) follow upon this evil; yet, all this while that the Lord thus chides
him, that he thus threatens and beats him, he does not cease to love him, as
appears in Nathans words, verse 13. The Lord has put away thy sin; some will
have love and anger to be inconsistent, hatred and wrath inseparable; God is
angry, as they say, with none, but those that he hates, and when anger appears,
love is no more; But all know that this is false among men, a father is many
times angry with his child, that he would be loath to hate; It is as false with
God, he was wrath with Moses, but he never hated Moses, he owns his with much
love, when he manifests much dislike and distaste of their present actions.

6. These sufferings of the godly must by no means be accounted satisfactions
of divine justice, as coming from vindicative wrath, nor any part of the curse,
that is due from vindicative justice for sin. Having a tendency not to harm,
but to reform; not to destroy, but amend; they are only fatherly corrections,
and chastisements, not properly (at least as some rigidly understand the word)
punishments; satisfaction was the work of Christ, and the whole of the curse
was divolved upon him, Gal. 3. 13. Papists do distinguish between the
friendship that is lost by sin; and the justice that is deserved. The
friendship that is lost, is made up again, as they confess, of free grace; but
the justice deserved, must by the offender be satisfied, which how impossible
it is, for man to do, and how injurious to the sufferings of Christ, to attempt
the doing of it, let us guess by the definition that Bellarmine gives of it,
Lib. quart. de peniten. cap. 1. Actio, qua is, qui alierum laesit, tantum
facit, quantum satis est, ad injuriam compensandam, sive, is qui laesus est,
just exigit. All that we can suffer, can never satisfy, the wrong that our
sins have done to the divine Majesty, God may justly exact more, then either
on earth, or in their imaginary purgatory; any man can discharge. As the
sufferings of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed;
so, neither do they match the evil that justly might be inflicted. They are all
just, but not from Gods revenging justice. In themselves they have the nature
of curses, but they are no part of the curse, which upon the breach of the
covenant of works, and upon the transgression of the Law, is menaced. As a
skilful Physician, makes poison up into a medicine, so does God turn curses
into blessings; they serve not to kill, but to cure his people.

7. These sufferings, are not yet barely as some use to speak from sin, but
chastisements for sin, not only to prevent sin, that it may not be committed;
but because men have already sinned. The Corinthians were chastened, not
alone, least they should profane the Lords Supper; but because they had
profaned it. God afflicted David, not only lest he should commit adultery,
but because he had committed adultery: He threatens Eli, and punishes him, not
only, lest he should be too indulgent to his sons; but because he had been too
indulgent to them. It cannot be conceived, how afflictions should prevent sin
to come, if they do not correct sin already past, why are men afraid to sin
upon account of sufferings, but because upon sin they have suffered? Smart for
sin, makes a child of God watchful against sin. The child, that has seen
his fathers frown is afraid lest he should frown again; that has been
scourged* knows what a father thinks of a fault, and is afraid of a second.

It is here objected, that it stands not with justice, in this way, to afflict
believers, seeing Christ in their stead has made satisfaction, and to punish
one sin twice, is injurious. Answ. 1. These know, that Socinians deny, that
Christ has made any satisfaction, and if these two cannot stand together, viz.
Christ's satisfaction, and believers correction, they will soon assume that
believers do suffer, (for which the Scripture is very full) and therefore
Christ has not satisfied, and so their dangerous error will be supported. 2.
One truth must not be produced to the overthrow of another, Christ
satisfaction, takes us out of the hand of condemnation, and delivers from
revengeful wrath, but not out of the hand of discipline; when God becomes a
Savior, he does not cease to be a Sovereign; a father, that is a Judge, may
lash his child, that he never intends to sentence. If any will see further
Objections raised and answered, let him consult Mr. Burges of justification.
Part. 1. Lecture 5. page 33.

CHAP. XIV.
Agreement between the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace.
HAving asserted a covenant of grace, and premised such things that may
contribute some light, toward a right understanding of it, I must proceed to
enquire into the respective agreement, and differences between these covenants.
The former is an easy work, there being no controversy or dispute raised
about it, and therefore I shall briefly pass it over. They agree, 1. In the
general nature of a covenant, both are covenants strictly so called, as has
already been demonstrated. 2. They have one and the same author, that is God.
He proposed the terms of the covenant, to Adam, for himself, and all of his
posterity, and he enters covenant with the posterity of Adam, in their fallen
condition. 3. The parties in covenant, are in both of them, God and man, God
propounding, man accepting, though there be (as we have heard) that would have
it otherwise. 4. In either of both, there is a tendency to man's happiness,
Life is given in promise in both, as we see Romans 10* 5, 6, etc. where both
covenants are distinctly considered, what difference or agreement there may be
in the life promised, will after be spoke unto. 5. In both of them there is a
restipulation from man as there is an engagement from God; as, God engages
himself for reward, so man is engaged to duty; the former was never doubted,
the later has been largely proved. 6. In either of both, righteousness is
called for from those that enter covenant. For the first it is not questioned,
in that it is a covenant of Works. Failing in doing was death. Interest in
perfect righteousness is required in the latter, which is called, the
righteousness of faith, and is the righteousness of the Law, performed, not
by our selves, but by another, Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness
to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. Sincerity, in inherent righteousness
is required likewise, both of these will be morefully demonstrated. 7. Either
of both are indispensable, the conditions being not performed, the penalty of
the covenant in both is inflicted, Adams posterity had experience of the one,
and all unbeleevers, and impenitent ones, will bear the other; not believing,
not repenting brings death, as sometimes not perfectly obeying. That
distinction, of the covenant of grace, calling for one thing, and accepting of
another, afterward will be considered. 8. Neither of both covenants are
personal, as entered with any single person, or persons, and determined in him
or them, but both of them, include posterity. In the covenant of works, it is
not so expressly delivered, but not to be doubted. That covenant was entered
with Adam, for all his, the latter is more express, to the covenanters and
their seed, both in Old and New Testament-Scriptures, which by a party is
questioned, but remains largely to be confirmed.

CHAP. XV.
Differences between the Covenants of Works and the Covenant of Grace.
HAving spoken to the agreement between these two Covenants, I must now more
largely enquire into the differences, which will prove a work of greater
difficulty, there being so much opposition. The first and leading difference
is, that being both of them between God and man, The Covenant of Works was
entered into in man's state of integrity.
they were entered into in a different estate and condition of man. The first
was entered in statu instituto, in man's integrity, when man had not at all, by
sin incurred the displeasure of God, or weakened his abilities for obedience;
Man then stood as he came out of Gods hand, bearing in himself a lively
resemblance of God. The Covenant of Grace was entered into in man's fallen
condition.
The second was in statu destituto, in man's fallen estate, now in sin, under
wrath, dead in sin, and wholly disabled from yielding obedience, of this
there is no controversy, and therefore I need not make more words about it.
And from hence all other differences which I shall observe; or which (as I
suppose) are observable, have their rise, which are these following.

The covenant of Works, The Covenant of Works was to man's preservation.
or (as learned Camero calls it) the covenant of Nature, was for preservation
of man in life, that is, in present bliss and happiness, to hold him in the
condition in which it found him, which is employed in the penalty threatened, as
was before noted; man must not die till sin enter, and expressed in that
promise of God, Do this and live; His life must be continued as long as his
obedience lasted, his happiness must have been perpetuated, (though not
necessarily in the same degree, God might have translated him from a life on
earth to a life in heaven) had he kept to the terms of the covenant. The
covenant of grace is for man's restitution, The Covenant of Grace was to man's
restitution.
reconciliation and recovery; He was before in bliss, and if he had so abode,
he might with good reason have taken up Peter's words, It is good for us to be
here. Now he is in misery, and must be restored, if ever he be blessed, and so
a farther difference does arise.

The covenant of works had its precedence, The Covenant of Works was first in
time. The Covenant of Grace in order of time followed after.
was first in time; The covenant of grace in order of time follows after; This
must needs follow, Man's estate in integrity being before his fall, the covenant
made in his integrity, must needs precede the covenant entered into in his
fallen condition, unless we will place the third of Genesis before the first,
the fall of man before his creation; And therefore that is utterly a mistake in
one, who in the very entrance upon his Treatise of the two covenants, gives the
covenant of grace the precedence in time, giving this as his reason, why he
places the covenant of Grace before the covenant of Works, because the covenant
of Grace was in being before the covenant of Works, quoting for proof, Gal. 3.
17. The covenant which was made before of God in Christ, the Law which was four
hundred and thirty years after cannot disanul. But this can by no means serve
his purpose, unless we should conclude that the covenant of Works had its
beginning in Mount Sinai at the giving of the Law by Moses, and the covenant of
Grace, of only four hundred and thirty years more ancient standing. And that,
will as little serve his purpose which he after brings in, that there was an
agreement and covenant between God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ about
the salvation of man before Adam sinned, yea, before the world began; Seeing
that covenant between the first and second person of the Trinity, was not the
covenant, which he has in hand to treat upon, namely the covenant which God
entered with man, as he himself confesses; No covenant can be made with man
before man be in being, A no^ens can be no party in a covenant. And whereas we
are told that the same covenant which was made with Jesus Christ before time,
was afterward made with man. I desire that all would observe what is laid down
in that Treatise concerning that covenant. Christ for his part was by covenant
to become a Mediator, Surety, and Savior; for all those that his Father
should give him. And must we become such Mediators Sureties and Saviors also?
God the Father did promise to Christ, as is further said, all the things that
did belong to his Mediatourship, and things to gratify and satisfy him for
his Mediatourship. May we by covenant expect such things from the Father
likewise? If we are neither tied to the same work, to which Christ by covenant
was tied, nor are to receive the like gifts, as he by covenant was to expect,
we are not in the same covenant that past between the Father and Christ. And
though these two were one, which must not be yielded, (the covenants ad intra,
which the persons of the Trinity make with themse^es, and those ad extra with
the creature may not be confounded) yet that would evince no such precedence in
time, seeing there was alike agreement in the whole Trinity for the creation of
man, and Gods covenant with him in his integrity, as is fully assented to in
the same Treatise, to the utter overthrow of all that which upon the former
supposition he had built. To that question, To what end should the covenant of
Grace be made before man stood in need of Grace? he answers, Known unto God are
all his works from the beginning of the world; And he had all things then as
present and real before the eyes of his glory, as now he has, viz. Man's
Creation, Fall, Recovery, and in this sense there was no precedence of time in
regard of any of Gods Counsels or secret actions. And then there can be no
precedence of one of his covenants before another, we must find then a sense
according to which there is a precedence, which is not found in any covenants
of the Trinity among themselves (which in exact propriety of speech are
purposes rather then covenants, and were before all time) but in the actual
entrance and assent by the creature given, which is in time, and admits
precedence; In which consideration the covenant of works has its precedence
before that of Grace, as the state of integrity was before the fall.

Whence farther yet follows that the covenant of works, The Covenant of Works
was a small time in force.
was but a small time in force, at least but a small time of use, only during
the space of man's integrity, which some say was only one day, in all
probability not long, in that man enjoyed no fruit of that blessing in
Paradise, Increase and multiply. The Covenant of Grace is of everlasting
continuance.
But this second, is, of everlasting continuance, when the first Covenant was
violated by our first parents, and so made useless, that of grace succeeded,
which is our only planck after shipwreck, but none shall ever succeed this
second. Adam failing of salvation by the covenant of Works (which he entered in
the first place) is saved by the covenant of grace, into which after his fall
he entered, and into which he was of grace admitted; but he that is not saved by
the second, must everlastingly perish, and so I understand that text, Heb. 10.
26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
then there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation; where, by sinning wilfully, I understand an
utter rejection of Gods tender of this sacrifice of Christ's blood, which I
gather from the Apostle in the words that follow, the proof that he brings of
that sad assertion, He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or
three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy that
has trodden under foot the blood of the Son of God, and counted the blood of
the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing? This is that wilful
sin of which there is no expiation. When man had cast off the yoke, a
sacrifice was found, Christ made his soul an offering for sin; but when
Christ is rejected, there is no other sacrifice to be looked for. In the
covenant of grace God has made known his whole mind concerning man's
salvation, by what means, and upon what terms man shall be saved.

CHAP. XVI.
A further difference between the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace.
ANother difference of great importance between these covenants, The Covenant
of Works had no Mediator.
and which necessarily (as the two former) flows from the first, is, That the
first covenant between God and man was immediate, no Mediator intervening, no
dayes-man standing between them, to make them one; But for the second, man
being fallen by sin, a Mediator was necessary that God and man now in that
distance, should be reconciled. I know some have contended, that not only man
in integrity, but the Angels themselves, stood in need of Christ's mediation,
producing their grounds for their assertion, and then this difference between
these covenants, falls, neither of both are immediate, both standing in need of
a Mediator. The grounds are,

First, That the obedience of man and Angels was imperfect, and stood in need
of pardon, and for the righteousness of Christ which he performed to the
Father, was accounted perfect, quoting that place of Eliphaz in his speech to
Job, Job 4. 18. Even his Angels he charged with folly. If Angels stood thus in
Gods eye, under such a charge, then much more man, as Eliphas there argues. Sol.
But I would demand of these, concerning this supposed imperfection in man and
Angels, thus supplied by Christ's perfection, whether it were properly, and of
its own nature a sin? If not, then there is no place for pardon; If it were,
then it must be divolved on Christ, and laid upon him to expiate, and so man
fell, Cujus enim participatione justi sunt, ejus comparatione nec justi sunt.
Aug. ad Orosium contra Priscil. cap. 10
(or at least lay down grovelling) before his fall; and the good Angels by
reason of sin, are evil as well as those that are fallen; but these are absurd.
In that of Eliphaz therefore (if it must be understood of Angels of glory) sin,
is not charged or implied, but only defect, standing in comparison or
competition with God, an imperfection negative is yielded, they match not God
in perfection, but in his presence cover their faces with their wings, Isa. 6.
2. but no imperfection privative, they want no perfection of which they are in
any capacity, and whereof they have any necessity; God made no creature in such
a necessity of sinning, or in such a being that needed pardon.

A second ground is, That though a Mediator was not necessary by way of
reconciliation, yet he was necessary by way of preservation in righteousness.
Sol.
The second fully overthrows the first, in that which it grants, and I know not
how that can be proved that it affirms, Man was not preserved, and therefore it
appears, that he had no such Mediator appointed for his preservation. And it
seems (according to this opinion) man could not have stood, unless Christ had
been incarnate, and so his fall was not, from the freedom of his will, but the
principles of his creation, For the Angels, how they can be said, to stand by
grace received from Christ, a Mediator; I know not, they being no
fellow members with us, though fellow servants; And howsoever accidental
benefits come to the Angels, by Christ, in their joy to see lost man restored,
and reconciled; as to God, so also to their fellowship and communion;
(according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 10. Col. 1. 20. in their
experimental knowledge also, of the wisdom of God in this great mystery, 1
Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 10.) yet, I doubt not that it was for man, whose nature
he assumed, that Christ was incarnate, and that he is a Mediator between God
and man, 2 Timothy 2. 5. and not between God and Angels, and that for fallen man,
and not for man in his integrity; Therefore I conclude the first covenant was
immediate; no Mediator intervening, all the blessings of the first covenant
flowed from the whole Trinity, as the Creation it self, without respect to
Christ incarnate, there was no revelation of that high mystery to man in
innocence, In which the Reader may consult G^marus in Colos. 1* 20.

The covenant of grace is by a Mediator; The Covenant of grace is by a
Mediator.
man's fallen condition in so great a distance from God, necessarily calling for
it. Two cannot walk together unless they be agreed, Amos 3. 3. That fallen man
may walk in covenant with God; it is necessary that a way of agreement be
found, This the second person of the Trinity, by covenant with the Father has
undertaken, and therefore he is styled The Mediator of the New Testament, Heb.
9. 15. A Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8. 6. The Mediator of the New
Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. Many obstacles were in the way of man's covenanting with
God; and attaiment of the mercies and grace of the covenant, all of which lay
on the Mediator, to remove, that God and man might once more be at one; All of
these Christ undertakes and effects, and so is the Meditatour in this work.

CHAP. XVII.
Works incumbent upon the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace.
THis work of Christ in his Mediatourship, I suppose may fitly be reduced to
these heads.

First, to bring man into a capacity of covenanting with God.

Secondly, to bring man into the bond of the covenant; professedly to accept it.

Thirdly, to enable those whom he brings to glory; to perform the duties of the
covenant, to be steady and upright in it.

Fourthly, to crown those with glory; whom by grace be brings up to the terms
of the covenant.

1. He is to bring man into a capacity of covenanting, Christ brings man into a
capacity of covenanting with God.
of which sin had made mankind incapable, for though it should be granted,
that God in absolute justice, is not bound to punish sin wheresoever he
finds it; and that it is not against his Essence (as some would have it) to
pardon sin without satisfaction, yet his ordinate justice is thus bound, That
law of his, being presupposed, The day that thou eatest, thou shall surely die,
he cannot recede from it; the penalty of this Law must be born; in order to
reconciliation, and justice satisfied for man's transgression, which must be
done by such a one, that can answer the claim of divine justice. The beasts of
the Forests, and cattle of a thousand hills (which were yet often given to God
in sacrifice) could not do it. The Apostle tells us, that it is impossible that
the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin, Heb. 10. 4. They were
never guilty, and they are no valuable consideration, nor yet the Angels who
are above mankind, as the bruit creatures are below. Man had sinned, and a
sacrifice from among mankind, is to be found, Neither can man in sin, and
under the taint of it be accepted, all that he can suffer is due for himself,
and therefore can be no other man's discharge. In the payment of my own debt, I
set free no other debtor; Neither can any, that is mere man go through with it,
here is pure justice without relaxation, as to the value, confessed by those who
yet contend whether idem or tantundem be paid by Christ, the same in kind, as
was owing by man, or the like in value and estimate; He that is brought under a
divine attachment, must not come out till he have paid the uttermost farthing,
which man in torments is ever in discharging, and never can discharge; It is as
easy to make a world, as by way of ransom to deliver a soul. Christ therefore
that knew no sin, is made sin, that is, an offering for sin. God manifest
in the flesh, he that was God and man, has undertaken the work, man to suffer,
and God to satisfy in suffering, and so God is in Christ reconciling the world
to himself, 2 Corinthians. 5. 19. The immediate effect or result of this price of
man's redemption, (I suppose) is the putting of man into a capacity of a
covenant with God, yet when this is done, till more be done, by Christ in the
way of his Mediatourship for man, men are not yet in covenant, not the Elect
among men. This is evident in those Ephesians, that were raised up together,
and made sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 6. There
was no time in which Christ had not paid the price of their ransom, yet there
was a time, and then but lately over, that they were without Christ, being
aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Elect
Infidels are not till their call, in covenant, they stand not actually
reconciled, and one with God before Faith, for then there needed no Ministry
of reconciliation to follow. If this were granted, then Christ did the whole
for man's salvation on the cross by himself, and does nothing now in heaven, by
way of intercession, nor any thing by his agents in a ministerial way upon
earth, neither could man before faith, be underwrath, in which he is yet
concluded by our Savior himself, John 3. 36. A state of wrath, and an actual
reconciled estate cannot stand together. There is a price paid, and (as I may
say) in the Fathers hand, but to be applied according to the good pleasure of
the Father and the Son; A man may purchase a prisoners liberty; so that he
has it in his just and legal power to set him free; and yet take what time he
pleases in discretion to impart it to him, and actually deliver him. In this
work there are three parties; God the Father, as Creditor, Christ Jesus, the
Surety Man, the Debtor. The Father might have refused this discharge from the
hand of Christ, and exacted it of the principal; Christ might have refused to
have made such payment, he was not in the Obligation; There was a relaxation of
the person, as is agreed on all parties; Man must come in and manifest his
acceptance, Till he is content to leave his old master, sin and Satan; This new
Lord gives him no entertainment, he must be content to come out of bondage, or
else he can enjoy no freedom.

2. The next work of Christ, Christ brings man within the verge of the
Covenant. 1. By his tender of it.
is to bring man within the bond of the covenant professedly to accept it, for
which there is yet a double work. First, to make tender of it, this has been
Christ's work as the Prophet of his Church in all ages. In what latitude in was
carried in the days of the fathers before the flood, it is rather obscurely
pointed at; then plainly showed; yet there was then a distinction, between the
posterity of Seth, and that of Cain, and so contiued till the days of Noah,
when the sons of God saw the daughters of men; children of the covenant, saw
those out of the covenant; Men within the visible Church, saw women without the
Pale, and joined themselves in marriage with them. From Abraham's days it was
confined to his posterity, and held within his line, and those few that as
proselytes joined themselves unto them. In Gospel times it is enlarged, the
tender is made not to Jews only, but also to every Nation under heaven, the
Commission being to preach the Gospel to every creature, none by Nation so
contemptible, that is to be excluded. In Christ Jesus there is neither
Barbarian, 2. By shaping the heart for it.
nor Scythian, Jew or Gentile, Col. 3. 11. And, as there is to be a tender; so
also it is his work to shape the heart for acceptance of it, to embrace the
terms, and enter into it. God shall persuade* Japhet, and he shall dwell in the
tents of Shem, Genesis 9. 27. The inhabitants of the Isles peopled by Japhets
posterity shall become the Israel of God, shall succeed the Jews in a
Church State, and vissible profession of the name of God, The hand of the Lord
was with them, namely, those that preached at Antioch, and a great number
believed, Acts 11. 21. where believing (after the manner of the History in the
Acts) is no other then embracing the Doctrine of Faith, they were made
Disciples; many of which after fell off, even from their profession.

A third work is to enable those whom he brings to glory (those among them in
covenant that are called according to his purpose) to perform the duties of
the covenant, Christ brings up to the terms of the Covenant.
to be steadfast and upright in it, and this is by Circumcising their heart
giving them a new heart, writing his Law in their hearts, putting it into their
inward parts, keeping them by his mighty power through faith unto salvation; of
which more hereafter. Christ crowns those that come up to the terms of the
covenant


The last work is to crown with glory those that by grace he raises up, to the
terms of the covenant, thus qualifying them, he crowns them, I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you to my self, John 14.
2, 3.

Here some difficulties offer themselves, If the covenant of works (past
between God and man in his integrity) were immediate, Difficulties removed.
and the transactions of it without reference to Christ, then if follows that
faith in Christ is not commanded in that Law, Adams believing it, Faith is a
duty of the moral Law.
seeing Christ was not revealed, and was not as Mediator of any use. This
opinion is strongly maintained by Arminians. Armin. in resp. ad artic. decimum
nonum. Corvinus Contr. Molin. cap. 11. And to this end, that they may make it
good, that God cannot in justice require faith in Christ, from man in his
fallen condition, unless he withal confer upon him abilities to believe,
seeing he never had that power from him in his integrity, and state of purity,
and upon this supposition the argument seems of force. We vindicate Gods
justice in commanding works; though to us now impossible, seeing once we had
power to reach the highest of his precepts, and his command, is no rule of our
empaired strength, but of our duty. But if men never had that power, and the
Law never required it, it is injustice (according to all parties) to exact it.
avoid it, how they can vindicate Gods justice thus impeached. But the Orthodox
party have still maintained that Adam had, in his integrity that faith that
does justify, though then it performed not that office of justification, as he
had that faculty whereby we see dead bodies; though then there was no
possibility of such sight, there being no dead bodies to be seen. And that
faith in Christ is commanded in the first precept of the Law is manifest. There
we are commanded to have God for our God, no Interpreter will deny, that the
affirmative is contained in that negative: Thou shall have none other gods but
me. Now God is the God of believers, Heb. 11. 16. No man can have any communion
with God, but by faith in Christ. And so consequently this faith is there
required; what Expositor of the Law does not put trust and affiance in God,
within the affirmative part of the first commandment, as well as fear, love,
and obedience? And without Christ there can be no affiance or trust. If we
conceive the moral Law, to reach no farther then the duties expressly there
named, or the evils forbidden, we shall make it very scant and narrow, we shall
see small reason, of that of the Psalmist, Thy Commandment is exceeding broad,
Psalm 119. 96. But in case we take in all that by necessary consequence may be
inferred, according to the approved rules of interpretation, then scarce any
duty is more clearly laid down then this of faith in Christ. And whereas one
faith, A man cannot preach Faith in Christ out of the Moral Law, I say, a man
out of the Moral Law, may evince the necessity of Faith in Christ; unto every
one that lives in Gospel Light, to whom Christ is tendered; The Law requires the
duty, and the Gospel discovers the object, no man out of the Law could have
evinced Abraham that he must offer his son, nor that he must have left his
country, but when Gods mind was made known to him, the Moral Law did bind
him to obedience, and he had sinned against the Moral Law, in case he had
refused. There is no command given of God to any man, at any time, of an nature
whatsoever, but the Moral Law ties him to the observation of it, not
immediately, explicitly, but upon supposition of such a command intervening.
Therefore ye shall observe all my Statutes, and all my judgments, and do them,
I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 37. Faith in Christ being commanded of God, I John 3.
23. the Moral Law obliges to obedience of it. See Molin. Anatom. Arminianis.
cap. 11. Respons. Wallaei. ad Censuram Johannis Arnol. Corvini cap. 11. Ball on
the covenant, page 105. Burges Vindiciae legis. page 117.

A farther difficulty here offers it self, The Covenant of grace not
commensurate with election.
and of no greater latitude, and only the elect and chosen in Christ, the
called according to Gods purpose, being reconciled, only these are in covenant;
when the Scripture (as shall be, God willing, made good) confines not this
covenant within the limits of the invisible Church, known only to God. But it
is as large as the Church visible.

To this I answer, That all the effects of Christ's death are spiritual,
distinguishing and saving; Seeing gifts of Christ; from his Fathers right hand
are fruits of his death, yet not spiritual, distinguishing and saving. That
they are in some sort spiritual, I dare grant that is, in ordine ad
spiritualia, (if I may so speak) they have a tendency to a spiritual work. That
they are distinguishing from the world, (as it is taken in opposition to the
Church visible) I yield, for I do not enlarge the fruit of Christ's death to all
mankind, assenting to Master Owen and Master Stalham in the grounds that they
lay, of Gods respite of the execution of the whole penalty on man, with the
continuance of outward favors not to be upon the account of Christ, but for
other reasons; yet I know not how to affirm, that Ordinances which yet are
fruits of his death, are all saving, spiritual and distinguishing, seeing they
neither confer salvation nor saving grace on all that partake of them, So
that Christ, is a Mediator of this covenant; and yet those enter into it that
have not reconciliation by Christ Jesus; The Ephesians that were afar off, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13. that is, brought into a visible
Church State in the fruition of Ordinances, made free of that city whose name
is, The Lord is here, Ezekiel. 48. 35.

CHAP. XVIII.
Farther differences between the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace.
A Farther difference of importance, between these covenants, is, in the
conditions annexed unto either of them, and here the difference is brought to
the height. This alone so diversifies them; that they are not barely, in
circumstance and way of administration; but in substance two distinct
covenants; The least difference in conditions, diversifies bargains and
agreements on what part soever the difference is. Conditions in the Covenant of
works and the covenant of grace of Gods part seem to be the same.
Conditions of the covenant between God and man are of two sorts, either such
in which God engages himself, or in which man is engaged; either the
stipulation on Gods part, or else the restipulation on the part of man. The
former unto which God is engaged, are, either rewards in case of
covenant-keeping, or, punishments in case of covenant breaking; The one the
Lord promises, The other he threatens. I find no material difference in the
conditions on Gods part in these covenants. Life is promised in both, in case
of covenant-keeping; and death is threatened in both, in case of
covenant breaking. Some indeed have endeavored to find a great difference in
the life promised in the covenant of works, and the life that is promised in
the covenant of grace; as also in the death that is threatened in the one, and
the other, and thereupon move many, and indeed inextricable difficulties, What
life man should have enjoyed, in case Adam had not fallen? And what death man
should have died, in case Christ had not been promised? From which two,
endlessely more, by way of consectary may be drawn; by those that want neither
wit, nor leisure to debate them. In which the best way of satisfaction and
avoidance of such puzling mazes; is to enquire what Scripture means by Life,
which is the good in the covenant promised; and what by Death, which is the
evil threatened? Now for the first, Life contains all whatsoever, that conduces
to true happiness, to make man blessed in soul and body. All good that Christ
purchases, and heaven enjoys, is comprised under it, in Gospel-expressions. I
am come that they might have life, and that they may have it more abundantly,
John 10. 10. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life, 1 John 5. 12. On the contrary, under Death is comprised, all
that is injurious to man or mankind, that tends to his misery in soul and
body. The damnation of Hell being called death, the uttermost of evils being
the separation of soul and body from God, John 8. 51. 1 John 3. 14. Sin which
leads to it, and is the cause of it, is called death in like manner; Ephesians. 2.
1. And the separation of soul from the body, being called death, sicknesses,
plagues, are so called in like manner, Life promised in the Covenant of Works
and the Covenant of Grace is one and the same.
Ex^d. 10. 17. Now happiness being promised to man in covenant, only
indefinitely under that notion of life, without limit to this or that way of
happiness, in this or that place, God is still at liberty, so that he make man
happy, where, or how he pleases to continue happiness to him, and is not tied
up in his engagement either for earth or heaven. And therefore though learned
Camero in his Treatise de triplici foedere, These. 9. with others, makes this
difference between the covenant of works and the covenant of grace. In the
covenant of Works, (which he calls nature) life was promised, and a most
blessed life, but an animal life in Paradise, in the covenant of Grace a life
in Heaven and spiritual. And Master Baxter in his Aphoris. of Justification,
page 5. says, that this life premised was only the continuance of that state
that Adam was then in, Paradise, is the opinion of most Divines. Yet with
submission to better judgments I see not grounds for it; seeing Scripture no
way determines the way and kind of this happiness promised, and in case that
we take liberty to say, that when long life is promised upon earth (in many
texts of Scripture) that the promise is made good though it fail on earth, in
case it be supplied in heaven, life being the marrow of the promise, much more
then is it made good, when it is indefinitely promised, without limit to a man
whilst on earth, in case it be made good by his translation into heaven. And
indeed there are strong probabilities, heaven being set out by the name of
Paradise in Christ's speech to the thief on the cross; and in Paul's vision in
that rapture, 2 Cor. 12. if we may make such a supposition of man's standing,
now he is fallen, that he should not have continued a life of immortality on
earth, but have been translated into heaven. He had that blessing from God as
other living creatures, to be fruitful and multiply, Genesis 1. 28. and how the
world could have contained all those individuals at once; which to eternity man
should propagate, cannot be imagined. And to conceive, that an end in time
should be put to propagation; when an animal life in the use of the creature
should be continued, is scarce consistent with reason. But a thousand of these
God can expedite when we are at a stand; He promised life, and he could have
made it good, Death threatened in the Covenent of Works and in the Covenant of
Grace is one and the same.
and we see he limited not himself, where, or how to confer it. And what I
have said of life promised, the same I say of death threatened, in case man upon
sin be brought into a state of misery, Justice is done, and the threat takes
hold, where, and howsoever this misery be suffered, whether it had been in
sorrows, and horrors on earth, in separation of the soul first, for torments
and the body to follow, or in a speedy dispatch of soul and body to hell. Gods
way of execution after the sin committed, (on those that are not by Christ
ransomed) does not argue that the penalty in the covenant necessitated him to
it, might not he at once have poured out the whole of his vengeance on vessels
of wrath, when yet we know, that he takes time for the execution of it? A
Learned Writer enquiring into this death that was here threatened, says, that
the same damnation that followed the breach of the second covenant, it could
not be; When I suppose it rather should be said, that in substance and kind, it
can be no other; Infidels that were never under any other covenant then that of
works; and covenant breaking Christians are in the same condemnation, there is
not two hells but one and the same, for those that know not God, and those that
obey not the Gospel of Christ, 2 These. 1. 8. Neither is there any Limbus, or
distinct place for infants in original sin, and out of the covenant of grace.
Neither can I assent to that speech, To say that Adam should have gone quick to
hell, if Christ had not been promised, or sin pardoned, is to contradict the
Scriptures, that makes death temporal the wages of sin. It were I confess to
presume above Scripture, but I cannot see it a contradiction of Scripture; A
burning Fever, a Consumption, Leprosy, Pestilence, etc. are in Scripture made
the wages of sin, yet many go to hell and miss those diseases. And if it be
said Scripture so makes death the wages of sin, that all must suffer it, I
answer, Those Scriptures are all of them leges post latae, appointed of God, as
his way upon man's fall, neither absolute justice, nor yet the penalty threatened
necessitating him to that way of proceeding. He takes the same way where his
justice has already satisfaction, Those that are privileged from death as the
wages of sin, thus die; God tied not up his own hands, as States do their
Judges, and ministerial officers, to one way of execution; and this his way
with the unbeleeving is voluntary, and not necessitated, Upon these grounds it
is, that I find no reason to widen the differences between these promises and
privileges in either covenants.

The identity of conditions, in the covenant of Works and Grace, on Gods part
we have seen; The great diversity in the conditions called for from man comes
to be spoken to.

And in the first place this difference offers it self. The conditions of the
covenant of Works were in man's power, The conditions in the Covenant of works
were in man's power.
being left to the freedom of his will; he had abilities in himself without
seeking out for further assistance then a mere general concurrence to perform
them. This ability in man to answer whatsoever was called for at his hands from
God, appears

First, in the integrity of his nature; Being made like God, his principles
must needs carry him to a conformity with God, and these principles were
connatural to man, in his first being and beginning. Man being made of God to
contemplate his glory, and to enjoy communion with himself, he made him not
defective in any of those noble qualifications that serve for it, or have a
tendency to it. Papists indeed will have this to be a supernatural gift of
grace, Qua^ veluti aureo quodam fraeno pars inferior parti superiori, and pars
superior Deo facile subjecta contineretur. Bellar. De. Great. primi hominis,
cap. 5.
and above the glory of man's first creation. Bellarmine compares it to a bridle
given to curb that lust which rises against reason in us. That rebellion of
lusts in man, they conceit, would have been, if man had not fallen; which, as
it lays a high charge upon God; in such an aspersion of his pure work drawn
after such a pattern; so, it makes way for other opinions, that the first
motions without consent are no sins, and that lust in the regenerate, is not
sin. But as the bottom is rotten, so, also the building that is raised upon it
is ruinous. There was an happy agreement in man, as well with himself, as with
his Creator: The fall brought in a necessity of support and supply of Grace.

Secondly, this appears from the equity which must be granted to be in the
command of God; which requires that the work given in charge be not above his
abilities, that is charged with it. The Arminian argument from a command, to
abilities to keep the command, from a threat to conclude a power to keep off
from the thing threatened, is of force, as long as the person under command
keeps himself in the same station, and strength, as when the command was given.
But applying this to man in his fallen estate (who had sinned away his
abilities,) the strength of it is wholly lost. The command of God retains its
perfection; when we are under the power of corruption. The Law is nothing
abated, though we be weakened.

3. It appears in the work it self which was charged upon man upon performance
of which he was to expect happiness. There is no more explicitly mentioned,
then that negative precert: Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou
shall not eat; the day that thou eatest, thou shall surely die. This, all may
yield might easily have been kept if the command had been heeded, or the menace
observed. The Jews at their worst could observe the commands of non-licet
meats, and this was a command of like nature, yet this was not all unto which
man was tied, Being made in the image of God; he had clear light to discern
good from evil, and as all yet retain, darkly and obseurely; so he had the Law
written in his heart, clearly; Adultery, Murder (though no otherwise condemned,
then by that light which he had by creation) in that estate had been sin. The
former positive Law was evil because forbidden, take away the prohibition, and
there had been no sin in eating. These are forbidden, because evil: The Law
imprinted by creation, being presupposed, there needed no further Law to make
them sinful. They that never had the written Law, are condemned for these
practices, by that Law which by nature is written in their hearts. But against
these, there was in nature an Antipathy; Man's pure nature had them in
abhorrency. As now there needs no Law more then nature does suggest, to forbid
the eating of poison, feeding on dust, or carrion: So then there needed no more
Law to condemn these practices; so that obedience in that state was in man's
power must necessarily be yielded.

The conditions of the covenant of Grace are not performed, The conditions in
the Covenant of Grace are not performed without special assistance.
but by special grace; a power from God must concur for their work in man;
Man has no abilities in himself to answer what God requires, and if he rise
not up to the terms of this covenant, till he raise himself, he will for ever
fall short of it. As the covenant was vouchsafed of grace, so grace must make
us meet to partake of the benefits of it.

This appears. Reasons.
1. In the state and condition in which God finds man, when he first enters
covenant with him; yea, after covenant entered, till a change be wrought, and
abilities conferred to answer that which God in covenant requires. This state
of man the Apostle expresses, Ephesians. 2. 1. Dead in trespasses and sins, alive,
and in power for nothing at all, but sin. This was the condition of Heathens,
never in covenant; and so of the Jews who were a people in actual covenant, and
owned of God as his inheritance, as God willing shall be shown. Their
conversation was the same as the Apostle there confesses; Among whom we also
had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath
as well as others. This in abundant other expressions in Scripture is
discovered, holding forth the same thing, Romans 5. 6. For when we were yet
without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. That infant, Ezekiel.
16. 4, 5. had no more possibilities of life, then is to be found even in the
state of death.

Reas. 2. It appears in that power which is exercised by God, in the change of
those in covenant with him, whom he fits for himself for Eternity. This power
in Scripture is set out, in several expressions. First, Creation, Ephesians. 2. 10.
We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. All ability to
good is from the frame into which grace puts us; As there is a power out of
man, which gives him Being, So also there is an answerable power, for his new
Being; He that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and the evil one touches
him not, 1 John 5. 18. Secondly, Quickening. The dead have not power to raise
themselves, without a further power for their Resurrection; Neither is it in
the power of man, Who is dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Thirdly,
Taking away the heart of stone, and giving an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26. To
change the nature of things, which is here done, is the work of an Omnipotence,
which was Satan's argument not denied by Christ, If thou be the Son of God,
command these stones to be made bread, Mat. 4. 3. Fourthly, Causing to walk in
Gods statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 27. A work as of authority, so of power. Fifthly,
Plucking out of the power of Satan, an act of the free grace and power of God,
2 Timothy 2. 26. Sixthly, Drawing, A work of power in him that draws, weakness in
him that is drawn. Joh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which
has sent me draw him. And therefore the Spouse prays, Draw me, and we will
run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. There must be more power in God for conversion,
than in Satan for the souls ruin. Grace must have advantage of temptation, but
Satan can allure, persuade; Our first parents had woeful experience of his
faculty this way, He has his moral persuasions, If God make use of nothing
more, they are even; yea, Satan has the advantage, by so much as we are more
apt for sin than obedience. And, as these metaphorical expressions hold it
forth; So in plain terms it is expressed in Scripture. The Apostle prays for
the Ephesians, that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, they may
know what is the exceeding greatness of Gods power, to those that believe,
according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. And by way of simile makes
Application, chapter 2. verse 1. etc. Even when we were dead in sins, has he
quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 5. Lest any should
say the former Metaphors are stretched above their line; when they are brought
in to hold forth that for which they have been produced; the Apostle here makes
application, and shows that the like mighty power, which was exercised of God,
in raising Christ, dead in the grave, and setting him up above all
principalities and powers, is exercised in raising those who are dead in sin,
to sit in heavenly places with Christ. The Apostle entering a similitude, chap.
1. 19. makes not an end of it till, chap. 2. v. 8. Only having named the
exaltation of Christ upon his Resurrection, does not leave till he have showed
how high he is exalted; and having named man's low ebb in sin; does not leave
till he has set out how low; which draws out the similitude to such length,
in which this truth is set forth unto us, which comparison with the
application, leaves the necessity of an Omnipotent concurrence in this work
without exception.

Reas. 3. This further appears in that inability which is in man, to accept
that which God of grace does tender, unless God cure the faculties by his
power. He is wanting, 1. In power to understand, or to discern the glory of
that grace which is offered: The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can be know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. This native blindness in
man; with the necessity of an Omnipotency for cure, is plain, not only in the
Heathens, who (wanting the light of Revelation,) are, as St. Paul speaks,
darkness; But also in those to whom light is brought, and the word preached;
that stand in actual covenant with God, as appears* Deuteronomy. 29. 1. and 4.
Compared, The Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, (speaking to men in
covenant) and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day. 2. In will to
desire, and heart to embrace any such tender; but on the contrary there is a
readiness still to oppose, which is plain, not only by the stirs that are
raised wheresoever the word is preached, as we see through the History of the
Acts, So that it is grown into a Proverb, Evangelicum ciet bellum, But also by
the struglings to withstand any motion or conviction which the Word works; what
Stephen tells the Jews that they did, that each man by nature is apt to do, to
resist the Holy Ghost. Acts 7. 51. There is much resistance in the heart, which
grace by power does not utterly take away, but overcome and subdue.

4ly This appears in Gods indication, and full declaration of himself, what his
work is, and what is to be expected from his hand in the covenant-conditions
which he requires of us, which we find from his mouth in several Texts of
Scripture. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed to love the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. A new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit I will put within you; I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. But especially in that Text, Jer. 31. 31, 32,
33, 34. The days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with
the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to
bring them out of the land of Egypt ( which my covenant they brake, although I
was an husband to them, says the Lord:) But this shall be the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel; after those days (says the Lord) I will
put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be
their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying; Know the Lord; for they shall
all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord; for
I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more. In which Texts,
a necessity of supernatural grace, Jer. 31. 33. cleared.
for the ends mentioned, is abundantly set out unto us: Had man power left in
nature for this work, or nature so repaired in all, that abilities were
universally conferred, this declaration needed not. No reason can be given of
these engagements, by those that deny any necessity of an Omnipotent
concurrence. These are usually called Promises, and they run indeed, in the
nature of Promises; so that they deserve not blame, that so conceive of them.
Generally taken also to be absolute Promises, says Mr Baxter, Aph. of Just.
page 9. and being Promises, they must indeed be absolute ones, we bring not the
condition of faith to accept of them; Here is nothing prerequired, as in
Promises that are conditional; Being Promises, (if Promises) of Grace, as some
have distinguished, and not Promises to Grace; they are spoken to those that
are in their unbelief and unregenerate condition; Yet that which is necessarily
required to make up a full Promise here is wanting; In Promises (properly so
called) some may claim their interest, and know themselves to be within their
verge, and conclude the thing in Promise (upon terms at least) to be theirs,
which here none can do. This indeed concerns the Elect; but being in
unregeneration, they know not their Election, it is not as yet made sure by
them. So that as to us it is without any determinate object; None can say, my
interest is in this Promise. These were delivered to the whole body of Israel;
when not one in many, did reap the benefit of them. Mr. Baxter therefore makes
them Prophecies, De eventu, Prophecies of what shall happen. I suppose they may
be fitly called, the declaration or indication of Gods work, in the conditions
to which he engages, and of the necessary concurrence, of the power of his
grace, in that which he requires: As Austin and others have interpreted, that
which is affirmed of our Savior, That he is the true light, which enlightneth
every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9. not to be so understood, that
all in the world are enlightened by him, for many are in darkness; but that all
that are enlightened, have light by his light, explaining it with this
similitude: Such a Schoolmaster teaches all the children in a Town; that is,
all that are taught, he teaches. Some go to no School at all, so, these
Promises, I will circumcise your heart, and the heart of your seed; All of
their seed that are circumcised in heart, he circumcises, and so in all the
other, none of all these are done without his special work. This was little
heeded by the generality of the people of the Jews; if they minded duty, it was
well, they little thought of assistance through grace; Tugging it out by their
own strength, and looking for no more from heaven, than that which they had in
hand; Therefore entering Covenant; and walking in their own strength; they brake
Covenant, and were never able to rise to the duties of it, as is hinted in that
of Jeremy. Therefore God promises a new covenant, in which there shall be a
full discovery, and right understanding, of the meaning of the Covenant; I will
write my Law in their hearts, I will put it into their inward parts. So that as
the commandment of love was a new commandment; so this covenant was a new
covenant, both given of old, both a new cleared, for a right understanding.
There was nothing wrong (says Mr. Dixon) in the former Covenant, but it was
imperfect, and all things in it were not expressed clearly. Annot. on Heb. 8.
7. That which was chiefly defective (as it seems) was this here mentioned, and
therefore Mr. Baxter says well, that this place does comprize but part of the
covenant, not the whole, though he be taken up by another for it in these
words, God saying expressly, this is my Covenant; to say it is not, is not to
interpret the Word, but to deny it; God says to the People of Israel, Is not
this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo
every burden? If any one should interpret that Text, would he say the whole of
a Religious Fast, is there expressed, and a full definition of a Fast laid down?
or would he instead of interpreting, deny that Scripture? So also that of
James, Jam. 1. 26. Pure religion and undefiled before God the Father, is this;
To visit the fatherless and the widow, and to keep a man unspotted of the
world. Will any say, that the whole of Religion is set out in that Scripture,
or will he be put to it, to deny the Scripture? I suppose he would rather say,
that that which those Jews (to whom Isay speaks) did in and use to do Religious
Fasts with supply of that which Isay calls for (in which they were defective)
makes up a Religious Fast complete. That which the scattered Tribes did in
Religion; with what James further calls for, would render a man entirely
Religious: So also that of Jeremy 22. 15, 16. Shall thou reign, because thou
closest thy self in Cedar? Did not thy father, eat and drink and do justice and
judgment, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and
needy, and then it was well with him; was not this to know me, says the Lord?
Will any say, that that was all the knowledge that Josiah had of God? or will
he say rather, that this was an evident proof of the sincerity of it; so I say,
that which the Jews already understood to be in the covenant, together with
that which those places of Jeremy and the Hebrews further hold forth, set out
the entire nature of a covenant; and so in all of them, Scripture is
interpreted, not denied. And whereas one affirms, that there is no condition
on man's part, in those texts in question, an adversary of all conditions on
man's part in the covenant replies. If you mean such conditions that God
requires of us; yet works in us; it is there punctually expressed. As Gods
work, it is there indeed expressed; but not as our duty, which lame understanding
of the covenant, has wrought as much mischief in our age; (setting up free
grace, without any eye upon his sovereignty, looking at Gods work, and not at
all on man's duty) as their looking at duty in that age without eye had to the
power of grace, to enable for it. Hence are those desperate counsels; Sit
still, do nothing; doing undoes you: and that not toward Dilemma. Art thou out
of Christ, thou may break thy heart in working, and profit nothing: Art thou
in Christ, then all is wrought to thy hands. And so doing still is vain; and
Mr. Baxters Questionists like demands. How can you make it appear that
according to the new Covenant* we must act for life, and not only from life; or
that a man may make his attaining of life, the end of his work, and not rather
obey it out of thankfulness and love? To which I suppose he has received a
satisfying, and (if thoroughly weighed,) a sadning answer, Appendix, p. 78. 79,
etc.

Fifthly, This appears in that differencing work, which is seen among men here
in the flesh. There is a great difference between those that are of God, and
those that are in the world, that lies in wickedness. This is from the power
of grace, enabling to answer to that unto which God in covenant calls, and not
from the different improvement of any power of man, or the exercise of that
freedom of will, which together with the whole species of mankind he has
received. The Apostle puts the question, Who has made thee to differ? 1 Cor.
4. 7. In which he intends to stop all mouths from boasting, as appears in the
next words; If any therefore shall answer in Grevenchovius his words (as I have
seen them quoted, or in any words that hold out or infer the same thing,) I
make my self to differ: The Apostle will not sit down by it, He expressly
tells us; It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs; but of God
that shows mercy. Rom 9. 16. If grace makes the difference and not man; then
grace enables man to go higher than his own power, and to go higher than any
power that can be in any other. Seclude this differencing grace, and the praise
will be wholly man's. That any have power and possibility for good, (according
to these Divines) may be of God; but that any is better than another it is from
self that makes to differ.

Bradwardine has to this purpose a notable similitude, Si filius miles
acceptis a patre naturalibus, ordine atque armis strenue militaret sicque
forsit an in superbia erigeretur inflatus; quomodo in ipso cradicaretur
superbia, and plantaretur humilitas? Si ei ab aliquo diceretur, Non glorietur
omnis mile: in conspectu patris sui; Ex ipso enim est in militia. ut qui
gloriatur i^ patre suc glorietur, and quid habes quod non accepisti? Si autem
accepisti, quid gloriaris quasi non acceperis? Posset enim rationaliter
respondere dicendo, quare non deberem de mea militia gl^riari? Accepi quidem a
patre meo natural a mea, quia nullus generat semetipsum, accepi and ordinem,
quia nulli conceditur infig nire semetipsum; accepi and arma, qui a similitur
and caeteri militum non nascebar armatus, nec sum fabor armorum: debitum tamen
usum istorum, qui omnibus praevalet non accepi ab alio, sed habeo me ex meipso,
crebas victorias fama celebri di^lugatas non accepi ab alio, sed ^abeo ex
m^ipso. Pro hujusmodi igitur in me ipso merito gloriabor, in alio autem nihil*
sic and de quolibet milite Jesu Christi.
If a son (says he) being a soldier, should receive from his father a
commission and arms, together with natural abilities for war, and fighting
stoutly should be puffed up and grow proud: How may this pride, says he, be
beaten down, and humility planted? If any one should say to him, Let not any
soldier glory in the sight of his father; for what he is in arms, he is from
him: So that he that glories, let him glory in his father; for what have thou
that thou have not received? He might very well and rationally answer ( says
our learned Author,) why should not I glory of my atcheivments in arms? I
have received natural abilities indeed from my father, for none does beget
himself; I have received a oommission from him, for none may put himself into
any such power; I have received also arms from him, for neither I, nor any
other soldier was born armed; neither am I any armourer. But the right use of
all these which is above all, I had from none but my self, and not in any
other; and so every soldier of Jesus Christ. Brad. De causa Dei. lib. 2, cap.
23. ad finem. That is, he may vapor against God, upon such supposal as this
soldier vapors against his father. If acts of grace make to differ and stop
the mouth of all boasting; then it is grace that enables unto these
covenant-duties and engagements.

Sixthly, This appears by the absurdities that will follow upon denial of this
doctrine of the concurrence of grace in the work of man's salvation. 1. Man
being left to the power of his own will, Necessity of the concurrence of grace.
to answer to the terms of the covenant (so that all shall be suspended
according to man's improvement to will or nill, to be active or idle, willing or
disobedient,) when the event in all, even in the Elect must rest doubtful; when
Christ has done all in the work of man's salvation, it might (notwithstanding
all such work of his) so fall out, that he had effected nothing. He might have
been a Savior, and not one man in the world have been saved; He might have
been a Head, without any one member; a Shepherd, and not a sheep in his flock;
a Lord, and never a one to have done him any service. It might have so fallen
out, that he might never have been able to have said to the Father; I, and the
children that thou have given, etc. This is evident; As some have withstood, so
might others; As the most withstand, so might all. Yea, it would have been no
otherwise, If Gods Ministers should go forth, and the hand of the Lord not with
them to work men to believe, Acts. 11. 21. But this is full against Gods
covenant with Christ, which must stand firm and inviolably remain. He shall
see his seed, he shall prolong his days; the pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand, Isa. 53. 10, 11 Therefore it is of grace, that it may be
sure; not of man, that it should be doubtful. 2. Then it will also follow, the
work of man's salvation begins in an act; not in an habit; in somewhat that a
man does respective to God, and not in any thing that God does in and upon man.
The first beginning work will be ascribed to him that wills and runs, not to
him that shows mercy. But this is contrary to all Gospel-Revelations,
concerning the way of our change: I will circumcise thy heart, that thou shall
love the Lord with all thy heart, etc. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I will write my Law in
their hearts, and put it into their inward parts, as Jer 31. 33. No man can
come to me, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. I will take away their
hearts of stone, and give them hearts of flesh, Ezekiel 36. 26. If man were alone
in the work, or had the priorety before any power infused, there had been none
of these undertakings. 3. This will make vain and void the prayers of the
people of God, which in the Scripture is put into their mouths; Draw me, and we
will run, Cant. 1. 4. Turn thou us, O Lord, and so shall we be turned,
Lament. 5. 21. Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit;
acknowledging their own weakness to do, and a necessity of grace to effect,
what in order to their salvation is called for.

7ly. If the Apostle may be heard, his authority will put it out of question,
Exhorting to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, which is done
no other way than in coming up to that which God calls for in covenant, he
gives in his reason for encouragement; It is God that works in us the will and
the deed. The special hand and power of God concurring in this works, is our
encouragement from the Apostle to set upon it. How can he encourage to this
work upon this account that God works in us, to will and to do, if there were
not a work of God upon us before there be any such work done by us? We work,
but he sets us on working; We will, but he sets us on willing; Let all the
glosses that have ever been put upon these words to promote the will and work
of man; and enervate the free grace of God, in the great concernments of
salvation, be examined, and they will all fall of themselves before this Text
of the Apostle. See Dr. Ward in his Sermon called Gratia discriminans.

CHAP. XIX.
Objections against the former doctrine answered.
BUt some say, Absurdities, and those not a few follow upon this Doctrine.

To which I answer; By grace we are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. not of our selves. It
is still equally impossible in both to be self-savours. Here is the difference.
Grace raises us, unto that to which the Gospel calls us, in a self-denying way
through faith; but works us not to that self perfection in those degrees of
inherent righteousness, as to be saved by works.

Secondly, This doctrine lays man as low as a stock or a stone; a dead
carcass, nothing is done by him but what is done in him, and so must needs be
injurious to man. slands in a capacity of a life of grace, of spiritual actions
and motions: having an understanding, will, affections, wanting not any
faculties in their substance. The new man attaines not a new soul, but only
renewed qualifications, which yet are of more glory, than the faculties
themselves, carrying such a glorious resemblance of God. Better know nothing
than not know God, to desire nothing, than not to desire good. The want of
this, turned Angels into Devils, and so man stands in a vast difference from
stocks, stones and those to whom he is thus injuriously compared. This doctrine
is not injurious to man, as it is traduced.

Thirdly, some say, This will render preaching vain, all mans-paines for
Conversion of souls will then prove useless, and to no purpose; we may let
men alone till God work; and when he has begun his work, they will set on
working. This indeed speaks hard to a sort of men in our times; that deny any
previous working in the soul for regeneration, or any preparatory work to
conversion, So that all uncoverted, stand equally distant from the grace of it,
in so much that it can be said of no one rather than another, which Christ said
to the Scribe, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, Mar. 12. 34. I see
not how these can make the preaching of the word of any use; Our Brethren that
went into America, and offer the Gospel to savage Indians there, may as well
find Christ there, as bring him thither. The dark places of the earth may be
equally happy, with those, where light is in most glory, if light contribute
nothing to the work of change, and the happy frame of Christ in us. But those
that have learnt, that infused habits are wrought in the soul in the same
manner, Habitus infusi infunduntur ad m^dum acquisitorum.
as those that are acquired, may easily return a satisfying answer. That
opinion* that the soul is by an immediate creation infused, how generally
soever it is received, yet never was thought of force to render the way of
marriage useless for procreation; God infuses not a soul by creation into any,
but an organized body, an Embryo fitted to receive it. Neither can this opinion
of the power of grace in the work of Conversion, render in vain the labors of
those that are spiritual Parents. Conviction is in order before Conversion, and
men must see themselves necessitated to do what they do, before ever they enter
upon it. The soul knows what it does, when it first believes, and sees a
necessity to accept Christ before it receives him, which is the work of the
Word in the souls, of those that are brought to Christ Jesus. It is not in
vain for God to send his Ministers to show the mysteries of the Kingdom of
heaven to those that are blind, when this is the way of God to open their eyes
and give them sight. It is not in vain that he sends them to those that are
without strength, when this is his way to enable them with power. It is not in
vain that Paul plants, and Apollos waters, when yet it is God that gives the
increase, when God will use Paul and Apollos for the increase that he gives.
Ministers should persuade, and people improve endeavors as though they were
Pelagians, and no help of grace afforded, They should pray and believe, and
rest on grace as though they were Antinomians, nothing of endeavor to be
looked after; So the injury that the Pelagian does to grace, and the Antinomian
to our endeavors, will be on both hands avoided.

CHAP. XX.
Farther differences in the conditions in the Covenant of Works, and the
conditions in the Covenant of Grace.
2ly. THe conditions, on man's part in the Covenant of Works, kept man within
him self for righteousness. The conditions in the Covenant of Works kept man
within himself for righteousness.
That righteousness in which he was to stand in Gods sight, was inherent,
wrought by himself; co-natural to him, flowing from the principles of his
creation, in conformity to God. And therefore properly his own; as now a man's
reason, will and affections are properly his, He needed no other, nor no more
righteousness than that in which he stood. Though he had that faith which now
serves to justify; yet it needed not, nor could be improved to take in any
other righteousness without himself for justification. Man stood then on his
own bottom. His dependence was on God for being, but that being, which God
pleased to communicate, was in that integrity and purity, that he needed not
any farther. But the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, carry man out of
himself, The conditions in the Covenant of Grace, carry a man out of himself to
be righteous by another righteousness.
He must be righteous with a righteousness extrinsecal, or else he will never
be able to stand in judgment. Paul was as high, as he that was highest, in that
righteousness, which he could lay claim to, as his own, wrought by himself,
as well before conversion as after. Before conversion he was as high, as a
Pharisee, or a Jew according to the letter could reach, either in privileges,
or duties; as we may see in that gradation of his, Phil. 3. Circumcised, and
therefore of the body of the people of God, and no alien from the Commonwealth
of Israel; Circumcised the eighth day, and therefore born of Parents in the
same Church Communion; Of the stock of Israel, and so the seed of Abraham, and
not descended of ancestors that had been Proselytes; Of the Tribe of Benjamin,
of that part of Israel that held the truth of worship; of whom was salvation,
and not of the Apostated tribes; An Hebrew of the Hebrews, and therefore had
not forgotten the language of Canaan; As touching the Law, a Pharisee, a man of
no vulgar account, but of the most exquisite Sect; Concerning zeal, persecuting
the Church, therefore not lukewarm or cold in the faith; As touching the
righteousness that is of the Law blameless, therefore of a conversation
exact, walk up to his principles. After conversion, he knew nothing by himself,
1 Cor. 4. 4. His heart condemned him not, He exercised himself continually to
have a conscience void of offense, both to God and man, Acts 24. 16. Yet he
durst rest, in none of these, I am not (says he) hereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.
4. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ; yea,
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
my own righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is through faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Philip. 3. 7, 8, 9. The
ignorance of this, was the bane of the body of the Jewish Nation. The Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even
the righteousness which is of faith. But Israel which followed after the Law
of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness; wherefore?
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law,
Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto
the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. And still, it is the undoing of a great
part of the world; Man being naturally inclined, to look after a righteousness
of his own, and extremely opposite to this righteousness, which in the
covenant of grace is tendered, and by which in a Gospel-way he must be saved.
The righteousness of the former covenant, was wrote in the heart by nature;
and such remainders left, that the man that minds any righteousness, alone
looks after it. But this, is only of Revelation, He must have light without
him to lead to this righteousness, which is not his own, nor inherent in him:
What naturally he did not know, he is naturally ready to oppose and refuse. Men
know not how, till they be taught of God, to see a reason of it; or to
understand that it is of any use. A man may be wise with another man's wit,
strong with another man's strength, learned by another man's knowledge, as well
as righteous (as they conceive) by another man's righteousness: Hence are the
scorns that are put upon it, and the Treatises that are wrote against it; Vain
man would feign be somewhat, as wise, Job 11. 12. so also righteous. This takes
all from man, strips him of all in, which he may glory, as Romans 3. 27. This
which man so opposes, the covenant of grace establishes; And that which he so
advances, the covenant of grace disclaimes. The conditions in the Covenant of
works were for man's preservation in present happiness.


3. The conditions on man's part in the covenant of works were for man's
preservation in statu quo; in that condition in which he was created, To hold
him in communion with God, which was his happiness; he expected not to be
bettered by his obedience, either respective to happiness (no more is promised
than in present he had,) nor yet in his qualifications respective to his
conformity to God in righteousness and true holiness. What improvement he
might have made of the habit infused, by the exercise of obedience; The
conditions in the Covenant of grace are for man's reparation.
I shall not determine, But no change in qualifications was looked after, or
given in promise.

The conditions of the covenant of grace are serviceable to man in his return
to God, for his recovery, as to his state of happiness lost; so to the repair
or new frame of his qualifications depraved and spoiled. This is plain of it
self, and will be further explained in that which follows, Other differences
there are assigned by Divines to difference these two covenants; some of which
fall in with these that I have mentioned, and some to which I cannot in all
things consent. See Camero de triplici foedere, 1 These. 9. * These I thought to
be most material, and with these I shall rest satisfied.

CHAP. XXI.
Faith is a condition of the Covenant of Grace.
HAVING asserted conditions, in the covenant of grace, and held forth several
differences between the conditions, in the covenant of works, and in the
covenant of grace, we are now further to enquire, what these conditions are,
that are called for in this covenant, on which we treat: Those Divines, that
with concurrent judgments, acknowledge this covenant to be conditional, are not
yet, so unanimous, in their assignation of them. For a full discovery, some
things are to be premised, as truths taken for granted, rather than disputed 1.
That God covenants with man, and engages himself to him, not only for
justification, but also for salvation. Not only for pardon of sin, but
everlasting life and glory. Not only to be reconciled to him; but to confer
eternal happiness upon him. 2. Whatsoever God requires of man, in order,
either to his justification, or salvation, without which he is not justified,
or saved, and man engages unto, in order to his justification, or salvation,
this is a covenant condition. This I take to be clear, in case there be any
such thing, as a condition in any covenant, and it is also granted by a
professed adversary of all conditions in the covenant of grace, faith and
repentance are (says he) means, of our enjoying the comforts of the covenant,
but not conditions going out of the nature of a covenant; for every means, is
not a condition, though every condition be a means; but, when a means is by
stipulation, and contract appointed; for the acquiring of any thing, then it is
a condition. Whatsoever then we can find, thus required of God, in this way of
contract, and stipulation; is a condition by the confession of our adversaries.
3. Whatsoever is required of man, in order to his justification, is a condition
of his justification, and all that is required, in order to his eternal
salvation, is, a condition of salvation, God making tender of both, and man
engaging himself to seek both, whatsoever is required in order to either,
respective to that, is a condition. 4. That, which is a condition of
justification, is also a condition of salvation, in that, salvation presupposes
a justified estate, but, it holds not on the contrary, that, which is, a
condition of salvation, is not therefore a condition of justification. More is
required, to hold us up, in constant communion with God, then to bring us into
a state of actual reconcilement to God. This being premised, the work will be
more easy, to assign conditions in this covenant. The condition, immediately
serviceable, for man's return to a reconciled state with God; and consequently
of his justification, is faith, which almost all acknowledge to be a condition,
and Camero, with several others, makes it to be, the sole condition of the
covenant. A condition it is, as, is above contradiction, John. 3. 15, 16. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that, whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, Mark 16. 16. He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but, he that believes not,
shall be damned. Acts 10. 43. To him, give all the Prophets witness, that
thorough his name; whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of
sins, Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore men, and brethren; that
through this man, is preached unto you forgiveness of sins. And by him, all
that believe, are justified from all things from which, ye could, not be
justified, by the Law of Moses, Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shall be saved, and thy whole house, Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set
forth, to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 10. 4. Christ is
the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believes. In all these
texts, and several others, faith is required of men, in covenant, and if men
did not engage to believe, they could not be so much as professed covenanters.
This is in reason further evident.

1. That which gives us interest in the Mediator of the covenant, without which
we have no title to him, Reasons convincing Faith to be a condition of the
Covenant of grace.
or portion in him; is a condition of the covenant: This is plain of it self,
without interest in the Mediator of the covenant, we are as though no covenant
were entered, and the former distance held up. But it is faith that gives us
interest in Christ the Mediator, He dwells in us by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. He is
set forth a propitiation through Faith in his blood; They that believe receive
him, John 1. 12. Others hold a distance from him; To as many as received him,
to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to those that believe in
his Name.

2. That which receives all that grace gives, must needs be a condition of the
covenant of grace; This is as plain, to be under a covenant of grace, and void
of the gifts of grace is a vain entrance upon it, and the reception of the gift
is a condition necessarily requisite. But Faith receives all that grace gives;
It is of Fath that it might be of grace, Romans 4. 16. God gives nothing, at
least tending to eternity, but he puts it into the hands of Christ; He is the
Fathers treasury and storehouse, Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father that in him
all fullness should dwell. And that of his fullness we should all receive, Joh.
1. 16. And faith receives al from him, He that believes, out of his belly
flows rivers of living water. Joh. 7. 38.

3. That which interest us in, and gives title to all privileges, of a people
in covenant with God through Christ, is a condition of the covenant: This is
plain, the end of the covenant being to confer those privileges upon us;
But Faith interests us in, and gives title to all these privileges, Paul is
sent to the Gentiles, to turn them from Satan to God, to bring them out of
Satan's kingdom, and to bring them in a covenant-way into Christ's Kingdom,
That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that
are sanctified (says Christ) by faith that is in me. Christ is the object of a
Christians faith, on whom it is terminated; Faith which is in Christ, receives
that leading privilege, forgiveness of sins; without this privilege we are
strangers to all other privileges; Being under sin, we are heirs of wrath,
and in no capacity of mercy. Faith interests us in this. Acts 10. 43. To him
give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in
him, shall receive remission of sins. Acts 13. 39. And by him, all that believe
are justified, from all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law
of Moses. Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins
that are past, through the forbearance of God. Faith interests us in the
consummating privilege, an inheritance among them that are sanctified. He that
believes has everlasting life, John 6. 40. Faith interests us in all
intermediate privileges, which a man in covenant can enjoy in the way to this
inheritance. Adoption of sons is this way obtained, John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26.
Pacification of Spirit, Serenity and tranquillity of mind, Isa. 26. 3. Romans 5.
1. Boldness at the throne of grace, Ephesians. 3. 12. There is no privilege
bottomed on Christ, that has foundation in him, but Faith receives, Faith then
must be a condition of the covenant.

4. That which puts into a capacity to receive the mercies of the covenant;
held forth in Promise, is a condition of the covenant, and the want of it
strips off all hope and expectation of it; But Faith puts into a capacity to
receive all the graces of the covenant given in promise; Said I not unto thee,
if thou will believe, thou shall see the glory of God? John 11. 40. God exerts
and glorifies his power in great things for good unto those that exercise the
grace of Faith. Paul saw the Creeple had faith to be healed, Acts 14. 9. Sure
if there be such a thing as a condition in any covenant, in the world any such
thing as a conditional covenant, then sure faith is a condition of the covenant
of grace; Some conceive an absolute covenant made of God for grace, as Jer. 31.
33. This with me is very disputable, and I have given my reasons. But the
covenant made to grace, must needs suppose grace. There is no covenant for
happiness made with any creature, but upon terms and conditions.

For further clearing of this point, In what sense faith is here taken.
we must know that faith is considered under a double notion. First, as an
instrument, or (if that word will not be allowed) as the way of our interest in
Christ, and privileges by Christ. Secondly, as an inherent grace or Christian
duty to which both the Law and the Gospel call. The radical grace from which
others flow, though not in their being, yet in their farther growth and
increase. I speak of Faith now in the first acception. Neither as a part, or
any way a working cause, of the farther progress in inherent righteousness,
so it will come in the second place, but as interesting us in another
righteousness, and so I say it is a condition in the covenant of grace,
immediately serviceable for our return to God, and reconciliation in Christ.
For clearring of which, Propositions tending to clear the point in hand.
I shall clear it in some propositions.

First, God will by no means justify a wicked person, no man in sin shall
stand and live in his sight. He that has made a Law to forbid it, ordained
hell for the punishment of it, will not justify the person that is convinced
and found guilty of it. Some say it is against his essence. The justice of God
(which is God) ties him to take vengeance, sure I am it is against his
declaration of himself, Exodus 34. 7. when he sets out his name in several
particulars, this is one, by no means clearing the guilty. Some indeed have
said (conceiting with themselves thereby to promote free grace,) that God
justifies sinners as sinners, which, as it must needs, if true, bring in the
salvation of all, a quatenus ad omne valet argumentum, then a man need no more
but sin, to conclude his salvation, and the more sin, the stronger
evidence; so, it is utterly destructive to the Gospel, and overthrows the whole
work of Christ's merit, as the Apostle says, If righteousness be by the Law,
then, Christ is dead in vain. Galatians 2. 21. So we may safely say, If a man
be justified as a sinner without a righteousness. So that the truth is, God
justifies as righteous, what he esteems as an abomination in man, that he does
not himself; but this in man is an abomination to him; He that justifies the
wicked, and condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord,
Proverbs 17. 15.

Secondly, Man has no righteousness of his own, to bring in plea for his
justification, in which he can appear before God in judgment. This will be
plain if we consider the ways of acquital where proceedings are just and
legal. This must be, either as innocent, when a man can plead not guilty to
that which is given in charge; So did David when Cush, the Benjamite did
traduce him, Psalm. 7. 3. If I have done this, if there be iniquity in my
hands. And so did Paul to the charge of Tertullus, Acts 24. 13. Upon this
account Pilate was willing to have acquitted Christ, I find no fault in this
man, Luke 23. 4. Or else by way of satisfaction or discharge of the penalty
which the Law imposes, so in all penal Laws, when the penalty is borne, the
delinquent is discharged. Man cannot be acquitted as innocent, his guilt is too
palpable. There is no men that sins not, (says Solomon) 1 Kings 8. 4, 6.
The Scripture has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3. 22. The Law speaks that
language, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God, Romans 3. 19. Man is under that guilt that he is wholly silenced;
which renders the way of salvation by works impossible. Neither can he be
acquitted by way of satisfaction; where the way of pure justice is held, the
debtor under charge can never come out till he has paid the uttermost
farthing, Mat. 5. 26. Which here amounts to such an height, that man may be
ever paying, but never able to satisfy: Our guilt is according to the majesty
of him, whose Law is transgressed, and wrath incurred. This is seen in Devils
and damned souls, who bear in their own persons the reward due to their sins.
That man, that must suffer it in his own person, may well say with Cain, My
punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13.

Thirdly, Man in this sad and perplexed estate, has yet a righteousness of
grace tendered him, a righteousness without the Law, but witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets, Romans 3. 21. And this is by way of discharge of his guilt by
another suffering; Our name was in the Obligation in case of sin to suffer
death, Christ was pleased (by consent and covenant with the Father) to put in
his; and as he was thus obliged, so he suffered, the just for the unjust, that
he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. We brake the Law, and he bore the
penalty, whether idem or tantundem, the same in specie, or the same in value,
is scarce worth dispute, So that it be yielded that justice was answered, and
the Father satisfied, and that we come out not on our own, but our sureties
account. And this (as I yet conceive) is by Christ's passive obedience; His
suffering in the flesh is our freedom, his death is our ransom. There needs no
more than innocence not to die, and when guilt is taken away, we stand as
innocent, no crime then can be charged upon us. But to reign in life (as the
Apostle speaks) to inherit a crown, there is farther expected, which we not
reaching, Christ's active obedience imputed to us (not adding to ours (but being
in it self complete) is accounted ours, and we are discharged.

And whereas some say, medium between them.

I answer, medium conceived between them, and is not only conceived, but
assigned by Papists in their Limbus infantum. Neither will it serve to say that
Christ's active obedience, served only for a qualification to fit him for the
work of suffering; none but innocent man free from sin, could be a sacrifice
for sin, seeing Christ had been innocent, though he had never come under the
Law, to have yielded that obedience. His person had not been, as ours, under
the Law, unless of his own accord he had been made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.
Somewhat might be said for the subjection of the humane nature in Christ, the
manhood of Christ, which was a creature, but the person of Christ God-man,
seems to be above subjection, Much may be said for the subjection of the Son
of David, so considered, he may say with David, I am thy servant, and the son
of thy handmaid, but not so of the Lord of David, had he not for our sakes made
himself a servant; We know the mortality of the humane nature, yet Christ had
never died, unless he had made himself obedient unto death, neither needed he
to have served unless he had humbled himself, Phil. 2. to take upon him the
form of a servant. See the confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Assembly of
Divines, chap. 8. sect 5. and Dr. Featlies speeches upon it.

Fourthly, This righteousness of Christ, whether passive or active, or both
passive and active, is made ours by faith. This is our way of interest and
appropriation of it to our selves, Faith and no other grace, this grace and no
other Gospel-work, gives us title; and therefore, as it is called the
righteousness of God, so, also the righteousness of faith; These two, are
promiscuously used and taken, for one another, Romans 10. 3, 4. Phil 3. 8. Called
the righteousness of God, being the free gift of God, wrought by Christ who is
God, denied to be our own righteousness, being neither wrought by us, or
inherent in us, called the righteousness of faith, not of works, not of love,
not of patience, or meekness. It is alone faith, and none of these graces that
puts out it self to receive it; love in a graciously disposed soul, cleaves to
Christ for communion, but receives him not for justification. These two stand
as relatives, there is no soul entitled to this righteousness, but by faith;
and faith is it that entitles to it, and the believing soul has interest in
it, Therefore justification in Scripture is ascribed to faith, and denied to
works, when neither faith, nor works can bear us out of themselves before the
tribunal of God; but faith takes hold, and the soul by faith rests on this
righteousness of grace, which the Gospel tenders. It is true, that faith
receives the Spirit as well as it receives the blood of Christ, Joh. 7. 39.
Gal. 3. 14. But this is for another use, for the work of sanctification
inherent, The acceptance of Christ as a Lord, does not justify.
not justification by righteousness imputed. And it is also true, that faith
accepts Christ as a Lord, as well as a Savior: But it is the acceptance of
him as a Savior, not as a Lord that justifies; Christ rules his people as a
King, teaches them as a Prophet, but makes atonement for them only as a
Priest, by giving himself in sacrifice; his blood for remission of sins; These
must be distinguished, but not divided, Faith has an eye at all, the blood of
Christ, the command of Christ, the Doctrine of Christ, but as it eyes and
fastens on his blood, so it justifies. He is set out a propitiation through
faith in his blood, Romans 3. 24. not through faith in his command, It is the
blood of Christ that cleanses all sin, and not the Sovereignty of Christ.
These confusions of the distinct parts of Christ's Mediatourship; and the
several offices of faith may not be suffered. Scripture assigns each its
particular place and work. Sovereignty does not cleanse us, nor does blood
command us; faith in his blood, not faith yielding to his Sovereignty does
justify us. There are several acts or fruits of justifying faith, Heb. 11. But
all are not justifying; It is not Abraham's obedience, Moses self-denial, Gideon
or Sampsons valor that was their justification, but his blood (in which faith
alone gives interest) who did enable them in these duties, by his Spirit. Paul
went in these duties as high as they, living in more clear light, and under
more abundant grace, I doubt not but he out-topt them, and yet he was not
thereby justified, as 1 Cor. 4. 4. James indeed says, that Abraham was
justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son on the Altar, James 2.
21. But either there we must understand a working faith with Piscator, Paraeus,
Pemble, and others, and confess that Paul and James handle two distinct
questions; The one, whether faith alone justifies without works; which he
concludes in the affirmative. The other, what faith justifies, whether a
working faith only, and not a faith that is dead and idle; or else I know not
how to make sense of the Apostle, who straight inferres from Abraham's
justification by the offer of his son. And the Scripture was fulfilled, that
says, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.
How otherwise do these accord? He was justified by works, and the Scripture was
fulfilled, that says, he was justified by faith; Neither can I reconcile what
he says, if this be denied, with the whole current of the Gospel. The Rhemists
indeed understand those texts of the Apostle, where he excludes works from
justification, to be meant of man's moral works, done before faith and
conversion; The works of the Law done without Christ, Annot. in Romans 3. 20, 28.
As though the Law did not command those duties, unto which Christ through faith
strengthens a Christian converted by grace; And when the Apostle concludes the
impossibility of being justified by the works of the Law, his meaning should be
unless grace assist the Law, that it may justify: This could not be, the
Apostle calls it a righteousness of God without the Law, not a righteousness
of the Law, with addition of strength from the Gospel; All works before or
after conversion inherent in us, or wrought by us, are excluded from
justification. See Ravanellus in verbum, Justificatio. Number. 3. page 867. This
justification wrought freely by grace through faith, Romans 3. 24. is no way
consistent with justification by works. And what the Apostle speaks of
election, we may well apply to justification, the same medium equally proves
the truth of both, If by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is
no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more of grace, otherwise
works were no more works, Rom 11. 6. And these things considered* I am truly
sorry that faith should now be denied to have the office or place of an
instrument in our justification; Faith justifies as an instrument.
nay, scarce allowed to be called the instrument of receiving Christ, that
justifies us because the act of faith (which is that which justifies us) is,
our actual receiving Christ, and therefore cannot be the instrument of
receiving. This is too subtle a notion: we use to speak otherwise of Faith;
Faith is the eye of the soul whereby we see Christ, and the eye is not sight.
Faith is the hand of the soul whereby it receives Christ, and the hand is not
receiving, And Scripture speaks otherwise, We receive remission of sins by
Faith, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified is received by Faith,
Acts 18. 26. Why else is this righteousness sometimes called the
righteousness of Faith, and sometimes the righteousness of God which is by
Faith, but that it is a righteousness which Faith receives; Christ dwells in
us by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. By Faith we take him in and give him entertaintment
We receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith, Gal. 3. 14. These
Scriptures speak of Faith as the souls instrument, to receive Christ Jesus, to
receive the Spirit from Christ Jesus. The instrumentality of it in the work of
justification is denied, because the nature of an instrument (as considered in
Physical operations) does not exactly belong to it, which if it must be always
rigidly followed, will often put us to a stand in the assignation of causes of
any kind in Moral actions, The material and formal causes in justification are
scarce agreed upon, and no marvel then, in case men mind to contend about it,
that some question is raised about the instrument. But in case we shall
consider the nature and kind of this work, about which Faith is implied, and
examine the reason and ground upon which Faith is disabled from the office of
an instrument in our justification, and withal look into that which is brought
in as an instrument in this work in the stead of it; I do not doubt but it will
easily appear that those Divines, that with a concurrent judgment (without
almost a dissenting voice have made Faith an instrument in this work) speak
most aptly and most agreeably to the nature of an instrument. The work about
which Faith is implied, is not an absolute, but a relative work, a work of God
toward man, not without the actual concurrence of man, such, in which neither
God nor man are sole efficients, nor any act of God or man can be sole
instruments, but there must be a mutual concurrence of both; This must needs be
granted, unless we will bring in Doctor Crispes passive recipiency of Christ,
Christ's abode in man without man, in spite of man, and suppose him to be
justified in unbelief; And hereupon faith is disabled from this office in
justification by this argument. If Faith be an instrument, it is the instrument
of God, or man. 1. Not of man, for man is not the principal efficient, he does
not justify himself. 2. Not of God. For (1) It is not God that believes,
though it is true, God is the first cause of all actions. (2.) Man is the causa
secunda, between God and the action, and so still man should be said to
justify himself. (3.) For (as Aquinas) the action of the principal cause, and
of the instrument is one action; and who dare say, that faith is so Gods
instrument? (4.) The instrument must have an influx to the producing of the
effect of the principal cause, by a proper causality; and who dare say that
faith has such an influx into our justification.

I answer, It is the instrument of man; and though man do not justify himself,
yet he concurres as a willing, ready agent with God in it; God is a justifier
of those that believe in Jesus, Romans 3. 26. God has set Christ forth a
propitiation through faith, Romans 3. 25. It is one God which shall justify the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith, Romans 3. 30. And
because it is the instrument of man in a work of this nature, it is also an
instrument of God. As some have observed a communication of Titles between
Christ and his Church: (the Church being called by his Name,) so there is a
communication of actions in these relative works; Christ dwells in our hearts
by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. We believe, and not Christ, and yet faith there is
Christ's instrument, whereby he takes up his abode; God purifies the hearts of
the Gentiles by faith, Acts 15. 17. They believed, and not God, yet faith is
Gods instrument in the work of their purification; so on the other side, the
Spirit is Gods work, yet we by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh,
Romans 8. 13. Man neither justifies nor sanctifies himself, yet by faith he is
raised to close with God in both; Fides percipit justificationem, efficit
sanctificationem.
and so Faith as an instrument receives righteousness to justification, and
therefore is called the righteousness of faith which is our justification, and
works sanctification; provided you understand not the first work, which is
properly regeneration, and precedent to faith, but the farther progress and
increase of it; The Spirit working faith, faith takes in a larger measure of
the Spirit, John 7. 37. He that believes on me, as the Scripture says, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water; but this he spoke of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him, should receive. The Spirit will do nothing
without our faith, and our faith can do nothing without the Spirit; Man cannot
justify himself by believing without God, and God will not justify an
unbeleeving man. Faith then is the act of man; man believes, yet the instrument
of God, that justifies only believers; so that what is here spoken by way of
exception against faith as an instrument, holds of efficients, and instruments
sole and absolute in their work, and causality. But where there is a
concurrence of agents, and one makes use of the act of another to produce the
effect; that in such causality is wrought, it will not hold.

The promise or grant of the new Covenant in the Gospel, is (insted of faith)
made the instrument in the work of justification. This is indeed Gods, and not
man's. It is the covenant of God, the Promise of God, the Gospel of God; but of
it selfunable to raise man up to justification. It is often tendered, and
justification not always wrought; and so disabled from the office of an
instrument by Ke^ker. in his Com upon his first Canon, concerning an
instrument. Quam primum ergo instrumentum, principali agenti non subservit,
instrumenti naturam a mittit.
As Soon as the instrument servs not the principal agent, so soon it loses the
nature of an instrument. He instanceth in an horse that obeys not the reins of
his rider, but grows refractory, then he cease to be an instrument for
travel. A sword is not an instrument of slaughter, where it slays not; nor an
axe an instrument to hew, where it cuts not: neither is the Gospel an
instrument of justification, where it justifies not, and without our faith, it
never justifies. Where the Minister is a Minister of condemnation, the savor
of death to death, there the Gospel becomes an instrument of condemnation and
of death. The efficacy that is in the Gospel for justification, it receives by
their faith to whom it is tendered. Heb. 4. 2. Unto us was the Gospel preached
as well as unto them, but the Word preached did not profit them, not being
mixed with faith in them that heard it. 1 These. 2. 2, 13. You received not the
Word of God (which you heard of us) as the word of men, but (as it is in truth)
the Word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe. So that
the Gospel in it self considered, is wanting in that honor assigned to an
instrument, to have influx to the producing of the effect of the principal
cause by a proper causality; If none dare say, faith has such an influx, they
may much less say, that the Word has such an influx. The Gospel is an outward
instrument, says Ravanellus, Faith an inward; They both making up one
instrument, full and complete, yet Faith is more aptly and fitly called an
instrument, Seeing that faith gives efficacy as an instrument to the Word, the
Word may be without Faith, and so no instrument at all; but Faith always
presupposes the Word of Promise, and is not without its object. Therefore to
wind up this whole dispute, in which I have studied to be brief, though I fear
some will think I have been too tedious, Seeing that those that make Faith the
instrument in justification, make the Gospel an instrument likewise, and dare
not go about to strip it of its honor. I hope that they that make the Gospel
an instrument, will acknowledge Faith to be an instrument in like manner; being
in their efficacy as instruments so inseparably joined, and so all the
controversy may be fairly ended and concluded.

CHAP. XXII.
Objections against the conditionality of Faith answered.
AGAINST this which has been said, it is objected by one, that Unbelief is not
a bar hindering one, Which words how high soever against the Gospel, yet he
undertakes to salve with a distinction. There is a twofold receiving of Christ,
says he, (1) There is a passive receiving of Christ, You will say, ( says my
Author) what is passive receiving of Christ? I answer, ( says he) A passive
receiving of Christ, is just such a receiving of him, as when a froward Patient
takes a purge, or some bitter physic* he shuts his teeth against it; but the
Physician forces his mouth open, and poures it down his throat, and so it
works against his will, by the ever-ruling power of one over him, that knows it
is good for him: Thus I say, there is a passive recipiency or receiving of
Christ, which is the first receiving of him; when Christ comes by the gift of
the Father, to a person whilst he is in the stubornesse of his own heart. (2)
There is an active receiving of him, etc.

This distinction carries a full contradiction in it self, There cannot be in
the same subject, a mere passive and active recipie cy of the same thing, as
appears in the similitude brought to illustrate it; This froward Patient that
has a medicine forced into him, in which he is merely passive, cannot again
afterward receive that medicine. If Christ be th^s forced, and enters against
our will, then we cannot actively at any time after receive him, And could it
be reconciled unto it self, yet it stands in full opposition to Scripture;
Christ stands at the door and knocks, Re^. 3. 20. He waits till his locks are
wet with the dew of the night, as Cant. 5. 2. But he makes no forcible entry;
we read of Gods power in changing the will that it freely accepts, but not
forcing gifts of grace upon any against their wills: Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110. 3. He works a will, Philip. 2. 13.
Christ dwells in none that rise in hostility against him, and the positio^,
which the distinction is brought to assert, ( That unbelief is no bar hindering
one from having Christ) is no better; If unbelief be no bar to our receiving
of Christ; then it is no bar to salvation; where the Savior enters, he
brings salvation, He that has the Son, has life, 1 John 5. 12. But we find
it evidently a bar to salvation, according to Scripture, Joh. 3. 36. He that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. He that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. Yea, according to the
Author himself, There is no person under heaven shall be saved (says he) till
he have believed; which is a truth according to Scripture. They could not enter
into the rest of Canaan, that did lie in their unbelief, Neither can they enter
into the rest of heaven, Heb. 4. 1. Then Christ dwells not in our hearts by
Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. But also in a state of unbelief; Then God is not a
justifier of those that believe in Jesus, as Romans 3. 26. but equally justifies
men without Faith in Jesus; Then Christ is not set out a propitiation through
Faith in his blood, but without any Faith in it; Then they that believe are not
only justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the
Law of Moses, but they that believe not. And God gave his Son, that he that
believes not on him should have everlasting life. This doctrine lays all the
honor of Faith in the dust; Then Habakkuk might have spared this speech, that
the just shall live by Faith, Habbakuk 2. 4. and Paul might have found another
way of life in the flesh than by Faith in the Son of God.

Secondly,

To which I answer, undergo all those sorrows, as to be a man of sorrows, to do
that which from all eternity was done? Then, as Paul says in another case,
Christ is dead in vain: This, some have seen, yet rather than leave their
opinion, have chosen to swallow it down, and the absurdity with it, and do
maintain that Christ did not purchase, procure, or work any love from God for
man, but only published and declared that he was from eternity beloved; A fit
conclusion drawn from such premises: Then Christ was no Author of eternal
salvation, as Heb. 5 9. but only the publisher, He was a messenger from God, in
the days of his flesh, but no Savior of man; He did not redeem us with a
price, but only made known that we were so far in the love of God from
eternity that no redemption needs. Secondly, I say, Gods purpose of a thing
does no put it in being; He takes his own way, to bring about in time, that
which he purposed before all time; All that is done, even every work under the
Sun, was alike from eternity in the purpose of God, Known unto God are all
his works from the beginning of the world, Acts 15. 18. So the house that was
built this day, was built from eternity; The child that was born this day, was
borne from eternity; We may as well say that the Elect were glorified from
eternity, so that they need to look after no other glorification, as to say
they are justified from eternity. All the works of God were in his purpose from
ever, who sees all things at once; and not as we can comprehend them in their
respective succession? But we enquire after things as they are in themselves
and not as they are in Gods purpose.

Thirdly, Burges well observes) we are here in mere darkness, and not able to
comprehend how God is said to act or work. Treatise of Justification, page 166.
How much more safe were it for us to learn a posteriore, from the mouth of God
in Scriptures, what his actions are, and the order how he works, than a pri^re,
to conclude that they are thus and thus, and therefore thus of necessity he
must work? Yet if we may be so bold as to look into this act of his, and take
it into consideration, Quae real^m and evidentem mutationem extrinsecus nullam
infert. Transiens actio est quae revera mutationem infert.
according to this notion; we may far rather conclude that justification is
an action transient, not immanent. An immanent action (as the Schools tell us)
is terminated within the subject, and works no real nor evident change out of
it: and they instance in our conceptions of, and resolutions about things,
Kek^rman, p. 107. A transient act is not terminated within the subject, but
has its effect, and is terminated upon some other object. Now, if by way of
analogy we may apply these to God, for we otherwise can reach none of his
actions; it is easy to conclude that justification of a sinner is a transient,
and no immanent act; It works man from a state of wrath to a state of
friendship and love, of a vessel of wrath, brings man into favor and esteem,
which though it work no Physical change in man, yet the whole effect is
terminated in him; That act of Pharaoh, had as real an effect upon Joseph, and
was terminated in him in his advancement out of prison, for rule in Egypt, as
though a Physician in case of sickness, had wrought a cure upon him. Though I
were not able to hold it our, that justification were a transient act, but
according to our conception of the actions of man, it should rather appear to
be an action immanent in God, so in him that it had no effect out of him, yet I
must follow the Scriptures that make justification an act in time, not from
eternity. Paul having mentioned a state of sin under which the Corinthians
were, says, such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified, 1. Corinthians. 6. 11. Once they were not, but now they are
in a state of justification; It has its (...), in which it is acted, a season
in which it is vouchsafed. It is affixed to faith. Acts 13. 38. Now faith is
not from eternity, it comes by hearing; A Ministry is continually employed for
reconciliation and pardon of sin, 1 Cor. 5. 19. John 20. Which were in vain
if justification were as election, from before the foundation of the world;
They work them not to election, but only call upon them to make their calling
and election sure; There are seniors and juniors in this privilege, one
obtains it before another; Andronicus and J^nia were in Christ before the
Apostle, Romans 16. 7. These evident proofs would take with my faith, above a
thousand such subtilties. But herein the Schools, in their application of these
acts to God, speak according (as to the point in hand) to the mind of
Scriptures.

Fourthly, Christ is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. His death
has been of efficacy in the Church through all ages, And he bore our sins in
his body, 1 Pet. 2. 24. All our sins did meet in him, Isa. 53. 6. and
therefore from the beginning we were justified.

I answer, triumphed over principalities and powers. But much of the work of
our salvation was behind; Election did not overthrow Christ's redemption, but
did establish it; Redemption does not overthrow our application, but does
establish it likewise. There is a farther work of Christ's to be done, his
intercession in heaven being one part of his Priesthood, which he is gone to
discharge as the High Priest into the holiest of holies; A farther work to be
done by man through believing. Not to have interest in Christ's death, is all
one as though he had not died; He that believes in him shall not perish. See
Baxter of Justification, Aphorism 15. Davenant de morte Christi, cap. 5. p.
58, etc.

Lastly, it is said by another, If Faith be a condition of the Covenant of
Grace,

I answer, and receive life, and so Faith is both a condition and an instrument.

Here I might by way of just corollary infer, A justified man is fitted for
every duty, to which God is pleased for to call.
that a justified man reconciled to God in Christ, is a man fitted for every
duty unto which God calls, which he is pleased to require; Faith is his
justification, the instrumental work of his reconciliation to God; and all
things are possible to him that believes, Mark 9. 23. There is not a duty
commanded, but a believing man through Christ is strengthened for it; The Word
works effectually in th^se that believe, as 1 These. 2. 13. We see the great
works that were achieved by those of ancient time, both in doing and
suffering, Heb. 11. and all of those are ascribed to Faith, what Christ can do
as in reference to duty, that they can do to acceptance; They can do all
things through Christ that strengthens them, Phil. 4. 13. Christ overcomes the
world, John 16 33. And this is their victory whereby they overcome the world, 1
John 5. 4. Christ treads down Satan, Romans 16 20. And they resist him strong in
the Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. A man of Faith is for universal obedience; He is a man
for dependence on God for the fruition of all promises. A word from God is
enough for Faith. He knows how to rest upon him, for the good things of the
earth, he is above anxious thoughts, what he should eat, what he should drink,
or wherewith he should he clothed, knowing that godliness has the promise of
this life, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and therefore, Though the fig tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no heard in the stalls, yet he will rejoice in the Lord, he will
joy in the God of his salvation, Hab 3. 17, 18. he knows how to rest upon him
for spiritual privileges, for adoption of sons, for evelasting salvation; He
rests upon this, that he that lives and believes in Christ shall not die for
ever. He knows how to manage all states and conditions, he knows how to be
full, and how to be hungry; he can bear prosperity, and not be puffed up; He
can be under adversity, and not be cast down; In the worst of times, the just
lives by faith, Hab. 2. 4. He can make use of every Ordinance for his spiritual
advantage. The word preach is for his benefit, Being mixed with faith when he
receives it, Heb. 4* 2. He knows how to improve the Sacraments for his
spiritual growth, those seals of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. Abel
by Faith exceeded Cain in sacrifices, Heb. 11. 4. and so do these exceed all
unbeleevers in their performances. All of these might be farther and more fully
enlarged, but that it is done at large by better hands; Master Ward in his Life
of Faith, Master Culverwel, especially Master Ball in his elaborate treatise on
that subject.

CHAP. XXIII.
Repentance is a condition of the Covenant of grace.
THe condition immediately serviceable for man's reconciliation to God, we have
seen; that which respects his reparation in his qualifications, to hold up
communion with God, follows, which is, Repentance. The end of Christ's coming in
the flesh being to save sinners: He saves them not in their sins; but from
their sins; and therefore calls them to repentance, and engages all to it, that
he receives into covenant. As God will have a self-outed, and believing people,
So, he will have an humble and an holy people. So John Baptist the forerunner
of the Mediator, began his Ministry, Repent, giving in this, as his reason,
The Kingdom of heaven is at hand, that is, a New Testament-state, in which the
covenant of Grace was to be opened, and the glorious privileges of it made
manifest, Matthew. 3. 2. With the self-same words, Jesus, the Mediator of the
covenant, begins his Ministry, Matthew. 4. 12, 17. verses compared. From that
time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. To this he resolves to engage those that he receives. So it was with
the twelve, that were men employed to bring Nations into covenant. They thus
began their Ministry, Faith and Repentance are distinct graces, and not one
and the same.
Mark 6. 12. They went out, and preached that men should repent. Neither let
any make these two (Faith and Repentance, or Faith and Obedience, which is
comprised under Repentance) one and the same, and old project to introduce
justification by works. The Scriptures evidently distinguish them, Paul makes
them two distinct heads in the Ministry, when he preached either to the Jews
or Gentiles, Acts 20. 21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. They are two
distinct heads, of Catechism in the Apostles times, Repentance from dead
works, and Faith toward God, Heb. 6. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark
1. 15. There are those acts in Scripture attributed to Faith, that will by no
means be ascribed to love or obedience, as the taking in of the privileges
before mentioned. If Faith work by love, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5. 6. And
love be the end of the commandment, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. then faith is a distinct thing
from love. If by Faith the Worthies of old wrought righteousness, then
righteousness may be distinguished from it, Heb. 11. 33. As Faith and Hope
make two Graces, so Love a third, 1 Cor. 13. 13. It is not the Gospel way to
confound them together, They must not be divided, but they are to be
distinguished. In this of repentance which is a Gospel Grace and condition of
the covenant, we may observe First, A necessary pre-requisite to it. Secondly,
The essential parts of it.


A necessary pre-requisite to this of repentance (as to the other of Faith) is
Conviction, Godly sorrow is a prerequisite to repentance.
Compunction, Remorse, Unto which the name of repentance is often given, though
it be of far more narrow comprehension than the whole work; yea, it reaches
not unto any thing which is of the essence of it, Called repentance (as some
say) by a Synechdoche, the part for the whole; but I rather take it to be a
Metonimy; Sorrow is rather an adjunct than a part of it, yet such an adjunct
that still accompanies it, and makes way for it, as the needle (as the Ancients
use to express it) enters the cloth, not to stay, but to let in the thread. An
Officer enters an house, to throw out one inhabitant, and to let in another,
but not to stay himself. It has its name from pain, grief, or trouble, which
affects the soul for sin, which must needs follow, when once we look upon it
with shame and wearisomnesse. Who can imagine a man to have his eyes opened, to
see that through his whole life, he has risen up in hostility, and opposition
against God? has taken off that stamp, which God in creation put upon him? run
his soul upon everlasting hazard, and all of this without sense of shame, fear,
or trouble? Who can imagine that the soul can leave so ugly a path, as that of
sin formerly so pleasant, and desired, without any grief or trouble of mind
that he has so long held it? Or that any will make out for help in a Savior,
till they see themselves through sin in a lost and undone condition? I speak
not of infants (who neither act faith nor repentance) but of those of growth,
whom God works for himself by his Ministers, Some degree of soul-shaking by the
Law necessary.
As they have their call by the Word, So the Word has its efficacy in some
measure of soul-shaking, by the Laws discovery, by which is the knowledge of
sin, as Romans 3. 20. Evangelical allurements (on which by some the whole of
the work is laid) can never (I suppose) work on the soul without
Law-convictions. If these Gospel allurements draw to Christ, they must draw
from sin, and how shall any be drawn from what he does not know; nor ever
understood either to be evil, or dangerous? It is with me no less a Paradox,
that a man may be drawn from sin, without the discovery of the Law, as to be
drawn to Christ without the light of the Gospel, And to say the Gospel
discovers sin, as well as the Law; taking the Gospel in opposition to the moral
precepts, (as here it must be taken) is the greatest absurdity. Exem. gr. If it
be questioned whether to take up arms be a sin? whether to fight a duel be a
sin? whether usury be sin? or to marry within the Levitical degrees forbidden
be sin, shall I determine this out of a Gospel-promise? That Jesus Christ came
to save sinners. That the blood of Christ takes away all sin. That in him all
that believe are justified. A thousand of these will contribute nothing to the
expediting of these or like questions; or the conviction of any under guilt;
The work must be brought to the rule, the action to the line for discovery;
Upon the Laws convictions there may follow Gospel-aggravations; But conviction
is the work of the Law, as an instrument of the Spirit. This conviction unto
change is hardly without compunction, remorse, and terrors in the soul. It was
not the single case of the Corinthians, but common with other Christians, as
the natural work of godly sorrow, that it works repentance not to be repented
of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. I will not stand to di^^^^ whether any, ever are exempted
from this preparatory work. I question not Gods prerogative, I am upon enquiry
after his usual method. I know some instance in Matthew, who being called,
suddenly, followed Christ, and we hear nothing of any work upon his spirit to
trouble; But who knows whether Matthew, a Jew, were not called by grace, before
this call to an Apostleship? and if not in grace, whether it necessarily
followed in that instant? The like is objected of Lydia, The Lord opened her
heart, that she attended to the things that were spoken of Paul, Acts 16. 14.
without any sorrow or trouble in spirit is mentioned; Neither is there mention
of any joy, Limits put to this doctrine of godly sorrow.
or rejoicing in spirit, and she by many is believed also to have been a
Proselyte. Yet this of godly sorrow, must be understood with some limit.

1. An equal degree of sorrow, and preparative work, is not necessary in all;
One man's terrors and heart-breakings, are no necessary precedent, for all
others to reach.

2. An high degree is not necessarily required of any; God can come sooner in,
with Gospel-cordials, after Law-convictions, unto one than another.

3. No man has reason to quarrel his conversion; because his sorrow has not
been like some others; each man has not like pain in cure of a like malady.

4. None should beg of God overwhelming and amazing shakings; and humiliations
of Spirit, God better knows their frame than they understand themselves.

5. None can judge of the truth of their repentance by the greatness of their
trouble; It may possibly end in horror and work nothing better than it self;
It may only have its present work to cast hell in the face, and then the person
return to his old byasse, to his sinful pleasures, his worldly advantages, as
Saul to his Music, Cain to his building of Cities; yet when God thus plowes,
it is a hopeful sign he intends sowing, and men in this case must not reason
themselves to be such soil, on whom no good can be done, as though they were
past all husbandry of the Lord, He can take away a heart of stone, and turn a
rock into a fruitful field. This is Gods method, do not dispute, but believe.

6. Then it is in a degree sufficient, when it effects the work for which it
serves; when it brings the soul out of love with sin, takes it out of the paths
of sin, when it so works to an apprehension of dangers, that it works the
soul to cast it self on Christ Jesus. When horrors work desires; not of ease,
but of grace, of Christ and of whole Christ, of pardon of sin, and power
against sin, there is a true work.

For the essential parts of this grace, which I make a Gospel-engagement and
condition of the covenant, they are privative, or positive. Privative, is the
destruction of what has been. Positive is the introduction of what is not.
Every change has two terms. The one is terminus ad quem; which is
endeavored. The other is terminus a quo, which is left; and so in this change
which grace works, The essentials in repentance are, 1. Privative Cessation
from sin.
and to which the covenant of grace does engage. The privative part which we
are to leave, is, sin, the work of Satan. The positive part which we are to
endeavor, is that which stands in full opposition; Forsaking of sin, we must
follow after righteousness, and turning from Satan, we must turn to God; and
therefore the Ministry which finds men out of covenant, and works them into
it, is to bring them from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God,
Acts 26. 18. The privative part is frequently enjoined, as that which binds at
all times, and to all times. A man in covenant with God, is to have no more to
do with sin; Cease to do evil, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, Isa. 1. 16. Be ye separate, touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6. 17.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry; for which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the
children of disobedience. In the which ye also walked sometimes when ye lived
in them, But now you also put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthy communication out of your mouth; lie not one to another, seeing ye have
put off the old man with his deeds, Col. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Old things with
Christians are to be done away; This is the duty of all those that pretend to
Christ; Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. All that is in Christ, is wholly against it; His Prophetic office
leads us from it, and gives us light to avoid it; In his Kingly office, his Law
is against it; and his Priestly office is to redeem from it. They that are in
Christ, and learn him as the truth is in Christ Jesus, attain to it, Ephesians. 4.
22. That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. It is the character of a man in
Christ, Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts. And this upon peril of bearing their sin, Ezekiel. 18. 30,
31. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your ruin: Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby
you have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will
ye die, O house of Israel? No man in sin is for glory, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye
not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? The works of the
flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, varience, emulation, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings and
such like, of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time
past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Upon these terms it is that they obtain pardon of sin,
Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Grace is no where more freely
tendered than there: Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he
that has no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money, and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not; hearken diligently unto
me, and eat you that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fastness. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear and your soul shall live,
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David, verse 1, 2, 3. And yet we see upon what terms it is tendered. That
which keeps from us the mercies, and brings upon us the curses of the covenant,
is upon covenant-condition, to be shunned; This is true of all covenants made
where any good is hoped, and evil feared. That sin against God keeps us from
the mercies, and brings upon us the curses of the covenant, is clear in what
has been spoke: What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou have instruction, and
castest my words behind thee? Psalm. 50. 16, 17. A people that keep to their
terms of covenant, are in communion with God; but sin separates between a
people and God; that is the ground of quarrel, Hos. 4. 1. between earth, and
heaven. Men entering and keeping covenant with God, are of God, and not of the
Devil; They are turned from the Devil to God, from fellowship with Belial, to
fellowship with God; But he that commits sin, is of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8.
Christ that carries on the covenant (as you have heard) will never cast off
those that walk up to the terms of the covenant; but he casts off, with a
dreadful sentence all those that work iniquity; Mat. 7. 23. As for those
Antinomian spirits, and ranting wretches, that do contend that sin is no
bar to their communion with God; That God is as well pleased with man in the
greatest height of sin, as the most holy duties; That this doctrine charges
a change upon God, to be now pleased, and presently in wrath and displeasure;
they do but deceive themselves, and make it their work to deceive others. They
neither know sin, nor the direful guilt of it, nor yet God, nor his direful
displeasure against it. The Apostle makes it his business to undeceive them,
as Ephesians. 5. 6. having reckoned up a catalogue of sins, he thus speaks; Be not
deceived with vain words, for because of these things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience. Neither is there any change (according to
this doctrine) supposed in God. The change is in them that covenant against it,
and walk in it. Did they know the terror of it, they would tremble at the
thought of running upon it, and by heaping up sin to treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgments of God, Romans 2. 5.
They will find this an aggregate of all miseries, and let them take beed that
they call not to the rocks and mountains to hide them from it.

The Positive part is to be followed, 2. Positive. A return to God, and an
holy walking with him.
as the Privative part to be shunned. As Timothy must flee covetousness, so he
must follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness,
1 Timothy 6. 11. Faith in the former place as an instrument serviceable for our
access to God, makes up (as we heard) a condition of it self, As a work or
inherent grace, it is here comprised in this covenant-condition, together with
others, to hold up our communion with God. As we must cease to do evil, so we
must learn to do well; As we must put off the old man with his deeds, so we
must put on the new man. It is not enough, not to bring evil fruit, wild
grapes; but we must be fruitful in every good work. God has a quarrel with his
people upon a charge of negatives, as well as affirmatives, omissions, as well
as commissions. She obeyed not the voice, she received not correction, she
trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near to her God, Zeph. 3. 2. We must not
alone, be free, from that charge of Christ upon the Jews, of doing the work of
the Devil, John 8. 44. but we must abound in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.
58. And this upon the penalty mentioned in the former branch; Every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire,
Matthew. 3. 10. Upon these terms it is, that we avoid the curse of the covenant.
Those on whom no condemnation is charged, walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit; and the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5. 21, 22. Upon
those terms, salvation, the mercy of the covenant is obtained, Christ is the
Author of everlasting salvation to them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. When the
Apostle makes light of outward privileges, he puts the whole stresse upon man's
faith and obedience, Gal. 5. 6. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God, 1. Cor. 7. 19. That which is so mightily available with
God in covenant, is the walking up to the terms and observance of the
conditions of the covenant; But faith and the keeping of the Commandments of
God, are as we see) thus available and prevalent. These two are distinguished,
but never severed. That faith which looks at Christ's blood as a Savior,
accepts him as a Sovereign, and the latter about which there is most dispute,
is an evidence to conclude the former; Hereby we know that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments, where knowledge is put for faith, as appears in the
context, 1 John 2. 3. These are heard of God in prayer, Joh. 9. 32. If any man
be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. Whatsoever we ask,
we receive of him, because we keep his Commandment, and do those things that
are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3. 22. These are sealed of God by his Spirit,
1 John 3. 24. And he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in
him. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us. These great mercies are for men in covenant, that keep covenant: But
the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him, and his righteousness unto childrens children. To such as keep his
Covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them, Ps. 103. 17,
18.

CHAP. XXIV.
Objections against the conditionality of Repentance answered.
HEre Objections must be removed; First, jointly against faith and repentance,
some making challenge of both as no covenant-conditions. So Mr. Baxters
questionist, How do you make faith and repentance, to be conditions of the
Covenant on our part, seeing the bestowing of them, is part of the condition on
Gods part; can they be our conditions and Gods too?

In case these two cannot stand together, The Objection retorted.
that they should be conditions both Gods and ours; we may answer by way of
retortion, Faith and repentance are our conditions, not Gods.
the Scripture will bear, but in plain terms deny that they are Gods
conditions, and affirm them to be ours. I know what God speaks in his Word
concerning these works; That he will write his Law in our hearts, and put it
into our inward parts; That he will take away the heart of stone, and give an
heart of flesh; which implies this work of which we speak. I know likewise what
in particular is affirmed of Christ, that he is the author and finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12. 2. that he gives repentance, Acts 5. 31. that God grants to the
Gentiles repentance to life, Acts 11. 18. And I have not forgot what I have
said before of the concurrence of grace in the performance of every
Gospel-work; Yet all this rises not up hither to make them formally Gods act,
and not ours. Whose acts they be, his conditions they are; this is evident: But
they are our acts. We believe, We repent, It is not God that believes; It is
not God that repents: That is an absurdity which Arminians have labored to
charge upon us, to render that which we hold of the necessity of the
concurrence of grace in these works odious; But it is that which the Orthodox
party have still disclaimed. The Apostle calls upon the Philippians, Phil. 2.
12. To work out their own salvation; the work is their own, as the salvation.
They are a Believers own act, and not barely a spontaneous act, (on which he is
carried, as a Bird in preparing a nest for her young, and Bees in preparing
honey for their subsistence, in which Philosophy tells us, that they aim at no
end) but they are voluntary actions of choice, done out of choice, aiming at
salvation as his end. The mercy in the Covenant being on these terms tendered,
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10. 10. The just lives
by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. They to turn to the Lord with all their heart, Joel
2. 13. They obey from the heart the form of Doctrine whereunto they are
delivered, Romans 6. 17. They do the will of God from the heart, Ephesians. 6. 6.
Faith and Repentance are man's work, which man in covenant does, respective to
salvation, in the covenant tendered, that it is God that works the will and the
deed, verse. 13. There he seems to take them from us, and ascribe the formality
of them to God. Sol.
In this cooperation of God, whether they be formally our works, or Gods, let
Esaias determine, Isa. 26. 12. Thou have wrought all our works in us; When God
has wrought it, the work is ours, we have the reward of it, and we shall bear
our sin in case it be neglected, and let the Apostle explain himself,
Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained that we should walk in them. God has ordained
good works as a Christians way and walk. Via ad regnum non causa regnandi.
They are charged upon man as is plain in the context, in order to salvation;
They are the way that we hold in our passage on to that salvation which God of
grace vouchsafes; and we are Gods workmanship created in Christ Jesus for these
ends. Our dexterity in holy duties,is from the frame into which grace put us;
So still the work is ours, though power for action is vouchsafed of God, And
the conditions are ours, for discharge of which we have yet divine assistance:
Arguments evincing that Faith and Repentance are our conditions, and not Gods,
in the proper conditional covenant.
That faith and repentance are our conditions, and not Gods, take these
arguments.

1. Those conditions that are not mentioned in the proper conditional covenant,
as from God, but required of God, from us, are not Gods conditions, but ours,
in that Covenant. This is clear; Being there expressly required of us, and not
so much as mentioned, as from God; they cannot be his engagement, but ours to
perform. But Faith and Repentance are not mentioned as from God, in the proper
conditional covenant, but required of God from us. Therefore Faith, and
Repentance are not Gods conditions in the proper conditional Covenant, but
ours.

2. The conditions of a covenant are his that performs, and not his that
imposes. This proposition is clear in reason, and confessed by the adversary.
But we perform, and God imposes Faith and Repentance. They are therefore our
conditions, and not Gods, in this covenant.

3. Covenant-conditions are theirs, that are charged with falsehood in case of
failing in them, and nonperformance of them. This is plain in all covenants:
To make conditions, and to fail in them, is to be false to them. But in case
of failing in Faith and Repentance, man is charged, and not God. God fails not,
but man deals falsely. Therefore, they are man's conditions, and not Gods.

4. Covenant-conditions are theirs, who upon failing in them, and not
performance of them, suffer as covenant-breakers. This is clear, Israel
covenanted to dismiss their Hebrew servants, and dismissed them not, and
Israel suffered for it, Jer. 34. But upon failing in Faith and Repentance, God
suffers not, so much as in his Name, as a covenant-breaker. He is not charged
with men's unbelief and impenitence: Men themselves suffer. Therefore Faith and
Repentance are man's conditions, not Gods.

2. There are objections peculiarly against repentance, as it comprises the
whole frame of obedience, In what manner Works are called for in the Covenant
of Grace.


By this means the covenant of Grace will be ( say some) a covenant of works;
Repentance in this latitude (to which we have spoken) contains the whole of
obedience, and being made a condition of the Covenant of Grace, Works are
introduced, and a Covenant of Works re-established.

As there was grace in the first covenant, conceived, his rule even in this
covenant, is to reward men according to their works. Behold I come quickly, and
my reward it with me; to give every man according as his work shall be, Rev.
22. 12. Works then are not excluded from this covenant; yea, Christ the
Mediator of the covenant aforehand tells us, Except our righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5. 20. They had their righteousness, and (as
was supposed) they made a great progress in the way of righteousness; yet we
must have an exceeding righteousness, above that which they taught, and
practiced, or else there is no salvation in this covenant. These two covenants
notwithstanding remain distinct, and not confounded together. There is a legal
righteousness; such as the Law in the highest extremity of it requires,
without the least indulgence in case of failing; This the covenant of Works
calls for, and in this we fall short; but Christ answers, and therefore He is
the end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10. 3. and by this, we are saved.
There is a righteousness of the Gospel which God in covenant calls for, to
which it is his Spirit enables, and in this we are saved.

2. Gospel-obedience is called for in the Covenant, Repentance necessarily
flowing from Faith, is not thereby disabled from being a condition in the
Covenant of Grace.
but not as any condition of the Covenant; Faith is the alone condition,
obedience necessarily flows from it, and follows upon it when once we believe;
it need not to be conditioned, or indented for; seeing when we are in Christ by
faith, we can then do no other than obey.

I answer. This position here laid down, that obedience necessarily follows,
and flows from Faith, is a position indeed maintained by the reformed Churches
against Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and other opposites of it, from which
position of ours, they infer as by necessary consequence that all commands,
requiring obedience, are then needless, and all exhortations, reproofs,
motives and promises to no purpose. None either commands or persuades the
Heavens to move, the Sun to give light, the Fire to give heat, or the water
to give moisture; That which necessarily works is let alone to work, and to
take its course in working. And this Objection (taking away this
Gospel-condition on this ground) is of the same stamp; Obedience necessarily
flowing from Faith, includes Gospel-commands, exhortations, reproofs, as well
as Gospel-conditions. If God need not, to condition, and engage for obedience,
from Believers, because they thus necessarily obey, then he needs not give
commands, or press obedience for the same reason, when yet the Gospel is full
of exhortations, commands, menaces, promises, with application to Believers, to
men professing Faith, to men in Christ by Faith.

For satisfaction then of this Popish-Arminian objection, we must distinguish
of consequents which necessarily flow from their principles. Some are natural,
which of themselves have their effects, as those in the objection mentioned;
Here is neither command imposed, condition required, nor promise held forth:
They are not in any capacity of acting or working otherwise than they do.
Others are moral, who work not by way of Physical necessity, but are kept in
their way by the power of grace upholding; which does not exclude, but
necessarily takes in man's endeavor in the use of means, to yield obedience,
and to hold on, in all patience and perseverance. This argument followed home
will be of equal force, against Faith (as a condition) as, against sincerity;
seeing Gods Elect shall believe, as they that believe shall yield obedience.
There is a like necessity of faith, flowing from election, as there is of
obedience, to flow from Faith, as Faith therefore, so obedience, either of both
in their places are covenant-conditions.

CHAP. XXV.
What degree of obedience the Covenant of grace calls for from Christians.
HEre is seasonably moved, and is not without some difficulty answered; what
degree of obedience, this new covenant calls for from us, that so we may
endeavor it, and understand our selves when we have by grace attained to it,
that having entered covenant with God, we may not be found of those that have
wickedly departed; and dealt falsely in the covenant. In this there are several
opinions, which are to come under examination.

First, Perfection of degrees is not so called for of God in Covenant, that
upon failing it, the mercies promised in Covenant are lost.
some say that it is required of Christians in an exact way, in a full
perfection, as, of parts, so of degrees, answering to the perfection of the
Law, as written in the heart, and given on Mount Sinai; And so required that
obedience in a more low degree, will not be accepted, or the mercies promised
in the covenant obtained; which doctrine of theirs (rigidly followed) stands as
that two edged sword, Genesis 3. 24. keeping the way of the tree of Life, and
making the way to salvation unpassable. Thus the Council of Trent, Si quis
dixerit, baptizatos per baptisimum ipsum solius tantum debitores fidei fieri,
non autem universa legis Christi servandae; anathema fit. Sess. Sept. Canon.
Sex.
If any man shall say, that by Baptism, men are obliged to Faith only, and not
to the observation of the whole Law, let him be accursed; which Chemnitius in
his Examen confesses in a qualified sense, might be admitted, seeing persons
baptized, owe subjection, but not in the sense, which that Canon holds forth,
being an allusion to that of the Apostle, Gal. 5. 3. I testify again to every
man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor of the whole Law; By which Gloss,
Baptism makes Christ of none effect, as well as Circumcision, as it was taken,
in the sense of those false Teachers among the Galatians, viz. as a leading
ceremony of the Law, binding to the observation of the whole. And so also
Bellar. lib. 1. de Baptis. cap. 15. Baptismus non id efficit, ut homo solius
fidei debtor ^it, non autem implendae universae legis. Duobus modis intelligi
posse hominem baptizatum dici liberum a lege divina servanda; uno modo ut
facere contra eam legem non fit injustum nec peccatum, quasi lex abrogata
esset; de hoc sensu non est controversia: altero modo intelligi potest ut
facere contra legem fit quidem peccatum, tamen non imputetur iis qui fidem
habent, nec pendeat justificatio aut salus ab impletione legis, sed a sola
misericordia quae per fidem apprehenditur.
Baptism does not make us debtors to Faith only, but to keep the whole Law,
and there explaines himself, that to deny a man to be a debtor to keep the
whole Law, may be taken two ways, either so, as that to do things against the
Law were no sin, as though the Law were abrogated. This he confesses
Protestants do not say, and in that, he says there is no controversy, or else
so, that justification or salvation does not depend on the fulfilling of the
Law, but only on the mercy of God by faith applied, this he makes the
Protestants error, and so brings in justification by the Law, and utterly
confounds the covenant of works and grace together, only I confess the
business seems much mollified by the explanations, that they give of those
words, fulfilling of the Law. First, curtelling the Law, in taking off, the
first fomes, and motions of actual sin, yea even all that goes before consent
of will, making it no sin at all, as also multitudes of actions, some of them
foul enough, as not within this verge, such, which they call by the name of
venial sins, which are besides the Law, but not against it, bending, (as some
merrily speak) but not breaking the Commandments, though they would never give
us a catalogue of sins, mortal, or venial, nor any certain mark or character,
whereby they might be distinguished. All these are pared off, as no breaches of
the Law, nor (in their own nature) deserving, the sentence of eternal death,
and the temporal punishments due to them after death is helped out, by their
Indulgences. Secondly so helping themselves out with distinctions, at least
some among them, that keeping the Law with them is no other than the grace of
sanctification, in the very sense as the Orthodox hold it forth; He that
pleases may read what Jansenius has, chap. 81. of his Harmony, Opposing Luther
for his denial, that the first and great Commandment in the Law in this life
can be fulfilled; and charging it with blasphemy, Luther having Austins
authority in several places, (as Jansenius confesses) for to second him
(affirming with him, that this Commandment in this life cannot be perfected or
fulfilled, but it is to be fulfilled in the life to come, giving his reason Nam
cum est aliquid carnalis concupiscentiae quod vel continendo foenetur, nam
omnino ex tota anima diligitur Deus.
As long as there is any thing of carnal concupiscence to be restrained, God is
not with the whole heart loved.) The good Bishop knows how by distinction, to
salve Austin, and maintain his doctrine to be good divinity, and denying
Luther that favor, to leave him under the brand of blasphemy, so that the
result of all with him, is this, Diligitur tunc Deus ex toto cord; cum quis ex
intima and sincera erga Deum affectione occupatur potissimum in his quae Dei
sunt, prae omnibus illi placere studens, ac sollicitus ut non tantum quaedam
Dei mandata perficiat, sed cuncta idque non seniter and ex tristi animo, sed
gnaviter and hilariter, dolens ex animo si quid vel ab alliis vel a se per
carnis infirmitatem admittatur contrium divinae voluntati. Jansenii Harmon. c.
81.
God is then loved with the whole heart, when any one, out of inward and
sincere affection to God, is principally exercised in those things which are of
God; studying above all things to please him, and carefully to observe not one,
but all his Commandments, and that not slothfully, and against heart, but
diligently, and cheerfully, grieving from the heart if any thing by others or
himself through infirmity of the flesh be admitted contrary to the will of God.
So that some might think, all controversy in this point, may cease; and that
the difference between us, were no more than a strife of words, seeing we do
not only confess that this ought to be done, but also urge a necessity of
doing of it, and they say the Law is fulfilled when it is done, The Law a rule
of our duty, not of our strength.
But here, 1. Much wrong is done to the Law (as though it were a rule of our
strength, not of our duty, that it answered, and might be applied to each man's
impaired strength, and weakened abilities, or that the Gospel Grace of godly
sorrow for sin against the Law, were the keeping of the Law, making repentance
a satisfactory discharge, for disobedience; When these men cannot bring up man's
nature to the straight line of the Law, they bring down the Law to the crooked
nature of man. 2. It is injurious to man, puffing him up with conceit of
answering the Law, setting him up as high as he should be laid low, ready to
say with the young man in the Gospel, All these have I kept from my youth, when
holding out the Law in its just latitude, (as it was happily brought home to
the Apostles conscience) sin would revive, and he would see himself in a lost
condition.

A second opinion is, The Covenant of Grace does not call for perfection, and
accept sincerity.
that the covenant of grace requires perfection in the exactest way, without
help of these men's distinctions in an equal degree with the covenant of works,
but with this difference; In the covenant of works there is no indulgence or
dispensation in case of failing, but the penalty takes hold the curse follows
upon it; But the covenant of grace, though it call for perfection, such is the
exactness of it, yet it accepts of sincerity, such is the qualification of it
through grace, or the mercy in it. If I should take up any opinion in the world
for the Authors sake, or those that have appeared as Patrons of it, then I
should embrace this; The reverence deservedly due to him that (I suppose) first
manisted himself in it, has caused it to find great entertainment, but upon
more than twenty years thoughts about it; I find it laboring under manifold
inconveniences.

1. It establishes the former opinion opposed by Protestants, and but now
refuted, as to the obedience and the degree, called for in covenant; And if I
should be indulgent to my affections, to cause my judgment to stoop, Dislike
of the one, would make me as averse from it; as an opinion of the other would
make me prone to receive it. Judgment therefore must lead, and affections be
waved.

2. If this opinion stand, then God accepts of Covenant-breakers, of those that
deal falsely in it, whereas Scripture charges it only upon the wicked, upon
those of whom God complains, as rebellious, Deuteronomy. 29. 25. Josh. 7. 15. Jeremy
11. 10. Jeremy 22. 8, 9. Yea, it may be charged on the best, the most holy in
the world lying under the guilt of it, according to this tenent.

3. Then it will follow, that, as none can say, that they have so answered the
commands of the Law, that they have never failed, they have not (if put to
answer in the greatest rigor) once transgressed, so, neither can they with the
Church make appeal to God, That they have not dealt falsely in the Covenant,
nor wickedly departed from their God, Psalm. 44. 17. Every sin (according to
this opinion) being a breach of it, and a dealing falsely in it.

4. Then that great promise of mercy from everlasting to everlasting, upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness, unto childrens children to such as keep
his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments to do them, Psalm
103. 17, 18. only appertains to those that so keep the Law, that they sin
not at all against it.

5. Then our Baptism-vow is never to sin against God, and as often as we renew
our covenant, we do not only humble our selves that we have sinned, but we
afresh bind our selves, never more to admit the least infirmity, and so live
and die in the breach of it.

6. Then the distinction between those that entered covenant and broke it, as
Jerem. 31, 32, 33. and those that have the Law written in their hearts, and put
into their inward parts to observe it, falls, all standing equally guilty of
the breach of it, no help of grace being of power to enable to keep Covenant.
Each of these five last arguments are replied to, by a distinction of the
precept, and conditions of the Covenant. Men that are sincere, break the
precept, (as is said) but not the conditions. But I know no precepts in
covenants, which are not conditions. Faith and Repentance are Precepts, and I
think, the alone Precepts, and I know not, neither do I hear of, any other
Conditions.

7. Then it follows that, Sincerity is never called for as a duty, or required
as a grace; but only dispensed with as a failing, indulged as a want. It is not
so much a Christians honor or character, as his blemish or failing, rather his
defect than praise. But we find the contrary in Noah, Job, Asa, Hezekiah,
Zachary and Elizabeth, Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed that entered covenant,
and kept covenant. Sincerity is a degree toward perfection in obedience, and
if the command looks no lower than perfection in degree, the imperfect degree
is not commanded, though it be indulged. And therefore I conclude, that, as in
the Law, there was pure justice as well in the command given, as the penalty
threatened, without any condescension or indulgence. So, in the covenant there
is mercy, and condescension, as well in the condition required, as in the
acceptance through grace. The Covenant requires no more than it accepts.

The alone Argument, Sol.
finds him under the command of the Law, which command, the Law still holds,
the Gospel being a confirmation, not a destruction of it. All imperfection then
is a sin upon that account, that it is a transgression of the Law, though
(being done against heart, and labored against) it is no breach of covenant;
We are under the Law as men, we are taken into covenant as Christians,
Retaining the humane nature, the Law still commands us, though the covenant in
Christ, through the abundant grace of it, (upon the terms that it requires and
accepts) frees us from the sentence of it.

Here is objected, What shall we think of those Texts in the New Testament,
which require us to be perfect, 2 Cor. 13. 11. James 1. 4. Yea, perfect as God
is perfect, Matthew. 5. 48. reproving weakness and infirmity, and commanding a
going on to perfection. Answ. We are to think of them as Protestant D^vines,
ordinarily do in their commenting upon them; We deny, says Rivet, that the
perfection of which Scripture speaks, either when it commands us to be perfect,
or gives testimony of perfection, or integrity to some, consists in a freedom
from sin, Exercit. 52. in Genes. page 267. The Text quoted out of James,
serves well to explain the rest, Let patience have her perfect work, that ye
may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, whence we may argue, 1. That
perfection which Christians may attain, is the perfection that the Apostle
calls unto, This is plain in the text, He calls for perfection, that we may be
perfect: But Christians can reach no further a degree in perfection than
sincerity; Therefore the Apostle calls only to sincerity. 2. That is the
Apostles meaning, where he speaks of perfection, that himself gives in as his
meaning; This is clear, he is the best interpreter of himself; But he
expresses himself by perfect there to mean entire, or lacking nothing. A
perfection of entirenesse, or integrality then he means, a perfection of
parts, and not of degrees. For that text of Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally
brethren, farewell, be perfect, etc. let us compare with it, that which he
testifies of some in Corinth, 1 Cor. 2. 6. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them
that are perfect, that is, those that have a right, and more full understanding
of Gospel mysteries, put in opposition to the weakness of novices, which
perfection is, (according to the Apostle) the way to unity of judgment. As for
the Text, Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect, If it be streined to the highest, it calls for a divine
increated perfection, our adversaries then must yield, that there is a sicut
similitudinis, non aequalitatis, in that place. And if the context be
consulted, we shall find, that it is opposed to that half
hypocritical-righteousnesse, which was found in Scribes and Pharisees; which
all must exceed that enter into the Kingdom of heaven. In Heb. 6. 1. a
novice-like imperfection in knowledge, is reproved; and a further growth
toward perfection is called for; It is further objected, If perfection were
not the duty of a Christian, and unperfectnesse, and infirmity his sin, why
does the Apostle groan, and grieve under the remainder of his natural
infirmities, and press on to perfection, Romans 7. 14. to the 24. Phil. 3. 12,
14? The conclusion here is granted; The one is a duty, the other is a sin,
and because of failing in the one, and the burden of the other, the Apostle
groans. Foreseeing that this would be yielded him, there is added by way of
objection, Or is such unperfectnesse a sin, only in reference to the rule of
the Law, and not the rule of the Gospel, or that the Law does, but the Gospel
does not call for perfection? Answ. There is not one rule of the Law, as I have
demonstrated at large, and another of the Gospel, seeing the Gospel establishes
the Law; Only the Gospel Covenant, calls for those sincere desires, which
grace works, to conform us in our measure of the rule of the Law.

There is yet a third opinion, which I may well doubt whether I understand; but
so far as I do understand, I am as far from assent to it, as, either of the
former, and that is of those who do not only assert a personal inherent
righteousness, as well as imputed against the Antinomians; But also affirm
that this righteousness is complete and perfect, which if it were meant only
of the perfection of the subject; Our Evangelical righteousness is imperfect.
as opposed to hypocrisy, dissimulation, or doubleness, implying that they do
not only pretend for God; but are really for him, that they do not turn to him
feignedly (as Israel was sometimes charged, Jerem. 3. 10.) but with an upright
heart, or of the perfection, or entirenesse of the object, respecting not one,
or only some, but all commandments, which is called a perfection of parts, we
might readily assent to it. The covenant calls for such perfection, Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, and many have their witness in Scripture,
that they have attained to it, as Noah, Genesis 7. 9. Job, Job 1. 1. Hezekiah,
Esaias 38. 3. But a perfection above these is maintained, a perfection complete
and full, Righteousness signifies (as is said) a conformity to the Rule; and a
conformity with a quatenus, or an imperfect rectitude, is not a true conformity
or rectitude at all: imperfect righteousness is not righteousness, but
unrighteousness. It is a contradiction in adjecto, though holiness be
acknowledged to be imperfect in all respects, where perfection is expected, in
reference to the degree that it should obtain, or the degree which it shall
obtain, or in reference to the excellent object, about which it is exercised,
or in reference to the old covenant, or the directive, and in some sense the
preceptive part of the new Covenant, in all these respects it is imperfect, and
righteousness materially considered is holiness, and therefore thus
imperfect, but formally considered, it is perfect righteousness, or none, this
not in relation to the old rule, but the new Covenant; Upon this account, they
are charged to discover gross ignorance, that use and understand the word
righteous, and righteousness, as they relate to the old rule, as if the godly
were called righteous (besides their imputed righteousness) only because their
sanctification and good works have some imperfect agreement with the Law of
Works; This, and much more to assert, a personal perfect inherent
righteousness, as is said; all which as it is here held out to me, is new, and
I must confess my self in ignorance all over; I never took imperfect
righteousness to imply any such contradiction, no more than imperfect
holiness. Isaiah, I am sure, says, All our righteousness are as filthy rags,
Esaias 64. 6. No greater charge of imperfection can lie against the most
imperfect holiness, than the Prophet lays upon our righteousness. Neither do
I understand, how holiness should be imperfect, taken materially, and
righteousness perfect, taken formally in reference to a rule. We may (for
ought I know) as well make holiness formal, and refer it to a rule, and
righteousness material, in an absolute consideration, without reference to any
rule at all. And in such consideration I do not know how there can be
perfection or imperfection either in holiness or righteousness; it is as they
come up to, or fall short of the rule that they have, the denomination of
perfection or imperfection. Paul's Gospel-frame, whether you will call it
righteousness, or holiness, is set out, Romans 7. full of imperfection, yet all
this, as in reference to the rule, as it answered or fell short in conformity
to it, verse 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. And whereas
a charge of ignorance, is laid even upon learned Teachers; that commonly
understand the word righteousness, and righteous as it referres to the old
rule, I profess my self to have little of their learning, but I am wholly
theirs in this ignorance. I know no other rule but the old rule; the rule of
the Moral Law that is with me, a rule, a perfect rule, and the only rule. The
perfection of this holiness and righteousness in man's integrity, stood in the
perfect conformity to this Law, and the reparation of this in our regenerate
estate (in which the Apostle places the image of God) must have reference as to
God for a pattern, so to his Law as a rule. As an image carrying an imperfect
resemblance of its samplar, is an image, So conformity imperfectly answering
the rule is conformity likewise. A perfection of sufficiency to attain the end
I willingly grant, God condescending through rich grace to crown weak
obedience, in this sense our imperfection has its perfectness; otherwise I
must say that our inherent righteousness is an imperfect righteousness, in an
imperfect conformity to the rule of righteousness, and without their reference
to the rule there is neither perfection nor imperfection in any action. See
Doctor Davenant disputing against justification by inherent righteousness upon
the account of the imperfection of it de justitia habituali, page 349 and how
fully he was persuaded of the imperfection of this righteousness appears in
sentences prefixed before two Treatises as may be seen in the margent. Omnis
humana justitia injustitia esse deprebendi^ur, si divinitus districte
judicatur. G^egor. Moral. lib. 21. Cap. 15. Nostra fiqua est humilis justitia,
rect^ forsitan, sed non pura, nisi forte meliores nos esse credimus quam patres
nostros, qui non minus veraciter, quam humiliter ajebant, Omnes justitiae
nostrae tanquam pannus me^st^utae m^lie^is. Quo modo enim pura justitia, ubi
adhuc non potest culp^ deesse? Bern. in Sermon. 5. de verbis Esajae p^ophetae.


In the last place I shall conclude that sincerity, in the way and work of God,
(which Scripture also calls by the name of truth, integrity, simplicity,
uprightness, perfectness, an heart in the work of God, The Covenant of grace
requires and acccepts sincerity.
whole and unfeigned) is that which the covenant of grace does require, and
that which it accepts; This God in covenant gives in charge, and this he
rewards and crowns. The Law stands as a rule, and the charge in it, is, the
highest top of perfection, without the least indulgence in any case of failing,
suitable to the abilities that once were put into our hands, God in
Gospel-condescensions, will have this rule eyed; with a single and upright
heart universally eyed, and observed, both in our returns from sin, and in our
application to God in new obedience. This doing of the will of God from the
heart, with good will-doing service, Ephesians. 6. 6, 7. Serving with a willing
mind, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. This preparing the heart to seek the Lord God of our
fathers. Ezra 7. 10. This delight in the Law of God in the inward man, Romans 7.
22. though it be in much weakness, and with strength that is little, Rev. 3.
8. by reason of inward corruptions, Romans 7. 23. Gal. 5. 17. enemies without,
Ephesians. 6. 12. is required of God in covenant, and through grace accepted. And
as faith (which as we have heard is the other new covenant-condition) brings us
into communion with God; So this of a sincere heart and walk, holds in
communion, Faith gives access to God in grace, and through sincerity we walk
with God in grace, to glory; Both of them are called for of God, both accepted
with God, and both of them crowned with glory. That in this degree obedience is
both required, and accepted, in the Gospel is evident. This where oever it is,
God observes and eyes. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. For the eyes of the Lord run to and
fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them
whose heart is, perfect toward him: Herein thou have done foolishly;
therefore, from henceforth thou shall have wars. These have letters
testimonial from heaven, Job 1. 8. Have thou not considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth? a perfect and an upright man, one
that fears God, and escheweth evil? Genesis 7. 1. Thee have I seen righteous
before me in this generation. According to the degree of this, higher or lower
they have praise, 2 Chronicles. 29. 34. The Levites were more upright in heart to
sanctify themselves than the Priests: yea, where there is integrity in a
single act, this God notes, Yea, I know that thou did this in the integrity
of thine heart, Genesis 20. 6. These God protects, and with his omnipotence
preserves; 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the
whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. He is a buckler to them that walk uprightly, Prove. 2. 7.
In these God takes pleasure; I know, my God, that thou triest the reins, and
have pleasure in uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. Unto these God speaks peace; Do
not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? Mich. 2. 7. This the people
of God plead with God, as an argument to find favor in his eyes, Psalm 26.
1. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in my integrity, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. As for
me in the uprightness of my heart, I have willingly offered those things,
Psalm 18. 23. I was also upright before him, etc. This has been the high
ambition of the servants of God in their most sad troubles to reach. David
begging mercy, says to God, Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts,
Psalm. 51. 6. This has upheld the souls of the Saints in their greatest
difficulties, with all joy and consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplici^y and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation
in the world. Yea, this is a mark of him who is entirely the Lords,
professedly, and really his. When the question is put, Who shall dwell in Gods
holy hill, Who shall abide in his Tabernacle? answer is returned, He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, Psalm. 15 1, 2. And when a like question
is put, Isa. 33. 14. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burning? We have the like answer
returned in the words that follow; He that walks righteously, and speaks
uprightly. And Jesus seeing Nathanael, says, John 1. 47. Behold an Israelite
indeed. There are many Israelites in name, but here was an Israelite indeed,
and this is his character, in whom there is no guile; His inside was the same
with that without. In the discharge of this, the Saints of God have promised to
themselves upon good grounds, all happiness, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. The want of this
renders all that is done, void and vain, as to the acceptance of God, when
the heart glances aside, and is not right with God, in worshipping him, does
not seek him. Math. 15. 8. This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth,
and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Israel is
an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit to himself, Hos. 10. 1. Their heart is
divided, therefore shall they be found faulty, verse 2. Amaziah did that which
was good in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.
2. Judah has not turned unto me with their whole heart, but feignedly, Jerem.
3. 10. Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him, and
they returned and enquired early after God, and they remembered that God was
their rock, and the high God their redeemer; nevertheless they did flatter him
with their mouths, and they lied unto him with their tongues, for their hearts
were not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. By all
which I suppose it is evident that God in covenant calls for obedience,
requires integrity of heart in it, will not accept where sincerity of heart is
wanting, and where it is, he crowns it with happiness and glory. And from what
has been spoken, a full definition of the new covenant may be thus given. The
Covenant of Grace defined.
A gracious Covenant of God with fallen man, whereby God engages himself upon
faith in Christ, and return to God in sincere obedience, to confer on man
remission of sins, and all whatsoever that tends to everlasting happiness.
They that profess to believe and return to God are in Covenant; They that do
believe and sincerely return, enjoy the blessings and mercies of the covenant.
This Arminians make the decree of God, and will have no other than such
conditional Election, not an Election unto faith and obedience; but because it
is foreseen that men will believe and persevere in sincere obedience; in which
they are opposed by the Orthodox. See Moulins Anatomy of Arminianisme, chap.
12. Sect. 10. This is the covenant of grace published and promised in the
Gospel, which Arminians would make one with Election, confounding the Will of
Gods Decree with the Will of his Command, and Promise. He that would see more
into the nature of sincerity, that he may answer to that which God in covenant
does require may peruse Ball on the Covenant, chap. 11. and Doctor Preston on
Genesis 17. 1.

CHAP. XXVI.
The necessity of a Ministry, to bring men into Covenant with God, and to
bring them up to the terms of the Covenant.
FRom hence several Corollaries may be drawn, and Inferences made. 1. Of the
necessity of a Ministry a constant standing Ministry, as, to bring men into
covenant with God* so, to bring them also up to the terms of the covenant, to
a lively saving faith, and sincere obedience; God works not man into covenant
by immediate voice, Neither does he use the Ministry of Angels, in his
ordinary way of working of it. But when he would take in, the Nations of the
world, into covenant with himself, he sends out his Ministers for that work,
giving them a Commission with gifts and abilities suitable to disciple all
Nations, Matthew 28. 19. Where a Ministry is not, there is no Vovenant People.
Where a Ministry comes not, there that people remain out of covenant, in the
state of the Ephesians before their call, as it is set out by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 2. 12. without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the
world. Where the Gospel is tendered and refused there is no Covenant.
And where the Gospel Covenant is tendered, and not received, there that people
continue out of covenant, rejecting the council of God against themselves, Luke
7. 30. and rendering themselves unworthy of everlasting life, Acts 13. 46. This
was the case of the people of Athens, There Paul preached, yet there he settled
(for ought we read) no Church of believers, though he had there some particular
Converts, Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, Where the Gospel
is tendered, there is a people in Covenant.
with others, Acts 17 34. Where the word was delivered, and there received,
there was a people in covenant with God, as at Ephesus, Corinth, Philippi,
Thessalonica, etc. Those Ministers had the honor of planting, of laying the
first foundation, of preaching where Christ before had not been named, Romans 15.
20. A people thus brought into covenant, do not always come up to the terms
of the covenant; All covenanters keep not covenant, their hearts are not steady
in it; Therefore there is no less necessity of a Ministry, in established
Churches, to keep up a people in Covenant with God, through the terms of the
covenant to bring them to the happiness promised, Theirs is the work of
watering, of building on another foundation, of preaching Christ, where Christ
before, at least was known by name, and in some sort professed. That there was
such a Ministry in the Church of the Jews, to teach Jacob his Laws, and Israel
his judgments, to require what God in covenant called for, is not denied that
a Ministry was necessary in the Primitive Apostolic times, to work men into
covenant, and for the plantation of Churches, is confessed likewise. But when the
Apostles left the world, then this order (as some say) sell with them, all
Ministerial power died with them. We are made to believe (says one) because
the Apostles were ordained by God to be Teachers of the people, and endued with
gifts for that end, that therefore there is a like divine, though secret
Ordination from God in the making of our Ministers. Compassionate Samaritane,
page 24, 25. But if the Scriptures may be heard, this may soon be decided: I
shall therefore by arguments make it appear.

First, that God has established a Ministry, and appointed it through all the
ages of the world to be perpetuated.

Secondly, I shall give reasons to manifest the necessity of such a Ministry
to be thus established and continued.

That such a one is established, appears

First, Reasons proving the establishment of a Ministry to be perpe^uated
through all ages.
By the work that they have to do, given them in commission, by Christ Jesus,
Matthew. 28. 19 20. Go, Disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. Here is commission given for the dispensation
of the Word and Sacraments. That of the Word, is either for laying the first
foundation, or for the superstruction, either for their work of planting,
preaching where Christ was never known by name; or else for watering, to carry
on that happy beginning. Their first work in laying the first foundation, is
given in charge in these words, Disciple all Nations, which was not the work of
one age. Though Egesippus (as he is quoted by Doctor Andrews, Preface to the
Decalogue, page 7.) says, That there was no known Commonwealth in any part of
the world inhabited, but within forty years after Christ's passion received a
great shaking off of Heathenish Religion; yet the whole work after so many
Centuries of years, is not yet done; Those that are learned in Geography say,
that there is not above the nineteenth part of the inhabited world, that bears
the name of Christian, and a great part of those so over-runne with Barbarism,
that they have little more than a name that they live; when yet we believe the
work shall be more universal, that as God was once known in Jury, his Name
great in Israel; So it shall be from the rising of the Sun to the going down
thereof, Mal. 1. 11. And that the Kingdoms of the world shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, Revel. 11. 15. Their work of
superstruction or building up of Disciples, is given them in charge in these
words, teaching them to observe all whatsoever I have commanded you. As long as
homage is due to Christ, so long a Ministry is to be continued to call for it,
and give directions in it, which we find farther held out, Ephesians. 4. 11, 13,
14, 15. There is an enumeration of Ministerial functions, extraordinary and
ordinary, as there is an appointment of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists; So,
also of Pastors and Teachers, their work is there pointed out, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ; as also their duration and continuance, till we all come in
the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. When in the
world all are Saints, and no imperfection can be found in these Saints, nor any
thing wanting in the Mystical body of Christ, when there is not an error to be
found, either in judgment or practice, nor a seducer, or false teacher feared,
then, and not before, a Ministry may be spared; This will not be, as long as
there is a Devil in Hell, and a man with corruption upon earth. There is not a
man that opposes a Ministry, but the being of that man is an unanswerable
argument for the establishment of it. Their work for dispensation of the
Sacraments is given in charge explicitly in those words, Baptizing them, etc.
as implicitly in that charge, Teaching them to observe all that I have
commanded. This of Baptism answers in duration to that other Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup, you show forth the Lords death till he come.

Secondly, It appears in the promise of Christ Jesus, annexed by way of
encouragement in this work, verse 20. Lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world. This is we see to the uttermost extent of time, always, even
all days, to the worlds end. And howsoever some quarrel may be raised about
the phrase (...), Saeculi being taken in so various an acception in the holy
Scriptures; yet the subject matter whereon it is spoken, is a work of more
lasting (as has been observed) than one age, together with the phrase annexed;
The consummation or finishing, plainly signifies that this promise is for
perpetuity till Christ's coming at the end of ages There was an end of ages at
Christ's first coming, Heb. 9. 26. There shall be an end of ages at his second
coming. See Gomarus Tom. 2. p. 530.
. That which puts a period to the Lords Supper, must alone put a period to this
work; And for any to make a promise to a dying man, ready to yield up the
ghost, for help for many years, who is but to live few years, were a strange
promise; And to settle a function of the Ministry with a promise of assistance
through all ages, when it must be extinct in that age, were as strange a
promise. A promise to a Nonentity, or mere Chimara. Ministers then are in the
Church as Stars, not as Meteors; they grow as Plants, not as Mushromes, their
duration is not for a year, for an age, but through all ages.

Thirdly, this appears by the Apostles care for a succession, Being not
suffered to continue by reason of death, they took care for others to fill up
their places; in the Churches which they had planted. Therefore Paul (called,
not by man, but by a vision and voice from heaven) gives order for a
Ministerial call by Ordination, Giving charge to Titus, Tit. 1. 5. to ordain
Elders in every City, and this by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. to whom the care of Church-inspection was by him committed, Acts
20. 17. compared with verse 28. And Paul and Barnabas in their journal, Acts
14. 23. Ordained Elders in every Church, and recommended them to God with
prayer and fasting, of which more afterward.

Fourthly, this appears in the settled Pastors, which were found in constituted,
established Churches. Epaphroditus in Philippi, Philip. 2. 25. Archippus in
Colesses, Col. 4. 17. Those of Ephesus, which gave the Apostles meeting at
Miletum, Acts 20. 17. John who lived longest of the Apostles, and wrote his
Revelation toward the ending of his days in the Issle of Pathmos, Rev. 1. 9.
in his banishment there for the testimony of Jesus Christ; writes several
Epistles to the Angels, of the several respective Churches in Asia, which
Angels were to be his survivors, and are not denied by any, to be Ministers of
those several City-churches there mentioned, Whether these Churches were such
as have been called Diocesan, Presbyterial, or Congregational, is not here to
be questioned, but that they were Ministers appointed over their several
charges, is out of question.

Fifthly, This appears by the charge given for respect and esteem to be given
to those who thus stood up in succession in such established Churches, 1 These.
5. 12, 13. We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in
love for their works sake. Phil. 2 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with
all gladness, and hold such in reputation. Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you, Heb. 13. 17. These were not to be reviled, railed upon;
but reverenced, honored and obeyed; and an Order not in being, is not to be
thus honored.

Sixthly, it appears by the Ordinance of the Lord Jesus for their liveli-hood
and subsistence, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Do ye not know that they which Minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel; should live of the Gospel. Here we find three things
implied. 1. That there was a particular order of men in the time of the Law,
separated by God for the Ministerial work, and designed by his especial
appointment for that business. 2. That there is a proportionable Ordinance of
Christ in Gospel Times of select men for that business. 3. That maintenance by
Gods appointment was designed, as for one, so for both in their respective
times and succession.

Seventhly, It is farther cleared, by that hand of Providence, that has
answerably provided in all ages, men for this work, in a constant succession.
No age since the Apostles, have wanted them, I say not that there was a
Ministry in every age, in equal purity and luster, yet all ages held up that
order, and Papacy, when the Minstery was laid most low, found out those that
were faithful to Christ Jesus. Some set Providence so high, that they make it a
rule of life, as well, as, Scriptures; Me thinks it may be confessed, that it
gives some light to doubtful Scriptures, The analogy of faith being held firm,
somewhat may be gathered from it. To give instance in those Scriptures which
seem to bear witness of a glorious call of the Jews, which most receive,
and some question, God so ordering by providence, that in the revolution of so
many ages, they still continue a distinct people, separate from others not
joining in their worship, but retaining still their own; and keeping up the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, when no such thing can be said of any
captivated dispersed people, it seems to speak that they wait for, and as it
were, expect when the veil may be taken off; that they may return to the
Lord. But here, providence seconding such clear Texts of Scripture, such that
leave not a doubt behind them unless men shut their eyes against the Sun,
may sure be acknowledged to be an additional demonstration.

For reasons of the necessity of such an established Ministry to be continued
in constituted Churches. Reasons evincing a necessity of such an established
Ministry.


1. The Church of God is to continue, and have its abode through all ages of
the world; as long as a world is to continue, so long a Church is to continue,
in which God may have glory by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3. 21. and therefore
compared to a mountain, as for eminence, so for continuance, Psalm 125. 1. to
an house built by Christ himself on a rock, against which the gates of hell
shall not prevail. Now a Ministry and a Church cannot be separated; It is of
the integrality, if not of the essence of it. A Church settled by a Ministry,
may continue being for some time, though in much imperfection, without a
Ministry, but will soon be without being. This is confessed of all that would
hold up a Church in being; whether Episcopal, Independent, or Presbyterial.
They that would level a Ministry (which is the work of many) would level all
Churches upon earth also. They would drive God from off the earth, and lay his
glory in the dust.

2. There must be intercourse between God and his people, between earth and
heaven in all ages. It shall at no time be truly said with those Apostates,
Ezekiel. 8. 12. The Lord has forsaken the earth. Now there must be men designed,
Ambassadors appointed to carry on this work. As the Priests in the Law were
ordained for men in things appertaining to God, as Heb. 5. 1. So the Ministers
of the Gospel have a parallel institution in succession, 1 Cor. 9. 14. God in
no age carries it on in an immediate way and manner.

3. Take away this Ordinance of a Ministerial function, and all spiritual
miseries to an utter confused Chaos will presently and necessarily follow.
First, Ignorance, all spiritual darkness and blindness. As the setting of the
Sun brings darkness upon the Horizon, so the absence of a Ministry brings
darkness upon the Church. They are the light of the world, Matthew. 5. 14. John
Baptist was a burning light, John 5. 35. Paul was sent to bring a people from
darkness to light, as Acts 26. 18. Their Ministry is called a Vision, without
them men are without light. It is the highest of contradictions to cry up
light, and cry down a Ministerial function. Secondly, Wickedness; this follows
from the former. If a man walk in the night he stumbleth, (says our Savior)
because there is no light in him, John 11. 10. An ignorant man cannot be above
a wicked man, Ephesians. 4. 18. Alienated from the life of God by reason of their
ignorance that is in them: As that Prodigal (which the wise man brings in
complaining, that he had not obeyed the voice of his Teachers) was almost in
all the evil in the midst of the Assembly, Prove 5. 12. So, they may say that
want Teachers; Blind places of the earth are full of the habitations of
cruelty, Psalm. 74. 20. Thirdly, Error, Heresy, Blasphemy. This is evident. 1.
In Reason. Men that want a guide must needs go astray, Sheep without a
Shepherd, cannot long hold their walk. The Apostle knew, that after his
departure, ravening wolves would arise, not sparing the flock, Acts 20 29. What
a Wolf is to the flock, that a seducer is to the Church. These waited the
opportunity of the Apostles absence; Smite the Shepherd, and the sheep will be
scattered; when there is no shepherd in Israel, every man does that which is
right in his own eyes, as when there is no King in Israel. 2. By Experience,
What gross opinions in worship did the Israelites entertain in Moses his
forty days absence from them? Let us go no further than our selves, Since a
Ministry in England was blasted, and men made it their honor to revile and
reproach it; how fruitful have we been in those monsters, from the lowest step
of Semiseparation, to the highest pitch of Rantisme? which has occasioned all
those attestations to the truth of Christ Jesus against Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of this time, from the Ministers of Christ, in most parts of this
Nation. Jesus Christ leaving not himself without witness, In which we may see
lists of them unto trembling amazement. But if we cannot see it at home, let us
hear of it from abroad, from the pen of a Protestant Divine, making
observation of the state of the Church in England, gives this sad, and too true
report unto the world: Anglia bis 4. annis facta est collu^ies and lerna omnium
errotum and sectarum: nulla a condito orb provincia tam parvo spa^io tot
manstrosas haereses protulit, atque haec. Referunt. Theo^ Cestrens. in
attestatione sua excusa. Anno Domini. 648.
That England in four years space is become an ^eap and sink of all Errors
and Sects, No Province from the beginning of the world, ever brought forth, in
so little a space, so many monstrous Heresies, as this. Honor. Reggus Comment
de statu Ecclesiae in Anglia, page 1. Has Christ any thing that he may enjoy
unquestioned among us? As he may not have an Ambassador, so he must not enjoy
a Day, or an Ordinance, not so much as his Deity among us. 3. If neither Reason
nor experience, will serve to convince us, let the Apostle be heard, Ephesians. 4.
11, 14. He gave gifts unto men, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some teachers, that we be not as children
^ost to and fro, with every wind of Doctrine. One end of the Ministry is
establishment of Saints against Errors. And it is not the least of the cunning
sleights of men to throw down a Ministry, that error may be introduced, and
Heresies planted, we must not look to be secure from Seducers, longer than a
Ministry ballasts us.

It is objected that in New Testament-times, Objections against a Ministerial
Ordinance answered Joel 2. 28, 29. vindicated.
there is a Promise, that God will pour out his Spirit on all flesh, sons
and daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions. And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids, in those
days will I pour out my Spirit, Joel 2. 28, 29 So that now this office is not
with limit to some, but promiscuously in all.

First, Messiah, with a temporal rule and power, they will receive no other.
This caused many in Christ's time, to expect Elijah in person, and not to regard
John, who came in the power and Spirit of Elijah. This holds those of the
Church of Rome, that they see not that Antichrist, who opposes Christ in a
mystery, but expect one that opposes Christ openly. And let others take heed,
that it do not deceive them, while they look after a personal reign of Christ
upon earth, which some mysterious Scriptures seem to imply, when open clear
Texts do manifestly contradict.

Secondly, when in New Testament-times, this prophecy was first fulfilled,
observe what way was taken for the fulfilling of it, The Spirit comes in the
form of tongues, fiery and cloven, and sat upon each of the Apostles, and
this Peter says, was that which was foretold by Joel the Prophet, Acts 2. 16.
There is a singular analogy between Scripture-signes, and the thing signified;
whether ordinary in Sacraments, or extraordinary in Visions. This shows in what
manner, and way, the Spirit is communicated, in all Languages, and Nations, and
that the Spirit is received by the hearing of Faith; If Peter may interpret
Joel, a Ministry is established, and not overthrown.

Thirdly, those high expressions there, serve only to set out the abundance of
knowledge which men by the Ministerial work should reach in Gospel Times; what
Prophets then saw, and those that saw visions, and dreamed dreams knew, that
men of all ranks should see, What the Prophets diligently enquired after, 1
Pet. 1. 12. they should understand.

Fourthly, I could wish that these men would compare another prophecy of New
Testament-times, Zach. 13. 2. where the Lord promises to cause the Prophets,
and the unclean spirits to pass out of the land. Prophets there, are men of
unclean spirits; those false spirits that are gone out into the world. These
shall be brought to a serious conviction, and shall be ashamed every one of his
Vision, of the spirit of the which they use to speak, the revelation of which
they were wont to boast; and shall no longer wear a rough garment to deceive,
sh^l relinquish that calling, function or practice, giving in this reason; I am
no Prophet, man taught me to keep cattle from my youth. Because they were bred
for husbandry, man another way, therefore they are not for this function; In
the case of extraordinary inspiration, this indeed holds not; Amos pleads, Amos
7. 14. I was no Prophet, nor a Prophets son, but I was an herdman, and a
gatherer of Sycamore fruit; He was thus trained up, and therefore lived in this
calling, in which he was trained, till God gave him an extraordinary call; and
this he pleads, The Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said
unto me, Go, prophecy to my people Israel, verse 15. Robinson the learned
Pen (I suppose) of that party, undertaking to defend the liberty of all,
promiscuously to preach the Gospel, and that it is no proper work of a Select
Ministry, instances in Christ and his Apostles, who preached (says he) in the
Jewish Church without contradiction: And whereas we except against this; that
they were extraordinarily called, and qualified, he answers, that the
exception, though true, yet is not of force, for their argument is not that
they preached (which their extraordinary call would warrant,) but that they
preached and were not excepted against by the Jews; who did not believe any
extraordinary immediate call of theirs, yet never excepted against them; but
received them, upon the account of private men, and therefore it appears that
it was their ordinary course, that any gifted man might preach without control.

Ans. It is wonder, himself was excepted against by the Jewish Elders, and that
upon this very point, how often we know not, but we see it upon record, in
three several Evangelists that the excepted against him. The chief Priests and
the Elders of (...) to him as he was teaching, and said, by what authority
(...) thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? Luke 20. 21. Matthew.
21. 23. Mark 11. 7. Their argument runs thus: They that preach the Gospel must
have their authority for it. Thou undertakest this work, produce thy authority,
let us see thy warrant? Christ answers not, that it was each man's l^berty, and
duty, who had gifts, as he must have done, else he was wanting in his defense
of the truth, in case their proposition had been false, but puts a question, in
which he clearly holds out his extraordinary call; The baptism of John, whence
was it, from heaven, or of men? As John Baptized, so I preach. He baptized not,
neither do I preach without authority, whence we may collect that he that may
presume to set up a new Sacrament, without farther authority, may with the same
liberty, undertake to be a Gospel-Preacher.

2. That Prophecy is objected, Israel; Jerem. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. vindicated.
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my
people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of
them, even unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their
inquity, and remember their sin no more.

This Text is frequently produced for several purposes,

The two first branches of the former answer will give satisfaction here; If
Old Testament-Prophecies are to be understood according to New
Testament-Interpretations, then no unconditional covenant will here be
established, nor yet Gospel Ordinances decryed; seeing in the New Testament,
covenant-conditions are clearly and undeniably held out, and a Gospel-Ministery
established, which already in both parts is fully cleared. A Ministry is set
up with instructions to require faith and repentance, and that upon those
terms, that without them there is no remission of sins, no salvation.

2. As to that, for which it is here produced, it rather serves for overthrow
of mutual conferences, Christian communion for mutual edification, than the
Ministerial power. The Text is, not that ye shall have no more Teachers in
public; But they shall teach no more every man his brother, and every man his
neighbor; for every one shall know him, etc. The Apostles charge, Col. 3. 16.
flies full in the face of this Interpretation, Let the Word of Christ dwell in
you plenteously in all wisdom, speaking to one another, This Prophecy is so
streined, that there is no need of such admonition, nor any use of brotherly
exhortations. Certainly neither of these inferences from this Prophecy, were
in the Apostles thoughts, when he exhorted the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5. 11.
Comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do,
adding in the next verses: And we beseech you brethren to know them which
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem
them very highly in love for their works sake, etc. The council had been more
suitable, to have bid them to have ceased this mutual consolation, and
edification; And, as for th^se that were over them, that distinction of over,
and under, was Antichristian, that they must cease to honor, and make it their
business to level them. But above all, it is wonder, how those that are high,
in setting up, all for Teachers, and will have liberty of prophecy
promiscuous, can with face urge this Text, The letter of it being against,
brother and brother, neighbor and neighbor, teaching one another, and not
against a Ministerial way for edification.

3. For the full interpretation of the words, that of King James must be
acknowledged; In mystical prophecies, it is far more easy to confute an
absurd interpretation; than find out a true one. One that joins in the former
part, to establish an unconditional covenant, against New Testament-light, yet
leaves them in the latter, and says, The not teaching one another, there spoken
of, is meant of that obscure teaching which was under the Law. I wish that his
party would here heed him, and that himself would consider, that when he would
have them to recede from the rigid adhering to the letter of this part of the
prophecy, for overthrow of all helps for knowledge, whether he have not equal
cause to recede from that which he, would with like rigor fasten upon it; I
shall undertake as clearly from the New Testament, to hold out conditions in
the covenant of Grace; as any other man shall find either warrant, or
Ordinance for public, or private admonition or exhortation; They shall not
have so much need of teaching as formerly, say the Annotations on that place,
and it is plain, that, that is often spoken in Scripture negatively; that is
meant comparatively; I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. When he
would have both mercy and sacrifice, though mercy preferred above sacrifice.
Calvin has fully spoken to this objection, satisfying both his Adversary and
his Reader, giving them a full refutation, and the Text a good interpretation:
Quod autem fanatici homines hinc occasionem arripiunt, abolendae exterrae
praedicationis, acsi sub Christi regno esset superuacua, facile little insania
rejell^tur. Haec little est objectio Post Christi adventum non debet quisque;
proximum suum docere; sacessat ig^tur externum Ministerium, ut internae Dei
inspirationi detur locus. Atqui praeter^unt quod in primis animadversione
dignum erat. Neque enim in totum Propheta negat quin docturi sint alii alios,
sed haec sunt verb^^, non doccbunt, dicendo, Cognosce Dominum, acsi diceret,
non amplius occupabit hominum mentes igneratia qualis antehac, ut nesciant quis
sit Deus Scimus autem duplicem esse Doctrinae usum Primo, ut qui poenitus rades
sunt a primis elementis incipiant deinde ut qui jam sunt initiati majores
faciant progressus. Quum ergo Christianis quam ^u vivunt proficiendum sit,
certum est, ne minem usquo adeo satere. qaiu ^oceri opus habeat utpars non
postremae sapieriae nostrae sit docilitas; Quae autem proficiendi sit ratio si
velimus esse Christi discipuli, Ptulus ostendit ad E^^es. cap. 4. 11.
Constituit Pastores and Doctores, etc. Hinc apparet nihil minus Prophetae
venisse in mentem, quam spoliari Ecclesiam tam necessario bono.
In that some fantastic spirits, (says he,) take occasion from hence to
abolish all outward preaching of the Word, as though in the Kingdom of Christ
it were superfluous, their madness may easily be answered. This is their
objection: (says he) After the coming of Christ a man ought not to teach his
neighbor; let an outward Ministry then be gone, and give way to an inward in
piration. But they pass that by (says our Author) that in the Prophet which
is chiefly worthy of observation; The Prophet does not deny that one should
teach another, but these are his words; They shall not teach one another,
saying, Know the Lord; as though he should say, such ignorance should not
possess the minds of men as heretofore, that they should not know who the Lord
is, for we know there is a twofold use of teaching. First, That those that were
altogether ignorant, may begin with the first elements; and afterward that
they that are thus entered, may make a farther progress. Therefore when
Christians as long as they live ought to learn, there is none so wise, but need
to be taught, so that a teachable disposition is not the least part of wisdom,
and what our way to profit is, if we will be Christ's Disciples, Paul shows in
his Epistle to the Ephesians, chap. 4. 11. He gave gifts unto men; some
Pastors, some Teachers, etc. Whence it appears that nothing else came into the
Prophets thoughts, than to spoil the Church of so great a benefit. Thus far
judicious Calvin on Heb. 8. verse 8, 9, 10, 11. In case these words [not only]
might be supplied as some would have it, men shall not only teach one another,
Know the Lord, but all shall know me; giving instances of the like, of
necessity to be supplied in other Scriptures, then the whole scope of the place
were cleared: For the Jews as they did make use of the teaching of men, so, for
the generality they rested in it; Here they are taught that which they never
minded, the necessity of the concurrence, of Gods teaching with man's, that when
man discovers the object, God should put in frame the Organ. Certain it is,
that when other prophecies foretell in New Testament-times, men's zeal, to
stir up one another in the knowledge of God, (as Isa. 2. 3. Zech. 8. 21, 22,
23. yea, the very Chapter whence this prophecy is taken, ver. 6. and the
Apostles in the New Testament call upon men for the mutual help of each other
for edification) this Prophecy does not stand alone for the destruction of it.

CHAP. XXVII.
Schools and Nurseries of Learning, in order to a gifted Ministry necessary.
AS a Ministry is to be established, to bring men into Covenant, and to bring
them up, to the terms of the covenant, so all that necessarily conduces to it,
is necessarily to be provided. First, Nurseries, Seminaries, Seed-plots, for
gifts and abilities fitting for it, and suitable to it. Qui vult finem, vult
media, is a certain rule; the end ever supposes the way to it. He that will be
a workman, must have tools; He that will fight a battle, must have arms; He
that will make a Purchase, must have moneys; As, other things, so, the
Ministry must have its due preparations. Christ having commissioned the
twelve, for the work of discipling Nations, they must not set upon it, till
they were enpoured for it. We have not inspiration; that is to be supplied by
education, the way that Paul gave in charge to Timothy, Give attendance to
reading, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Meditate wholly on these things, that thy profitting may
appear to all, verse 15. As he had not health by miracle, but in the use of
means, 1 Timothy 5. 23. so, neither had he gifts for the Ministry, but by study.
A way for the advancement of study is therefore necessary, and though neither
Law nor Gospel, do in the letter expressly appoint them; no more than they did
Synagogues for the Jews, and the like places of Assembly for Christians, yet
by way of necessary consequence, both Law, and Gospel call for them, seeing
they expressly call for that, which without these cannot be effected. A School
to teach letters, with the Art of spelling, that we may be able to read, is not
any where appointed, The Holy Ghost speaking to men of the light of Reason; and
requiring knowledge of the Law by searching the Scriptures, and meditation in
it, knew, this was needless: As petty Schools for private Christians, so are
Schools of a higher nature, for the Ministerial Function; Therefore, as all
Sects whatsoever had their Schools, to advance their way; Stephen met with
some of them at Jerusalem, Universities of necessary use.
Paul at Athens, so, we find the like for the propagation of the knowledge of
the Law of God, The Sons of the Prophets say to Elisha, 2 King. 6. 1. Behold,
the place where we dwell is too strait for us. Sons of Prophets, were no
other than Pupils, or Scholars of the Prophets, and we see, that they made
their abode together, and their number increased; To this Solomon alludes in
the Proverbs, in the Person of Wisdom, My son, receive my instruction; and
our Savior also, Wisdom is justified of all her children, Mat. 11. 19. Such a
place there was at Naioth in Ramah, whither David fled, and Saul followed him,
1 Samuel 19. 20. There was Samuel, and a company of Prophets. Naicthum venerunt,
etc. They came to Naioth, which was the dwelling of the Prophets, who exercised
themselves in the Law of God, that the doctrine of salvation might be propagaed
throughout the whole region of Israel. So Calvin on the place, Naioth habitatio
quaedam, etc. Naioth was the dwelling of the Prophets in Ramah, where the
believers gave themselves up to the study of Gods Law, and were called the
sons of the Prophets. Pelican in locum, page 200 And from these wor^s Willer
on the place (out of Peter Martyr) concludes, that The noble foundation of
Universities, and Schools of Learning, is grounded upon the example of the
Prophets. To this end there was a College in Jerusalem, where Huldah the
Prophetess did live, 2 Chronicles. 34. 22. And Jeremy who lived in the same time,
speaks of the Prophets of Jerusalem, as of the Prophets of Samaria, Jerem. 23.
13, 14. In either places they had, as appears, Schools of the Prophets. After
the destruction of Jerusalem, Schools for learning were still held up by the
Jews. They had their University in Tiberias, as Weemes observes, Christian
Synagogue, page 148. In Babylon, says he, there were three famous
Universities, Neharda, Sora and Pambeditha. He farther says, Colleges were
appointed to receive strangers, and were called Labrothenu, which is corruptly
read Libertines, Acts 6. 9. By the same providence, on like warranty in the
days of the Gospel, they have been set up at Alexandria, Antioch, where many
famous men taught publicly (says Wille^ further out of Martyr,) as Pentianus,
Origin, Clemens. These through Gods goodness are continued; wheresoever the
Gospel is preached, so that the use of Schools, the necessity of Universities,
is evident as well in Scripture as the light of Reason.

Object. But the Universities of Europe are a cause of vnivers^l sines and
plagues, we want the Universities. the S (...) and Seed plots of all Piety. But
have not those fountains, ever sent what streams the times liked, and ever
changed their (...), according to the Princes eye and palate? Bloody tenent,
page 173. Answ. Jerusalem (as Jeremy complains) profaneness went into all the
land, Their Universities (it seems) were as foul as ours which the Prophet
bewailed, and had a zeal to purge but not to destroy and wholly ruinate. The
streams from thence (blessed be God) have not run in one channel. We have from
thence sweet waters (as well as bitter streams) that have made glad the Cities
of God.

Object. I honor Schools for Tongues and Arts, but the institution of Europes
Universities, devoting Persons, for Scholars in a Monastical way, forbidding
marriage and labor too, I hold (says one) as far from the mind of Jesus
Christ, as it is from the propagating of his name and worship. Sol.
Bloody Tenent. page 173. Answ. I am of your mind, They very well agree to
both, as may sufficiently appear in that which has been said They that
propagate his Name and worship, must know it; and this is the way to attain to
knowledge, For the forbidding of labor, I know no such express statute, but
the very being of Schools, of this kind is inconsistent with it. A School for
Tongues, and Arts, cannot be a shop for Trades, Can we think, those Sons of the
Prophets that studied under Elisha, or those Prophets under Samuel, had their
employments of manufactures or tillage? If they had been men of labor, they
would sure have had an Axe among them, and not have been put to borrow. To be a
Prophet and an Husbandman, as Zach. 13. 5. taught from youth to keep cattle;
cannot stand together, as has been shown. The Levites had no land for tillage,
nor yet do we read that they drove any trades, Their work we find prescribed
them, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy Laws,
they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt-offering before the Altar.
So for Ministers of the Gospel, we hear of their labor in Word and Doctrine,
their charge to preach in season and out of season. For the forbidding of
marriage; there is no such thing, who has not known men, in that state in the
Universities, and Resident in Colleges? It is true that those Students, that
have their maintenance from the Founders donation, upon marriage lose their
place, but do not incur expulsion. And the thing is very equal, seeing those
places are not intended for a settled abode, (as some abuse them) but for
Preparation for public employment, whether in Church or State, and who blames
those ties of Apprentices from marriage, for the term of their service to know
their trades? If wives and families should be taken in, they would soon find
the inconvenience that the sons of the Prophets complained of, their
dwellings would be too strait for them.

Object. Have not the Universities sacrilegionsly stole this blessed name of
Christ's Scholars from his People? Is not the very Scripture Language it self
bec^me absurd, to wit, to call Gods People, especially women (as Dorcas)
Scholars? ibid. And was it not an equal sacrilege, for some peculiar men to
take the title of the Sons of the Prophets, who (as it is plain) were not their
children, but their Scholars, and therefore the Prophets, (under whose tuition
they were) were called by them, as, by the name of Father, 2 King. 2. 12. so,
also by the name of Master, 2 King. 6. 5. being those Masters of the Assemblies
that the Wise man speaks of, Eccles. 12. Others heard the doctrine, and as sons
received the instructions of the Prophets as well as they, yet the title is
given peculiarly to some, who in a peculiar way were separate for that work,
not common to all men, much less to women. Besides, the word Scholar is
plainly in relation to Schools, men may learn Christ and be his disciples, is
confessed, though they be not Scholars in this way.

I know no Schools of the Prophets in the New Testament, but the particular
Congregation of Christ Jesus. And I question whether it be any thing but sin
that has dried up this current of the Spirit, in those rare gifts of tongues,
to Gods sons and daughters, serving so admirably, both for the understanding
of the Original Scriptures, and also for the propagating of the Name of Christ.
Who knows but that it may please the Lord, again to cloth his People, with a
Spirit of zeal, and courage for the Name of Christ, yea and pour forth those
fiery streams again of tongues, and prophecy in the restoration of Zion?
Bloody tenent page 174. I am glad to here it confessed, that sin is
displeasing to God, and that any judgment on the Church is confessed to be let
in at this gate; I am glad farther to hear that tongues serve, so admirably to
propagate the Name of Christ, whence I infer, that while this judgment for sin
continues, there is a necessity of other courses to attain this, that is
acknowledged to be of this excellency. Since the judgment was laid on the
earth for sin, men have got their bread with labor, and so must as long as the
judgment remains. The like pains must be for learning as for a living; When
God shall please to pour out again these fiery streams, we then shall
confess the unusefulnesse of Schools to this purpose, in the mean space their
use is evident. And seeing it is acknowledged that men must dig with daily
study, and labor to come at the Original fountains; let none be like Pharaoh
to urge a tale of brick, and deny straw. If they must thus dig, let them not
be necessitated to go to the Papists to sharpen their spades, as sometimes
Israel to the Philistines, with their goads and mattocks, which yet necessarily
will be, if their Schools be kept up, and ours cried down. Mr. Ainsworth is
brought in for an instance, who (as is said) had scarce his peer, among a
thousand Academians for the Scripture-Originals, and yet he scarce set foot
within a College walls. His abilities in the tongues is evident (which was his
Masterpiece) but his education I know not but one Swallow makes not a Spring.
I have known a man excellent, in the most exquisite manual trade, who yet never
served a Master to learn it, yet this never took men off the way of
Apprentiships If Mr. Ainsworth scarce set foot in a College walls, yet he
reaped the fruit of their labors that were studied, and thi^ way excelled. Is
this the honor that you profess to give to Schools for Tongues and Arts, to
persuade men not to set their foot within them?

Another goes yet here farther, not only to put down Schools, and demolish
Academies for learning but to deny any necessity or use of learning at all,
yea, any necessity of a Ministry for interpretation of Scripture, as the
Compassionate Samaritane, page 29, 30, 31. One interest ( among others by him
named) of Ministers, is to persuade the people, that the Scriptures, though we
have them in our tongue, are not yet to be understood by us, without their
help, and interpretation, so that in effect we are in the same condition with
those we have so long pitied, that are forbid to have the Scriptures in their
own tongue; for it is alone, not to have them in our own tongue, and to be made
believe that we cannot understand them, though we have them in our own. Is the
cabinet open to us? and do we yet want a key? has so much labor been spent? so
many translations extant, and are we yet to seek? Let us argue a little with
them; either the Scriptures are not rightly translated, or else they are; if
they are not, why have we not been told so all this while? why have we been
cheated into errors? if they are rightly translated, why should not English
men understand them? The idiomes and proprieties of the Hebrew and Greek
languages, which some say, cannot word for word be expressed in English, might
all this while have been translated into as many English words, as will carry
the sense thereof.

For the dilemma concerning the Scriptures rightly translated, or not rightly;
I may apply that of Job, chap. 6. verse 15. How forcible are right words, but
what does your arguing reprove? and answer in a word, that they are rightly
translated according to the reach of a humane work, and more rightly than the
translation followed so much by the Evangelists and Apostles. I suppose, all
will yield that ours is more exact after the Original, than was that of the
Seventy; And yet there was no cheat in those translations; if there had, those
witnesses of Christ had not been silent; and yet not such a perfection that
will bear no amendment. There is still use of examination of them, of asserting
and defending them; But be it granted that the translation is every way exact
and full, does it follow that there needs no help or interpretation? The people
of the Jews had the Original it self, and spoke the language in which
Scripture was written; yet the Priests lips were then to preserve knowledge,
and the people were to seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2 6. The cabinet was
open to them, as it is to us; yet there needed a key for farther opening. Those
two Disciples, with whom Christ had to deal with, upon the way, had the
Scriptures, either in the translation, or Original, as is evident from Christ's
own words, reproving them for not believing all that the Prophets had written,
and yet a key of interpretation was needful, and useful; Christ opened unto
them the Scriptures, Luke 24. 32. If this Compassionate Samaritane were
questioned (as the Eunuch was by Philip) understandest thou what thou read?
he would not have given his answer, How shall I understand without an
Interpreter? But would straight have answered, Yes, as well as any linguist in
the world; I have no need of your help for interpretation. The cabinet is open,
spare your key. This was one of the Arts, that some Prelates made use of, to
keep up a reading Ministry, to persuade, that Scripture were so plain
distinctly read in our own tongue, that they might be understood without any
interpretation. But the plainness and easiness of a rule, and the use of
means for understanding of it stand together; We maintain a plainness in
Scripture for the simple to understand, but not sitting idle, and lazy; but
searching the Scriptures, and making use of those gifts of Christ, which he
shed forth from the right hand of the Father, for the edifying of his body,
till we come into the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man. That we might not henceforth be as children, tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness
of those that lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. We may soon see their
artifice that labor to bear them down, Thus they know their cunning slight
may be carried in the dark, and their impostures lie undiscovered. Our
compassionate man, pretending to avoid a cheat; acts the part of the most
notable cheater. The Prophet stood for that office of the Priests, that their
lips should preserve knowledge, even when they had corrupted the covenant of
Levi, Whatsoever their way was, yet this was their duty, so must we for the
Stewards of the mysteries of God, It is their work to dispense them, and the
people are to seek at their mouths for them. But enough I hope has been spoke
for a Ministry, for a knowing Ministry, and objections against it fully
satisfied.

CHAP. XXVIII
An orderly way of admission of men, into the Mininisterial function necessary.
AS men for the Ministry are to be trained up for the work, So there must be
an orderly way of admittance to it, Self-consecration to the Ministerial work
unwarrantable.
the way which Scripture traces out to us. Self-consecration is alone beseeming
the Priests of Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13 9 the lowest of the people that have
neither inspiration, nor education, that have been taught of men (not any thing
that may conduce to the dividing of the Word aright; but) how to keep cattle,
Zach. 13. 5. or some answerable employment, in its due place commendable, but
no introduction to the Ministerial honor. These run, and stay not for sending,
and going without commission, they go without assistance, and soon run
themselves into those bogges, in which without special grace, they are
irrecoverably plunged; they want home-reproofs, the wounds of friends, Zach.
13. 6. that they may no longer wear a rough garment to deceive; When the
Apostle lays down the greatest necessity of preaching, he puts the question,
How shall they preach, unless they be sent? Men that go upon this work, must
be able to make good their call. The Ministry of the Gospel being of divine
institution, as well as the Priesthood of the Law; there must be a call from
God for the one as for the the other; Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. There is none that expect
not a call from God in this work, but have their brand in the Scripture, Jerem.
14. 14. The Lord said unto me, The Prophets prophecy lies in my name, and I
sent them not; yet they say, sword and famine shall not be in this land: by
sword and famine shall those Prophets be consumed, Jerem. 27. 15. For I have
not sent them, says the Lord, yet they prophecy a lie in my name, that I
might drive you out, and that ye might perish, and the Prophets that prophecy
unto you. A call from God to the Ministerial work must be expected.
And as they run on their own heads, so they vent their own tenants, and
prophecy out of the deceit of their own hearts, Jerem. 23. 26. Those shall
never find comfort in the work, that are not able to say with the Apostle,
Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17.

1. The work is Gods, the advancement and setting up of his Kingdom, the ruin
and demolition of the Kingdom of Satan, Acts 26. 18. The whole of all that
they do is of high concernment to him; Each man will see to his own business,
and find laborers for his own work; God has no less care, Jesus Christ is
no less mindful, Harvest-Masters provide harvest-labourers; The Master of this
harvest provides laborers for his work, and gives them commission, Mat. 9 38.

2. All necessaries for the work, inward, outward, are to be supplied from him.
They must have livelihood and provision from heaven, they must receive
instruction from heaven, They must be taught of God, that they may teach; God
must protect; he must encourage and embolden, he must command success, and
give increase. They are agents in his hand, and must be appointed by him; it is
no marvel, if they that be not sent of him, be left destitue of all

3. He is a God of Order, and he will have Order observed, and in no way is
Order seen so comely, as when all know their places, and stations; When in a
great house or a mighty Army, each man will do what work he pleases; undertake
what place of trust and command he pleases; each Soldier in an army will be a
Commander, each servant in a family a Steward, there must needs be high and
great confusion. The manifold absurdities that will unavoidably follow, in case
each man may thrust himself into this work, and so drive on his own interests,
see in Master Hall his Pulpit guarded, Argument. 5. This power of putting men
into this work, equally concerns the whole Trinity, Each one of the persons
has his hand in the separation of men for it; Jesus Christ in a vision, sent
Paul upon this errand, Acts 26. 18. see further, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Ephesians. 4. 11. He
is, an Apostle by the will of God, Col. 1. 1. which is understood of the
Father. God set in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.
28. The Holy Ghost has here an hand, Acts 13. 2. The holy Ghost said, Separate
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, Acts 20. 28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. And this sending or authorizing, is, as their
gifting, The call of God is either extraordinary and immediate, or ordinary and
mediate by the Ministry of men.
or fitting, either extraordinary and immediate, nothing of man intervening; or
else mediate by man's Ministry and his approbation. Paul had both an immediate
way; both his authority, and ability for the work; he professes that he is an
Apostle; not of man, nor by man; he owes it not to man as the Author, so may
any Minister of Christ say, he owes it not to man as an instrument; so only
Prophets and Apostles can say: As his Calling was thus immediate, so in like
sort was his instructions for it, Gal. 1. 12. For I neither received if of man,
neither was I taught it; but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. They that
divide these, are exceedingly to blame; assuming authority without man, but
confessing that for abilities, as they must look up to God, so they must make
use of man, must apply themselves to reading, and make use of the helps of
others.

The immediate Call is by Vision, The immediate call is by vision, revelation,
etc.
Revelation, or whatsoever otherway God pleases to manifest himself. Thus in a
vision Paul was called; where that is not, the mediate Call only remains, which
is the way of all that attain to gifts by education, study, and the blessing
of heaven on their endeavors. This is called, as in Scripture, The mediate and
ordinary call is by Ordination.
so in Church-writers, by the name of Ordination, and the whole work
(containing as well that which is essential to it, as the adjuncts of it) may
be thus described. An act of men in a Ministerial function, Ordination
described, and in the several parts of it explained.
associated in a Presbytery; setting some apart upon proof and examination, as
Presbyters and Elders in the Church, by fasting and praying with imposition of
hands. We find no other, but men in Ministerial function, in all the holy
Scriptures acting in it. Men in Ministerial function are to act in it.
Paul and Barnabas ordain Elders in every Church, which in their journal they
visit, Acts 14. 23. Timothy is directed in the way of it. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay
hands suddenly on no man. Titus is enjoined to ordain Elders in every City in
Creet, Tit. 1. 5. He is named alone, but the naming of one excludes not others,
and therefore it appears, that in Timothies Ordination, a Presbytery, or a
combination of Presbyters did join, 1 Timothy 4. 14. which way in our Church has
ever been held. The Bishop (supposed by some, to be vested in the whole power
of Ordination) never had authority to ordain alone; but grave Presbyters
according to the Canon, were to join with him, though by reason of greatness,
his vote ordinarily did overmuch sway in it. Some would have the people here to
have their hand, in that the word (...) in that place of the Acts, chap. 14.
23. implies a lifting up of the hand. But whatsoever the word in its Etymology
may imply, the use is not such, as is plain by comparing Acts 10. 41. where
the immediate Ordination of God, by the same word is held forth unto us. They
know the weight of the Ministerial function, and they are best able to judge of
requisite abilities. One that is willing to give as much to the people, as may
be, yet confesses that in Grammatical construction, the word (...) can agree
with no other but Paul and Barnabas, and that it was only their act; and
therefore he would find it in the word (...), which (says he) does not
signify in every Church, as it is translated, but according to the Church
instancing in the Orators phrase, Faciam secundumte; I will do it according to
thy mind: So they (viz. Paul and Barnabas) ordained them Elders, according to
the Church, that is, according to the mind and will of the Church. If this
were granted, it would only conclude an acquiescency in the people, and that
they had satisfaction in that Ordination, carried on by Paul and Barnabas. Yet
this phrase here, can no where prove that the Church or people; made choice of
them, then we man prove from that injunction of the Apostle, Titus 1. 5. to
ordain Elders in every City, that the whole City had there their vote in
Elections; As much stresse may be laid upon (...) in every City, or according
to the mind of the City, in this of Paul to Titus, as upon (...) in every
Church, or according to the mind of the Church, in that of Luke in the History
of the Acts. What power the people or the faithful may have in Election, and
how far it may be convenient that they may be overborne for their good, I
will not here dispute. I only conclude, that we find not the people any where
ordaining we read of Ordination in Churches, for the Churches use, not
Ordination by Churches, taking it in that sense, for the whole community of
Believers.

These, This Ordination is of Presbyters and Elders.
in a Ministerial function in this act of Ordination, set select men apart for
Presbyters, or Elders; so Acts 14. 23. Titus 1. 5. Titus is enjoined to ordain
Elders in every City in Creet, who are the same with Bishops, as appears in
Titus 1. verse 5. 7. compared. These Elders are the same with Bishops.
The qualification of Elders is there prescribed; and the reason is given, for
a Bishop must be blameless, which will hold no congruity, if an Elder be not
the same with a Bishop, Which also may be seen, Acts 20. comparing ver. 17. and
the 28. together. The Apostle there speaks to the Elders of Ephesus, and he
gives them a charge, to take heed to all the fl^ck, over which the Holy Ghost
had made them Overseers; that is, had given them an Episcopal charge, as the
word signifies. Elders must set apart men for Elders, and Presbyters are to be
set apart by a Presbytery.

This Ordination of Elders is to be in the Church, They are Elders of the
Church universal.
or for the Church, which may be taken either for the universal Church visible,
or for some particular Church, and that either congregational or classical.
Ministerial functions are appointed of God, for the Church universal visible.
God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secundarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12* 28. No one particular Church, congregational or
classical, enjoys all the particular kinds there enumerated, yet so as the
exercise of this function, is to be with limit to one particular only. They are
Ministers of the Church universal; yet so as orderly to exercise their
function, only there, where God by his providence shall design them. There are
some functions (as I may say) Catholic, what such a one does any where in his
function, is good every where, as a public Notary, or Master of the Chancery,
that which they do any where, is every where valid, within the limit of that
power under which they act; It is of force through the whole Nation. Some
functions are topical or local, as Justices of Peace, a chief officer in a
Corporation, Sheriff, or Constable, who are without power out of their own
limits. A Minister or Presbyter is a Catholic or Universal Officer, he has
jus in re, in the whole Church visible, for all Ministerial actions, whether of
Word or Sacraments, he has jus ad rem, in the place assigned and appointed
him, where alone he is regularly to officiate, and so, has the title of an
Aggel, or Elder of such a particular Church to which he is called, Rev. 2. 1,
7, etc. Acts 20. 17. He has a first right every where, a second right only
where he is orderly placed.

This is to be done by examination or trial, Ordination is to be past on
examination or trial.
if no word of Scripture did mention it, yet the thing it self evinces the
necessity of it; Scripture lays down the requisites or qualifications in
Ministers. First, for years, not a novice, 1 Timothy 3. 6. Some are old young,
which may answer some want of years, more fit at twenty four, then others at
thirty. Secondly, for conversation; Blameless, as the Steward of God; not
self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre; but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate, Titus 1. 7, 8. Thirdly, for parts and gifts; 2 Timothy 2. 15. A workman
that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth, Tit. 1. 9.
Holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince gainsayers. Fourthly, for graces
of the Spirit, they should be as Barnabas, full of the Holy Ghost and of Faith,
Acts 11. 24. From which gifts of nature must not be excluded, as strength of
body in its measure, that the body may in some sort keep pace with the soul.
The gift of utterance, that not only his head, but his lips may preserve
knowledge, that he may be able to speak, to edification, exhortation, and
doctrine; of these such that act in Ordination, should have knoweldge, of each
of them so far, as they may come to cognizance, of some of these by letters of
commendation from faithful persons, 2 Cor. 3. 1. of others by proof and
examination, 1 Timothy 3. 10. The Apostle having laid down the qualifications of
Bishops, and proceeding to that of Deacons; has these words, Let these also be
proved, and then let them use the office of a Deacon; both Bishops and Deacon
must undergo examination. Timothy must lay hands suddenly on none, 1 Timothy 1.
22. He must then lay on his hands no otherwise, but upon proof and trial, which
the context (speaking of sins, some open going before to judgment, others
following after) seems to evince, such cautiousness cannot stand; without all
possible ways and means of proof and trial

All this is to be solemnized by fasting and prayer; in which we have
Scripture-precedents, To be solemnized with fasting and praye^s.
Act. 13. 2. When they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them,
they sent them away, Acts 14. 23. When they had ordained them Elders in every
Church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom
they believed. This I take not, to be of the essence of Ordination; not
necessary to the very being; but the better being of it in imploring Gods
assistance and blessing. It is a great work, a work of glorius concernment; it
is a work above our strength to manage, more weighty than our shoulders can
bear, there is more than parts, gifts and endowments, (whether natural or
acquired) required in it. All supplies being (as before we heard) to be
expected from heaven, heaven must be implored, God must be earnestly sought in
it. Fasting should add wings to our prayers, that our voice may be heard on
high. A shadow of this still remained in the Church, as appers, by those
Jejunia quatuor temporum at the times of Ordination; which indeed, was almost
brought to a mere shadow.

The last thing mentioned in the Definition, Imposition of hands to be used in
Ordination.
is imposition of hands; A rite or usage in practice before the Law, Genesis 48.
14. held in the time of the Law, Levit. 1. 4. and continued in the days of the
Gospel, as consisting with the simplicity of it. It was used in blessing, Genesis
48. 14. Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraims head in
his blessing of them. Matthew. 19 13. They brought children to Christ, that he
should put his hands on them and pray; which accordingly he did, Mark 10. 16.
He put his hands upon them, and blessed them. It was used in Offerings, Levit.
1. 4. If any man bring an Offering unto the Lord, he shall put his hand upon
the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him, to make
atonement for him. It was used in bearing witness, as Levit. 24. 14. Where the
Lord gives charge concerning the blasphemer; Bring forth him that has cursed,
without the Camp, and let all that have heard him, lay their hands upon his
head. It was used in conferring extraordinary gifts, Acts 8. 17. Peter and John
laid their hands, on those that believed in Samaria, and they received the Holy
Ghost. It was used in miraculous cures, Mark 6. 5. Christ could do there no
mighty works, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed
them, Acts 28. 8. It was used in designing men for office, and that either
civil, for the work of the Magistracy. Deuteronomy. 34. 9. Joshua the son of Nun was
full of the Spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him, and the
children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as Lord commanded Moses. Or
Ecclesiastical, and that for the work of the Lord in the time of the Law,
Levit. 8. 10. and also in the days of the Gospel, Acts. 13. 3. And from this
rite of imposition of hands, (in use in this work of Ordination) the whole work
has sometimes its denomination, 1 Timothy 5 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man; An
Objection answered.
where imposition of hands is put for the whole work. Some I know would take
all this off, as to Ordination by laying on of hands, by the objection of
extraordinary gifts, which were this way conferred, as was before confessed, of
which they will have that Text understood, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Wherefore I put thee in
remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting
on of my hands. But this is too weak to avoid, it for though we have already
said; that when the Holy Ghost was given in those extraordinary endowments,
hands were imposed, yet whole Presbyteries cannot ordinarily be conceived, to
be vested with that power, yet they jointly in this work laid on their hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14. And that advice of Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 22. plainly
contradicts it, lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins. In case Timothy had had that power to have conferred with the calling,
qualifications for the calling, he had no need to have been in that way
advised, to use such circumspection. Why should he be so careful to see them
first fit, in case his laying on of hands would fit them? There need not such
trial whether they were gifted in case a touch of the hand would be the gifting
of them. And for Timothies Ordination in the place quoted, 2 Timothy 1. 6. it
follows not from our grant; that extraordinary gifts are there specified, that
authority for the Ministerial work is denied. It is plain that Moses authorized
Joshua, for succession in his place; by laying on of hands, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. The
people upon that took him for his successor, yet it is as plain in the Text,
that the Spirit of wisdom was then conferred upon him: Authority and power are
sometimes given at once, yet all that are in power to authorize, cannot empower
for this business, he that will see more, may read Dr. Seamans Treatise on
this subject, and jus divinum Ministerii Ecclesiastici.

CHAP. XXIX.
Ministers of Christ must bring their people up to the terms of the Covenant,
pressing the neccessity of Faith and Repentance.
THen it farther yet follows; that the Ministers of Christ are to call their
people unto these duties, before mentioned as conditions. They must urge and
press the necessity of Faith and Repentance. These are the terms of the
covenant, and stipulation, to which God in covenant does engage, in which the
Apostles of Christ spent their pains, Testifying both to Jews and Gentiles,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21.
And this must be the business of those that make it their business to preach
the Gospel in all ages. Men must be taught to observe what Christ commands and
teaches, Matthew. 28. 20. These Christ teaches, and gives in charge; Thus he
begun his Ministry, Mark 1. 15. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. They must
so preach that men may not perish; that they may not be the savor of death,
But they only that believe, shall not perish, John 3. 16. They that repent not,
must perish, Luke 13. 1. They must so preach Christ, that men may have their
interest in Christ, that they may not be cast off by Christ, But Faith gives
this interest: He dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. Workers of
iniquity must be cast off, Mat. 7. 23. Depart from me all ye that work
iniquity. It is no plain dealing in any of the Ministers of Christ to make
tender of promises, to hold forth privileges, and conceal the terms, upon
which they may be obtained; to speak of salvation to men in sin, without so
much as the name of sanctification, or application to God in a way of
Repentance; to tell men in the Prodigals course, of the Fathers bowels, and
readiness to meet them with kisses; without mention of the Prodigals
humiliation or coming in, to tell them of the many sins forgiven to the woman
in the Gospel, Luk 7. 47. without once mention of those many tears, that were
shed in evidence of her repentance. An Objection answered.
They say, that these are the strongest motives to work men from sin. This I
gladly yield when the promise is tendered, and with it repentance urged. I know
it was the way of the Prophet, The danger of severing the promise from the duty.
Esaias 55. 7. and therefore a prevalent way; Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. The way
also of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch
not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. But the severing of the promise
from the duty, so that Christ is heard only in a promise, not at all in a
precept, when they hear that Christ will save; but are never told that they
must repent. These are but delusions; Promise-Preachers, and no duty-Preachers;
grace-Preachers, and not repentance-Preachers, do but (as the Apostle has long
since given warning) deceive with vain words, Ephesians. 5. 6. This will never work
men from sin, but strengthen men in sin, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Because with lies ye
have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and
strenthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, by promising life. These promises of life thus tendered, we see are lies,
for men in sin, are men for death, Ezekiel. 18. 31. These promises, strengthen
the hands of men in sin, that they return not from it. It is the observation
of many, that the false Prophets so branded in the Old Testament, vented no
errors in Faith, but only misapplications of truths. They promised peace,
where the Lord had promised no peace; and therefore a false Prophet among the
Jews is distinguished from a false Teacher among Christians, 2 Pet. 2. 1. These
latter bring in damnable heresies, and so did not the former; But as ours
outstrip them, in that they bring in errors in faith, so they join with them
in misapplications of truths. If thou be a whoremonger, a blasphemer, a
drunkard, a mad man in iniquity (says one, or words to that purpose) and there
be no manner of change wrought in thee, yet come and take Christ, etc. Does any
Gospel-Text, speak of such a man's taking of Christ, without any manner of
change wrought? Are not those the enemies of Christ, that rise in hostile
rebellion? Psalm 68. 21. And while they despise him, can they receive him? We
would not have such a sinner (if we can possibly imagine a great sinner) kept
from Christ Jesus; but he must come in at the Gospel-door, He must come in the
way of his call, He must come to receive whole Christ in each function of his,
He must come for every gift, Whole Christ must be received, and all of his
gifts embraced.
which Christ poures out, He must come for repentance from Christ, as a Prince,
as well as remission of sins as a Savior, Acts 5. 31. God has exalted him
with his right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins. He must come by the way of Faith for
forgiveness, This both Prophets and Apostles, Old Testament and New
Testament-Gospel calls for, Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness,
that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of
sins. They must come by repentance and conversion in order to forgiveness,
Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. I
do not say that there is no promise in Scripture made to a wicked man, that is
the greatest Gospel-paradox; But I say, they are not made good, to wicked
persons. They are made to the wicked, made good, Promises are made to the
wicked, made good only to the believing and penitent.
that is, performed, to the believing and penitent. To find a promise made,
and made good, that is, tendered and performed to a man unbeleeving, impenitent
is indeed a labor. One replying to this question, What, if I have not those
conditions in me, as to feel my self hungry, thirsty and heavy-laden? answers,
If you find not these or such conditions in you; then you are not to apply
your self to those promises, that are made to such as have those conditions in
them; But you are to seek out for other (and more suitable) promises, which are
absolute and without condition. It is worth asking where those suitable
promises are to a man void of faith? For that before by the Author was
mentioned, or to a man impenient, and not so much as hungring after them, such
a one I mean, that upon good grounds, is able to charge the want of these upon
his soul, I am sure they are under heavy Scripture-woes, even Gospel-menaces,
and can they at the same time be fitted to receive the mercy of a promise?
Where are his promises that hungers and thirsts not, when Christ says, Woe to
you that are full, for you shall hunger? Where is his promise that mourns not,
but goes on frolic in his way, When Christ says, Woe unto you that laugh now,
for ye shall weep and lament, Luke 6. 25. Where is the unbeleevers promise,
when the Lord says, He that believes not, is condemned, already; because he
has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God, John 3. 18.
Where is the impenitent man's promise, when the Psalmist says, The wicked shall
be turned into hell, Psalm 9. 17. and the Apostle, That no unrighteous person
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9. But instance is given,
Isa. 43. 25. I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own name
sake. But this is not the unbeleeving, the impenitent man's transgressions, they
still stand on record, and the bond uncancelled. This excludes motives from us,
not graces wrought in us, when God justifies a believer, it is for his own name
sake, or else he is a loser in his glory, when he justifies those that believe
in Jesus, Romans 3. 26. and Faith gives not glory to God, as Romans 4. 20. but
takes glory from him. As Peter said of the creeple that was cured; His name,
through faith in his name, has made this man strong, Acts 3. 16. So we may say
of every sinner, justified and pardoned, His Name, through faith in his Name,
has acquit and freed him. When God pardons a penitent man, it is not for the
merit of his return that he pardons him; if this were so, Peter who is so
zealous, to advance his name in the place quoted; had not presently urged;
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. 19. It is not for
his honor to pardon any other. This is with him a rule which he will for ever
follow, Those that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 3. 30. The same Author says, Conditions and
qualifications are mentioned in some promises; and therefore we may safely
infer, are understood in all promises of life and salvation, unless God deny
himself, He has threatened death and condemnation against an unqualified man;
namely the unbeleeving and impenitent; and therefore has not promised them
life and salvation. Believing penitent ones, have the promises of life to be
made good to them, exclusively to all others. To lead the sinner to Christ for
the gaining of the qualifications of grace in the way of his Ordinances, is to
lead him right; He is the Author of our faith, and he is a Prince to give
repentance. But to persuade a sinner to look for life, in the want of all
these, or to tell him of Assurance of life without sense of these, is to
deceive him. That happy Doctrine of free grace, so timely abused, even as soon
as clearly preached, is now no less abused; Then, inferences were made from
it, for encouragement to abound in sin, Romans 6. 1. Now inferences are drawn to
cry down duty, Righteousness imputed must overthrow righteousness inherent.
The Apostle would not suffer the former; the Ministers of Christ must not bear
the latter.

CHAP. XXX.
A people in covenant must come up to the terms of the covenant, being engaged
to God, they must answer their engagements.
HEnce farther follows, The evil of breach of Covenant with man.
that all people in covenant must come up to the terms and propositions of the
covenant, Entering covenant they must see that their hearts art upright in it.
How do we aggravate their wickedness, and hold in detestation all those
persons that break covenant with men, that having past a promise, (especially
having put upon it the sanction of an Oath) yet violate and transgress it.
These first involve themselves in the guilt of lying, which every where in
Scripture is followed with judgments, an Art which they learn of the Devil,
who is a liar, and the father of lies, John 8. 44. And therefore with him have
their doom in the lake that burns with fire and brimstome, Revel. 21. 8.
Secondly, in the pollution of Gods Name, which we should have in fear and
dread, Deuteronomy. 28. 5, 8. Taking it in vain, in falsehood, and deceit into their
mouths, endeavoring to bring in that God, whom they pretend to serve; in whom
is all their expectation, as a party in their falsehood, and ungodliness. This
high crime is charged upon Israel in taking to themselves again those servants
that according to covenant they had dismissed, Jerem. 34. 15, 16. Ye turned and
polluted my name, and caused every man his servaut, and every man his handmaid,
whom he had set at liberty, at their pleasure to return, and brought them into
subjection to be unto you for servants and for handmaids; Therein is the
overthrow of all bonds of humane society, of all converse and commerce, whether
in more public, or private negotiations. Truth is the upholding, and
perfidiousnesse is the bane and utter destruction of it. When Papists have
maintained that Faith, or covenant is not to be kept with Heretics; reformed
Churches have concluded upon it, that there is no safety of any, league or
intercourse of dealing with them. The example of John Husse is a sufficient
warning. Those that hold no such principles, yet being such in their practices;
are equally dangerous. We look upon these, as given up to a very Spirit of
Atheism, if not wholly in their judgments to deny a Deity, and to utter with
their mouths that which the Psalmists fool says in his heart, yet utterly
slighting his Sovereignty, and disregarding his judgments. They have arrived
at that dedolency that the Apostle mentions, Ephesians. 4. 19. and therefore rankt
by him with the worst of Heathens, Romans 1. 31. and put into that black bill of
ungodly persons, that will be found in the last and most perilous times,
Breach of Covenant with God, is a greater evil.
2 Timothy 3. 3. How much more then will God and man have in detestation those;
that have entered covenant in an immediate way with God, for faith and obedience
and to stand out in opposition to sin, and Satan, yet (making defection from
God by sin and unbelief) stand up in rebellion against him. Is the dreadful
Majesty of the great God of no more regard, than to pretend to him, engage with
him, and then stand up in hostility against him? Is there any thing so lovely,
or honorable in sin, to allure men to run upon the wrath of God, that they may
welter in it? or any thing so unpleasing in the ways of God, that neither the
dread of his name, nor the bliss, held forth in promise, can persuade to
embrace them? A viler thing cannot be named, than a Christian in sin, a
Christian in ways of unbelief and wickedness. Were the name of a Christian
off, and no covenant bonds engaging to the Lord; then there were no more than a
creature in rebellion, and that were bad enough, the work of Gods hand to
strive with its Maker. But standing vested in this covenant relation, honored
with this glorious Name, here is an addition of Hypocrisy, Apostasy and
defection. We hate none more than those that are false to us; and we may well
conclude that God hates none more than those that are false to him, and
therefore challenges his people, whether they have found any iniquity in him,
Jerem. 2 5. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone
far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? A servant
does not use to quit one Master, and betake himself to another, but he gives
some reason of his change. One that has been engaged for the ways of God (as
all are that are called by the Name of God, and dignified with the title of a
Christian) would be hard put to it, to give a reason of his revolt from God.
When God and vanity are set in competition, that God should be refused, and
vanity chosen, when the fountain of living waters, that never can be drawn
dry, is left, and cisternes, broken cisternes chosen, that are always running
dry. How does the holy Ghost, set out these, 2 Pet. 2. 22. The dog is turned to
his own vomit against, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire. Can the sow find no other place than filth? nor the dog no other food
than his vomit? A return to sin is more loathsome than these, and such are
all the ways of all men in sin, of all of a Christian profession, that are
seen in ungodly ways; Nothing so glorious as a Christian that holds to his
principles, that answers in conversation to his profession, Nothing so
inglorious as a Christian in sin. A Jew outwardly, and a Heathen inwardly, a
face for God, and a heart for iniquity. When such as these came out of the holy
land for Babylon, they, there said in way of reproach of their God, These are
the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land, Ezekiel. 36. 20. Romans
2. 24. Insomuch that God is put to it for his vindication, not to suffer them
to carry their sin with impunity, Ezekiel. 39. 23, 24. And the heathen shall know,
that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they
trespassed against me; therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into
the hand of their enemies; so fell they all by the sword according to their
uncleanness, and according to their transgressions have I done unto them, and
hid my face from them. This falsehood in covenant draws present sufferings,
National plagues: I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel
of my covenant, Levit. 26. 25. Every Christian Nation under sufferings; It
brings National plagues.
may sadly reflect upon all that they groan under, and say their iniquities
have procured these things unto them.

But this breach of covenant with God has greater evils, even unto eternity
following upon it; It brings evil to eternity.
Men of sin and unbelief, that lie in distrust and disobedience, can claim
no interest in the grace and mercy of the covenant. God in covenant engages to
Faith and Repentance, these as we have seen are his terms, when men come not
up to them, they dis-interest themselves, and disengage God from any tie of
conferring bliss and savation upon them. Their own folly and madness, puts a
bar to their own happiness and glory. They cannot be self-saviors, yet they
will not go out of themselves for salvation by another, when they have received
the sentence of death in themselves, they will not come to Christ, that they
may have life. He may worthily bear his own debt, that in pride of spirit,
refuses another bounty; Christ offers himself as a Surety in our stead, to
make payment for us in his own person. The unbeleever will stand on his owu
bottom, and make pay out of his own store, or perish; Having heaven and hell
set before them; the tender of the one, and the terror of the other, quitting
heaven and all the glory of it, and happiness in it; they make choice of that
fire, that is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, No Assurance of
happiness, but in performance of the terms of the Covenant.
covenant breaking having the certain doom of destruction fastened upon it.
Assurance of salvation cannot be gained, but in a way of covenant-keeping; yea,
the conditions of the covenant are the basis, and never failing bottom of our
Evidence and Assurance. It is gathered thus: He that believes and repents,
shall be saved. This is evidently laid down in Scriptures; A man void of saving
faith, and impenitent, may give his assent to it. Then the sold is to assume
to it self, but I believe and repent, therefore I shall be saved. These two
(as at large has been shown) are the conditions of the covenant; these we must
find wrought in our souls, or else all Evidence is wanting, and when these are
concluded, an undeceiving interest in salvation follows.

There is a twofold work to be done on the soul that is in sin in order to
bring it to salvation; There is a third to be done for assurance of salvation.

The first work is to set the soul free from Hell, to deliver it from the
sentence of Death; to which by the rule of justice, man stands condemned. A man
must be fetched out of prison, before he can be for any preferment, or place of
honor. This is done by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of his grace. This is the price of our ransom, Being redeemed, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,
1 Pet. 1 18.

Secondly, to make a man meet for heaven, A man so vile as sin makes, is a
man fit for nothing but hell, and must have a change wrought before he be meet
for heaven. Upon this ground the Apostle is so large, in returning praise for
the Colossians: Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. As alone, the
blood of Christ sets free from hell; so alone, the Spirit of Christ makes fit
for heaven. This is done by a double work. 1. Of regeneration or first
implantation of grace, which is called the birth of the Spirit, John 3. 5, 6.
2. By acting, improving, carrying on this work of grace; which is properly
sanctification, so that when the Spirit is gone thus far, here is a certainty
of the object. It is sure, nothing more sure than this; that a regenerate
sanctified man shall be saved. But here is more required for a certainty of the
subject. Here is certitudo de re; but more is required to attain certitudinem
de se. If Peter do believe and repent, he shall be saved, is out of
controversy; But that Peter does believe and repent, is not always so soon
discovered, And this is the Spirits work as the former It is not my business
now to hold out what is the Spirits whole office in concluding our Assurance,
but to show that the conditions of the covenant are the bottom ground, not of
salvation, but of our evidence of interest in salvation. We must know that we
do believe and repent, before we have assurance, and we must first believe and
repent, before we know that we believe and repent. If before faith and
repentance there can be no salvation; then before we know we believe and
repent, we cannot be assured of salvation: But without faith and repentance
there is no salvation, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. Luke 13. 3. 5. I tell you,
may, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; Therefore before we
believe and repent, we cannot be assured of salvation. And how assurance can be
gained without a practical syllogism, and how a syllogism can be framed with
any other medium, than the conditions of the covenant, is above my
understanding Man is so far from abilities to conclude salvation, without faith
and repentance, that be must conclude himself to be in faith, and that he does
repent, before he can conclude any interest in it. The covenant of God is the
ground of our salvation; if that be waved, all is lost, and we must make good
our part in the Covenant, Grace must assist to answer what the covenant
requires, or no salvation. How is it a covenant, if nothing be required? and
why is it required, if it must not be performed? To gather up assurance from
the conditions of the covenant is a business of greater consequence, even the
highest pitch of Christianity. It is a great work to believe and repent, a
greater work to know that we savingly believe and repent. The work it self is
difficult, no business of a lazy soul, but to know, that the work is aright
done, is a greater difficulty; but that it must be gathered from the
conditions, is easy to resolve. I know some finding the seal of the Spirit,
The office of the Spirit in the work of Assurance.
and the witness of the Spirit mentioned in Scripture in order to assurance,
will have the whole of the work of Assurance to be carried on alone by the
Spirit, and that all is done in us without us. They expect a secret whisper
from God, that we are Gods, and no more. This witness, they say, must be
heeded, and our faith and repentance in the work not at all regarded, But I
would know of those if the Spirit be a seal; whether the soul does not bear
the impresse? and what this impresse is, but the graces of the Spirit? The
Seal sealing, and the impresse made, fully answer one the other, Sometimes it
may dimmely answer, where the wax or clay, (or whatsoever is sealed) takes not
a full impression; but if it answer not, it is no Seal. The graces that the
Spirit works, are its impresse* and these are the conditions of the covenant,
and so instead of an objection, we have a proof. For the witness of the
Spirit, I desire to know whether it be a single witness, giving testimony to
us without us, or a witness concurring with our spirits? The Text is clear,
Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are
the children of God. Our spirits bearing witness, are our consciences, Romans 2.
5. Their consciences also bearing them witness; and therefore Master Baxter
rightly affirms, That the testimony of the Spirit, and the testimony of our
consciences are two concurrent testimonies, or causes, to produce one and the
same effect. But every conscience cannot witness thus with the Spirit, or
join in a concurrent testimony. It is the witness of a good conscience, 1
Pet. 3. 21. Baptism saves (says the Apostle) by the resurrection of Christ;
Explaining himself, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, not the bare
outward act of administration (which is worthily set out by the most
undervaluing terms, when it is put in opposition to the inward work) but the
answer of a good conscience toward God. Baptism is a seal of the covenant,
and it engages to what the covenant requires, which (as we have been still
catechized) is to believe in God, and to forsake our sins, and when conscience
answers that this is done, Baptism is a seal that Christ saves. The seal of
the Spirit is an impresse of those graces; and the witness of the Spirit is a
clearingup of these graces, and giving in testimony to the truth of them,
opening our eyes to read the characters, which it self has made, 1 Corinthians.
2. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. So that
in vain do men talk of the Spirit; that have not on their own hearts the
impresse of it, or of the witness of the Spirit, when a renewed conscience
cannot concur, The immediate test of the Spirits examined.
in testimony that these engagements are answered in faith and repentance; let
that Text of the Apostle be considered, 1 John 3. 24. He that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. I know there are some that
admit of all this, and freely yield, that this is a safe way to conclude
Assurance from Sanctification, Confessing that the Spirit never witnesses with
an unsanctified heart, yet they contend for a farther and immediate test of
the Spirit, without any consideration had, of inherent graces wrought, or any
reflection made, by the the soul upon it self, in review of any gracious
qualifications. Yet here they confess danger; and limit this doctrine of
theirs with diverse cautions, as I have met with some, from an eminent hand, in
a manuscript. 1. This is extraordinary (as they say) very seldom seen or
known, it is no common way of the Spirits witness. 2. It is for the most part
in, or upon performance of some duties, or conscientious employment of a man's
self in the way of his calling. 3. After some great abasement of a man's
spirit, and more than ordinary soul-humiliations and self-denials. 4. After
some great adventures made for God, and the advancement of his Name. 5. After
some great combat, and conflict with temptation, in which God gives in his
Spirit, as an honorarium, or glorious reward upon victory obtained. First, by
way of concession, it is not to be denied, that God in a more than ordinary
measure, does many times manifest the gift of his Spirit for this work of
Assurance, and that upon these occasions here laid down, the soul has many
cheering consolations nigh unto raptures. The Spouse has not like converse
with the Bridegroom at all times; Sometimes she walks with him in the
Galleries; Sometimes she is with him in the wine-sellers; Sometimes she can say
in a way of exultation, My beloved is mine, and I am his. But these limits in
the instances before laid down, seem to me to be a full denial, instead of
proof, that it is thus immediate, without all reflex upon our graces. These
being means sanctified of God, to stir up the habit of grace by his Spirit
wrought within us, and to bring them forth into action, which God then farther
honors with a greater measure of light, to discern his own work wrought in
us. Our spirits being got into such a posture, are in an aptitude to witness
with us; and God is then pleased, to come in by his Spirit, to join in
Evidence; So that still the conditional promises, are not only a safe, but the
alone way, in which through the help of the Spirit we get Assurance that we
shall be saved. They that go about to assert an immediate test, will never
secure the soul from delusion, Satan will soon find an artifice, to
counterfeit this testimony, and bear witness, in the Spirits stead, and when
we think we have the Spirit of truth to assure, we shall have the father of
lies to deceive. A gappe will be opened to all licentious presumption, Children
of disobedience will soon heed vain words, that the wrath of God shall not
come upon them; Neither will it be to purpose to demand, how the Prophets were
assured that it was the word of the Lord that came to them, and no delusion,
and to affirm that the same way we have assurance of the truth of the Spirits
witness, seeing Gods extraordinary way of discovery of himself in visions,
dreams, or what other way himself pleased to choose, is not the same with his
ordinary way of discovery unto us, we no more understand that way of discovery
than we do the way in which by power received, they wrought miracles. As for
Doctrines, which men are apt to obtrude upon the Spirit; so, for testimonies,
in order to our adoption and salvation, we must go to the Law, and to the
Testimony. The Law and Testimony lead us, for Assurance to our own hearts,
excusing or condemning in the particulars mentioned; And if our hearts condemn
us not, then have we confidence toward God; and whatsoever we ask, we receive
of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment, 1 John
3. 21, 22, 23. And if the stresse of all had not lien here, Christ had never
compared the Professor, that hears and does not, to the foolish builder that
raises his hopes of salvation on a sandy foundation, upon a bare title of an
empty profession, without any well grounded interest, and the Professor that
hears and does, to the man that builds on a rock, and so lays his hopes of
salvation on a foundation, that never will deceive: Neither would the Psalmist
have concluded that, he shall not be ashamed, (his hope would not make him
ashamed) when he had respect unto all Gods Commandments, Psalm 119. 6. And
howsoever our doing does nothing by way of merit; yet our doing through grace
(in which believing is comprised, which is the command of God, 1 John 3. 23.)
does all; taking in the Spirits help to clear the integrity of these works, by
way of Assurance. And though it be no foundation of our subsistence in grace;
and therefore the Apostle durst not rest on that bottom, nor will be found in
his own righteousness; yet it is the foundation of our evidence. The Apostle
gives it in command to Timothy, Charge them that are rich in this world, that
they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God,
who gives us richly all things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, giving this in as
the end of all, Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. God
has ordained these, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. and walking in
them; we are pronounced blessed, Psalm 11 9. 1, 2. The efficient cause of our
happiness is grace, the free favor and good will of God toward man, Being
justified freely by his grace, Romans 3. 24. The formal cause, is, the imputation
of Christ's righteousness without ours, when we fall short of the
righteousness of the Law; Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness,
Romans 10. 3. Therefore the Apostle observes, that David describes the
blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works,
(that is, wherein his blessedness does consist,) saying* Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord will not impute sin, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. The instrument or hand
applying, is Faith: Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth for propitiation through faith
in his blood, Romans 3. 24, 25. But the subject on whom this blessedness rests,
is the godly righteous man: The Lord has set apart him that is godly for
himself, Psalm 4. 3. The man that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has
not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully; he shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation, Psalm.
24. 4, 5. There is a concurrence of sundry causes in man's happiness, but all
falls upon the head of him that is steadfast with God in covenant, that comes up
to the terms and conditions of it. He is pronounced, and shall remain for
ever blessed, and without holiness no man shall see the Lord. It is questioned
by some, whether it be the truth, or the degree of these graces, which are
conditions of the Gospel covenant, upon performance of which we may conclude
our Assurance of happiness; but the determination of that (being thus put) is
easy, No man in true grace shall go to hell, or miss of heaven, God does not
adorn man with that glory to reject him. The Apostle exhorts to love, not in
word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth; and for a motive adds; Hereby we
know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him, 1 John
3. 18, 19. But the minimum quod sic, when it is that grace may be accounted
true, is not so easy, to determine. It is not every faintish desire that is
the work on which all this glory rests. It must be a work of farther power and
efficacy on the soul, for satisfaction of which I shall refer the Reader to
the learned labors of my much honored neighbor, Master Anthony Burgess in
his spiritual refining.

CHAP. XXXI.
The distribution of the Covenant of Grace into the Old and New Covenant with
the harmony and agreement that is found between them.
BY Gods assistance we have been thus far carried on in the work in hand, to
find out the nature of a covenant, and Gods way of entering covenant with man.
And for the more clear discovery of both, we have held forth the agreement
which is found, between the covenant of Works; which God entered with man in his
state of integrity; and the covenant of Grace entered of God with man, in his
fallen condition, as also their respective differences, So that all that is
essential in this covenant, (and necessarily required to the attainment of the
privileges and mercies promised in it) has been made known, and a complete
definition given, with such corolaries and inferences that have been judged
necessary.

Now this covenant thus entered with man in his lapsed estate, and hitherto
cleared, The Old and New Covenant
admits of distinction; and is distinguished in Scripture by the names of the
Old and New Covenant, Heb. 8. 13. The first and second covenant, Heb. 8. 7. The
first some call, and not unfitly, a covenant of Promise; under that covenant
Christ was known in promises only, and not manifested in the flesh; Others call
it a subservient covenant, being to lead in the second, in its full luster and
glory, which alone they call a covenant of Grace, and make it a third covenant
But I shall content my self with the Scripture-termes, calling the first, Old,
not because it was first in being; but because it is to be abolished, and
another to succeed, the later New, because it is never to be antiquated, as the
Apostle, Heb. 8. 13. explains himself. Now, it must needs contribute much to
the clear understanding of the covenant; as well of the terms of it, as the
mercies in it and be a great advantage for the better understanding of sundry,
both Old and New Testament-Scripture; in case the agreement between this Old
and New covenant, together with their true differences be rightly assigned, and
those imaginary differences assigned by some (erroneous on either hand to the
great prejudice of either of the covenants) be thoroughly examined. The method
followed in the ensuing part of the Treatise.
A work of difficulty, but (were it well followed) of singular profit. On this
by the help of Gods grace I shall adventure, and in the first place lay down
their agreement, afterward their respective true and real differences, and
then proceed to examination of such differences which some have assigned, which
I reserve to the last place, seeing in the two first I shall be brief. The last
will be found a business full of tedious difficulty, and trouble. In several
things there is a full agreement between these covenants. Agreement between the
Old and New covenant in six particulars.


1. In the Author propounding, God is the Author of them both; God is the
God, not of the Jews only, (who were in the first covenant) but of the Gentiles
also, taken through grace into the second covenant, Romans 3. 29.

2. In the party accepting, as specifically considered, they are both entered
with man; Neither Angels, nor any other creature articles, or is articled with
in it; and hitherto there is an agreement of both with the covenant of works.

3. In the motive or impulsive cause; Both of these are of singular grace,
entered with fallen man in his lost condition; there was no hint of this grace
before the fall, nor any need, or use of it, being not for man's preservation,
but his restitution.

4. In the Mediator Christ Jesus, who was one and the same in both: For though
Moses have the name of Mediator, Gal. 3 19. Receiving the lively oracles, and
giving them to the people, Acts 17. 38. as the Judges in Israel had the name of
Saviors, Nehem. 9. 27. and thereupon Camero makes this difference between the
Old and the New covenant, That Moses was Mediator in one, Christ in the other,
These. 68. yet he confesses, that that mediation, by the benefit whereof men are
truly and effectually united to God, belongs only unto Christ. De trip.
foedere. These. Moses work was only to deliver the way of the worship of God in
those times, and that not in his own name, but as a servant, Heb. 3. 5. He that
Moses did serve, of whom he wrote, Joh. 5. 46. that Prophet like unto Moses,
whom God promised to raise, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. in all ages was Mediator.

5. They agree in the conditions annexed. Both these covenants have one, and the
same conditions, on Gods part, Remission of sins, and everlasting happiness,
as after shall be showed more fully; They are the same on man's part, Faith and
Repentance. The just then did live by faith, Heb. 2. 4. And without faith it
was then impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Acts 10. 43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins. God then called for return to himself, and
sincerity in our returns, accepting those that were sincere, Ezekiel. 18. 31. The
eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to show himself strong
in the behalf of those whose hearts are perfect before him, 2 Chronicles 26. 9.

6. They agree in the unity of Church-felloship, constituting one and the same
Church of Christ. The Church in those days in which the Fathers lived, is one
and the same Church with this in Gospel Times. In Gospel Times men come from
the East, and West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom
of heaven, Matthew. 8. 11. One and the same Kingdom receives both. Their Faith
was terminated upon Christ as well as ours; Abraham saw his day and rejoiced,
John 8. 56. Moses bore his reproach, and esteemed it greater then the treasures
in Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. They did eat the same spiritual meat, and did drink the
same spiritual drink; they drank of the Rock that followed them, and the Rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 3. The same, not among themselves, but the same with us.
They are saved by the same free grace and mercy as we; Jews by nature, are
justified by the same faith in Jesus, as sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2. 15,
16. All these identities evidence one and the same Church, ours and theirs;
Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, Matthew. 21. 43. The same
Kingdom was taken from them and given to us, was taken from the Jews, and
given to the Gentiles; where Sem left, there Japhet took possession, Genesis 9.
27. Sems Tents are Japhets. These speak the covenants, The Old and New Covenant
in substance one.
into which we have successively entered, to be one and the same in substance. A
covenant entered by the same parties, upon the same terms and propositions on
either hand, is the same covenant; Such is the Old covenant entered with the
Jews, and the New covenant entered with Christians, they are therefore one and
the same in substance.

CHAP. XXXII.
Differences assigned between the Old and New covenant.
THese covenants, are not in that manner, fully and entirely one, but there is
difference in the way of administration. They are one in substance,
constituting one Church, one Kingdom; but different in circumstances. Upon
which account, they are distinguished, by the names of the Old and New, the
first and second Covenant. Some have made it their ambition to rise as high as
may be, in the number of differences, and have assigned several, where there is
a full accord and perfect agreement: I shall lay down such where the difference
is clear; and afterward take view, of those imaginary differences upon which
any controversy of moment hangs.

1. They differ in the agents employed, Differences between the Old and New
Covenant.
in administration of these respective covenants entered of God, and upheld and
continued with his people. The Old covenant was administered and held forth by
Servants only, Prophets, Priests, and such as God pleased to appoint, whether
by ordinary call, as those of the Tribe of Levi, who were appointed among men
in things appertaining to God. Or, extraordinary, to whom he spoke in visions
and dreams; God in sundry ways and manners (as the Apostle to the Hebrews
observes) then speaking to his people, Heb. 1. 1. The New covenant is held
forth by the Son, as in the same place the Apostle witnesses. He was the Angel
or Messenger of the covenant, Upon that errand he came from the Father, clothed
with our flesh. This is that great salvation, which first began to be spoken to
us by the Lord, Heb. 2. 3. And this he carries on, by his delegates and
deputies, whom from the right hand of the Father he gifts and qualifies.

2. They differ in their extent and latitude, as to the Nations taken into
covenant. The Old covenant received only the Jews; To them appertained the
Adoption, the Glory, and the Covenants, Romans 9. 4. Circumcision, the Seal of
the covenant, was proper to them, with some few of other Nations, that
forgetting their own people, and their fathers house, joined themseves to them,
whilst other Nations were known by the name of uncircumcision being without
title to that Seal; and were without Christ, aliens to the commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. Therefore the
Apostles, before the veil was taken away, had that restraint upon them, Matthew.
10. 5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans
enter ye not. The lost sheep of the house of Israel (being in covenant) only
were in their commission. That was a valley of vision, All other people were in
darkness. They were a people of God, Others were no people. The New covenant
takes in all Nations, respective to the covenant, no Nation has any bar put
to it, but in every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him, Act. 10. 35. Christ having taken away the partition wall;
the Apostles have a commission for the discipling of all Nations, so that in
Christ Jesus, There is neither Jew nor Greek, Scythian nor Barbarian, Col. 3.
11.

3. They differ in their duration or continuance. The Old covenant had but its
date of time, which being expired, it must give way for the New to succeed.
Thus the Apostle reasons from the Prophets prediction, of a New covenant, Heb.
8. 13. In that he says, A New covenant, he has made void the Old; now that
which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. This was to stand till
times of reformation, Heb. 9 10. This second covenant must remain till the end
of time. These are called the last days, in that, after these there must be no
change of Ordinances. The Ministry now established, is to remain to the end
of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. and the Sacraments, until Christ's second coming
unto judgment.

4. They differ in the way of dedication or consecration. The Old covenant was
dedicated, and purified with the blood of Bulls and Goats, and other
Sacrifices, which according to the Law were slain and offered, as the Apostle
to the Hebrews observes from Exodus 24. 7, 8. Heb. 9. 19, 20, 21. When Moses had
spoken every precept to all the people according to the Law, he took the blood
of calves and goats, with water and Scarlet-wool and hysope, and sprinkled both
the book and all the people; saying, This is the blood of the Testament which
God has enjoined you. Moreover, he sprinkled with blood both the Tabernacle
and all the vessels of the Ministry But in the New Testament, the dedication
is in the blood of Christ. This is my blood in the New Testament shed for you,
and for many for the remission of sins: Where we see, 1. An agreement, Either
of both are Testaments and covenants, Either of both have their dedication,
Either of both are dedicated in blood; 2. An answerable difference and
opposition. The first was the Old Testament to be antiquated. The second the
New, to succeed in place of the Old. The first was dedicated in the blood of
Bulls and Calves. The second in the blood of the Mediator; in my blood, says
Christ. The first had no possible power to take away sin, as the Apostle
presently shows, chap. 10. 4. But this is shed for many for the remission of
sins. The Apostle in the words immediately before these quoted, gives the
covenant the name of a Testament, though a covenant, and a man's last Will and
Testament really differ, seeing herein they agree, that the covenant had its
validility, as a Testament, by the death of him that made the covenant, Heb. 9.
16, 17.

5. They differ in the way of exhibition of Christ, the glory and grace of the
covenant, And upon a threefold account here, there is a difference. 1. In the
Old covenant we have Christ only in a Promise; to be incarnate, to suffer, and
to rise again, and to be received unto glory. Under that covenant, light was by
way of prophecy; In the New covenant he is evidently set forth as come in the
flesh; Having been dead and now alive, Rev. 1. 18. Having suffered in the
flesh, risen again and entered into glory. To us, it is not a prophecy, but a
Gospel. 2. In the Old covenant, all was held out to the people under types,
figures, shadows; All about the Tabernacle and Temple, Persons, U^ensils,
Sacrifices, did lead to Christ; all of these, darkly holding him forth. They
had a shadow of good things to come, and not the image of the things
themselves, Heb. 10. 1. a little of reality in a great bulk of ceremony. In the
New Testament, the truth of it, is clearly, and manifestly (without figure or
type) held forth unto us. 3. In the Old Testament, knowledge was dim and
obscure. The Jews were in a state of light comparative to Heathens.
It could be no other, when it was wrapped up in prophecies and types. A
prophecy is a riddle till it be unfolden, and little is known of a man by his
shadow, comparative to that which is seen in the man himself. In a state of
darkne^s comparative to Christi^ns.
Therefore though the state of the Jews in Old Testament times was a state of
light, comparative to the darkness that was with other people, and their land
was called a valley of visions, Isa. 22. 1. yet it was little more than
darkness, comparative to that light which in Gospel times is revealed. Christ
was a Minister of circumcision, and when he began his Ministry in the land of
Zebulon and Nepthali; the Text says, The people that sat in darkness saw a
great light, Mat. 4. 16. Circumcision therefore, in different respects, was both
a Privilege, and a Bondage, A Privilege, Romans 3. 1. It was a great mercy to
have light let in at any crevice, promises any way sealed and ratified to us. A
Bondage, Acts 15. 10. To live in so dim a light, and to be laden in so
burdensome a way, was a heavy yoke; So that, as the Apostle putting the
question, What advantage the Jew had, and what privilege there was of
circumcision, above and before the Gentile? Romans 3. 1. answers, Much every way,
and gives in his reason of the pre-eminence; So, in case the question should be
put What advantage has the Christian, and what privilege there is of
Baptism, above and before the Jew? Answer may be made Much every way, and the
reason given of the pre-eminence in Gospel Times, in the particulars above
mentioned; So that, the New covenant, is a better covenant, established upon
better promises, Heb. 8. 6. Promises are more full and clear. Though it must be
confessed, that a Christians pre-eminence above the Jews, does not equal a Jews
pre-eminence above the Gentile. The Jew was in covenant with God, and was heir
of the Promise. The Gentiles were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of Promise; having no hope, and without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2. 12. The Jew was in the same covenant in his time, as
Christians are in Gospel Times. There is not a promise in the New covenant,
whether it be for privileges, conferred upon us, or graces wrought in us, but
by the help of that light, we may find in the Old covenant, the same held out,
as after will be more clearly manifested. The betternesse is, in the greater
ease being freed from that bondage, of the ceremonial yoke, and in their more
distinct clearness. The glory of all, that the covenant does tender, being in
so clear, and full a way held out in Gospel Times, that he that is least in the
Kingdom of God, under the glory of the New Testament-revelation, is greater in
the way of Gospel-Mysteries, then John Baptist, who was the greatest of
Prophets, greater than a Prophet. Those Prophets that did foresee, and foreshew
the Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, the triumphant
conquest of his enemies, his glory at the right hand of his Father, the
spreading of the Gospel, the call of the Gentiles, did not themselves see it;
as now the meanest that are in Christ do understand it, no more than they who
now preach through Christ the Resurrection of the dead, the everlasting bliss
of glorified Saints, in their eternal fruition of Gods presence, are able to
understand it in that measure, as the meanest that then shall have the
happiness to enjoy it.

6. They differ in the Seals annexed for either of their ratification and
confirmation; for howsoever they are of the same use, leading to one, and the
same thing signified, the Jews had Christ in their Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. 4 1
Cor. 5. 7. and we have no more in ours; yet they differ in the outward stamp or
effigies, as I may so speak, as well that, of initiation, as that of
corroboration: The initiating Sacrament of the Jews (which gave them the
denomination of the people of God) was that painful circumcision in the flesh,
signum vile, and incivile, yet, those that would be the Lords, did, and must
submit unto it. All of Abraham's seed with him, received that sign; And all of
those, that with him would join unto the Lord. This was to be the leading
Sacrament; He that was not circumcised in the flesh, might not eat of the
Passover, Exodus 12. 48. And when a stranger shall sojourne with thee, and will
keep the Passover unto the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then
let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is borne in the
land, for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. A full Text against all
that plead for unbaptized persons admission to the Lords Table, God will not
suffer that disorder, that the leading Sacrament should come after. The
initiating Sacrament with Christians is that of Baptism, no sooner was a man
brought into covenant, but he was straight baptized; as soon as he made
profession, he had this sealing engaging sign, the application of water, which
is of an abstersive cleansing nature, implying our stain and guilt, and
leading us thither, where purification and freedom is found, the Spirit and
blood of Jesus Christ. The following Sacrament in the Old covenant, was that of
the Passover; a Lamp without blemish to be eaten in the place and way that God
prescribed. That in the New Testament, is the Supper of the Lord, in ordinary,
common, useful, and necessary elements, Bread and Wine, which are of a
strengthening and cheering nature, Ps. 104. 15. Implying our fainting, feeble
estate, our disconsolate and sad condition, and leading us, where we may find
both strength and consolation.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Positions tending to clear the first covenant, under Old
Testament-dispensations.
BEfore I proceed to the examination of those supposed differences; which some
have brought in, to the prejudice of both covenants; I shall lay down certain
positions, to give some light for the more clear understanding, especially of
the Old covenant, and to help us (if it may be) in our judgments of them both;
as well in their agreement, as their several differences.

First Position, God delivered unto Adam in Paradise, not only a Law or Rule of
life, Moses delivered a Covenant from God to Israel in Mount Sinai.
but also a Covenant, (as was before showed;) So, Moses in Mount Sinai
delivered unto the people of the Jews, not a Law or rule only, but a covenant
likewise. This might be confirmed at large, but that others have fully done it;
and I know not that there is any adversary that appears in it. The name of a
covenant is frequently given to it, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. He declared unto you the
covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even ten Commandments. See 2
Kings 18. 12. 2 Chronicles. 6. 11. All the essentials of a covenant before
mentioned, Parties, Consent, Conditions, are found in it, as we may see in that
one Text, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God,
to walk in his ways, and the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee. Yea, the solemnities of a covenant,
as before has been largely shown, are found in it.

Secondly, M^ses delivered a Covenant of Grace to Israel
This covenant delivered by Moses to the people of Israel, was a covenant of
Grace, the same in substance with this, under which, we live in Gospel Times.
This is so largely proved to my hand by Master Ball in his Treatise of the
covenant, page 102, 103, 104. and Master Burges in his Vindiciae legis, page
224, 225. that I may spare my pains; yet in brief, That covenant which
teaches Christ, in which men attain salvation, that accepts men upon
repentance, in which there is pardon of sin, and in which the heart is
circumcised of God; that is a covenant of grace. One of these single will
evince it, much more in their joint strength will they conclude it; But the
covenant delivered by Moses, was such a covenant. In that covenant Christ was
taught, John 5. 46, 47. Had ye beleved Moses, ye would have believed me; but if
ye believe not Moses, how will ye believe my words? Whence the collection is
plain, Believers of Moses, are Believers of Christ; and Rejecters of Moses,
are Rejecters of Christ: See Luke 24. 25, 26. with 44, 45, 46. John 1. 45. Acts
26. 22, 23. Romans 3. 21, 22. The Prophecies, Promises, Types, Genealogies,
Sacraments under that covenant (whether ordinary or extraordinary) all held
forth Christ as might be easily shown in their several particulars. In that
covenant the people of the Jews attained salvation, and were not only fed with
temporal Promises, and a covenant merely carnal; not looking above or beyond
the land of Canaan, as shall be shown: In this covenant men are accepted, and
received into mercy and favor upon repentance; When thou art in tribulation,
and all these things are come upon thee in the later days, if thou turn to the
Lord thy God, and shall be obedient to his voice, (for the Lord thy God is a
merciful God) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the
covenant of thy fathers which he swear unto them, Deuteronomy. 4. 30, 31. In this
covenant there is pardon of sin, (the great privilege of the New covenant,
Heb. 8. 12.) The Lord proclaims himself to Moses; The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus
34. 6, 7. See Exodus 32. 31, 32. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Psalm. 25. 11. Psalm. 51. 12. 7.
9. 14. In this covenant the heart is circumcised (another great privilege of
the New covenant, Heb. 8.) And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God. The ten Commandments delivered
by Moses. were of this Covenant of Grace.
All of these, any of these hold out a covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, the ten commandments, which are called the covenant of God, Deuteronomy. 4.
13. 2 Chronicles. 6. 11. (all that Moses delivered to Israel, being there
epitomized) holds forth a covenant of Grace, and not of Works. This appears in
the Preface, intimating, Gods grace and goodness to that people, bringing them
out of the land of Egypt, and the house of Bondage. Which deliverance had more
in it than a bare temporal mercy; otherwise their passage through the red Sea
could have been no Baptism as the Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 10. 1. Neither had
it been any act of justifying faith in Moses to observe the Passover, which
yet the Apostle observes, Heb. 11. 28. Then their Rock and Manna had been a
viaticum in the way, but no Sacrament. There God avoucheth himself to be the
God of that people; I am the Lord thy God, and he was a God in covenant to none
of mankind fallen, but by an act of grace. It appears in the first
commandment, where God requires them to accept him, and cleave unto him, which
cannot be done but through Christ. It appears in the second commandment; in the
preceptive part of it, which contains the whole ceremonial Law, in which,
pardon of sin was found through Christ. Thither Interpreters reduce all the
Sacrifices, Types, Sacraments of the Jews. It appears in the reasons annexed
to that precept, which, as it threatens judgment on transgressors of the Law;
so, mercy to those that observe it. Mercy is an act of Grace, and not
vouchsafed but in Christ. It appears in the fifth commandment, in the promise
there annexed, and fastened to it; So that this covenant (or this sum or
epitome of the covenant between God and his people) which was put into the
Arc, and the Mercy-seat or propitiatory set upon it, in the most holy place,
Exodus 26. 34. was a covenant of Grace.

Fourthly, Being a Covenant of Grace, it could by no means be a Covenant of
Works.
this covenant (delivered by Moses and epitomized in the Decalogue) being a
covenant of Grace, it could by no means be, in the whole and entire nature of
it, a covenant of Works. This is plain, God does not at once, with the same
people enter covenant upon so opposite terms. These are (...), either of them
destructive to the other, We may argue concerning the covenant, as the Apostle
does concerning Election, If by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise
grace is no more grace; but if it be of works, then it is no more grace,
otherwise work is no more work. This I speak as for their sakes, that make it a
mixed covenant, such a one as Paul's adversaries preached in the Churches of
Galatia; so also for their sakes, that assert it to be a covenant of Works,
never undertaking any answer to those arguments, which so clearly conclude it
to be a covenant of Grace.

Fifthly, What this Covenant is to any, it is to all.
What this covenant is to any, that it is to all, whether it be of works or of
grace; what it is in it self in the tender and terms of it, that is the
denomination of it. This is plain, Men's faith or unbelief, Men's obedience or
transgression, cannot diversifie the nature of that which God does tender; And
what God spoke to the people, he spoke to all the people, the same to all, that
he spoke to any, Exodus 19. 25. Exodus 20. 18. compared, and therefore that is
a mistake in some that say, That the Law is, doubtless a pure covenant of
Works to some men, but not to all. It is a covenant of works, occasionally and
accidentally, and not only to those which are not related to, comprehended in,
or made partakers of the covenant of Grace. He should rather have said, that
the ten commandments had been a covenant of Grace, but sometimes by an accident
or especial occasion had become a covenant of Works, which yet could not have
held. The covenant of Grace and the covenant of Works are two distinct and
opposite Species, They have one and the same univocal Genus, of whose nature
they equally partake. Therefore as an Ox can by no occasion or accident, be a
Horse, or a Horse a Sheep, or a Sheep a Lion, or a Lion a man; so a covenant of
Grace, can by no occasion or accident be a covenant of Works; one and the same
thing intended for one end, may occasionally and accidentally have another
event; as the Ministry intending salvation, may prove an aggravat on of
condemnation; but no occasion or accident can change the nature of any thing,
into that which is of a kind opposite to it, and different from it. And, in
such cases where the event is hindered, and another happens; the denomination
is, and must be, from the primary intention. The Apostle calls the Gospel the
power of God to salvation, Under Moses his administration, commands were
frequent and full, spiritual promises were rare and more obscure.
Romans 1. 16. The word is called the word of Life, though to some through their
obstinacy, it turns to condemnation, and to death. If our author in this
question, take liberty to differ from all (as himself professes) I hope he
will not be displeased, if all differ from him, Hanc veniam petimusque,
damusque, vicissim.

Sixthly, In Moses time, and under his administration, commands were frequent
and full, as well ceremonial, as moral, as also menaces. The directive, and
maledictive part of the Law; were clear and open, for discovery of sin, to
work to a sense of danger, to put them in a posture to look for and long after
the Messiah; But the promises more obscure, (I mean the promises of eternity)
scarce known, any otherwise then as they were shadowed out in temporal things.
This (as the Apostle shows) was figured by that veil, which was before Moses
his face, when he spoke with the people upon the renewing of the Tables, Moses
his face upon his converse with God in the Mount, shone with that glory, that
Aaron and all the children of Israel were afraid to come nigh, Exodus 34. 30.
Afterward he speaks to the people, and talks with them; And till he had done
speaking with them, he put a veil before his face, verse 33. Whereupon the
Apostle having entered comparison between the Ministers of the Law, and the
Ministers of the Gospel, alludes to this veil before Moses his face, 2 Cor. 3.
12, 13, 14. in these words, Seeing then we have such hope, (says he) we use
great plainness of speech, and not as Moses which put a veil over his face,
that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which
is abolished, but their minds were blinded; Upon which Diodati says; Moses
Ministry kept the people under the shadows of ceremonies, without contemplating
the mysteries which were figured by them to the bottom, which was reserved for
the time of the Gospel, Heb. 10. 4. Whereof was a figure that veil on Moses
his face; Not (says he) that, that was the end of that act of Moses, but of
that which the Apostle says, may be allegorically understood thereby, namely
of the obscure dispensation of the Law; Which obscure dispensation meeting with
that blindness that was in the judgments of that people, held them in such
ignorance, that they saw little of Grace in that covenant, but rather through
their blind mistake, looked upon it (the generality of them) as a covenant of
Works. And this the Apostle signifies in the place before quoted, as also, Romans
10. 3. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness
of God. This caused them so tenaciously to hold to the precepts of the Law
(especially to the ceremonial part, which though more burdensome, yet was
easilier fitted to their corruption) that they refused Christ the end of the
Law for righteousness sake, to every one that believes, Romans 10. 3.

Seventhly, There was so much of Grace and Christ held out in the Old Covenant
to leave them without excuse.
There was yet so much of grace, and Christ held out in this covenant, that
they were not only left without excuse, that were under it; but convinced of
sin, if they saw not Christ and the grace of the covenant in it. Christ in his
contest with the Jews (who would not receive him, but stood in opposition, and
raised persecution against him,) appeals to the Scriptures, Old
Testament-Scriptures; Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me, and in
them you think to have eternal life, John 5. 39. Where we see a double encomium
of the Scriptures. 1. From the Jews own acknowledgement, In them eternal life
may be found. 2. From the testimony they give of Christ, In them, upon search,
Christ may be found; There are such discoveries there, that hold him out, and
eternal life in him, to those that search them. And they suspecting, by that
intimacy of communion that he professed to have with the Father, and the heavy
charge that he laid upon them, that he was about to accuse them to the Father;
Christ puts it off from himself, and puts it upon one that they had least in
suspicion, even Moses, Moses in whom they trusted, in whom they pretended to
repose confidence; It is he that is ready to accuse them, not of breach of the
Law, or transgression of any command of his, (which they could easilier have
believed) but of unbelief of Moses; You have one that accuses you, even
Moses, in whom you trust; for had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me,
for he wrote of me. Unbelief in Christ, set forth in Moses, is a sin, which
Moses his writings shall charge upon them. So also in that speech of Christ to
the two disciples in the way to Emmaus, O ye fools and slow of heart, to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken; ought not Christ to have suffered
those things, and to enter into his glory? where we see them charged with sin,
in that they understood not Christ in the Prophets, Many phrases in use under
the Old Covenant-administration seemingly holding out a Covenant of Works,
according to Scripture use hold out a Covenant of Grace.
Christ in Moses, as follows there in the next words; Beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, he expounded unto them all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself, Luke 24 25, 26, 27. They that dwell at Jerusalem and their
Rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets which are
read every Sabbath day, they fulfilled them in condemning him, Acts 13. 27.

Eighthly, There are those phrases in Moses, which are ordinarily quoted, as
holding out a covenant of Works, and in a rigid interpretation are no other;
yet in a qualified sense, in a Gespel-sense, and according to Scripture-use of
the phrase, they hold out a covenant of Grace, and the terms and conditions of
it; To instance in some few, Deuteronomy. 4. 1. Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto
the statutes, and unto the judgments which I teach you to do them, that ye may
live, and go in and possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers gives
you, Deuteronomy. 5. 33. You shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has
commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you; and that ye
may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess, Deuteronomy. 30. 16. In
that I command this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways and to
keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, that thou may
live and multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither
thou go to possess it. Deuteronomy. 6. 24, 25. And the Lord commanded us to do all
these statutes, to fear the Lord our God for our good always, that he might
preserve us alive as it is this day. And it shall be our righteousness if we
observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as he has
commanded us. We may so interpret those Scriptures (and the Jews, as it
appears for a great part, did so interpret them) that they hold out a covenant
of Works, when Grace was not at all acknowledged to assist in doing, nor Christ
known at all to satisfy for failing, and to expiate for transgression. These
seeing nothing but a reward upon labor, and punishment in case of
transgression. They may yet be so interpreted as taking Grace, in the Work for
change of the heart, and putting it into a posture for obedience, according to
that even in Moses, Deuteronomy. 306. I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart if
thy ^eed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
that thou may live, and so these duties are only Gospel qualifications of
truth and sincerity of obedience. In this sense (which they may well bear, and
I take to be their native sense) here is no more than what we find in the
Gospel, from Christ and the Apostles. They that have done good, shall rise unto
the resurr^ction of life, John 5. 28. To them that by patient continuing in
well-doing, seek for glory and immortality, eternal life, Rom 2. 5. Where (as
in many other places) we may see, that according to the New covenant, a man may
make the attaining of life, the end of his work, and the Reader may see phrases
of his nature, to be New covenant, New Testament, and Gospel-language; unless
they will charge Christ and the Apostles to have Old Testament-spirits. To save
a man's self may be so understood as to bear a sense, purely legal,
anti-Evangelical, and opposite to Grace or Faith in Christ, and so it is used
by the Apostle, or a phrase very near it; For by Grace ye are saved through
Faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Not obscurely
showing, that if we are saved of our selves, it is not of Grace, not of Faith,
and not the gift of God. Yet the phrase may be understood in a Gospel-sense, as
requiring and implying no more than our endeavor in a state of grace, through
the assistance of the Spirit, to walk in Salvation-way, To strive to enter in
at the strait gate, and to seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of
it, and so we find it used, and that more than once in Scriptures, 1 Timothy 4.
16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the doctrine; in so doing thou will save
thy self, and them that hear thee. Ministers taking heed to doctrine, save
hearers, and yet are no saviors, in opposition, but in subordination to the
Lord Jesus; Ministers and others taking heed to themselves, save themselves,
and yet are no self-saviors in opposition to free grace, the merit of, or
faith in Christ Jesus; Peter in his first Sermon after receiving of the holy
Ghost pre^cht the Gospel, yet he urged this, which some will have to be no
other than a covenant of Works; Save your selves from this untoward generation,
Act. 2. 40. And the Apostle preached no other thing than Christ and him
crucified, when he called on the Philippians, to work out their own salvation
with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. To be found in our own righteousness, in
that sense that Paul uses it, Phil. 3. 8. does exclude the righteousness of
faith, that was no bottom on which he durst stand; yet in the sense that
Ezekiel uses it, the soul is delivered by it, Though Noah, Daniel, and Job
stood before me, they would but deliver their own souls by their
righteousness, Ezekiel. 14. 14. so Ezekiel. 18. 22. In his righteousness that he has
done he shall live; Noah was an heir of the righteousness of faith, Heb. 11. 7.
as the Holy Ghost himself witnesses; yet the same Holy Ghost tells us, that
his own righteousness delivers his soul. So Solomon says, Righteousness
delivers from death; he does not only say, it would deliver, were it exact and
complete, but (such as it is) it does deliver, Prove. 20.2. David (as Paul
observes) describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. Yet the same David puts blessedness
upon works, Psalm. 112. 1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord that
delights greatly in his commandments. Psalm 119. 12. Blessed are the
undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord; Blessed are they that
keep his testimonies, that seek him with the whole heart. Ps. 128. 1. Blessed
is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways. And so also the
Apostle James, Who so looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and continues
therein, not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the word, that man shall
be blessed in his deed, James 1. 25. The Apostle Peter tells us, We are kept by
the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1 5. Our salvation
is not in our own keeping, It is not our own care, that frees us from
destruction; yet John says, He that is begotten of God sins not, and
keeps himself, that the wicked one touches him not, 1 John 5. 18. Here are
the same words affirmed, and denied, and both from one and the same mouth of
truth; a different sense therefore is to be enquired after. A righteousness,
which is the condition of the covenant of Works; out of our own inherent
strength and abilities, in an exact perfection, is denied, a righteousness,
not of us, but through grace wrought in us, in sincerity, which the covenant of
Grace calls for, is asserted and required.

Ninthly, Though Moses delivered a Covenant of Grace to Israel, yet the Law is
sometime taken in that restrained sense as to hold forth a Covenant of Works.
Though the whole Law that Moses delivered from God on Mount Sinai to the
people (and is among the sacred Oracles of God for posterity) do contain a
covenant of Grace, yet the Law is taken sometime in that strict sense, as
containing a covenant of Works, and holding forth life upon condition of
perfect obedience. So the Apostle, Romans 10. 5, 6. puts an opposition between
the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of Faith; So also Gal. 3.
18. If righteousness be by the Law, it is no more of Promise, So that, there
is a necessity of distinguishing, between the Law, abstracted from the Promise,
the Promise of Christ, I mean the Evangelical Promise, and the Law, including
this Promise, and writing of Christ Jesus, so that the works of the Law,
considered in the bare mandatory part of it, can save none; If righteousness
come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain; yet the righteousness witnessed
by the Law and the Prophets, even the righteousness of God which is by Faith
of Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 21, 22. is, our justification, and brings salvation,
Romans 3. 21, 22. And no marvel, that Moses, and the Law delivered by Moses,
should be taken in Scripture in so different an acception; when circumcision,
that leading ceremony of the Law, is sometimes looked upon as a Privilege, as
has been showed, and a saving Ordinance, Romans 3. 1. Romans 4. 11. And sometimes
as a yoke, A yoke that neither our fathers nor we were able to bear; Acts 15.
10. yea, as a deadly ceremony, dividing and cutting off from Christ. I Paul say
unto you, if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, Gal. 5. 2. So
that the Law abstracted from Christ, as the greater part of the Jews took it)
was a Ministry of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 9. It could never reach so high as
salvation, but including Christ, it wa^ perfect, and saves the soul, Psalm. 19.
7. The Apostles thinks he can never sufficiently vilify the ceremonial
Fabric, looked upon, as absolute of it self, without farther relation; We see
what titles he gives those Ordinances, Weak and beggarly elements, Gal. 4. 9.
Rudiments of this world, Col. 2. 8. But being taken in their relative
consideration, as a Schoolmaster to Christ, they are an atonement, a sweet
savor, they are so called, times without end; The honor due to Christ (who
was an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2.
and by whom we receive the atonement, Romans 5. 11.) without derogation from
Christ, is given to them; not by way of opposition, but subordination; and not
by man's device, but Gods appointment not holding the soul from him, but
ministerially serviceable to lead to him.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The Old covenant was not made up of mere carnal and temporal Promises, but
contained New covenant-promises that were spiritual and saving.
THese Positions premised, to clear our way in a farther progress in this
thing: I should now look into those differences; which several parties; have
not found, but made between these covenants; and to reckon up all, which some
have at least hinted and touched upon, I should weary both my self and the
Reader. He that pleases may find them numerously reckoned up, by Master Ball
in his Treatise of the Covenant, page 94, 95, 96. with his general censure and
dislike of the most of them, though sparing a particular refutation which I
also shall forbear. So many of them as are differences indeed, will fall in
with those before delivered, and the other will fall before that which has,
and (God willing) may be spoken. There are only four, of which I shall (by
Gods assistance) take notice, upon which much controversy depends. The two
former being injurious to the Old covenant laying it too low; The two latter
putting too great a limit to the New covenant in respect of its latitude and
extent.

First, The first imaginary difference between the Old and New Covenant.
The Old covenant, under which the fathers lived, and which circumcision sealed
(say some) was a carnal covenant, and contained only earthly promises, the
mercies of the land of Canaan, such as were in this life to be enjoyed: But the
New covenant under which we live in Gospel Times, and which Baptism seals,
contains spiritual mercies and privileges, Ad literam non fuisse promissionem
remissionis peccatorum, sed peculiaris protectionis and gubernationis and
terrenae foelicitatis.
has promises of everlasting salvation. In the device of this difference
Papists have led the way, and Socinians and Anabaptists follow. Bellar. 1. l.
1. De Baptismo, cap. 4. says, and referres to what he had said before upon the
question of the difference of the Sacraments of the Old and New covenant, that
the promise of God to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, was
not in the letter of it, any promise of forgiveness of sins, but of special
protection, providence, and worldly happiness, with whom Stapleton and Becan
the Jesuits join hands, Promissio terr^na erat annexa carnali Circumcissioni,
and hac sola ad vetus Testamentum pertinebat; and contrarium asserere, quod
facit Calvinus, nihil est aliud, quam ex lege Evangelium facere, and omnia
confundere Bellar, lib. 2. de es^ec. Sac. Cap. 17.
as they are quoted by Chamier, lib. 5. de Baptismo, cap. 11. sec. 11. though
Vasquez one of their fraternity dissents; And Master Blackwood in his Storm of
Antichrists Garrison, says, That these are two covenants essentially
differing. The first was carnal, typical; and showing the difference between
Baptism and circumcision, he says, circumcision signed a right to Canaan, The
several interests for which the assignation of this difference serves.
Baptism signs a right to the death and satisfaction of Christ. page 32.

This difference of the covenants (however the reality of it will appear in
the Scriptures) serves for several interests.

1. It is this high way to bring down all the honor and esteem of Old
Testament-Scriptures, 1. To decry all Old Testament-Scriptures.
If the promises there mentioned be (as those of the Turkish Alcoran) sensual
and carnal, yea, inferior to them, and determine with this life; who can put
such an estimate upon them? especially having at hand by them, in the New
Covenant, Promises lasting to eternity. This doctrine has produced those
Atheistical jeers and blasphemies, Old Testament-men, Old Testament-spirits;
yea, by inevitable consequence, if it may stand, it will bring the bane and
ruin of New Testament-Scriptures along with it. The Old and New
Testament-Scriptures, as couples in ancient buildings, so answer one the other,
that, neither can stand, if either fall; It is the Gospel of Jesus Christ that
we seek in New Testament-Scriptures. Now that is defined to be, that which God
before promised by his Prophets concerning his Son Christ Jesus, Romans 1. 2. In
the promise of the Prophets then, this must be found. A righteousness of faith
we there seek; now this righteousness is witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets, Romans 3. 21. They must then be heard witnessing, Christ is the All
that in the Gospel we look after; he must be an Old Testament-Christ, whom the
Law and Prophets hold out to us or else he is not the Christ of God; All the
vilifying reproaches which are fastened on the Old Testament, fall upon the
head of the New Testament; yea, upon Christ Jesus.

2. It wholly takes Infants out of all Covenant with God; 2. To take all
Infants out of Covenant.
If that great Charter, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, contain
only carnal promises, and those proper to that people, it is determined, and
now no covenant for the seed remains. Hence Papists and Antipaedobaptists have
their respective advantages, The Papists hence conclude Infants damnation,
dying before they are taken of God into covenant by Baptism, and
Antipaedobaptists joining with them in the premises; will they, nill they,
they must be enforced to yield the Conclusion. They may fret and storm about
the charge of it, and dip their pen as deep in gall as it can reach, yet they
shall never wipe it off. That all out of Covenant with God, being no
Church Members, having no title to Church Membership, are in a perishing
condition, is a Scripture-Position above all exceptions. In case they will
subscribe, as they do, to the Popish Tenent, that Infants in their first birth
state, are out of covenant, and in no better condition than the children of
Heathens, except the hope of better education, then they must agree, in Infants
condemnation.

3. Antipaedobaptists, 3. To keep Infants from Baptism.
hence find a way to keep Infants from Baptism; Being out of Covenant, they
have no right to any seal of the Covenant. These several interests make them
all to join in one, to conclude that the first was a Covenant carnal, and
raising the men in Covenant, no higher than earthly expectations. But if truth
may be heard, none of these interests will hold; Testimonies evincing the
spirituality of Old Test^ment-promises.
certain it is, that those that were in the Old Covenant had better thoughts of
it. The Apostle, speaking of the Patriarchs confession, that they were
strangers and pilgrims on earth; makes his observation upon it; They that say
these things, plainly declare that they seek a Country. A stranger, or
pilgrim, is a man not at his home, but seeks a country. Now this country must
either be Earthly, or Heavenly, there is not a third which men could have in
desire. That it was not an earthly country that they sought; he makes good, in
that they had opportunity of return, they might have gone back to Ur of the
Chaldees at pleasure. Then it follows, as he inferres, that they sought a
better country, that is, an Heavenly, Heb. 11. 16. Men of this opinion have
not only the Apostles authority against them, but (putting himself on in a
Logical dispute with them) his reasons likewise, yea, those that were most
carnal, and earthly-minded among them, were taught to judge better of the
Promises, that they lived under; Christ gives that testimony of the Jews, with
whom he had contest, that in the Scriptures they thought to have everlasting
life, John 5. 39. They had no Scriptures but Old Covenant-Scriptures, and of
them, they had this opinion, which was no error of theirs corrected by Christ,
but were by him confirmed in it, Christ justifies them in their opinion, that
in Scripture they thought to have everlasting life, and rectifies them in the
way of finding everlasting life in it. A great part of the dispute is about
those words of God to Abraham, in which the foundation of the Covenant stands,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, whether in them there be promises,
only of earth, or of heaven likewise? And this Christ himself determines in his
answer to the Sadduces about the Resurrection, where he applies that speech of
God to Moses at the bush: I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob; for proof that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob live for ever, Mat. 22.
33. How injurious are they to the Covenant of God with his people, that put
such unworthy limits upon it: Other people that were without Covenant had
temporal mercies from God, they were protected, and provided for by him; Leave
thy fatherless children unto me, and let thy widows trust in me (says the
Lord to the people of Edom,) I will keep them alive, Jer. 49. 11. The woman of
Canaan thought it a privilege for dogs to eat of the crumbs that fall from the
childrens table; for Gentiles, who were without Covenant, to partake of any
little of the mercy that the people of God in Covenant did enjoy; But if this
gloss of the Covenant may stand, the dogs crumbs, are beyond all the childrens
provision. They will not leave their crumbs, for all that is set on the
childrens table. It may seem a high speech of Luther after his manner, Imperium
Turcicum quantum quantum est, mica est quam pater familias projicit canibus
that the Turkish Empire how great soever, is but a crumb that the great Master
of the family casts to the dogs; yet this is above all that Israel had in
Canaan, if we look at no more, than a temporal possession. Ishmael the son of
the bondwoman must be cast out, not to be heir with the son of the
freewoman, Genesis 21. 10. he and his posterity must be cast out of Covenant, and
in Isaac the seed must be called. But if there were no more in Isaacs grant
than the possession of Canaan, the son of the bondwoman had had the better of
the bargain: Ishmaelites in earthly possessions exceeded Israelites; And Esau
had not need to have complained so much of the loss of his birth right, and
his brothers supplantation of him; if Jacob had gained no more than a
possession for his posterity in Canaan, having that blessing both promised and
performed; That his dwelling should be the fatness of the earth, and the dew
of Heaven from above, Genesis 27. 39. he had small cause of envy of his brothers
felicity. How did the Saints of those times boast of God, exult and triumph in
him, proclaiming his goodness, That there was no Rock (...) their God? If
their portion did reach (with the men of this world) only to this life, none
can be able to give a reason of such triumphant exultations. And the Psalmist
had never spoken of it as the worlds portion, in case himself had looked for no
better an inheritance. Providence was, indeed, singularly eminent over that
people, yet considering their great afflictions which they still bore, and
heavy chastisements wherewith they were exercised; if that special care of God,
had not had an influence upon eternity, that blasphemous conclusion of the
Orator, that a man might see how much the gods esteemed the Nation of the
Jews, in that they were so often carried into captivity, would hardly receive
a satisfying refutation. Certainly their sufferings were above any other
Nation, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities, if then they had their
hope only in this life, and were not chastened in the world, that they might
not be condemned with the world; as the Apostle speaks of Christians, so we
might say of the Nation of the Jews; Of all Nations in the world they were the
most miserable. See Chamier, lib. 5. de Baptism, cap. 11. sect. 11. Whitakers
praelectiones de Sacramentis contra Bellar. page 125. Rivet. in Genesis 17.
Exercitat. 87.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Old Covenant was a pure Gospel Covenant, and not mixed.
2ly. OThers that rise not so high against the first covenant, as to make it a
covenant merely carnal; yet loath to yield to so much truth, as to confess it
to be a covenant Evangelical; have found out a middle way; which yet they think
may carry on their interests, and say, It is not a pure Gospel Covenant, but
mixed; and therein differs from the second covenant, which is wholly
Evangelical: In which they seem to go, but one half of the way with their old
friends the Jesuits, from whom in this controversy they so much glean, yet,
far enough to sit down with Anabaptists, to cast Infants (as they hope) out of
the covenant and Church Membership, and so exclude them from Baptism. Here I
shall undertake to make good these four particulars.

1. That this expression of theirs is very untoward; That expression of a mixed
Covenant under which the Fathers are supposed to live untoward.
and such that will bear no fair sense, without the utter overthrow, even of
that difference between the Covenants, which they would build on this
distinction.

2. That the proof that they bring of this mixture of the first covenant is
very weak, and not at all cogent.

3. That they are not constant to themselves, but give and take, and know not
what to determine.

4. In case all were granted, yet they know not how to bring any thing home, of
all that they say, to serve their own interests. Their expressions, I say, are
untoward, in denying purity of Gospel in the first Covenant, and affirming a
mixture. That which is not pure, but mixed, is a compound of pure and impure;
such that has some ingredients, such as they ought, and others such that make
all adulterate: As silver mingled with dress, or wine with water, Isa. 1. 22.
The false teachers (Saint Paul's adversaries) preach such a mixed Gospel, when
they urged with such vehemence a mixture of works, which caused the Apostle to
stand in such fear of the Corinthians, lest they should be drawn away from the
simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. They do not believe that the Gospel
which Paul tells us was preached to Abraham, Gal. 3. 8. was any such impure
Gospel, this sure is not their meaning, they dare not say that Abraham was
under any such delusion; What then can be the meaning, but that he had
promises, not only of bliss, and in reference to eternal salvation; but also
promises of earthly concernment, as that of the land of Canaan, and his
plantation there? The Covenant takes its denomination from the Promises, (says
one of them) but the Promises are mixed; some Evangelical, belonging to those to
whom the Gospel belongs; some are domestic or civil Promises, specially
respecting the house of Abraham, and the policy of Israel. To this I readily
agree, and then the distinction falls to nothing; Seeing in Gospel times, in
New Testament-dayes, this will denominate a not pure, but mixed Gospel as well
as in those times, we our selves are under such a Gospel as well as the Jews.
I know not how we could pray in faith, Give us this day our daily bread; in
case we were without a promise of these things, or how man could live by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, in case we had no word from God.
The Apostle tells us, Godliness has the promise of this life, and that which
is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. It would trouble many a perplexed man in case he could
not make good, that those words, Verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37. 3. did not
at all belong to him. There is no believing man in any relation, but he has
Gospel-Promises in concernment to that relation, as appears in that speech of
Paul's encouragement of servants, Epes 6. 8. Knowing whatsoever for good thing
any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
free. It It were ill with all sorts, had not they their domestic
relation-promises, which these speak of, as making a mixture.

2. As their expressions are untoward, so taking them at the best, their proof
is weak, That the Covenant takes its denomination from the Promises; but the
Promises are mixed, say these men. The most eminent Promises, which contain the
marrow of all, give the denomination, and not such that are annexed as
Appendants to them. The Promise of the land of Canaan, is an appendant to the
great covenant made of God with Abraham, as Chamier with good warrant from the
text, Genesis 17. 7, 8. calls it, lib. de baptis. cap. sec. The Covenant being
made of God, to be the God of Abraham and his seed, which might have been made
good wheresoever they had inhabited or sojourned, the promise of Canaan is over
and above added to it. The reason given in by one for his dislike of Chamiers
expression, calling it an Appendix to the covenant, is little to purpose, Psalm.
105. 10, 11. The gift of the land of Canaan is called a Covenant, says he, and
therefore is not an appendant to it. By the same reason Circumcision must be
the Covenant, and not a Seal appendant to it; seeing Circumcision is called a
Covenant, Genesis 17. 10. they are not ignorant of these Scripture-metonymies.

3. As the proof is weak, to make the Covenant not a pure Gospel Covenant, but
mixed; so, they are not constant to themselves, pointing that out, which makes
pure Gospel, Genesis 17. 5. Genesis 15. 5. Genesis 12. 3. Genesis 18. 18. illustrated by
some New Testament-Scriptures, Romans 4. 17, 18. Gal. 3. 8, 9, 16. Acts 3. 25.
one observes, it is to be noted, that those Promises, which were Evangelical,
according to the more inward sense of the Holy Ghost, do point at the
privileges of Abraham's house in the outward face of the words, and thereupon
raises a doubt, whether any covenant made with Abraham be simply Evangelical?
And so he finds out Evangelical-Promises in the inwards of that covenant,
which is non-Evangelical in the outward face; So Bellarmine, with whom he so
much (to speak in his own language) symbolizeth, finds out spiritual
Evangelical Promises, in that which he concludes to be of another nature;
denying that the Promise made to Abraham in the letter, was any Promise of
forgiveness of sins, but of special protection and government, and earthly
happiness; yet confesses that in a mystical sense they were spiritual
Promises, (...) quodam sensu fuisse e^iam (...) promissiones and remissionis
peec^^m ac vita ^ternae and ad nos pertinere.
both of pardon of sin, and life eternal, and that they belong to us, Bellar.
de Sacr. Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 4. whereupon Chamier observes, That which is
promised mystically, God in covenant does promise, but heaven is here promised
mystically; therefore in this covenant here is a Promise of heaven; so the
inward, and outward face, will be all Evangelical.

Lastly, they yet know not how to bring any thing home (were all granted) to
serve their interest, they seem to contend that the Evangelical Promises are
vested in the persons of true Belevers. The other which are civil, or
domestic, serving to make up the mixture, were privileges descendable, and
traducible to posterity, and upon this account, circumcision of the natural
seed of Abraham came in for confirmation and seal of that which alone was
civil, domestical, and non-Evangelical; and being not considered, as a leading
Sacrament of the whole Church, as Baptism is now, but only of the Jewish
Church, as such, proper to Abraham and his posterity, and much differing from
Baptism, it is no argument that we in Gospel Times transmit any such
privilege to posterity, Circumcision was a Seal of spiritual mercies of the
same that Baptism seals.
or that our seed before actual faith, have any title to the covenant. This
seems to be their meaning, to which we have many things to say.

First, that Orthodox Divines, both ancient and modern have made circumcision
to be of the same signification and use as Baptism, and till Anabaptists
closed, they had no adversaries but Papists, who to advance their ^pus operatum
in the Sacraments of the New Testament, will have them, as far to exceed the
Old, as heaven does earth, and the substance does the shadow; This is observed
by Chamier Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 4. lib. 2. cap. 19. sect. 58. having reckoned
up several testimonies to this purpose, he adds, Plurima sunt ejusdem
testimonia exquibus constat persuasum olim fuisse Christianis, non fuisse
admodum diversan circumcisionis rationem and Baptismi. Cur body mutatum* and
quidem in Papistarum gratiam and ^^idem ad arbitrium Jesunarum.
There are very many like testimonies, by which it appears, that Christians
were heretofore persuaded that there was no so great difference between
circumcision and baptism; and why, says he, is it now changed? Truly in
favor of the Papists, and according to the pleasure of the Jesuits.

Secondly, if circumcision have respect to those Promises that were no Gospel
mercies, but civil, domestical, restrained to Jews, and not appertaining to
Christians; How could it be a distinction between Jew and Gentile respective to
Religion? it might have made a civil distinction, and the want of it have been
an evidence against other Nations, that they had been none of the multiplied
seed of Abraham according to the flesh, and that their interest had not been in
Canaan. But how it could have concluded them to have been without Christ,
strangers from the covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world, as the Apostle determines upon their uncircumcision, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12.
cannot be imagined.

Thirdly, How is it that we hear so much in Scripture of circumcision of the
hear Jer. 4. 4. Romans 2. 28. Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 44. 9. and the
circumcised to have this character, that they worship God in Spirit and in
Truth; if circumcision have not relation to Promises that are spiritual? When
complaint is made of uncircumcision in heart, is it not (as it is ordinarily
understood) that their ^^ndes were carnal, and not taken up with spiritual
things or is it that they were not fixed on their civil and domestic interests?
when they are said to be uncircumcised, as Ier. 6. 10. is it not upon that
account that Jeremy there gives, that they could not hear the Word of the Lord,
that they had no delight in it, that it was a reproach to them; or is it
because they could not suck in Promises of mere civil, home, and
self-interests? So it must need be if circumcision be such a Seal, when they
emproved it for the use to which it was instituted, they kept the right use of
it, and were not worthy of reproof concerning it.

Fourthly, what Sacraments had the Jews of any Gospel-relation, if this
respected alone their civil interests? There might be more spoken to that of
the Passover, to carry it to peculiar National mercies, than to this of
circumcision. See Exodus 13. 14, 15. And it shall be when thy sin asks thee
in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shall say unto him, By
strength of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the (...) of B^ndage.
And it came to pass when Pharao^ would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew
all the firstborn in the land of Egypt; both the first borne of man, and the
firstborn of beasts; therefore I sacrifice unto the Lord all that opens the
Matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my children, I redeem. I am sure
far less can be said to carry it to that which is spiritual, and of common
concernment both to Jews and Christians.

Fifthly, how is it that the Apostle giving a definition of circumcision,
refers it to nothing national, civil, or domestic; but only to that which is
purely spiritual, Speaking of Abraham, he says; He received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet
being uncircumcised? The righteousness of faith, is a Promise purely
Evangelical, Romans 3. 22. Romans 3. 30. Romans 10. 3. Philippians 3. 8. and
this Circumcision sealed, the self-same thing that our Sacraments seal; So
that as their extraordinary Sacraments are expressly affirmed to be the same
with ours, by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 3 They eat all the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink, so are their appointed established
Sacraments, Circumcision, and the Passover. Will they with Bellarmine, lib. 1.
cap. 17. de Sacramentis in genere, deny, that Circumcision was an universal
seal of faith, and affirm that it was only an individual seal of the
individual faith of Abraham, that so all may fall to the ground which is spoken
from that Text of the use of Circumcision to the Jews, all that is there
spoken, having reference only to Abraham in person; I answer, 1. This Popish
shift is flat against the Apostle; He brings it as an argument for proof of the
way, of our Justification to be by faith alone, which were a mere
inconsequence, if proper to him, and not belonging to others. 2. It is flat
against Moses, who referres this of circumcision to the covenant there
mentioned, Genesis 17. 7. But the covenant is not with Abraham alone, but his
seed also together with him, as is there plain. 3. It carries several
absurdities with it. (1.) By this means Gods covenant with Abraham in person,
and his covenant with Christians in Gospel Times is indeed the same; but his
covenant with all believers in the Old Testament and with believers in the New
Testament are essentially differing. Abraham, and New Testament believers, are
under one covenant; Old Testament-beleevers are under a covenant essentially
differing. (2.) Then Zachary, Luke 1. 72. interpreting the covenant made with
Abraham of salvation by Christ should have limited it to Abraham, and not
extended it to the Fathers; But we see all are there, under one and the same
mercy; our father Abraham; and all that followed him, even all that came out of
Egypt, and were for Canaan, are called Fathers, 1 Corinthians. 10. 1. All our
Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and all these had
the same mercy in promise with Abraham. To perform the mercy (says Zachary)
promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the Oath which he
swear to our father Abraham. (3.) Then Abraham himself in person, and
Christians in the days of the Gospel are interessed in Christ, and all other
believers in the Law were without Christ; but the contrary is plain. Moses
esteemed the reproach of Christ greater than the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.
26. (4.) Then Abraham and Christians have from God the Kingdom of heaven and
salvation; but the rest of the Jews have nothing better than the land of
Canaan. They have no more than the covenant reaches unto, and the seal of the
covenant did confirm; But the covenant reaches only temporal Promises, as the
land of Canaan, in their opinion. These evasions Bellarmine is put to, and
Anabaptists are glad to follow, both of them willing to say any thing rather
than confess a truth.

But they say, Abraham, of the righteousness of faith, that he might be the
Father of all them that believe, etc. But only Abraham is such a father. Sol.
Answ. This priority of receiving the Faith, and the sign and seal, is proper
to Abraham; each one could not be first, but father and child, both received
it, and both had the righteousness of Faith sealed in it. If Bellarmine please
so well, I shall refer to Bellarmines opposites, Chamier de Sacramentis in
genere, lib. 2. cap. 9. Ames. Tom. 3. more especially Whittaker praelectiones
de Sacramentis page 22 23. H^c desperationis, etc. So that which way soever
they take truth fastens upon them, and the friends of truth fly in their face;
and all to make it appear that a pure Gospel was preached to Abraham, and that
the first covenant was not mixed, but truly Evangelical.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Covenant of Grace in Gospel Times admits Christians, in a state of
unregeneration, and is not limited in the bounds of it to the Elect regenerate.
THe two former supposed differences did lay the first covenant too low, not
vouchsafing it the honor of a Gospel Covenant, or at the best, a mixed Gospel;
Two others follow, which will hold us longer, that put too great a limit to the
second covenant, A third supposed difference between the Old and New Covenant.
in respect of the latitude and extent of it. A third difference therefore
assigned by some, is, that the first covenant took in all the seed of Abraham,
by Isaac and Jacob, as many as professed themselves to be of the Faith, and
that were willing to join in the worship of the God of Abraham. The New
Covenant, they affirm, admits no more than Elect Regenerate persons. The Gospel
strips us of all relative Covenant holiness, of all holiness that is not
real, and intrinsecal, and God ownes none, as his Vovenant People, but Elect
regenerate persons. In the first place we shall take what is yielded, or at
least not gain-sayed, and after proceed to the examination of what is affirmed.

In Old Testament-times the covenant was made with Israel in the uttermost
latitude and extent, All of Israel were in Covenant in Old Testament-times.
with all that bore the name of Israel, as we may see, Deuteronomy. 29. at large held
forth. There is a covenant entered, and the words of it expressed, 1. With Israel,
verse 1. 2. With all Israel, verse 2. 3. With them to whom God had not given an
heart to perceive, eyes to see, and ears to hear, ver. 4. viz. with
unregenerate persons. 4. It is made with Captains of Tribes, Elders, Officers,
little Ones, Wives, Strangers, Hewers of wood, Drawers of water, verse. 10, 11.
5. With them that were present, and with them that were absent, verse 14, 15.
All this clearly shows in how great a latitude this covenant is entered; No
Israelite of any Sex, Age, Rank, nor any that joined themselves to that body
are exempted* Which also farther appears in those innumerable places of
Scripture, where God owns that people generally, promiscuously as his people,
professing himself to be their God, and he is the God of none, but a
vovenant people, of his own vovenant people, others are without God, Ephesians. 2.
12. He was the God of all that came out of Egypt, Exodus 20. 2. I am the Lord
thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
Bondage; Of all that whole family, Amos 3. 1. Hear this word that the Lord has
spoken against thee, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I
have brought up from the land of Egypt. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one
Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Yea, Isreal at the very worst is thus owned as Gods in
covenant; Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee, O Israel, if thou will hearken unto me: but my people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would
have none of me, Psalm. 8 8, 11. The Ox knows his Owner, the Ass his Masters
crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa. 1. 3.
Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge,
Isa. 5. 13. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. And when
they entered into the Heathen, whither they went, they profaned my holy Name;
when they said unto them, These are the people of the Lord, Ezekiel. 36. 20. This
is brought as a motive to withhold Israel from sin; Ye are the children of the
Lord your God, ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness between
your eyes for the dead, for thou art an holy people to the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy.
14. 1, 2. This is pleaded as an aggravation of sin; You have I known of all the
Nations of the earth, and therefore you will I punish for all your iniquities,
Amos 3. 2. This is brought as a motive to prevail with God under misery for
mercy; Behold we bese^ch thee, we are all thy people; Isa. 64. 9. Yea, this
covenant takes with God for national mercies: The whole of the Nation then is
in covenant. Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and my covenant with
Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember, and will remember the
land, Levit. 26. 42. The Apostles authority puts it out of question, Reckoning
up the privileges of Israel according to the flesh, nine in number, Romans 9. 4.
This is one, The covenants, Israel then after the flesh was in covenant; All
Israel were the vovenant people of God. There were many not Elect, not
Regenerate; but there was not a man not in covenant, not owned of God as
visibly his; Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God. -- And the
Lord has avouched thee this day to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. This was
the state of the Church of old. But now, as is affirmed, it is far otherwise.
God is not so large in his privileges, nor so ample in his munificence, none
have honor to be in covenant in Gospel Times, but real believers, men truly
sanctified and regenerate. Some Divines seem to put too great a restraint upon
the Covenant in New Testament. ^im. ^.
And here it cannot be denied, but there are many expressions, ordinarily found
in many Orthodox Writers, and like passages frequently heard in Sermons from
godly Ministers, seemingly implying, if not asserting it, and restraining the
covenant only to the elect and regenerate. As when they give Marks and signs
of men's being in covenant with God, this must needs imply that some professing
Christians are in covenant with God, and some without, which is yet farther
evidenced, when they conclude, that in case a man be in covenant with God, then
happiness and salvation follows; But when these men fully explain themselves,
they yield up again to us, that which seemingly they had taken from us, and
ordinarily do distinguish of an outward, and inward covenant, acknowledging the
outward covenant to be made with every member of the Church and the Parents,
with that hear and professedly accept the promises, and their children, But the
inward covenant as they say, belongs to them only, that receive the benefits
of it, and are upright in it. An eminent Divine putting the Question, and
returning answer, How a man may know himself to be in covenant with God;
presently foresees an Objection against any such Quaere. As Saul and all the
people of Israel were in covenant with God, so all professing Christians are
covenanters likewise; and hereby all distinguishing notes of Professors, some
in covenant, and some without must needs fall to the ground, one member then of
the distinction, having no being for solution of the doubt, he lays down a
distinction. Distinctions holding forth the meaning of these Divines in these
expressions.
There is (says he) a twofold covenant. 1. A single Covenant which God makes
with his children when they are baptized, which is this; if ye will believe,
repent, and walk in my ways, ye shall be saved, now if they break this
condition, God is freed. 2. A double covenant to perform both parts, which is
this, if you will repent and believe, ye shall be saved, and I will give you an
heart, and you shall repent, believe, and be saved: So Preston on Attributes,
part 2. page 85. 86. These distinctions, plainly yield that there is a covenant
between God and man, in this latitude, of which we speak, and which here is
expressed, and that all professed Christians so called, are in an outward and
single covenant, which puts them into a capacity of Sacraments, and their
children, which is a covenant properly so called, and which Scripture holds out
for the covenant of God with his people. These Divines yielding so much, and
their meaning being so Orthodox, there is no reason of contraversie with them,
or contention about words; Yet I should choose rather to express my self in
Pareus his words against Stapleton the Jesuit, on 1 Cor. 7. 14. objecting
against this doctrine, Esse in foedere dicitur dupliciter, vel quoad jus
foederis, vel quoad foederis beneficia. Est in foedere, vel qui obtinet
beneficia foederis, quae sunt remissio peccatorum, adoptio, regeneratio, salus,
vel qui tantum habet jus, vel symbolum foederis externum, ut socius foederis,
non alienus censeatur.
for it is a doctrine which Antipaedobaptists, and Independents have borrowed
from Jesuits, and we have them all in this, as in many other things our
Adversaries, To be in covenant, says he, is taken two ways, either according
to tiole to the covenant, or to the benefits of the covenant. He is said to be
in covenant, that either obtaines the benefits of the covenant, which are
remission of sins, adoption, etc. Or else that has only the title, and
outward badge of the covenant, so that he is repute to have interest in it, and
is not an alien from it. The right of covenant belongs to all that externally
make profession. These engage themselves upon Gods terms. The benefit of the
covenant, remission of sins, justification, adoption, etc. belongs only to
the Elect regenerate. Or farther we may distinguish of the covenant of grace,
and the grace following the covenant, The covenant of grace is in the latitude
before mentioned, the grace following the covenant in that restriction that
some contend for, or else we may distinguish of entering covenant, and
steadfastness and faithfulness in the covenant; All enter that are visible
professors, only the elect and faithful are steady in it. This distinction is
evidently grounded on Psalm. 78. 34. They remembered that God was their rock, the
high God their Redeemer, nevertheless their heart was not right in them,
neither were they steadfast in his covenant. All covenant-enterers, are not
covenant-keepers. To take off this restriction, and for overthrow of this
imaginary difference, it were enough to require of these Asserters of this
covenant-restriction, and limit, where God has put any such restraint, for
affirmanti incumbit probatio, and to require some reason, why men in nature, in
Old Testament-times, should be honored with that near relation to God, as to
be of the Commonwealth of this people, enjoying not barely civil and domestic
Privileges, but saving Ordinances, and under the Gospel, must stand shut out
of all such visible relations, why unregenerate men in order to regeneration,
may not come under the discipline of God under the Gospel, as well as under Old
Testament-dispensations? Why poor sinners that confess with their mouth with
the Eunuch, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Acts 8. 37. may not be
indulged those proviledges (now Christ is come in the flesh to save sinners)
whereby they may be brought to be believe with the heart that they may be
saved? To those that would make such a distance between the covenants, as to
throw out of the covenant of God, and visible communion, all that are
unregenerate, we may speak in Christ's words, From the beginning it was not so,
and either we must see some good ground, that in this there is by the will of
God, this great change, or else we shall believe, as it was then, so it now.
But I shall deal more liberally, and make it appear, that the Gospel does not
only not quit us of it, but establishes it; does not only not abolish it (as it
does the Types of the Law) but holds it forth, and gives testimony of the
continuance of it.

CHAP. XXXVII.
New Testament-Scriptures asserting the latitude of the covenant of Grace in
Gospel Times.
LEt that Text Matthew. 28. 19. in the first place be weighed Go, New
Testament-Scriptures holding out the Covenant of Grace in its full and just
latitude.
teach all Nations, etc. which our adversaries in this cause willingly consent
to have translated, Disciple all Nations, and therefore there needs no words
nor stir to be made about it, and that a Disciple of Christ is in covenant with
God, is as freely confessed, he takes God in Christ to be his God, he lays
claim to salvation by him; Matthew. 28. 19
this ground being laid, in which I think I have not an adversary, I draw from
hence a twofold Argument.

First, that covenant between God and man, which is committed to the Ministry
of man to work, to judge of being wrought, and to put to a Seal for
confirmation of it, is a covenant only visibly entered, and does not require
any inward real change, or work upon the soul to the being of it. This
Proposition is clear, man can judge no farther than of that which is outward
and visible, Man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the
heart. If none but a regenerate elect person be in covenant, then none but God
knows who are in covenant. Then we may apply that of the Apostle spoken of the
Seal of Election, The Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. unto every
one that as a Churchmember, is to be received into visible fellowship; A
Churchmember, and an elect person, according to this tenent are termini
convertibiles; and the seal of the Spirit, and the seal of the Sacrament are
in equal latitude; To baptize an unregenerate person is to put a seal to a
blank, as high an abuse of that sacred Ordinance, as the circumcision of the
Sichemites, Genesis 34. 24. That this covenant is such, appears in that Text, It
is committed to man to work, and to judge of it being wrought, to put a seal
for ratification and confirmation of it. The Apostles were to make Disciples,
to bring men into covenant with God, and being discipled, to baptize them,
sealing them, as Gods in covenant; So John 4. 1, 2. When the Lord know that the
Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples then John,
though Jesus baptized not, but his Disciples. Here John made Disciples, and
baptized them being made; The Disciples of Jesus made Disciples, and baptized
them being made; An outward work then to make profession of the faith, is
sufficient to make one a Disciple, and to bring him within the verge of the
covenant.

Secondly, That which a whole Nation, in Gods ordinary way of administration is
in a capacity to attain, and enter into, is a covenant only professed,
visibly entered upon, and does not require any inward change, or work upon the
soul to the being of it; this is plain, It cannot be expected in Gods
ordinary way, that a Nation should be brought forth at once, all really holy
and sanctified, Such a field has not been seen without tares, Such a floor
without chafe, Such a draw-net without any fish that is bad; Such a Feast and
no one without a wedding garment; But whole Nations are in a capacity, in Gods
ordinary way of working, to enter into this covenant, as is plain in the Text;
The whole of the Nation, is, in their commission, where they come, and in many
Nations it has had happy success, Whole Nations without exceptions (unless
strangers so journing) have been brought within covenant. One would feign
fasten another interpretation on those words, The literal grammatical sense of
the words vindicated.
and make the commission to sound, not according to the letter of the words,
nor yet according to the success by grace attained, but to his liking, and
therefore is put to it to change the word (...), into (...), and then [all
Nations] must either be put by apposition, (...), or with the Preposition
(...), and so instead of disciple all Nations, it will be, make disciples in
all Nations. This he thinks is very tolerable, because to disciple, and to make
disciples is all one. But though they may be one in themselves, yet it makes a
maine difference in the phrase, and with the addition of his preposition,
inverts the whole meaning of the words, as to the thing in controversy, which
is such a violence offered to the Text, as is not to be endured in him, that is
about to draw a Logical argument for his advantage against an adversary. And as
it is against the letter of the Text, so it is plainly against our Saviors
scope, Confirmed by the relation that this more enlarged Commission has to
that which was restrained to Israel only.
and end in giving this commission. This enlargement unto all Nations in this
place was in opposition to the restriction, Matthew. 10. 5. as by the adversary
is confessed. Now in that Nation, to which there they were limited, the whole of
the Nation was in covenant, all the land was the land of Immanuel, Esaias 8. 8.
and consequently so it was to be in other Nations, by virtue of this happy
enlargement, or else the opposition is utterly taken away, the meaning of the
words clouded, and the Apostles at a loss for the understanding of them;
Having before spent their pains in a Nation, all Disciples, and now having a
commission for the discipling of all Nations, By Old Testament-prophecies.
how shall they understand the words, unless the whole of the Nation, where
they come are to be discipled? And hereto accord the prophecies of Scripture,
for the calling of the Nations of the Gentiles, God shall enlarge Japhet, and
he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, Genesis 9. 27. Sem was wholly in covenant, not
by pieces and parcels, but universally in covenant; Japhet is to come in
succession into covenant in like latitude, Psalm 2. 8. Ask of me, and I will
give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for thy possession. It is not some among the Nations of the Heathen that
are to be the inheritance ^f Christ, but the Heathen, To which agrees, Rev. 11.
15. The Kingdoms of the earth, shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of
his Christ; Immanuel of old had one, now he shall have more Kingdoms, and they
become his, no other way, than by discipling; Gods Ministers are his men of
war, for subduing and captivating them, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. and Kingdoms are
promised them, not some only in Kingdoms. Alexander would not sit down with
such a conquest, neither will Christ Jesus. If to possess some in a Kingdom,
be to possess a Kingdom, then Antichrist of long has had this Kingdom; All
Kings shall bow down before him, all Nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72. 11. All
Nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and
shall glorify thy Name, Psalm. 86. 9. Thou shall call a Nation which thou
know not, and Nations that knew not thee, shall run unto thee, Esaias 55. 5.
There God calls the Nation, and the Nation does answer Gods call. In that day
Israel shall he a third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the
midst of the land, whom the Lord of Hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be
Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel my inheritance.
There, Egypt and Assyria are in equipage with Israel, all three
sister-Churches, Israel without any pre-eminence; Either Israel then was not a
Nation of Disciples, a Nation wholly within covenant, or else these are to be
National Churches; the whole of the Nation to be discipled and brought into
covenant. Passing by other Scriptures in silence, one tells me, that he marvels
that I am not ashamed to produce, Psalm 72. 11. Psalm 86. 9. to prove that
the whole of the Nation, even infants must be included, Matthew. 28. 19. As if
(says he) it were foretold that the whole Nation, even Infants should come
before God and worship. But it is strange, if he be ignorant, that prop^ecies
in the Od Testament; of the glory of New Testament-times, are in Old
Testament-phrases by way of allusion to the worship of those times, set forth
to us. It was the practice of the people of the Jews, for their males of
growth and strength to appear before the Lord, and neither females nor Infants,
as Ainsworth on Exodus 23. 17. observes, yet they appeared in the name of
females and children, and their females and children, were in covenant,
together with them, Deuteronomy. 29. 11. so that, as the rest of the prophecies, to
which he has nothing to say, so, these two prophecies (against which he
excepts) speak fully for the discipling of Nations in New Testament-times. By
the happy success that in many Nation has followed upon it.
The success of these Prophecies has happily answered in many Nations, which
may well serve, as a clear Comment both of these Prophecies, and the
commission granted by the Lord Jesus, though by the working of the man of
Sin, and other Heretics, the glory has been much dazeled, yet, in most of
the Nations of Europe, it has been happily effected. Let any man find equal
Reasons for the variation of the words, as I have done for keeping to the
letter of the Text, then I shall hearken to him, in the mean time all
indifferent men may well challenge their reason that heed him.

A second Text holding out the covenant in its ancient latitude, 2. Mat. 22. 14.
we have from our Savior Christ, Mat. 20. 16
Matthew. 20. 16. and 22. 14. Many are called, but few chosen. The close of two
several Parables: The one of the laborers hired into the Vineyard, where some
claimed a more large pay upon merit: The other, of the Parable of the
Wedding-feast, where one intruded without a Wedding garment; whence our Savior
inferres, Many are called, are of the number of guests at the wedding feast,
are of the laborers in the Vineyard, but few are chosen; from whence I thus
argue; If there be a call from God in the times of the New Testament in a far
greater latitude than the grace of Election, that, of many called, few only are
elected; then the covenant in New Testament-times, is not to be restrained to
the elect and regenerate, but contains all that professedly accept the terms
of the covenant, and visibly appear a people of God. This is evident, seeing
the call is, into covenant, all at the Feast were called ones, all the hired
laborers were covenant-servants. To conceive men to be called of God, and not
to be in covenant with God, is a full contradiction. The call has its terminus
a quo, and its terminus ad quem; a state which upon call they leave; and a new
state on which they enter. They are upon this call in a nearer relation to God,
than the rest of the world, otherwise they were the same as ever, and not
called at all, they are not in so near a relation, as men borne of the Spirit,
so they were elected. They have a call by the Word, and ministerial outward
Ordinances, to which they yield a professed subjection. They have not attained
the inward working of the Spirit to a real Sanctification. Now for the
Assumption, that there is a call in New Testament-times in this latitude, in a
far greater latitude than the grace of Election, our Savior evidently shows in
the Text quoted; There are those at the feast that are not accepted; There are
those that are taken into the Vineyard, that at the evening of the day do
displease, there are those therefore that are called into covenant with God,
and yet are rejected of God, a full, and a clear Text for covenant-holinesse.

This is farther evident in those Parables of our Savior Christ, of the field
with Wheat and Tares, 3. Those several Parables.
Matthew. 13. 24, 25. of the draw-net with fishes good and bad, Mat. 13. 24, 25
Matthew. 13. 47. of the floor with chafe and Wheat, Mat. 13. 47.
Matthew. 3. 12. of the great house, where there are not only vessels of gold and
silver, Mat. 3. 12.
but also of wood, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
and earth, and stone; some to honor, and some to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 20. In
which parables by the floor, the field (expressly compared to the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the great house) the Church is understood, which stands in
covenant relation to God, and contains those that are in covenant with God. A
man in the Kingdom of Heaven is a man in covenant with God, unless he stood
in a covenant relation, he could have no standing there; and the comparison
were very strangely drawn, if this Kingdom thus set out, had all that were
good, none bad in it. But of this more, when I shall speak to some Corolaries
that follow from this Assertion.

Another Scripture, in which the covenant, in the ancient latitude is held out,
is Romans 11. thoroughout a great part of the chapter. There is (as all know) a
large discourse of the Apostasy of the Jews, and the call of the Gentiles, of
the rejection and breaking off of the one; and the taking in, and ingraffing of
the other, which I shall presently have a further occasion to open, when I
shall speak to another pretended difference between the covenant, as it stood
then, and as it stands now. In the mean time this is clear, into the same
Church State, and covenant-latitude from which the Jews fell, Gentiles were
taken in, and do still continue. This cannot be denied, we being graffed in
their stead, come in upon like terms as they left. They fell from a visible
Church state, and that latitude of covenant which did receive regenerate and
unregenerate, justified and unjustified. That covenant-latitude then still
remains in the Churches of the Gentiles in Gospel Times. Nothing here that I
can see can with any color be objected, unless any will say, that the
invisible Church is there spoken to, and not the visible, that the Jews fell
from the invisible body, and that the Gentiles in their call are generally
taken in, into the same fellowship. Which (as I think) few will affirm; so I
shall have presently occasion to examine. If any shall further say, that they
have this title, in Foro Ecclesiae, and not in Foro Dei; as to men they have so
far right, that Ministers may not refuse them, or in their administrations deny
them admittance; but in the sight of God, who knows their unregenerate and
unjustified condition, they have no title at all, I shall refer them to the
whole tenor of that chapter, where they shall see, this engraffing of theirs
ascribed to the power of God, that it is done by the election of God, and
mentioned as his gift, and choice mercy to that people. All of which speak the
mind of God in it, and his approbation of it.

This is farther clear in that Text of the Apostle, Heb. 10 29. Of how much
sorer punishment suppose ye, 4. Heb. 10. 29
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? Where we see those that
are sanctified with the blood of the covenant, do tread under foot the Son of
God, and count his blood an unholy thing, have an esteem of it, as that which
is common, and never devoted at all to God. These must needs be granted to be
wicked, ye cannot be denied to be in covenant, being sanctified with the blood
of the Covenant. A threefold interpretation of the Text.
There is indeed a threefold interpretation of this Text; One of the Arminians,
and those of that party, enemies to perseverance in Grace, and they understand
by sanctification in this place, an internal change and renovation of the soul,
from whence by Apostasy such persons fall. They that will embrace this tenent,
may indeed say, that in the state of sanctification, they were in covenant, but
falling from sanctification, they fall from covenant. But this is not affirmed
by those with whom I have to deal, and therefore I shall not lanch out into
this controversy. Two other interpretations are given by those that are
adversaries to this way, and make it their work to vindicate this text from
these men's glosses; The first refers sanctification, not to those delinquents,
that tread under foot the Son of God, and do despite unto the Spirit of
grace, but unto Christ himself: Christ was sanctified (they say) with this
blood. This indeed clearly takes this Text out of their hands, that would from
thence infer the Apostasy of sanctified, that is, regenerate persons. And if
this hold, it as little serves our purpose, Here is Christ in covenant, but no
reprobate or wicked person in covenant. But this reference of the words and the
interpretation which is grounded on it, has (I suppose) come into the thoughts
of few Interpreters, and it seems to be very much strained, the scope of the
place being for aggravation of their sin, that set themselves against the
Son of God and the holy Spirit. The common interpretation (which is obvious,
and clearly held out in the Text) fully vindicates it from any favor showed to
the doctrine of Apostasy of the Saints, and fully confirms the point in hand.
There is a sanctification by separation for God, and dedication to him, as
there is by inhesion and infusion. Master Dixon on the words having so fully
spoke my thoughts, I had rather express my self in his words, than my own,
putting the Question, How the reprobate can be said to be sanctified by the
blood of the covenant? answers; There is a sanctification to the purifying of
the flesh, and a sanctification to the purifying of the conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God, Heb 9. 13, 14. The sanctification external to
the purifying of the flesh consists in the man's separation from the world,
and dedication unto Gods service, by calling and Covenant, common to all the
members of the visible Church, and it is forcible thus far, as to bring a man
into credit and estimation as a Saint before men, and unto the common
privileges of the Church, whereupon, as men, so God also speaks unto him,
and of him as one of his people, and deals with him in his external
dispensation as with one of his own people. In this sense all the Congregation
of Israel, and every one of them is called holy, yea Core also and his
followers, Number. 16. 3. The sanctification internal by renovation consists in
a man's separation from the state of nature, to the state of grace, from his old
conditions to be a new creature indeed; by this latter sort a reprobate cannot
be called sanctified, but by the former he may be called sanctified, and that
by virtue of the blood of the covenant, albeit he should not get any farther
good thereby; for as the blood of Christ has virtue to cleanse the conscience,
and ^^nue the soul which comes unto it truly and spiritually, so it must have
force to do that which is less, that is, purify the flesh, and external
condition of the man who comes unto it, outwardly only as the types did under
the Law, whereupon an hypocrite in the Christian Church, must be accounted one
of the congregation of the Saints, as well as an hypocrite under the Law was so
called, because Christ's blood cannot be inferior to the Types, which were of
this force to sanctify men to the purifying of the flesh: Or we may say more
shortly, There is a sanctification by consecration, when any thing is devoted
or dedicated unto God, and a sanctification by inhabitation of the holy Spirit,
2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. Of the former sort the Censeres of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
are called holy, and the reason is given, Because they offered them before the
Lord, therefore they are hallowed, Number. 16. 38. And in this sedse all the
members of the visible Church, even such as afterward do prove Apostates are
sanctified, because they offered, and offer themselves unto the Lord. But the
inhabitation of the holy Spirit, is proper only to the elect, and Gods
children. To the same purpose Paraeus on the words, Erat sanctificatio
apostatarum non interna sed externa professione fidei et participatione
Sacramentorum externa consistens. Erant sanctificati, hoc est, a Judais and
Paganus professione segregati and pro veris Christianis habiti.
The sanctification of Apostates was not internal, ( says he) but external,
consisting in the profession of Faith and participation of the Sacraments. They
were sanctified, that is, separate from the Jews and Pagans in profession, and
accounted for true Christians. In the same sense as men are ordinarily called
Saints, as after we shall hear, so, those that are turned Apostates, were
sanctified by the blood of the covenant, and therefore were men in covenant.

Neither can all the noise that has been made about that Text, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
adversaries take it off, but that it speaks fully to hold up a covenant in this
latitude, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
and from thence I thus argue: If those phrases, a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, be applied to Christians; as to
Jews, in an equal latitude, to one as to other, then it must needs follow that
there is a covenant in Gospel Times in like latitude, as in the time of the
Law, including all that accept the terms of the covenant, and visibly appear
as the people of God, and is not restrained only to the Elect regenerate. The
consequence is evident, seeing the terms plainly imply a covenant. Here is a
covnant-people or no where. But these terms, a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, are applied to Christians, as
well as to Jews, to one, in as great a latitude, as to the other. That which
God speaks to Israel in the wilderness, that Peter speaks to the Church to
which he writes, All Israelites in Moses days, all Christians professing in
Peter's time, had those titles, when only those that kept covenant, were at any
time worthy of them, and had the comforts of them. Here it is objected that this
Text is meant of the Church, as it is invisible; and so it follows not, that it
is spoken by the Apostle in that latitude, as it was by Moses to the
Israelites, but in as great a difference as the Church visible, stands from the
Church, as it is invisible; but I would wish that it might be taken into more
serious consideration.

First, Arguments carrying this Text to the Church as visible.
whether the first Verse of this second Chapter, be meant only of invisible
members? Whether the Apostle persuades Regenerate men, and only Regenerate men,
to lay aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and evil speakings?

Secondly, whether the third verse be to be thus limited, whether the Apostle
makes doubt in that manner, whether invisible members had tasted that the Lord
is gracious? and yet the words in both those verses must needs be understood of
the same men, and under the same notion as these, ver. 9. The Apostle brings
his speech to no full period till ver. 11. Those that must lay aside all
malice, guile, etc. and those of whom he makes question, whether they had
tasted that the Lord were gracious; are this chosen Generation, this royal
Priesthood.

Thirdly, let us more seriously consider the Apostles farther enlargement of
this honor of these Christians, Which in times past were not a people of God;
words borrowed from Hos. 1. 10. Hos 2. 23 and spoken of the call of the ten
revolted Tribes, and in Deuteronomy. 32. 21. of the call of the Gentiles into a
visible Church State and profession, and so applied by the Apostle, Romans 9. 24,
25, 26. Whence I argue, The call of the ten revolted Tribes, and of the
Gentiles into a visible Church Way, is not to be meant of the Church, as it is
invisible only. This one has already taken into consideration, and answered.
Howsoever it be in the places in which the allusion is, yet it is certain that
here it is meant of such a calling as is from darkness to mavelous light.
Taking it, it seems, for granted, that there is no marvelous light in visible
Churches, that in the land of Zebulon and Nepthali, where they saw a great
light, there were, only invisible members, Mat. 4. 15, 16.

Fourthly, as honorable titles as these are frequently given in Scripture, as
shall be shown to visible professors, why should then these be limited to
invisible Members?

Fifthly, this Text by adversaries is made to be parallel with those Texts,
Gal. 6. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 20. And those Texts I have demonstrated to
be meant of visible Churches. To which nothing is replied. Arguments to evince
it, to be meant of the Church, as it is invisible, come to be considered.

(1.) I argue (says one) from the terms, chosen Generation, royal Priesthood,
and holy Nation, a peculiar people. This is by Christ's death, which can be
understood of no other than Elect and true Believers Tit. 2. 14.

Answ. 1. Such a way of arguing would not pass with him in his Adversary. As
[peculiar people] is taken in one place of Scripture, so it must be taken in
all places; but in one place it is taken for the Elect regenerate. If this
would hold, much labor might be spared in finding out the various acception of
words in Scripture.

2. These terms and others equipollent to these, are given to the Israelites,
Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 9. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. 9. not as a Church invisible, but as
visible Members. Their qualifications are often as low as their appellations by
reason of their relation to God, raise them high. And setting apart Christ's
death, I would know how the Israelites came to this honor.

3. The gift of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers were the
gift of Christ, and the purchase of his death. These are for constitution of
visible Churches, and visible members, enjoy these privileges in common with
regenerate persons, to which more is already spoken.

(2.) An Objection is raised from that which is said of them, They are called
of God by his power, and virtue into his marvelous light; and verse 10. Which
now had obtained mercy, which they had not before, which cannot be affirmed of
any but true Believers and Elect persons.

Answ. Men brought into a visible Church State, are brought into a marvelous
light. The seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 20. had a marvelous light in
their lamps, and yet in some of those there were only a few names that had not
defiled their garments; And this light is a mercy, the fruition of it is a
great mercy, Psalm 147. 19, 20. Yea, it is applied by the Prophet, Hos. 2. 23.
whence the Apostle gathers it unto the mercy enjoyed in a visible
Church Communion, which is not denied by the adversary.

(3.) It is said, that those persons did believe contra-distinguished to them
that were disobedient, and stumbled at the word; but such are only the Elect.
Ergo.

Answ. So did all they that made shipwreck of the faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19. So did
Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13. So did the hearers compared to the rocky ground, Luke
8. 13. And whereas it is said, these Believers are contra-distinguished to them
that were disobedient and stumbled at the Word, it fully makes against this
interpretation. Those disobedient ones are, those that disallow Christ, as we
see verse 7. that reject Christ upon tender, that persist in Judaisme or
Gentilisme. All others, not professed Jews nor Gentiles, are in that place
Believers, and in all other Scriptures respective to visible prerogative, all
which are visible Church Members.

(4.) They are said to be built, as living stones, etc. which can agree to
none, but Elect persons, and true Believers.

Answ. That is left out, in the Quotation of this Text, which would wholly
spoil the argument, and carry it on the other hand; namely those words, To
whom coming as unto a living stone. The Apostle shows them the way, and points
out the condition called for, which being done, they are then built as living
stones. And this implies that it was so, with some, but not with others. Here
is that which was done by some and neglected by others, and their happiness
upon discharge of their duty declared. I am told by one, that he hardly
believes, that any approved Writer joins with me in this Interpretation; But
though I were alone in it, yet I might learn of him to adventure, not barely
on the interpretation of one single-Scripture-Text, but on a conclusion in
Theology, against all Protestant Writers, and herein I should have the
advantage, in that few comparatively (I think) have started this question, much
less have they seriously handled it, minding more what those titles engage us
to be (in which there is an agreement of all parties) than to whom they are
given, when some of my opposites, dare affront the whole body of Protestant
Writers, in that, in which ex professo, they have to deal against Papists.
Estius indeed upon examination of the thing in question, appears to be of a
contrary mind, and censures those that set out this holiness by Religion,
doctrine, Sacraments, which Authors by him thus censured, may be (for ought I
know) as approved as himself, and they, as we see, limit it not to the Church
invisible, I doubt not, but that holiness, which is intrinsecal, is here aimed
at, yet all those have these titles, that do make profession of the way of it,
and are of the number of those that engage themselves to it. Gerrard also on
the words, puts it to the question, and determines the same way, but tells us
of others, that understand it of common and general election, His name (I
suppose) is waved in that his Arguments are borrowed, and have been answered.
But on the other hand Master Ball (who if authorities must carry it, will sway
with me as much as either) treating on those words, Hos. 2. 19, 20. I will
betroth thee unto me for ever, etc. says, The external betrothing, by outward
covenant, so as God betroths himself to all professing the true faith, may be
broken, for though God offer them mercy if they will believe, yet he gives not
not faith to them, and quotes for proof, Romans 9. 24, 25. 1 Pet. 2. 8, 9. And
Zanchius de perseverantia sanctorum cap. 1. Tit. de Sanctis, has these words,
Hear now what I understand by the name of [Saints] This name [Saint] when it is
spoken of men, is, 1, Generally taken, for all those that have consecrated
themselves to the true God, and given their name to Christ, and do profess him
and his Religion, whether it be done before God truly, and sincerely, or only
before men, so the people of Israel, although they were not all truly holy,
yet they are all called holy, so Paul calls all those Saints, who had given
their names to Christ; so Peter, 1 Pet. 2 calls all those Christians to whom he
writes a holy Nation, and a royal Priesthood. And Laurentius, 1 Pet. 1. 1. page
6. distinguishing of a threefold election. 1. To any function, civil or
ecclesiastical. 2. To the external communion of divine worship, or the outward
Church or people of God. 3. To salvation and eternal life, brings for proof of
the second acceptance, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. both which Texts, with him
there, are parallel; and taken in the same sense that I understand them.
Ravanellus in verbum [election] quotes diverse Texts of Scripture, in which
election is taken for the adoption of any Nation, and puts this of 1 Pet. 2. 9.
in the last place, adding these words, And this election is general as has
been said, nor are all that are made partakers of it, necessarily saved, Romans
9. 6. but respective to this general election, he is said to be chosen of God,
who is called to the participation of his free covenant, or a people whom God
adopts to himself for a people. So also in verbum [Sanctus,] which he says is
taken three ways. 1. By separation or segregation. 2. By imputation. 3. By
inchoation of holiness in this life. He there gives many instances of the
first acception, of holiness by separation, distinct from the two other, and 1
Pet 2. 9. for one. So Salmero, as I find him quoted to my hand, understands it
of election, distinct from that which is to eternal life; and calls it an
election to faith, and all know that they mean no more than their Catholic
faith, which (according to them) does not necessarily entitle to eternal life,
A Lapide, with whom my adversaries in these controversies, frequently join, is
also wholly on my part, in his Comment on these words, so that it needed not to
have been said, that no approved author joins with me, Let the Reader judge
as the strength of reasons given will persuade.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Arguments evincing the Covenant of Grace in Gospel Times in that latitude as
before is asserted.
THe first Argument shall be borrowed from those titles, which undoubtedly and
undisputably imply a covenant, 1. Titles given to men in covenant, and in
Scripture applied to unregenerate men, prove it.
and yet in Scripture, are still attributed to all that professedly accept the
terms of the covenant, and professedly appear as the people of God. Those
titles before mentioned by Peter from Moses, are confessed to be such that
argue a people in covenant, and therefore adversaries are so shie to confess
them to belong to visible Professors; But titles as high as these, and as
undeniably implying a covenant, are given to visible Professors; those then
(even according to them) are on this account in covenant with God. And these
are all of those titles wherewith the people of God are honored. In New
Testament-Scriptures, which are especially four, Believers, Saints, Disciples,
Christians. He that is a Believer, a Saint, a Disciple, a Christian; he is a
man in covenant with God. But all visible Professors that accept the terms of
the covenant are Believers, Saints, Disciples, Christians; so they are still
styled in New Testament-Scriptures, Believers from the Faith that they
profess, Saints from the Holiness to which they stand engaged, or from the
holy God to whose service they are separated, Disciples from the Doctrine which
they profess to learn, and Christians from him whose they are, whom they
serve, and from whom they expect salvation. I know some have inured themselves
to that language, that those that are thus dignified, are necessarily concluded
by them to be Elect, Regenerate persons; It is grown, I know the Dialect of the
times, but not of the Scriptures.

To begin with Believers. Unregenerate persons, as to the name and outward
privileges, are Believers.
He is in Scripture a Believer, that is, a visible Professor, that puts
himself into the number of those that expect salvation by Christ Jesus, So it
is through the History of the Acts, where account is given of the Converts made
by the Apostles Ministry, Acts 4. 4. Many of them which heard the Word
believed, and the number of the men was about five thousand. They that are thus
numbered by the poll, are visible Professors, that outwardly embraced the
Doctrine of Faith; This might be seen and the names of such taken. They are
not all Elect, regenerate Christians, such could not be visibly known: The
generality of men and women in Samaria believed, Acts 8. 12. But that they were
Elect and Regenerate in that universality cannot be conceived; Simon Magus is
an example to the contrary, of whom the Text says, that he did believe, verse.
13. and yet his heart not right in the sight of God, verse. 21. He was with
those Israelites, Psalm 78. 34. in covenant; yet his heart was not steadfast in
Covenant. A great number of the Grecians believed, upon the preaching of those
that were scattered, upon the persecution raised about Stephen, Acts 11. 21.
yet Barnabas (whom the Church of Jerusalem sent to them) well enough knew, that
there was no certainty, little hopes that all of these were Regenerate persons;
therefore he exhorts them, that with purpose of heart they would cleave to the
Lord. He was afraid that the work might be overly and superficial, of which the
Church in every age has sad experience; he desires and endeavor that they may
be rooted and established. Only those hearers which are compared to the good
ground, are Regenerate persons, But those compared to bad ground, believe, Luke
8. 13. Regenerate men, who alone are invisible Church Members, have their
hearts more right with God, than to love the praise of men, more than the
praise of God; but many believers are thus censured, as we see, John 12. 42,
43. Regenerate persons make no shipwreck of Faith; They are borne of
incorruptible seed, the seed of God abides in them; Yet there are believers
that thus suffer shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Myriads of thousand of Jews believe,
Acts 21. 20. yet not all Regenerate. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. satisfies a case of
conscience put to him by the Corinthians, that if any brother has a wife that
believes not; if she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
If the believing brother, here be only a Regenerate man, then the unbeleeving
wife is an unregenerate woman; So the question will be, whether a Regenerate,
sanctified man, joined in marriage to a Professor of the true faith, not of
those hopes for the truth of sanctification may dwell with her? A case that
never yet was disputed or doubted: The unbeleever is a worshipper of idols, one
that sacrifices to devils, and not to God. The Believer is a Professor of the
Faith, one in name a Christian and not a Heathen.

Saint is taken in the same latitude as Believer, and is the most common
appellation in the New Testament, Unregenerate persons, as to the name and
outward privileges are Saints.
for all that are separate for God, and dedicated to him. The distinguishing
name for professing Christians, as the title of People of God, Circumcision,
was for the people of Israel; some do not hear of the word Saint, but presently
they understand a Saint in glory, and will not endure that any man should be a
Saint upon earth; Others will have none Saints, but those that are really such,
and shall be for heaven. They will have no denomination of a Saint, from a holy
profession: But if we look into the Scriptures, and may be suffered to speak in
that language, we shall find, Saint for the most part, taken for men upon the
earth. The psalmist professedly names Saints upon earth, Psalm. 16. 3. And those
Saints not often taken for other, than a Saint by profession. He is a Saint
that makes a Christian profession. We read of Collections for the Saints, 1
Cor. 16. 1. Administration to the Saints, Heb. 6. 10. which can reach no higher
than visible Professors, and can by no means be limited to Elect, Regenerate
ones. When Paul shut up many of the Saints in prison, and did much evil against
them, Acts 26. 10. he knew no other way of distiction; then an outward
profession, and so he explaines himself, those of that way, Act. 9. 2. We read
of Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33. and they were taken in, to be
Church Members as soon as they made profession; that is as soon as they ceased to
be Jews or Pagans, and took them to the way of Christianity. As we see in those
three thousand, Acts 2. The Samaritans, The Eunuch, Simon Magus, as soon as they
were taken off from Heathenisme, Judaisme for Christianity, they had that name
of Saints. The Epistles wrote to particular visible Churchs, are inscribed to
Saints, among which, what some are, read both the Epistles to the Corinthians;
yea, what almost all are in some Churches, read the Epistle to the Church of
Sardis. Amesius judged by some to be of the opposite party) has these words;
It is most probable, that there is no particular Church, in which the
profession of the true faith flourishes, but in the same we may find some
truly Believers, Medul. lib. 1. cap. 32. sect. 8. The Apostle tells us of the
Faith once delivered to the Saints. Jude 3. the Doctrine of Faith, as is agreed
on all hands is there understood; All that profess that Doctrine are Saints:
no other Comment can be put upon it, than upon the Apostles words, Romans 3. 1.
To the Jews were committed the Oracles of God; Saint then is a name of
distinction, to set out those that take the way, not of Jews, or Heathens, but
the way of Christians and Saints are men in covenant.

For the term Disciple, Unregenerate persons, as to the name and outward
privileges, are Disciples.
enough has been spoken before. This argues an interest in the covenant, as
well as the former of Saints, and Believers, and whole Nations are in capacity
to be Disciples, Matthew. 28. 19. that is, to be put into a way of salvation, as
sometimes the Nation of the Jews was, in the fruition of saving Ordinances; And
the Kingdoms of the earth, being made the Kingdoms of the Lord and his
Christ's, by a visible profession are Discipled. Judas is called a Disciple,
Matthew. 10. 1, 4. as well as Simon Magus is called a Believer. Saul breathed out
threatenings against the Disciples of the Lord, Acts 9. 1. In case you will know
who the holy Ghost there means, see verse 2. all that Saul could find of that
way. He made it not his work to enquire after their Regeneration, or inward
work of Sanctification; we may well think he understood as little of that as
Nicodemus, It was enough to him that they made such a profession. Complaint is
made, Acts 15. 10. that those that urged the necessity of circumcision, put a
yoke on the necks of the Disciples, which neither they nor their fathers were
able to bear; and they urged it upon all in visible profession, and not upon
regenerate ones alone. Let that one Text speak for all, in what latitude the
word Disciple is taken, and in how large comprehension it is used, John 6. 66.
From that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him.

For the last of these terms, Unregenerate persons, as to the name and outward
privileges are Christians.
Christians, it stands in the same latitude as the other, where we first hear
of it, we find it the same with Disciples, Acts 11. 26. The Disciples were
first called Christians in Antioch. And in what acception through all ages it
has past, is also manifest. All of these imply an interest in the covenant,
and these are given to unregenerate persons.

Here that of our Savior is objected, Luke 14. 27, 33. If any man come to me,
and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters; yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. These
qualifications are signs of Regeneration, and these only that are thus
qualified, Sol.
are Disciples of Christ; Regenerate men then only have that honor of
Disciples. I answer, They only do the duty of Disciples, they only are worthy
of that title as Christ explaines himself, Mat. 10. 37. He that loves father
or mother more than me, is not worthy of me; Yet others have the name, as we
have heard, and the outward privileges, in order to bring them to the duty of
true Disciples. There are Disciples as to the fruition of visible privileges,
and those are they that make visible professions. There are Disciples for glory
and life, and those only are Regenerate ones, John 3. 3. Except a man be borne
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Ordinances are granted in a greater
latitude than Regeneration. All that enjoy the privileges of Ordinances are
Disciples, and therefore it is no honor proper to Regenerate persons. The
absurdities that follow upon the restriction of the Covenant to the Elect
Regenerate do evince it.


Secondly, as these titles argue a covenant interest, when the parties are yet
short of Regeneration; so the manifold absurdities that will follow upon this
restraint of the covenant, alone to Regenerate, plainly evince that it is to be
taken in a larger extent, and that it takes in unregenerate Professors.

1. This restriction of the covenant, to out shut all non-Regenerate, makes an
utter confusion between the covenant it self, and the conditions of it; or (if
that expression do not please) the covenant it self; and the duties required in
it, between our entrance into covenant, and our observation of it, or walking
up in faithfulness to it. All know that a bargain for a sum of money, and
the payment of that sum, the covenant with a servant for labor, and the
labor according to this covenant, are different things. Faithful men that make
a bargain, keep it, enter covenant, and stand to it; But the making and
keeping, the entering and observing are not the same, many enter and
transgress, covenant for much, and perform nothing; So it is in the covenants
of men, and so Scripture speaks of those covenants which God enters with man.
There are those that enter covenant, and keep covenant, Psalm. 44. 17, 18. All
this is come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt
falsely in thy covenant; our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps
declined from thy way. These have mercy promised; All to which God enegages
himself, is theirs, Psalm 103. 17, 18. The meecy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him; and his righteousness
unto childrens children, to such as keep his covenant, and to those that
remember his commandments to do them. There are those that break covenant,
Psalm. 78. 10, 37. They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his
Law. Their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
covenant. And these are threatened with a curse, Jer. 34. 18, 19, 20. And I will
give the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the
words of the covenant, which they had made before me, when they cut the calfe
in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. The Princes of Judah, and the
Princes of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs and the Priests, and all the people of the
land, which passed between the parts of the calf: I will even give them into
the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and
their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the
beasts of the earth. The Lord brings a sword that avenges the quarrel of his
covenant, Levit. 26. 25. When the heaviest of judgments is mentioned, and a
large list enumerated, as Esaias 24. Behold the Lord makes the earth empty, and
makes it waste, and turns it upside down, and scatters abroad the
inhabitants thereof. And it shall be as with the People, so with the Priest; as
with the Servant, so with his Master; as with the Maid, so with her Mistress;
as with the Buyer, so with the Seller; as with the Lender, so with the
Borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury; to him the
land shall be utterly empited, and utterly spoiled, for the Lord has spoken
this word. The earth mourns and fades away, the haughty people of the earth
do languish, the earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof. Therefore
has the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate;
therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burnt, and few men left; the new
wine mourns, the vine languisheth, all the merry-hearted do sigh. The mirth
of Tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends, the joy of the Harp
cease; They shall not drink wine with a song, strong drink shall be bitter to
them that drink it. The city of confusion is broken down, every house is shut
up, that no man may come in. There is a crying for wine in the streets, all joy
is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone: In the City is left desolation, and
the Gate is smitten with destruction. The reason of all this is given in the
close of verse 5. Because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the
Ordinances, broken the everlasting Covenant. Now according to this opinion,
Regeneration is our entrance into covenant, and Regeneration is our keeping of
covenant; before regeneration we make no covenant, after Regeneration we break
no covenant, there is no such thing as covenant breaking. All this makes an
utter confusion in the covenant.

2. Then there is no such thing as an hypocrite in the world, as in reference
toward God; no such thing as an hypocrite in the Church as in reference to
Religion, and ways of godliness. An hypocrite is one that personates the man
that he is not, with Jeroboams wife, feignes himself to be another person, 1
Kings 14. 6. He that acts Tarquin or Lucretia in the Tragedy, is not Tarquin or
Lucretia, that acts a King is many times a peasant. Now an hypocrite respective
to Religion, and in Scripture use of the phrase, is one that pretends for God,
and is not Gods; pretends to be wholly his, and is some others; of these God
frequently complains, These in the Scriptures are menaced with heavy
judgments. Now according to this opinion, that only Regenerate men are in
covenant, there is no such thing as an hypocrite, No such sin as hypocrisy;
Where the Gospel is preached, God makes tender of himself in covenant; and in
case none but Regenerate enter Covenant, then only they take upon them the
persons of people in relation to him, only they strike hands with him, and
these, as they profess, so in sincerity and reality they are; as they covenant
with him, so in the uprightness of their hearts they walk before him, and so
all of Israel, are Israel. There cannot be found a man in Israel that is not a
Nathaniel; Men out of covenant, are without, and aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12. And if they be in covenant, then according to this
opinion, they are men sincere, and upright-hearted in it. But you will say,
They pretend to the covenant, and are not in covenant, and so are hypocrites.
Psalm 78. 8, 10 a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation that set
not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God. They kept
not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his Law. More fully, verse 36,
37. They did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their
tongues, for their hearts were not right with him, neither were they steadfast
in his covenant. Therefore they pretend not barely to a covenant, but the
covenant which they enter, is their pretense for God, and their breach of
covenant argues them guilty of hypocrisy before the Lord. (2) According to
these such pretend to the stage, but are never admitted on it. They pretend to
act the part of a Servant of God, but never act in it; so we may say, they
pretend to hypocrisy, but never are in the honor to be in any capacity of it.

3. If the covenant be with this limit, only to Regenerate persons, then no
Minister in any Church, no Church Officer, nor any other Churchmember, in case
you will make it to be their work, may baptize any person. That Disciples are
to be baptized, is out of question with all that acknowledge such a standing
Ordinance as Baptism; It being in the Apostles commission, to disciple
Nations, and baptize them. These are brought into the bond of the covenant, as
Ezekiel. 20. 37. But those only, passing for Disciples, and men in covenant that
are Regenerate, they can by no eye of any Minister, Church Officer, or member
be discerned. This is that work that comes not with observation, or outward
show, that men should say, so here, or so there, Luke 17. 20, 21. Christ might
indeed have baptized in his own person at pleasure, seeing he knew what was in
man, John 2. 2. He could have distinguished a Believer from an unbeleever, a
Saint from an unsanctified man, a Christian from him that is no Christian, a
Disciple from one that is no Disciple, taking these titles in the sense of
these persons. So can no other man. It is the Prerogative Royal of God to
search the heart; If Paul could have discerned false Brethren by a spirit of
infallibility, he had never been in that danger, 2 Cor. 11. 26. But Christ
baptized none, but left all to his Disciples, John 4. 2. And they being thus
tied up, to baptize none, till they be discipled; of which according to this
Tenent they could be no competent Judges, it must needs follow that none at all
must be baptized. If any say, those are to be baptized, that in the judgment
of charity we judge to be Disciples, on whom we have grounds of hope that this
work is wrought, as I know it is said by many, I shall give heed to them when
they can show that Christ has said it, that he has made known that the inward
work, is alone the true ground, on which this privilege is granted, and
charity is our rule in judging of it; But I find Christ giving charge to
Disciple Nations, and to baptize them; But I find him not giving commission,
that when in the judgment of charity, men have cause to conceive them to be
Disciples, then to baptize them; We find the Apostles and others in the
Primitive-times, making that haste to baptize upon profession, that they stayed
not for observation of those signs that might in a well-grounded charity
persuade that they were Regenerate persons. And those that fix it here, too
ordinarily, make interests the chief ground to carry their charity to a more
favorable construction; charity (according to the Proverb) beginning at home,
they that are most like to make a party with them, or drive on an interest
their way, will be judged persons meet for Baptism; Of this in a short time we
have large experience. As for those that gather up Churches, and initiate them
by Baptism, the way of the Apostles, I confess, in case that they would make
good that they have to deal with Heathens, and therefore a way of more color
than theirs, that set up new Churches, and retain the old Baptism, we see
what manner of Saints are received among them* such that civil persons
(respective to sobriety, chastity, or upright dealing with men) cannot without
stain of their reputation, make their companions. And congregations of Saints
have just cause to say, that they have lost none of their gold, but much of
their filth and dross by such Saint-separation; That I speak the truth, and
lie not, I need not to appeal to my conscience bearing witness, (which alone
is satisfaction to my self) but to thousands of witnesses which may give
satisfaction to others.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Objections against this latitude of the Covenant answered.
IT is here objected, that in Old Testament-times, God speaks to all in visible
profession, in that way of compellation as his people, as appears in those
places that already have been quoted; but in New Testament-times, we find not
that title in such generality, only the Regenerate, those that yield ready and
loyal subjection to God, are honored with the name of the people of God, they
therefore only are in Covenant. The title is restrained peculiarly to them,
and so also the mercy. To this much may be said.

First, if this were granted, that this way of compellation, or speech of God
to man, is not found in all the New Testament, in this latitude, as to take in
men of Christian Profession, not yet regenerate, yet there is little gained,
seeing as we have found, there are terms equivalent. Believers are the people
of God, so are Saints, Disciples, and Christians. But those that are yet
unregenerate have these titles, as we have heard at large, and therefore it
argues the Covenant to be as large, as when that term was so frequent.

Secondly, it is not often, that that phrase is found in New
Testament-Scriptures, with such restriction, only to regenerate persons, Tit.
2. 14. is the most pregnant place, where it is said, that Jesus Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. But if it be granted, that it
is sometimes taken for a people separate by grace out of the state of nature,
it will not follow that it is never taken for a people separate for God by
Profession; I know that Text, Revelation 21. 3. will be urged, I heard a great
voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God. But this will hardly serve for their purpose,
There is no small dispute whether this be to be fulfilled on Earth, or in
Heaven; if in Heaven, as learned Interpreters contend, then it is nothing to
our purpose; if on Earth, then it sets out a singular glory in the Church
through Ordinances in purity; nothing that offends being suffered, yet such a
one in which yet there is a mixture of close hypocrites: As for those that
interpret it of Christ's personal reign upon earth, when he in person shall
manage all, and work nothing by his Agents, I leave them to enjoy their own
opinion, how they shall be qualified on earth that do attend him. But if we may
make conjecture by a considerable party of those that publish it, and receive
it, we shall have strong cause of doubt, that all will not be found regenerate.

Thirdly, I say, the expression mentioned of my people, or people of God, is
used more frequently in the New Testament in the Old Testament-latitude, than
with restriction to the Elect Regenerate. That in 2 Cor. 6. 16. with me is
plain; I will dwell with them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people, quoted out of an Old Testament-Scripture, Levit. 26.
16. and there it is a National Promise, and here, to be understood of Gods
visible abode in Ordinances, as may be made out from the context, being
tendered to those that were over-busie to meddle with idols, from which he
disswades with this Argument, that they were the Temple of the Lord, separate
of God for his worship and service, and the Promise is no more than is made
good to visible Churches; Christ walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, Revel. 2. 1. and some of them (witness that of Sardis) had not
all their Members Regenerate persons. That of the Apostle, Romans 9. 25. I will
call them my people, which were not my people, and her beloved, which was not
beloved, is to be understood no otherwise; That of the Prophet of the call of
the ten Tribes, from Hosea 1. 10. Hos. 2. 23. is there applied to the call of
the Gentiles into a Church State and condition. Neither is that of force
against it, that is objected from verse 23. where the Apostle says, That he
might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had
before prepared unto glory. God sets up visible Ordinances, and calls to a
Church State as is there prophesied, that he may there work to himself a
people of invisible relation, that thereby he may make them vessels of mercy,
having before prepared them unto glory; So likewise, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues. All Professors of faith, and worshippers of the true God, are
there included in that exhortation to quit Babylon; so all Ministers of Christ
are to urge and press it; Men therefore of visible Profession, have this title
in compellation from GOD of my people.

It is yet objected, Jeremiah 31. 31, 32, 33. Behold the days come, says the
LORD, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers,
in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt;
which my Covenant they brake, although I was an husband to them, says the
Lord. But this shall be my Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel;
after those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.
Here is a third purpose or interest for which this Text is produced to serve.
The first was to assert an unconditionate Covenant in the days of the Gospel,
(which we examined chapter 25.) when the Gospel expressly holds out
Covenant-conditions, more expressly than the Covenant of Works, which is
confessed to be conditional. The second to overthrow a public Ministry, and all
private mutual exhortation (which we spoke to chapter 26) when the New
Testament does establish both. And to set up this Prophecy in a third
particular, against all New Testament-light; none must be of the called of God
into Covenant, for fruition of Church Priviledges, but those that are
regenerate: Men in Old Testament-Covenant, broke Covenant as is there expressed;
Men in the New Covenant shall keep covenant, and these are only the Elect and
Regenerate. To this I might have many things to say.

No such sense must be put upon this one single Text, as to restrain the
covenant only to those that are steadfast in it, and carefully observe it when
other New-Testament-Scriptures clearly and unanimously hold it out in that
latitude to comprehend those that are transgressors of it, no more than it
must be brought (though there be like color for both) to overthrow
Gospel Ordinances private and public exhortations, when in the New Testament
there is a clear and full establishment of them. There are those that are in
the faith, so far as to enter Covenant, that make shipwreck of the faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Disciples of Christ, that go back and walk no more with him* Joh. 6.
Men sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, that tread under foot the blood of
the Son of God, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10. 29. There are
that escape the pollution of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and are again entangled and overcome. Those that have
known the way of righteousness, that turn from the holy Commandment. To whom
it happens according to the true Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit
again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2 22.
It is far easier to return answer to this Scripture held out by way of
Prophecy what shall be, than to give answer to all these Scriptures, and far
more than these, setting out what is in New Testament-times.

2. That we may interpret, and not commit Scriptures, find out the sense of
all, and not create differences in any; we may observe that though it be
granted, that those that have the Law written in their hearts, and put into
their inward parts, do enter covenant, and not break it; yet it is not said,
none shall enter covenant and transgress it. There may still be an outward
covenant, according to Interpreters, that may be broken, as well as an inward
covenant that shall be observed. If it be said, that these are two distinct
covenants, one succeeding the other; one abolished when the other takes place,
according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 8. 13. In that he says, a New Covenant,
he has made the first Old; now that which decays and waxes Old, is ready to
vanish away; then it will follow (this being the characteristical difference)
that, as none in New Testament-times enter covenant, but they keep covenant; so
none in Old Testament-times were in covenant, but they did transgress it; at
least that the covenant that then was, was wholly transgresseable; and the
covenant that now is, is not in any possibility to be transgrest. But the
contrary is evident, there were those that kept covenant in Old
Testament-times, Psalm. 44. 17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotton thee, neither have we dealt falsely in the covenant, Psalm. 103. 17.
And also there are those that break covenant in New Testament-times, 1 Timothy 5.
12. Having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith. The Law was
written in men's hearts, and put into their inward parts in the days of the Old
Testament, and some were (as it is called) in an inward Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed; to love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may
live, Psalm. 37. 31. The Law of his God is in his heart, none of his steps shall
slide, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall
live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of D^^id, Isa. 55. 3. And so by consequence it fairly holds, notwithstanding
this Text that there is (as has been proved) an outward covenant in the days
of the Gospel. The oldnesse to be abolished is only in circumstances, wherewith
one and the same covenant that now is, was then clothed.

3. The covenant then spoken to by Jeremy in the place quoted, is not a
covenant properly so called, or at least, as Master Baxter observes, not the
whole of the covenant. So there must be two distinct covenants, one in being
when the Prophet wrote, and another to have its being in the time of which he
prophesied; one covenant made with the Jews, and another covenant distinct
from it made with Christians, and so of necessity there must be two distinct
Gospels. If that spoken of by Jeremy be a covenant properly so called, holding
out the whole nature of the Gospel Covenant, and that New distinct from the
former, then the old covenant must needs in the whole nature of it be a
distinct covenant likewise. In what sense Jeremy is to be understood according
to the genuine meaning of the Text, I have endeavored to clear* as in my
answer, page 105. 106, 107. So also chap. 26. of this Treatise, and whether I
have answered the objection, which some divine that I cannot, without
enervating the Argument, for effectual grace and perseverance in it, I must
appeal to the impartial Reader. I am sure none can build effectual grace, and
perseverance on that Text (making it a distinct Covenant from the first)
without the overthrow of effectual grace and perseverance in Old
Testament-times.

CHAP. XL.
Professed believers, are under a Covenant of Grace, and not a Covenant of
Works.
IT necessarily follows, First Corollary
by way of Corollary, from that which has been delivered, that no professed
believer, that is a member of the Church visible, is under a Covenant of Works,
but eo nomine, that he, professedly, gives his name to Christ, he is under a
Covenant of grace. That a man cannnot be under two Covenants, respective to the
same thing, I suppose, is agreed upon, on all hands. A man that holds by one
title, if he accept a second, makes void the first; whether his former title
were better, or worse; whether it tends to his prejudice, or benefit, thus to
make change of it; As it is with covenants among men, so it is in the Covenant
between God and man. If the New Covenant make void the Old, where both Old and
New are substantially the same; and the difference only circumstantial, as the
Apostle shows that it does Heb. 8. 13. much more then, in those covenants,
which are essentially differing, as are the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant
of grace. Some, that would limit the Covenant, only to the regenerate, and men
of justifying faith, as to the just latitude of it, make use of this Maxim,
that the same man cannot be under two Covenants; which is, indeed, a right way
of arguing; from principles granted on both parts. Now they assume, that all
unregenerate, and persons not justified, are under a Covenant of Works. This,
they take for granted, when it rests to be proved; and so conclude that these
are under no Covenant of Grace, but a Covenant of Works. I assume, on the other
hand, that so many of them as are Christians, though, not Regenerati, but,
Regenerandi, as Pareus speaks, are under a Covenant of Grace, and therefore,
they are not under a Covenant of Works. Here to avoid mistakes some things are
to be premised, 1. That many of them have not any explicit knowledge of either
Covenant, either that, under which originally they were, or that, under which,
through grace, they are. They are the people of God (and therefore under a
saving Covenant with God though not emproved for salvation) that perish for
lack of knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. all that bear the name of believers in primitive
times, were not got up in knowledge to the first principles. 2. As to their
present qualification and condition, they are in no better an estate, than if
the obligation of the Covenant of Works, were still upon them. A man, dealing
falsely in the Covenant of grace, is in as sad a condition, as he that is under
that hopeless, and destructive Covenant of Works, yea, his condition admits of
many sad aggravations, in that treachery is above rebellion, and
perfidiousnesse exceeds bare disobedience. They were a people in Covenant, that
God owned as his, to whom he said, Ezekiel. 16. 48. As I live, says the Lord God,
Sodom thy sister has not done, she, nor her daughters as thou have done, thou,
and thy daughters. Blessedness, is no where in Scripture said to be on the
head of all those that are in covenant, unless it be meant comparatively, or
respectively only, but, on such as keep his covenant, and remember his
commandments to do them, Psalm. 103. 18. And, if all that were in covenant, did
keep covenant, there would not be so much complaint as there is in Scripture,
of breach of covenant, nor could men be under that charge, that their hearts
are not steadfast in covenant. 3. They are yet in a more desirable estate, and
in fairer way toward happiness, than those, that are as the Apostle speaks,
strangers from the covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. As the Jews were a people
nigh to the Lord, Psalm. 148. 14. So they are, Ephesians. 2. 13. Salvation is of
these, though they be not as yet, by a thorough work of grace in a saving
state. There are of these that shall be saved, Acts 2. 47. and so there is not,
for ought that Scripture speaks among those that are without covenant, such
are, in Scripture Language, without God, without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. under the
wrath and indignation of God, Jerem. 10. 25. Psalm. 79. 6. When the Apostle
therefore, had spoken much against the Jew outwardly, and the circumcision of
the flesh. (that is, men circumcised in flesh and not in heart) Romans 2. upon
the question put, yet concludes, that these Jews have; This circumcision has
much profit, every way much advantage, and the advantage is, as he expresses
it, especially, the Oracles of God, which are the covenant-draughts, and if
they were utterly out of covenant, I would desire any to show, where the
advantage lies. That they are in covenant with God and in a covenant of grace
appears therefore.

1. In that they have the Oracles of God. To them, that is, to the Jew
outwardly, these Oracles were committed, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 3. 1.
They were committed to them as their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 33. 4. They were
possessed of them, in order to everlasting life, John 5. 39. And these Oracles,
being Covenant-tables, Covenant-draughts, the professed believer, that by
favor from God, stands possessed of them, is in Covenant with God.

2. They have the seals of the covenant. Covenant, and right to the seal,
where seals are appointed, cannot be severed as shall be shown. They are in
covenant, as Abraham was, and, they have the seals of the covenant, as Abraham
and his seed had, Those were circumcised, and these are baptized; and, that it
may appear, that they had not this honor barely from man, without approbation
from God (as some seem to hint, in their distinction of Forum Dei, and Forum
Ecclesiae, as though the Church received them, when in the sight of God they
had no right to be received) we find, 1. That the Spirit of God, in the
Scripture, still calls them, in way of honor, by the name of circumcision, and
men may, but God will not thus give, an equivocal or nickname to them. As they
were circumcised in the flesh, so it was the mind of God, that they should
bear in their flesh, this sign and seal of the Covenant. 2. Upon it, they
had many and great privileges, yea, all Church privileges, followed upon this
leading privilege, though otherwise, strangers to the Commonweal of Israel,
now they were looked upon as of Israel.

3. Answering unto, and in sincerity making good, that unto which they do
actually engage, the whole blessing of the Covenant is theirs. They that
undertake the terms, on which covenant-salvation according to the Gospel is
had, are actually vested in a a saving covenant; but they undertake the terms,
on which covenant-salvation according to the Gospel is had, they are therefore
in a saving covenant.

4. In case unbelief and impenitence in them, be not only Law-transgressions,
but also Gospel-sins, and breaches of a Gospel Covenant, then these professed
believers are under a Gospel Covenant. This is evident; They sin not against
the Gospel that are not under the Gospel, they break not covenant that were
never in covenant, but their unbelief and impenitence are above
Law-transgressions, they are Gospel-sins, and breaches of covenant, as I think,
need not to be proved, and therefore it is plain that they are in covenant.

Upon this account, I confess, I have often marvelled why many eminent and
godly Divines do earnestly persuade their people to whom they speak, to enter
covenant with God, giving directions what way they are to take to come into
covenant with him; telling them that it is of great concernment to them to know
under what covenant they are, whether under a covenant of Works, or a covenant
of grace; when the same men expressly say that we all entered covenant in
baptism; and that unbelief and impenitence at least, if not every sin, is a
breach of our baptism, vow and covenant. Might not any think that these did
persuade to be baptized? and that they tell their people that it is of great
concernment, to know what covenant it is that baptism seals, whether it
seals the covenant of Works, or the covenant of Grace. If we enter in covenant
in our baptism, as they truly say, that we did, as to the Jus in re, then how
comes it to pass that any that are baptized are out of it, and being already
actually in it, how are they persuaded to enter into it. These persuasions
therefore, and motives to enter covenant, I think should be to press men on to
keep covenant, and so the directions which they lay down are indeed of divine
and excellent use. And when they say it so much concerns men to know what
covenant they are under, I conceive it should rather be to let them know of how
great concernment it is to them to see that they have their interest in the
mercies of the covenant through grace answering to the terms of it, and
requisites in it, and so the entering of covenant, which is done, as these say,
in baptism, and keeping of covenaut, or obtaining the mercies of the covenant,
would not be confounded but distinguished. Their labors would likewise be of
excellent use which otherwise scarce suit either with their own words or the
Scriptures. It may be objected, that in case they are from under the covenant
of Works, and under the covenant of Grace, then they are exempted from the
curse, and acquitted from the condemnation which is annexed to that covenant,
which cannot be affirmed of any mere Professor of Christianity in unbelief and
impenitence, and enough is spoken in this Treatise it self against it. To this
I answer, 1. The curse may follow upon the transgression of the Law, as a Law,
without consideration of any covenant at all, whether of Works or Grace, and it
is not interest in Covenant, but interest in Christ, (which these, supposedly
such, have not) that frees from condemnation. 2. What if it be yielded that
they bear no more than the penalty annexed to the breach of the Covenant of
grace. If the Gospel be consulted that is sufficiently sad and heavy. If they
be put to bear that, nothing more needs to be added to the burden, and indeed
with submission to better judgments, not resolvedly determining any thing, it
is my thoughts, that professed Christians in unbelief and impenitence, suffer
not upon account of the penalty annexed to the breach of the covenant of Works,
but upon account of the penalty annexed to the breach of the covenant of Grace;
and let not any here object that the transgression of the Law shall not then be
laid to their charge, for the Gospel binds us to the obedience of the Law,
though not in exact perfection, yet in sincerity and truth. And this, I
suppose, receives strength from that of the Apostle, 2 These. 1, 7, 8. The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which character thereof [not knowing God] Interpreters (says
Dr. Slater upon the words) generally take to be a description of the Gentiles,
who though they know God by his Works, yet they know him not by his Word, and
to this he subscribes. The other character of [not obeying the Gospel of Jesus
Christ] is, as he says, a circumscription of Christians, according to
Interpreters; Gospel-disobedience is then their guilt, and upon account of this
they suffer. Had they believed and yielded sincere obedience which they
professed, and to which they engaged themselves, they had not perished, and the
want of this appears to be their destruction.

CHAP. XLI.
Interest in a Church State is of equal latitude with the Covenant.
THen it follows by way of necessary corollary, 2. Corollary.
that Church Membership, interest in a Church State, is of equal latitude; not
only the elect and regenerate, but all in covenant (as before spoken to) have
their right, stand entitled to Church Priviledges. And here lest I should be
mistaken, let me explain my self, that my meaning is not, ipso facto, because
in covenant with God, and called by his name, to entitle them to the Church
invisible, and so to suppose them lively members, living in grace, by influence
of the Spirit from Christ; This would clearly enough contradict, that which
before I have spoken, and were indeed a contradiction in the adject, I mean it
of a visible Church State, and interest in visible privileges. If any quarrel
at the distinction, as some have done on either hand, endeavoring to take off
both members. The Church of Rome not admitting any Church invisible, and others
not brooking any Church, but such as consists of invisible members, as may
appear in their definitions of a particular Church, putting in those clauses,
that belong only to the Church invisible: I shall refer them to Doctor John
Reynolds, in his second Thesis, fully bottoming it on that Text, Mat. 22. 14.
Many are called, but few chosen, which yet, must be confessed with judicious
Master Hudson, that it is not a division into two distinct Churches, or species
of Churches, but a distribution of the subject by the adjuncts, viz. a duplici
modo communionis, externo, and interno, Vindication, page 4. One, and the same
Church, has members of a visible, and invisible notion, a more full
explanation may there be seen. This being premised, I affirm, that interest in
Church Membership, in a visible Church State, is theirs, and may be claimed by
all those that have interest in the covenant before named, an external
interest, or, an interest in the external covenant, as usually it has been
called This is a sure rule, Ubi foedus, ibi ecclesia.
Where the Covenant is, there the Church is; and in what latitude soever men
are taken into covenant, they are received into the Church. Laws tendered by a
Prince, and received by a people (whether they be tendered immediately by
himself, or by his Heralds or Ambassadors) make up the relation of King and
people: A marriage-covenant tendered by a man (as by Abraham's servant in the
name of Isaac to Rebecca, Genesis 24.) and accepted by a Virgin, makes up the
relation of husband and wife: covenant-draughts between man and man for
service, (as an apprentice his indentures) make up the relation of Master and
servant, now the Gospel Covenant is all of these, between God and a people;
where God tenders it, and a people receive it, there God has his Spouse, his
Subjects, his Servants. These are his people, and all of these are
Church Members. The Word preached and received has ever been assigned by
Orthodox Divines, as the characteristical note of a Church of God; a Church
stands and falls with it; where it is professedly received, there is a
Church-interest. Let one man apart receive it, as was the case of the Eunuch,
he forthwith becomes a Churchmember, and is to have (as we see he had) his
present matriculation, and to be admitted by baptism a member (not of this or
that Congregation, but) of the Church universal visible: and upon this account
wheresoever he comes, is a Saint, a Disciple, a Christian, a Believer, and so
to be received and acknowledged; This is abundantly confirmed in those parables
of our Savior Christ, of the floor, where there is both chafe and wheat,
Mat. 3. 12. of the field, where there is both wheat and tares; of (...)
draught-net, where are fishes good and bad, Mat. 13. 24, 47. As also in that of
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 20. In a great house there are not only vessels of gold,
and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to honor, and some to
dishonor. The Church is this floor, this field, this draught-net, this great
house, in which there is chafe, tares, fish unfit for use, and vessels of
dishonor, to which may be added, the parables of the wedding feast, in which
there is a mixture, of, some without a wedding garment. Mat. 22. of the
sheepfold with kids and goats. These parables are brought by Bellarmine for
proof, that the Church does not consist only of the elect, lib 3. de Eccl. Mil.
cap. 7 to which Debuit Bellarminus probare in Ecclesia Ca^holica quae est
corpus Ch^isti, esse tam malos quam bonos, tam reprobos, quam electos. Hoc ut
probaret affert hanc parabolam de area inqua and triticum and palea est. At per
aream hoc in loco non Catholica, sed particularis quae que ecclesia
intelligitur, in qua nos fatemur tam malos quam bonos esse, and plerunque
plures malos quam bonos.
Whitaker Controv secunda, quaest. prima cap 7. answers by distinction.
Bellarmine (says he) ought to prove, that in the Catholic Church (which is
the body of Christ) there are both good and bad, reprobate as well as elect,
and for proof of this (says he) he brings the parable of the floor, in which
there is wheat and chafe; but by the floor in this place is not meant (says
he) the Catholic Church, but each particular Church, in which (we confess)
there are bad as well as good, and for the most part more bad than good. And
though he makes some exceptions against some of the Parables, yet he applies
the same answer to others. Concerning that of the draw-net he says, The sense
of the parable is manifest Sensus parabolae manifestus est sic in Ecclesia
evenire solere cum Evangelium praedicatur, ut cum verriculum in mare projicitur
ad pisces capiendos. Primo non omnes pisces qui sunt in mori capiuntur. Secundo
non omnes boni sunt qui capiuntur, sed multi inutiles. Tertio, non separantur
mali pisces a bonis donec verriculum ad terram extractum fuerit. Sic in
Ecclesia cum Evangelium praedicatur, non omnes homines accedunt, non omnes qui
accedunt sunt boni, non separantur boni a malis ante finem mundi.
It happens in the Church when the Gospel is preached, as in the sea, when the
draught-net is cast to take fish. 1. All the fishes that are in the sea are not
enclosed in the net. 2. All are not good that are enclosed, but some are unfit
for use. 3. The bad fish are not separate from the good, till the net be drawn
to land: so when the Gospel is preached, all men do not come in, all are not
good that come, and the good and bad are not separate till the end of the
world. And Doctor Reynolds maintaining that position, That the holy Catholic
Church, which we believe is the whole company of Gods elect and chosen, says,
The wicked must needs be a part of the Church, if the name of Church did
signify the visible Church, as we call it, consisting of the good and bad.
Amesius who (as we heard) judges it very probable that there is no visible
Church where the Word is truly preached, in which there are not some that are
godl^, and therefore is far from concluding the godliness of all; Falsum
esse internas virtutes requiri a nobis* ut aliquis sit in ecclesia quoad
visibilem ejus statum.
says, in his Bellar. Enervatus, lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 1. It is false, that
inward graces are required of us, to a man's being in the Church as to the
visible state of it: see Apollonius Syllog. page 8. Professores Leyden disput.
40. page 3. If any man judge it to be absurd, that Christ should have wicked
men (who are limbs of Satan) to be of his mystical body, carnal wicked men to
be members of such a gracious and glorious head. Christ is the head of his
Church, say they; if such be Church Members, then Christ is their head; I shall
refer them to a full and satisfying answer to Master Hudsons Vindication,
page 6, 7, 8. And for those that deny any being of a Church universal visible
as Master Blackwood in his Storm, page 65. who says, the objector, is
overtaken in a gross absurdity, to think there is some universal Church
visible begun in Abraham, into which upon the rejection of the Jews, the
believers among the Gentiles, and their seed are to be received; for besides
the invisible Church, the body of Christ mystical, there are only particular
Churches under the Gospel. I would learn of them, into what particular Church
the Eunuch was received, and by baptism actually and solemnly admitted, or
whether he was still no Churchmember, but an alien and stranger to the
Commonwealth of Israel, not added to the Church. To what particular
Congregation, the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists joined themselves by
covenant; and to save farther labor, leave them to Master Hudsons Vindication
of the essence and unity of the Church Catholic visible, which will receive a
satisfactory answer when the Sun has no more being in the Heavens.

CHAP. XLII.
A man in Covenant with God, and received into the universal Church visible,
needs no more to give him access to, and interest in, particular visible
Churches.
2ly. IT farther follows that a man by virtue of covenant, 2. Coroll.
being thus enrighted to membership, in the Church universal visible, and
baptized into this body, there needs no farther covenant to give him access
to, and interest in, particular visible Churches. What the Apostle gives in
charge to the Church at Rome, concerning those that are weak in the faith, that
they must receive them, giving this reason, for God has received them, Romans
14. 1, 3. we may apply to those that make profession of the faith, being able
to make application of his reason, God takes them into communion, unto visible
fellowship, we are not then to reject them. Is the necessary qualification of a
member of the visible Church universal one thing, and the necessary of a member
of this or that particular congregation another? and may one be fit to be a
member of the universal visible Church, and yet not qualified to be a member of
a particular congregation, says Master Wood, Append. p. 169, 170. If I should
enlarge this to heathens brought to a profession of the faith, and argue their
right to baptism, upon profession, and by baptism their right to
Church Fellowship in any visible Church-society. I should find the Scriptures
abundantly to favor it. Of so many thousands, myriads of thousands of
converts. Acts 21. 20. which were added to the Church, and received by
baptism, (baptized the same day for a great part, sometimes as appears the
very hour of their conversion) there is not one, that we read, refused, but
all received; yea, not a scruple raised, save of one only, as I remember, which
was Saul, when he offered himself into Church Fellowship, and that not upon
this account that we are now upon, but good Ananias fearing that he came, not
to join with them, but to seize upon them, knowing that at that time, he had
authority from the chief Priests, to bind all that call on Christ's name, Acts
9. 14. If the competentes, as they were styled in the primitive times, ( viz.
men that offered themselves for Church Fellowship) had then entered at so strait
a door, as now in some places they are put to pass, where a glib tongue is in
a far fairer way to take, than an upright heart, we should have heard of no
small bustle about it; When we find murmurings of Grecians against the
Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration, Acts 6.
1. we should sure have heard of it, had they been neglected in
Church Fellowship and communion; But when no such thing can be found in the
practice of the Church, after the Holy Ghost was given, which is called by way
of eminence the Kingdom of Christ, or the Kingdom of Heaven; yet they think
they find exceptions taken, and some refused by the forerunner of Christ, John
Baptist. One laying down this Proposition, Competentes non sunt admittendi in
ecclesiam, quia competunt sine ulteriore satisfactione.
That men seeking admission into the Church, are not to be received without
farther satisfaction, gives instance, in no other but John Baptist, and says,
The Baptist did not admit all that sought it, unto baptism, and proves it from
no Text* either of Matthew or Luke, which give us the narrative, but by the
authority of Pareus; Phariseos baptismum petentes ad baptismum indignos
nonadmisit, inquit Paraeus.
The Pharisees (says he) did seek baptism, but John did not admit them, being
unworthy; to whom he adds Baptismum petierunt, inquit Aretius, at baptizatos
fuisse nullo modo videtur judicare.
Aretius, who says, They sought baptism, but he seems to think (says our
Author,) that they were not by any means baptized. But how eminent soever
their authorities are, their reasons are very weak. The Baptist reproved them,
called them to repentance, and therefore did not baptize them; when the text
seems to speak the contrary. For, as soon as his reproof with his exhortation
is ended, there follows, I indeed baptize you with water, verse 11. And it
seems by Saint Luke, that those Pharisees and Lawyers that were not baptized of
John, were not refused, but did refuse, Luke 7. 30. But the Lawyers and
Pharisees rejected the Council of God against themselves, being not baptized of
him. When the same learned Author cannot instance any precedent, or produce
any Scripture-Ordinance for it, he endeavors by arguments drawn from the form
of a particular Church, the way of reformation of Churches, the relation of
inferiority and superiority among those that are free, and such like reasons to
evince it; To which (but that I will not here make it my business) an easy
answer might be given, it is more than strange, that when the Apostles had by
Commission from Christ planted Churches, and were to leave them to be
propagated in future Ages, and knowing a covenant to be essential to the
constitution, as now by some is asserted; would yet wholly be silent in it,
especially when no such thing was known in Old Testament-Scriptures, that we
might gather it by analogy, and through all Ages, till this last Age, had lien
hid and never discovered, and leave us, by our reason to discover it, In which
we are in danger to set our threshold by Gods threshold, of which he so sadly
complains, Ezekiel. 43. 8. or rather justle out his threshold with ours, denying
baptism to be any door for admission, at which the primitive Saints entered*
and setting up a covenant, of which Scripture speaks nothing; Positions
concerning particular visible Churches, where nothing is wanting to the being
of a Church, yet much more may be required for the well ordering and regulating
of it.
and Master John Goodwin was sometimes as confident as confidence could make
him, that it had no ground in the holy Scriptures. But to leave heathens, happily
called by Gospel Ordinances, to speak a word or two to our own case, who are a
discipled Nation, a Kingdom subjugated to the yoke of Christ Jesus, enjoying
saving Ordinances, and therefore have a Church of Christ fixed among us. Here we
might lay down diverse positions for the regulating of our judgments.

First, where nothing is wanting to the being of a Church, God having a people
owning him in covenant, yet much more may be required for the well ordering and
regulating of it; where a people accept of a King, and receive his Laws, there
he has a Kingdom, and is a Monarch, yet much more is required for the ordering
of such a Monarchy, for the public weal and safety; so it is, where there is
a Church of God, accepting the Laws of heaven, there the Lord Christ reigns as
a Monarch, yet farther care must be used for the right regulating of it
according to his Will, and the Laws tendered by him, and received by them.

Secondly, A people in a vicinity or neighborhood ought to associate according
to their best convenience, for participation of Ordinances.
a people in a vicinity, or neighborhood, dwelling together, ought to
associate themselves and join with those of that neighborhood, according to
their best convenience, for the participation of Ordinances. As it is against
all dictates of reason, that a people scattered at a great distance should
combine themselves in a Church Way, for Ordinances, in which God rules, so it
is as clear against the Scriptures. You read of a Church of God, at Ephesus, at
Corinth, at Philippi, at Thessalonica, at Laodicea, But you read not of any
one Church made up of members, residing at all those places, or in any places
at like distance. That cohabitation or dwelling together, makes not up a Church
congregational, will be easily granted; Infidels, Turks, Pagans may cohabit,
they may make an idol-church, but not a Church of God, but co-habitation or
dwelling together, is one ingredient; Saints cohabiting, that is, in New
Testament-language, men separate for God, not Jews, nor Infidels, but
Christians, and joining in Ordinances, as in duty they ought, are a
congregational Church. A Pastor ought to watch over his people, and a people
ought to attend to their Pastor, which how it can be, when the Pastor makes
his residence at Ephesus, the people, some at Ephesus, some at Corinth, some at
Philippi, and so scattered, it cannot be imagined. We find seven several
Epistles, written from heaven to seven several Churches, all which had their
abode at the place, whence the Church bore its name; these are
Scripture-Churches. Now, if any one Church be made up of Christians, some
inhabiting at one of those places, some at another, a third at a third place,
scarce three of one Town, no more than of one mind; here is not
Scripture-order, which is of God, but an Apocryphal confusion; Exceptions may
be taken at the over-large extent and disordered situation of diverse Parochial
Congregations, which calls for Reformation, coming too near the inconvenience
before mentioned, but Parochial Assemblies, not the name, but the thing; viz. a
people inhabiting at convenient distance, and joining together under Officers,
according to Scripture, is the way that comes up, both to the light of reason,
and the Presidents of primitive times. Our dissenting Brethren will have the
limit of a particular Church, to be within that number of persons, that may
congregate in one place for Ordinances, if this be yielded (as it must be for
Churches merely Congregational,) then it will easily be proved, that
Parish-congregations, that is, congregations of men dwelling in a vicinity, are
of divine institution; Saints that made up a Church were still Saints in
cohabitation, such convenient numbers as are fit to make up a Church, did not
live divided in place, and scattered, some here, some there, but were, as in
faith, so in habitation joined together.

Thirdly, Professing Christians upon tender of themselves ought to be esteemed
members in the places where they inhabit.
all professing Christians in such cohabitation (especially the civil power
authorizing) are to be esteemed and judged members, and not to be refused, when
they offer themselves as members; where there is a holiness of separation for
God, and a professed engagement to real holiness, there is no
Scripture-warrant for repulse; Those that offer themselves to learn, are taken
into the School, and not those only that have made a good progress in
knowledge, and fit for the uppermost form. Me thinks this should be a
Proposition agreed upon between us, and our dissenting brethren, seeing
reverend Master Cotton laying down certain Propositions consented to on both
sides, in his Treatise of the holiness of Church Members, page 1. says, That
such, as are borne of Christian Parents, and baptized in their Infancy into the
fellowship of the Church, are initiated members of the same Church, though
des^itute of spiritual grace, until they justly deprive themselves of the
privilege of that fellowship. For even of such is the Kingdom of God, as Mar.
10. 14. This was the case as we conceive of those that have gone from us into
those parts of America, Here they were, in infancy baptized, here they have
joined in Communion at the Lords Table. If they say, they were not baptized
here into such Church Fellowship, then they must say that here is no Church of
God amongst us (which as we abhor to speak, or think of them, so we must not
yield concerning our selves) and farther conclude their baptism here a mere
nullity, and no more than an application of a little common water. They whose
baptism is valid, are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and therefore in
a baptized estate, cannot be out of fellowship with that body. The late
Confession of Faith agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines, not excepted
against in that particular by our brethren that I know, define baptism to be a
Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ, not only for the
admission of the party baptized into the visible Church, but, etc. Admission
into Church Membership they then lay down as a thing never doubted, which
reverend Master Cotton seems to affirm likewise, and I know no Orthodox Writer
that questions, As Soon as any were discipled through the Acts of the Apostles,
according to Christ's commission, Mat. 28. 19. they were thus received. I have
often marvelled what men mean, when they speak of admission of members into
Churches, when the parties of whom they speak have already equal right with
themselves to membership, Have they any other, or better right than title to
the covenant, and admission by the seal of baptism? if they have, let them
produce it, and then submit it to Scripture-trial. I know none other that will
abide the test; If they confess baptism to be an admission, then their title
is as good, that were thus before admitted, as theirs that give them admission.
Their plea in both is one, viz. birth of Christian parents, and baptism. For
those that they pass by, either forbearing to give them admittance desiring,
or that through scruple cannot join themselves, not seeing warrant for such a
way, varying from the way of all the Churches of the Saints heretofore, what do
they judge of them? Do they look upon them as men without, and unworthy of
their Communion? Then they leave them without hope, without God in the world,
Ephesians. 2. 12. yea, they put them into an incapacity, according to Gods ordinary
way of salvation. Acts 2. 47. All were not saved, that were added, nor saved in
the judgment of charity; that is a comment, as strange as new, but all were
added, and none refused that would enter themselves into salvation-way, which
they might do out of affection of novelty, at that time possessed with amazement
by reason of the miracles, under great present convictions, through Peter's
powerful Scripture-applications, and upon twenty other accounts which might be
but fits, flashings, or present workings, yet all that were to be saved were
added. All the maids that were brought to Ahashuerus and offered for
purification, Esther 2. 3, 4. Were not made Queens, but none was made Queen
that was not thus offered and purified. If it be said, they are within, as many
passages from several hands would seem to imply, as well concerning such that
are refused, as those that do refuse, the modesty of many is such, that they
are loath to unchurch all but themselves, then they are heirs of the same
promise with themselves, and all the essentials of a Church of God are with
those that in this way of Communion are none of theirs, and consequently their
covenant or separate way, is not of necessity to Church-constitution, whether
it be at all according to Scripture-pattern, rests farther to be enquired and
debated.

Fourthly, Reformation of abuses in Churches is much rather the work of
Christians in Churches, than separation from Churches.
men by Providence seated among those that are thus in Covenant by a visible
Profession, and joining in Ordinances, as before, must, much rather make it
their business to reform and redress abuses, that are found in the respective
Societies on which they are cast, than by any means withdraw and separate from
them. We find frequent advice in Scripture of considering one another,
provoking to love and to good works, Hebrews 10. 24. of exhortation one of
another, Heb. 3. 13. of comforting of themselves together, edifying one
another, 1 These 5. 11. of warning them that are unruly, and comforting th
feeble-minded, supporting the weak, 1 These. 5. 14. of converting sinners from
the error of their ways, Jam 5. 20. which argues a well-ordered zeal for God,
and hatred of sin, bowels of compassion toward a brother, we find their
praise that have followed this council, 1 These. 5. 11. we read of separation
from ways of sin, and fleshly defilements, 2 Cor. 6. 17. James 1. 27. but we
read not of any separation from Church Communion, and fellowship in Ordinances
thus given in charge, nor in this way approved, nor any presidents to go before
us in it, but we read of an heavy brand laid upon it, Jude 19. These be they
who separated themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit; yet, seeing things
may be so carried in societies that be a^ the Name of Christ, and Christian
Professors brought to those straits, that there is no abiding for such as would
keep their garments unspotted, it will be of use here, to deliver certain rules
for our help and guidance.

1. A Church in covenant with God, A Church is pure where the pollutions and
taints are not soul.
as before, and keeping up communion in Ordinances, is to be accounted pure,
where the pollutions or taints are not great, nor many, it is to be accounted a
right believing Church, notwithstanding some few lesser Errors. We account a
corne-field clean where some few tares and weeds are found, a body healthful
that is not without grudgings, Christ from heaven gives commendations to those
Churches which yet he taxes, Rev. 2. 3. for failings. There is that light in
which Errors may be seen and shunned, and rules for discerning things that
differ. If custom, education, conceit of Teachers, or the like so dazzle the
judgment, that the error is swallowed; howsoever that be a detriment, a
blemish, as the Apostle shows of the wood, hay and stubble, built upon the
foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 12. yet it prejudices not salvation. There is power of
truth remaining, to form and frame Christ in the heart, to direct the soul in
a sanctified way to salvation.

2. Where the Word is received and professed, Foully polluted and defaced, it is
a Church, re^ains a being though polluted and erroneous.
though polluted and defaced with additions and false glosses, there is a
Church, though polluted and erroneous; Where the essential parts of a man are
in being, there is a man, though sick and diseased; where corn is sown* and
comes up, there is a corn-field, though overrun with tares and weeds. The
Churches of Galatia have the name of Churches, though miserably defiled; we
deny not the Church of Rome the being of a Church, having the Scriptures and
several fundamental truths from thence, as the Church in Christ's time from the
hand of the Scribes and Pharisees, though the worst deserving the name of a
Church of any people with whom the Word is continued; No Church, some have
avouched, But do her the most right, and the being of a Church granted, she is
a hurch certainly miserably defaced, monstrously polluted: I will not rake in
her sores, it were easy to name many and loathsome ones. I will only point at
the causes. Where food is scarce, and that polluted and unclean, there must
needs be bodies diseased, and distempered; but so it fares with the Church of
Rome, when the Word should dwell in us in all plenteousnesse, Col. 3. 16. they
will have theirs dieted, the Word kept in an unknown language, as under lock
and key, that the children cannot come near it. That on which they feed, is not
the sincere milk, which only nourishes to growth, 1 Pet. 2. 2. But they have
their unwritten word, to stand in equipage with the Scriptures, men's Traditions
made doctrines; how many doctrines do we there find, by necessary consequence
undermining those fundamental truths that are there professed? where food is in
no more plenty, and no better, it is no wonder to see diseases follow.

3. That which especially denominates a Church pure or impure, Purity or
impurity in doctrine, especially gives Churches d^n^mination.
sound or tainted; is the doctrine which they drink in, the principles by which
they are carried. Where these are right, this is an high praise; where these
are tainted, this is the greatest blemish. That which advances a Nation above
all other Nations, so that no Nation is so great as they, that brings them nigh
unto God, is that which is their greatest honor, and the pollution the
greatest blemish, where all is right in doctrine, it can hardly be conceived,
but that there are at least a few names, that defile not their garments, though
the more the greater glory. This was the case of Sardis, and therefore has the
honor to be one of the golden Candlesticks where Christ kept residence.

4. Doctrines, Errors in doctrine, are either in the foundati^u or
superst^uction.
which are as the covenant-draughts between God and a people, have their taints
or crazes in the foundation, or in the superstruction; A breach in the
foundation is the buildings speedy ruin, while that stands, somewhat of a
building remains, when that falls, all falls, and therefore Jerusalems enemies
that thirsted after her total ruin, say, Raze it, raze it, even to the
foundation thereof, Psalm. 137. 7. These foundation-breaches in buildings may be
either crazes threatening danger, but repairable, taken betimes may be helped,
though a failing there is soonest helpless, or else, it is a ruin or
rottenness that is irremediable, irrepairable. Truths doubted, disputed,
questioned, I call a craze in the foundation wonderfully dangerous, not always
damnable; the case of the Galatians, of whom the Apostle stood in fear, and
was jealous over them, through a godly jealousy, even of their revolt from
Christianity to Judaism, from Christ to Moses, from the Gospel to the Law:
These, he calls Churches, the members brethren, though in a way to be no
Churches, entertaining those doctrines, that cut off from Christ, Gal. 5. 2.
Here, all those that are builders in Christ's work, that are pillars, or any
part of his house, must be zealous, as we see Saint Paul was, in this Epistle
quoted; who will see the foundation of the house where he lives so undermined,
as every day to threaten ruin? much less may we suffer the foundation in
Christ's house to be thus used. This faith once delivered to the Saints is the
common salvation, for this we must earnestly contend, Jude 3. for this we must
strive together, Phil. 1. 27. Truths denied, abjured, and resolved against (as
it was with Hymeneus and Philetus, and the Apostle saw the Churches in Galatia
in danger) is a ruin, and rottenness, that is irremediable, and irreparable.
Besides breaches in fundamentals, there are breaches in superstructions, and
these either more near to the foundation, or at a greater distance. The nearer
the foundation, the more danger; a breach is more sufferable near the top, than
at the bottom of a tower, or castle. There are errors of more affinity with
those that overthrow bottom-truths, and there are those that are not so nigh,
and therefore not so dangerous; Such crept into the Latin Church before
Antichrist was raised to his height and strength in his delusions, and
Antichrist still holds them of all sorts and sizes; Either of both of these,
may^e Negative, or Positive. Negative, are such where the doctrine of faith is
not laid, Positive, where it is mis-laid; where edifying doctrines are not
preached, and where they are mis-preacht, both tend to the Churches danger; a
house never complete or built up entire, but defective in several parts, little
differs from that which is ruinous: The Apostle, who is worthily styled a wise
Master Builder, 1 Cor. 3. 10. makes known the whole counsel of God, Acts 20.
27. and builds not up defective Churches.

5. All errors being against Christ, Errors have their estimate accordingly as
they rise up against Christ and obscure his glory.
who is the foundation to bear up, and carry on the whole work, accordingly as
they dash upon Christ, and obscure his glory, whether more, or less, the
estimate of the danger is to be taken. These are either such that render Christ
in an uncapacity to be our Mediator and Savior, or such that are
inconsistent, in whole or in part with his Mediatourship; of the former kind
are those that are against his person. 1. Those that impugn the Godhead of
Christ, such, that though they give him the glory, to be above Angels, yet will
make him no more than a creature; a God in title and place, as are Magistrates,
not in nature or power; An opinion that involves the Apostolic Church, and all
Churches in succession in idolatry, giving the honor of God, the worship due
to God, unto him who by nature is no God; A doctrine that will make Christ an
impotent, and not an omnipotent head, too weak for his work, to govern the
world, and bring under his enemies. 2. Those that deny his manhood, as having
not taken our flesh, and so, no suitable head, but a fantastic or seeming
body. Those that are against his Mediatourship; are, either such that obscure,
or some way eclipse it, as every error does that is any way considerable, or
such that raze, if not utterly overthrow it, in some of the necessary parts of
it, his Kingdom, Priesthood, or Prophetical Office. These are overthrown,
either directly, in terms of full opposition, or else by consequence, and this
such, that is either immediate and evident, the truth being confessed, these
cannot be denied, or else the consequence more remote, and not so easily
discerned. Separation in some cases necessary.
These things being premised, we must bring it home to our purpose. 1. Where
fundamental truths are not only questioned, doubted and disputed, but abjured
and denied, errors directly or by immedate clear consequence introduced so,
that the truth cannot be known, but the error must be seen, and this declared
by public confession, and generally held, Christians are to be gone, here are
not sufficient edifying truths, nor yet antidotes to preserve from danger, when
they would have healed Babylon, and she would not be healed, then it is time to
forsake. If any man come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed, 2 John 10. says John, much less
then, may we hold such communion with them It is said of Mice, that when the
house, through ruins is falling, they will be gone, shall nature teach them to
provide for their safety, and shall nothing teach Christians to see to their
own salvation? When Jerusalem was to be destroyed according to Christ's
prediction, and not one stone to be left upon another; a voice is said to be
heard crying, Get out to Pella. Foundation-breaches seen, and suffered, are, as
this voice to be gone, such a Jerusalems walls are falling* There is a flight
too soon, when care might keep up the buildings, when with the poor man we may
save and deliver the City, Eccles. 9. 15. They that preached Christ in those
Churches of Galatia, and preached down Circumcision, and other points of
Judaisme, pleased the Apostle better, then they that without such endeavor
should desert it; so those that had preached the resurrection in Corinth, had
better pleased then those that had left the place for their sakes that denied
it. A Church may not only degenerate, but apostatize; may not only languish,
but lose her vital spirits, may not only displease her Bridegroom, but suffer
a divorce; perhaps keep the title of a wife, and indeed be a strumpet, and want
all evidence of relation to the Bridegroom. 2. In the case of pollutions of a
more inferior alloy, a Christian may be necessitated to leave. 1. When the food
of life, knowledge in the word or means to compass it, cannot be had. In such
a case it must be sought, They must resolve with the Lepers, 2 King. 7. 3. not
to sit still and die. When the Priests and Levites left their suburbs and
pessessions, under Jeroboams government being cast out of their employment, and
the lowest of the people, men of self-consecration, set up in their stead after
them out of all the tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the Lord
God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the Lord God of their fathers,
2. Ch^^n. 11. 16. Being without a teaching Priest, they were (as the Prophet
tells Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.) without the Law, and without God, and there was no
staying there. 2. When a man by compulsion is necessitated to give approbation
to such pollutions, in any such way that speaks his compliance, whether it be
by the civil power, through unsufferable fines, ^ulcts, imprisonments
unavoidable, or peril of life, Or by the Ecclesiastical power in
excommunications, when men are driven out, or necessitated for soul-subsistence
to go out, there is full liberty and warranty to leave, But when Ordinances in
a saving way, may be enjoyed, with liberty and safety, no Laws being enacted
for their so heavy persecution, or through indulgence or connivence not put
into execution, there the Churches good calls for good men's stay, not their
secession or separation There was not a little leaven in the Churches doctrine,
in Christ's time, error was advanced into Moses chair, yet Christ himself,
with many other that waited for redemption in Jerusalem, held communion as
Church Members. All was not right in every Church of the Saints to whom Christ
wrote, Revel. 2. 3. and to whom Paul sent Epistles, yet as they retained still
the honor of Churches, and the happiness of Christ's presence, so we hear
nothing of separation enj^^ned, or practiced. The condition of Believers in the
Synagogue of Rome was otherwise, The key of knowledge is there taken away, the
people not allowed to read it, in private, or to hear it in public, but kept
reserved in an unknown language, neither could they without capital danger keep
themselves from compliances in their sin, so that reformed Churches did not
in any unwarrantable way of Schism leave, but rather were left, They forsook
not the Church, but the botches and corruptions in it, though we were never
forbidden to partake of their truths, yet we are forbidden to partake of their
sins, lest we partake of their plagues, Rev. 18. 4. and therefore to depart and
be gone, when their truths could not be enjoyed, but their guilt through sin
contracted, and it is only their sin that we relinquish. It is their
Schism, in that or any other Church, that obtrude these Heterogeneal things,
and not theirs that do refuse them.

6. Corruptions in conversation scarce admit of separation, Corruption in
conversation hardly admit of separation.
provided that doctrine be such, in which men may have communion for
edification; If we look upon the people of Israel through the revolution of all
times, after they were a visible body come out from Abraham's loins, we may
find high titles given them of singular glory by reason of privileges, which
they enjoyed by their call into Church Fellowship, children of God, holy
people, Gods peculiar ones, his portion, his heritage. The apple of his eye,
Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2. and 32. 9. Zach 2. 8. and abundant the like Elogies in sundry
other texts of Scripture, A people near unto God, Psalm. 148. 14. the adoption,
and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law; and the service,
and the promises did appertain to them, Romans 9. 4. Therefore Prophets and
righteous persons, kept their residence among them, held communion with them,
and saw no ground of separation from them, the words of eternal life being with
them, as Christ testifies in his speech to the Samaritan woman, John 4. 22.
when in the mean time their qualifications were as low, as their titles high,
their conversation no way answering their calling, but branded to be
stiffenecked, of an iron sinew, adulterous, a sinful Nation, a people foolish
and unwise, as Sodom and Gomorrah to the Lord, Deuteronomy 9. 6. Isa. 48. 4. Ezekiel. 16
32. Isa. 1. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Isa. 1. 10. It is a great contradiction with some
men, to name men at all Saints, believers, professors, when their lives
evidence an unsuitablenesse to such a glory, yet we know the Churches to whom
Epistles are directed in Scriptures, are so honored as we may see in their
frontispieces, and among them the choicest, and most upright-hearted, had
converse and communion, when yet they did wrong, defraud, contended and
disputed for Idol pollutions and defilements, profaned the Lords Table, were
fornicators, unclean, lascivious, lukewarm, having only a name to live, when
they were dead, 1 Cor. 3. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 7. 1 Cor. 8. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 20. 2 Cor.
12. 20. Rev. 3. 16. Rev. 3. 1. So that Calvin on 1 Cor. 1. 2. puts a question
how Paul could give the name of a Church to them. If we would know what the
Prophets and Apostles held concerning lawfulness of communion in such
Churches, we may enquire what was their practice, They did not leave them, but
made it their business, by all ways in their power to reclaim them, to work a
change and conversion among them. The advice that was sometimes given to a
maid, Aut de fatuis virgiuibus es aut de or^dentibus si de ^atuis Con^regatio
tibi necessaria est, si de prudentibus tu congregationi Corruption in
discipline hardly admits of separation.
that for religions sake would retire her self to a solitary life: if she were
bad, she needed the City to better her; if good, the City needed her: may be
given to these persons, either they stand in need of the Church, or the
necessities of the Church call for their help and assistance.

7. The same that I have said of corruption in conversation, I may affirm of
neglects in discipline. Reverend Master Cotton judges, that the many notorious
scandalous Persons, that were found in the Church of Israel, did argue the
neglect of Church Discipline, in the toleration of such public scandals in the
Church. Holiness of Church Members, page 21. And yet none of the Prophets or
men of God, who could not be ignorant of the Churches duty, and their sin in
such neglects, ever made attempt of setting up purer select Churches nor made
separation from that which was in this sort (as is said) faulty. All was not
right in exercise of discipline, in the Churches planted by the Apostles some
are censured as foully faulty. The Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5 2. The Church of
Smyrna, Rev 2 14. The Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 20. Neither could the church
of Sardis be free, seeing that the greatest part, as it appears, were openly
bad there being but few that had not defiled their garments, Rev. 3. 4. and yet
nothing is heard by way of advise for any to make separation, nor reproof for
their holding up communion* nor any one instance of a separatist given. Those
that for many years together, during the Reign of the three last Princes,
denied to come up to a full conformity to this Church, had a low opinion of the
discipline then exercised, of which they have left behind them large
evidences, yet how tender were they of the Churches honor to keep Christians
in Communion? How zealous were they against separation? As may appear in the
labors of Master Parker, though distasted by him that prefaced before his work
of Ecclesiastical Policy, Master Paget, Master Ball, Master Brightman laid us
low enough, when he did not only parallel us with lukewarm Laodicea, but made
that Church the type, and us the antitype, Our state, as we stood at that time
by reason of our discipline, (according to him) being rather aimed at by Jesus
Christ in his Epistle, then the Laodicean State in Asia, then existent; yet how
zealous is he against separation from these Assemblies? Having largely set out
a double and singular honor in that Church, (as he styles it) viz Christ's
entrance into those that open to him, and his sweet residence and abode being
entered with them, he breaks out into these words. Scelestus igitur and
blasphemus eorum error est, qui sic ab hac ecclesia desiciunt, quasi Christus
hinc pro^sus exularet nec ulla spes salutis manentibus esse posset. Cogitent
hic Christum convivantem cum suis. An pu^bit eos illic discu^^bere, ubi vident
Christum non pudere An illo sanctores and mundiores er^^t? Sed quare se non
co^vincunt suo ipsorum usu^ Non possunt i^ficiari quin p^iut in Christum
crediderint qu^m fecerunt nobis divortium? unde haec illi fides? Annon
expraedicatione in nostra ecclesia? Nu^quid autem praedicare quis potest nisi
mittatur? Romans 10. 13 Quid ^^go verbum propter labem ^liquam externae
vocationis tam pervese r^^puunt cujus vim divinam in ^or^ibus senti (...)?
Quamobrem redite ad unitatem ecclesiae quae vos genuit and aluis; si fugiatis
hunc Christum, qui cum electis in nostris coetibus coenat, ac eos vicissim
excipit, profecto nusquam invenietis.
Therefore their error is wicked and blasphemous, who so forsake the Church,
as if Christ were altogether banished thence, and no hope of salvation left for
those that do remain. Let them think upon Christ, as feasting here with his.
Will they be ashamed to sit down where they see Christ is not ashamed? Will
they be more holy and pure then he? wherefore do they not convince themselves in
their own practice? they cannot deny but they believed in christ, before they
made a divorce from us? whence ^ad they this faith; came it not by the
preaching in our Church? and can any one preach unless he be sent? Romans 10*
13. Wherefore then do they so perversely nause (...) the word upon any pretense
of blot in an external calling, when they are sensible of its divine power in
their hearts? Wherefore return to the unity of the Church, which has begotten
and has nourished you; if you fly from Christ (...) feasts with his elect in
our Congregation, entertaining them mutually, truly you will find him no
where. How does Reverend Master Cotton in his preface to Master Hildersams work
upon the fourth of John (whom without honor I cannot mention) set forth his
renoune for this work of opposing separation? of which he still appears to be
tender though he seem page 13. of his Treatise of holiness of Church Members
to be over indulgent to it, Speaking in excuse of those that withdraw from
communion in public Ordinances of Christ, when Church Officers receive in, for
members of the Church, those that are most scandalous and wicked, and not such
Saints as Paul writes to at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, and defending
them against Mr. Rutherford, he says, But if private members be persuaded in
conscience from the word of God, that themselves have due right and interest as
well in the admission of members as in excommunication of offenders or in
election of officers, how shall they keep themselves from partaking in the
sins of their Officers, if they suffer them to go on in such a manifest
breach of rule without due proceeding against them for their reformation? and
after some caution given he concludes, It is essential to Community to have
power to admit unto communion, and to withdraw from communion. To which I say.
1. We have not a full account, of the Saints in those Churches, respective to
scandals, it seems by diverse passages, that many in Colosse, were none of the
soundest in faith, as appears by the Apostles reproof, chap. 2 20. I am sure,
that if any Church, have such as were to be found in Corinth, for ignorance,
Idolatry, faction, oppression, adultery, lasciviousness, profanation of the
Lords Table, they will be judged sufficiently scandalous. 2. If such a
persuasion in conscience, would warrant a separation, it would be worth enquiry
to know what separation is not warrantable? The error that Mr. Brightman
brands, as wicked and blasphemous, is here abundantly justified; Church-guides
(at least in some places) were then, so far at least, guilty in their
admissions. 3. What warranty is there, for any man's withdrawing himself, from
public Communion in the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, when he may with freedom
enjoy that glorious privilege, upon that account that he cannot enjoy the
whole of those privileges, or actual exercise of them, in which he takes
himself to have any interest. Sure I am Ministers of Christ, in many reformed
Churches in the world, have judged themselves to be overmuch coopt up, in
several particulars, when yet they judged the very thought of separation in
this case, to be the greatest p^aculum. 4 This right or interest in every
particular member to vote in this way for admission or ejection, may well be
questioned; If there had been this freedom in primitive times claimed, and
exercise, there had not been so much, in so short a space dispatched, as was
done in Jerusalem and Samaria, Acts 2. Acts 8. If all must vote, in business
of so high concernment, as in proceeding against officers, and to give
definitive sentence concerning their proceedings, either many a meet member
will be kept without, or else many an incompetent judge, must be taken in, many
a poor soul weak in the faith is fit for the Lords Table, who is not yet fit to
judge of the abilities of his Pastor. All, that I know, that is produced with
any color, is that direction of Paul to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
When ye are gathered together with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. But if it be considered, that
Corinth had more then one Congregation (as several Dissenting brethren have
yielded, and as to other Churches may easily be proved) then, it must follow,
that this meeting was only of officers, and not of all Members. And how this
power is essential to a community, I cannot conceive. The English Nation have
judged themselves a community, and yet there is many a freeborn Subject, that
never had a thought of interessing himself by way of vote; to naturalize
strangers, or to make them free Denizons, nor yet to expulse them in case of
intrusion. The ^orporations of England are communities, yet every Member has
not his interest, for vote to receive into their body. When the chief Captain
bought his Freedom in Rome, Acts 22 28 I scarce think, every Freeman of that
society was consulted in it, neither did Paul when he heard of it, enter his
exception, because his interest was infringed. The several companies in London,
are so many several communities; yet every one of the members of those
Companies, does not claim an interest, in receiving in, men, as free of their
respective mysteries; an opinion of such a Liberty, will soon bring Church
Members under an heavy yoke, taking themselves to be so far interessed in
every public act of their Officers, that they may not without open opposition
(which is seldom borne) or actual separation, keep themselves from guilt in
their aberrations.

Fifthly, To gather Churches out of Churches to make up one Congregation out of
many is unwarrantable.
to gather Churches out of Churches; to make up one congregation of Members
appertaining to, and locally seated in many, is most anti-Scriptural. It were
easy to bring abundant arguments against this practice. The disorderly
confusion, which of necessity it does occasion; The weakening of the work of
God in the place where providence has seated them, and conferred many mercies
upon them: The robbing of Pastors of their flock, spiritual Parents of their
children, who, they confess are of use to fit men, for such a new congregated
way, that is, to beget them by the Gospel to Christ Jesus; but unfit to
instruct or build them: The animosity of Spirit that is wrought in these
separating ones, judging them whom they leave as no Ministers of Christ, nor
their congregations any Churches of Christ withdrawing from thence, where
Christ is pleased to keep residence. But letting these pass, I shall only
urge this, that it is without all Scripture-president, or example, to gather up
one Church (as these pretend) out of the cream and quintescence of many
Churches. There was much amiss, in several of the Churches, of Asia;
Philadelphia it appears was the soundest, yet Saints they left not, but held
communion with the several Churches, where by providence they were placed, and
did not pick up one out of all, as a Church in eminence of purity and glory;
neither there or elsewhere has there been found any such practice. John
Baptist, who while the Church of the Jews stood a Church of God, gathered a
Church out of them, as is objected, and did embody them. To this I might have
much to answer.

1. John Baptist set up no new Church, Sol.
distinct from the Church of the Jews; Christ and his Apostles submitting to
that which John did introduce, yet still held communion with the Church of the
Jews; They were not Members at once of two distinct Churches; of the new,
because more refined, and of the old tainted and corrupted.

2. If John Baptist according to duty, set up a new gathered Church in a Church
of Christ; then all the Prophets from Samuel to John the Baptist, fell short of
duty. If they follow John in what he did, we follow all the Prophets and
Apostles in what they did, All the Prophets till John, did prophecy in the
same Church of Christ and not any of them did set up new Churches.

3. The old Church Way of administration among the Jews was then to fall, that
present administration to be taken down by Gods appointment, and a new one to
be set up according to his prescript.

4. John set up a new Sacrament, in a new way which after his days was the
alone Church Way. If any can show (as our seekers look after) that Jesus
Christ, shall now put an end to this way, and that, they have a Commission, for
a new Sacrament of initiation, then they speak somewhat, for setting up new
Churches, in like manner.

CHAP. XLIII.
A dogmatical Faith entitles to Baptism.
3. IT farther follows by way of consectary, 3. Corollary.
that a dogmaticall Faith (ordinarily called by the name of Faith historical,
such that assents to Gospel Truths, though not affecting the heart to a full
choice of Christ, and therefore was short of Faith which is justifying and
saving) gives title to baptism. The Covenant is the ground on which baptism
is bottomed, otherwise Church Membership would evince no title either in
Infants, or in men of years to Baptism; But the Covenant (as we have proved)
is entered with men of Faith; not saving, and therefore to them Baptism is to
be administered. How the consequent can be denied by those that grant the
Antecedent; Baptism denied in foro Dei, to men short of saving faith, when
they are in covenant, I cannot imagine; yet some that have confessed their
interest in the covenant, Arguments evincing the title of men professing faith
to Baptism.
now deny their title to Baptism; and affirm, If men be once taught that it
is a faith, that is short of justifying and saving Faith, which admits men
to Baptism; it will make foul work in the Church.

(1.) All that has been said for the latitude of the covenant, may fitly be
applied in opposition to this tenent, for the like latitude of Baptism.

(2) All the absurdities following the restraint of the covenant to the Elect,
to men of Faith saving and justifying, follow upon this restraint of interest
in Baptism.

(3.) To make the visible seal of Baptism which is the privilege of the
Church visible, to be of equal latitude with the seal of the Spirit which is
peculiar to invisible members, is a Paradox.

4. The great condition to which Baptism engages, is not a prerequisite in
baptism. This is plain, to man is bound to make good his covenant conditions
before his engagements to conditions; no servant is tied to do his work, to
gain admission into service; no soldier to fight in order to get himself
listed under command. But Faith, that is justifying, is the condition to which
baptism engages, and no condition necessarily required to vest him in it.

5. That Faith upon which Simon Magus in Primitive times was baptized, is that
which admits to baptism; Simon himself believed, and was baptized, Act. 8.
13. But Simons faith fell short of saving and justifying.

(6.) In case only justifying faith give admission to baptism, then none is
able to baptize; seeing this by none is discerned; and to leave it to our
charity, affirming that we may admit upon presumption of a title when God
denies, I have spoken somewhat, chap. 38. and I refer to Master Hudson in his
Vindication, whom learned Master Baxter so highly commends to show the
unreasonablenesse of it. Here it is objected.

First,

I answer. In case I make this first objection brought against me, my seventh
and last argument for me; it will fully discover the weakness of it, and thus
I form it. All that are Disciples unto Christ, and made disciples for Christ,
are to be baptized; but some are made Disciples to Christ, that are short of
faith saving and justifying, as has been proved at large. This Discipleship
that Christ there mentions, is such, of which whole Nations are in capacity, as
is plain in the Commission, to which this Nation (with others) has happily
attained according to the manifold prophecies before cited; of these the whole
universal visible Church consists as is irrefragably proved by Mr. Hudson in
his Treatise of that subject, and his Vindication; and most amply spoken to by
Mr. Baxter in his plain Scripture Proof of Infants Church Membership and
baptism, page 279, 280. Sir, if you were my father, I would tell you that when
you say [Christ makes no one City, Country, Tribe his Disciples] you speak
most malignantly and wickedly against the Kingdom and dignity of my Lord
Jesus. Has he not commanded to disciple Nations? Has not the Father promised
to give him the Heathen or Nations for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the earth for his possession? Psalm 2. And that Nations shall serve him?
And that the Kingdoms of the world shall be become the Kingdoms of the Lord
and his Christ? and do you not see it fulfilled before your eyes? Are not
Bew^ly, Keder Minsters, etc. and England (till of late) as full Christ's
disciples, and so Church Members, as the Jews were in covenant with God, and
so Church Members? We are not all sincere: True no more were they for with many
of them God was not well pleased, but shut out all that Nation of covenanters
from his rest, save Caleb and Joshuah. We may have Pagans and infidels lurk
amongst us unknown; but they had many amongst them known. In the mean time we
as generally profess Christianity, as they did to serve the true God. And are
you sure there is never a City or Town that are all sincere? I think you be
not; or at least is there never a godly family as Abraham's was? you cannot be
ignorant that the term [Disciples] in Scripture is given to more to the
sincerely-godly. And if whole Nations; yea, the whole Universal visible Church
(consisting of discipled Nations) were all believers, it were a happiness,
then election would be as large as Vocation; when Christ says, many are
called, but few chosen.

Secondly,

1. This is the weakest of all arguments, to reason for a precedence of one
before another, John baptized before he preached the baptism of Repentance;
for his baptizing is put before his preaching of baptism, Mark 1. 4. and that
those that he baptized did confess their sins after their baptism, seeing
it is mentioned after that it is said, that they were baptized, Mat. 3. 6. and
both of these with a far greater probability of reason, seeing in both there
is a narrative of the thing by the Evangelists, and in the place in hand there
is neither commission given for the work of baptizing, nor yet any narrative of
the work, but only doctrine given in charge which they were to deliver, which
least of all speaks the order in which the duties specified must necessarily be
practiced. All that can be collected, is that we must in Gods ordinary way of
conferring salvation, have both Faith and baptism; though there be not the
like absolute necessity of baptism as of Faith; baptism being necessary,
necessitate precepti; Jesus Christ having instituted it, and commanded it; but
Faith is necessary both necessitate medii, and praecepti; seeing Christ not
only commanded it, but salvation at no hand can be obtained (by men in capacity
of it) without it; And therefore it has been well observed that in the words
following, the like stresse is not laid on Baptism as on Faith; not he that is
not baptized, but he that believes not, shall be damned.

2. Let Peter where he speaks of salvation by baptism, interpret these words;
Baptism does now also (says he) save us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 3. 21. and then explaines himself; Not the pntting away the filth of
the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God. This answer or
restipulation, unto the outward administration of baptism, is that which
follows upon baptism; but justifying Faith is that restipulation (at least a
principal branch of it), and therefore there is no necessity that it go before,
but a necessity that it must follow after baptism. It is true that in men of
years, justifying faith sometimes goes before baptism, as in Abraham it went
before Circumcision, but it is not of necessity required to interest us in a
right, neither of baptism, nor circumcision.

Thirdly, foro Dei of the title to the seal;) But it is only solid true faith,
which is the condition of the promise (of Remission; Therefore it is that only
that gives right in foro Dei to the seal.

Here is an Argument first proposed, parenthesis paraphrased, for the
proposition I say faith is not sealed to, but remission of sins or salvation
upon condition of faith. A professor of Faith that goes no farther, may engage
himself to a lively working faith, and upon those terms God engages for, and
puts his seal for Remission and Salvation. For the parenthesis, That faith
which is the condition of the Promise, is the condition in foro Dei of the
title to the seal, I judge the contrary to be undeniable. That faith which is
the condition of the Promise, is not the condition in foro Dei of title to the
seal. An acknowledgement of the necessity of such faith with engagement to it,
is sufficient for a title to the seal, and the performance of the condition of
like necessity to attain the thing sealed. To promise service and fidelity in
war is enough to get listed, as to do service is of necessity to be rewarded.

Fourthly, as for the Argument ad hominem framed against those who make initial
or common faith sufficient to entitle to Baptism, and yet affixe remission of
sins to all Baptism, even so received without any performance of farther
engagement; I leave to them to defend who maintain such doctrine, and to speak
to the absurdities that follow upon it.

Fifthly, that of Philip to the Eunuch seems to carry most color. The Eunuch
must believe with all his heart before he be baptized, and I have known it
troublesome that are fully convinced that a dogmatical faith gives title to
Baptism, satisfying themselves with this answer, That howsoever Philip called
for such a faith which leads to salvation, yet did not express himself so far
that no Faith short of this gives title to baptism.

It may be answered that a dogmatical faith is true faith, suo genere, as well
as that which justifies; therefore I know not why men should give it the term
of false faith, seeing Scripture calls it faith, and such as those believers,
and the heart in such a Faith (as to an entire assent) is required. If we look
into the Eunuchs answer on which Philip did rest satisfied, and proceeded upon
it to baptism, it will take away all scruple; his answer is, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God. There is no more in that then a common faith,
this is believed by men not justified; yet this faith entitles to baptism, and
upon this confession of faith, the Eunuch is baptized.

CHAP. XLIV.
Impenitence and unbelief in professed Christians, is breach of Covenant.
4. IT yet follows by way of consectary, 4. Corolary.
that men in impenitence and unbelief, that lie in sin, and live in neglect of
the sacrifice of the blood of Christ, live in a continual breach of covenant.
They engage by covenant to believe in Christ, and forsake their sin; when yet
they lie in unbelief and impenitence, are convinced that they are Fornicators,
Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind,
thieves, covetous, drunkards, revellers, and extortioners, These do not only
transgress the Law (which on the severest penalty forbids these ways) but
break covenant with God, and so are shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven; the
reward upon covenant, to those whose hearts are upright. For howsoever, I fully
assent to learned Master Baxter, that all weaknesses are not covenant-breaches,
and therefore with him, judge it to be their mistake, who in their confessions
acknowledge that we break covenant all that we do; yet those men in the list
mentioned, having given their names to God, and entered covenant with him,
walking in these forbidden ways, are found covenant-breakers; and therefore
the Psalmist deservedly says to them, Psalm 50 16, 17. What have thou to do
to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth;
seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? that is to
claim any mercy or favor by virtue of Gods grant in covenant, as appears in
the context* Engaging to him, and thus flying off from him, they desert the
mercies which they might receive from him. As a wife by adultery, so they by
sin forsake the covenant by which they stand betrothed, and by consequence it
must needs follow, that Christ died for breach of the covenant of Grace, as
well as for breach of the covenant of Works; unless we will say that all men
by name Christian, and found in any of these sins, are in a lost and
unrecoverable condition; joining with them that have said, that there is no
grace or pardon for those that fall into sin after baptism. That he died not
for their sins that live and die in final impenitence and unbelief, may be
easily granted, and that rises to no more then that he died not for those, that
finally and unrecoverably break covenant with him. It is granted by a learned
adversary that final unbelief and impenitence, are violations of this covenant,
but no other impenitence or unbelief; but that which is final, and for this, as
is affirmed Christ never died; To this I say, If unbelief and impenitence be
not breaches or violations of covenant properly so called, then final unbelief
and impenitence is no breach or violation of covenant properly so called. This
is clear, Final perseverance in unbelief and impenitence is no more, then a
continuance of the same posture or state of Soul God ward, in which they before
stood, in impenitence or unbelief; As Perseverance in faith and repentance, is
the continuance of faith and repentance. If then final unbelief and impenitence
be a breach of the covenant of grace, then all unbelief and impenitence,
denominating a man, an unbeleeving and impenitent person, is a breach of
covenant likewise.

CHAP. XLV.
The question stated concerning the Birth-Priviledge of the issue of Believers.
A Fourth difference supposed to be (and assigned by some) between the first
and second covenant is, The fourth supposed difference between the Old and New
covenant.
That the first Covenant was in that latitude to comprize, not alone
unregenerate men professing the worship of the true God, but the whole of the
seed of those that made such profession. But the second covenant is entered
personally, and so vested in them that make actually profession of it, that it
is terminated in them, and none of their seed are taken in with them. Here I
cannot be so clear in my method as in the former, some have so mudded the way,
that it is not easy to proceed in any fair and clear order; As to the latter
branch (concerning the New Covenant) their opinion is fully and clearly enough
held out. All believers according to them are in covenant, and only those that
actually believe; They entitle themselves, but cannot interest their seed in
any title to it. But as to the first Covenant some make it to consist merely of
carnal promises, and Circumcision they answerably make a carnal badge, and so
their opinion is clear, that the first descends to posterity, but not the
second. The seed is included in the first carnal covenant, but excluded from
the second. But one undertaking a full Comment upon those words of the
Covenant, Genesis 17. 7. I will be a God to thee and thy seed, distinguishes of
the seed of Abraham, and says it is many ways so called, and by his
distinction instead of clearing much darkens the thing in question.

1. Christ is called the seed of Abraham by excellency, Distinction of the seed
of Abraham examined.
Gal. 3. 16.

2. All the Elect, Romans 9. 7. all Believers, Romans 4. 11, 12, 16, 17, 18. are
called the seed of Abraham, that is, the spiritual seed.

3. There was a natural seed of Abraham to whom the inheritance did accrue,
this was Isaac, Gen 21. 12.

4. A natural seed, whether lawful, as the sons of Keturah, or base, as Ishmael
to whom the inheritance belonged not, Genesis 15. 5. Here by the way he much
mistakes himself.

(1.) In casting Ishmael out of Covenant, in that manner that all the time of
his Circumcision he had not any title to it; as afterward he more fully
explaines himself, to that end that he might make (were it possible) the
Covenant and the Seal distinct of themselves, without any relation one to the
other, Conceiving some to be sealed, that were never in Covenant; and some to
be in Covenant that were never sealed. But Ishmael was in covenant, as was Esau
also at his Circumcision, and his circumcision (were there no more arguments)
does witness it, Genesis 17. 11. Ye shall Circumcise the flesh of your foreskin,
and it shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you. Circumcision was
bottomed on the Command, we grant, had there been no institution, no man might
have presumed to have signed it with such a Seal, but the Command had relation
to the Covenant; Men in Covenant were the adequate subject of Circumcision, and
are of Baptism; Genesis 17. 9, 10. God said to Abraham, Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is
my Covenant which you shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee,
every man-child among you shall be circumcised. He was indeed after cast out,
with his seed, as was Esau; not by a Church-censure, as Master Cotton affirms,
Holiness of Church Members, Church Censures, fall not so heavy as to reach all
posterity; but by divine prerogative as the Apostle, Romans 9. abundantly
declares. His casting out sufficiently argues that he was once in, and when he
received the token of the covenant, he was in covenant.

(2.) He does ill, in laying upon Ishmael the brand of bastardy, as though he
were a son of whoredoms to faithful Abraham; Concubines in Scripture have
the name of wives, and their seed was ever accounted legitimate; neither will
this serve his purpose at all to argue Ishmael out of Covenant. It was the case
of Dan and Nepthali, Gad and Asher, (out of whose loins a considerable part of
Gods Vovenant People did issue) as well as Ishmaels. And could he fasten that
ignominy on Abraham, and Ishmael, to make it an illegitimate issue; yet this
would not cast Ishmael out of covenant. It was the case of Pharez, Zarah,
Jephthah, and yet they were all in Covenant with God. 2. He makes applicat on
of this distinction, and says, Of the three former kinds of Abraham's seed the
promise recited is meant, but in a different manner thus: That God promises he
will be a God to Christ, imparting in him blessings to all the Nations of the
earth, to the spiritual seed of Abraham in Evangelical benefits to the natural
seed inheriting in domestic and political benefits. So that it evidently
appears, that he casts out all the natural seed of Abraham, (legitimate or
base, as he calls them, inheriting or not inheriting) from any title to that
Covenant, save in domestic and political benefits. Here I shall undertake a
Position in full opposition, that that Covenant in those words expressed; I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their
generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to they seed
after thee, Genesis 17. 7. in their fullest latitude, as they are there spoken, in
the largest comprehension (which according to Scripture they can be taken) are
entered with all the natural seed of Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob. But before I
come to the confirmation of it (which is a matter of ease, if any) give me
leave, (as well for the help of the Reader, as satisfaction of the Adversary,)
to premise some things to avoid all misunderstandings being necessitated to it
by the foul miscarriage of some in their stating of this question.

First, Positions premised for a right understanding of the question.
we take not in all the natural seed of Abraham, as the Position plainly
expresses, but the seed by promise which I understand not of the Elect, or
Regenerate seed; but of that seed which God by miracle (according to promise)
gave to Abraham by Sarah, All the natural seed of Abraham is not in Covenant,
but only the seed by promise.
when she was past years of childbearing. The natural posterity (which was the
birth by Promise) we only understand; And so the Apostle explaines it, Romans 9.
7, 8. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children; but
in Isaac shall thy seed be called. That is, they which are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of the Promise are
counted for the seed: Where [children of God] is taken in the same latitude as
[Adoption] ver. 4 comprizing all the visible body of the Jews, as it is also
taken, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Only those that are borne by Promise are included, and all
the sons of Ishmael and Keturah, (though their parents were once in Covenant)
are by Gods special command shut out* Neither are all these included; for as
God cast off Ishmael and his seed, so he also cast out Esau, and his posterity,
Therefore the Apostle having brought the former distinction of seeds, rests not
there, but adds, verse 10, 11, 12, 13. And not only this, but when Rebecca
also had conceived by one, even by our Father Isaac; for the children being not
yet borne, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to Election might stand; not of works, but of him that calls. It
was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written; Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated. And therefore the denomination of the
seed, is, in Jacob, surnamed Israel; Therefore when the head, or if you will,
the root of the covenant, is mentioned in Scripture, it is not barely Abraham,
but Abraham and Isaac, to exclude all Abraham's seed of any other line; not
barely Abraham and Isaac, but Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The natural seed of
Jacob, then (not according to ours, but Gods own limits) is included in that
covenant, in the full latitude and extent of it.

Secondly, The Covenant was entered of God with Abraham as accepting the terms
of it for himself and his natural issue.
we do not say that this covenant was entered with Abraham as a natural Father,
nor his seed comprehended as natural children, we well know that qua tale is
omne, then all natnral parents were in Covenant, in that they had natural
children, and all natural children were in Covenant, because they were the
natural issue of their parents. Abraham's Father was a natural father, and
Abraham was his natural son, yet neither of them, upon that account were in
covenant, we say it was entered with Abraham, accepting the terms of it from
God, for himself, and his natural issue, all his natural issue, not by God
himself excluded were in covenant, He that made the covenant (according to his
good pleasure) might put limits to it; Abraham may be considered, 1. As a man,
the Son of Terah, of the race of Adam. 2. As accepting of Gods call, and
receiving his tender for him and his. 3. As a faithful and an upright man,
regenerate and steadfast in covenant. It is not as man that God enters covenant
in this latitude, for Abraham himself was not thus in covenant, If he had been
in covenant, as a man, then no man had been out of covenant: Neither is it as
an upright man before God, and keeping covenant, for those of his posterity,
whose hearts were not steadfast, were in covenant, and did hand it over to their
seed, But as a professor of the Faith accepting the covenant, taking God for
his God, in contradistinction to false gods, he accepted it for himself and for
his seed, his natural posterity. And all that profess the faith hold in the
like tenure, are in covenant, and have the covenant; not vested in their own
persons only, but enlarged to posterity.

Thirdly, The Covenant entitles to spiritual mercies, and life eternal upon
Gods terms and condition.
we entitle the seed of Abraham, as before, to spiritual mercies, and so the
seed of all that hold in the tenure of Abraham to saving grace and life
eternal; not by an absolute conveyance, infallibly to inherit, we know, though
Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant only shall be saved, Romans 9.
27. but upon Gods terms, and conditions in the Gospel held out of God to his
people. Salvation is made over by virtue of covenant, to all thus in covenant,
in that sense, as Christ speaks, John 4. 22. Salvation is of the Jews. In that
sense as Christ uses it of Zacheus family; This day is salvation come this
house, Luke 19. 9. In that sense as the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks of it,
where he sets out the danger of neglecting so great salvation, Heb. 2. 3. In
that sense (as I conceive) the Apostle speaks of it, where he says, that upon
the call of the Jews, All Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 26 They shall enjoy
those privileges, in which salvation upon Gods terms may be obtained, and this
is all that can by any means be squeezed out of their words, that say, the
covenant of Grace was made of God, with Abraham and his natural seed, or with
believers and their seed. It is even irksome to read the large business that
is made, to find out our meaning about the covenant of God made with Abraham
and his seed; and we must per force confess that we mean it of a covenant,
infallibly, absolutely, to confer grace, and consequently salvation. To be so
in Covenant, as that a man cannot fall from it. To this end, words of mine are
produced, that I never uttered, and several arguments produced, against this
supposed tenent and authorities multiplied out of Protestant Writers, Beza,
Twisse, Wallaeus, The Annotations on the Bible, Ames, Paraeus, Downham. I am
content that all these Worthies shall still stand up in their honor, and that
this shadow should fall with shame, as well as I am that Bellarmine, Stapleton,
a Lapide, Becanus, Estius should fall with it, whose arguments in this
controversy one after other have been brought against me. To draw all up
toward a conclusion, All that is necessarily included in Gods entrance of
covenant with a people, engaging to be their God, and taking them for his
people; is here by this grand Charter of Heaven made over to Abraham and his
natural issue by Isaac and Jacob. All their posterity are branches of this root
by nature simply considered, and they are holy branches by virtue of this
covenant, which necessarily implies privilege of Ordinances, the fruition of
Gods Oracles, which are his covenant-draughts; without which no people are in
Covenant, but all are strangers: And this privilege of Ordinances implies also
all Privileges, leading to, and accompanying salvation, and salvation it self
upon Gods terms, in his word revealed: and so before the disputation, the
Reader has my supposition.

CHAP. XLVI.
Arguments concluding the natural issue of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to be
taken into Covenant.
MY first Argument is taken from the addition annexed to this covenant in the
words immediately following. The natural issue of Abraham possessed the land of
Canaan
The Lord having made a covenant in full words with Abraham and his seed, he
adds, and I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein
thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and
I will be their God. That seed of Abraham that had possession of the land of
Canaan, through the gift, and by virtue of the promise of God, is the seed here
taken into covenant, to have the Lord for their God. This is so plain, that
nothing can be plainer to any that read the words. But the natural seed of
Abraham, all the seed of Jacob in their several Tribes, (according as God set
them their bounds) inherited the land of Canaan, which is called the land of
their inheritance, and not only the spiritual seed Regenerate. Look into the
History of of Scripture, who those were that inherited Canaan, and you may see
who were in this covenant; The natural seed were there, and not only the
spiritual, Even those of Abraham's posterity that died, not having obtained the
promises, Heb. 11. 13. that only so journed in Canaan, and were never possessed
of it, had title to it. It was theirs in reversion, though they never came into
actual possession.

My next Argument is drawn from the Seal that is annexed in the words
immediately following this additional promise, Had the seal of Circumcision.
ver. 9, 10, 11. And God said unto Abraham, thou shall keep my covenant
therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is my
Covenant which you shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee;
every man-child among you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the
flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and
you. They that had the sign and seal of the covenant, that had it by divine
appointment, were a people in Covenant. This is so plain, that nothing can be
more plain; God does not enter covenant with one, and give the sign and seal
to another: but all the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob, had the
seal, viz. all the males, all those that were in a capacity of it, it was not
limited to the spiritual seed. There had been no place for that distinction of
Circumcision in the flesh, and Circumcision of the heart; if none must be
circumcised in flesh, but those that are circumcised in heart.

My third Argument is drawn from the Comment that God himself makes of this
covenant, Were owned of God as his people.
in the whole Series of Scripture-history, holding it out every where in this
way of tenure, to Abraham and his natural issue, as before; Where God himself
speaks to the whole body of Israel when they were newly come up out of the land
of Egypt, he says, I am the Lord your God, Exodus 20 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 6. God owned
all of that whole people as his, all of them being Abraham's natural issue, yet
all of them were not spiritual* and while they were in Egypt, God speaks of
them all in community as his; Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto
me in the wilderness, Exodus 5. 1. We see the titles that he gives them,
Children of the Lord your God, an holy People, a peculiar People above all
Nations, Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2. That speech of the Lord to Israel, Amos 3. 1, 2. is
very full to our purpose: Hear ye the Word of the Lord that he has spoken
against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up
from the land of Egypt, saying, You only have I known of all the families of
the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Every one that
descended from Jacob, the whole of the family that came out of Egypt, were a
select people to God in covenant; He was according to the terms of that
Covenant, their God. There is not a place, where God calls them by the name of
his people (which are almost endless;) but there we have this confirmed, that
that people were the Lords by virtue of this grant made to Abraham and his seed.

In the fourth place, Pleaded their interest in the Covenant for obtaining of
mercy.
I argue from the practice of the people of God, making this Covenant of God
entered with Abraham and his seed, a plea to obtain mercy from God for all
Israel, the worst of Israel, in their lowest state and condition, Deuteronomy. 9 26,
27. O Lord God, destroy not thy people and thine in heritance, which thou have
redeemed through thy greatness, which thou have brought forth out of Egypt
with a mighty hand. Remember thy servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, look not
unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin. If this Divinity had been then known, Moses might have been sent away
with this answer; That he spoke for dogs, and not for children; not for
Israel, but for aliens and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel. But as
this and the like requests of the people of God were made in faith, so they
prevailed with God; Moses there urges, They are thy people, and thine
inheritance, verse 29. as does the Church, Isa. 64. 9. Be not wroth very sore,
O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever; behold, see, we beseech thee, we
are all thy people; and Moses petition takes as the History shows, Exodus 32.
14. And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people;
yea, when God vouchsafes mercy to his people thus in covenant, Levit. 26. 42.
it is upon this account of the Covenant; Then will I remember my Covenant with
Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will
I remember, and I will remember the land, Lev. 26. 42. And appearing for the
deliverance of Israel out of their hard and pressing bondage; he says to
Moses, I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, Exodus 3. 6. and that to stay up his faith in confidence of
deliverance.

To this here in this place delivered one replies, says he) with Abraham and
his seed I find, Genesis 17. 7. and the urging of this covenant I deny not, Exodus
32. 13. Deuteronomy. 9. 27. Lev. 26. 42. Exodus 3. 6. And though I say not that it
contained only the promise of Canaan, but grant it contained the Promise of
Redemption by Christ, Luke 1. 17. yet I like not Chamiers saying, to call the
Promise of Canaan an appendant to the covenant, since the Holy Ghost me thinks
speaks otherwise, Psalm 105. 8, 9. 10, 11.

I shall say no more, Sol.
but leave it to the Reader, whether this be any answer, only for his censure
of Chamiers calling the promise of the land of Canaan an appendant to this
covenant; the thing is so clear in the narrative of it, Genesis 17. that nothing
can be more evident. The Covenant is full, verse. 7. To be a God to Abraham and
to his seed, and this he might have been had he pleased, in the land of Vr of
the Caldees, or in any land whatsoever where Abraham's seed had been planted:
But when the covenant is thus made, there is added; And I will give unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land
of Canaan for an everlasting possession. As for that of the Psalmist, where he
thinks the holy Ghost speaks otherwise; the force of this Argument must needs
be this. That which is any where called a Covenant, that is not an appendant to
a covenant; but the giving of the land of Canaan to the seed of Abraham, is
there called by the name of a Covenant. He will not, I think, say, that
Circumcision is the Covenant between God and his people, he will not deny, but
it is a sign and seal annexed to the covenant; and yet, Genesis 17. 10. it is
called a Covenant, This is my Covenant which she shall keep between me and you,
and thy seed after thee, every man-child among you shall be circumcised.
Metonimies of the adjunct are well enough known, and the common use of them in
Scripture; but that it is his wisdom for his advantage to conceal it.

My fifth and last argument is drawn from those several Texts in the New
Testament, New Testament Scriptures concluding Abraham's natural seed to be in
Covenant.
which interpret this Covenant thus entered with Abraham, in that latitude; as
extending to his natural issue, and not with limit to his spiritual seed; and
that not barely in domestic or civil, but in spiritual promises; so that this
one has many in the bowels of it.

First, Rom 9 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Romans 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses. The Apostle aggravating in the highest and
saddest way, that great heaviness, and continual sorrow of heart, that he had
for Israel; (not respective to civil or domestic, but higher concernments,)
even for the whole body of Israel; his brethren and kinsmen according to the
flesh, as he expresses himself, v. 3. For amplification of the real grounds of
his trouble, that such a people should be cast off; he reckons up their
privileges, the privileges of all that according to the flesh were
Israelites; Privileges formerly enjoyed, but now lost, nine in number: Who are
Israelites, to whom appertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises? Whose are
the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all,
God blessed for ever, Amen. Here sure is enough to conclude them of the seed
thus in covenant, to be of Gods adopted seed under the Promises.

Secondly, Romans 11. Throughout.
Romans 11. Throughout the whole body of the chapter, the Apostle speaks of the
casting off of Gods people. Those that are cast off from being a people of God,
were once his people; those that are put out of covenant, were a people in
Covenant; but the natural issue of Abraham (called natural branches, verse 21.
being by right of birth of that Olive) are there broken off, cast off;
therefore the natural issue was the seed in covenant.

Thirdly, Mat. 8. 11, 12
Mat. 8. 11, 12. Upon occasion of the Faith of the Centurion, which Christ so
magnifies, and preferres before the faith of any in Israel; he prophecies of
the call of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews, I say unto you, that
many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven: But the children of the Kingdom
shall be cast out into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Nations from all quarters of the world, every point of the Heavens shall
embrace the Faith, and be received visible members of the Kingdom of God; when
the children of the Kingdom that are now in it, and enjoy it, shall be cast
out of it; children of the Kingdom that are to be cast out, are in the
Kingdom only upon an interest of birth, for the fruition of the privileges of
Ordinances, and not upon any spiritual title, infallibly giving interest in
Salvation: But the children of the Kingdom were upon our Saviors sentence to
be cast out, therefore they were in the Kingdom only on an interest of Birth.

Fourthly, Gal. 2. 15
Gal 2. 15. In that chapter among other things we have a narrative from the
Apostle, of his dealing by way of reproof with Peter at Antioch. In which we
may observe.

(1.) The occasion given by Peter, verse. 12. Before that certain came from
James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew and
separated himself.

(2.) The issue which followed upon this carriage of his, And the other Jews
dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with
their dissimulation.

(3.) Arguments brought for conviction of Peter of this error, which are two.
The first in the 14. verse. If thou being a Jew live after the manner of the
Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as
do the Jews? Thus the Argument runs; It is unreasonable to draw others into
a practice that thou thy self purposely forbearest; But thou thy self keep
not the Jewish Rites and Ordinances, and therefore it is an unreasonable and
blameworthy practice, by thy example to compel others to their observation;
yea, thou being a Jew, take thy self to have freedom unreasonably, then do
thou draw on others, who were never under any such obligation. The second
Argument is in the 15. and 16. verses, We who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles; knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works
of the Law; for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, which is
thus enforced. In that way wherein we who are Jews, with all our
birth-priviledges cannot attain to righteousness, we may not teach the Gentiles
to attain to it. But we who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the
Gentiles, cannot this way attain to righteousness. We know that a man is
justified by faith; we are compelled to quit the Law, and to cleave to Faith
without works, for justification. These words which come up to our present
purpose, contain. (1.) The privilege of Peter, Paul, Barnabas with the rest
of the Jews. (2.) The character of the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews* As
to the full purpose for which these words are brought by the Apostle, they have
for the sense of them their dependence on the words that follow; but so far
as they contain the privilege of the Jews, in opposition to, and above the
Gentiles, (to which we are to speak) so far they are full of themselves;
showing, First, Positively, what himself and Peter were, Jews by nature.
Secondly, Negatively, what they were not, sinners of the Gentiles. Where
[nature] is taken, not in the proper, but vulgar acceptance, for birth or
descent from Ancestors, as usually in our common phrase of speech we say, men
are naturally Dutch, French, Spanish, Irish, when they are such borne and bred;
This Scripture therefore Camero cites for one, in which the Apostle speaks
after the vulgar manner. We have a Scripture parallel with this. Romans 11. 24.
where [nature] and [natural] is only by birth and off spring, Peter, Paul,
Barnabas were all naturally Jews, borne of Jewish Parents, and bred up in the
way and Religion of the Jews; such only Christ chose for Apostles, being
himself a Minister of the Circumcision. Peter therefore being one of the twelve
must necessarily be such, Paul was such* as we know from his own mouth, a Jew,
and of the Tribe of Benjamine Barnabas was such, of the Tribe of Levi. And
being such they enjoyed a privilege which the Gentiles wanted, they were by
birth and offspring of a Nation that is holy. No Nation was so great as they,
who had God so nigh unto them, who had statutes and judgments so righteous.
The Jew had every way prerogatives and advantages, but chiefly the Oracles of
God. God had not dealt so with every Nation; when other Nations were without
God, they had God nigh unto them; when others were unclean, they were holy.
This great privilege of Birth, Gentiles wanted, and so were by offspring
sinners; as Birth renders all, so they remain unholy and unclean, among the
unholy and unclean without any such title to the Covenant of God, that thereby
they might obtain any other denomination; they are dogs, while the people in
Covenant are children. And by this means the seeming opposition which is
between this text and that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 3. is easily reconciled.
Here the Apostle makes an opposition nature, between Jews and Gentiles; Jews
by nature had privilege above Gentiles. There he makes Jews and Gentiles in
nature equal? We (says he) were by nature children of wrath as well as others,
as well as Heathens, that have no Birrh privilege [Nature] in that Text is not
the same as nature in this [Nature] there is taken for the qualification of
nature, which is equally defiled in Jews and Gentiles, which is there
evidenced in the conversation of the Jews, being (before convertion by grace)
the very same with the Gentiles. Among whom also we all had our conversation in
times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
of the mind, and were by nature children of wrath, even as others. [Nature]
here is taken for a Birth-priviledge, and so the Jews (though in themselves
sinners) are reputed an holy people a people by covenant holy to the Lord.
Nature simpl considered, is stained, and renders Jews and Gentiles equally
sinners and obnoxious to Gods wrath; of which, Justification by faith is an
acknowledgement, as the Apostle here shows, verse 17. But birth of Jewish
Ancestors, of the stock of Israel puts them into a select condition, into the
number of a people holy to the Lord. Neither is this any contradiction; common
things dedicated for holy service and use, are holy: A people by nature sinners
dedicated to the Lord, are for holy service and use, for the service of the
Lord, when others are for service of idols. Therefore jerusalem a City, none of
the holiest for any transcendent manners of the inhabitants thereof, is yet
called by the Evangelist, the holy City, by reason of the Temple and worship
there, that were holy.

That which is a privilege of nature or birth, belongs to the natural issue,
that cannot be denied: But to be incovenant with God as a people holy and
exceeding others that are without as sinners, is a privilege of nature or
birth; therefore this privilege belongs to the natural issue. This Argument,
as it is clear of it self, so it has this advantage, that for interpretation
of the word [Nature] it has approbation from professed adversaries; one says, I
grant his sense of the word Nature, and that the Apostle there speaks of
himself and other Jews, as in reputation more holy then the Gentiles, because
of their interest in Circumcision, and observance of Moses Law; And this grant
involves him not in a few contradictions. 1. That this was a Birth-priviledge
as he here acknowledges, being the Jews privilege by birth of nature, and
therefore belonged to the natural seed; when(...) elsewhere he says, they
inherit only domestic and civil benefits. 2. This interest in Circumcision,
and observance of Moses Law, was a privilege of Ordinances, and he is wont to
deny, that birth entitles any to such privileges. 3. This is spiritual mercy
which the Jews here had in Circumcision, and Moses Law. Circumcision by his
confession seals Gospei-mercies, the same that Baptism seals. And Moses in
the Law wrote of Christ John 1 45. John 5. 46. and yet he denies the natural
seed any Promise of spiritual mercies. Any one of these arguments severally,
much more all jointly make good this Position, that all the natural seed of
Abraham by Isaac and Jacob are in that great Charter (vouchsafed of God) taken
into covenant, so as to be the people of God, and to enjoy all privileges of
his people, in order (upon Gods terms) to everlasting salvation.

CHAP. XLVII.
ROMANS 9. 6, 7, 8. Vindicated.
THough I hear of none that have much to say to all these Scriptures, as indeed
little, rather nothing can be said; they hold forth with so clear a light a
covenant in that latitude, and with those prerogatives, as you have heard; yet
one has a Text of Scripture, not to clear any one, but to silence and
overthrow them all, and that is the words of the Apostle, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.
where the Apostle (having sufficiently hinted to them the rejection of a great
part of the Jews, in his profession of that great heaviness and sorrow of
heart in their behalf, and that he could wish that himself were accursed from
Christ for them) undertakes to answer an objection. If Israel be cast off then
the Word of God will be of none effect, his promise will fail; But the promise
of God made with his people cannot fail, therefore Israel in such a
considerable number is not cast off. In which place ( says One) this very
Text, that now is the apple of our contention, was brought into question. This
Argument thus held out in behalf of the Anabaptists is borrowed from Stapleton
the Jesuit, at least Stapleton has gone before him in it, and he has learned
to a hair to follow him. Dicit Calvinus totam Abrahae progeniem esse sauctam,
quia foedus vitae Deus cum illo pepigerat his viz. verbis: Ero Deus tibi and
semini tuo, id est, ut Calvinus vult omnibus ab Abrahamo oriundis, omnibus ex
secundum carnem nat^^, sicut nun^, diruta mace ia omnibus Christianerum
parentum liberis ab illis secundum carnem natis. Addit, Deum omnes filios suos
vocare, qui ex Israele sunt progeniti, Atqui Apostolu^ dissertissime contrarium
dicit, non omnes qui ex Israele, ii sunt Israelitae; neque qui semen sunt
Abrahae omnes filii, sed in Is^ac vocabitur tibi semen, id est, non qui filii
carnis, by sunt filii Dei sed qui filii sunt promissionis, astimaxtur in semine
Filii autem promissionis sunt filii secundum Spiritum sive ex Abraham and Isaac
carn^liter oriundi, sive non.
Stapleton in his antidote, undertaking to make good that Calvin contradicts
the Apost. (which he puts into his Marg.) says, Calvin says, that the whole
progeny of Abraham is holy, because God entered the covenant of life with him in
these words; I will be a God to thee and thy seed, that is according to Calvin,
to all that shall descend from him, to all that according to the flesh are
borne to him, as also now (the partition wall being taken away) to all the
children of Christians, which according to the flesh shall be born to them; And
Calvin adds ( says he) that God calls all of the offspring of Israel his
children; But ( says he) the Apostle speaks the contrary expressly. They are
not all Israel that are of Israel, neither because they are the seed of Abraham
are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be caled; that is, they that
are the children of the flesh, those are not the children of God, but the
children of the promise are counted for the seed. But ( says he) the children
of the promise are children born after the Spirit, whether they descended from
Abraham and Isaac, or no, with much more to this purpose. We have drunk up the
Protestants poison, and their great care is, to preserve their party by the
Jesuits antidote; They are wholly beholding to them for the receipt; what
probatum est they can write upon it, must be examined. And that they may not
deny, but in the examination of this triumphing Argument, they have square
dealing, I shall give you the Authors words at length. I deny not ( says he)
but there was some other promise included in that objection, to wit, some
promise made to Israel, or the house of Israel, probably that, Jerem. 31. 33,
36, 37. For so the words, verse 6. They are not all Israel which are of Israel,
do intimate. But without question the promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. was
one which was included in that objection; Beza, Twisse, Ames, and others
answering Arminius, call it the Covenant of God with Abraham, which was that,
Genesis 17. 7. and the very phrase of Abraham's seed (in Isaac shall thy seed be
called, verse 7. The children of the promise are counted for the seed, verse 8.
Sarah shall have a son, as verse 9.) do evidently show, that the promise
(objected to prove, that if the Jews were rejected from being Gods people, then
God failed in making good his word) was that promise to Abraham; I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed; whereto I may add that the answerers of
Arminius, and the cited Remonstrants, to wit, Baine, and Ames, do say it was
the word of promise, not of the Law as Arminius conceived; for the word of
promise says Ames, Animadv in Remonstran. Script. Synod. de praedest. Cap. 8.
Sect. 4. is distinguished and opposed to the words of the Law, Gal. 3. 17, 18.
Now the word of the promise there is to Abraham and his seed, verse 16. and
this is there called by him verbum foederis, the word of the Covenant; now let
us consider how the Apostle answers it. He denies that Gods Word made to
Abraham did fall, though the Jews were rejected; because that promise, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed; as it comprehended saving grace, was never
meant by God of all Abraham posterity, or of any barely as they were descended
from Abraham by natural generation; but of the Elect, whether descended by
natural generation from Abraham or not. And this is apparent, both from the
words, verse. 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all
children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, verse. 8. It is expounded thus;
that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children
of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. Whence it is
apparent, that the same are not always the seed by calling, which are the seed
of Abraham by natural generation; and that the children of the flesh are not
the same with the children of the promise, and that the Apostle conceived this
the right may of answering those that objected the falling of Gods word; upon
the rejection of the Jews, by restraining the promise of being God to Abraham's
seed, only to the Elect, whether of Abraham's natural posterity or not; with so
little respect to any birth-right-priviledge, that he not only rejected
Ishmael, and took Isaac, but also loved Jacob, and hated Esau; by prophecy
declaring his mind, The elder shall serve the younger, and in this, the
Apostle acquits God from unrighteousness, in that he has mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens; notwithstanding his promise made
to Abraham and Israel, or any Birth-priviledge they could claim. Yielding that
this Text in that place is brought into question by the Apostle: Before I come
to the Apostles words themselves, I have diverse Queres to put.

1. How Baine and Ames come to the name of Remonstrants? I had thought they had
been on the party that are called Contra-Remonstrants?

2. Where it appears that Arminius conceived that the covenant there spoken to,
was the word of the Law, and not of Promise; I am sure in his Analysis on this
Chapter to the Romans he speaks in another manner, even in our authors own
Dialect, as though the ones Comment had been spit out of the mouth of the
other. Filii carnis Apostolo hoc loco sunt qui per o era legis justitiam and
salutem consectantur. Filii vero promissionis sunt illi qui fide in Christum
justitiam and salutem quarunt.
The sons of the flesh, with the Apostle, ( says he) are those that by the
works of the Law, follow after righteousness and salvation. The sins of the
promise are those that seek after righteousness and salvation by faith in
Christ, and he thus frames the principal Syllogism of the Apostle, for
confutation of the Jews arguing from the rejection of the Jews, Gods failing in
his promise. Si verbum Dei solos filios comprehendit, exclusis filiis carnis,
^um s^quitur verbum Dei non ex idere, etiamsi filii carnis reji^iantur imo
exidere si admitterentur isti qui ^^^^riptione ipsa conditionis foederis
ex^lu^luntur, t^ue^bum Dei ^los filios promissionis comprehendit, exclusis
filiis. carnis. Ergo verbum Dei non excidit, etiam filii carnis r^jiciantur.
If the word of God comprehend only the sons of the promise, shutting out the
sons of the flesh; then it follows that the word of God does not fail though
the sons of the flesh be rejected: But the word of God comprehends only the
sons of promise, shutting out the sons of the flesh: Therefore the word of
God does not fail, though the sons of the flesh be rejected. Armin. Anal. Cap.
9. ad To. p. 781. Let any now judge whether he can interpret this of the Law
and not of the promise.

3. When he affirms that to be borne after the flesh is all one with the
Apostle, with legal justiciaries, as he does (which is Arminius his
Interpretation) how then can he by that distinction of children of the flesh,
and children of the promise, shut out the natural seed of Abraham? are the
natural seed of Abraham, and legal justiciaries one and the same?

4. If the Apostle exclude all the natural seed of Abraham from this Covenant
of God (as Stapleton argues, and from him the Anabaptists) and takes in only
his spiritual seed, how can he be reconciled to himself? in the words
immediately before this objection, he speaks of the Jews (as his kinsmen
according to the flesh, which were the natural seed of Abraham) and says, To
them pertain the Adoption, the Glory, and the Covenants, etc. How then can his
distinction be interpreted to throw them out of Covenant, when in express
terms he had affirmed that they were in covenant? How can he deny that these
are children, verse. 7. when he had affirmed that to them pertains the
Adoption, verse. 4. Which may be confirmed by abundant other Texts of Scripture;
Ye are the children of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Out of Egypt have I
called my Son, Hosea. 11. 1. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and
cast it unto Dogs, Matthew. 15. 26. where all that were not Gentiles, all to
whom Christ was sent, are called children; Ye are the children of the Prophets,
and of the Covenant which God made with your Fathers, Acts 3. 20. Does the
Covenant appertain to them, and they styled the children of the Covenant, and
yet are they out of Covenant? Are they children to whom the Adoption pertaines,
and yet no children? When they have given any fair answer to these Quere's,
especially the two last: we shall conceive some probability of truth in their
Gloss on the Apostles words; in the mean time we cannot but look upon it in
full opposition and contradiction to that which the Apostle expressly
delivers. For the Text of the Apostle, it will be besides my purpose to make
any full Comment upon it; it will be sufficient to take it out of their hands,
and vindicate it from that which they would assert from it, and to let the
Reader know the Apostles scope in that place, which is not to make a full
Comment on those words, Genesis 17. 7. but only to free it from an objection which
the unbeleeving Jews might raise from it. God has made a Covenant with them,
to be their God, and the God of their seed. If he now cast them off as the
Apostle does affirm, the Covenant then is broke, and the word of God is of
none effect. The Apostle denies that this follows, and shows that the term
[Israel,] or [children of Abraham.] admits of distinction, and produces a
Scripture, verse. 7. where one distinction is implied, viz. Genesis 21. 12. In
Isaac shall thy seed be called, and so a numerous company by Ishmael is
excluded (who were Abraham's seed after the flesh) and only the sons of promise
by Isaac are accounted the seed, verse. 8. that come from Isaac, borne by
miracle. And verse 10, 11, 12, 13. seconds it with others concerning the
children of Isaac, Esau and Jacob. As then there was a distinction of seed; so
also now, one member he had laid down before, viz. Israelites according to the
flesh vested in all those privileges there reckoned up, ver. 4, 5. These they
pleaded, and the Apostle yields them; And these men (according to the discovery
of these times) deny them. The second member he after falls upon, the eternally
beloved and chosen of God, and largely amplifies. In these Abraham's seed may
continue, though the other be cast off; to whom yet God has continued (in
successive generations) a God in covenant, and continued to them the
privileges of being his people, though now he was upon the rejection of them:
And that it may appear that I go not alone, I shall give an Exposition of this
Text from a more able Pen, above the suspicion of an Arminian, which is here
charged, namely Gomarus, who (having in his Analysis on that Chapter, spoken to
the Jews objection, and the Apostles answer) makes this inference; Unde
perspicua est Apostoli sententia qua negatur excidere seu irritum reddi
Sermonem de foedere cum Abrahamo and semine ill us, deque benedictione and
salute per promissum Messiam, Gal 3. 7 uamvis Judaeorum maxima pars a Christo
and benedictione exclusa sit Anathema, Idque probat distinctione Israelitarum
and seminis Abrahami; ^aque ratione ostendit promissionem Dei ratione
efficaciae illius esse indefinitam ac sensu particularem, non autem
universalem, ac proptere^ universalim perperam inde constitui; ^am quamvis
Israelitae plerique pereant promissionem tamen Dei minima reddi irritam inde
constat, quia in elect is est efficax, Now enim omnes, ut v. 6. ait, qui sunt
ex Israele patre prognati secundum carnem, sunt very illi Israelitae; ad quos
foederis gratiae Dei non solum oblatio cum condition officii praestandi; sed
etiam collatio and hareditas coelestis reipsa pertineat. ut ver. 7. exponitur
clarius, and Romans 2. 28. and 19. Neque quia semen Abraham^ sunt, ideo omnes
sunt filii seu haeredes benedictionis illius and ^jusdem gratiae gloriaeque
participes, Romans 4. 12. Gal. 4. 28. Quamvis enim hac videantur and inter se and
cum superioribus puguare quibus d^cuit Apost^los Judae^^ incredulos esse
Is^aelita^ and Abrahamit^s, non solum origin carnis, sed etiam ratione
foederum and promissionum acceptarum; nulla est dissentio. Etsi enim ad omnes
Israelta^ and patres and Adoptio and foederaac promissiones pertineant; non
prop^e rea tamen sunt omnes vere filii and haeredes salutis. Illa enim quae
objectantur. Judaeis infidelibus ab Apostolo tribuuntur, quidem ratione
vocationis externae (quia salus iis sub condition obedientia annunciats and
oblata est, and oblatio illius Circumcisione obsig^ata; unde omnes Israelitae
filii foederis dicuntu^ communiter, Act^r. 3. 25.) Sed non ratione vocationis,
internae and efficacis secundum propositum electionit, qua salus non solum
exterius cum condition fidei vivae annunciata and oblata est verbo ac signota
Sacramentis, sed etiam interius efficaciter donata condition seu fide
confertura Spiritu sancto. Hoc enim solum genuinis filiis and vere electis
Israelitis convenit non autem promis^ue omnibus.
From whence (says he) the Apostles conclusion (in which he denies that Gods
word concerning the Covenant with Abraham and his seed, and the blessing and
salvation by the promised Messiah, Gal. 3. 17. did fall, or become void) is
manifest, though the greatest part of the Jews be shut out from Christ, and
accursed. And this he proves by distinguishing Israelites and the seed of
Abraham; and thereby shows that the promise of God, respective to the efficacy
of it, is indefinite, and therefore particular, not universal, and so an
universal promise cannot rightly from thence be concluded: for though the
Israelites for a great part perish, yet that the promise of God is not thereby
made void appears, in that it has its efficacy in the Elect; for as he says,
verse 6. All which are of Israel ( borne according to the flesh) are not true
Israelites, to whom not only the tender of the Covenant of Grace, with
condition of duty to be performed; but the heavenly possession and inheritance
only belongs, as in ver. 7. and Rom 2. 28, 29. is more fully shown; Neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they therefore all children, or heirs
of that blessing, and partakers of the same grace and glory, as Romans 4. 12.
Gal. 4. 28. For though these things seem contradictory to themselves, and to
that also which was delivered before, where the Apostle affirms that the
unbeleeving Jews are Abrahamites, and Israelites; not only by reason of their
birth after the flesh, but also by reason of acceptance of the Covenants, and
promises, yet there is no contradiction; For though the Fathers, and Adoption,
and Covenants, and Promises belong to all the Israelites, yet all are not
therefore true children, and heirs of salvation. For these things which are
objected, viz. The Jews great privileges, are attributed by the Apostle to
the unbeleeving Jews, by virtue of their outward call, because salvation is
revealed and offered to them under condition of obedience, and that offer
sealed with Circumcision, from whence all Israelites are promiscuously called
children of the covenant, as Acts 3. 25.) and not by reason of their inward
call according to the purpose of Election effectual, because salvation is not
only outwardly under condition of a lively faith revealed and offered in the
word, and sealed in the Sacrament; but also inwardly and efficaciously, (the
condition, that is, faith being given them) is conferred by the Holy Ghost. For
this belongs not indifferently to all, but only to the genuine Sons and true
elect Israelites. Thus far Gomarus, in which we have these three things. 1.
This objection wholly s^lved. 2. The Apostle reconciled to himself. And, 3. The
Doctrine of Covenant-holinesse from the Apostle fully established, which when
they have well considered, with that which was spoke before, (having the whole
current of Scripture against them) they will have little list to make this one
Scripture their asylum.

It is farther said, John's Baptism, and were about to plead this
Birth-priviledge; John beats them off it, and takes that plea out of their
mouths: Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our father,
Matthew. 3. 9. that plea could not stand when the men were carnal.

I answer, Sol.
First, when those that were no better than these, make the same plea, John 8.
33. We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any; Christ yields it,
verse. 37. I know that ye are Abraham's seed; he allows them all that upon this
account they can claim. And for Pharisees he does not barely yield them to be
Church Members, but also Church-Teachers, Matthew. 23. 2. 2. I say John Baptist
does not deny what Christ yields, but lets them know, that this plea, will not
serve to avoid wrath, while they live in impenitence; They may perish
notwithstanding this plea, and yet Gods Covenant with Abraham hold; being able
of stones to raise up children unto Abraham, to make good what in Covenant he
had said. He no where says that they are not entitled to privileges of
Ordinances, and thereby interessed in the prerogatives of Gods visible people.
What Paul, Romans 9. 4, 5. so largely yields them, John Baptist in that place
does not deny them, which also now they had in visible possession. All sorts of
men, fare better by privilege of birth in civil things, Prove. 19. 14. House
and riches are the inheritance of fathers. The Jews fared better respective to
Religious things, Romans 3. 1. What advantage then has the Jew, or what profit
is there of Circumcision? Much every way* Privilege of Ordinances in the
Church of God, is a Birth-inheritance.

CHAP. XLVIII.
The Covenant in New Testament-times takes in parents with their children.
BUt in case all this be yielded in Old Testament-times, that the Covenant
entered was in this latitude, that the whole of Abraham's seed were taken with
him into Covenant, and that then it ran in a race by carnal descent, yet it is
otherwise at least in New Testament-times. No child fares now the better
respective to any visible Church-interest, for the Faith or Religion of their
Ancestors. And here is a fourth difference between the first and second, the
Old and New Covenant according to some. The first Covenant was entered in that
latitude, to take in Children with their parents, Posterity with their
Ancestors, according to the Charter so long infisted upon: But in New
Testament-times, the Covenant reaches no farther then the person that actually
enters; He covenants for himself, his seed have no more or farther interest
then the seed of Heathens and Pagans. When I first published my
Birth-priviledge, I here expected opposition, and did look* that some would
appear to put this limit to the Covenant in New Testament-times* but for the
state of the Church under the first covenant I thought I should not have found
an opposite, and therefore was less mindful of the confirmation of it, which I
hope is now done to the Readers full satisfaction. As to those that plead such
a change of things in New Testament-times, we might interrogate them in sundry
particulars.

First, Quere's premised.
when God by free Charter, did once vouchsafe such a grant to his people, how
it can be made appear that it was ever reversed; or any such limit put to it,
when the Church of God has held it in see from Abraham to this present hour,
they may well look that they should produce some plain word from God (revoking
his grant) that challenge them for usurpation. It is true that Gods Sovereignty
is such that he may contract his grace at pleasure; As he may wholly strike a
people out of covenant, so he may put what terms he pleases to it; but such
that affirm it should make it appear, in which hitherto they have been silent.
They that will eject us out of so long a possession, had need to make their
plea firm for our eviction.

Secondly, we might demand the reasons why the Covenant should run in so narrow
a limit now, being vouchsafed in so great a latitude then* being once made of
God as with men of years, so with little ones, Deuteronomy. 29. Why should little
ones be now excluded, and only men of growth admitted? when it is granted on
all hands that God continues a people to himself, how comes it to pass that he
admits them on such new terms? That his favors are now thus shortened, that
as a lease for term of life, differs from a fee-simple for inheritance, so the
Covenant in New Testament-times differs from the Covenant vouchsafed of God to
our fathers? Where the absurdity lies that Baptism should be administered to
those that do not actually believe, when yet Circumcision was administered to
infants in as great an incapacity.

Thirdly, we might demand how they can avoid that great scandal that must
needs by this means be given to the believing Jews, (who waved the old way of
the administration of the covenant, and embraced the new) to have their infants
upon this new admission struck out of Covenant, A man that should be seized on
an inheritance for ever, will hardly be brought to quit that tenure and accept
with limit for term of life, God was their God, and the God of their seed,
Genesis 17. 7. They did bring forth children to God, Ezekiel. 16. 20. Now they bring
forth children without God. They have a seed, but no holy seed; a world
replenished, but not a Church or people to God continued; The savage Indians in
a married condition have this privilege* that their issue are not bastards,
and this is all that can be claimed by Christians.

Fourthly, we might demand if so great a change were made and held in the
Apostolic Primitive times, how it comes to pass that there was such silence,
no man moving a question about it? The pomp of worship and observation of
places formerly in use, was laid aside in Gospel Times, but this we hear of,
and the reason of it, John* 4. 22. The initiating Sacrament of Circumcision had
a period put to it, of this we hear, and many complaints about it? Psalteries,
Harps, Organs, Cymbals, and such instruments of music, in use in the time of
the Law, were laid aside in Gospel Times, and not known in the western
Churches till after Thomas Aquinas his days; As this was done, so it was not
past in silence, but spoken of, (as elsewhere I have shown, and given reasons
of it) by Justin Martyr, [or at least one that bears his name,] Chrysostom,
Isidore, Thomas Aquinas. When none of these changes can pass, but observation
is made, it is more then strange that so great a change as this in the terms
of the Covenant, between God and his people, can be so carried on without any
observation at all, or one word once moved about it, or spoken in it? See
Master Baxters Treatise of Infants Church Membership, proving that Infants were
sometimes Church Members, page 26, 27. that there is no repeal of this grant
vouchsafed of God, p. 27, 28. Waiting for some fair answer to the former
demands, I shall proceed to those texts of Scripture, where the Covenant in New
Testament-times is held out in this latitude to believers and their seed,
comprizing their parents in the same privilege of Covenant and participation
of promise.

First, Acts 2. 38, 39 vindicated.
let us look into those words of Peter, delivered in his first Sermon after the
receiving of the holy Ghost, (the first place in which the Covenant of promise,
and Baptism the Seal of the Covenant are mentioned) to the Jews, with whom
the Apostles as yet held communion being not actually rejected out of a visible
Church State; Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, The text ^nalized.
Acts 2. 38, 39. In which words we may observe. 1. An Exhortation, as, to
repentance for the guilt of the blood of Christ; (of which they stood
convinced) so, also unto Baptism. 2. A Motive stirring them up to embrace
baptism in the name of Christ, drawn from the benefit which they shall reap,
Ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. 3. A farther encouragement to the
acceptance of Baptism drawn from their Covenant-priviledge, which is here set
out in its full latitude and extent (as Calvin rightly upon the words
observes) 1. ^o the Jews, For the promise is unto you. 2. To their children,
and to your children. 3. To the Gentiles upon call, and to you that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Where an effectual call
cannot be meant (which the Apostle calls a call according to purpose) proper
only to the elect, It is a call unto such a Church State, as the whole Nation
of the Jews did then enjoy, as the firstborn in the family; A call that puts
them into a like Church State, and condition with the Jews. From whence this
argument may be drawn. Those to whom the Covenant of promise appertains have a
right to Baptism; But the covenant of promise appertains to men in a
Church State and condition, and to their children. The major cannot be denied
by any that will not make themselves the Apostles opposites. The minor
proposition is now to be considered, That the covenant of promise to men in a
Church State and condition is in that latitude as to comprize their children.
For which the words of the Apostle are full and clear, To you is the promise
made, and to your children, on which Calvin rightly comments. Peter observes
(says he) a due order, when he assigns the first place of honor to the Jews,
That it takes in children, it depends on the words of the promise, Genesis 17. 7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Where God joins children with
their parents in the privilege of adoption, in the inheritance of privileges
belonging to all Church Members.

But this clear text wants not wits that study to cloud it; [children,] and
will have them to be the same as the sons and daughters mentioned, v. 17. of
that chapter, from Joel, chap. 2. 28. and consequently the promise to be meant
of the Spirit of prophecy, and to appertain to none but those of age and
capacity for prophecy. To this I answer, 1. The extraordinary gifts of the
holy Ghost in this visible way cannot be the promise here by Saint Peter
mentioned, seeing it is enlarged to all that are afar off, even to as many as
the Lord shall call. But all these have not the holy Ghost in that way
extraordinary, nor any promise of it; Baptism with the holy Ghost and with
fire, is a baptism proper to those primitive Saints, wherewith they were told
that they should be baptized not many days after* 2 Howsoever the promise be
interpreted so, as to belong to all that are believers, and call on the name of
the Lord, as there follows, yet that promise is on condition of their
baptism; The means are to be used in reference to the end, Baptism is the
means, receiving of the holy Ghost (there specified) is the end; And the
Apostle confirming them in the promise of the end, does likewise encourage them
to the use of the means, in Baptism to expect the gift of the Spirit, and so
(according to this interpretation) that place is an encouragement to baptism.
The promise is the fittest encouragement to the Sign and Seal of the promise.
Baptism is the Sign and Seal to which they are here encouraged, and in that
latitude as they had formerly known the command of Circumcision. 3. Neither are
the children here mentioned the same with sons and daughters spoken of by the
Prophet, nor limited to such sons and daughters as are of growth, and
capable of the gift of prophecy. 1. The Apostle urges the promise in the way,
as in the Scripture it is delivered, which is to men and their posterity, to
them and theirs. So God promises to be a God in covenant to his and their seed,
and this the Apostle holds out, to draw them on to the Seal of the covenant to
accept Baptism on the same terms that Abraham did circumcision. 2. It is
without reason to believe that the Apostle should instance in one piece of the
distribution of the Prophet there, and to leave out the rest; to put in alone
sons and daughters, when we have in the Text young men, old men, servants and
handmaids. 3. Children here are mentioned under a promise to the parents, to
you and your children is the promise made, but not so in Joel, nor in the
quotation of the Apostle. That Scripture has only an enumeration of the
several sorts and conditions of people in any Nation, on all which the spirit
is promised, without any reference made to the parents of those sons and
daughters, more then to the masters of those servants and handmaids; not the
sons and daughters of their flesh, but the sons and daughters of the
Nation. A Language usual in our ordinary expressions speaking of men of any
sort or condition, as your Lawyers, your Merchants, etc. so here, your sons,
your daughters, your old men, your young men, etc* Others say, That the promise
made, is the sending of Jesus Christ, and blessing by him as is expounded, Acts
3. 25, 26. Act 13. 32. To. 15. 39. I answer; it is true, that Jesus Christ is
the most eminent mercy promised, and may be called the promise virtualiter,
being the ground of all promises, and therefore some interpreters have
mentioned the gift of Christ on this occasion. But it is plain that Gods
Covenant, and this gift are to be distinguished; Christ is promised in priority
to the Jew, before the Gentile; The Jew then is taken into Covenant before this
gift of Christ can be of them expected: It is therefore the Covenant it self
(entered with parent and child, root and branch) that is here meant (as Calvin
in the words before observes) from which the giving of Christ in the flesh
follows. And therefore Diodati fully pitches upon the true sense of it, Seeing
as you are Abraham's children, you are within the Covenant, you ought to
acknowledge Christ to be the head and fountain of the Covenant The Covenant, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, is here meant, which from Abraham had
been the Jews privilege, Romans 9.

It is farther said, that the limitation, as many as the Lord our God shall
call, shows that the promise belongs to them, not simply as Jews, but as
called of God; which is more expressly affirmed, Acts 3. 26. To you first God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities. I wonder how it came into any man's head to call
this amplification, a limitation, it plainly enough speaks their boldness in
dealing with the Scriptures; Had the Apostle said, To you is the promise made,
and to your seed, in case God shall give you a call, he had spoke to their
purpose; but saying, To you, and to as many as the Lord your God shall call; it
plainly shows that he does not limit, but amplify the mercy, extending it not
barely to the Jews (who in present by reason of fruition of Ordinances were a
people near to the Lord, Psalm. 148. 14.) but also to the Gentiles, who Ephesians.
2. 17. we affare off. 2. In that he says, this promise belongs to them not
simply as Jews, but as called, is a full contradiction: A Jew uncalled (at
this time before the Kingdom was taken from them) is as much as a Convert
unconverted, or a Gentile disciple undiscipled: In case they think to come off
by limitting it to an effectual call, the Scriptures by themselves quoted, does
evidently contradict it, Christ came to give them, that effectual calling, and
not only to those that were thus called. It is yet said, Peter does exhort to
repentance, and Baptism together, and in the first place persuades to
repentance, then to Baptism, which shows repentance to be in order before
baptism. To which I answer, that these who had crucified Christ as a
blasphemer, a seditious person, an impostour must needs repent before they
would accept Baptism in his name, or hope for remission of sin by him, I had
been lost labor for the Apostle, to have pressed those, that had crucified
Christ, and retained their former opinion of him, to become disciples to him,
and to look to be saved by him, To persuade them to look for remission of
sins in his blood, who took themselves to be without sin in shedding of it;
Yet notwithstanding this guilt (of which the Apostle would have them to repent)
he shows that they and their seed are under the promise of God, and puts them
into a way, in acceptance of Christ in the Gospel-tender, in his present way
of administration, to be continued his people still in covenant, and that (as
is plainly enough signified) that they might enjoy it in their former latitude,
to them and to their children. The promise (of which they were not yet
dispossessed, but stood as a people of God in visible Covenant, and their
children) is here brought as a motive to encourage them to hold correspondency
with God (as his vovenant people) embracing the way which their long expected,
and desired Messiah had now instituted and appointed. But this promise was to
them and their children. Here is yet another evasion, The text speaks not
expressly of Infants, but of children indefinitely; And if infants be not
children, we will be content that they be cast out of covenant, and will hold
no more plea for their Church Membership nor Baptism. God in the Covenant with
Abraham did not expressly mention infants, but seed, yet infants were his
seed, and, as his seed, by Gods command to be circumcised, And all our infants
are our children, and consequently to be baptized, Acts 20. 7. is an express
Text with some of this party (without any help of consequence) to prove that
women received the Lords Supper, Because it is said that disciples came
together to break bread, as though woman, and disciple, were synonyma? But here
the promise being made to children, infants must neither be comprised in the
letter, nor yet by any favor of consequence included.

It is further objected, that the text speaks not of the children of the
Gentiles at all (of whom we are) but of the children of the Jews, and therefore
if that promise be extended to infants, which does not appear, the promise is
to be expounded so, as to note something peculiar to the Jews infants. If the
Gospel held out any such transcending privileges appertaining to the seed of
the Jews above the Gentiles, they may do well to produce a Text for it,
otherwise we shall take it for granted from Saint Paul, that there is none at
all, that in Christ there is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free. And when the Apostle
adds, To those that are afar off, even as many as the Lord shall call, he
plainly means the Gentiles, as appears, comparing Ephesians. 2. 13. and though I
take not the boldness to add to the words, as some stand charged, yet it is
clear, that he same is understood there in reference to the children of the
Gentiles, that is expressed before to the children of the Jews. If any shall
grant an inheritance to Titius and his heirs for ever, and to Caius, every one
will understand that the heirs of Caius are meant as well as the heirs of
Titius, especially if it can be proved out of the Grant it self, that the
privileges conveyed to Caius, are as ample, as that to Titius. We can prove
the privileges granted to the Gentiles in the Gospel to be equal to those
granted to the Jews; when the Jews children then are under the promise with
their parents, the children of believing Gentiles cannot be excluded.

CHAP. XLIX.
Romans 11. 16. Vindicated.
SECT. I.
The Series of the Apostles dispute opened, and several Arguments deduced.
THe next Scripture for proof of the Covenant in New Testament-times takes in
children with the parents, The Series of the Apostles dispute.
is Romans 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy, and if
the root be holy, so are the branches; which Scripture, that it may be aright
understood, we must look into the whole Series of the Apostles dispute in that
place, Having before largely discoursed of the rejection of the Jews, out of a
present Church State and fellowship with the call of the Gentiles, and their
present Adoption, now somewhat to allay the seeming harshnesse of that doctrine
of his against the Jews, and to take down the insultings of the Gentiles over
that people, in this chapter he speaks to both. 1. To the Jews by way of
mitigation, limiting this doctrine of their rejection with a double caution. 1.
That it was not total. 2. That it was not final. That it was not total, he
first asserts, secondly proves; asserts, ver. 1. I say then, has God cast away
his people? God forbid. Proves by a threefold argument. 1. By instance in
himself, verse 1. For I am also an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the
Tribe of Benjamin, and he does not dispute for his own rejection. 2. By
instance in the elect of God, verse 2. God has not cast away his people which
he foreknew. 3. From a parallel Scripture, out of 1 King. 18. which parallel he
first lays down, verse 2, 3, 4* W^t ye not what the Scripture says of Elias,
how he makes intercession to God against Israel, saying Lord they have killed
thy Prophets, and dug down thy Altars, And I am left alone, and they seek my
life? But what says the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to my self
seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal. And
afterward applies, verse 5. Even so then at this present time also, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace. And so falls into a digression
concerning grace and works, verse 6. to the 11. 2. He speaks to the Gentiles,
and to take down their insultation over the Jews, he shows that this
rejection of theirs is not final. And this, as the former, is 1. Asserted,
verse 11. I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? (viz.
irrecoverably fall) God forbid. 2. Proved by giving account of a twofold end of
this rejection of the Jews. 1. The call of the Gentile, verse 12. But rather
through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to
jealousy. 2. A more glorious return of the Jews, in emulation of the
Gentiles, verse 12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness?
Hereupon he falls upon a large discourse of his zeal toward them, and their
re-ingraffing, verse. 13. 14, 15. adding the words of the Text, If the first
fruits be holy, the lump also is holy, and if the root be holy, so are the
branches. This Para^us makes a farther Argument, for proof that the Jews shall
again be called; Gomarus makes it an encouragement to the Apostle to endeavor
their call, howsoever here is a double similitude, One drawn from the
Ceremonial Law, If the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy. The other
from Nature, If the root be holy, so are the branches. The first is only
mentioned, the second is largely commented upon. In both we see, 1. A
supposition 2. An affirmation. The supposition is, of the holiness of the
first fruits, the holiness of the root. The affirmation is, the whole lump is
holy, the branches are holy. This last is grounded on a principle in nature
universally true. As is the root, so is the branch, they are both of one and
the same nature; As is the one, so is the other. Which he applies to the state
of the Church of God; first to the Church of the Jews, and that 1. In their
ancient estate, when they were a people of God, in Covenant Relation, holy, so
styled of him frequently in Scripture. 2. In their present state, for a great
part broken off, and so made no people* 3. In their future condition when they
should be called of God, and as it were risen from the dead. Secondly, he
applies it also to the Gentiles. 1. In their ancient estate, as no people. 2.
In their present estate, made a people of God, in the place of the Jews. 3. In
their possible estate, and condition, to be rejected and cast off* On which we
may ground several undeniable Positions, some concerning the subject, [root and
branch] some concerning the predicate [holy]. Positions premised for the right
understanding. 1. Of the root and branch.


First, concerning the subject root and branch, in this place (as by way of
Metaphor) set out the estate of parent and child, ancestor and issue. 2. The
whole body of the Church is compared to a tree, to an Olive tree. 3. The root
of this tree ( viz. the first supreme universal root) is Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Not Abraham alone, so Ishmaelites would be of the body. Nor Abraham with
Isaac alone, so the Edomites from Esau would have been taken in* But the
Apostle in this chapter (from Old Testament-authority) excludes both of them,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are therefore jointly the root. 4. The branches of
this tree are of two sorts. ^ome natural, issuing from the root by descent;
others ingraffed put in by way of insition. The ^ewes were natural branches,
descending from the loins of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The Gentiles are
branches by insition put into the stock, the natural branches being broken off.
5. The fatness of this tree is the glory of Ordinances, of which the whole
Church partakes, or as some say, Christ is the fatness, but that is only as
he is tendered in Ordinances, for he walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks. In which sense only we may yield that Christ is that fatness.

Secondly, 2. Of the holiness here mentioned.
concerning the predicate, Holy. There is one and the same holiness goes
through the whole tree, all the branches natural and engraffed through the
whole Church, and all the children of it Jews and Gentiles; The whole of this
holiness is from one Original root, and therefore one and the same. 2. This
holiness is such as is communicable from parent to child, and necessarily
communicated, as a root communicates sap to the branches. This is so plain,
that if it be denied, all the Apostles dispute falls. 3. It is no holiness of
inhesion, but relation, not qualitative, but federal. The holiness of the
Jews who were a holy Nation was such; The holiness of the Gentiles can be no
other. Holiness of inhesion is not communicable, but only holiness of
relation. In holiness of inhesion the proposition holds not* as, is the
father, so, is the child, who knows not that holy fathers have unholy
children? regenerate parents have issue unregenerate.

These things considered, it is evident, that, as the father is in regard of
Church State, Covenant-holinesse, so is the child, both in the Church of the
Jews and Gentiles: The father being without, the child is without; the father
being within, the child is within, eo nomine, because a branch of such a root,
a child of such a father, which is a full confirmation of the point in hand,
that the child is in Covenant with the father, and the person that actually
enters Covenant, is not solely vested in it. One stands upon the contrary part,
and puts it to this issue for trial, Whether this ingraffing be into the
visible Church by profession of Faith, or into the invisible by Election and
Faith; and concludes, that it is meant of the Church invisible; which if he can
make good, I shall confess all Arguments drawn from hence (as to this point)
are lost; I would (to avoid impertinent cavils, and quarrels) each Text were
brought to such issue. I shall in the first place bring arguments to evince
that the breaking off, and engraffing, is respective to the Church, as visible,
and then proceed to answer arguments from a late hand against it.

1. That ingraffing which is into Abraham, Arguments evincing the ingraffing to
be into the Church only as visible, and the breaking often to be from the Church
as visible.
Isa^^ and Jacob as a root is not an invisible graffing by saving Faith and
Election* This is plain, we live not by power received from Abraham, Abraham
cannot say he bears us up, in saving graces, and that without sap from him, we
can do nothing, But the ingraffing is into Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as a root.
This argument as is said by one, were of force if Abraham were made a root by
communication, and for prevention he is put to it to tell us of a root
communicating nothing, but an exemplary root, or an exemplary cause of
believing only; what an exemplary non-communicating root is or means, let the
Reader Consider.

Secondly, that ingraffing which caused disputation and contention in some,
emulation in others upon the sight and report of it, was not by saving faith
only into the invisible body, but open, visible, and apparent into the visible
body; But this ingraffing of the Gentiles into the Church of God, caused
disputation and contention in some, Acts 11. 2, 3. emulation in others, Deuteronomy.
32* 21. Rom 10. 19. Romans 11. 14. this therefore was into the Church visible.

Thirdly, That privilege which is not restrained to some few invisible
Churches, but is the privilege of all that are contained in it, and members of
it, is not an invisible work upon the heart to a saving change, but only an
interest in visible privileges. This is evident, the invisible work is not in
all, Matthew. 2^. 14. But this, here mentioned is the privilege of the whole
body, as is clear in the Text, and adversaries are constrained to acknowledge;
Therefore the ingraffing is only into the visible body. That privilege wherein
the Jews while they were a people of God did transcend the Gentiles when they
were no people, is the privilege which these Gentiles have by their
ingraffing, this is plain, verse 17* But it is the privilege of Ordinances in
being visibly related thus to God wherein Jews did then exceed Gentiles, as
has been largely shown.

Fourthly, that Faith from which the Jews actually fell* and the Gentiles stood
in danger to fall from, is not a saving justifying Faith, entituling to
invisible privileges, but a Faith of profession only giving a visible title.
This is plain, unless we will maintain Bertius his Hymenem desertur, and
assert the Apostasy of the Saints. But this Faith whereby the Gentiles are
ingraffed, is a Faith from which the Jews fell, and from which they were in
danger to fall, v. 20.

Fifthly, that reconciliation or ingraffing, which is opposite to casting out
of a visible Church State, is an ingraffing into the Church visible; But this
reconciliation or ingraffing is opposite to the casting out of a Church state:
This is plain, Matthew. 21. 43. It is a casting out of them that bore not fruit,
and not a casting off invisible branches.

Sixthly, If the state of the Jews continued from the Apostles time to this
day, be an exclusion from a visible Church State, so that they are no people of
God in name, then a visible Church State is that which they lost and the
Gentiles gained; This is plain. The state in which they stand being rejected,
is their state of rejection; But their condition since that time, is an
exclusion out of a visible Church state. This needs no proof: Therefore a
visible Church state is that which the Jews lost, and these gained. I wish that
these arguments to which many more might be added, may be taken into
consideration, and for a close of all, seeing it is peremptorily asserted that
it is manifestly false, that the Christian Gentiles were graffed into the same
visible Church with the Jews, for then they should have been Circumcised
contrary to the determination, Acts 15. and that God has quite taken away the
visible Church of the Jews, or to that purpose. This Error begetting many
others, I wish that it may be a little better thought upon, whether it be the
language of the Scriptures. I have learnt, that as we and they, have one and
the same God; one and the same Faith; that is, the doctrine of Faith, one and
the same Covenant, eat of one and the same spiritual meat, and drink of the
same spiritual drink, one and the same expected heaven; so, we are one and the
same Church Let us to that end further observe the manifold Metaphors by which
the Church, ours, and theirs, is set forth, all of them holding forth this
Oneness.

First, That of a Tent which is the habitation of sojourners, Genesis 9. 27. God
shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall
be his servant. Shems Tents must be possessed by Japhet, and not others built for
their habitation, The Tents of Shem, that is, his posterity by Abraham (which
Japhet, that is, the Gentiles by a special blessing did possess) is the Church
visible, as needs no proof; Shems Tents, and Japhets Tents are one, and the
same, Japhet comes to Shems, not Shem to Japhets.

Secondly, That of a Sheepfold, John 10. 16. Other sheep I have which are not
of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one fold, and one shepherd, The Sheep that in present were in the
fold, viz. Jews, and those not yet taken in, viz. Gentiles, all make up one and
the same fold; which though some may limit to the Church invisible, because
Christ gives notes of those that are indeed his sheep. but that is no argument
at all; Christ speaks to those that were disciples only according to
profession, and gives notes, of disciples indeed; and it is against all reason
that Christ should in discourse point out the invisible Church with the
demonstrative This, and that to those that were malignant enough in the Church
visible, namely the Pharisees, as appears in the close of the former Chapter*
And the mention of thieves creeping into it, hirelings employed in it does
contradict it. The visible Church of the Jews and Gen tiles, in which Christ
has true sheep for whom he dies, and others that thieves and hirelings do
deceive, makes up one sheepfold.

Thirdly, By a natural body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Man's body most aptly to this
purpose, that one new man, Ephesians. 2. 15. is the visibly body compact of both Jew
and Gentile.

Fourthly, to add no more, that of a Kingdom, Mat. 8. 11. Many shall come
from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven. The same Kingdom that Jews leave, Gentiles enter, Matthew.
21. 41, 43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. That can be no more then the presence of God
in Gospel Ordinances, which is without fruit among Jews (all invisible Members
bring forth fruit) and upon that accout is given to the Gentiles; Neither is it
of force that which is said against it, Then we must be circumcised. As though
we may not be in the same Kingdom, and yet under a new way of Administration,
Lawgivers on earth, are sometimes pleased to change their Laws; and so does
the Lawgiver of Heaven; or if he will limit his instance to Circumcision,
taking in no other Laws, the same house may have a new door or porch; let our
opposites then know that they are in the same visible Kingdom, as Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob and their posterity after the flesh in Israel were, and I wish
that they may take heed of making divisions in it or separations from it.

CHAP. L.
Arguments from a late hand for ingraffing into the Church invisible, and
breaking off from it, answered.
Argument. 1.
FIrst, That ingraffing which is Gods act by his sole power, is into the
invisible Church by Election and giving Faith. For graffing into the visible
Church, is admission into visible Membership, which if it be by an outward
Ordinance, is the easy act of the Administrator; if by profession of Faith,
the easy act of the Professor. But the ingraffing meant, ^om. 11. is Gods act
from his sole power, as is proved from verse 23. where the reason is rendered
why the Jews should be again graffed in, is because God is able to graffe them
in again, Ergo the graffing here is into the visible Church.

Answ. This ingraffing is by a power of God, working the heart to a professed
subjection to the way of God in Ordinances tendered, and assent of heart unto
all that is there promised; that power that brought Japhet into the tents of
Shem, Genesis 9* 27. That hand of the Lord that was with those that preached the
word, Act. 11. 21. so that a great number believed and turned to to the Lord,
must bring the Jews back into their former Church-condition. How easy soever
you take this work to be, to bring a people who are strangers to God into a
Church State; yet our Brethren in New England have not found it awork so easy
to bring the Natives there into a Church-condition; nor is it so easy a
business to bring in the Jews to this posture of a visible Church State. Have
so many prayers been* laid out for this work, and it is yet not done? when it
is a matter of such ^ase with man, and no need of the power of God for the
doing of it.

We understand a discipling of Gentile-Nations, and acknowledge it a work,
above the power of man, and confess it solely to be in the hand of God. We do
not speak of the bare admission of men that stand entitled, but the working of
them to such a title, and if an outward profession ^e in the power of man's
will, yet to bring men, or Nations to such a profession, cordially to embrace
the Gospel; so far as to assent to the truth of it* i^ above man, and a work of
no such ^ase.

Argument. 2.
Secondly, That ingraffing which is called reconciliation, opposite to casting
away, that is by Election and giving Faith* for (...) acts can reconcile; But
the ingraffing here is called reconciliation* opposite to casting away, verse
15. as may appear in that, verse 16. is a reason of the clause about the
reception of the Jews, verse. 15. and the 17. verse* is an admonition from the
suspicion, verse* 15. that the Jews were cast away, which is called breaking
off, v. 17. Now if breaking off* verse* 17. ^e the same with casting away,
verse* 15. then ingraffing is the same with reconciliation; Ergo ingraffing is
by Election and giving of Faith.

Answ. Reconciliation is either gradu^l, or total, Either to take in, or hold a
people in visible communion, or else to receive them with an ever^asting
delight in them. The former of these Moses obtained for the people of Israel,
when the Lord upon the sin of the golden Calfe, said; Let me alone, that my
wrath may wax hot against them, Exodus 32. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. This being
premised, if any were at fault for a full answer, he might easily find it in
the objection it self. Reconciliation is opposite to casting away. The Jews
then by reconcilation are brought into that state, out of which they were once
cast; But they were not cast out of the Church invisible; not out of Election
and justification, but out of a visible Church State and fellowship. Breaking
off, is rightly said to be the same as casting away, and reconciliation the
same, as ingraffing. Their reconciliation, or ingraffing is, then, into that
condition, from which they were broken out of which they were cast: Now they
were cast out of the Church visible, not out of the Church invisible, Their
reconciliation brings them into the same Church state, which is a
reconciliation gradual, not total.

It is here said, When any shall show either a Scripture, wherein by
reconciliation to God, is meant bare vouchsafing a visible Church State; and by
casting away, and breaking off, a l^sse of visible privileges, or any approved
Writer in the Churches of the Protestants so expounding it, I shall begin to
suspect that I am mistaken, but till then, I shall remain confident I am in
the right, and shall wonder that any that love^ not to wrangle, but fears to
pervert the Scripture and the truth of God, should dare so to interpret it.
Here I may have many things to say.

1. When this Author pleases he can heap up phrases which are only once used
in a select sense in Scripture, and that to uphold this interpretation of holy
and unclean, 2 Cor. 7. 14. when the context clearly evinces the contrary.

2. When he pleases, he dare undertake the defense of an opinion held
unanimously by all Papists, and as unanimously opposed by Protestants, as in
that of Covenant-holinesse.

3. Gomarus, Tom. 1. p. 111. observes, that World is taken in that sense in
Romans 11. 12, 15. as in no other Scripture.

4. If reconciliation in no other place be so used, yet little is gained;
seeing as we have seen, there are parallel phrases that hold out the same thing
to us.

5. I shall gratify him with an Author, an approved Writer in the Protestant
Church, that so interprets this text in hand, that by reconciliation to God is
meant no more then vouchsafing a visible Church State. It is Ravanellus who
having in his laborious work, Thesaurus Scripturae distinguished of a
Reconciliatio est duplex 1. Hominis cum Deo. 2. Hominis cum proximo.
Reconciliatio hominis cum Deo, qua amicit^a, quae in prima creatione hominis
cum* Deo Creatore intercesserat, and propter hominis off^nsam in Deum soluta
fuerit adeo ut inimicitiae sequutae essent, redintegratur per mediat^rem. De
qua quidem reconciliatione notanda veniunt* 1. Nomen. Reconciliatio hominis cum
Deo sumitur vel proprie iu significatione praedicta; vel minus proprie, ut Romans
11. 1. (Prove. 15. error^ typographi) ubi per reconciliationem m^ndi cum Deo
intelligitur Gentium ad fi^em Christi conversio, seu ipsar^^^ v^catio ad
participationem gratiae Dei, quae etiam salu^ Gentium, ver. 11. and opulentia
mundi, ver. 12. dicitur.
twofold reconciliation. 1. Of man with God. 2. Of man with his neighbor. And
defining reconciliation according to our Authors sense of it, he goes on and
says; Where we are to consider. First, the name which (says he) is taken
either properly in the sense already spoken to, or less properly, Romans 11. 15.
Where by reconciliation of the world to God, is understood the conversion of
the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, or they are call to the participation of
the favor of God, which also is called the salvation of the Gentiles, verse
11. and the riches of the world, verse 12. Here he may see [Faith] taken for a
bare dogmatical Faith reaching a visible Church State and not justifying;
[Reconciliation to God] taken for the grace and favor of Church Priviledges,
And the [salvation of the Gentiles] and [riches of the world] interpreted to
signify the same thing. These phrases are Synonima, and they signify a
reconciliation not properly so called; but such a one that is opposed to the
Reconciliation for which he contends. And for the other phrase, that by casting
away, and breaking off, is meant a loss of visible privileges, let him
consult the last Annotations to those words, verse 22. Otherwise thou also
shall be cut off, which they enterpret, as an unfruitful branch, adding this
caution, as though they had foreseen this Gloss, But here it is to be noted,
that this passage ought to be understood of the outward incorporation into the
Church by profession, whereof many hypocrites do partake, and not of the inward
and efficacious ingraffing into the mystical body of Christ by a lively Faith,
and the communion of the Spirit according to the election of God, which is ever
accompanied with perseverance. Doctor Featly in his Pelagius redivivus has
these words which being so pertinent, I shall transcribe, Second parallel, p.
38. To the place alleged, Romans 11. 19, 20. We Answer (says he)*

First, that it is not meant of particular Believers, and their danger of
falling away from justifying Faith; but of the people of the Gentiles in
general, and their danger of being cut off from the true Olive into which they
were ingraffed, that is, from the outward profession of Faith, and communion of
the Catholic Church into whith they were admitted upon the rejection of the
Jews. The Gentiles therefore ought not to be high-minded against the Jews,
but fear; lest God who spared not the natural branches, should not spare them
but cut them off also as he did the natural branches, if they should grow
proud, and presumptuously secure. Now there is no question but that a visible
Church, which at this time professes the truth, and is a Member of the
Catholic Church, may fall away from the outward and public profession of
faith, and cease to be a part of the Catholic visible Church, as the most
famous and sometimes flourishing Church in Greece, and Asia, planted by the
Apostles themselves; (now over-runne with Mahometanisme, Idolatry, and Heresy)
prove by their lamentable Apostasy, deplorable, if not desperate estate. But
Bertius, and the Appealer should have their eyes upon the mark, and point in
question, which is not in the doctrine of Faith, but of the habit of faith; not
de fide quam credimus, but de fide qua credimus, not of the public profession
of a Church, but of a particular affiance of every true believer in Christ. A
Member of the visible Church may be cut off, but no Member of the invisible,
for Christ cannot have damn^ta membra, any Members who shall not be saved, as
the approver of the Appealers book, rightly gathers out of Saint Austine in
his reply to Fisher. A Church or Kingdom generally may depart from the
Christian Faith, or renounce the pure profession thereof in public, and yet no
true Believer either totally or finally lose his Faith; but either secretly in
that state or Kingdom, or elsewhere openly he may retain both Faith it self
and the profession thereof. So Peter Martyr Loc. Com. page 491. speaking to
those words, Be not high-minded, but fear. Neither (says he) is there here
speech concerning particular men, but of the whole company and body of
believers, deservedly therefore the Apostle does warn them, Be not high
minded, but fear. For as the Church of the Jews has ceased to be, and also
Africa, Gr^cia, and Asia* have lost many Churches; so it is to be feared, lest
the same may now happen to Churches which seem to stand, let them not
therefore lift up themselves. (...) ^n the words, Thou stand by faith,
says, He speaks of the generality of Jews and Gentiles, and upon these words;
Be not high-minded, but fear, says, He speaks to the Gentiles in general, from
many of whom (as is to be bewailed) the Kingdom of God is taken away, as at
first from the Jews, as Persians, Arabians, Syrians, Egyptians, Asians, and
many others; so that this Author has lost not only this Argument, but this
whole Text; For if Reconciliation, World, Riches, be thus understood, and
cutting off in like manner* then he sees this Chapter in the whole against him,
and in no part for him. And if any Writer against Arminians understand by the
World, Romans 11. 15. only the Elect, (unless they mean an Election into a
Church State) they do but give advantage to them; there is not meant
universally, the whole world, that is too large, not yet they, that shall be
eternally saved out of the world, that is too strict; but the men whom God
persuades of Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, all Nations dispersed
through the world, at the last Annotations on verse 12.

Argument 3.
Thirdly, The ingraffing must be meant of that act whereby the branch stands in
the tree, as a branch; this will none deny, it being the very terminus of
ingraffing, as heat, the terminus of calefaction, but that is by giving Faith,
Ergo. The minor is proved from verse 20. where it is said, By unbelief they
were broken off; but thou stand by faith; whence I argue, That act whereby
the branch stands in the tree as a branch, must be the giving that means
whereby the branch thus stands: But that is Faith, v. 20. Ergo the act of
ingraffing is by giving Faith.

Answ. Here I shall willingly grant the conclusion, and do affirm that it is by
Faith, that grown persons, whether Jews or Gentiles do stand in a visible
Church Fellowship; such a faith upon which all called ones, (among which few
are Elect) are admitted. Such a faith that gave Simon Magus title, that
Hymeneus had, of which he made shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Doctor Featley in the
words above mentioned, showing Bertius and the Appealer their fallacy; shows
this objector his. The Apostle speaks of the Doctrine of Faith, this objector
of the habit. The Apostle speaks de fide quam credimus, this objector speaks de
fide qua credimus. The Apostle speaks of the public profession of a Church, He
of a particular affiance of every Believer in Christ. He adds, This conceit I
conceived, and still think is so far from the Apostles expressions, that
there seems to be no show of such a sense in the words; giving in his reason,
For there is not a word of taking into the Olive, but by Faith, verse 19, 20.
There is indeed here no show of reason unless it can be affirmed, that there
is no faith, but the Faith of the Elect, and that which is justifying;
therefore if it please the Author, I shall enter the lists with him in these
three Positions.

1. That Faith is taken in more acceptions then one in Scripture; All Faith
does not entitle to the Church invisible, and therefore there is scarce show of
sense in his reason, disputing from the Genus to the Species affirmative, or
from the Analogum to the Analogatum.

2. That the Faith here spoken to, is (as Doctor Featly asserts) the doctrine
of Faith, not the habit; Faith of Profession, and not a particular affiance;
fides quam, and not fides qua credimus, and so the fallacy is clear; and it
will no more follow that the ingraffing is into the Church invisible, because
it is by faith; then it will follow that because bruits have souls that
therefore they have reasonable souls.

3. That there is no such thing in all Scripture as ingraffing into the Church
invisible by Faith; All ingraffing is into the body visible, and therefore by a
faith of profession. (1.) All ingraffing is into that subject, which
immediately receives what is ingraffed, as the stock receives the syens; but it
is Christ, and not the Church invisible that receives the Elect Believer;
Christ dwells in us by Faith, so we in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. (2.) All
ingraffing is into that which gives sap and juice to the ingraffed, as the
stock from the root to the syens; Now Christ gives sap to the Elect believing,
not the Church, and therefore it is not into the Church, but into Christ. (3.)
If saving faith ingraffe the branch into the Church invisible, then the Church
invisible is the proper object of such Faith; but the Church is no such object
of Faith but Christ. (4.) That supposed ingraffing into the invisible Church,
is either known to the body invisible, or unwitting; if know, then it is no
invisible. They have no light to discern an invisible work; if unknown, then
there could not be such a dispute about the new* ingraffing of Gentiles, nor
complaint of breaking off of the Jews, all being done by an invisible
translation, and so the subject of the question is taken away. To dispute
whether ingraffing into the Church, be into the Church-visible, or invisible;
is to dispute whether the Mount of Olives be a Mountain of Earth, or Air. I
shall as soon find a Mountain of Air in Geography, as this ingraffing into
the invisible Church in Divinity: And here I tie not any up to the word (which
I conceive in reference to any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual station, is not
elsewhere used in Scripture) but to the thing. All that access to the Church
from Gentile Nations, which is so large fore-prophesied in the Old Testament,
and Historically related in the Acts of the Apostles, was an ingraffing into
the Church visible, and this ingraffing here mentioned. The visible Church did
immediately receive these new branches, and so the whole body of Jews and
Gentiles professedly believing, Ephesians. 2. 15. became one new man. The visible
Church communicates sap and juice (which is the fatness of the Olive) in
Ordinances. This is known by the Church visible, they were sensible of, and
full of praises, for the new addition to this number.

Argument. 4.
Fourthly, That ingraffing is meant, verse 17. whereby the wild Olive is
co-partaker of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree, as is asserted there.
But such is only Election and giving of Faith. Ergo. The minor I prove by
considering who the root is, and what the fatness of the Olive Tree is. 1.
Negatively the root is not, every believing parent.

Answ. I suppose I may answer for my self, that I never said that every
believing parent is the root; I willingly yield that every believing parent is
not (...), the root, but I affirm that every believing parent is a root, I
cannot reach this mystery, that Abraham can be a root of all the branches in
Israel, reaching down to the Apostles times, no intermediate roots
intervening, no more then Adam can be a natural root of mankind to this time,
without intermediate fathers of our flesh, deriving us from him, as Jacob with
Rachel and Leah was a root from whom Israel sprang as branches of an Olive; so
Judah and Tamar, Boaz, and Ruth were roots likewise: They built up the house of
Israel, Ruth. 4. 11, 12. The house of Israel was this Olive Tree, these several
Metaphors expressing the same thing, the building of the house, and bringing
out the branches are one and the same. All builders are roots; these are
builders therefore roots; Abraham may be called the builder laying the first
foundation, so the root from whence every branch was derived; yet every
particular Believer that had issue, a builder, a root. Those Israelites that
had no holiness of inhesion, but only of relation that were members of the
Church visible, not invisible, were fathers by way of communication of this
holiness, 1 Cor. 10. 1. All our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed
through the sea. It is as necessary to have intermediate fathers between us and
Abraham, as to have intermediate mothers between us and Eve. Eve may as well be
the mother of all living, and no other mother between us and her, as Abraham
can be the father of the Faithful, and no intermediate father to derive from
him, and communicate to us. But his proof is very well worth the hearing, that
every believing parent is not the root. For then all the branches should be
natural; the child of every believing Parent is a natural branch from his
father. But here Apostle makes the Gentiles branches, and a wild Olive graffed
in besides nature, and the Jews only natural branches growing from the root,
verse 21, 24. The Apostle makes them wild only at their first ingraffing, and
so was all Terahs race wild likewise, till that change of Faith wrought in
Abraham's call, and the covenant of God entered with him; We now are natural as
they were, and cannot be called wild, but in our first Original. Positively,
(he says) the root is no other then Abraham, that Abraham only is a holy
root, or at most Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. If this have any face of Argument,
it runs thus. If Abraham be the root, and not every believing Parent, then
the ingraffing is by Election, and Faith that justifies. The truth is, the
sequel is undeniable on the contrary; If Abraham be the root, then the
ingraffing is not into the invisible Church, (which he strangely calls by
Election) but only into the visible. This Master Blakwood saw, and feign would
have maintained that Christ is the root; for ingraffing into Christ, and not
into Abraham, makes a member of the Church invisible. If the ingraffing be by a
saving Faith only, to derive saving Graces personally inherent, as a fruit of
Election from Abraham, then it must needs be that we are Elect in Abraham.
Abraham may say, Without me ye can do nothing, and he that believes in me, out
of his belly shall flow forth rivers of living water; and we may say, The life
that we live in the flesh we live by faith in the son of Terah. This must
necessarily follow, if Abraham be the root, not only respective to a
conditional Covenant, but to the grace under condition covenanted; It had been
more safe for our Author with Master Blackwood (though in contradiction to
himself) to have made Christ the root; when these consequences must follow; To
which he answers,

If I made Abraham a root as communicating Faith by infusion; or impetration
mediatory as Christ, this would follow; But I make Abraham a root, as he is
called the father of all them that believe, Romans 4. 11. Not by begetting Faith
in them, but as an exempl^ry cause of believing as I gather from the
expression, verse 12. That he is a father to them that walk in the steps of our
father Abraham, which he had yet being uncircumcised, A root not by
communication, but example, an ingraffing, not to have any thing communicated
from the root, but to imitate it, is such a Catacresis as may well make all
Rhetoric ashamed of it; and if the Sun ever saw a more notable piece of
non^sense, I am to seek what sense is. A root is too low in the earth, to have
its examples followed, and syens suck in juice, but know not how to imitate.
And what kind of root soever any can make it; the root mentioned by the
Apostle in that Chapter, is a root by communication, verse. 17. If some of the
branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive Tree were graffed amongst
them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree. The
root here communicates fatness to the branches, and the branches receive from
the root. It is then a communicative root, and does communicate that which
makes the branch one with it. Abraham is indeed called a father, as well as he
is called a root, but these two are not full Synonima's, though in the maine
they agree, both Metaphors aptly setting forth, what the branches, as from a
root, the children, as from a father, receive, namely their title to the
Covenant from him; and therefore, as to Abraham, so, to all Israel appertained
the Covenants and the Adoption, Romans 9. 4, 5. And so to all those that are
become children and branches with them. The title father is yet extended to a
greater latitude, as he does impart to his issue, (as before) so he is a
pattern and example, as even natural parents are likewise, according as Romans
4. 12. it is set forth.

Argument 5.
Fifthly, From verse 25. If the breaking off the Jews be by blinding; then the
ingraffing is by giving Faith, but the former is true, ver. 25. Ergo the latter.

Answ. Here as in the third Argument, I grant the conclusion, and return the
same answer. Jewish blindness keeps them out of a Church State, and so from
all Faith in the Covenant; and when the veil shall be taken away, they shall
be reinvested in a Church State and Covenant-condition. For proof there is
added, (...) blinding or hardening is, verse 7. opposed to that state which the
Election obtained, by which, ver. 8. they had a spirit of slumber, eyes that
they should not see, ears that they should not hear, verse 10. Whereby their
eyes were darkened that they might not see, from which Anti-Arminians gather
absolute reprobation, Ames animad. in Remon. Script. Synod. Art. 1. Cap. 16.
Hoc ipsum ad reprobationem spectare Apostolus Paulus clare ostendit, Romans 11.
17. Now according to the rule of opposites, Oppositorum opposita sunt
attributa; If the blinding be the effect of reprobation, and the breaking off
be by blinding, then the ingraffing is by inlightening, and that enlightening
is according to Election, and so is all one with giving of Faith.

The proposition being; If the blinding be the effect of reprobation, and the
breaking off is by blinding, then the ingraffing is by enlightening, and that
according to Election, then the assumption can be no other, but that blindness
is the effect of reprobation, and the breaking off is by blinding. No one of
the Contra-Remonstrants worthy the name of an adversary of Arminians, has
taught this doctrine: It that which their adversaries indeed charge upon them,
but that which they unanimously do disclaim. I have heard that reprobation is
the antecedent of sin, but never that it was the cause; and that sin is a
consequent of it, but never an effect. Reprobation is the Act of God, and in
case it be the cause of blindness, then God is the cause of blindness; so
that the Contra-remonstrants have got a sweet Advocate to cast that upon them,
that none of their adversaries (though they have turned every stone to do it)
could never prove by them. And the other member, that casting away way is by
blinding, is little better. The Apostle speaks in another manner; Blindness
was their guilt, and casting off was their just sentence; Because of unbelief
they were broken off, verse 20. upon this account God God did not spare them,
as it follows in the next verse. The work, and the wages, the guilt, and the
punishment are not one: Unbelief and breaking off, are the work and the wages,
the guilt and the punishment: Breaking off then, as not blinding. The Apostle
lays all at man's door, makes his blindness the moving cause, according to
that of the Prophet; Thy destruction is of thy self, and God only the severe,
but just Judge. Our Author lays all upon God, Gods reprobation causes
blindness, and their breaking off is by blinding; here is no hand but Gods, in
their destruction. And now the blasphemy of the consequence being denied, so
that blindness is no effect of reprobation, breaking off being not by
blinding; what becomes of the rule of opposites here produced? Election and
reprobation in the work of salvation and damnation, do not per omnia quadrare,
otherwise as Election leads to salvation without any merit of works, so
Reprobation should lead to destruction without any merit of sin, which
Contra-remonstrants unanimously deny, though we find it here affirmed. It is
further said, that from verse 8. 10. of this Chapter. Anti-Arminians gather
absolute Reprobation, and then explaining what this absolute Reprobation is, in
the words spoken to. But though much be spoke of the irrespective decree both
between us and Arminians, and also among our selves: yet I would feign learn
what one Anti-Arminian ever made Reprobation absolute in this sense; Amesius is
quoted, but the word [absolute] is not found in him; And Gomarus, a man for the
irrespective decree as much as any (and upon that account entered his dissent in
the Synod of Dort, where respective to reprobation that was denied, and
Sublapsarian opinion established) yet he peremptorily denies any reprobation
absolute in this sense; Neque Deus quenquam ad exitium absolute ac nude fine
subordinatis mediis, sed ad exitium justum hoc est, per and propter peccata
judicio justo inferendum destinavit.
Neither does God (says he) absolutely and barely destinate any man to
destruction, without subordinate means; but he destinates him to just
destruction, that is by, and for, sin justly to be executed. Analysis Epist.
ad Romans cap. 9. p. 60. Neither will he have this decree to effect the sin;
that is a just Medium of destruction. In the same page he says; Deus non
decrevi^ peccata efficere, sed permittere, seu non impedire, and regere ad
gloriam suam. Nec ^nim quicquid Deus decrevit illud etiam efficit, sed quae
decrevit effice^e, eorum est Author, ut omnia bona quae fiunt: quae autem
decrevit non impedire increaturis mala seu peccata, ea non efficit; quia
efficere non decrevit, sed permittit and regit tantum and just tandem punit
convenienter decreto.
God does not decree to effect sin, but to suffer; or not to hinder, and to
govern for his glory; Neither does God effect all that he does decree, but
those things which he decreed to effect, of those he is the Author, us all the
good that is done: But the evil which he decreed not to hinder in his creature,
that he does not effect, because he did not decree to effect them; but only
permits, and governs them; and at last justly, according to his decree,
punishes them. And Doctor Prideaux, Lect. 1. de absoluto decreto. Non paucos
dissolvit nodos, distinctio illa necessaria inter effectum and consequens quam
minus intelligentes aliqui, vel insuper ^abeutes ad incitas frequenter ab
adversariis adiguntur. Induratio aquae (ut instem cum Augustino) consequens
est, non effectus: Ruina Demus alicujus ex se labilis necessari^ sequitur
defectum fulturae quam supeditare potuit Dominus si libuerit, sed nec vult, nec
tenetur. Hand aliter reprobationem sequitur peccatum, non ut causam
efficientem, sed deficientem, non qua removetur quod adest* sed non admovetur
quod sustentaret.
That necessary distinction between the effect and consequent (viz. of
reprobation) lo^ses not a few knots; which many understanding, or not duly
heeding, are brought into fraits by their adversaries. The condensation of
water (that I may use Austins instance) is a consequent of the absence of the
Sun, not an effect. The ruin of a house, of it self tending to decay,
necessarily follows upon the want of repair, which the Master might do in case
he pleased, but, will not, neither is he bound. Sin no otherwise follows upon
reprobation; not as a cause efficient, but deficient, not whereby any thing is
removed that is present, but that is not supplied which is wanting. And Master
Ball in his larger Catechism, p. 57. Sin is the effect of man's free will, and
condemnation is an effect of justice inflicted upon man for sin and
disobedience; But the decree of God which is good, is the cause of neither. The
signs of Reprobation may appear in those that are thus dischurched, according
to that which is quoted out of Ames, but not as an effect of it. The severity
which God shows in not sparing, but breaking off these natural Branches, is
explicitly no more then that which Jesus Christ did threaten against them,
Mat. 21. 43. That the Kingdom of Heaven should be taken from them, and given
to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof; the same which he threatens
against Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. in taking away their Candlestick, which is the
effect of their own sin, and not of Gods decree.

Argument. 1.
Sixthly, If re-ingraffing of the Jews produces salvation, is by turning them
from iniquity, taking away their sins according to Gods Covenant, then it is
into the invisible Church by giving faith: But the former is true, v. 25. Ergo
the latter.

Answ. This Argument well husbanded, might have made three. To the first ^ say,
that privileges enjoyed in a Church State, in Scripture Phrase are the
salvation, John 4. 22. Seeing Church Members are partakers of saving
Ordinances, And the fruition of Ordinances under Gospel-dispensations is a
great salvation, Heb. 2. 3. And so that Text, Romans 11. 26. all Israel shall be
saved, must be understood, as the last Annotation speaks. The body of this
people in general shall be brought again into a way of salvation, and
re-istablisht into the Church of the whole Israel of God, consisting of Jews
and Gentiles. And so Diodate; That is, the body in general shall be put again
into a way of salvation, and re-established into the Communion of the Church.
And such men brought into a Church State are turned from iniquity partially,
from their former way of iniquity, their contradicting and blaspheming; having
escaped the pollution of the world, 2 Pet. 2. 16. of the world that remains
out of the Church of God. Their sin is pardoned quoad hoc, and when Moses
prayed for the pardon of the sin of Israel, Exodus 32. and God pro^miseth it,
2 Chronicles. 7. 14. it is so to be understood of a National dardon.

Argument 7.
Seventhly, If the re-ingraffing be by virtue of Gods Election and love, his
gifts of calling, then it is into the invisible Church by Election, and giving
Faith: But the former is true, v. 28, 29. Ergo the latter.

Answ. His Election, love, and gifts of calling did at the first put them into
a visible Church State and condition, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. The Lord did not set his
love upon you, nor choose you because you were more in number then any people:
for ye were the fewest of all people: But because the Lord loved you, and
because he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto your Fathers, etc. And
the same love, election and gifts of calling, now they are broken off, does
re-ingraffte them; If this Argument hold, it was an invisible Church that was
brought out of the land of Egypt.

Here our Author says with much confidence that he questions not, but all
Anti-Arminians that understand the controversy, will disclaim Master Geree in
this answer, and acknowledge that the election, love, gifts, and calling meant,
Romans 11. 28, 29. are by faith into salvation. But he is much deceived, Those
before mentioned understood somewhate, and Diodate in his Annotations has
these words, God never recals his grace, which by absolute decree he will
communicate to some person or Nation, to call them to him, and to have right to
his Covenant; Now the election of this people has been such above all others
in the world, who being once called, have and may fall totally and irreparably,
which this people cannot, without repentance, that is to say, irrevocable, of
which God never repents. Tenendum est non de privata cujusque electione nunc
tractari, sed de communi adoptione totius gentis quae in externa specie
collapsa videri potui, ad tempus.
Calvin on the words says, This is to be held, that private Election is not
here handled, but the common adoption of the Nation, which in outward
appearance seemed for the time to be lost, but not cut off from the root. And
presently after, Contendit Paulus firmum and immutabile stare Dei consilium,
quo semel sibi illos in gentem peculiarem eligere dignatus est.
The Apostle argues that the counsel of God, whereby he once chose to himself
that Nation in peculiar, remains firm. And Paraeus in dubio decimo nono on
this chapter understands it of the Argumentum Apostoli ad probandam constantiam
dilectionis Dei erga suam gentem.
constancy of the love of God toward his own Nation. And most fully in dubio
vicesimo, where urging Stapletons objection Videtur ex (...) donorum and
vocationis Dei, non sequi illa quam nos statumus gratiae, and salutis (...). 1.
Quia fatcute Calvino and martyr dictum Apostoli, non de singulari cujusque
electione, sed de totius gentis Judaicae communi adoptione accipiendum sit.
Atqui hac communis adoptio and vocatio gentis fuit mutabilis, quoniam gens
Judaica donis and vocatione ill^ excidit.

Ad corruptelas Stapletoni facile respondetur.

1. Non negatur, de communi gentis Judaicae, ^oc est, foederali dignitate
propri^ loqui, and hanc (...) in Deo pronun^iare Apostolum, sed negatur hinc
(...) singulorum non confici, Imo a minori ad majus firmissime concluditur. Si
enim de gratia communi and quidem aliena, Apostolus recte pronunciat esse Deo
(...), quanto magis de gratia propria fideles idem statuere debent.


, That it seems from this irrevocablenesse of the gifts and calling of God, the
assurance of grace and salvation cannot follow. 1. Because, as Stapleton
objects, and Calvin and Martyr confess, the speech of the Apostle is not to be
understood of the election of each particular person, but of the common
adoption of the whole Nation, and this common grace of adoption of the whole
Nation was mutual, for they fell from this gift. To which Paraeus says,
Stapleton's corrupt gloss, is easily answered. 1. Says he, It is not denied,
that the Apostle spoke this of the Common, that is, the federal dignity of the
Nation of the Jews, and that the irrevocablenesse in God, is to be understood;
yet it is denied ( says he) that from hence the assurance of particular
persons is not concluded, yea from the less to the greater it is firmly
concluded. For if the Apostle from common grace do rightly conclude this
irrevocablenesse in God, much more may it be determined from that grace which
is proper. Ravanellus in verbum Electio, understands Election in v. 28. of
common Election, as he do also in 1. Pet. 2. 9. Amesius* is urged as an
adversary yet appears otherwise. The Remonstrants giving two answers to this
Scripture. The second is the self-same in (...) with Stapletons. To which
Amesius replies Coron. page 233, 234. Sic illis jam solenne est, partem unam
veritatis assumere, caque abuti ad alteram vel evertendam, vel dimovendam.
This is their custom, to take one part of a truth, and to abuse it for the
overthrow or removal of another; So that it appears according to him, that they
spoke truth in the denial of this to be meant of the unchangable decree of
eternal Election; but they abuse this truth in about to avoid the argument
drawn from it, for perseverance. As Jesuits and Arminians do object it, so
their adversaries freely confess it. I have indeed sometimes in my thoughts
doubted, how fitly this Text was brought against Arminians for proof of
perseverance and estament of assurance, yet satisfied my self according to
what has been said; but (since I had any understanding) never questioned but
it was here applied (according to the mind of these Authors) to the National
privilege of the Jews, the full scope of these Chapters being to dispute the
rejection of Israel after the flesh, their former dignity, and consequently
their future recovery unto the state from whence they were fallen, in which the
Gentile-Nations by discipling do succed: let us go no farther for determination
of the question, then the preceding verse, As concerning the Gospel, they are
enemies for your sakes, but as touching the Election they are beloved for the
Fathers sake. Here is to be enquired. 1. Who were enemies concerning the
Gospel. 2. Who the Fathers are, for whose sake they are beloved. 3. What this
election is, and then we shall soon see who are beloved for the Fathers sake.
For the first, It is not the spiritual seed that were as concerning the Gospel
enemies, that is the highest of contradictions; but, as Diodate says, the
Jews who at present time were alienate from God by reason of rebellion against
the Gospel, which only can unite souls to him. Enemies against the Gospel, are
enemies against God, which cannot be understood of spiritual Israel. The
fathers for whose sake they are beloved, are the ancient fathers, from whom
after the flesh they did proceed, especially Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The word
is (...), prepter patres, for the fathers; Then Election must needs be (as
Paraeus upon the words, Diodate and Ravanellus in verbum Electio observe)
understood of an external grace of the Covenant whereby God chose this Nation
to himself, according to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. For thou art an holy people
unto the Lord thy God; The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people
unto himself above all people that are upon the face of the earth; unless we
are elect in Abraham to salvation, and not in Christ. And Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob are our Mediators reconciliation; and when the Apostle says, We are
accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. it is to be understood of acceptance in
Abraham; and we are to conclude our prayers not in and through Christ, but
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; we are not for their sakes beloved to salvation. Per
electionem intelligit Apostolus primo externam foederis gratiam, qui Deus hanc
ge^tem sibi delegerit; deinde ipsam aeternae dilectionis gratiam, quam in ^ac
gente quasi deposuerat Deus. N^m adoptando cos in foedus testatum fecit se ex
ea gente plurimos habere, and semper habiturum esse electos ad s^lutem.
Paraeus indeed makes the grace of eternal Election to be secondarily here
understood, which God ( says he) deposited in that Nation, for adopting them
into Covenant; he makes it evident ( says he) that he has many of that
Nation, and ever shall have that are Elect unto salvation. But this is not the
Election here mentioned, but only an adjunct of it; and now of it self it will
follow that these beloved for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are the children of
their flesh, Quia Deus patres dilexit, etiam ad filios dilectionem suam
extendit: si enim inter homines amicitiae parentum merito transeunt ad liberos,
Qui ni Deui idem facer^t?
Because ( says Paraeus) God loved the Fathers, the love extends it self to
the children; for if among men friendship with parents be divolved to Children,
why should it not be so with God likewise? I desire that it may be considered
for whom Moses interceded, when he prayed, Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel
thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thy own self, and saidest unto them, I
will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have
spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever. Exodus
32. 13. Was it not the whole body of Israel? And for whom is it that God
promises to remember his Covenant with Jacob, and also his Covenant with Isaac,
and also his Covenant with Abraham, Levit. 26. 42. Was it not the whole Nation
under suffering, as there is expressed, I will remember the land? Either then
Paul and Moses err, together with the list of Authors here mentioned, or
else, the love, election, calling, in this place is, into a Church state and
condition.

Argument. 8.
Eighthly, If the ingraffing both of Jews and Gentiles be the fruit of Gods
mercy, the breaking off by shutting up in unbelief, then the ingraffing is into
the invisible Church by election and giving faith: But the former is true,
verse 30, 31, 32. Ergo the latter. Answ. The privilege of a Church State,
which the Jews once had; and again shall have, is a mercy, as may be seen,
Hosea 1. 6, 9.

Our Author adds, What shall I say more? It is so plain from the whole scope,
and tenor of the Apostles words, that the ingraffing there spoken of is, into
the invisible Church by election and giving faith, that from the first of the
chapter, to verse 13. there is scarce a verse but speaks of rejecting,
foreknowing, election, grace, hardening, giving a Spirit of slumber, darkening
the eyes, stumbling, falling, or some equipollent term to these; and the
Apostle does plainly signify his intention in all that discourse, to be the
showing the mystery of Gods counsel in electing, reprobating, blinding,
converting, one while the Jews, another while the Gentiles; so that I cannot
but admire that Mr. Marshal should interpret the ingraffing of bare admission
into visible Church Membership.

Answ. 1. I would willingly learn what ingraffing by Election is, I take
Election to be an immanent act in God, which is terminated in himself, and not
on the creature; such expressions do not suit with so high pretendings to
scholastical learning* as every where may be seen in this Author.

2. I would have this Argument made up by taking in the assumption which can be
no other then this. But the Jews in their fall from Church Fellowship cannot
be said to be rejected, hardened, given to a spirit of slumber, or that their
eyes are darkened, or that they have stumbled; neither Election or Grace should
have any hand in their Church Fellowship. This must be the reasoning, if there
be any show of reason in this heap of words, and then all may well admire,
while he is in his admiration of others. I say no more, but that he is very
weak both in Divinity and Logic, that cannot presently upon the first sight
discover the weakness, and return a satisfying answer to this flourish of
words.

Argument 9.
Parallel places, as is said, must be understood of implanting into the
invisible Church, as Ephesians. 3. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 14, 26, 28, 29.

Answ. Master Hudson, page 132. has not only affirmed, but proved that the
Text, 1 Cor. 12. 13. is meant of the Church as visible, to whom I refer the
Reader. He places his greatest confidence in the first as he professes, and
thus enlarges upon it. Now sure the Gentiles were made fellow-heires of the
same body, and co-partakers of the promise of God in the Gospel, not by an
outward Ordinance, but by giving of faith according to Election; Ergo the
ingraffing, Romans 11. 17. parallel to it is not by an outward Ordinance, but by
giving Faith according to Election. To this I only say. O that this were
truth: Then as the Apostle says of Israel at their restoration, all Israel
shall be saved, Romans 11. 26. so we may say, all England in statu quo shall be
saved in the sense that he would understand salvation. Whether we be by descent
Britains, Saxons, or Normans, we are gentiles and consequently by his Divinity
partakers of the Gospel, by Fatih according to Election, But it is too clear
that this Text is meant of Gospel-glory, in Ordinances dispensed by the
Apostles Ministry, And as to the Jews appertained the glory and the promises,
Romans 9. 4, 5. So now the glory and promises belong to the Gentiles; And as many
Jews as fell not off, still enjoy this this glory with the Gentiles and so both
make one new man, Ephesians. 2. 15. The visible state of the Jews was a distinct body
from the Gentiles, Now upon this glorious call they are one new man, or new
body. For the Texts, Gal. 3. 14, 26, 28, 29. when any shall tell me how they
are paralle, then I shall give my answer, There is an in graffing into Christ
mentioned; but none into the Church, and so the parallels are without force, as
are the Arguments. Two things lie upon him to do, and neither is done. 1. To
prove that these Scriptures speak of a Church invisible. That they are parallel
with this Scripture. He is wont to reason with his full strength against the
force of all Arguments, a Pari and yet this argument must carry force from the
parity of Scriptures, which he only says, and not at all proves to be parallel,
nor yet shows so much as in a word, wherein their parity consists; he well
knows that by this means their disparity might appear. There is a tenth
Argument drawn from Authorities produced, but to so little purpose that I will
not trouble the Readers patience in the recital of it.

CHAP. LI.
1 Cor. 7. 14. Vindicated.
THe next Scripture in which this extent of the Covenant is evidenced, is 1
Cor. 7. 14. For the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your Children
unclean, but now are they holy. In order to a right understanding of these
words, the whole scope of the Apostl is to be taken into consideration, which
appears to be this.

The Corinthians converted by the Apostles Ministry, The Series of the
Apostles dispute opened.
consulted him by letters in several cases of conscience; one concerning
Marriage, a second concerning things offered to Idols, a third concerning
spiritual gifts, a fourth concerning collection for the Saints. That of
Marriage is first spoken to, and consists of diverse heads, and are all
satisfied in this Chapter.

One, among the rest concerns Marriage-estate, between a Believer an an
Infidel, a Professor of the true Faith and a Worshipper of Idols; whether such
society may be continued, or must be separated. That this was their Quaere,
appears by the Apostles resolution, The Corinthians Quaere.
He gives in his answer in the affirmative, both in the case of a believing
husband joined to an unbelieving wife, and a believing wife joined to an
unbeleeving husband, let him not put her away, let her not leave him, only
excepting the case of wilful desertion, when for religions sake the unbeleeving
party leaves; Unbelief breaks not the Marriage-bond, renders it not a nullity,
(Religion being not of the substance of Marriage,) It might make null all
Covenants, as well as this Covenant, the Law of God seeing that condemns
Marriage-Covenants with unbeleevers, condemns all other Covenants with them,
Deuteronomy. 7. 23. Having determined the point in an universal proposition, or that
which is equivalent with it, A Believer and an unbeleever joined in
Wedlock-bond, are not to be separated, He meets with their scruples, and
answers their objections against it; That they had their scruples, must be
confessed, otherwise they had never sent the case to the Apostle, And those
scruples which reason it self will suggest, that have a fair color in
Scripture for them, The Corinthians scruples.
and are met with, and satisfied by the Apostle in this his answer; we must
take to be their scruples and grounds of their fears, Unless we had the
Corinthians letter, we have no other way of cognizance of them. And these are
two.

I shall mention the second in the first place, seeing I am to dwell upon the
first, and that is their jealousy of themselves, of their own standing and
perseverance in the Christian Faith. This in reason they might well fear, who
so active to seduce and draw away as a yoke fellow? and this has fair color
of Scripture for it, Deuteronomy. 7. 4. They will turn away thy son from following me,
that they may serve other gods. Examples are not wanting, Nehem. 13. 26. Did
not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet among many Nations was
there no King like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him King over
all Israel, nevertheless, even him did outlandish women cause to sin. To
this the Apostle answers, and opposes the hopes of conversion of the
unbelieving party; How know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy
husband? or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? As there
is fear of seducing, so there is hope of conversion.

The other is the condition of their issue, lest they should not be reckoned
with the Saints, but of the fellowship of unclean Gentiles. Reason is strong
for this; they well knew that as it is with the Parent, so it is with the
Child; for Church State and condition, being a privilege communicable, and
derived by descent from Parent to Child. If the Parent were without, and of
the Gentiles, the Child was ever such, and in case the parents, were of the
people of God, their children were reckoned so in like manner. Now Parents
being divided, the one holy, the other unclean, they feared that the issue
would follow the worser part, a stain would lie upon them, they would be
accounted unclean with the unbeleeving parent this has a fair color of
Scripture likewise, and in a like case it had been so determined, Ezra 10. 3.
Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, to put away all the wives,
and such as are borne of them. The Apostle takes off these fears of theirs, and
tells them that the unbel^^ving party does not (as they fear) defile the issue,
but is sanctified, as to issue, by the Believer, so that their children are
holy, and to be reckoned with the believing Parent, who is a Saint, not
unclean, and not reckoned with the unbeleeving parent, who is a Gentile, and so
takes off their scruples respective both to themselves and their issue, and
quiets their fears. So that several positions might be here laid down for a
right understanding of the words.

1. By [Beleever] in this place is meant, Explicatory Positions.
a man or woman professing the true Faith, and bearing the name Christian.

2. By [Unbeleever] is meant, an Infidel* an unconverted Gentile, living in
Idolatry, sacrificing to Devils, and not to God, of such the question is put,
and not of regenerate and unregenerate, such a scruple was never heard, whether
or no such might continue marriage society.

3. To be [sanctified] here, is not to be made holy, which is the case of the
Regenerate; or to be set apart for God, which is the case of the visible Saint
and Christian; but together with their yoke fellow to be an holy root to
produce an holy seed.

4. By [Holy] is meant, federal holiness, to be reputed and received among the
people of God, who are holy, no other holiness is transmittible from parents
to children.

5. By [Unclean] is meant, a sinner of the Gentiles, an alien and stranger from
the Commonwealth of Israel.

6. [Else] implies a certainty, that upon this account of sanctification of the
Parent (from whom the ground of fear arose) the children are holy, a like
certainty that were it not that they were thus sanctified, they were unclean.

Much stir is made about this doubt of the Coronthians, The ground or rise of
the Corinthians scruples.
from whence it might arise. In my apprehension, says One, it is likely that
the doubt arose from the Epistle he wrote before to them mentioned, 1 Cor. 5.
9, 10. not to keep company with Fornicators, or Idolaters, which might occasion
the question, whether they were then to continue with their unbeleeving
yoke fellow. To this conjecture I answer.

1. That many will not grant that the Apostle wrote any Epistle to the
Corinthians before this; but as this carries the title of the first, so there
was none before it; and this they do, to make it good that no Scripture given
by divine inspiration is lost; which would impeach (as they fear) both the
providence of God, and the faithfulness of the Church to whom the Oracles of
God were concredited. But let it be granted that he wrote another Epistle,
which he here mentions; yet the tenth verse where the stresse lies seems to be
his present farther explanation of his words there, and no part of the contents
of that Epistle formerly written, and so there is no room left for this
conjecture. But put the case, that the ninth and tenth verses do both express
the Contents of that Epistle, yet why do they take both the ends, and leave out
the middle? Making their converse to be with Husbands, or Wives, Fornicators or
Idolaters, and not as well with Covetous, or Extortioners? It is answered, the
middle terms [Covetous and Extortioners] are left out, because I conceived it
superfluous for me to put them in. Their only scruple I mentioned, was their
conversing with the Idolatrous, or unbeleeving yoke fellow, because the Apostle
only resolves that doubt, 1 Cor. 7. 12. 13, 14. about which the dispute I held
was, Whether or no they scrupled, conversing with Covetous and Extortioners, I
could not tell; because the Apostle is silent about that doubt. If their
scruple was concerning conversing with their Idolatrous yoke-fellows, upon
occasion of those words, not to keep them company, they must needs scruple
their conversing with Covetous and Extortioners, Husbands or Wives upon the
same account, and the Apostle being silent in his answer, it is clear they were
silent in their letter, and moving no scruple, they had no scruple; when it is
imposible for them to scruple one upon those words, and not scruple all. When
the Apostle names four evils respective to civil sociable converse, it is a
wild fancy to imagine that they should startle at one (respective to their
marriage-society) and question no more. I farther add: If this conjecture
hold, the Apostle thus writes to the Corinthians, If any brother has a wife
that is an Idolator, Fornicator, a Drunkard or Extortioner, let him not put*
her away, and to this I am answered, Wise men do not always see the consequent
of that principle which they are possessed with. And how comes it I wonder into
any man's thoughts, that the Corinthians had wit to see the consequence from his
warning given of one sort of sinners, and of never a one of the other named
with them? It is further said, If they had the occasion of the doubt from 1
Cor. 5. 9. does it follow that the Apostle must either know, that to have been
the occasion, or resolve their doubt with reference to it? and if he did, yet
there was no necessity he should resolve it in like manner concerning
Fornicators, as Idolaters. If the Apostle did not know it, how comes it now to
be known, did he want their Sagacity? If he did know it, there must be a like
necessity of resolving the doubt in reference to this, as any other at which
they scrupled. And if they doubted of all; why is there a necessity of clearing
one, and not all, the Apostle doubtless took in every part, and piece of their
scruple. It is likely (says one) the Apostle took in every part and piece of
that which is propounded to him as the Corinthians scruple indeed; but there
was no necessity he should take in every part of that which Master Blake may
imagine, would have been their scruple if my conjecture hold. But there was a
necessity to take in all that had the same evident ground of scruple, and which
every ratinal man will not only with me imagine; but certainly conclude ( Hoc
supposito) must be their scruple, Had the Apostle taken in every part of their
scruple, the question about divorce so much agitated, would have been
determined. It is wonder B. Howson, Bunney, and others that say Moses
permission to put away wives, was in case of Adultery only, could not have hit
upon this Text which would have salved all, to this is answered.

If the Apostle had taken in every part of the Corinthians imagined scruple,
and resolved as I would have it; Yet, this does not here determine the
controversy so much agitated, whether the innocent party might marry after a
lawful Divorce.

The full truth is here now spoken, such a resolution had indeed destroyed the
the thing supposed, and there could have been no lawful Divorce; and when the
Apostle had determined against all Divorce, and had given charge, as concerning
the unbeleeving wife, so concerning the wife of Fornication, If any man have
such a wife, let him not put her away, why should there be any dispute about
it, either respective to Divorce, or Marriage after it. But as to this enough
is spoken.

Having examined that which others by their conjecture would make the ground of
their scruple; I must speak to that which we make the occasion of it before
suggested, viz. that case of those Israelites, Ezra 9. 10. chapter who upon their
return from their captivity had married strange wives, and were ordered not to
live with them, but to put them away with their children, and here to prevent
tedious impertinencies, and to make this piece as brief as possible, let me
premise this as an undoubted truth; That these Corinthians had their scruples
concerning their issue upon their marriage in their disparity. That which the
Apostle satisfies in his Answer, that the Corinthians scrupled in their letter.
This no man can deny, for he writes to give satisfaction, (as is plain, verse
1.) to their letter-scruples: But we see in the Text that he as satisfies
scruples concerning themselves, so also concerning their issue* 2. Let the
Reader know, that I do not peremptorily determine, that the determination of
the case of the Israelites, for their separation from their wives, and putting
away their children with them, did occasion this scruple in the thoughts of
these Corinthians thus joined, with unbeleeving yoke-fellows, But I say, it is
more then probable, that it did either occasion, or mightily strengthen it,
When they are men known in the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10. 15. and did question
their own marriage upon the account of the unbelief of their yoke fellow, and
finding a case thus determined, both against mother and child for separation,
how can we imagine but they hit upon it, and were affected with it? 3. I do not
say that the Israelites case and the Corinthians were wholly the same, as it
stood with Israel then, and with the Corinthians now: I know it was not, for
then either Ezra had, been too harsh in ordering a separation; or Paul too
indulgent in determining the lawfulness of the continuance of their
marriage-society, and so I may say of their children; But I say their cases
were so like, and so seemingly parallel, that it might well occasion the
Corinthians (thus in conscience concerned) to judge them the same. Their cases
somewhat did differ, but the Corinthians had need of the Apostles help to see
the difference. The cases were the very same in themselves, but different in
regard of diverse administrations, under which they respectively lived. He that
would make their case the same, (says One) must not vary it in one particular:
All Casuists and Lawyers determine a Case to be varied when one material
circumstance is varied. The Jews being under the Law of Moses, and professing
it; the Corinthians, Christians not so, and yet that doubt as if occasioned by
that fact, must arise from the doubted force of the Law of God. This hits right
upon the difference between them, which yet argues them to be still in
themselves the same, had not times differenced them; whereas he says, the Jews
were under Moses Law professing it, but the Corinthian-Christians not so. I
hope he will not deny they were under the Moral Law, the Apostle even in this
Epistle pressing it upon them, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 1 Cor. 14. 34. and it was not so
easy for them to determine that the Command, Deuteronomy. 7. was judicial, purely
respecting their relation to those Nations, and so their case by this means
better then those Israelites, and being not able to determine, their scruple
remained, and they sought to the Apostle for satisfaction in it.

Having enquired into these Corinthians scruples we are to look further into
the meaning of the words, Two heterodoxical interpretations of the words, holy,
unclean.
and here we might reckon up variety of interpretations of this Text in Ancient
and Modern Writers, most of which are generally exploded, as to the words holy
and unclean, and therefore I think not fit to trouble the Reader at all with
them. Two there are which now appear especially in competition with this here
delivered, which I shall hold forth in this place, that the Reader may judge of
either. The first interpretation setting up parent and child too high, examined
The first sets up parent and child, root and branch too high; The second
lays the issue too low. The first is, that the believer here mentioned is an
elect regenerate man, not only a Professor of the faith, but a man endowed with
the grace of faith, not only of the Church visible, but of the Church
invisible likewise; That the holiness here mentioned is a real holiness, that
is, an holiness of regeneration, and the issue of one or both regenerate
persons is also such, regenerate. The issue of the unregenerate is (as they
say) unregenerate likewise, An interpretation as far from the Apostles mind as
that which is farthest, and the doctrine fetched from it as untrue as that
which is untruest. The Believer here is the man that is not an Infidel, one
that is taken off from Gentisme to the profession of Christianity. Paulinus
(whom Hierome so much admired) interprets it (as Hierom relates his words, Ep.
153. of a baptized person. The Corinthians never questioned the marriage
between one party, in whom the power of godliness appears, and another
professingly of the same faith, though not in that sincerity, There was never
such a scruple made, but the marriage between a professor of Christian
religion, and a Pagan; Neither is the issue of a regenerate man, because his
issue, regenerate; Habits, neither infused, nor acquired, are thus communicated
from parent to child; Neither will it help to say that this proposition is not
universal, but indefinite, which holds ad plurimum, but not always; The
Apostles proposition universally holds, now are they holy, not in the opinion
of charity, but certainty, where neither are holy, the issue, not only ad
plurimum, but certainly is unclean, not as to the judgment of our fears, but
for his present state, so infallibly. That assertion to help this out, that God
draws regeneration through the loins of the Elect, at least for the most part
(few elect ones but their children are regenerate) is such a paradox that I
suppose very few will receive; And thence to infer the lawfulness of the
Baptism of all of such birth, because some are regenerate (and as then surmise
the most, even in the womb, and from the birth) is a bottom that will not bear
it; One without any name has published a Treatise of Baptism, and in it
impugnes with all his strength Infant Baptism. He takes notice of this, and
like positions of this nature, as our ground of it, and then endeavors the
battery of it It has passed some years without any answer, that I know. I
could wish that those that maintain it on these grounds, would take upon them
a refutation. His reasons to me (the doctrine so grounded) are above answer. I
have often said, if I be brought to these men's premises, I shall then conclude
with the Antipaedobaptists. It so much more concerns those, in that the Author
(as I hear) was one of their society, and they see how frequently their members
that are principled against Covenant-holinesse, and borne in hand that the
Gospel strips us of it, do betake themselves from them into these men's tenants.

The second interpretation lays the issue too low, The second interpretation
laying parent and child too low.
and will have the holiness mentioned, to have no respect to their spiritual
or Church State, but only their legitimation; They are not bastards but
legitimate, This Text (says One) does not speak of federal holiness, but of
holiness, that I may so call it matrimonial, so that the sense is, your
children are holy, that is, legitimate; adding whether any in the ages before
the age last past expounded it of federal holiness, as they call it, I am not
yet certain, His arguments against our interpretation of Covenant-holinesse
and uncleanness, we shall examine, being attended as he says, with many
absurdities; in the mean space let me tell him, that his interpretation,
understanding the Apostle as he does, ( The unbeleeving husband is sanctified
in the wife, etc. that is, his society with her is lawful, not adulterous, else
your children were unclean, that is, bastards, illegitimate, but now they are
holy, that is, of a birth legitimate, not spurious) renders the reasoning here
in this place. 1. Childish. 2. Incongruous. 3. Untrue.

1. Weak and childish, 1. Weak and childish.
to tell the Corinthians if their marriage-society were adulterous, then their
children were bastards, if their marriage were null, children were illegitimate.
This is too low a way of reasoning und unworthy of the Apostle such that every
child well knew before the Apostle told them. In that great contest about the
marriage of Henry the eighth, with the relict of his brother Arthur, (in which
the judgment of so many Universities was desired) if one had argued, that in
case this marrige be a nullity, then the Princess is not legitimate: But the
Princess is legitimate; Ergo the marriage is no nullity) he would have been
looked upon as a strange disputant.

2. Incongruous To bring phrases fully answering the Church State and condition
of either parents* 2. Incongruous
believing, unbeleeving, (which in the Scripture is holy and unclean) and yet
to understand them of holiness, and uncleanness of another kind, of
legitimation and bastardy, if they may be (as I think they never were) so
called, is merely incongruous: That these words fully answer the Church State
of parents, and the Church State and condition which the children derive from
them, is plain in that parallel text, Gal. 2. 15. Jews by nature, that is,
holy by birth from believing parents, not sinners of the Gentiles, not unclean
by birth from unbeleeving ancestors; So Master Cartwright on these words in his
answer to the Rhemists. If you will know what this holiness of children
newborn is, the Apostle tells you, it is through the Covenant to be a Jew by
nature, or birth: and if you will farther understand what this uncleanness of
children is, the Apostle in the same place tells you, it is not to be sinners
by nature, as those which are born of the Heathen. I well know, and acquainted
the Reader, p. 2. of my Birth-priviledge, that the Apostles scope, Gal. 2. 15.
is another, viz. to prove that Jews and Gentiles have both one and the same
justification, not by works of the Law, but by Faith, but falling upon the
mention of the Jewe and Gentile, he gives them characters (as Master Cartwright
well observes) fully parallel to that which is here delivered.

3. The argument thus understood, 3. Untrue.
is untrue; The stresse is wholly laid on the believing party, as to the
holiness of the issue twice over; The unbeleever is merely passive in it, when
the child has legitimation equally from both.

Against the former interpretation, Arguments evincing the holiness in the
Text not to be legitimation.
and for mine, which Chamier affirms to be Calvini, and omnium nostrorum, take
these arguments. 1. That holiness which necessarily follows to the issue, from
the sanctification of an unbeleeving, by a believing yoke fellow, is Covenant
holiness, and not legitimation: But the holiness in this place of the Apostle
necessarily follows to the issue, from the sanctification of an unbeleever by a
believer; Ergo it is Covenant-holinesse, not legitimation. 2. That which is
derived from the eminency of one parent above another, and not equally from
both, is not legitimation: But this holiness is derived from the eminence of
one parent ( viz. the believing parent above the other;) Ergo it is not
legitimation. 3. The result or fruit which follows from a believers faith is
not legitimation: But the holiness in the Text is a result of the faith of the
believing yoke fellow; The minor is evident, seeing faith is twice hinted at in
the believer. I know that there is one that denies, that the unbeleeving
husband, or wise is here said to be sanctified in the believing; It is (says
he) in the husband, not in the believing husband, in the wife, not in the
believing wife, that is not in the Text. The marriage is between a believer and
an unbeleever, the unbeleever is sanctified whether husband or wife by their
yoke fellow, but not as is said, by their believing yoke fellow; the Reader
that puts off his reason may matter such denials.

To evince sense of bastardy and legitimation from those words of the Text, The
sanctificat^on spoken to, is not of parents in general, but of one parent
believing, and another unbeleeving in particular.
unclean and holy, the Apostles argument is put by one into this form, If the
unbeleeving husband were not sanctified by the wife, then were your children
unclean; But they are not unclean, but holy; Ergo, the unbeleeving husband is
sanctified by the wife. And this sequel (as is said) were not true, if this
proposition were not true; All the children of those parents where one is not
sanctified to the other, are unclean. The Proposition is, of an unbelieving
husband and a wife, and yet the Proposition must be of all parents, that will
prove it, as he that wi^^ prove, If an Englishman be noble, he is honorable,
must prove it by this universal or general, All Noble men are honorable, and
not put in all Englishmen Noble, for then he antecedent and the conclusion
would be all one, whereas the Proposition proving, must be larger then the
Proposition proved, else we might conclude ex meris particularibus; To say if
the unbeleeving husband were not sanctified by the wife, your children were
unclean is all one with this, All the children of the unbeleeving husband not
sanctified to the wife are unclean. This of it self is not such, that many
words should need to be spent about it, But seeing that a learned hand, lays
so much, and so great stress upon it; It may not be slightly passed over, and
who sees not here a wild parallel well worthy of such a monstrous assertion,
The proposition is, of two standing in full disparity, and an instance is given
in a single person, where there is no disparity at all, and by two adjuncts
which are Synonyma: I desire to know how this sequel may be proved, If a wife
of an ignoble birth be not made Noble by her husband, her issue is ignoble;
must it be proved by this Proposition, The issue of every wife not made noble
by her husband, is ignoble? or will it serve, The issue of every ignoble wife
not made noble by her husband is ignoble? If a poor man take a wife, and is
not enricht by her, he still remains in a poor condition; shall this be made
good by a proposition, That all men taking wives, and not enricht by them are
in a poor condition; or will it serve that every poor man taking a wife, and
not enricht by her, is in a poor condition? are these true, or are they false
propositions. Yea, what is affirmed in his own instance, to prove that if an
Englishman be noble, he is honorable, it is sufficient to prove it by this
Proposition; All Englishmen noble, are honorable, will not hold. Let any one
tell me how he will make good this Proposition: If a Dutchman be borne of a
Duke, he is a Duke; if he be borne of an Earl he is an Earl, must it be; All
men born of Dukes, are Dukes, of Earls, are Earls; This with us in England is
false, but of all Dutch men thus borne it is truth; But the reason given must
be looked into, The antecedent and the conclusion (says he) would be all one,
whereas the Proposition proving must be larger then the Proposition proved. But
who knows not, that the Proposition proving is larger here then the proposition
proved. A proposition express^ly universal, is larger in a Logic argument,
then either an indefinite or particular. The Proposition by him excepted
against, in Logic consideration is as universal as that which is most
universal; Every Englishman that is noble, is honorable, is an universal
Proposition, as well as every man that is noble, is honorable; and I never
learnt that in the quantity of propositions, there is magis and minus. I am
challenged for saying, The truth of the Apostles sequel depends on this
proposition; All the children of an unbeleever are unclean, unless for
generation he or she be sanctified by a believer; and adds, I deny it, in that
the terms, [for generation by a Beleever] are added by him, not in the
Apostle, and so he changed the terms. I pray leave generation out, and see
whether there can be any sense in it, unless it be understood; Their
sanctification will confer no legitimation, without generation; If I say not
believer, I must say husband or wife that is a believer.

Another bottom on which the forenamed interpretation is grounded is, The
Apostle brings not formal arguments to conclude the lawfulness of
marriage-society, but removes scruples concerning their o^n state and their
issue.
That the Apostle in this Text brings a formal argument to prove the
marriage-society of these yoke-fellows to be lawful, which in the two former
verses he had determined, and (as was confessed before) they scrupled, and it
cannot be denied but the words at first sight, seem to carry some color to
understand them so far in this sense, as to make them formal, concluding
reasons of his former determination, Having said, verse 12, 13. If any brother
has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him
not put her away. And the woman that has an husband that believes not, and he
be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him; then he adds, For the
unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife; and the unbeleeving wife is
sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy. But the way of inference will as well bear it; that the Apostle does
first determine the Controversy by revelation as an Apostle, and then takes
off their scruples which occasioned their fears, both respective to their
posterity and themselves; This way of interpretation is charged as making the
Apostle immethodical, but what better method then to determine a point, and
then answer reasons against it; The Apostle meeting with their fears in respect
both of their posterity, and themselves, it must needs be that they signified
them, and he removes them; The Apostles method (it is true) and manner of
inference indifferently favors either interpretation; But the words themselves
clearly evince, that they are a removal of scruples against their
marriage-society, and not a formal concluding argument for it. Let us look
first into verse 16. where [For] may lay as fair a claim to a formal reason
as this in the fourteenth, and such that stand for this interpretation say, it
is a formal reason, But I would feign learn how any one can make it up into a
reason; He must thus draw it up, whom man in marriage-society may have hopes to
save from idolatrous ways, with such a one he may continue marriage-society;
But a believing husband in marriage-society may have hopes to save his
unbeleeving wife from idolatrous ways, Ergo. This proposition as to such a
conclusion is. 1. Vain, for, though there were no such hopes, yet
marriage-society is to be continued, Gentilisme being not of the subsistence of
marriage. 2. This Proposition is false as to this purpose; The incestuous
Corinthian might have hopes to have had converted his fathers wife, (if a
Heathen) and yet such hopes would not conclude the lawfulness of their society
together; Herod might have had like hopes to have converted his brother Philips
wife, and yet this was not objected against John Baptist, and had it been
objected, it had been frivolous. We have many cases put about marriage, if such
an argument would serve the turn, it would salve them all. And for verse 14.
though I cannot say, but in case it were made up into a reason of the former
conclusion, it would contain a truth, and so far might pass in the way of a
reason, yet I have many material exceptions against it.

1. From the thing it self, it would be a reason (though true, yet) silly,
childish, vain, your married condition is lawful, else your children were
bastards; what child in Corinth (as was hinted when I spoke of the Apostles
words, as in themselves that knew the right hand from the left) but well
understood it? There is not a boy that plays in the streets, but knows that
children born out of wedlock are bastards. There is a Book published, putting
it to the question, and disputing it, whether marriages between professors of
the true religion and Infidels, and so of Papist, with Protestants, be not ab
initio, null, and they to be separated in case any shall now come in with this
argument for the negative, that they are not null, and to conclude their
continuance; If such marriage be null; their children are bastards: But they
are not bastards, Ergo the marriage is not null; the Author or any other might
be brought to a smile, not to conviction. As Erasmus in his censure of those
suppositio^s spurious Epistles that have past with many for Paul's to Seneca,
charges them with no false doctrine, but is bold to say, I see not what can be
said more simply or senselesly, and that there is nothing in them worthy of
Paul's spirit; So I may say of this suppositio^s spurious interpretation put
upon this Text in Paul's Epistle. Erasmus is deservedly troubled that these
Epistles should have their verbosous Comments, any may equally be troubled that
such a reason should find defense from any hand in so many words.

My next challenge is from the phrase in which it is delivered, altogether
unsuitable to a reason of this doctrine, upon a threefold account. 1. The
Apostle being only to tell them, that the legitimation of their issue proved
the lawfulness of their marriage-society, he should attribute all (as to
either sex) to the believer, when the child owes his legitimation equally to
either parent, to the unbeleever as much as the believer. 2. That being to give
reason of the lawfulness of marriage in such a special case, he should give
his reason of equal concernment to all marriages, where both are unbeleevers,
both believers, as well as this between a believer and an unbeleever. 3. When
he is to speak only of legitimation and bastardy, he should praise it in such
uncouth language, and in words, fit it only, suitable to their parent,
Ecclesiastical capacity, whether title to it, as in the believer, or want of it
as in the unbeleever; now, on the other hand interpret the Apostles words (as
his method will equally bear) accordingly as you have heard before, and no such
inconveniency follows from the words either verse 14. or 16. And now our
adversary may easily receive an answer to that odious inference, which he makes
from our interpretation of Covenant-holinesse: According to this interpretation
(says he) the medium of the Apostle to prove the lawfulness of the living of
a believing wife with an unbeleeving husband, will as well prove the
lawfulness of a believing fornicatrix with an unbeleeving fornicator, as may
appear (says he) by a Syllogisticall Analysis of the Apostles argument, the
major whereof is this, That man and woman may live together, notwithstanding
the unbelief of one party, whereof one is sanctified to the other for begetting
an holy seed. This is manifestly the Apostles reason, he says after our
interpretation. But he is manifestly mistaken; not to mention the liberty that
he will scarce allow another to leave out husband and wife expressed in the text,
and instead of it to put man and woman: The Apostle does not conclude the
lawfulness of their marriag-society by the federation of their issue, but
shows that the supposed and feared non-federation does not conclude the
unlawfulness, and I dare yield that any man and woman may live together,
notwithstanding any fear of the unholinesse of their issue; where one is
sanctified by the faith of another, to the begetting of a seed federally holy.
And if he will apply this, which the Apostle speaks, of a man's living with his
wife ( ad faciendum populum) to the living with his whore, there is no danger
to yield it; Pharez his issue had belonged to the Commonweal of Israel, if
Tamar had been an Infidel, as for ought we know, and in all probability it was,
with Jephtaes mother. If Sampson had issue by the Harlot of Gaza, Judges 16. 1.
such issue had belonged to Israel, such issue male had right to Circumcision.
To gratify him I shall put it under my hand, that if a man have no other
reason from Scripture to leave his Harlot then the non-federation of his issue,
he may still abide with her, and that he is not bound upon that sole account to
desert her If any shall attempt to keep up these two maine propositions by me
examined, on which the whole fabric of a long discourse is built, for to make
good the interpretation mentioned, and refute the arguments against it, I shall
readily and willingly look into it, which for several years I have waited,
till then I shall conclude that federal holiness and not legitimation is here
intended.

A mighty stir is here further made about instrumental sanctification, A
vindication of instrumental sanctification.
and arguments heaped by Master Tombs against it, the most of them grounded
upon those two Propositions (which he would have his Reader believe that I
confess, when he cannot prove,) That all the children whereof one parent is not
sanctified to the other are unclean; none of the children whereof the one is
not sanctified to the other are clean, together with the other; That this is a
concluding formal reason to prove the lawfulness of their abode together; upon
this account it is affirmed that our interpretation fits not the case of
persons disabled from procreation, it makes the Apostles argument to be from a
future contingent, I appeal to any Logician and Grammarian whether a person may
be said to be instrumentally sanctified for such an effect which he neither
does nor can produce? Whether a woman may be said to be sanctified quoad hoc,
so far as to bring forth an holy seed, by virtue of the faith of her husband,
who is by age or accidental impotency utterly disabled naturally from bearing
any children, and has no supernatural power enabling her thereto? whether she
may be capable to bring forth an holy seed, who is not capable to bring forth
any at all? bringing forth an holy seed cannot be without bringing forth a
seed, and therefore the woman incapable to bring forth a seed is incapable to
bring forth an holy seed. And I on the contrary appeal to any, yea, the meanest
Christian whether persons that have children born in wedlock-bonds, in such
disparity may not have their fears and scruples about them, notwithstanding
other in the same condition of marriage are childlesse, or unable to bring
forth children? Whether the seed which came of those marriages, Ezra 10. were
not unclean, notwithstanding many so married had no children? many of the
Priests had herein transgrest, and it was but some of them that had wives by
whom they had children, Ezra 10. 44. And because this is the medium for proof
of the Apostles determination, verse 13. that they might live together, it must
needs be from a future contingent; but when this is no medium for proof of the
Apostles determination, as has been sufficiently shown it is not, this falls
with the other.

Two arguments against instrumental sanctification I shall take notice of,
which seem to have some other bottom. 1. That the act of producing an holy
seed is not from any special designation of God, and therefore cannot be meant
of instrumental sanctification, seeing an instrument must be the instrument of
the principal agent which can be no other then God; I am sure they bring forth
children unto God, Ezekiel. 16. 20. and this they do not independently of
themselves, so Christ would not have warned, Matthew. 23. 10. Call no man father
upon earth, for one is your Father whech is in heaven. All natural parents are
instruments of God to produce a seed to people the world, according to that
blessing of Genesis 1. 28. Genesis 9. 1. Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the
earth; All believing parents are instruments of God for an holy seed, it being
of his free grace that the promise is to them and their seed.

The second argument is that many a child of both unbeleeving parents are
federaly holy; and being answered that they are not so at their birth, if
afterward by grace they are changed, this is no fruit of their birth (of which
the question is in this place) but the work of the Gospel through grace. It is
replied, This is nothing to the purpose, since the Proposition has not those
words in it, nor the Apostle; the Apostles reason supposes it cannot be at any
time; It seems then that the Apostles Proposition has this in it, that their
children so borne, are unclean by birth and for all eternity shall so remain
never to be cleansed, or else this exception is less to purpose, who does not
see that the Apostle speaks uncleanness or holiness as a product of their
birth? without consideration of any thing which after by providence (through
the omnipotence and free grace of God) might happen, as a mean woman given in
marriage to a Senator or Peer, she is enobled by her husband, otherwise her
issue were plebeians, yet so as they are capable of honor by the Princes
munificence, or their own merit; It seems that Proposition of Christ's, That
which is borne of the flesh, John 3. 6. will not hold, unless it must for ever
continue flesh, and no omnipotence of God shall be able to make it otherwise.
It is further said, and yet it may be certain that the child of two unbeleevers
may be federally holy at birth, whether it be understood of Election, inherent
holiness, or outward holiness if God please to work, and declare it. To this
I only say, let that proposition stand, till God by such a miracle confute, or
contradict it, and whenever he shall thus own such unclean infants as
federally holy, I shall be silent.

It is farther said, But the issue of them that are not lawfully enjoined as
husband and wife, cannot be made legitimate by God, because it is contrary to
the definition of legitimation, which is a state consequent upon birth by the
lawful copulation of lawful husband and wife. So that the reply is brought to
this, because God by his omnipotence can make our unclean ones holy, and to
make their unclean ones holy, is without the verge of omnipotence; therefore
his interpretation stands and ours must fall. If we should put case in their
manner, that God should appear in approbation of a man's enjoying a woman out of
marriage-society, then there were a legitimation of the issue, as he did the
marriage of the brothers wife, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. otherwise against the moral Law,
Levit. 18. 16. Or as some understand it, the Prophets taking a wife of
whoredoms.

CHAP. LII.
Gal. 4. 29. Vindicated.
THe next Scripture Text to make good the point in hand, is Gal. 4. 29. As then
he that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the
Spirit, The Text Analyzed.
even so it is now. For the clearing of which I have observed heretofore in the
Apostles words there. First, the History. Secondly, the Mystery by way of
Allegory. Thirdly, the parallel by the Apostle observed and applied to his own
times.

The History we find, verse 22, 23. It is written that Abraham had two sons,
the one by a bond-maide, the other by a freewoman, but he who was of the
bondwoman was born after the flesh, but he of the freewoman was by promise.

The Mystery by way of Allegory, verse 24, 25, 26. Which things are an
Allegory, for these are the two Covenants, the one from the Mount Sinai which
gendereth to bondage, which is Agar. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia,
and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.
But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.

The parallel in these words, But as then, he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, so it is now. From whence this
argument is drawn, The argumen deduced from it.
If there yet remain in the bosom of the Church children borne after the
flesh, as well as those that are borne of the Spirit, (so that the distinction
of births, as applied to Abraham's seed, still has place among Christians) then
there is that privilege of birth-holinesse still remaining; The consequence is
plain, Birth of the flesh in the Church gave a Church-interest, The Apostles
kinsemen after the flesh, Romans 9. 3. were all Church Members. That there is is
such a birth yet remaining, the Text quoted makes clear; Ishmael was in
Abraham's family, and was by birth of his family, and did persecute in the
family, and was by birth of his family, and did persecute in the family, as the
Apostles shows out of Scriture History, Men in the Church, borne in the Church,
by birthright of the Church, do persecute, as upon experience he affirms, and
so makes up the parallel. There birth of the flesh, is the highest honor they
attain; when others have the same with an addition to it; this implies two
things. 1. A birth of nature, a child by lineal descent of such a father. 2.
Outward prerogatives that accompany such a birth.

I know and have declared that this is not that which the Apostle here chiefly
intends, or is about to hold out. But this I affirm, that he occasionally
lays down, that which I here have delivered. And by this free concession of
mine, any man in reason might have thought, that I had prevented that which is
still charged upon that which from this Text I have inferred, or rather that
which in this Text I have observed, one largely showing that these words in
hand, are a compound proposition, which Logicians call a comparative
proposition, in which are two parts, a Protasis, and an Apodosis, or rendering,
wherein that which answers the fore part, first held out, is expressed, now
that always notes some agreement, correspondence, parity or likeness, whether
in quantity, quality, action, etc. But according to my Apodosis or reddition
(as is said) there is no such answerablenesse, or likeness, as has the show
of a comparison of things equal or alike (as this is as the affirmative terms
show) for who would conceive any better then nonsense, in such a speech as
this, Even as Ishmael persecuted Isaac, so the children of Christian believers
are visible members in the Christian Church. It were all one as to say even as
Esau hated Jacob, so godly men are heirs of heaven, or have access to God. The
absurdity of which with him is so gross, that the man is amazed that I do not
see it, nor will confess it. Being above his strength to answer that sense;
which I give of the words, he is pleased to take pains to make them up, by his
gloss, into nonsense, that so no answer may need, But he well knows or might
know, that I have not to deal with the whole of that Protasis, nor the whole
of that Apodosis, and not at all with the persecution there mentioned, but
only with the distinction there let fall, which is a distinction of births,
both in Abraham's family, and in the Church, in Gospel Times, which the Apostle
in his Application in those words [Then] and [Now,] plainly does demonstrate.
The truth which the Apostle supposes, and takes for granted, I have here to
speak to, and not to that, which by way of allegory, he infers from it, or
applies to it, and so the list of authors here brought in by my adversary;
speaking of the persecution of Christians, by Jews and Papists, may all of them
speak truth; but none of them all, any thing against me, who deduce no more
from the words, but that a distinction of births is there laid down, or rather
taken for granted, which is by the Apostle allegorised, but the allegory is not
at all within that which I am upon. I met with like dealings, from the same
hand; when I did compare, 1 Cor 7. 14. with Gal. 2. 15. to make good a title to
Covenant-holinesse, by birth of nature, both with Jew and Gentile. I then heard
those words of the poet, Cerni^us, an qui amant, ipsi sibi somnia fingunt? But
the evidence of truth, with Master Cartwrights authority, making them as to the
thing, full parallel (as to every eye they are) has there wrought some
silence, so I doubt not, but it will follow here. It is not the Apostles
intention, Gal. 2. 15. to speak of the birth-priviledg of the Jews, nor yet the
want of it in the Gentiles, yet there he mentions both, Gal. 4. 29.
neither is it his intention to treat of such a distinction of births, in the
Church. Jewish or Christian, but the hostile disposition of one, so born;
against another, yet in that place he plainly signifies such a distinction of
births in either Church, both Jewish and Christian. Can any man deny that
Abraham had two sons of such different births, as the Apostle from the hystory
in Genesis shows, v. 22, 23. Ishmael is set out as a son of Abraham, and upon
that account we know he had the honor of circumcision, Isaac had the same, but
a degree of further honor with it, being born as Ishmael was not) by promise,
And whatsoever Allegory the Apostle makes of it (which is not to my purpose to
examine) yet in his reddition or application, he looks at the hi^story, not at
the allegory, as the adverbs of time, Then, Now, (neither of which are
allegorised) do demonstrate. And though Ishmael may be a type of a justitiary,
seeking righteousness by works, and persecuting those that seek a
righteousness by faith, whether typus, factus, or destinatus I will not
enquire, yet, I think, it will never be proved; that Ishmael was such a one, in
his own person, persecuting Isaac on that account; which must be proved, if the
Apostle in his reddition do no look at the history, but the allegory as my
adversary contends or else he speaks besides the purpose, [Then] looks at the
history denoting time, as none can deny, and [Now] must not refer to the
allegory without great absurdity. My interpretation (as is said) will not hold,
in that according to it, there is no agreement, correspondency, or parity in
the parts of the compound proposition, And I wonder; what agreement,
correspondency or parity there is, or can be, in the parts of this compound
proposition, according to the interpretation opposed against me, confounding
history and allegory together. Thus it must be, as Ishmael no justitiary, then
jeered Isaac, a sucking babe (as my adversary out of Hierome speaks) who was
not in capacity to look after any righteousness, so it is now; justitiaries
persecute those that do follow after righteousness by faith. If this gloss
stand it should not be, so it is now, but rather, now it is otherwise. He that
will come to a right understanding of the Text, must refer this 29. verse to
22, and 23. looking upon verse 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. (where the allegory is
prosecuted) as a parenthisis, seeing the words in v. 29. cannot be referred to
the allegory in those words, where there is no mention made of persecution but
to the history in the former. I am told, that the Apostles distribution, cannot
be, of a subject by its adjuncts, but, of a genus, into its species, because
[birth] is neither substance, quantity, nor quality; but an action, or a
passion, and actions though they be capable of various modifications, yet
Logiscians (as is said) do not call them subjects. But doubtless the person
borne, is and may be called a subject, and stands in a capacity of adjuncts,
and I look to the persons here distinguished, some with more inferior, and
others with more noble adjuncts. When I cite may Master Baine (brought in
against me as an adversary) saying, The children of the flesh here, are those
only who in course of nature came from Abraham, I am told, it is true, that
Mr. Bayne so interprets the term [children of the flesh, Romans 9. 8.] as I have
cited him, which place he meant, but not the term [he that is borne after the
flesh, Gal. 4. 29.] yea, p. 138. he says, for though children of the flesh, in
some other Scripture (meaning Gal. 4 29.) does note out justitiaries, seeking
salvation in the Law, yet here (Romans 9. 8.) the literal meaning is, to be
taken, a child of the flesh, being such a one who descends from Abraham
according to the flesh. But how can Mr. Bayne possibly mean, Gal. 4 29. (as I
am here told he does) when he speaks of the children of the flesh, when those
words are not to be found there, [but born after the flesh] and those terms
[children of the flesh] and [born after the flesh]* are in this very place by
my adversary distingushed. And though Master Bayne do not quote, Gal 4 29. in
that place which I mentioned, yet Doctor Abbot in Thomsoni diatribam, p. 115.
says. Circumcisus est Ishmael, circumcisus and Isaac, solus autem Isaac, natus
secundum spiritum, Ishmael tantummodo secundum carnem, non est autem
justificatus, qui natus est tantum modo secundum carnem, Ishmael quanquam
circumcisus, non est tamen justificatus, etc. Here he plainly makes the birth
of the flesh, an honor giving circumcision, though an honor inferior to that
of the birth of the spirit which justification accompanies, and he quotes Gal.
4. 29. as a proof of what he speaks, and I am much engaged to my Antagonist,
for his quotation out of Hierome. Sicut ergo, tum; major frater Ishmael,
lactentem adhuc and parvulum persequabatur Isaac, sibi circumcisionis
prerogativum, sibi primogenita vendicans, ita and nunc, etc. Whence had he this
prerogative of circumcision, but from this birth, that I speak of from Abraham,
and there is, the like prerogative of birth; still continuing, or else there is
no parity in the Apostles reddition. Here I shall take notice of a fourfold
absurdity endeavored to be fastened upon me.

1. That I understand this to be said of Infants which then must be said to
persecute, But I understand it not of Infants, but of those, which sometimes
were Infants; and had their birth in infancy, from such and such parents.

2. That I take [being born after the flesh] in the latter part to note a
natural birth, but that is clean besides the Apostles meaning, who considers
persons borne after the flesh, not as borne by humane members and seed, but as
born by a fleshly covenant, otherwise it would import no allegory, contrary to
the Apostles speech, ver. 24. which tells us these things are an allegory. If I
should take it in one part of the proposition, in one sense, and in another
part of the proposition, in another sense I should then quite spoil the
agreement, which I am told must be in it, and then I might have been indeed
argued against for an absurdity whereas it is said that the Apostle considers
persons borne after the flesh, not as born by humane members and seed, but as
borne by a fleshly Covenant, I say, that, that is false, as to the history, and
I have showed by reasons that have yet no satisfying answer that the Apostle,
v. 22, 23. lays down the history, which afterward he allegorizes in five
verses, and then makes application of the history, and not of the allegory, v.
29.

3. That to be [born after the flesh] should import, birth of Abraham, as a
believer, and so natural generation, of each child of a believer in that
respect, ^ut then [to be borne after the flesh] would be common to Isaac with
Ishmael, to him that is borne after the spirit, of the free woman by promise,
with him that is borne after the flesh of the the bondwoman; for to be borne
of Abraham, or a believer agrees also to Isaac, to him that is born after the
Spirit, of the freewoman by promise; whereas to be borne after the flesh is
taken in a sense from which Isaac and we, that is, Paul and other Christian
believers are excluded. That is, that certain clear truth by way of necessary
corollary would follow, which that great Doctor Abbot, in the place quoted
takes for granted, speaking of both births, and applying his tantummodo twice
over to Ishmaels birth, he clearly signifies, that Ishmael had this honor, and
that Isaac had it likewise, and that which is far more noble together with it.

4. It is said, that I quite pervert the Apostles intent, in taking [to be born
after the flesh] to impart an honor, whereas the Apostle mentions, birth after
the flesh, as a debasement, takes it in the worser part, not as importing a
descent from the father, but from the mother and that mother a bond woman, and
therefore the children, servants, or bond^slaves, by reason of their being
borne after the flesh. And does not the Apostle tell us, in the relation of the
history, of their father as well as their mother? does he not speak of one
common father, in these words, Abraham had two sons, as well as of two
different mothers? and I dare not take the boldness to exclude either. I
confess the Apostle mentions [birth after the flesh] as a debasement, in
putting it in opposition to [birth of the Spirit,] yet I affirm, that he
mentions it also, as an honor. As circumcision was a debasement in one
respect, Ephesians. 2. 11, and an honor in another, Romans 3. 1. Phil. 3. 5. It was an
honor to have Circumcision in the flesh, they were thereby a people of God in
Covenant, but it was a debasement, being put in opposition to circumcission in
heart; and to the worshipping of God in Spirit and in Truth; it was an honor
to be born of Abraham, after the flesh, and frequently mentioned in Scripture
as an honor, but an abasement, when it is opposed to the birth of God by the
Spirit. Much more might be animadverted, but this is enough (as I think) to the
cause, and I purposely avoid all that concerns the person, I know not what
more may be said, but I find nothing, as yet, said; but that which instead of
evincing the contrary (being thoroughly examined) is a more full confirmation,
that in New Testament-times, such a distinction of births, is in New
Testament-times continned, clearly hinted and taken for granted here, and in
other Scriptures fully expressed.

CHAP. LIII.
Matthew. 19. 14. Mark. 10. 14. Luke 18. 16. Vindicated.
THat Text in the Gospel (uttered by our Savior Christ) and recorded by three
Evangelists, comes now to be considered; Suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God. In the whole
Narrative in Gospel-records we may see First, The whole narrative analyzed.
The pious care of Parents, or others in their stead; to present Infants to
Christ. Secondly, The harsh entertainment that they found from the Disciples of
Christ. Thirdly, The good will of the Lord Christ toward them manifested. 1.
In his displeasure against those that forbade their coming. 2. In his free
admission of them. 3. In gratifying their requests that brought them. 4. In
receiving them in his Arms.



In the words that we have in hand, we see. 1. Their admission; or at least
charge given for it; Suffer little children to come unto me. 2. The reason, for
of such is the Kingdom of God. Here is wont to be enquired. 1. What moved
these thus to present their children. Upon what account these infants were
tendered to Christ.
This by the Evangelists is expressed; that Christ would put his hands upon
them, and pray. Which as they requested, so he condescended to answer, He put
his hands upon them, and blessed them. They looked upon Christ (as it seems)
as a great Prophet highly in favor with God, and such were wont to bless in
the name of God, and their blessing was highly prized. Hands were used to be
imposed as in sacrifices, Exodus 29. 10. so on persons in blessing, Genesis 48 14.
The reason that moved his Disciples to forbid their coming, can scarce be
doubted. They saw men resorting to Christ; Why they were forbidden by the
Disciples.
either moved by his Doctrine, or his Miracles, either to be instructed, or
cured; neither of these could be in their thoughts that presented these little
ones. They were incapable of his teaching, being infants; and that they needed
not his cure, being not diseased, and therefore they rebuked those that came to
tender them. Positions rending to clear Christ admission of them.
Now to come to a clear understanding of the words, we shall lay first some
positions concerning these Infants admission, and afterward come to the
consideration of the reason.

First, That these were Infants, or as Infants in an incapacity to learn ought
from Christ, and so actually to embrace Christ, or enter Covenant themselves
with him. Which does appear. 1. In that they are called little ones, (...). 2.
They were brought, and came not on their own accord. 3. In that Christ took
them up in his arms. 4. Had they been capable by age of instruction, with what
color could any have denied them? Why might not they come as well as those
multitudes that flocked to him? 5. Why were not the children themselves spoke
to, to forbear to come, rather than those that brought them, not to bring them?
If they were capable of instruction, they were capable of rebuke. 6. Why is
there no word of instruction spoken to them? The young man that came to Christ,
was instructed by Christ in the same Chapter. So should these have been
instructed as well as blessed, had they been in a capacity for instruction.

Secondly, As they were in an incapacity by reason of age to be taught, so they
were not (as was said) diseased to have need of cure. This the Disciples well
knew that this was usual with Christ to cure those that labored under
infirmities of all ages, and therefore would never have had it in their
thoughts to have rebuked those that brought these, and the Evangelist would
never have concealed this reason, and mentioned another. Such a thing as this I
said was vented in a Manuscript, but I knew not that ever any print had
maintained it. Now I am told that there is a book in Folio entitled Baby
Baptism mere Babisme, that does assert it. If any man will trouble himself
with the book or reasons, he may enjoy his liberty. He says the touch
mentioned was in order to healing, but I shall rather believe the Evangelist
that referres it to blessing, Mark 10. 16.

Thirdly, These were infants of such parents, that were in covenant with God,
as appears, in that Christ who now was in the Coasts of Judea, was sent alone
to them of Judea in covenant with God, Matthew. 15. 24. And was a Minister of the
circumcision, Romans 15. And we see how facile he was to them, when his carriage
was otherwise, and of another sort: when a Canaanitish woman comes for her
child, Mat. 15. 26. This further appears by that which they requested for
these infants. This seems to be yielded, They came (says one) to Christ upon
the conceit that he was a Prophet, and so they might bring children to him to
be blessed; and further says, if this reason prove any thing, it is, that the
childrens parents were Jews, which is all that we contend for, the Jews as
yet were in Covenant with God. To this is said, if it be meant of all the
Jews, and of the covenant of grace in Christ, it is palpably false,
contradictory to the Apostles determination, Romans 9. 7, 8. I am sure, Rom, 9.
3, 4. Proves it to be above all contradiction true, and that Romans 9. 7, 8. has
nothing against it, I have largely showed, which is past by in silence.

Fourthly, These infants themselves were in covenant, and stood in relation to
Christ, bearing his name, and being of his people; and were not as heathens in
their present state without Christ; aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and strangers from the covenant of promise. This is evident by their free
admission by Christ, and the reason by him given, of such is the Kingdom of
heaven. After some personal reflections which I am resolved to wave, I am told
of the often complaint of the use of the word covenant, in so various senses,
or rather sometimes none-sense by the Paedobaptists, and again of their
nonsense or proper gibberish, which language I resolve to bear, being the
least of many thousands that herein I suffer.

Fifthly, They were admitted upon a common right equally belonging to all
infants of covenanting parents, and not by virtue of any extraordinary
privilege peculiar to them, and not common to others. This is plain. 1. By
the general admission which he gives to infants on this occasion; suffer little
children to come unto me, and extraordinarium non facit regulam communem; Here
is a general rule, all have admission, and therefore there is nothing
extraordinary it is objected, these present infants only were admitted, but
though one say it, me thinks another should not be found to believe it, of such
little ones is the Kingdom of heaven, therefore let these little ones come,
and only these. 2. It was such a right that the Disciples of Christ ought to
have understood, as plainly appears by Christ's sore displeasure conceived
against them, for forbidding their admission to him, and that must be a known
right and not secret; One indeed says, They were not admitted out of any known
right common to others, but a peculiar privilege as being elected; for which
Piscator is quoted, when as Piscator sylogistically concludes the contrary. His
evasion of this argument is very well worthy of animadversion, The reason of
Christ's anger was their hindering him in his design, not the knowledge they had
of their present visible title, this is but a dream, afterward he says, the
truth is, this thing was done to these infants, not by reason of any visible
title they had, or to enter them into any outward Church privilege, but to
accomplish by his blessing their interest in the invisible Kingdom of God by
election. I would demand whether the Disciples did understand Christ's design,
or whether they were bound to know it, or were their sin not to know it;
whether they knew these infants to be elect, or whether they were bound to know
their election? Neither of these having any ground (election being of the
secrets of heaven, and Christ had not made known any such design) Christ who
condemns anger without a cause as a breach of the sixth commandment, M^t. 5.
22. would not himself have been angry, where there could be no sin the alone
just ground of anger. It is now confessed that the Disciples of Christ ought to
have understood that they were to be admitted; but it was, either because they
heeded not some particular intimation of his mind concerning those infants, or
some general truth concerning Christ's office, and his readiness to do good to
all sorts of persons, as there was oppertunity offered, from which he ought not
to be hindered by them, when Christ himself assigns an open known reason, of
such little ones is the Kingdom of heaven, they that will may heed opposite
conjectural reasons. It is confessed that elect infants might be baptized were
they known; but in this case Christ may be as sore displeased at men's
non-baptizing elect ones, as he was at his Disciples for forbidding the
admission of these little ones. And let them take heed upon this account lest
they suffer more from Christ's displeasure in not admitting elect infants to
Baptism, than they can imagine that we shall suffer in the Baptism of those
that are not elected. I am told that I have just cause to fear the displeasure
of Christ for admitting to Baptism those that are neither known to be elect,
nor believers, but infants of parents, who are manifestly children of the
devil, covenant breakers. If they be covenant-breakers as is here confessed, then
they are covenanters, for none out of covenant breaks covenant; and I here
profess that I will baptize none of whom I have not all assurance that they
are the children of God. As to that Adoption which is to the inheritance of
privileges, as those were, Ezekiel. 16. 20.

Sixthly, They are here admitted by our Savior Christ to a Church-priviledge,
proper to Church Members, the Israel of God; They are admitted to a blessing,
Mar. 10. 16. Blessing is a Church-priviledge, Number. 6. 22 23, etc. to the end of
the Chapter, The Lord spoke unto Moses saying, speak unto Aaron and his sons,
saying, on this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them,
the Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc. And they shall put my Name upon the
children of Israel, and I will bless them. They are therefore admitted to a
Church-priviledge; the Israel of God are under the blessing, little ones are
ordered to receive this blessing, little ones therefore are of Israel. The
Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
These are the blessed of the Lord upon this account, Jerem. 31. 23. As yet they
shall use this speech in the land of Judah, and in the Cities thereof, when I
shall bring again their captivity; The Lord bless thee O habitation of
justice, and mountain of holiness. Children are within this number, they are
the heritage of the Lord, Psalm. 127. 3. and consequently admitted by our
Savior Christ to this privilege of a blessing. The Author that charges
nonsense and gibberish on Paedobaptists in general, there tells his Reader,
that my arguing is as though my wits went on wool-gathering, because I was not
mindful to put my argument into an explicit sylogistical form, but now it is
done for his satisfaction; blessing is a privilege of the Israel of God, Numb.
6. 23. 27. Christ admits infants to a blessing. Therefore he admits them to a
privilege of the Israel of God or Church-priviledge. It is objected that
Christ admits only a few, but it is with a reason that gives admission to
others of such is the Kingdom of heaven. A great triumph is made of a speech
of mine, page 91. of my answer, where I say we do not think that this blessing
was baptising, or that these desired, or that Christ intended their baptism;
only we affirm that a medium hence may be taken* from whence we may infer
the right of infants to baptism; They that are admitted to one
Church-priviledg, may not be denied another, whereof they are equally capable;
But infants are here admitted and order taken for their admission to one
Church-priviledge, of which they are no otherwise capable than of Baptism; so
that here is no direct precedent for baptism in particular, but for
Church Priviledges of which infants are capable. None that are interessed in
the Church of Christ which is his Kingdom may be denied an admission to it by
Baptism. A ground it is, not immediate express, but by necessary consequence.
Observation is made, Mark this speech, if [but] be adversative, then he grants
that infants are capable of Church Priviledges; not of Baptism, which
overthrowes all his dispute. But that is left out which would fully explain my
meaning, and wholly take off the force of his reply. This act of Christ is no
direct precedent for Baptism in particular, but of Church Priviledges in
general. If he can but assume and make good with our Socinian Antibaptists (who
in the parts where I live, begin to triumph over Antipaedobaptists, beating
them down with their own weapons) that Baptism is no Church-priviledge; then I
shall confess, that he has wrested this argument out of my hands, and that
this text as to this argument falls, otherwise it is of force and an undeniable
consequence. I am now told, that, if this act of Christ's be a direct precept (I
intended precedent) of Church Priviledges in general, then it is of Baptism in
particular, being a Church-priviledge, that which is said of the Genus, being
true (as Logicians say) of the species, quicquid praedicatur de genere,
praedicatur de specie. Whence it follows, he speaks inconsistencies. But he
should have taken in all my words [immediate expresse] as well as [direct] and
I think he that speaks of the Genus does not immediately, directly, and
expressly speak of the species. But if it be otherwise, and that herein I was
mistaken, I am here content to retract it, and confess now, with help of this
new light, that there is an express, immediate, direct precedent for
Infant Baptism.

Concerning the reason given of admission of infants in that proposition of
Christ's, Of such is the Kingdom of heaven: We have 1. The subject, of such. 2.
The predicate or attribute, is the Kingdom of Heaven. The particle such cannot
here have reference to their qualification: that those that were qualified as
these, in humility, and meekness, had their interest; Sheep and Doves as well
as infants, are thus qualified. They are not proud, nor revengeful. That which
the Disciples took to be an impediment of force to hinder infants, and a just
ground of rebuke of those that brought them, is that which Christ understands
in this reproof of the Disciples, and admission of their infants; But it was
their want of growth, their littleness, which the Disciples took to be a just
impediment, and which occasioned their reproof: So that the particle [such]
has direct reference to the quantity (as I may say) not to the quality of
these infants, to their infant-stature, or minority not to their meekness or
humility. And so it is referred elsewhere expressly by our Savior himself;
Who so shall receive one such little child, Matthew. 18. 5. the word is the same
here, and there, it respects littleness therefore, and not meekness. The
whole Text may be thus fitly parathrased; Trouble not our Master with such as
these, say the Disciples, there is no use of their coming, they need not his
cure, and they are not capable of his instruction, they have no infirmity to be
healed, no capacity to be taught; It is fit for men of abler parts, not for
infants to make their address to him, Let them come, says our Savior, and
let not their infant-age exclude them, how little soever they are capable of
the Kingdom of Heaven.

For the predicate or attribute, the Kingdom of heaven: This as is said, is
meant of the Kingdom of Glory; and on this hinge (as is further said) the
answer to the whole Argument turns. The Author therefore assumes his
affirmation, and says; I determine the Kingdom of Heaven to be meant of the
Kingdom of Glory, and gives his reasons. To encounter with this confident
assault of his, I shall undertake these three particulars.

1. To make it appear that the hinge of the whole hangs not here.

2. That in his reasons given are nothing satisfactory, to evince that it must
be meant of the Kingdom of Glory.

3. That in case it were granted him, yet it does not at all advantage the
lea^e.

First, That all hangs not on this, appears, in that our Savior had said
enough in his order for admission of these infants, on which we can build our
conclusion. Those that are admitted to Church Priviledges, they are
Church Members; But infants are admitted by our Savior Christ to
Church Priviledges, and therefore are Church Members. However Master Tombs can
interpret the reason, yet he cannot deny Christ's order for their admission, nor
deny that it was a Church-priviledge to which they are admitted. To illustrate
it by a parallel. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 10. The woman ought to have
power on her head, because of the Angels. The woman's duty is there clear, to
be covered in token of subjection, though we do not agree what is meant by
Angels; Whether Angels of Glory, or Gods Ministers in the Congregations that
are called Angels of Churches; our duty is as plain to give infants admittance
as Church Members, though the reason annexed remains controverted; Whether Gods
Kingdom on Earth, or the Kingdom in Glory be here meant by the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Secondly, For his Reasons (which though I should yield, the cause is already
gained) there is not force in them.

1. Says he, The Kingdom of God must be understood, Mark 10. 14. as it is
verse. 15. and Luke 18. 16. as verse. 17. and Matthew. 19. 14. as it is in both
those; This is proved, because our Savior from their estate, inferres a
likeness to them in others for the same estate, Apolog p. 150. This Argument
what color soever it carries, yet it is not conclusive. It may be taken more
largely in Christ's argumentation, and in a more restrained sense in his words
of Instruction or Application, as in a place much parallel I shall show, 1 Cor.
6. 1, 2. There we have the Apostles reproof, verse. 1. and his reason, verse. 2.
as in the Evangelists we have Christ's assertion confirming his reproof, ver.
14. and his application, ver. 15. Now Saint, in the Apostles reproof is taken
more largly, than it is taken in his reason. A visible Saint is meant in the
first place, a real and glorified Saint in the second; visible Saints may judge
in small matters, for real Saints in glory shall judge the world, shall judge
Angels; and so it may be here, infants have their present title to the visible
Kingdom; and men qualified as infants, shall only enter the Kingdom of Glory.
His second reason, that Christ directs his speech to the Disciples already in
the visible Church, and therefore speaks not of the Church visible, I know not
how to make up into a reason; If I understood it, I would either yield or
answer it. The third reason, that the speech, Mark 10. 15 Luke 18. 17. is like
Mat. 18. 3, 4. but there it is meant of the Kingdom of Glory; Ergo, so here is
answered already. If Mark 10. 15. Luke 18. 17. be like Matthew. 18 3, 4. yet Mark
10. 14. Luke 18. 16. which we have in question; is unlike to Matthew. 18. 3, 4.

Thirdly, Were it granted him, that the Kingdom of Glory must be understood
both in Christ's reason and application, yet he is nothing helped. Infants have
right to the Church visible militant, because they are in a capacity of
entrance into the Church triumphant, Acts 2. 47. The Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved; Not necessarily saved, but now (having entered
Covenant with God) they were in a capacity, and therefore added as visible
Church Members. Infants standing in this capacity, ought to have admission
likewise. It is said, that if this proposition were granted, that they have
right to the Church visible militant who shall be of the Church triumphant, yet
this right cannot be claimed but by those who are elect, and therefore from
these Scriptures so expounded, it cannot be proved that any other than elect
infants are to be baptized.

Answ. If election or non-election must steer us in admission to Baptism this
were to purpose interposed, but when there is nothing that can be objected
against them as hindering their salvation it is sufficiently proved that it may
not hinder their Baptism. That must not be pleaded against any as a bar to
hinder their admission into the Church on earth that will not hinder their
admission into the Church in heaven.

CHAP. LIVE.
Reasons evincing the Birth-priviledge and Covenant-holinesse of the issue of
Believers.
HAving already so largely insisted upon by Scripture proofs, that children are
in covenant with parents, and that privileges of Ordinances (which necessarily
imply a covenant) do descend to posterity, I shall lay down certain grounds;
some of them making way toward, Covenant Interest is of the nature of those
things that descend from parent to child.
and others necessarily inferring of themselves the conclusion.

First, This is of the nature of those things which descend from Parent to
child, from Ancestors to Posterity, which is in their power to convey to their
issue. There are those things indeed which are personally inherent in men, and
proper to them, so that they cannot convey them to their issue; there is no
deriving of them to others by succession. As, 1. Individual accidents of the
body, wounds, scarres, or comeliness of feature, these are so in the Parent,
that they are not conveyed to their children. 2. Habits, or proper gifts;
whether acquired by pains, or infused. The son of a learned man inherits not
his fathers gifts; The son of an Artificer is no such Artist; The son of a
Prophet has not by virtue of birth the gift of prophecy; nor is the son of a
regenerate man endowed with saving grace for that reason.

There are on the contrary those things that pass from Parent to child, which
the Parent by nature or special privilege has power to convey. As, 1. The
essential or integral part of a Species, with the natural properties that do
accompany it; so one brute beast brings forth another, one brid brings for
another, and man brings forth one of mankind. 2. The privileges or burdens,
which in Family or Nation are hereditary, they are conveyed from Parents to
Posterity, from Ancestors to their issue; As is the Father, so is the child, as
respecting these particulars. This none have questioned, and these things in
hand being of the same nature, it is a fair propable ground of it self (if
evidence to the contrary from Scripture be not clear) that they are thus still
transmitted. Like privileges do descend in Kingdoms, Commonweals, Cities,
etc.


Secondly, It is so in Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Cities, in Corporations,
Families; The son of a Noble man is Noble, of a Freeman, is Free, Acts 22. 28.
As the son of a bondman (where by the Law of Nations they are bond men) is a
bondman likewise, Exodus 21. 4. Now we know that in Scripture the Church of God
is frequently styled by these names; By the most honorable of them, Mat. 8.
11, 12. Mat. 21. 43. Ephesians. 2. 19. Hebrews 12. 22. Ephesians 3. 15. to let us
understand, that as Cities, Kingdoms, Families, have their privileges; so the
people of God in covenant have theirs ^ikewise.

But we are told, Sol.


Protestant Divines are taken up by the Jesuits in the self same way for this
very thing. A Lapide on 1 Cor. 7. 14. says; Hinc Calvinus and Beza suum dogma
de traduce justitia hauserunt, docentque fidelium fi^ios proprie esse sanctos
and sine Baptism salvari quia hoc ipso quo fidelium sunt filii, censentur esse
in Ecclesia nati juxta foedus divinum, Ero Deus tuus and seminis tui, Ge. 17.
7. Quemadmodum jure civili censentur liberi qui ex altero parente libero
nascuntur; sed errant,
Hence Calvin and Beza have drawn their opinion of a birth-righteousnesse, and
say, that the children of Believers are holy, and saved without Baptism;
because on this account that they are Believers children, they are reputed to
be born in the Church, within that Divine covenant; I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed, Genesis 17. 7. As children in the civil Law are accounted free,
whose parents are either of them free; but ( says he) they are deceived, and
gives his reason; The Church is not a civil Commonwealth, but supernatural;
and there is no man born a Christian, but spiritually newborn, and is made
holy; not civilly, but really, by faith, hope and charity infused into the
soul. So Stapleton on the same words in his Antidotum, ( applying the Spiritual
Antidote against Calvin's Carnal Poison,) says* Foederis inter Deum and Abraham
initi participes sint, sive Judaei ab eo carnaliter oriundi, sive Christianorum
parentum liberi: carnalis generatio nihil facit.
That Jews carnally descended from Abraham or the children of Christians may
be made partakers of the Covenant entered of God with Abraham: Birth according
to the flesh does nothing. So also Bellarmine speaking of the covenant with
Abraham, says; Ad nos descendit non per carnalem generationem parentum, sed
per spiritualem regenerationem Christi.
It descends to us, not by carnal, but spiritual generation; So that these men
have sucked the spiritual meaning from the Jesuits, and Master Marshal holds
to the carnal imaginations of Protestant Reformers. They produce many Texts of
Scripture, where this Birth-priviledge in their thoughts is evidently set
forth, Jesuits contradict it, and upon this account it is a carnal imagination
to conceive it.

The Apostle knew not ( says one) that God had so by promise, Moses after the
promise made to Abraham, to have mercy on whom he would, Romans 9. 15.

If this be meant of any engagement of God to confer saving graces, Sol.
or habitual qualifications on the natural seed of Believers, the words then
carry reason with them. But neither he nor his great friends will learn, to
distinguish between Gods conditional covenant (contained in privileges of
Ordinances) and habitual saving graces, otherwise they know from Moses, that
God exercised this freedom in making choice of Israel above all Nations, and
that the Apostle knew, and in the same Chapter lets us know, Romans 9. 4. that to
them pertained the covenants, and that this was their prerogative for
Birth-priviledge, Romans 3. 1. We say the son of a Freeman is Free, the son of a
Nobleman is Noble; we never said that the son of a Learned-man is Learned; we
say that the son of a Christian is a Christian, as to interest in Ordinances;
We never said that the son of a Regenerate man is Regenerate.

It is further urged, Pelagians, and deniers of Original sin; it concerns
those that use such speeches to consider.

To this I answer. Sol.
It concerns those that press these objections, to see how Chamier, Paraeus
and other Protestant Writers answer them, when they are in their very words
urged by Jesuits. If they can reconcile Galat. 2. 15. with Ephesians. 2. 3. then
they have an answer. The Apostle was by birth of the people of God in covenant,
and yet by nature a child of wrath.

It is further said,

It is well that they have learned an Artifice from these Sol.
superstition-hating Jesuits, to keep out the inlet of superstition among us:
if there were no parallel held betwixt the Church of God and other Kingdoms,
after the manner of the Law of Nations, but such that are Seminaries of
superstition; they may do well to acquaint us how it comes to pass, that the
Curch in Scripture has the name of a City, Family, Kingdom? Similitudes ever
carry some resemblance. If this were the alone ground, on which the
Birth-priviledge of Christians were bottomed, they had said something; but
being only an illustration of it, and nothing more, they are over lavish in
their censure. Similitudes indeed may be over-stretched beyond their reach, and
if they had laid down rules to declare where the Similitude holds, and where it
holds not (as I have done in the Birth-priviledge) and made it appear that it
holds not in that for which I produce it, they had said somewhat to the
purpose; Read Mal. 1. 6, 8, 14. and tell me whether there be any ground laid
for dangerous superstitions. Birth-interest descends in all other Religions


Thirdly, It is so in all other Religions, they keep up their privilege of
interest in the worship of their Ancestors. The child of a Turk is a Turk,
the child of a Pagan is a Pagan, the child of a Jew is a Jew: And it is the
Apostles Argument in like case respective to Ecclesiastical communion, that
because Sacramental communion rendered them one Ecclesiastical body with
Christians; so communion in worship will make one body with those of other
Religions, 1 Cor. 10. 17, 18, 19. See Paraeus on the words, and Cudworths True
notion of the Lords Supper. There are common principles that are the same in
all Religions, and we must believe them to hold, unless Scripture hold forth a
difference. God ownes children borne in the Church as his servants, and as his
children.


Fourthly, God ownes children born in the Church as by birth his, his servants,
Levit. 25. 39, 40, 41, 42. If thy brother that dwells by thee be waxen poor,
and be sold unto thee, thou shall not compel him to serve as a bond-servant,
but as an hired servant, and as a sojourner he shall be with thee, and shall
serve thee unto the year of Jubilee. And then shall he depart from thee, both he
and his children with him; and shall return unto his own family, and unto the
possession of his fathers shall he return; For they are my servants. Root and
Branch, Parent and child are servants of God; As they were the servants of
their Master; when they could do them actually no service, by reason of their
relation to them; so they are the servants of God on the same account. And as
he owns them as his servants, so also he ownes them as by birth his children,
Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. Moreover, thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom
thou have borne unto me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be
devoured; Is this of thy Whoredoms a small matter, That thou have slain my
children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire for them?
If there were no Birth-priviledge, how had God this property in Infants? and
this David pleads, Ps. 116. 16. O Lord, I am thy servant, truly I am thy
servant, and the son of thy handmaid; because he was borne in Gods house, and
was a child of a servant of his; he pleads his interest.

Fifthly, Parent and child respective to Church-interest, are not in an
opposite condition.
If the child be not in covenant, the parent and child are heterogeneal, and
respective to Church-relation in the most opposite condition: the Parent in the
Kingdom of God by virtue of the faith that he professes: the child in the
Kingdom of Satan by reason of his non-interest in the Promise, and want of
title to Covenant Relation. But Scripture makes them still as one, Jews
children are Jews by nature, Gentiles children are sinners, that is, Gentiles
by nature. The Root being holy, the Branches are holy; Parents not sanctified,
children are unclean; but Parents being sanctified, they are holy.

Sixthly, No president in Scripture, of a believing Parent bringing up a child
for covenant and not in covenant.
If children be not taken into Covenant with their parents, then the most godly
of Parents bring up children; not in covenant, but for a covenant; not in any
present interest of relation to God, but at best in an hopeful expectation of
it. They bring not forth children to God, but at best they have their desires
to train them for such a future visible relation; But there is no such example
in all Scripture of a parent in covenant, training up the seed of their bodies
for a covenant. No one in all New Testament-Scripture, ever bred up a child in
years to baptize him, no more than in Old Testament-Scriptures they bred their
children to circumcise them; we read of many baptized in years, but we read of
none borne of Christian parents, kept till years of discretion to be baptized.
--

Seventhly, Infants out of covenant according to Scripture-grounds are without
hope of salvation.
If children be not received into covenant with their parents, but stand
without covenant, and in no right of Church Membership, then they are without
any Scripture-ground of hope of salvation, then they are as all others that are
out of covenant; without Christ, without God, without hope. And because some
have risen up against this Argument with high clamours, though hitherto with
feeble, or rather no reasons, I shall somewhat more enlarge my self in
confirmation of it. That which the prime authors of, and chiefest sticklers
for, the non-federation of infants freely confess, which the general consent
of their adversaries (Protestant Writers) unanimously upon Scripture grounds
conclude, that the present Patrons can maintain with nothing but clamours, and
such reasons (improved to the highest) which will equally conclude the hopes of
the greatest Drunkards, Idolaters, Adulterers, Heathens; that must be taken for
an Argument of force, and a reason conclusive this cannot be denied; But so it
is here, as I shall make good in several particulars.

1. Those of the Church of Rome, Jesuits our leading adversaries confess it.
that have stood up against Infants covenant-holinesse, do confess that all
infants going out of the world as they came into the world, in that estate
perish, and so have provided a chamber in hell, which they call by the name of
Limbus Infantum, and now since their Limbus Patrum by Christ's death is made
empty by the fetching out all that were there in expectation of him, and the
number of infants thus dying increasing, it is said by some that these two are
laid together: howsoever it falls out with these places about which we have no
reason to busy our selves, this position that infants thus dying without any
covenant, or Church-interest, do perish, follows as directly from their
principles as any conclusion from its premises.

2. Protestant Divines who assert Infant-salvation, Protestant Divines cannot
avoid it.
and believe no such division of hell into chambers, and have other thoughts of
the condition of Infants, still bring this interest of theirs in the covenant
of God as their ground, (not prying into the secrets of Election, nor urging
prerogative above that which is written) the covenant of God, Genesis 17. 7.
confirmed by the New Testament-Scriptures before mentioned. They very well
know, that in case Papists can wrest this covenant interest of infants from
them, they conclude according to Scripture-ground their damnation: Luke tells
us, there were daily added to the Church such as should be saved, namely to the
Church visible, as the Text is clear, Acts 2. 47. Now if they stand not
admitible into the Church, they stand without hope of salvation; see how the
Apostle joins these together, Ephesians. 2. 12. Without Christ, being aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of Promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world. If any can conclude against the
interest of any in the Commonwealth of Israel, that is, the Church of God, and
the covenants of promise (which those do that will have them to be no
Church Members, nor to be taken into covenant with Parents) they sadly doom
them to be without Christ, without God, without Hope. Those that disclaim
Zuinglius his opinion, that Hercules, Socrates, Aristides, Numa, and such like
Heathens are now in heaven; would be desired to show how they cast those out,
upon that account as Heathens, and take in infants as great strangers
(according to them) to any Church-interest. Infants want not sin for
condemnation; our first Original estate being a corrupt estate, and by nature
children of wrath, and putting them out of covenant, they can find no
Scripture-way to entitle them to Christ for redemption; They seem to conceive
other hopes of the salvation of infants of Heathens, that upon the same ground
they may be charitable to the infants of Christians, that with them are in the
same posture with Heathens, when they speak of Hercules and other Heathens as
before; yet speaking of the infants of Heathens, they say, It is bad to say,
that God does not save some of the infants of Indians pro been placito,
according to his good pleasure. For any warrant we can find in Scripture, it
is as bad to say it of the parent as of the child. The Scriptures leave the
whole of the Family, root and branch under the fury and wrath of God* Jeremiah
10. 25. Psalm. 79. 6. Our present adversaries instead of reasons oppose only
comers against it.


3. The present Patrons of this non-federation of infants, can maintain their
salvation with nothing but clamours, and such reasons improved to the highest,
that equally conclude the salvation of the greatest drunkards, adulterers,
idolaters, Heathens; I shall now purposely for peace sake pass by those high
clamors and bitter invectives that we meet with on this occasion, and come to
take notice of the reasons produced, to exempt infants from this doom of
condemnation, and all that I can find is one and the same thing to fly for
refuge to prerogative; This is my judgment (says one) that God will have us
to suspend our judgment of this matter, and Rest on the Apostles determination,
Romans 9. 18. For satisfaction of which I need to add no more than what I have
said, page 15. of my Answer, seeing it rests, and not one word yet replied to
it. The Text of Scripture (which we have over and over) is, that God will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, telling his adversary, that it is bad to say
that God does not save pro been placito, which no adversary of his will deny,
But God is pleased in his Word to make known the way of the dispensation of his
mercy, otherwise the vilest person against whom in our ministerial way, we
denounce Gods judgments* may reply that his hope of salvation is as good as the
best, for God saves ex been placito, and has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and the best soul, in a case of disertion, will take off all his applications
of comfort, with the close of that Scripture, And whom he will he hardens,
Romans 9. 18. And so the Jews even in their rejection, (of which the Apostle
speaks so largely,) being cut off by unbelief, might have pleaded their hope of
salvation, as well as in a believing condition; we must therefore not look to
the secret Will of God, of which no reason can be given, but his good pleasure;
but into his revealed Will, where he is pleased to make known the dispensation
of this will and good pleasure of his, and so we shall learn not to carry our
hopes beyond his promise. To that Text of the Apostle, Eph^ (...). 12. In which
all out of Covenant are concluded to be with (...), It is said, Though the
Gentiles were without hope, Eph^ (...). 12. in respect of the body of them, yet
now and then, God called some, as Rahab, out of the visible Church, and
therefore we may not determine universally that out of the visible Church there
is no salvation at all. But when Rahab was thus called she was no more a
Gentile, as appears, Ephesians. 2. 11. as the Ephesians had been, but in present
were no Gentiles, so also it was with her, neither she, nor they, were saved
out of the Church; but brought into the Church for salvation.

CHAP. LV.
A Corollary for Infants Baptism. Infant Baptism by Arguments asserted.
THen it follows by way of necessary Corollary, that Infants have right to
Baptism, children of baptized parents are entitled to that Ordinance.

First, those that have been Church Members, and admitted with the initiating
sign and seal, are yet to be admitted, unless order be given to the contrary;
But Infants have been Church Members, and accordingly admitted by the
initiating sign and seal, neither is there any order for the contrary;
Therefore Infants are Church-membes, and still to be admitted.

Secondly, Those that are under the Covenant-promises of God with the body of
his people, have right to Baptism, Acts. 2. 39. But Infants are under the
Covenant-promises of God with the body of his people; Infants therefore have
right to Baptism.

Thirdly, Saints, or holy persons have right to Baptism: Infants are Saints,
they are holy persons, Romans 11. 1^. ^ Cor. 7. 14. Infants therefore have right
to Baptism.

Fourthly, They that by birth according to the flesh, are in the bosom of the
Church, have right to Baptism: But Infants by birth according to the flesh are
in the bosom of the Church, Gal. 4. 29. Infants therefore ought to be baptized.

Fifthly, They that are admitted to Church Priviledges have right to Baptism,
the leading privilege; But Infants are admitted to Church Priviledges, Mark
10. 14. Matthew. 19. 14. Luke 18. 16. Infants therefore have right to Baptism.

Sixthly, The children of the Kingdom, that with others make up the Kingdom of
God, have right to Baptism; But Infants are the children of the Kingdom, that
with others make up the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. 14. Matthew. 19. 14. Luke 18.
16. Infants therefore have right to Baptism.

Seventhly, The heritage of the Lord are to be admitted to Baptism: But Infants
are the heritage of the Lord, Psalm. 127. 3. therefore Infants are to be
admitted to baptism.

Eighthly, Those that are to be saved, are to be added to the Church by baptism,
Acts 2. 47. Infants are to be saved, and therefore are to be added to the
Church by Baptism.

In all of these Syllogismes the minor is at large confirmed in the discourse
before going, the major in each shall presently be at large confirmed, and so
the conclusion will be undeniable.

Here it is objected with no small noise, that Infant Baptism wants an
institution, Objections against Infants Baptism answered.
we find no command for it in all New Testament-Scripture, where our warrant
alone is for New Testament-Ordinances. Neither have we any example in the New
Testament of an Infant baptized; whatsoever then our Arguments are, this
concludes it to be without warrant. To speak to these, and first to the
institution.

The institution spoken to in this objection, The Question stated whether there
be any institution of Infant Baptism.
either is an institution of the Ordinance of Baptism it self; or else an
institution with limit to Infant-age; For Baptism it self they will not deny
that we have warrant in the New Testament; John was sent to baptize in the
Nation of the Jews, John 1. 33. and the Apostles have the^ commission Matthew.
28. 19. to baptize all Nations. For an institution with limit to Infant-age; we
heard but even now there was no institution in the Old Testament for
Infant-Circumcision. The institution Genesis 17. 10. is for males without limit in
respect of growth: I am sure it cannot be affirmed that there is any
institution of Baptism in the New Testament, with limit to any determinate age
or growth. This ob^ection if it have force in it, followed home, will overthrow
all Baptism at any age, and every other New Testament-Ordinance whatsoever.
Suppose a man of 20, 25, 30, 40, 50. years of age seeks Baptism. According to
this rule, he must bring a prescript for one of this age to be baptized, and
the same also for the Lords Supper. But it is replied, Believers of any age may
be baptized, believe, and the age is not regarded. This will be easily yielded,
if they be not already baptized, but then the institution with limit to Infancy
is waved; and upon the same account Church Members in Covenant of any age,
ought to be baptized, and so the institution is not in question about that
there is an agreement. But whether Infants be in Covenant, or whether they be
any Church Members, is to be disputed, which already is satisfied.

2. I say those words of our Savior. Matthew. 28. 19. Disciple all Nations,
Infants are within the verge of the institution of Baptism.
baptizing them, etc. do comprize Infants in them as well as men of years;
Infants serving to make up a Nation as well as Parents. The Infants of Nineveh
did make a considerable party of the City of Nineveh. The Infants of any Nation
make up a part of the Nation, and the Nation where they came was to be
discipled, and baptized. And that Infants are here comprehended, farther
appears by this Argument.

In the same sense and latitude as Nation was taken in respect of the Covenant
of God, when the Covenant and Covenant-initiating Sacrament was restrained to
that one only Nation, where the^r commission was first limited; In the same
sense it is to be taken (unless the Text express the contrary) now the
commission is enlarged. This cannot be denied of any that will have the
Apostles to be able to know Christ's meaning, by his words in this enlarged
commission: But Nation then (as is confessed) did comprehend all in the Nation
in respect of the Covenant, and nothing is expressed in the Text to the
contrary; therefore it is to be taken in that latitude to comprehend Infants.
This Argument has strength from that of the Apostle, Acts 3. ^5. Yea are the
children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our fathers,
saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed. As it was with the kindred of Abraham in respect of
Covenant-holinesse; so it is with all kindreds of the earth, they jointly make
one party in the Covenant But Infants of Abraham's kindred were in the Covenant,
and of the Nation, in respect of Covenant-blessednesse.

But it will be said, that an exception of Infants is implied, in that all of
the Nation must be discipled before they be baptized: But Infants are not
capable of being discipled; and so they are made incapable of Baptism.

I answer. 1. Here is implied that they are of capacity to be Disciples, in
that Christ sends to disciple Nations, and they serve to make up the Nation.

2. It is the way of Scripture-speaking of an universality of a people in a
Land, expressly to except Infants in case they be to be excepted, as we see in
the judgment that befell Israel in the wilderness, to the cutting off of
those that came out of the Land of Egypt, Numb. 14. 38. And in the Covenant
entered by the body of the Nation of all degrees and sexes at their return
from Babylon, Nehem. 10. 28. and an exception could be no where more useful and
necessary than there; to let us know that it is otherwise with Gentiles in this
particular, then it was with the Jews, that the Nations where their commission
thus enlarged, were herein differenced from the Nation to which their Ministry
was first limited.

3. Let that Text of the Prophet be well weighed, where speaking by the Spirit
of Prophecy of the rejection of the Jews, and the glorious call of the
Gentiles in their stead (in that ample way as it is there set out) he has
these words: Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy
daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders, Isa. 49. 22. If there were but
such an hint as that, by way of Prophecy, to have left them behind, we should
from some, have heard of it with a noise.

4. In the Lord Christ's own Dialect, Infans are Disciples.
who is best able to express his own meaning, they are Disciples. To belong to
Christ is to be a Disciple of Christ. This is plain from our Saviors own
mouth, comparing his words recorded in Matthew and in Mark, To give a cup of
cold water to drink in the name of a Disciple, it is in the one, Matthew. 10. 42.
To give a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to me, it is in
the other, Mark 9. 41. To belong to Christ, to be a Disciple of Christ, and to
bear the name of Christ is one and the same thing with our Savior. Now that
infants are of the number of those who as Disciples in Christ's account do
belong to him, and bear his name, is yet farther plain by another Text of
Saint Matthew, Matthew. 18. 5. where Christ setting a little child in the midst
of his hearers, says, Whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name,
receives me. By all which it appears, that which is done to Infants, is done
to Disciples, and has a glorious reward as done to Disciples. Infants
therefore are Disciples of Christ, are of those that do belong unto him, and
bear his name: Who then is not afraid to refuse them who will receive Christ?
Who will not baptize them that is willing to baptize Disciples in the name of
Christ?

For that part of the objection, The invalidity of that objection, that we have
no example of Infant Baptism examined.
that there is no example in New Testament-Scripture on Infant Baptism. I
answer.

First, For an example of Baptism with limit to any one precise number of
years, or days; we have but one that I know (if that) in Scripture, and that
is of Christ, who was (as is computed) about the age of thirty, when he was
baptized, if this be pressed and followed, all must at that alone be for
Baptism, and no other of any age may be baptized.

Secondly, There are many things of which we make no question, and yet we have
no example of them: I have instanced in the trial of the suspected wife by the
water of jealousy, that there is no example for it in all the Old
Testament-Scripture; and for women's receiving of the Lords Supper, there is not
a particular institution, or any particular express precedent for it in the
New Testament; They cannot give us any instance of any one trained up by
believing Parents for Baptism, and as soon as he could give an account,
baptized; not one child of a Believer brought up for covenant, and not in
covenant. One goes about to give instance of particular precedents for women's
receiving the Lords Supper. 2. And instead of a precedent urges, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
as an express command in formal terms for women, (...) comprehending both
Sexes. To this I have replied in my answer, page 52. We are then furnished with
an express command in terms as formal, and with an example to boo^e of women's
circumcision; and so the difference between circumcision and Baptism (so often
laid in the dish of Paedobaptists) here falls to the ground; Ye on the
Sabbath Day do circumcise, (...) a man, John 7. 22. if (...) a man on the
Sabbath Day receive circumcision, that the Law of Moses should not be broken,
John 7. 23. Here is Moses his command, the Jews practice, with Christ's
approbation, in the same comprehensive latitude in regard of both Sexes, as in
Saint Paul for receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And if arguments
borrowed from Grammar use of words, be of that force; you see what they have
proved, As (...) is taken in one Sacrament, so it is to be taken in another:
But in the Sacrament of circumcision it is limited to the male only, to which
accords that Logic rule; Omne analogum stans per se, stat pro famosiori
analogato. To this is replied that the subject matter of the command as well as
the Grammar use of the word, proves females to be included, but then his
express formal command is lost, they are not expressed, but included, and by
consequence only, which will not be denied. He farther says, that 1 Cor. 10.
17. is an express command in formal terms of women's receiving the Lords
Supper; we being many, are one bread, and one body, for we are partakers of one
bread. I demand, whether the Apostle speaks in the person of Christians, or in
the person of women? not of women sure, for he takes in himself, and he was a
man, and then the formality of an express Example falls. He brings Acts 20. 7.
that the Disciples on the first day of the week came together to break bread.
Here is an example as express and formal, as the former. They cannot
infallibly prove by help of consequence, much less expressly, that there was
a woman there. At that night-meeting there might be none but men, as at the
first institution. It can never be an express example till it be made to
appear that none are Disciples but women.

Thirdly, The examples that we have of a whole household, being baptized; if
some had them in hand, would be sufficiently formal; but any thing will serve
as an express proof, when they have a mind to affirm it, and nothing will
serve to evince it by consequence, when they have a mind to deny it. But as
Disciples are women, so families have children. There are Families without
children, and there are Disciples there are not women. The commission is to
disciple Nations, and baptize them. Providence has happily ordered that
Nations have been brought in, and their Infants received to Baptism. In the
Primitive times households were baptized, without mention of exclusion of
children, in after-ages households have come in with their children.

Secondly, Infants want of faith and repentance, no impediments of their
Baptism.
It is yet objected, Men must believe and be baptized, Mark 16. 16. Repent and
be baptized, Acts 2. 39. Infants can neither believe, nor repent, therefore
they may not be baptized; and will it not as directly follow, that when they
can neither believe nor repent, they must be damned; let them frame an answer
to the one, and then they have answered both; That which will speak for them to
receive them into heaven (notwithstanding those Scriptures that threaten
condemnation to men in unbelief and impenitency,) will speak also, to receive
them into the Church by Baptism. The want of those express words, Infants
ought to be baptized is no impediment of their Baptism.


Thirdly, Some say, Where is it said in so many words, infants must be
baptized? Bring us those words, we abhor syllogismes and consequences. To
deal with them with their own weapons; Where is it said that Infants must not
be baptized, where are those words written? if they care not for our
consequences, we shall not care for theirs. They have answered. Negatives
cannot be proved. To this we answer. 1. Where is that said? we find it no
where in Scripture, that Negatives cannot be proved. 2. Christ proved
Negatives, That himself was not a Spirit; A Spirit has not flesh and bones, as
you see me have, Luke 24. 39. That God was not to be tempted, Mat. 4. 7. 3. if
Negatives cannot be proved, then Negatives are not to be believed, ours is an
Affirmative which they yield may be proved, theirs, is a Negative which they
say cannot be proved, we then have the better of it, there is hope of proof on
our side, theirs is desperate.

To help the Reader in a word for the necessity of consequences: Necessity of
Scripture consequence.
If those be fools that cannot gather consequences from Scripture, to settle
their faith upon them, then much more those that deny them; But such are fools
by our Saviors own testimony, that cannot gather consequences from Scripture
to settle their faith on them, Luke 24. 25, 26. O fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to have entered into his glory? Those were fools and dullards
that did not believe from the Scriptures of the Prophets, that Christ must
suffer and enter unto glory. But those words are no where in express words
written: It is alone by consequence from the Prophets words that we know them.
Somewhat I have spoken to those that reason in this sort, lest they should be
wise in their own conceit, I will have no more to deal with them, lest I be
thought to be like them.

Fourthly, Antiquity is for Infant Baptism.
There is a great flourish made by some, as though Antiquity were against
Infant Baptism, and famous flourishing Churches never received it: In which
some have taken much pains, but never did men travel in a business to less
purpose, as all may see that will take the pains to read what they have wrote,
and bring it home to that which lies upon their hand to prove, which is, that
Infant Baptism is not ancient, as is pretended, that there were some ages of
the Church in which it was not in use. In all of which search of theirs and
help that they have found from the greatest Antiquaries of the Socinian party,
no friends to the Baptism of infants, they cannot find one Writer of any kind
whatsoever, or wheresoever, from the day that John baptized in Jordan, and in
Aenon near Salom to this very year, that has said, and left on record, That
there was no such custom as Infant Baptism in his days; and when so many have
expressly affirmed that the original, was from the Apostles, and that no
beginning of it in the Church can be found, till some one appear in
contradiction to assert the non-usage of it in his time, let any indifferent
Reader judge to what purpose all serves that can be said. The primitive times
had not musical instruments in their congregations, they had not Altars,
Images, they erected not Temples to Saints, this we hear from Writers in their
several Ages, and in case they had not Infant Baptism (when the Church of the
Jews had infant-circumcision, and the ancient, made Baptism to succeed
circumcision) and never any one mention their non-usage of it, or give any
reason concerning it, is above a wonder, the prime argument to render this
practice to be of lower standing, than is pretended, is the silence of some
Authors of ancient, who times in their works (as is said) do not mention it,
as Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, Epiphanius, and Eusebius, if it
had been known in their times, why do they not once mention it? To this, much
might be said. 1. Every Writer does not treat of all Subjects, nor deal in all
Arguments, some have written in our age, and Infant Baptism is not found in all
their Writings, shall after-ages infer upon their silence that Infant Baptism
was not used in our times? 2. If some Writers do not mention it, yet others in
the same time, or near about, speak fully to it. 3. Master Marshal full proofs
of it, in several of the Authors that are said to be silent in it, as Clemens
Alexandrinus, Athanasius, and that in Epiphanius, that does necessarily imply
it. And those that mind farther satisfaction of his Objections, drawn from the
Questions put to the baptized, and the delay of Baptism by some, they may
find it in his Answer, and if he ingenuously confessed, that he craved the
help of some learned Antiquaries, it speaks but little ingenuity in those that
once and again upbraid him for it. I have put to the adversaries seven Queries
concerning the practice of antiquity about Infant-Bapti^me, with some
Observations also about it, in my Answer of his Letter, page 3. to the tenth,
which I thought might give some satisfaction to all that which has been spoke
to this thing, but have received no answer; It is said by one that the
determination mentioned by Cyprian, so far as he can find by search, is the
springhead of Infant Baptism, which upon challenge made, he thus explaines. I
did not deny that I found Infant Baptism practiced before, but that the
determination of that Council was the springhead that is the first determined
rule or Canon, by force of which, it has since continued in a stream, and this
is true. It seems the River had run some hundreds of years before the
springhead brake forth, but not in such a channel as a determinate rule or
Canon, when it is well known that Infant Baptism was not in that Council of 66
Bishops at all agitated, much less determined; It was not put to the Question,
but taken for granted by all that were present. The dispute and the
determination was upon that which Fidus questioned, which was the Baptism of
infants before eight days old, and not Infant Baptism; how could he mean that
it has since continued in a stream, by virtue of that determination or Canon,
when he very well knows there was neither determination nor Canon upon it, nor
yet any need of it? They determined that which in their meeting was put to the
Vote, that an infant under eight days might be baptized. So that this Quaere,
as all the rest, stands unsatisfied, and antiquity cleared for Infant Baptism.

It is yet farther said, Infant Baptism is not bestowed on unwritten tradition.
that many learned men in former and latter times, take Infant Baptism only
for an unwritten tradition; giving us a list of Popish Writers that have spoke
to this purpose, a Cardinal in a Popish Council, Bennus, Bellarmine and Erasmus
that had scarce stepped over the threshold from them: To which we answer, That it
is no marvel, if these making it their business to parallel unwritten
Traditions with Scriptures, some of them to prefer them before them, and
knowing Infant Baptism to be in honor in all Churches, do pin it upon
unwritten Tradition, that so they may advance the honor of unwritten Tradition
with it, yet even these cite Scriptures for it, and so mar their own market
of Traditions, as those that procure them are forced to acknowledge. When
Bellarmine would argue the Scriptures imperfection, and assert a necessity of
unwritten Tradition, then he can affirm that Infant Baptism, has no other
foundation, but when he will defend Infant Baptism against those that matter
not Tradition, he can find Scripture for confirmation: Foreseeing this
Objection an Answer is brought out of Bennus, That some things may be proved
out of Scripture, when the true sense of Scripture is evident; and
Infant Baptism is proved from John 3. 5. but the sense whereby to prove it is
manifest by tradition, Becan. Manual. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 24. It is very well
known that these Jesuits will say as much of any point of Faith, and leave the
whole meaning of all Scripture to rest on the Churches interpretation,
continued by tradition. As to the quotation of Protestant Authors, so many of
them as have kept up the honor of Scripture, and made no defection from that
way, it only speaks their boldness to affirm that any of them ever
dishonored Infant Baptism in that way, as to settle it upon unwritten
tradition, or to fix it on such a bottom. They very well know, that, as they
defend the Scriptures full perfection, and make it their business to oppose
all that would, have it ek't out by any thing that is unwritten, so, they
assert Infant Baptism on Scripture-foundation. Can they think that they have
to deal with such weak adversaries, that whiles against their party they
contend with Scripture-Arguments, that infants ought to be baptized, they will
yield up the cause on the other hand to Papists, and confess the insufficiency
of Scriptures. But the homonymie or various acception of the word Tradition,
The various acception of the word Tradition.
may deceive the unwary Reader; Sometimes tradition is taken in the proper
sense, for that which is delivered, or handed over from one to another, in this
sense, every point of faith is a tradition, and so is Baptism it self, as well
as Infant Baptism in which sense Paul takes it, 2 These. 2. 15. Stand fast, and
hold the traditions, which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our
Epistle. Sometimes tradition is taken for that which is delivered in word,
without writing, as there is distinguished a tradition by word, and a tradition
by Epistle; what Paul taught in his Epistles is a tradition, and what Paul
delivered by word of mouth is a tradition, and both must be held. Here somewhat
seemingly is spoken for unwritten traditions by the Apostle. For solution of
which our Protestant Divines have taught us to Distinguendum inter resquae
traduntur in Ecclesia and rationem earum tradendarum.
distinguish between the doctrine it self that is delivered to us, and the way
and manner of delivery. So Chamier de canone fidei, lib. 8. cap. 1. sect. 16.
The former of those might admit of many sub-divisions. The way of delivery is
either by writing in the Scriptures, or by lively voice by Gods Ministers, as
Chamier farther observes, sect. 19. Here again we must distinguish between
words and things, the words that are uttered and the doctrine that these words
contain; all words are not written, all our words in Sermons are not written in
the Scriptures, all Paul's words in his Sermons are not written in Scriptures,
as appears by his distinction before delivered, by word or Epistle, but the
doctrine it self that we deliver is contained there; Paul preached nothing but
that which Moses and the Prophets said should come, Acts 26. 22. yet there were
many words delivered by him, which Moses and the Prophets never spoke; Quadam
and sunt and dicuntur in Scripturis, quaedam vero sunt in Scripaturis tametsi
non dicuntur. N^zianzen. lib 5. de Theol.
They yet teach us to distinguish between that which is expressly written in
the Scriptures, and that which is by evident consequence thence deduced:
Amesius defending the Scriptures perfection against Bellarmine, introducing
unwritten traditions, says, Non quaeritur antotidem verbis omnia necessaria in
Scripturis continentur, sed vel sententia expressa vel per necessariam
consequentiam inde colligenda.
The Question is not whether in so many words all necessary truths are
contained in the Scriptures, but whether they may be gathered from thence, in
any express speech, or necessary consequence? Bellar. Enervat. cap. 6. these.
1. Let Doctor Sclater in this be heard, who speaking to this point, says, Thus
inform your selves, 1. Where generals are delivered, there are all particulars
comprised in those generals intentionally delivered, because generals
comprehend particulars. 2. Where principles and causes are delivered, there
effects are also intended, as being virtually contained in their principles. 3.
Where one equal is taught, all of like reason it taught, quia parium par ratio,
and where there is par ratio, there is par lex: Where there is like reason,
there is like law. So take contents of Scripture, no instance of any point of
necessary, or but convenient faith and practice, can be given but what is
delivered in the written Word. Doctor Sclater in 2 These. 2. 15. and when they
have well weighed these things they will find small cause to believe that they
have any advantage from these Authors. Field (it is said) says, The fourth
kind of Tradition is the continued practice of such things as are neither
contained in the Scripture expressly, nor the examples of such practice there
delivered, though the grounds, reasons, and causes of the necessity of such
practice be there contained, and the benefit or good that follows it. Of this
sort is the Baptism of infants, which is therefore named a tradition, because
it is not expressly delivered in Scripture that the Apostles did baptize
infants, nor any express precept there found that they should do so, yet is
not this so received by bare and naked tradition, but that we find in
Scripture to deliver unto us the grounds of it. If they will subscribe to that
part, That the grounds, reasons, and causes of the necessity of Infant Baptism
are contained in Scriptures, then I will subscribe to the other, that those
words, infants ought to be baptized are not the Scripture. Then Doctor Prideaux
is brought in, who says, Paedobaptisme rests on no other divine right then
Episcopacy, but we are not told whether Doctor Prideaux goes about to bring
down Infant Baptism to unwritten Tradition, or to bring up Episcopacy to divine
right according to Scripture. And out of these Premises this conclusion is
inferred, that the Ancients and learned before Zuinglius did account
Infant Baptism to have been an unwritten tradition, having reason from
Scripture not evident of it self, but to be received from the determination of
the Church. Which for ought that I can discern is thus gathered, some Papists
to set up unwritten traditions have, in contradiction to themselves, fastened
Infant Baptism upon it, of which only one lived before Zuinglius. Some
Protestant Writers, every one of them living after Zuinglius speak not one word
to the purpose: Ergo the learned before Zuinglius did account Infant Baptism
to be an unwritten tradition. Me thinks the Scripture-Arguments which may be
found in Authors far above Zuinglius his standing, as in Aquinas 3. part.
quaest. 68. art. 9. August. de Baptis. contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 24. with
others, might with more strength conclude, that they rested on a written
foundation, and were not satisfied with unwritten tradition.

CHAP. LVI.
The reality of connection, between the Covenant and initial seal, asserted.
THe several minor propositions, in the syllogismes before laid down, being
proved at large, in the foregoing discourse. So that nothing more needs to be
added, yet if there be no necessary connection, between the covenant, and the
seal, the major propositions, will yet be called into question. Though it be
granted, that infants be Church Members, are in covenant, have the promises,
are Saints, are in the bosom of the Church by birth-priviledge, are children
of the Kingdom, etc. Yet it will be said (though most unreasonably) that they
are not yet to be baptized, I shall therefore 1. Bring Scripture proofs for
the real connection between the covenant and the seal, clearing those
Scriptures from exceptions taken against them. 2. I shall make it good with
arguments or reasons. 3. I shall return answer to objections brought against
that which is here asserted.

That all in covenant, are to enjoy the initial seal of the covenant, let the
words of God himself, in the institution of circumcision be considered, Genesis
17. 7, 9, 10, 11, 14. I will establish my covenant, between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Thou shall keep my covenant
therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee, in their generations. This is my
covenant which ye shall keep, between me and you, and thy seed after thee,
Every man-child among you shall be circumcised, and ye shall circumcise the
flesh of your foreskinne, and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me
and you. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people. Here we see 1. A
covenant entered. 2. A seal appointed, as the Apostle, Romans 4. 11. calls it. 3.
The necessary connection between the seal and covenant declared. They are to be
circumcised, because they are in covenant, Having interest in the covenant.
They have together with it, interest in the initial seal, against this is
objected.

First, All the force of this proof hangs on the particle [therefore,] verse 9.
and may be rendared; And thou, or, but thou, as well as, thou therefore, and is
by others rendered. Tu autem, and Tu vero, which are neither of them illative
terms. 1. We have no reason but that it may be an illative as well as a
copulative, and being an illative particle, he has no exception against the
strength of it. 2. I deny, that all the force of the proof hangs on that
particle; look farther on into verse 10. This is my covenant, which ye shall
keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee; every man-child among you
shall be circumcised, and take in with it Acts 7. 8. And he gave him the
covenant of circumcision; And so Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the
eighth day, etc. and let them at more leisure find an answer to this argument.
That which God himself calls by the name of a covenant, ought not to be
separated from it: But God calls circumcision by the name of a covenant, Ergo
they ought not to be separated. 2. Let them consider the relation in which the
Apostle puts this Sacrament of circumcision to the covenant, Romans 4. 11. An
instituted appointed sign and seal, is not to be divided from that which it
signifies and seals, circumcision was an instituted appointed sign and seal
of the covenant; therefore it is not to be divided from it.

Secondly, it is said, If it were granted, that [therefore] is the best
reading; yet that the inference, verse 9. should be made from the Promise only,
verse 7. I will be a God to thee and thy seed after thee, and not as well, if
not rather from the Promise, verse 8. of giving to him and his seed the land of
Canaan; I find no sufficient reason given. This reference engages the
adversary, 1. In a contradiction to himself, who says elsewhere, the promise
of the Gospel was confirmed to Abraham by the sign of circumcision. He also
contends that it was a mixed covenant, made up of spiritual and temporal
mercies, and then it must take in the spiritual as well as the temporal
Promise. All that know the nature of covenants, and use of Seals, know that
the Seal ratifies all that the covenant contains: But the covenant (according
to him) contained not barely the promise of the land of Canaan; and therefore
the reference, must carry it farther than the land of Canaan. 2. It engages him
in a contradiction to the Apostle, who makes circumcision a sign and seal,
not alone of the land of Canaan, but of the righteousness of faith.

Thirdly, It is said, But if it were yielded, that the inference were made
peculiarly from the Promise, verse 7. to be a God to Abraham and his seed; it
must be proved that every Believers Infant child is Abraham's seed, before it be
proved that the Promise belongs to them. It must either be proved that they are
Abraham's children* or have the privilege of the Children of Abraham, which
from Genesis 9. 27. Romans 11. 17. is sufficiently proved, especially being
confirmed by those Texts that carry the covenant in Gospel Times to the issue.
And for his exception that the covenant was not made to every child of
Abraham, though it were true, yet it would not serve his purpose, provided,
that we in Gospel Times are under the same covenant as was Isaac, to whom the
promises were made, If some of Abraham's children were left out, that concerns
not us, so that we are taken in; yet the instance is very weak to prove it. As
appears (says he) verse 19. concerning Ishmael, and Heb. 11. 9. that Ishmael
was himself in covenant, though not established in covenant, (as God there, and
verse 21. promised concerning Isaac) not his seed never received, appears not
alone by the sign and seal which he received, verse 23. which yet is
sufficient (for God to seal to a blanke is very strange; to sign a covenant
to a man never in covenant) but also from Gal. 4. 30. What says the Scripture?
Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the son of the bondwoman shall
not be heir with the son of the freewoman. A man cast out of covenant, was
before casting out, in covenant; Ejection supposes admission, unless we will
give way to our Authors dream of Ejection by non-admission. He was cast out
after the time of the solemnity of his admission by circumcision, as may be
seen, Gen, 22. For that of Heb. 11. 9. it is a mystery what he will make of it,
unless he will conclude, that because Abraham sojourned in the land of
Promise, that therefore none were in covenant that were not taken into that
land; so Moses and Aaron will be found out of covenant.

It is further said, As for a visible Church-seed of Abraham, that is neither
his seed by nature, nor by saving faith, nor by excellency, in whom the Nations
of the Earth should be blessed, to wit, Christ; I know none such in Scripture,
therefore some men have fancied such a kind of Church-seed, as it is called. I
know not how saving faith comes in, when a faith of profession will serve the
turn; The whole of Abraham's seed had circumcision as a seal of the
righteousness of faith, when many of their Parents had no more than a faith of
profession.

Fourthly, Were all these things yielded, yet the Proposition (as is said)
would not be made good from hence. All these we see are made good against his
exceptions. Let us now see the strength which is reserved for the last push,
for overthrow of this Proposition. The inference is not concerning title or
right of infants to the initial seal, as if the covenant or promise of it self
did give that; but the inference is concerning Abraham's duty, that therefore he
should be the more engaged to circumcise his posterity. This should rather have
been left to us for the strengthening of our proposition, than have made use of
it himself for refutation of it. It was Abraham's duty to give them according to
Gods command the initial Seal: in this we are agreed: whether it will thence
follow that they had right and title to it, or were without right, let the
Reader determine.

It is further said, He was engaged to circumcise only those that are males,
and not before eight days, and not only those that were from himself, but
also, all in his house whose children soever they were, which apparently shows
that the giving Circumcision was not commensurate to the persons interest in
the Covenant, but was to be given to persons as well out of the Covenant as in;
If of Abraham's house, and not to all that were in the Covenant; to wit Females,
which does clearly prove that right to the initiall Seal, as it is called, of
circumcision, did not belong to persons by virtue of the covenant, but by force
of the command. If it could be proved that Abraham kept Idolaters in his house,
professedly worshipping a false god, and gave circumcision to them in that
faith and way of false worship; it would prove that a man might have the seal,
and not be in covenant; but it would not prove that he might be in covenant,
and be denied the Seal, and then Infant Baptism might be of easier proof.
Though they were not in covenant, though they were not holy, yet they might be
baptized. But I will not yield so much; I do not believe that Abraham carried
circumcision beyond the line of the covenant, and that he had those in his
house which were aliens from God; seeing I find that Testimony of the Lord
concerning him, Genesis 18. 19. For I know him, that he will command his children,
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do
justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken of him. And that resolution of Joshua, That if others would serve the
gods that their fathers served that were on the other side the flood, or the
gods of the Amorites in whose land they dwell; yet he and his house would serve
the Lord, Josh. 24. 14, 15. As it is a private man's duty to serve the Lord, and
not Idols, so it is the Master of the Families duty to see that the Lord and
not Idols be worshipped in his house. As I do believe that if any of our
adversaries had a professed Heathen in his Family, he would not keep him there,
and not chatechize him, and that he would not during his profession of
Heathenisme baptize him: So, I believe concerning Abraham, He catechized all
that he took in as Heathens, and did not circumcise them in their Heathenisme.
This some Paedobaptists (as is said) are forced to confess, when they grant
the formal reason of the Jews being circumcised, was the command, and the
covenant he makes only a motive. I wonder what need there is of an Argument to
force such a confession. The reason I say, why Jews were circumcised, and
Christians baptized, is the command; were there a thousand covenants, and no
institution of a sign, or seal, such a sign or seal, there could have been
no circumcision, nor no Baptism. The command is the ground, and the covenant
is the directory to whom application si to be made. We say, all in covenant are
entitled to the Seal for admission; but we pre-suppose an institution. They
will have all Believers, and all Disciples baptized, which they cannot conclude
upon their faith and knowledge barely, but upon the command to baptize
Believers and Disciples; So that the command is with reference to the covenant,
with reference to interest in the covenant. From these foregoing exceptions a
conclusion is drawn, that all this does fully show, that the proof of the
connection between, and the initial Seal without a particular command for it,
is without any weight in it. And I conclude, that it fully shows that the
proof of the connection between the covenant and the initial Seal,
(pre-supposing the institution of such a Seal, and a general command) is of
that weight that all are mere frivolous trifles that are brought for
exceptions against it.

Another Scripture holding out the connection between the covenant and initial
seal is, Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost, for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Here I must
mind the Reader of that which I have already spoken on this text, concerning
this text, Chap. On which words after a brief Analasis (which there may be
seen) I have grounded this argument, They to whom the covenant of promise
appertains, have right to Baptism. But the covenant of promise, belongs to men
in a Church State, and condition; together with their children, therefore,
those that are in a Church State, and condition, have right to Baptism
together with their children. My business being then, to assert the just
latitude of the covenant; without respect to Baptism or any other seal, I
spoke only to the minor proposition, that the covenant extends it self not
alone, to men professedly in a Church State, but also to their children with
them, and to that I think I have there spoke sufficient. Now I am put upon the
proof of the major. That they, to whom the covenant of the promise appertains,
have right to baptism. If this fail, it must be confessed, that the ground of
Infant Baptism, as to this Text, falls with it, seeing their right is not
asserted, qua infants, no more than the right of men of growth or men of
years, qua of growth, or in years, but as they stand in reference to God in
coventnt, and this is clear in the Text. Be baptized, for the promise is to
you, and to your children. Because they are vested in the promise, they have
their right and interest in the seal. If this do not hold, the Apostles
argument falls to evade this full and clear argument, one is bold to say, that
in the expounding of these words there are almost as many mistakes as words,
when words are only brought to convince us, of so many mistakes, though in a
multiplication of exceptions.

First, The Exposition is commonly carried as if the promise there meant, were
the promise, Genesis 17. 7. To Abraham and his seed, and this expounded as if it
were meant that God would be a God to every Believer, and to his seed, in
respect at least of visible Church Membership. When a promise is mentioned, and
a seal, any man but he will presently understand that promise, which is
ra^ified by such a seal. For discovery of their mistake that make any other
reference of it, I shall refer the Reader to what I have said on these words.
Chap 48. and to Master Cobbets Vindication, Part. 1. Chap. 2. Sect. 3.

Secondly, it is said, They expound [(...) is Acts 2. 39.] as if it were a
promise of a thing to come some outward privilege to be conferred on them and
their children, whereas the chief thing meant in the speech i^, that as is
expressly said by Paul, Acts 13. 32, 33. Yet no man is quoted for this
Exposition of a thing to come, but on the contrary quotes Master Cobbet against
it. It is meant of a present right for as yet they were not broken off from the
Olive, not Gentiles g^^^fed in, in the instead.

Thirdly, It is said, It is taken as if [to you] were meant of those persons to
whom he spoke, as then Believers, and under that formal consideration, and then
reasons are brought against it. I do not interpret it of any present explicit
Faith in Christ as the Messiah; though now this conviction, that so evidently
appeared, did evidence them to be in an hopeful way, and with that Scribe not
to be far from the Kingdom of God, and therefore he takes his opportunity, and
presses it on to come into the way of Believers in Christ Jesus.

Fourthly It is said, [your children] is expounded of their Infant-children,
yea, it is carried as if of them only To thi^ is sufficient spoken, Chap, 48.

As for that which follows; They would have the promise to be to their children
as theirs, whether they be called or no; which can be verified only in their
sense of their infants, since they maintain that even the children of Believers
are not in covenant; the promise is not to them, they are not visible
Church Members when they come to years of discretion, except they be called in
their own persons, and accept the call. Children as theirs, whether they be
called or no, is a contradiction; Children are called in their Parents call,
and we say, they are in covenant, the Promise is made to them; they are visible
Church Members till they reject the covenant, and deny their Membership, this
is a calumny.

Fifthly, He says, Whereas it is urged, that when it is said the promise is to
all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, which is
expounded of the Gentiles, it is not added to their children: To this in the
same chapter sufficient is spoken.

A sixth, is the same with the tenth, and thither I shall refer the Reader.

Seventhly, It is said, And in like manner we hold the command, [Be babtized
every one of you] in a covenant^sense (that is, a new devised non^sense, such
as we have no Dictionary yet to interpret words by) be baptized you and your
children. I am sure here is a nonsense devise to talk of Dictionaries, does
Calepin or Scapula, Rider or Thomasius help us to compare covenant and seal,
promises and Sacraments.

Eighthly, It is said, Some would possess people with this conceit as if
Peter's scope were to take away by ver. 39. an objection or scruple they would
make. If we be baptized our selves, our children shall be in worse case, in
respect of the privilege our children had in the former dispensation of the
covenant, when they had the s^al of the covenant, if they be not to be baptized
also; and that he answers them by assuring them that in this dispensation also
their children were in covenant, and were to have the seal of the covenant.
And then adds, There is not a word of any such scruple in the Text; nor i^ i^
likely that they were sollicitous about such an imaginary poor privilege of
their children. I am of the same mind that there was no such scruple in their
heads. This unhappy conceit of casting the seed out of covenant was not then in
being, though I think the reason given is little to purpose.

Ninthly, He says, They all do most grossly abuse the meaning of the Apostle,
in interpreting the inference of the Apostle, signified by the particle [(...),
for, verse. 39.] which they would have to be this, you have right and war^ant to
be baptized; For the promise is to you and your children, as if the illative
particle did infer a warrant, or right for them and theirs to be baptized;
whereas the thing inferred is not any right, which in a legal way they might
claim; but is a plain motive in a moral way urged to persuade them to be
baptized. They do grossly abuse their own judgment in this way of refutation,
as though the right in which they stood, could be no Topic, from which in a
moral way the Apostle might persuade them to Baptism. When Shechaniah
persuaded Ezra to the reformation of the marriage of strange wives in these
words, Arise for the matter belongs unto thee, Ezra 10. 4. Here was a motive
in a moral way to call upon him to do it, and an Argument inferred, that it lay
upon Ezra as a duty by command from God to set upon it. The reason added is
worthy of observation: This is manifest from the form of words, ver. 38. which
if they had expressed a right to Baptism by virtue of the promise, should have
been in the indicative mood in such a form as this; you are to be baptized,
you may be baptized, you have right to it, the Minister ought to do it; but the
words are in the imparative mood, exhorting them and persuading them to it,
They have quite forgotten, that the words holding out their right, are in the
indicative mood, (...). For the promise is to you and your children. And here
is a notable correction of the Apostle, he should have said, if this had been
his meaning, you must be baptized; and he says, Arise, and be baptized.

Lastly, It is said, In the paraphrases, which usually in their disputes,
Paedobaptists make of Acts 2. 38, 39. they put not any thing to answer the
term [repent] as if it stood for a cipher, but paraphrase it thus, Ye may be
baptized, you and your children; for the Promise is to you, and your children.
The sixth exception was against our interpretation of the word repent, ver. 38.
as if it were as much as to say, Covenant for your selves and your children;
and here it is complained that it is left for a cipher. And the Author thinks
he has discovered the reason of this Omission. The putting the word repent
first, and be baptized after, does manifestly overthrow their paraphrase of a
right to Baptism from the word of promise, and show that the particle, [For]
does not prove a right to Baptism, but press to a duty; and such a duty as i^
to have repentance precedent, and that in every person that is to be baptized.
I confess it presses to a duty, and such a duty as is to have repentance
precedent in them that at that time were his hearers, to interest themselves,
and with themselves their children in this privilege; But right and duty do
not shoulder out one the other, but very well stand together; encouraging to a
duty which is a privilege as well as a duty, he fitly makes use of their
interest as a motive. And they might see that the Apostle puts the promise in a
greater latitude than he urges repentance; He speaks to his hearers, when he
says repent; and he tells them, that the promise is to them and to their
children with them: Whereas our Author presses the precedence of the word,
repent, to the command of being baptized, and elsewhere says, P^^er does
exhort to Repentance and Baptism together, and in the first place persuades to
Repentance, then to Baptism, which shows Repentance to be in order before
Baptism; I answer, as I did before Chap. 48. that these who had crucified
Christ as a blasphemer, as a seditious person; an impostor, must needs repent
before they would accept Baptism in his name, or hope for remission of sin
by him. It had been lost labor for the Apostle to have pressed those that had
crucified Christ, and retained their former opinion of him, to become Disciples
to him, and to look to be saved by him; to persuade them to look for remission
of sins in his blood, who took themselves to be without sin in shedding of
it, and yet notwithstanding this guilt (of which the Apostle would have them to
repent) he shows that they and their seed are under the promise of God, and
puts them into a way in acceptance of Christ in the Gospel-tender, in his
present way of administration to be continued his people still in covenant, and
that (as is plainly enough signified) that they might enjoy it in their former
latitude, to them and to their children. So that Master Stephens his
Interpretation so much slighted by an adversary, and repeated not in his
words, but in his own paraphrase upon them, is indeed the Apostles meaning. The
Apostle (says he. page 14.) does speak to these Jews who had crucified
Christ; that if they would receive him as the particular Messiah, the same
promise should still continue^ to them and their children in the new
dispensation: And on this does he build the word of command, to baptize father
and child; To this the word repent here referres as may be made plain.

First, By taking into consideration the present state of this people, and that
in several particulars.

1. As yet they had the promises with them, and were children of the covenant,
Acts 3. 25. Though the Apostle, Romans 9. 4. do distinguish between the covenants
and the promises; yet to have the promises here, and to be children of the
covenant, there seems to be one. If any can distinguish them, this people, had
the honor of both of them; God had not yet cast them out of a Church State and
covenant relation.

2. They were in present danger to be cast off according to what Christ had
foretold, Mat. 8. 12. Mat. 21. 43. Being so fast riveted to the ceremonial Law
which now was dead, and presently grew deadly: God denying any presence (as
has been said) with them, now the substanee was come.

3. These particular persons with whom Peter had to deal, were now well
prepared for a free acceptance of a Gospel-way, under this administration,
which Jesus Christ (having pulled down the Law of Ordinances) was to set up:
Being amazed with the glory of the mircale which was wrought before their eyes,
and convinced with the powerful application of the Prophets by Peter in that
elegant Sermon, they fell upon enquiry what they should do.

Secondly, By comparing other Texts of Scripture, which may serve as a Comment
to the clearing of this; especially two Texts of two Evangelists, recording the
words of Christ, and holding out the impenitent obstinacy of the Jews,
standing out against every call to repentance, respective to their rigid
pertinacious adhering to former dispensations, and opposition of that now
tendered and offered to them. 1. That of our Savior Christ, Mat. 21. 31, 32.
Christ having held before them, ver. 28. 29, 30. the parable of a certain man,
that had two sons, and came to the first, and said, son, go work to day in
my Vineyard; He answered and said, I will not; but afterward he repented, and
went; And he came to the second, and said likewise; and he answered and said, I
go Sir, and went not, and made appeal to them, ver. 31. Whether of them twain
did the will of his father? and they answering, the first: Jesus says unto
them, (as it follows in that and the next verse) Verily I say unto you, that
the Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you; For John came
unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the
Publicans and the Harlots believed him. And ye, when ye had seen it, repented
not afterward, that ye might believe in him. The Publicans and Harlots answer
to the first brother, who from a professed rebellion against the command of
God, by John's preaching, were brought to repent, and accept of a
Gospel Covenant, and enter into it by Baptism. The chief Priests and Elders of
the people (that here opposed Christ preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom)
answer to the second brother that said, he would go into the Vineyard, and
went not; These repent not, but hold fast, and pertinaciously adhere to the way
of old received, when the Publicans accept and embrace the spiritual state of
the Church by Christ set up. From this impenitence of these chief Priests and
Elders with whom these joined in crucifying Christ; Peter disswades, and
exhorts to the repentance of the Publicanes and Harlots. The second Scripture
which may give light to this text, is much parallel to this, Luke 7. 29, 30.
Christ having given a large testimony to John and his Ministry; holds out the
different effect that it took: First, in the people and the Publicanes, ver.
29. And all the people that heard him, and the Publicanes justified God, being
baptized with the Baptism of John. Secondly, in the Pharisees and Lawyers,
ver. 30. But the pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized. They persisted in their old way, in opposition
to that way held forth by John, approved by Christ, and refused baptism, These
with whom Peter had to deal, had gone with the Priests and Pharisees, kept
full pace with them even to the guilt of the death of Christ, they were now in
a good way to follow the steps of the Publicanes and People, to embrace the
counsel of God, and accept baptism, their impenitence had held them from
entrance into a new covenant-way by baptism, Peter therefore exhorts to repent
and be baptized.

Thirdly, This appears by the Text it self, whereas they will have the
illative particle For, to infer no warrant or right in them to be baptized,
but only a motive in a moral way urged, as we have heard in the last
exception. It is worth our enquiry to learn what good interpretation suitable
to Peter's exhortation, they put here on those words, To you is the promise
made, and to your children, excluding all consideration of right, in them and
their children, Because Christ was promised to them and their children,
therefore they must repent and be baptized. Not to insist upon that just
exception of Master Gobbet, page 23. That the Apostle does not say, the promise
was to you as in reference to the time of making it to the fathers, with
respect unto them, or in reference to Christ, who was not now to come, but
already come, as the Apostle proves from ver. 3. to 37. Nor is it the use of
the Scripture when mentioning promises as fulfilled, to express it thus in the
present tense, the promise is to you, or to such and such, but rather to annex
some expression that way which evinceth the same, giving instance almost in
twenty several texts, which utterly overthrows his exposition. Let them tell us
why in this moral persuasive holding out a bare motive to persuade the parent
only, the children (not concerned in the thing and in an utter incapacity)
should be mentioned. And why the words should be carried in that way that
interest in covenant and covenant-seales formerly ran, and no right at all to
covenant or covenant-seales intended? This gloss puts too much violence upon
the words. But carrying it on as a disswasive from persistance in their former
way of old covenant legal rites, and persuading to embrace the way appointed by
him, whom God had made both Lord and Christ, it singularly answers, as, to
their present condition, yet in covenant, though in eminent danger to be cast
out of covenant, so, also to the words of the text, holding out a
covenant-right in Scripture language according to the grand Charter of heaven.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; so that I hope by this time, the
intelligent Reader will easily perceive the frivolous shifts instead of a full
refutation that is here brought to avoid Paedobaptists proofs of a word of
command to Baptize infants from this Scripture.

As these Scriptures plainly hold out the necessary connection of the covenant
and initial seal, so, the evidence of reason is clear for it. No man that
stands enrighted or legally interested, in any privilege, or possession, may
be denied that ceremony or seal which is appointed for confirmation. A
copyhold being found the next immediate tenant, of a copy-hold-right must not
be denied, but received according to the ceremony, or solemnity of the place,
whenever the King did grant, out letters-pattents, the Lord Keeper might not
deny the seal, the Lords Commissioners, may not now deny it to any, that by a
just grant have interest. This were to keep a child out of his fathers house,
a servant from his place of abode and residence; when Christ was so much
displeased with his Disciples on like occasion, these may well expect to be
under as high displeasure. Having thus made good the point, it remains that I
take off some objections, and meet with some quarrels that are raised against
it.

If there be any necessary connection between the covenant and the seal, it
must be (says one) either, by reason of some necessary connection between the
terms which is none, for it is but a common accident to a man that has a
promise or a covenant made to him, that he should have a special sign, it may
adesse vel abesse a subjecto, it may be present or absent from the subject.
Giving some instances of covenants without seals. Answ. 1. By way of
concussion it will be easily granted, that a covenant may stand alone without a
seal annexed? but where a seal is appointed for confirmation, (as there has
been in the Church ever since God took a people to himself out of Abraham's
loins) there is a necessary connection. This answer he foresees, and says: But
you will say, All that are foederati should be signati, since the solemn
covenant with Abraham; But neither is this certain, since we find no such
thing concerning Melchizedek and Lot, that lived in Abraham's time, nor
concerning Job that it is conceived lived after his time. If we read nothing to
confirm it, the Reader sees nothing to contradict it; There is added, But you
will say, it is true of all the foederati in Abraham's family. But neither is
that true, for male-children before the eighth day, and women though
foederatae, yet were not to be signed. Is there no connection between them,
because he that receives into covenant and appoints the seal, has prescribed
a time when it shall be applied? A man that has a grant from King or State,
has ipso facto right to the seal, and the right necessarily follows upon the
grant, though he must stay till a sealing day before he possess it.

For the exception of women, though foederatae, yet were not to be circumcised;
I say, 1. Master Marshal has sufficiently answered, that they were of the
circumcision, and it was an exception against Sampson by his parents that he
would go to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines, Judge. 14. 3. Had he
married in Israel, as he ought in obedience to God and his parents, he had
married a wife of the circumcised, though that sex by nature is in an
incapacity of that sign or seal. In diverse places of England, the husband
being admitted by verdict of a Jury into an estate, the wife is virtually
admitted; his admission is her admission, so it was in circumcision. 2. They
had doubtless actually received that sign of circumcision as in New Testament
times they do Baptism, Acts 8. 12. Acts 16. 15. but that it was a sign
whereof they were in an incapacity. It is farther added, If then I should
farther grant the conclusion, That infants of believers were to be signati, yet
you would not say they are to be partakers of the Lords Supper, because it is
not appointed for them; So in like manner if it were granted you that infants
of believers were to be signed, yet it follows not that they are to be
baptized, unless you can prove that it is appointed to them; and the truth is,
if it were granted that children were foederati, yet it were a high presumption
in us to say therefore they must be signati, without Gods declaration of his
mind; and if it were granted they must be signati, it were in like manner a
high presumption in us to say, therefore they must be baptized, without Gods
declaration of his mind concerning that Ordinance. To this a reply is made by
another hand, that there is difference between a seal for initiation, and a
seal for confirmation; a seal, wherein no more is of necessity, than to be
passive; and that wherein we are to be active; yet to come more near to them, I
am content to yield the conclusion, supposing that his argument is of force,
Every Churchmember has true title to all Church Priviledges; But infants are
Church Members, the Lords Supper is a Church-priviledge; and therefore infants
have true title to it. But then I must distinguish jus ad rem, and jus in re,
every infant has right to it, yet by reason of infancy has his actual
interest suspended; Paul by birth had right to all the privilege of the City
of Rome, being born free, Acts 22. 28. yet it does not follow that he was to
give his vote, or appear in Assemblies as a free Citizen in the time of his
minority; James the sixth was crowned in Scotland, and Henry the sixth in
England, in the time of their minority, so that they were reckoned among the
Kings of Nations; yet neither of them did in their own persons exercise regalia
till years of discretion. As these infants of title were crowned, so infants
that are Church Members are to be baptized, when yet an infant can no more
partake, as a Christian ought, of the Lords Supper, than an infant King can
wield the great things of his Kingdom. An infant-heir from the first instant
of his fathers death, and a posthumous child from the time of his birth,
stands seized of his fathers inheritance; The whole title is vested in him, how
ample soever, and in no other, and he is received into it, and lives upon it,
yet he is held from the managing of it till he can improve for his own and the
public benefit; So that the taking into covenant is a sufficient declaration
of Gods mind, that the signs and seals in an orderly way should be granted to
them, and all these appear to be cavils, and not answers.

As, these exceptions are causlesly taken against the connection between the
covenant and eale; so, quarrels are raised, against some phrases in common use
among Divines relating to this thing, as making the metaphor of a seal the
Genus of a Sacrament, which (if an error) was the Apostles error, Romans 4. 11.
and many such like, with which it is needless to trouble the Reader.

CHAP. LVII.
The withholding infants of Christian parents from Baptism is the sin of
Sacrilege.
HEnce farther follows, that the Prohibition of Infant Baptism or
withholding them from that Ordinance that are the issue of Christians, is the
sin of Sacrilege. This is plain from the premises, they are the Lords, His
heritage, Psalm. 127. 3. The Lords servants, Levit. 25. 42. holy ones, Romans 11.
16. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Children of the covenant, Acts 3. 25. interessed in the
privileges of the people of God, Mark 10. 14. Therefore they are to be given
to God, Caesar will account it a robbery, if that which is his due be denied;
God will account it a robbery, if that which is his be denied; Infant Baptism
cannot be charged with will worship.
Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods, Matthew. 22. 21. Adversaries fasten the brand of will worship on the
practice of it; But if Baptism be any worship according to the mind of
Christ, then Infant Baptism is out of all danger or possibility of
will worship. In case infants were not within he verge, yet their Baptism
could be no will worship; we set not up of our selves the Ordinance that we
apply to them, but make application of the Ordinance that Christ has
instituted; In case they have no title, there is only a misapplication of
worship instituted, and no devise of worship. To this is replied, and demand
made whether infant-communion were not will worship? whether baptizing of Bells
were not will worship? yet these are but misapplications of an instituted
ordinance to a wrong subject. I answer, none of these were will worship, nor
yet the Baptism of the Horse in Huntingdon-shire, but the horrid profanation
of an instituted worship; Baptism is still Gods, but the application man's, and
here the will is not carried to a devise of an ordinance, but alone to the
application of it. Our adversaries making it a corruption of the Ordinance of
Baptism, acquit it from will worship: But in Infant Baptism we neither devise
an Ordinance, nor of our own heads make application of it: we know they belong
to the family of Jesus Christ, we know Christ's order to admit them to the
privilege that was proper to those of his family, and as faithful stewards we
follow the will of our Master, not our own will, but the will of Christ Jesus.
Could they wash their hands of Sacrilege, as we are able to clear our wills
and wits from devise of a worship, it were better with them; The times were,
when men looked upon things consecrate (as holy to the Lord) in a multiplying
glass; we had holy places, holy Altars, in which some of our present opponents
went too far to the grief of the godly, and farther than the times with their
streams needed to have borne them, had he been merely pressed, and no voluntier
in it. Extremes are dangerous.
I wish they would seriously consider, how ordinary it is with men to carry on
their ways in extremes, and out of superstition to run upon Sacrilege. It
is well known how apt the people of Israel were for idolatrous ways, and ready
to embrace every superstition after the way of the Heathen, and in conformity
to them; yet after the Babylonish captivity, they were quite taken off that
course; What wickedness soever they were otherwise guilty of, yet it is
observed that they kept themselves from Idols; That sin had so consumed them,
that at last it had even wearied them: And then (as it appears from the
Apostle) they run upon this extreme, The Jews leaving idolatry, run upon
Sacrilege.
to which we are here speaking; Therefore when in other things they are charged
with the same sin that (as men of knowledge) they condemned in others, Thou
that preachest that another should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that
say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? And the
Series of the words leading to a charge of Idolatry, the Apostle changes the
phrase, and says, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Romans 2. 22. This was now their sin in the other extreme, not on their own
heads to put a supposition of holiness to the Lord on any thing for worship,
but to convert to other uses that which was sanctified as holy. I know some
understand these words in a Metaphor, that by Sacrilege is meant the robbing
of God of his honor by sin against him; but that interpretation the next
words contradict, in distinct words forbidding that Sacrilege, if they will so
call it. Origin will turn it into an Allegory, and understand the spoiling of
the sense of Scriptures, and stealing Christ out of the Scriptures; But the
text is plain, that it is a reproof applied to their capacities, and in the
letter convincing, as well as the former of stealing, and adultery, The plain
sense, (says Peter Martyr) is the meaning. May not I now say that these things
are out examples, to the intent that we should not run with them in these
extremes from an abhorrency of the one to the other, from an abhorrency of
Idols to the guilt of Sacrilege, which according to the Schoolmen is rei
sacrae viola^io, or rerum sacrarum furtum, a deteigning from God that which for
an holy use is separate for him, Separation for God of persons or of inanimate
or unreasonable creatures. Whether Sacrilege be any New Testament sin.
which separation is either of persons, or of inanimate, or irrational
creatures. I know there are those that affirm that there is no such separation
for God in Gospel times, and consequently there can be no such thing as this
sin of Sacrilege in our times, for what is not, cannot be thus violated or
detained. As to the separation of inanimate or unreasonable creatures it cannot
be fully denied, nor yet must it fully be yielded, that no such things are now
to be accounted as separate to the Lord, we must therefore distinguish. These
may be said to be separate for God, Separation for God either by institution or
approbation.
and consequently holy, two ways. 1. By divine institution and appointment, So
the Temple and Utensils of the Temple were holy. 2. By divine approbation, when
men let them apart for advancement of such an holy use as God approves. The
former we confess was proper to the times of the Law, but the latter yet
remains in Gospel Times, and upon this account Ravanellus justly makes the
sin of Ananias and Sapphira, (in keeping back part of the price of their land
that was set apart by them for the service of the Church) to be the sin of
Sacrilege. The land before sale was his own, and the price after sale was his
own, but now it was to serve (by their voluntary act) only to a purpose that
was holy; The detaining of it is the violation of that which is holy. Places
for worship and maintenance of those that attend upon worship separate by
divine approbation.
And in this way, both the places of public worship, and the revenues for
maintenance of those that attend upon this worship, are separate for God: It
will be thought somewhat out of my way to speak to these things, yet having so
fair an occasion, I shall take the liberty of a few words, concerning the
places of worship, shall speak somewhat in the [negative,] and by way of
concession; There is not any such holiness in them, as in the Tabernacle and
Temple, This is disavowed by Christ, Positious concerning places.
John 4. 23. These had the pre-eminence above our places of meeting in four
several particulars. Negative.


1. They had their institution, and immediate injunction from God, Exodus 35.
10, 11. 1 Kings 5. 5. 1 Chronicles. 22. 9, 10.

2. Their direction and prescription, Heb. 8. 5.

3. Their promise, not alone respective to the worship, but the place, Exodus
29. 42, 43.

4. Their sanction or penalty in regard of typical profanation, Number. 19. 20.
In all of these particulars we must give the Temple and Tabernacle the
preeminence, besides that the Temple and Tabernacle were but one for all
Israel, we have many. In the affirmative I shall lay down several positions.

First, Positive.
there is equal warrant and reason for the building of our places of meeting,
for the worship of God, as there was for the Synagogues of the Jews; Though we
put no such holiness on these places to parallel them with the Temple, yet
they have equal warrant, and are to have equal respect with the Synagogues
which the Jews had in every City, Acts 15. 21. Not only in Judea, but where
they were dispersed, Acts 13. 14, 15. There is no word in all the Scripture for
the erecting of these Synagogues, no mention made of them but once, where a sad
complaint is made of the burning of them, Psalm. 74. 8. But the people of God
being by Gods command to be instructed in the Law, they built them places for
convenience of meeting, and in such places they met, The Law was there preached,
Christ and his Apostles did preach there, our places of meeting then stand in
equal honor with these Synagogues: Those that can say any thing for these
Synagogues, which we cannot say for our public places of meeting, let them
produce it.

2. There is as much reason and equal warrant to call our places of meeting by
the usual common Name of Churches, as to call theirs by the common name of
Synagogues; Nothing can be said to condemn the use of the word Church for our
place of meeting, but the like may be said to condemn, the use of the word
Synagogue for their place of meeting. The Scriptures therefore calling theirs
Synagogues, Luke 7. 5. Acts 18. 7. we may therefore fitly call ours Churches.
That which is objected against the word Church, is, that Church signifies not a
house of wood or stone, but a society or fellowship of men, professing faith in
Jesus Christ; So also the word Synagogue signifies not a building, but such an
assembly or society likewise; In the ordinary signification (says Spanhemius)
Synagogue signifies the assembly, not the place where they assemble, but in the
New Testament it is sometimes put for the place of assembling, Luke 7. 5. Acts
18. 7. Synagogue, and Church, are one and the same, both signify the assembly
met; As the one, so also the other may be applied by an usual figure to the
place of meeting, and therefore where it is said, the Centurion loves our
Nation, and has built us a Synagogue, Luke 7. 5. the last Annotations have it,
a Church; So that they that would reform this language, which calls our places
of meeting a Church, must reform the language of Scripture, which calls the
like places by a name of the same signification.

Thirdly, it is a pious work to erect these Churches, or public meeting places
for advancement of the knowledge and worship of God, as may be evinced from
that Narrative of the Centurion, Luke 7. and the transactions between Christ
and him. 1. There are several evidences of piety in the man. 1. He is tenderly
affected with his servants sickness. 2. He sends to Christ for cure, makes to
him as Mary for Lazarus. 3. He evidences a mighty faith in Christ, believes
that Christ's word without his presence will work for his servants recovery. 4.
Makes this good by an argument from the less to the greater, I my self am a
man under authority, and have men under me, if my word stands, who am an
inferior person, how much more then thine? 5. The Lord Christ speaks by way of
commendation and admiration of his faith, ver. 9. 2. There are evidences of the
warranty of his fact. 1. The Elders of the Jews take notice of it, and upon
this account commend him to Christ to have his request gratified, Lord, he is
worthy for whom thou should do this: For he loves our Nation, and has
built us a Synagogue. 2. This takes with Christ, Then Jesus went with them.

Fourthly, being a pious work as we see to erect them (not only in the
judgment of this Centurion, but of the Jews, yea and of Christ Jesus) it is
then an evil, a sin to demolish and destroy them, this follows from the
former; If piety let them up, sin pulls them down: If he be a good Townsman
that builds a Markethouse, a School, etc. then he is an ill-deserving one that
does ruin it. If the Centurion have his praise for building a Synagogue, then
it must be their reproach that deface them. Farther we have a sad complaint of
such acts of Sacrilege done by adversaries, enemies, blasphemers, Psalm. 74. 7,
8. They have cast fire into thy Sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down
the dwelling place of thy name to the ground: They have burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land. The burning of the Temple in the first place is
complained of, the dwelling place of Gods name. Then of the Synagogues which
were scattered through the Land, all these were destroyed and consumed. This
the godly lay to heart, as a sore evil, and complain of it heavily and sadly.

Secondly, Ministry maintenance asserted.
As to the revenue for maintenance of those that attend upon this worship, I
might speak, 1. To that which is conscienciously due, 1. What conscientiously
is due.
in which the mind of God is, that it be not detained, as might be made good,
1. By the Apostles authority. 2. By his Arguments and Reasons. 1. By his
authority, Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him
that teaches in all good things. Subsistence is of due to him that teaches
from them that are taught according to their abilities, and the proportion of
their possessions. This is no alms or free gift, but a due debt. The Apostle
gives it in charge, and takes off excuses and evasions in the words that
follow; Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap. And as the Apostle by his authority orders it, so he gives
his reasons for it, which might be enlarged to a great length from 1 Cor. 9. He
first argues from the practice of other Apostles, of all the Apostles except
himself and Barnabas, ver. 5, 6. I only and Barnabas have we not power to
forbear working? 2. He argues from a civil right and common equity in three
particular instances, ver. 7. 1. In Soldiers, Who goes a warfarre at any time
at his own charges? 2. In Husbandmen, Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not
of the fruit thereof. 3. In Shepherds, Who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? All these live of their labors, Ministers who undergo
equal labors must live of theirs. Thirdly, he argues from the command of the
Law, ver. 8, 9. Say I these things as a man? or says not the Law the same
also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for Oxen? Where two
observations are clear. 1. The Law of force is to Christians; and secondly,
Ministers must live on their Ministerial pains. Fourthly, he reasons from
communicative justice, ver. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, it
is a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Whence three things are
clear. 1. That the things of earth carry no proportion with the things of
heaven. 2. By the Ministry of the Word the things of heaven are conferred. 3.
When Ministers confer on their people the things of heaven, there is all
equity that they should receive the things of earth. Fifthly, he argues from
the provision made in the Law, ver. 13. Do ye not know, that they which
minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? And they which
wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? If the Law judge it equal for
the Levites, to live on the pains that they take about holy things, then it is
equal that the Ministers of the Gospel live of their pains, But the Law made
such provision for the Levites, not with an hungry, narrow proportion, but in a
liberal and honorable way; See Doctor Reynolds on Psalm. 110. page 478.
Sixthly, he argues from Christ's institution in a parallel way, ver. 14. Even so
has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel; whence we see at large that it is the mind of Christ that this be not
detained in case the Apostle (as he says, 1 Cor. 2. 16.) has the mind of
Christ.

For that which is legally due either by order of the Sat, 2. What is legally
due.
or a voluntary gift of any person, to that end, it ought not to be alienated;
There is equity in the thing (as we have heard at large) when authority shall
put upon it their sanction, it is a farther confirmation; for a voluntary gift,
in case Ananias may not revoke his own, none may alienate another; If it be a
man's Testament, no man disanulleth it, Gal. 3. 14. The poor must enjoy that
which by free gift is settled upon them, so a Corporation, and so the Ministry
in like manner. To destroy public places (of necessary and convenient use) for
advancement of public worship, to alienate livelihood which is in order to
it, is to devour that which is holy, reductively holy: not by Gods particular
institution, with limit to that thing or place, but by his Warranty and
approbation.

Separation of persons, for God is of another sort; they that are thus
separate, God ownes; not only as reductively, but relatively holy: This is
either peculiarly, in some way of special calling, to do such work as is holy,
of which there were several sorts in the time of the Law, Priests, Levites,
Nazarites, Singers, Porters, which will not be denied, and in a parallel way
Ministers of the Gospel as we have seen, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Acts 13. 2. The Holy
Ghost said, Separate me Saul and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called
them.

Here an eminent adversary gives in his assent, and says, Pastors and
Teachers, or Presbyters to teach, and govern the Church of God; I am assured
are a divine institution, and a very merciful gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
13. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Acts 14. 23. 1 Timothy 3. 1. Titus 2. 5. to whom people should
yield obedience, Heb. 13. 7. and yield maintenance liberally, 1 Cor. 9. 14.
Gal. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. If any go about to extirpate them, let him be
accursed as an enemy to Christ and his Church. This the evidence of truth
forces him to confess, though presently he takes again all that from them,
which he had under such an Anathema yielded them. He that gives to every
Freeman of London, in case competently qualified, the whole power and
authority of the Lord Major, to every free Subject of England, the whole power
of the Lord Chief Justice, goes a destructive way for extirpation of those
places, or functions. This I think all will grant, when each man may do their
work, they shall soon have little honor in the naked title. Now our Author
gives the work of preaching promiscuously to all. Notwithstanding what such and
such have said, I still conceive (says he) that not only for trial of
expectants, but also upon other occasions, persons not ordained, may be
permitted, yea desired to preach in the Pulpits. If all that such have said
cannot withstand this conceit, me thinks his Anathema (but now pronounced)
should affect him somewhat. Let him take heed lest he let them loose to run
upon so heavy a curse that hangs over those of such principles. It were to be
wished he would have answered their reasons in a better temper than he has
done other men's, or have given in somewhat of his own farther than his bare
conceit. I confess, he speaks somewhat by way of caution. Nevertheless I am
against the courses of many Soldiers, and others who against the denial of
able Teachers, to whom the teaching of the people is committed, love to get
into the Pulpits of the ablest men, to vent their peculiar conceits, and
oftentimes their pernicious Errors, not regarding to preach to the ignorant
the clear Truths of Faith, and a holy life in places where they have no
Preacher, but to new Converts; to pervert them, and withdraw them from their
able Teachers, and to disquiet them and their Congregations by frivolous
exceptions. If they have but their liberty to become Pulpit-men, and may
consecrate themselves without laying on of hands (which is confessed to be of
divine institution) they will soon be their own carvers for the choice of
Pulpits, They will be the judges of the ability or insufficiency of Ministers
gifts where they quarter. All shall be clear truths that they vent; Break down
the Apostles fence, that by appointment from Jesus Christ he has set up, Let
them be proved, and then do the office, and then a mound, Segges and Bul-rushes
will soon be trodden down. The God of order has taken more care; The
dispensation of the Sacraments is with these every man's work, as well as
preaching the Word, which he notably proves against Master Baxter. Does the
Embassage of Christ, dispensing of his mysteries, beseeching in his stead, etc.
consist (says one) in breaking bread, delivering it; bidding, take, eat, etc?
If it do, then a non-preaching Minister who does these things, may yet be an
Ambassador of Christ, and Steward of his mysteries; then the breaking bread,
etc. is a converting Ordinance, as Mr. Pryn held, which Mr. Gillespy and Mr.
Rutherford deny.

If it be granted that this is the whole of a Ministers work, is it no part of
it? are they to do nothing else, if they are to do this? If it be an edifying
Ordinance (which neither Master Gillespy nor Master Rutherford will deny) it is
a part of their function. For my part, (says he) I think to be an Ambassador
of Christ, and to beseech in his stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. to be a Steward of the
mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. are all one, as to preach the Gospel, and that
the Assembly did misalledge the Text, 1 Cor. 4. 1. as they have done the other,
to prove that neither Sacrament may be dispensed by any, but a Minister of the
Word lawfully ordained, Confession of Faith, Chap. 27. Sect. 4. Perhaps when
the Assembly voted that Text for this purpose, they had read that which our
Author elsewhere delivers, speaking of admission to Baptism, he says, A
Minister in this case is to act as a Steward, who is to deal according to his
Lords will, not his own mind. Is not Baptism then one of the mysteries of
which they are Stewards? or perhaps they thought that the Sacraments are
contained in the Gospel, and are verbum visibile, being teaching signs. A man
that will oppose so quick-sighted a Society, should have said some little at
least to purpose; It is said, that Mysteries of God never signify Sacraments
in Scripture, but the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. Romans 16. 25. I never took those to
be opposites, but have ever thought that Sacraments are included within the
Gospel; we have ever taken them for signs and Seals, and if they do not teach
Gospel Truths, and seal Gospel-promises, Ministers are not to dispense them,
nor Christians to intermeddle with them: But Chamiers authority is here
brought, in Scriptur is (...) usurpari pro ipso rei sacrae signo, profecto
impostura est. And is not the Quotation of this from him a greater imposture,
who ever took the bare sign to be the Sacrament? then the definition would
fall that calls it a visible sign of an invisible grace. If marriage be not
that great mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32. but the union of Christ and his Church, then
certainly the Sacraments (in which we have that communion and fellowship with
Christ) 1 Cor. 10. 16.) are not excluded from the number of mysteries.

As there is a separation for this public work, so there is also a separation
more general, from Idols to God, upon which account Christians are called
Saints. Men holy by dedication to the Lord, as the Temple of God which is holy,
1 Cor. 3. 17. Our adversaries some of them at least baptize, and by Baptism
consecrate men to God, upon no other account than such a separation by a
profession of Faith and holiness, as some of the most eminent of them express
themselves. To deny Baptism to these in their own account, can be no other
than Sacrilege. This profession gives them interest in God by way of visible
communion; and therefore they must be given to God. Children are separated for
God, and styled (as we have heard) holy; if they yield them this interest, they
cannot deny them Baptism, and avoid this charge of Sacriledg, They are
servants of God and of his holy Family, and they are to have admittance into
the Family. In case they deny it, they must leave them without God, and so
without Hope; so that of necessity one will follow, that either they rob God
of them as belonging to him, or denying their interest in him, they doom them
to destruction. If they have no interest in God, Quae sententia, tantum secum
in vexit jam errorum and schismatum agmen, ut nihil de ullis superiorum
temporum Hae reticis legatur tam insanum, quod non fuerit reductum proximo
quadriennio subsque rursum sectatores invenerit, ut vel unum hoc pietatis
studiosis radicem hanc suspectam merito reddere debuerit, ex qua tam in fausta
germina suppulularunt.
then they perish; If they have their interest, then they are Sacrilegiously
withheld from him. Many have observed how God has followed the sin of
Sacrilege, above other sins with his judgments; but instances can be given
of no piece of Sacrilege, so sadly followed by the hand of heaven, as this of
deteining Infants from Baptism. They have heard not a few, and it may well
move pity in all Readers to take notice of their answers. No consent of
History, nor authority of men, of most eminent piety can work their belief of
such a hand of God, giving up so many of their party to such abominations. I
shall to that which they have heard from Master Marshal and Master Baxter add
only one testimony of Martine Bucer in his Dedicatory Epistle before his
Comment on the Evangelists, relating to the Doctrine of Antipaedo baptism, he
says, Which opinion has brought such an heap of Errors, and Schisms, that
there is nothing so abhorrent from reason, can be read of any of the Heretics
of former times, which has not been in four years space revived, and sonud
followers, that this alone may render that root suspected to all that follow
after godliness, from whence such unhappy branches have sprouted, and out of
which they have budded.

CHAP. LVIII.
The Children of all that are Christians in profession, are by virtue of
Covenant Interest, to be received into the Church by Baptism.
THen it farther follows by way of necessary Corollary, that according to the
Parents Interest in the Covenant, the child has Interest in the Sacrament of
Baptism; But all professing Parents separate from Idols, and professing the
worship of the true God, though nothing more of a Christian be in them, in the
latitude as has been shown, are in covenant; the infants of all these then
have interest in Baptism. The Major cannot be questioned by any that
acknowledge a right in infants, derived from their Parents for Baptism, for it
is interest in the covenant that gives the title to parent and infant: The
Minor I have abundantly proved. The covenant must either be made to appear to
run in a more narrow channel (which I suppose will hardly be done) that a man
in Ignorance, or in Impenitency, as he does not keep covenant, so he never
entered covenant, or else this must necessarily follow. To assert this by
Arguments evincing the right of Christians in this latitude.
Arguments.

First, Their children whom God owns as his peculiar people, above others have
right to Baptism. This cannot be denied; either these have a just claim, or
else no children at all. But God owns all in visible profession, as his people,
Isa. 1. 2. Isa. 5. 13. Hos. 4. 6. Jer. 2. 11, 13, 31, 32. Jer. 4. 22. Jer. 5.
51. therefore the children of visible professors have right to Baptism.

Secondly, Their children, that are brought forth to God, by their parents,
have right to Baptism; This is as plain: But visible professors bring forth
children to God, Ezekiel. 16. 20. therefore their children have right to Baptism.

Thirdly, Those children whose Parents are children of the Kingdom of God,
have their title to Baptism; But those that are in sin, and in a way to be
cast out for sin, are children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8. 12. Mat. 21. 43. Ergo
the children of Parents in sin have right to Baptism.

Fourthly, The children of those, who are themselves Disciples of Christ, ought
to be baptized; But men in sin are Disciples of Christ, Joh. 6. 66. whole
Nations, among whom are many wicked ones, are Disciples, Matthew. 28. 19. The
children then of those that are in sin, ought to be baptized.

Fifthly, The children of those that are of the number of brethren in the faith
of the Gospel, have right to Baptism: But men in sin are brethren in the
faith of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 5. 11. If any that is called a brother, be a
fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, etc. This our dissenting brethren will not deny to be meant of
Christians, therefore their children are to be baptized.

Sixthly, Those children that are holy by reason of birth from one or both
believing parents, are to be baptized: But the children of those that are in
sin may be holy by reason of birth of one, or both believing parents, 1 Cor. 7.
14. To clear this place, which some weakly enough, have urged for the contrary*
Let us enquire who the Apostle means by a Believer, and who he means by an
unbeliever, and this will soon be decided; if we look to the case propounded
by letter from the Corinthians, which he there resolves, and answers their
scruples; That is confessed to be marriage between a Christian and a Heathen a
professed Believer and an Infidel, a man removed from an Infidel, (to take upon
him the name of Christ), is there a Believer, and many of these even in
Corinth, were men in sin. They that will have the Believer there to set out
only a justified and sanctified person, they must by unbeleever mean all
unsanctified persons, and so the case propounded and satisfied, is, whether a
regenerate person sanctified by the Spirit, married to one that gives not full,
or at least hopeful evidences of sanctification, may continue a
marriage-society? whether a man of Jobs integrity might have lived with such a
wise to whom Job was joined? a thing that was never yet brought into question,
either by Jew or Christian; and altogether unworthy of an Apostles
determination. The thing is plain, Amplification of this position.
that as infants have right to Baptism, so all the infants of those parents
that nomine tenus are Christians, have right to Baptism. See more, Treatise of
the Sacraments, page 161.

To amplify this in some particulars, and if it may be, to make it more clear
to doubting Christians.

First, A life in distrust of God, and rebellion against God, provoking him to
the highest punishment of the parents does not divest the child of the title to
the covenant, and interest in the Sacrament of initiation into the number of
Christians. For proof of this, look upon that act of Joshua, when the people
were got out of the Wilderness, and were brought into the Land of Canaan,
Josh. 5. 6, 7. The children of Israel walked forty years in the Wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war that came out of Egypt were
consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord; And the children which
he raised up in their stead, them did Joshua circumcise, for they were
uncircumcised, they had not circumcised them in the way; you see what the
fathers were, yet the children Joshua ordered to be circumcised; Concerning
their conversation, the parents were enemies, but as touching the election, the
choice made of God, the issue is to be numbered among the beloved. Who had a
worse father than Josiah, yet where was there a better son? A circumcised man,
who in youth began to seek the God of his father David, 2 Chronicles. 34. 3.

Secondly, Misbelief in a parent divests not the issue of this
birth-priviledge; though the father err in the faith, yet the child is not to
be shut out of the number of believers. We have in this particular the Apostle
for a precedent, had misbelief in the parent denuded the child of this
privilege. Saint Paul had not been a Jew by nature, but an Heretic, or
Sectary by nature, being before conversion a Pharisee, and the son of a
Pharisee; Scribe was a name of office, but Pharisee the name of a Sect, and
therefore Christ warns to beware of the leaven, that is, of the Doctrine of the
Pharisees, as of the Sadduces; Such was Paul's parentage, and yet by descent and
offspring, he is of the people of the Jews. What we say of Pharisees, is as
true of Sadduces; It is not to be doubted but they were circumcised persons,
and entitled their children according to the Directory in Scripture for
circumcision, as appears by their embodying of themselves with the people of
the Jews, Matthew. 22. 23. Acts 23. 6. The most strict of Pharisees took them
into their society, which they had not done, had they not been men of the
circumcision, we see the accusation charged on Peter on this occasion, Acts 11.
2, 3. A man transmits not his errors, nor his vices no more than he does his
graces.

Thirdly, ignorance of needful truths, in a parent does not divest the child
of this privilege. Those were the people of God (and therefore brought forth
children to God) that did perish for lack of knowledge, Hosea 4. 6. that went
into captivity for lack of knowledge, Isa. 5. A reverend brother, giving his
reasons why he is among his brethren singular in this point, not baptizing all
born in his Parish; one maine one is, the gross ignorance among them, and that
(as he says) not in Cumberland, and those parts, but in Essex, such, that if
he should print, his Reader would scaree believe it were possible to be true;
To which I only say, I wish that our own experience in the places where we
live, did give us occasion of suspicion, that any wrong is done them. Therefore
to let the truth pass unquestioned, I would only wish him to consider, whether
there might not have been found the like in Corinth, that Church of the Saints,
1 Cor. 15. 34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame.
Whether there he might not have found the like among the illuminated Hebrews,
were not there those that were dull of hearing, that when for the time they
ought to be teachers, they had need that one teach them again, which be the
first principles of the Oracles of God, and were become such as had need of
milk, and not of strong meat? yet these were of the Church, and therefore with
them their children.

Fourthly, illegitimation of birth, adulterous copulation in the parents,
divesteth not such issue of this privilege, David had never in that manner
sought in fasting and prayer his childs life, had he believed that he must not
have been of the seed of the Jews, but of the uncircumcised Heathen; Pharez was
of such a birth, yet who bore a greater name and glory in Israel than he, and
his family? even where the illegitimation of his birth is noted, there the
glory of his race is magnified, which is yet farther honored in that Christ
according to the flesh was made of his seed. That seed of Abraham per
eminentiam, was out of his loins; Jepthah indeed was driven out by his
brethren, but not because that he was not of the seed of the Jews, and people
of God, but because they would not have him to share of the inheritance among
them. A Reverend Divine says, That some persons may be notorious offenders (as
known Atheists, mockers of Religion, Idolaters, Papists, Heretics, Witches)
and yet profess before men the faith, seems to him to imply a contradiction.
These (I confess) are plausible words to take with well-meaning souls, that
attend not to the language of the Scripture in this particular. And for the
first, if he means Atheists in judgment, that professedly maintain in word,
what David's fool said in his heart, that there is no God, and by mockers of
Religion, not those alone that oppose the power, but with Lucian, all notion of
Religion; and by Idolaters, those that professedly worship false gods, and
worship not at all the Lord Jehovah, then it cannot be denied* that this is a
contradiction: But Reverend Master Rutherford, whom he opposes in that place*
has no such meaning; But for an Atheist in life, to be a professor of the
faith, we have Paul expressly for it, Titus 1. 16. They profess that they
know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate. The Apostle (we see) saw no contradiction in
it; and for mockers of Religion, Peter did not foretell them to be out of the
Church, but within the bosom of it, when he said, There shall come in the last
days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, 2 Pet. 3, 3. For Idolaters, if
an Israelite might be an Idolater, then a Christian; How high were those in
Idolatry mentioned, Psalm. 106. 36, 37, 38, 39? and yet in covenant, ver. 45.
For the Church of Corinth the Apostle is plain, A brother may be an Idolater,
1 Cor. 5. 11. It is within the Church, and not without, where men escape death
by plagues, yet repent not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship Devils, and Idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of
wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk, Rev 9. 20. For Papists, I
marvel how they are distinguished from Idolaters and Heretics; for Heretics
as false Prophets were of the Church of the Jews, so Heretics are of the
Church in Gospel Times, 2 Pet. 2. 1. The Apostle tells the Elders of Ephesus,
Acts 20. 30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to
draw away Disciples after them. For Witches, though there were a Law in Israel
not to suffer a Witch to live, Exodus 22. 18. Yet Israel had Witches, as is seen
in those that Saul put out of the Land, and her that in his distress he sought
unto, 1 Samuel 28. Paul had never reckoned up witchcraft among those sins that
shut out of the Kingdom of heaven, and certified the Churches of Galatia of
it, had there been an impossibility that any such should be found of their
number that made claim to it; This the Reverend Author does as much as
acknowledge in the words that follow, I deny not (says he) but that in some
sense, any such notorious offender may have the essence and being of a member
of the Church as visible, to wit, in this sense a corrupt and rotten member fit
to be cut off. A member of the visible Church, (though formerly an inoffensive
professor of the faith) may afterward fall away into any of these notorious
scandals, and yet for a while still retain the essence and being of a member of
the Church as visible. Master Rutherford that is there opposed (I suppose) will
affirm no more, Respective to the power of godliness, there is in them no
soundness, nor yet in those that are better than these; Some say that one that
is such in any known foul sin, to them is no better than a Heathen, as bad
as a Turk, or Pagan, and nothing at all better for the name Christian. And I
say, that to me they are as bad, as to them, and perhaps worse in the eyes of
God. This privilege in which they stand thus interessed, is an aggravation of
their sin, and a farther provocation of God against them; When the Lord saw
it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons and of his
daughters, Deuteronomy. 32. 19. yet such is Gods long-suffering, and forbearance of
them, that he is pleased to vouchsafe them farther and more large evidences of
his favor, Nehem. 9. 30. Jerusalem was corrupted more than Sodom and Samaria,
in all her ways, Ezekiel. 16. 47. Sodom and her daughters, had not done as
Jerusalem and her daughters, ver. 48. Samaria had not committed half her
sins, ver. 51. In her abominations she had justified both of them; yet
Jerusalem enjoyed those privileges, that Samaria and Sodom enjoyed not;
Jerusalem was in covenant, ver. 16. when Sodom and Samaria were no
vovenant people, but worshipped they knew not what, John 4. ver. 22. Corazin
and Bethsaida, Cities of Israel, were no better in the eye of God than Tire and
Sidon, yea their sins deserved an heavier weight of judgment, Matthew. 11. 22.
It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon at the day of judgment, than for
you, says our Savior; and so it was with Capernaum, compared to Sodom, ver.
23. yet Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, enjoyed those privileges from God,
that Tire, Sydon and Sodom wanted. As the Apostles zeal against the
Samaritanes* sins, Luke 9. 54, did outstrip our Saviors, when they would
have fire from heaven to consume them; so our zeal out-goes Gods, when we
would have such men, root and branch, parent and child struck out of covenant,
before God has sued out any Bill of divorce against them, or removed his
Candlestick, and taken all covenant-priviledges from them. For the baptism of
children of Apostates, there is a greater difficulty. Some of reverend worth
say, They see not how justly a Parents Apostasy should deprive the child of
Baptism, and some Texts of Scripture seem strongly to favor that opinion,
Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. Moreover, thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters whom
thou have borne unto me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be
devoured; Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, that thou have slain my
children, and delivered them, to cause them to pass through the fire for them?

There could not be an higher evidence of Apostasy, than to give their children
in sacrifice to a false god. It was one of the highest acts of obedience that
Abraham could testify to the Lord, and yet these yield it to Idol-gods; They
bring forth children to God, and give them to Moloch, Psalm. 106. 35, 36, 37,
38, 39. They were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, and they
served their Idols, which were a snare unto them, yea they sacrificed their
sons and daughters unto devils. And shod innocent blood, even the blood of
their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of
Canaan, and the land was polluted with blood. Thus were they defiled with their
own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions. These in this
apostatized from God in covenant, yet God looks upon them as a covenant
people, ver. 45. And he remembered for them his covenant, etc. But this seems
to be but a partial Apostasy, taking in the worship of Idols, they did not
totally cast off the worship of God. A line of profession was still (it seems)
held up, God was not wholly cast off in Judah. They seem to be of those, that
swore by the Lord and Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. keeping up the worship of the true
God, and yet take in the worship of a false god with him. As for those in whom
Master Firmin instanceth; our Englishmen now in Turkey, apostatized from the
Faith to that Religion; concerning whom quaeres are often put, it may seem
equal, that as a man comes into covenant, and his posterity with him; So,
totally rejecting the covenant, denying God as well in profession, as in his
works; that he and his posterity should be out of covenant; Being before an
holy root, to transmit holiness to his seed, now he becomes unholy, and put
out of such capacity, and is disabled from making over any such privilege to
them. But here we need not to trouble our selves with the Baptism of such,
having renounced Christ, they baptize not their infants in his name. A Minister
shall have none of these rendered to him, and to baptize them into this body,
when he well knows they must be never suffered to be of it, were an high
taking of Gods name in vain, and a mockery of so sacred an Ordinance. Now in
case a grandfather shall take one of these children, and offer it unto
Baptism; and being a Progenitor, shall undertake the education in the
Christian Faith, and not in the Turkish abomination, whether in this case there
be right to Baptism, is the question. Now these may be looked upon, either as
mere Heathens, in the same condition, as if they never had an Ancestor in the
Faith, or else as issuing out of the loins of mediate Ancestors, believing,
and so coming from a root that has been holy. If considered in the former way,
they may have a title to Baptism according to many eminent Divines, by virtue
of their Adoption. Reverend Master Cawdrey observes a threefold way to
circumcision from Genesis 17. One is personal upon profession of Faith in a man's
own person, so Abraham entered. A second is paternal, when a man comes in by
right derived from his Parents, so Isaac and Ishmael had title. A third,
adoptive, being taken into the family of a Believer according to that, Genesis 17.
12, 13. He that is eight days old among you, shall be circumcised, every man
child in your generations, be that is born in the house, or bought with money
of any stranger which is not of thy seed. He that is borne in thy house, and he
that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised, etc. Any bondsman that
he would take, and adopt into his family, in such case had right of
circumcision: Rive^. on Genesis 17. Exercit. 8^. is clear of this judgment, and
says, he remembers that it was so determined in the National Synods of the
French Churches, quoting in like manner Prosper in his second Book, De
vocatione gentium, Chap. 8. Aliquando filiis infidelium praestatur baec gratia
ut baptizentur cum occulta Dei providentia in manus piorum quomodocunque
proveniunt.
Sometimes this privilege is vouchsafed to the children of Infidels, when by a
secret providence they into the hands of the godly. Master Cotton I remember in
his book of Infant Baptism is for it. Master Norton against Apollonius for
present suspends his judgment, page 38. I had rather go his way, than theirs
that determine it; and in my thoughts with submission to better judgments, I
rather incline in present to the contrary. Those that Abraham bought with his
money, I suppose were men of years, who were to be circumcised and their issue;
But whether they were not first instructed, is the question. No uncircumcised
person was to be in his house, and whether he might compel to circumcision may
well be disputed. He found them explicitly in covenant with false gods, and
whether he might give them the seal of the covenant of the true God in that
state, I question. It is said, Gods covenant shall be in their flesh, verse 13.
and that this should be done, and no covenant with the true God at all
professedly in their mouth, no notion of him by way of assent in their heart,
to me is strange; I think it implies Abraham's work, first in instructing of
them in the covenant, and upon their assent they were received, and their seed
with them. Circumcision did denominate them a people of God, and that is a
strong contradiction to have them circumcised, whose faith was in a false god;
and who applied themselves to such worship; Their entrance I should rather take
to be personal, than adoptive. Consider them then as descending from the loins
of Christian progenitors, having fathers of their flesh heretofore in covenant
with God, and we shall find them in a better condition than those Heathens
that had ever been strangers. And here the Apostle will help us to a
distinction, Romans 11. 28. Speaking of the Jews cut off from the body of the
Church visible. As concerning the Gospel, (says he) they are enemies for your
sakes. Their present condition is as Heathens, being alienated from God by
reason of unbelief of the Gospel (which Apostasy of theirs has given occasion
to, and made way for the calling of the Gentiles:) But as touching the
Election, they are friends, says he; God has respect to them, not totally to
reject them for their fathers sake; for the covenant which he entered with, and
the love that he showed unto their forefathers, being beloved upon the account
of their fathers; When there is a father found to do them that office, to take
them out of the wild Olive, to put them into the true Olive; I do not doubt,
but that they have title: Though Baptism should be denied to infants
respective to all predecessors, pure Heathen (notwithstanding Adoption, which I
will not determine) yet the Apostle speaking so much in favor of Jews, even
in their state of blindness, respective to the hope of their future call; I do
not doubt but it might be vouchsafed (upon this account of Adoption) to an
infant. Jew, if we can have any ground fairly to conclude his descent from
Abraham, much more where we can easily evidence a descent from parents that are
Christian. And this I hope is some explication of my meaning where in answer to
the demand of an adversary I say, That infants be capable of Baptism, by
descent from parents, either within man's memory, or beyond it; when a line of
profession holdi, or is again restored, that the infants may be received into
the visible Church, and enjoy the saving Ordinances of Christ Jesus, page 68.
of my answer; and some satisfaction to the question concerning the power of
mediate Parents, giving title to Baptism, where out of the case of total
Apostasy there is small difficulty. I shall conclude in the words of Rivet, Si
Parens carens vera fide, came tamen profiteatur and in externo Eclesiae coetupro
fideli habeatur, aut olim habitus fuerit sub veteri Testamento infantes ex
talibus nascentes erant foederati and promissionis participes; quia etiam
promissio acceptata fluerit, a parentibus majoribus in gratiam nasciturae
posteritatis cui non praejudicat immediati Parentis incredulitas aut hypocrisis
quamdiu infans incredulitatem and hypocrisin Parentis imitari non potest.
Rivet. in Genesis Cap. 17. Exercit. 88.
If a parent wants true Faith, yet makes profession of it, and in the external
society of the Church is accounted a Believer, or has been accounted
heretofore under the Old Testament; the infants borne of such parents; are in
covenant with them, and partakers of the promise, even upon this account;
because the promise was received of the Ancestors in behalf of the posterity
that should issue from them which the unbelief or hypocrisy of the immediate
parent, cannot make invalid as long as the infant cannot imitate the unbelief
or hypocrisy of the parent.

CHAP. LIX.
A Defense of the former Doctrine respective to the latitude of Infant Baptism.
A Reverend Author putting it to the Question, Whether the Ministers of
England are bound by the Word of God to baptize the children which say they
believe in Jesus Christ, but are grossly ignorant, scandalous in their
conversations, scoffers at godliness, and refuse to submit at
Church Discipline? determining it in the negative, a work most heartily carried
on, must be ingeniously acknowledged, yet a work in which the Author appears
rather diffident, than confident, more in suspicion, than assured of the verity
of his own tenent, or warranty of his present practice. Sometimes he consesses
himself at a disadvantage, and comes very weakly off it, page 13. Sometimes he
calls for better fingers to untie the knot that he meets with, page 32.
Sometimes he even yields all, as the state did stand not only with the Jews,
but also as it does stand with us, though it ought de jure to be otherwise,
page 34. Sometimes he professes not to deny any infants, but to delay them,
page 42. Sometimes he says he had rather grapple with those, who think he is
too large, than with those who judge him to be too straight, page. 43.
Suspecting his error (as indeed it does) if Scripture may determine) to lie on
that hand. I shall as briefly as may be take a view of it. He premises two
things, page 1, 2. for the clearing of the question.

First, Premises two grounds, on which he builds his discourse; 2. Puts the
Question as above; 3. Brings arguments sor the negative, which I shall here
take into consideration.

First, The infant that is to be baptized, if we consider it in it self as
abstracted from the parent, gives no reason for it self why it should be
baptized. This we willingly yield, the infant has no independent title, the
right claimed is in relation to the parents, and thence I infer the infants
right is somewhat, that parents can transmit to their children that gives the
title, otherwise they might have regeneration from parents, as well as
Baptism. It is not then inherent graces that we must look after, respective to
the childs interest, but covenant-priviledge, covenant-holinesse.

A second ground is inferred from the former. All children then (says he) are
baptized by virtue of the parent, one or both, ever considering the child in
relation to the parent, being the branch of such a root, and so I take in the
child together with the parent. Hence we say commonly, they must be children
borne in the Church, that is, of such parents as are members of the Church,
being a society of visible Saints joined together, by way of covenant, to
exercise an holy communion with God in Christ, and so one with another,
according to the order of the Gospel: for I presume none are so sottish to
understand a Church to be that place which by a Metonymy of the subject we call
a Church, nor the Parishes that men live in which never were of Ecolesiastical
constitution. I am utterly to seek what is meant by that place, which by a
Metonymy of the subject we call a Church: our meeting places seem to be
intended, but few children are borne there; and the Authonr speaks of a Church
where children are borne. Covenant of Church Members either explicit or
implicit.
For the covenant of which he speaks one with another, according to the order
of the Gospel, which he seems to understand of a Congregational Church,
constituting covenant, and puts into the definition of a Church; this should
not have been premised, but proved. His adversaries in this thing, know no such
explicit covenant. If an implicit one will serve, then the Parish inhabitants
(which he says were never of Ecclesiastical constitution) are all in covenant;
Men that profess God in Christ, and by virtue of convenience of habitation,
join in one, in the worship of God, in the use of Ordinances, tacitly and
implicitly are in covenant together, and we take it to be no sottish thing to
esteem these as Churches. If this be his meaning, to assert only an implicit
covenant, where he says page 3. ( This rule warrants any Minister comfortably
to administer that Ordinance, Here is a parent, one or both visibly in covenant
with God, and a visible member of Christ's Church; I do therefore administer the
seal of the covenant unto this infant by virtue of this parent, according to
that Command given to Abraham, the father of believers, with whom when the Lord
entered into covenant, and laid the foundation of the Church visible in his
family, he took his seed into covenant with him, and commanded that they with
him should keep that Seal of his covenant,) we freely consent, and then the
question is determined in the affirmative; I am sure the Church of the Jews
took in such by circumcision, that some would exclude from Baptism. In case he
means an explicit Church Covenant, over and above the covenant of grace, as
the Jews had no such way, so neither had the Apostles or primitive Christians.
Those converts, Acts 2. did not that first day of their conversion before their
Baptism set up Congregational Churches with officers, The Apostles and
primitive Christians knew no explicit Church Covenant.
they dwelt in many remote places at great distance (whither they were to
return to their respective families,) and therefore could not in this way
embody themselves, in one distinct society for exercise of discipline. As Soon
as the Eunuch by Philips preaching of a Jewish proselyte, is made a Christian
Disciple, he says to Philip, See, here is water, what does hinder me to be
baptized? Acts 8. 36. Had Philip understood a necessity of confederation into a
Church Way, over and above the covenant of grace before Baptism, he had
doubtless informed him; and as Christ sent the Leper that he had cleansed, to
show himself to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses had Commanded,
Matthew. 8. 4. so Philip would have observed the Gospel Order appointed, and have
sent him to some particular constituted visible Church, upon his covenant to
have been received, and not hand over head, upon his bare profession that he
believed that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, baptized him. When the Gentiles
had received the Holy Ghost, Peter said, Acts 10. 47. Can any man forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well
as we? had there been any such rule of a Church Covenant, orderly to have
preceded, he might easily have seen that any man, upon that account might have
forbidden it. Paul had made much more haste (as I may say) than good speed,
Acts 16. In baptizing the Jaylour and his household, in case Jesus had set down
an order of a preconfederation into a particular Church-society. Master Bartlet
in his model of the Congregational way, says, that those particular instances
which are produced by diverse reverend Divines, of the Eunuch, Centurions,
Jaylours Baptism, though not belonging to any particular Church against what
we have laid down, are of little force and validity, in regard that which was
done to those persons was by the hands of extraordinary officers, that were not
tied to particular Churches, as ordinary Pastors and Teachers were then, and
still are. But these persons whom they thus baptized, were not persons in any
such extraordinary capacity, and they must come in, in a Gospel-way. This might
have privileged the Leper cleansed by Christ, from offering his gift appointed
by Moses, as well as it could privilege these new Converts from any
covenant-way appointed by Christ; and the Eunuch says, What does hinder me to
be baptized? without mention of any special privilege of an officer
extraordinary, in a way otherwise irregular. And the like we may observe in the
speech of Peter. (2.) They should show us where, when, and by what authority,
any ordinary Pastors and Teachers tied themselves to such an order, to bring
men into a Congregational Church Way, and to baptize into such particular
Church Congregational, and not into the universal Church visible. (3.) Those of
his judgment, may do well to give us their thoughts of their own Baptism.
They had no independent right all their right was in relation to their parents.
Their parents were not (as we conceive) thus in any particular Church
federation, perhaps they were no fit persons in their judgment for admission,
neither were they baptized by the hands of extraordinary Officers. If their
Baptism was null, then they are yet to be baptized; if valid, they had then
title to Baptism, and others in their condition are entitled. (4.) Then it is
in the power of man, at pleasure to keep parent and child from the privilege
of Ordinances, to have them pass as Heathens and Infidels, yea believing godly
men and their children at their courtesy, must be reputed either of the number
of dogs or of children, this cannot be denied. The majority of these have
power at pleasure of admission of members. And to be no Churchmember (with
them) is the same as to be a Turk, or Indian, page 9. And how different their
judgments are, who are fit to be received, and who are to be denied, is
evident. Some of no obscure note have affirmed, though minded, be contrary
minded, that to render a man capable of admission into Church Membership, grace
is not sufficient, but he must have expressions, and so a fathers slow tongue,
shall exclude his child from admittance into the fellowship of the Saints;
when upon the other hand upon the bare account of his fathers glib tongue,
(though there be scarce another commendable quality) another may be received,
when these are not judged worthy of fellowship, who are not of abilities to sit
in judgemeut with the Congregation, to admit members, to pass sentence upon
delinquents, to judge of Doctrines, not only to elect, but to ordain Pastors
and Church Officers, we may easily guess how many they exclude as without,
whom Christ receives. Such a way had it been taken, had deprived the Church of
an Hezekiah, Josiah, and many others in their age renowned; How great a
provocation is this to such children when once of growth to join with them
with whom the Church rancks them? and to oppose with the uttermost of fury,
such that (after the revolution of so many generations inheriting that
privilege) now do debar them? And how great an encouragement to join with
such in all holiness, with whom they are honored with these privileges?

As to the second, whether the Ministers of England are bound by the Word of
God to baptize their children which say they believe in Jesus Christ, but are
grossly ignorant, scandalous in their conversations, scoffers at godliness,
and refuse to submit to Church Discipline. Our Author puts a Question, What
parent do you mean; the immediate parent only, or the predecessors? For
suppose the immediate parent be as your question mentions; yet it may be the
Grandfather, or some of the predecessors have been godly. And farther says, I
perceive diverse of our Divines help themselves here, and some in discourse are
content to lose that ground of the immediate parent, and fly to this. Though I
see no reason that any should fly hither, in hope of help, yet it is strange to
me that he should stand for the immediate parent, excluding all mediate
predecessors, who has said enough for their power in giving of this interest
to the children. He says, I do administer the Seal of the covenant unto this
child by virtue of this parent, according to that Command given to Abraham,
the father of Believers, with whom when the Lord entered into covenant, and
laid the foundation of the Church visible in his family, he took his seed into
covenant with him, and commanded that with him they should keep that Seal of
his covenant, When God took Abraham into covenant and his seed with him, it
was not only his immediate seed, but the issue of his flesh at the greatest
distance, Gods covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, is mentioned in Gods
apparition to Moses, Exodus 3. 6. and was pleaded by Moses in his intercession
with God for Israel, Exodus 32. 13. Moses then, and all Israel were in this
confederation of Abraham, yea all Israel in succeeding ages, Levit. 26. 42.
When the worst of Jews make that plea, that they are Abraham's seed, the Lord
Christ yields it, John 8. 37. and the Apostle concludes a holiness in the
whole body upon that account, that the root at such a distance, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, were holy, Romans 11. 16. I know not how we can bottom any thing upon
the grand Charter of God, made to Abraham, and exclude the mediate parent from
all power to confer this interest upon posterity. When Jacob calls Ephraim
and Manasseh by the name of sons. Genesis 48. 9. as a father gives his blessing
to them, putting his name, and the names of his fathers, Abraham and Isaac upon
them, ver. 16. and 20. were they not to be reckoned for the sons and seed of
Jacob? does not their mediate Parent, as well as Joseph their immediate Father,
confer an interest on them? Mr. Hooker was before our Author in this tenent,
and his grounds are fully answered by Mr. Caudrey, Mr. Firmins reasons and his
replies to them.
in his Diatribe, concerning infant baptism. I shall only take into
consideration our Authors Reasons.

First, 1.
he yields that England had Christians in Primitivetimes. Thousands of Martyrs
under Dioclesian, but after the waters grew brackish at Rome, and brings it to
us in England; we held ( says he) the name Christianity under the Romish yoke,
till of late the State threw it off, and then the people following the State
concluding, I doubt not but God had his number in those dark times; but what
were those few in comparison of the body of the people, or predecessors, since
the time of the Gospel restored to its purity; God has wonderfully appeared in
England; but those who use the argument of predecessors run very high.

Answ. 1. If the waters grew brackish at Rome, so that they gave their sent
hither; so did the waters of Judea and Jerusalem grow as brackish, yea, and of
a worse savor in the days of Ahaz; and at those times when they brought forth
children to God and gave them to Moloch, Ezekiel. 16. 20.

2. Neither do we look so far back (when we look back as far as Dioclesian)
as the Jews in Christ time; as Paul that looked as far as Abraham in his
time: yea, himself stays not till he come up to him, we are not necessitated
to look so high. A pedigree in a shorter line as to this purpose will serve our
turn; we are not tied to make it out that our Progenitors were really godly,
to confer such covenant interest upon us. Primitive-Christians were admitted
upon the account of Profession, by our Authors confession, and not upon the
account of reality of godliness, and they gave their posterity interest. We
see how much reverend Master Hooker. speaking the opinion of his party, gives
to the Churches connivance, negligence, or indulgence in this thing: If the
Church (says he) either through connivance, negligence, or indulgence shall
tolerate such evils, and evil persons in that state of Church Membership, they
cannot then deny them the privilege of Members. And I dare attribute as much
to Gods connivance, his indulgence, and long suffering; Till he sue out a bill
of divorce, and openly casts a people off, (that they be none of his Kingdom,
or called by his name,) they are in covenant, and their children with them. It
seems Master Hooker judges that the Church may thus connive without sin;
seeing he distinguishes between connivance, indulgence, and negligence. I am
sure God may, out of just prerogative; And to have the line broken off, as soon
as the power of godliness, in a race declines, is to be infinitely above God,
rigorous, and severe, and the ready way to bring in a strange and monstrous
confusion. He goes on, and says he will a little consider the Text in
reference to them; and then instances in that in the second Commandment,
showing mercy unto thousands, of them that love me, and keep my Commandments,
as though that were the alone Text we had, to rest upon. Though much might be
spoke by way of Animadversion of his Answer, yet I forbear. Use may be made of
that Text, to evidence that it is no unreasonable thing to carry on a
privilege so far, from generation to generation, and an easy reply made to
most that he has spoken; Yet I build not a formal Argument upon it, therefore
I shall not spend time in it. His second, third and fourth Argument come in to
fill up his Comment on that Text, 2, 3, 4.
and therefore might have been answers, not Arguments.

Fifthly, 5.
he says, that Text, 1 Cor. 7. 14. seems to tie the federal holiness of the
child to the immediate parent; does not say, the child is holy, etc. by virtue
of a great grandfather: And so it seems to me also. Those Corinthians being
new Converts, their issue had none but immediate Parents, from whom they might
claim their interest; and by whom they might be entitled. As the Parents
themselves did claim it from no Parents or Progenitors at all, their
Ancestors having no power to communicate it; Isaac and Ishmael had right of
circumcision only from their immediate Parent; Abraham had right immediately
from God, Jacob and his posterity had right from Parents, both mediate and
immediate, and these Corinthians from their immediate Parents only, and their
children from Parents mediate and immediate.

Sixthly, 6.
He says. If that promise does give this power to predecessors, etc. then
though there are none to educate this child, (For the ignorant profane parents
will not but teach them how to break the covenant; The predecessors cannot,
they are dead, and are not;) yet we must seal to this child, etc. Where do
you see Churches take care of such children? they must be of some bigness, and
understanding before the Church meddle with them; the immediate profane person
brings him up in ignorance and profaneness, neither will take care to have his
child instructed by the Church, as experience witnesses too much? Answ. I
understand here the covenant-promise, as Acts 2. 39. by virtue of which these
Jews were children of the covenant Acts 2. 35. and not with limit to the
second Commandment; and then speak to it.

1. Here is enough spoke to conclude the childs interest, in case he shall be
taught to break covenant, then he is in covenant. An Indians child breaks no
covenant with God; And being in covenant, he is interessed in the privilege of
the covenant.

2. Let him make it up into formal Argument, and then it runs thus. That
child whose immediate Parents will not bring it up in the power of godliness,
has no right to Baptism. This, though it carry some fair show, with those that
are not able to judge; yet it is evidently false, Those that were witness to
themselves, that they were the children of those that killed the Prophets, were
of the circumcision, Matthew. 23. 31. yea, those that had crucified Christ, were
in covenant with God, and their children in confederation, Acts 2. 39. That
counsel of the Prophet, Zach. 1. 4. Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the
former Prophets have cried, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye now
from your evil ways, and your evil doings, etc. might have been spared, in
case none had been received as Members in covenant; but those whose fathers
took all care for their education in the power of godliness, and Stephen might
have spared his reproof, Acts 7. 51, 52, 53. or rather had run upon a
contradiction when he said, Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in hearts and
ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost as your fathers did, so do ye. Which
of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them
which showed before of the coming of the just One, of whom ye have been now the
betrayers and murderers; who have received the Law by the disposition of
Angels, and have not kept it. They stood vested with their children in that
great prerogative, Romans 3. 1. The case of such children is sad, but not
desperate: Though the Church cannot do the whole duty incumbent on a godly
Parent, yet it takes care for the dispensation of those Ordinances that are
saving, and Scripture calls by the name of Salvation. I know some seeing the
truth of title in such children to the covenant, and consequently to Baptism,
and therefore dare not deny them; yet are so far scandalized with this loose
education of children, that they will admit it only with this caution, that
some undertake for their education; and so those of loose life, may have their
children baptized; because (say they) some difference ought to be put in all
divine Ordinances, between the pure and impure for the comfort of the godly,
the censure of the wicked, and the edification of all. But I wonder how this
difference of pure and impure is seen between child and child, that is
tendered to Baptism. As to covenant-holinesse they are both equal, otherwise
these men's undertaking would very hardly give them admission; and as to
real-holinesse, neither have it, by communication from their Parents; otherwise
(say they) the Ordinances of God cannot be kept without blot and pollution. I
wonder what pollution these mean; I know none in children but Original sin, and
the child of the best Parents is tainted with it; and let us take heed of
busying our selves with more care for preservation of Ordinances, than ever God
himself took about them. If these, thus borne, have no right at all, (I
suppose) they should not be admitted with any caution whatsoever. Master Cawdry
observes (and seems to be of that judgment,) that some think this proviso to
be too hard: I confess, I am of that mind; If (notwithstanding so sad
discomforts in such Parents) infants stand vested in any such
Birth-right-priviledge; why should it be suspended on the courtesy of such
undertakers? being by birth-interest Christians, they must not on this account
pass for Heathens. And how hard is it to impose such a burden upon any that is
not ready to adopt the issue as his own? and in such case, his undertaking
upon that ground brings the charge of a father upon him. This will soon grow
into the bare formality of former Susceptors, Godfathers, and Godmothers,
without any real advantage to the child. If by education be meant, such as a
godly Parent ought to give, none will be found to do it. If only education in
the way of a Christian, as in opposition to Judaisme, Heathenisme, it needs not
to be doubted, and that implies a covenant. What farther is desired, must be
lest to the blessing of God, by providence on Ordinances. The want of piety in
the Parent is supplied by the piety of the Church, into which the infant is
received.

Seventhly, 7.
says he. If the Predecessor may by this promise give right to Baptism,
without the immediate Parent; then I pray you tell us how far we may go for
this Predecessor? how many generations? Where has Gods Word limited
Ministers, you may go to this Predecessor, and no farther? 1. I know few that
say the Predecessor gives right, without the immediate Parent, but all
concur in a joint way to communicate a covenant interest; but his question
may have an easy answer.

2. I demand in titles of Honor, and inheritance of Lands, which men claim by
descent from their Ancestors, where it is that they stay? It will be soon
answered that they stay, when they can rise no higher, to find any other
Predecessors vested in such honors, or such inheritance. Some can make no
claim at all from Parents, they are the first of their house, of honor or
inheritance. This was the case of Abraham, he had no interest from Terah; such
was the case of the Primitive Converts, and such is the case of the Indians,
that now by a gracious providence are converted by the English. Some can go no
farther then their immediate Parents; they were the first in honor, or that
gained an inheritance to their house. This was the case of Isaac, and of those
children called by the Apostle, holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and will be the case of the
children of the Indian Converts, Others can rise to the third or fourth
generation; others can go as high as the Conquest; some can claim beyond the
Conquest, by deeds beyond date: so it is with some Christians, all may go as
high as Ancestors have been in Christianity.

Eighthly, 8.
If by virtue of that promise Predecessors may without the immediate parent
give right to Baptism, then the children of an immediate parent apostatized
from the Faith, and excommunicated from the Church, may be baptized.

I have spoke already to the children of Apostates, The interest of infants of
excommunicate persons in Baptism.
and as to the children of excommunicate persons, I readily yield his
conclusion, that I may baptize them, against which, he thus farther reasons.

If I may baptize the children of an excommunicate parent, then I may baptize
the children of one who is no Member of a Church, (for so is the excommunicate
person); so consequently the children of a Turk or Indian, for they are no
members of a Church, and the excommunicated person is no other, in respect of
his communion in Church Priviledges.

I answer, if excommunication be only out of a particular visible congregation
(as some say,) then the reply is easy, being thus excommunicate his right, in
the Church universal visible, still remains, and into this, it is that we
admit Members by Baptism, 1 Cor. 12. 13. otherwise a Christian were a
Christian respective only to one congregation, and that congregation falling,
his Christianity must fall with it; and being taken into a new one, he must be
also admitted-anew by Baptism.

But I farther answer. A Churchmember may be considered, either quoad jus ad
rem, or quoad jus in re; either respective to a fundamental proper right, or a
present personal actual fruition of his interest. An excommunicate man in the
former sense is a Churchmember, not in the later; This excommunication is a
sequestration, not a confiscation. He himself is suspended from present
benefit, not cut off from all title, as several ways may be made to appear.

1. The Text says, Let him be as an Heathen or a Publican (in respect of
society with him or familiarity, says Master Cawdrey, Diatribe page 218.) not
an Heathen and Publicane. That Text, 2 These. 3. 14. is ordinarily understood of
Excommunication; yet there the caution is added, Count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother, verse. 15. A brother is a Churchmember, an
excommunicate person is a brother. That which is for cure, not only of the
body, but of the member in particular, is not a total dismembring: But this
sentence is for cure of the particular member, For the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Haec
enim excommunicatio nou est iustar veneni, quod hosti datur ad exitium, sed
medicina, quae fratri datur ad salutem.
Excommunication is not like poison that is given to an enemy for death, but a
medicine that is given to a brother for life, says Gomarus in 2 These. 3. 15.
Certainly Gods casting out of his Kingdom, Matthew. 8. 12. taking away his
Kingdom, Mat. 21. 3. removal of his Candlestick, Rev. 2. 5. the breaking off
from the Olive, Romans 11. 17. is a sentence far above Excommunication. To let
pass Authors of this mind, Zanchy, and Perkins, quoted by Master Firmin. The
National Synod of France, 1583. The Divines of Geneva, Calvine, Dr. Ames.
Danaeus, Brochman, quoted by Master Cawdrey, Diatribe, page 216. and examine it
by reason. Either the excommunicate persons sin divests the child, or else the
Churches censure; But neither the sin, nor the censure: Ergo. 1. Not the sin as
may appear, 1. By an Argument, ad hominem. Our Dissenting Brethren (as we
heard) allow the Baptism, notwithstanding sin before the sentence of
Excommunication; It is not then the sin in their judgment that does divest
them. 2. By an Argument ad rem. No sin but that of nature descends to
posterity; man transmits not his personal vices, neither fault nor guilt, no
more than his graces. And for the sentence that cannot reach the child, I
never read that Church Censures were like that plague laid upon Gehazi, to
cleave to him and to his seed. In any legal proceeding, the child is not to be
punished for the fathers fault; there was a Law against it, Deuteronomy. 24. 16. The
fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children
be put to death for the fathers; every man shall be put to death for his own
sin; and Amaziah King of Judah is commended for observation of it, and (in his
acts of justice) proceeding according to it, 2 Chronicles. 25. 34. and we read not
that any Ecclesiastical censure should transcend it. The child of a thief is
not committed with him to prison, and I see no reason that he should be
committed with him to Satan: I say then there is right to Baptism in the child
of an excommunicate person* I wish our Brethren would stick here, and not
refuse those children, whose parents are under no Excommunication.

As to the third, our Author; 1. Premises a question, Whether is this bare
profession of Faith in Christ, (though Parents be grossly ignorant,
scandalous, and refuse to subject to Church Discipline) sufficient to make a
man, and continue him a Member of the Church visible. And then proceeds to
arguments, as to his question; I wonder how he can imagine that it makes any
thing to his question; and in case it were wholly yielded him, whether thence
he could draw his conclusion, that Ministers in England should not baptize the
infants of all that profess the Faith in Christ Jesus. He confesses in this
question he has disadvantage. For if a man be looked upon ( says he) as a
visible Saint, and reputed a Member of a true Church; if that Member be very
scandalous, and the Church let him alone and not deal with him, that person
may challenge any Ordinance in the Church, both Baptism and Lords Supper. But
I conceive such a person is not sufficiently qualified to make a Member of a
Church, nor ought to be continued a Member of the Church; but the Church ought
to seek to reform him, or if not to cast him out: so that if the Church will
let such a person alone, and give him these Ordinances, there will be guilt
charged upon that Church.

Here, is his acknowledgement that they are continued Church Members, though
they should not be continued, and see what he has further; It is true, the
wicked Jews being members of that National Church, so long as their Membership
held; they might challenge circumcision, so for wicked persons so long as they
continue members, and the Church lets them alone, they may challenge Baptism,
and so upon his own grounds, they may of right challenge it, and Ministers then
must needs do wrong in case they deny it, and so in all men's judgments, the
question is concluded in the Affirmative; yea, should the Church pass to the
highest of her censures, through all that is allowed to the highest top, yet
still the person under censure continues in a fundamental right of Membership,
though debarred of present fruition, and so their infants entitled, as we have
seen, to Baptism. His Arguments are worthy of examination, in which he
concludes such a one is not fit to be a Member.

First, Arguments to carry the question in the negative answer.
Members of Churches according to the Gospel are Saints visible: But such a
person as the question mentions, is not a visible Saint: Ergo. The Minor he
proves, Such as will say that such a person as the Question mentions is a
visible Saint, I think his eyes are not good. He that tells me, the Saints
which Paul mentions in those places were no other than such a person as is in
the Question, he must pardon me, though I believe him not.

Answ. Visible Saint, is taken, either in regard of Separation for, and
dedication to God, or for real qualifications according to the power of
godliness, in the first sense, such are real Saints, that he mentions and
rejects, in which sense we have shown [Saint] to be frequently taken, and such
were most of the Members of the Church of Sardis, there being few that had not
defiled their garments, and many such in the Church of Corinth: In the second
sense (and I know not a third) his eyes are better than mine, that can
determine concerning them. Inward graces only make a real Saint, and these to
me are invisible: if he means so far as men's judgments can upon any fair
ground conclude that they are such, then the Apostles will be involved in our
guilt, who hand over head admitted members the same day they were converted,
being in foul sins, and never staying time to make judgment of the hopeful
truth of their graces. Paul calls all those that he persecuted, Saints, Acts
26. 10. So does Ananias, Acts 9. 13. all those for whom after conversion he
ordered and made Collections 1 Cor. 16. 1. And these were some of them as bad
as any that in his Epistles he reproves.

Secondly, If a bare profession in Christ be sufficient to make a member of a
Church, then no person can justly be excommunicated out of a Church for the
vilest sins or heresies, provided he does but hold this profession of his
faith, the consequence is clear, the person is the same which he was when you
took him into the Church. The consequence is clearly erroneous: for he made a
profession of his faith, and not of sin, as we see in Simon Magus.

Thirdly, He that manifestly opposes Christ in his visible Kingdom, is not
fit to be a member of a Church. But such a person as the question mentions does
manifestly oppose Christ in his visible kingdom. Ergo, Not fit to pass
without censure, should have been added: but whiles he acts rebellion, he
professes subjection and in the Apostles language is a professor, Tit. 1. 2.
Having thus made way he propounds several Arguments, that Ministers by the
Gospel are not to baptize the children of such Parents.

We come now to our Authors arguments; First, Such persons as de jure ought,
and de facto are excluded by godly Ministers from the Lords Supper, ought also
to be excluded from their childrens Baptism; But such persons as the Question
mentions de jure ought, and de facto are excluded from the Lords Supper: Ergo.
The Major is proved, If Baptism does seal to the same covenant which the
Lords Supper does, and does signify and seal as great blessings and
privileges as the Lords Supper does, then those who are excluded from the
Lords Supper, ought also to be excluded from the^r childrens Baptism: But the
Antecedent is true: Ergo. The Consequent. This is Master Blackwoods argument to
keep infants from Baptism, because they are kept from the Supper: And if it be
of any validity to serve our Authors turn, it is of as great force for Master
Blackwood; Give me leave in Master Blackwoods behalf to urge it in this
manner, with the least change of words that is possible: If Baptism does seal
to the same covenant which the Lords Supper does, and does signify and seal
as great blessings and privileges as the Lords Supper does: then those that
are excluded from the Lords Supper ought also to be excluded from Baptism; But
all infants are excluded from the Lords Supper eo nomine, because they are
infants; and therefore they are to be excluded from Baptism. When Master
Firmin has given a fair and full answer to this Syllogism, he may easily fit
it to his own, to give like satisfaction. An infant in covenant may be admitted
by that sign and scale, in the use of which he is merely passive, and yet be
kept back on the account of his infancy, from that sign and seal, which the
Participants must actually improve for their spiritual benefit, and
consequently a Parent may put a present bar to his actual admission (by reason
of present guilt) to the one, when his innocent infant can put no bar to his
admission to the other. The Parent stands de jure entitled, when for the
present he may be for his spiritual benefit de facto suspended. Another
reverend Author has made use of this argument from the uniformity of the
service of God in general, and in particular from the uniformity in the
Sacraments to another purpose; not to exclude any infants at all who descend
from Christian Parents, from Baptism, but for admission of all visible
Church Members, not under the sentence of Excommunication, to the Lords Supper.
As one from the suspension of Parents from the Lords Supper would conclude the
suspension of infants from Baptism; So, the other from the admission of all
infants without difference to Baptism, would infer, not only a just warranty,
but also a necessity of answerable admittance of their Parents to the Lords
Supper: Let our Independents ( says he) answer, Why do you allow a Syntax in
the service of God besides, and bring in a Quae genus of Anomales and
Heteroclites only at this Ordinance? let some of our Presbyterians answer how
can we admit of children as members of the visible Church being borne of
Christian parents unto Baptism, and yet turn away the parents of those
children from the Sacrament? Those that have gone about to answer this, had
better happily have said nothing: for our free course of Baptism, and a denial
of this is such a seam-rent, as will never be handsomely drawn up, though
stitcht together; nevertheless in yielding the one, they have granted the
other; As to this passage, I first marvel how this is laid to the charge of
Independents, that they allow a Syntax in the whole service of God besides, and
bring in Anomalaes and Heteroclites, only at this Ordinance; namely, the Lords
Supper; when it is plain that they have as many Heteroclites in Baptism as the
Lords Supper. And in both the Sacraments (as to those that they judge
admittible) they keep the form as whole as himself contends it ought to be
kept, how many rents soever they may make besides. The same latitude that they
hold in admission of parents to the Supper, they hold in admission of children
to Baptism. And for Presbyterians, their admission of infants to the one, will
by no means conclude them under any necessity of admission of the parents to
the other Sacrament; Nor on the contrary will their suspension of parents,
conclude any necessity of like suspension of infants; Every tub must stand on
its own bottom, every one must bear his own burden; when parents divolve a
covenant-title, they do not divolve a covenant-breach upon their children. And
I desire to know how he will keep up any such uniformity that he contends for,
according to that which I conceive to be his own opinion. Persons under
Excommunication are confessed to be incapable of the Lords Supper; I desire to
learn whether that sentence, cut off from the Church root and branch? Whether
it be a sentence personal or hereditary? I much mistake my Author, in case he
will maintain the latter, that that sword is held out with so keen an edge, to
lop off both parent and child; If he admit the former, than the same rent is
made, of which he so much complains. Presbyterians that keep those persons
from the Sacrament as a degree of punishment in order to that sentence of
Excommunication (as they use to speak) whom they judge to be in a way
deserving it, and admit their infants to Baptism, make no other manner of rent
in the worship of God, than those that keep back persons under actual
excommunication, and give the like admission to infants. The state of Parent
and child respective to the covenant is homogeneal. If the root be holy, the
branch is holy, and so e contra, yet the parent by his misdemeanour may incur
that censure of which his infant is not deserving. His argument should run
thus, If the guilty parent be debarred of a privilege, then the innocent
child ought to be debarred likewise: me thinks a difference might be put
between a scandalous parent that is active, and an innocent child that is
passive; a parent that cannot, will not improve it to his comfort, but to his
judgment, and a child that cannot mis-improve it; My Argument (says he) runs
upon the first supposition, that the child brings nothing with it, considered
as abstracted from the parent, but it is the parent gives the right. And the
parent conferres right in covenant, Though he breaks covenant, yet conferres
not the transgression of it; the Argument were as good that the child must
necessarily be admitted to the Lords Table, because the father did worthily
receive it. If it be said, the father is worthy, so is not the child; so we
say, the father is unworthy of the one, i.e. tenders himself unworthy, and so
does not the child of the other.

The second Argument. Such parents as if they themselves were now to be
baptized, ought not to be baptized, cannot justly challenge Baptism for their
children, neither are we bound to administer it. But such parents as the
Question mentions, if they now were to be baptized, ought not to be baptized.
Ergo. This argument is of the same stamp with the former, and needs no other
answer, The parent has contracted a great load of guilt, of which the infant
is innocent; This argument well followed home might unbaptize a great part of
those that are of this judgment, and render all their privileges in
Church-Ordinances fruitless, for want of a previous Baptism.

The third argument. If Ministers in baptizing are bound to hold to their
Commission, then the children of such parents as the question mentions, are not
to be baptized. But the Antecedent is true, none will deny that; Ergo. The
consequence is true. Ministers by their Commission, Matthew. 28. 19 ((...)) are
bound to baptize Disciples, but these are no Disciples, Ergo. My argument tends
to this, If the parent be not a Disciple, the child is none: But such a parent
is none, Ergo. his child is none. Here he says, the Anabaptists triumph, and
well they may, if there be any strength in this argument. But (says he) we can
easily distinguish; and I say we can distinguish as easily. Distinctions
sufficient may be seen, chap. 38. where it is sufficiently made good that these
in question are Disciples, Disciples as to the participation of Ordinances;
Even a truantly untoward boy is of the number of Scholars, and, as he well
deserves the lash, so he has the privileges of the School.

The fourth argument. To administer the Seal of the covenant of grace to a
child by virtue of him who is visibly in covenant with Satan, must needs be a
profaning of the Ordinance. But to administer Baptism to a child by virtue
of such a one as the question mentions, is to administer the Seal of the
covenant of grace to a child by virtue of one who is visibly in covenant with
Satan. Ergo. The minor is thus by him proved. A person grossly ignorant in the
fundamentals of Religion, his course of life, his trade is to live in sin,
scandalous, etc. What shall we say of such a one, though he does not formally
make a covenant with the Devil, etc.

To be visibly in covenant, and formally enter no covenant, is little less
than a contradiction: put the argument into form. To administer the Seal of
the covenant of Grace to a child, by virtue of him that is formally in
covenant with God, and really does service to Satan, must needs be a profaning
of the Ordinance; and then the weakness of his argument will appear visible,
and no visibility of a covenant with Satan found. I do not know a man or woman
in the world, whose child I could refuse on this account. Those to whom our
Savior speaks in the sharpest language, Joh. 8. 44. You are of your father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do, were men in covenant with God,
and had their children initiated with the sign and seal of the covenant, he
farther says, I wonder how Ministers pray, when they baptize the child of
such a one, they cannot but have some eye to Gods covenant, and do we not
mention so much to the Lord, that he having taken the parent into covenant with
himself, he does also the seed of the parent, and so we plead the covenant,
and a blessing, etc. but when a godly Minister shall carry the parent in his
heart thus, does not his heart check him, trouble him, in the thought of the
parent? They may well pray that God will make his Ordinances (through his
Spirit) of power, that the infant of a covenant breaking father, may be a
covenant-keeping child, that such an Abaz in covenant, and breaking covenant,
may have an Hezekiah keeping covenant; such an Ammon, a Josiah, and this
without the least check of conscience. This is frequently heard of God, and
prayers for the children of godly parents frequently denied: David has an
Ammon and Absalom, Jehoshaphat a Jehoram and Josiah a Jehoaz; Their conscience
would infinitely more check them, (if the word regulate their consciences) when
providence conferres privileges of Ordinances on such an infant to be received
where salvation is, upon so weak, and as to Scripture unheard of plea, as his
fathers transgression to keep it out.

For a fifth Argument. He hints two things which he would have seriously taken
into examination, though he says he will not put them into form. 1. How
exceedingly this Ordinance is slighted, abused through this heedlesse
administering of the Ordinance; for we see persons never mind the Ordinance
beforehand, nor after: But come let us have our children baptized, and that is
all; if they can make a feast, and drink after it, that is well. This is the
argument of Anabaptists against Infant Baptism; Because some Reverend Divines
complain that few improve their Baptism received in infancy, to any spiritual
advantage to their souls, therefore it is in vain to Baptize infants. One is
like the other, in Ordinances of God, to reason from the abuse, to the casting
of them aside. Nonsingers of Psalms (which himself professes to oppose) may
reason in this sort, and upon like ground some have warned men out of Christ
not to pray, they ought to forbear till they are in Christ. And when a natural
man blesses God for a good crop, that it were as good that he cursed him. If
men were disposed to wrangle, here doubtless were more color against such
men's performances of duties, in which only themselves are interessed, than
against parents tender of their infants to an Ordinance, in which of right they
are entitled, though they lay not to heart a right and pious way of performance
of it. Besides, ( says he) it is strange to see how we jumble the most holy
and profane men together; If Master Greenham, Master Perkins, Master Rogers,
Master Dod, or whom you will, should come and bring their children to be
baptized, let the most ignorant sot, drunkard, swearer, unclean person,
scorner of godliness, etc. come, he shall have his child baptized as well as
they. Have they their children taken into covenant? so have I says the
drunkard, swearer, etc. shall we own all these men alike under the covenant so
as to give the seal of the covenant a like to all? This many a time has been
in my thoughts, and in nothing did I ever receive more full satisfaction, Not
one of these holy men, would have made any such complaint, and in case the
children of such should meet in this Ordinance, I could as easily difference
them by their visage and features, as I could respective to their several
interests or privileges. Parents are in covenant with God, as long as they
keep up the name and profession of Christians; the one with all care walks up
to the terms of the covenant, and the other are as loose and careless in it:
Master Greenham, Master Perkins could not transmit to their children their
graces; Neither do these transmit their personal wickedness: Look into the
Commonwealth of Rome, and call out the most deserving Patriots, set against
them Verres, Catiline, or who you will, freedom of birth, interest in native
privileges is like to the issue of either, and so it is in the Church of God,
the Commonweal of Israel: and it can be no otherwise; if there be any
privilege divolved from parent to child; And when this falls, Infant Baptism
falls together with it; nothing in the child (as our Author well observes)
without relation to the parent can give any interest.

CHAP. LX.
The application of the whole in several inferences.
TO wind up the whole of this discourse of the birth-priviledge of the seed of
Believers in some practical application.

First, 1. All possible engagements and obligations to holiness.
All possible engagements and obligations unto all holiness of conversation
necessarily follows and flows from this royal privilege, and high advancement
of birth-holinesse; If we contend for their dignity, and mind them not at all
of duty, of the honor of their birth, and call them not to a suitable life; In
the neglect of duty they may soon make forfeiture of their dignity, and turn
this singular mercy into the highest aggravation of their misery: we blame
those of noble and generous birth, that betake themselves to sordid and ignoble
ways, Thus degenerating they are a blot to their families, a disgrace and
reproach to their race; no birth equal in honor to that of Christians.
Theodosius worthily esteemed it a greater honor that he was a Christian, than
that he was an Emperor: None degenerate so foully and blame-worthily, as they
when their conversation is unchristian, ways of sin are for sinners of the
Gentiles, a way proper for Turks and Pagans, let the holy seed be holy, their
demeanor suited to their honor. Sardanapalus the King may with less infamy
spin among women, or Domitian the Emperor spend his time in catching of flies,
works far below their dignities, than a Christian may sin with a Heathen. The
Martyrs in Primitive times being moved to swear by the fortune of Caesar,
thought that the answer was full, and fair, to say they were Christians: Such
answer should he have that would tempt to ungodliness, should such a one as I
fly? says Nehemiah, Nehem. 6. 11. his honor would not suffer him to be so
base; should such a man as a Christian (the least of whom is greater than
Nehemiahs better, Mat. 11, 11.) be for sin? He that is not a sinner by birth,
should be no sinner in his life. Baptism is the greatest honor, such bear
Christ's name, and wear his livery; they have that title in which Jude and
James with other of the Apostles gloried, A servant of Jesus Christ. Baptism
is the greatest engagement, Let every one that names Christ depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. To talk of Baptism, and to live in sin, is to wear the
colors of one, and plot and fight for another; to wear Christ's colors, and
fight for Satan. Baptism renders a sinner up to the heaviest punishment. The
high favors showed to the Jews, made a Jew to fare worse in the ways of sin
than an Heathen, Amos 3. 2. The high favors showed to Christians make
Christians to fare worse in sinful ways than Heathens, Heb. 2. 3. All in a
Christians calling bespeaks this holiness. God by whom he is called, 1 Pet. 1.
15. The work to which he is called, 1 These. 4. 7. The company unto which he is
joined, Ephesians. 2. 19. The attendants by whom he is guarded, Matthew. 25. 31. The
rule whereby he is guided, Romans 1. 2. The Seal by which he is confirmed,
Ephesians. 1. 13. And the place whither he makes and tends, Heb. 9. 8. all are holy.

Secondly, Parents must see that their childrens breeding do answer their birth.
Let the parents of such seed, now see what education is expected. Breeding
must answer birth and descent; A Christian is of the noblest birth, he must
therefore have the most noble education; and the Apostle calls upon parents to
bring up their Children in nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. God
may call on them thus to bring up his children, in nature theirs, in covenant
Gods. Every Christian parent, has a child of God committed to his care and
tuition: How great a soloecisme is it, that Parents should dedicate children,
so soon as borne unto Christ, professing to the world that they belong to him;
and that with Hannah concerning Samuel, they intend them for him, when nothing
appears in their education, but that they might have been given to Molok,
somewhat worse than the mongrell seed that spoke half in the language of
Canaan, and half in the language of Ashdod, Nehem. 13. 24. Scarce a word can
be heard out of their mouths, to argue that they are Christians, lisping out
oaths as soon as words; put to learn trades, and little regard had that they
might know Christ Jesus. And how much is it to be desired, that authority would
take order, for more careful catechistical teaching of youth in the ways of
Christian Religion, that God may not complain of England, as of Israel, My
people perish for want of knowledge, Hos. 4. 7. A people of God, and a people
ignorant to perdition and destruction; England is highly honored of God by
this gracious call, with Capernaum lifted up to heaven; England would highly
honor God, if care might be taken, that all might know God from the highest to
the lowest; we shall never be a Gospel-like people, till we be a knowing
people, (...) we take care, that as we are Jews by nature, so we may be Jews
in qualification, so borne, so bred, that as our youth is descended, so also
they may be trained; That as God honors our children with his name, calling
them his children, so they may honor his name, and advance his glory in all
holiness of conversation.

Thirdly, The danger of persecution.
Those may yet see whom they oppose, that stand in opposition of a people thus
interessed, a people so ingratiated to God in covenant, that there is not the
least infant in whom God has not his title, and right of challenge. The
aggravation of the Psalmists complaint is, that the Heathens are come into
thine inheritance, the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat
unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy. Saints unto the beasts of the
Earth, Psalm 79. 1, 2, 3. The whole body of such a people, root and branch,
stand in relation to God as the inheritance, the servants, the Saints of God;
such inscriptions we find in Saint Paul's Epistles, not one of the whole body
is excluded, but they are such by covenant, and such by calling. Enough has
been said to make it to appear that the denomination reaches even infants who
are the Lords heritage, Psalm 127. 3. and Christ's name is upon them, Matthew.
18. 5. As it is accounted an happy work to dash the little ones of Babylon
against the wall, Psalm 137. 9. because of the hostility of that Nation
against God and his people: so it is a like execration to intermeddle with the
little ones of Sion, by reason of the holiness of such a people, their
covenant-relations in which they stand interessed, 2 Kings 8. 12. Much is
spoken in Scripture against the enemies of the righteous, the haters of them
shall be desolate, he that offends against them shall not be innocent, Psalm
34. 21. God observes every carriage of the adversary toward them in misery,
they speak not a word but God has it against them; when Ammonites, Tyrians,
cry Aha, against the people of God, they are witted with it, and threatened for
it, Ezekiel. 26. 2. 36. 2. Not a proud word that they utter but it is brought in,
to fill up the charge against them, Obad. 12. Psalm 137. 7. yea, every eye
that is cast with approbation of the adversary, Obad. 13. 14. Every encouraging
word they speak, and every act they do against such a people, yea injuries of
elder times are kept in the deck, and laid to them, Deuteronomy. 25. 17. And all
because they stand in this relation to God as his in covenant, which you cannot
limit only to the personally righteous, but all that are of a Society and
fellowship, that is, such as are interessed in a righteous cause. The holy
anointing oil did make sacred when yet too often the man was wicked, and
therefore David looked upon Saul as the Lords Anointed. It holds in Analogy and
proportion unto all that have any unction from God, as all the called of God
have. When they were but a few in number, yea very few, and strangers; when
they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another people, he
suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not mine Anointed, Psalm 105. 12, 13, 14, 15. All the people of
God have that Anointing from God, that none may dare to intermeddle for their
harm. God promises his people that dwell in Sion, that the burden of Assyria
shall be taken from off their shoulder, and his yoke from off their neck, and
that the yoke shall be destroyed, because of the Anointing, Isaiah 10. 27. Some
will say, as this is carried, The danger of intermeddling with any is with us a
like: Even Papists and the worst of men that are called Protestants, are thus
of a people that are called Gods people, and go by the name of Christians. For
answer I shall not enter upon that controversy, what there is of the being of
a Church under the Papacy. The Papacy it self is none of it, but only a botch
bred in it, and cleaving to it; only this I say, That he that shall oppose a
Papist, under the notion of a Christian, shall bear his sin, and that upon
the grounds that have been given. Though a Papists damnable errors in the faith
shut him out from the happiness of Christians, yet such an adversaries
persecution renders him guilty of opposing the faith of Christ Jesus. And he
that follows with injuries a carnal Protestant, because of profession of the
sincerity of Religion, in opposition to Antichristianisme, is formally guilty
of persecution. The hearers resembled to the rocky ground suffer persecution
for the Word, as does the good ground that brings forth fruit with patience,
Mat. 13. 21. But to come home with more clear satisfaction. A people of foully
polluted Ordinance, standing in opposition to a people of a pure and untainted
way, are as a people void of Ordinances, are as a people without God in
comparison. The opposition of the purity of his service, God accounts as the
opposition of his great name, though it be by a people that go under that name
of his people. And therefore though Elijah take so much to heart the pulling
down of Altars set up by Jeroboam, looking upon them as Gods Altars, when it
was done by Israel apostatizing and turned to Baal, 1 Kings 19. 10. and in
opposition to the worship of Baal, makes that way of worship at Dan and ^achel
a following of God; yet we know how the Prophet from the mouth of God did cry
out against that Altar, which Jeroboam erected, and foretold the destruction of
it, and the slaughter of the Priests that offered upon it, 1 Kings 13. 2. and
with what honor that act of Josiah is mentioned in accomplishment of this
prophecy, 2 Kings 23. 15. and the brand that lies upon Jeroboam himself in
bringing in that worship of his, 2 Kings 15. 9. scarce the like on any man in
Scripture, the man of sin only excepted, the high phrases also in which this
worship is set out, making Priests for the high places, and devils, 2 Chronicles.
11. 14, 15. with the height of guilt to which he rose, in casting the Levites
out from executing the Priests office, Hosea 4. 6. And howsoever God often
calls that people of the ten tribes by the name of his people as having
Ordinances, though miserably polluted, yet in opposition to Judah where more
pure Ordinances were enjoyed, they are said to be without God, without a
teaching Priest, and without the law, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. And fighting against
Judah (who could reckon up the particulars of the Ordinances of God in their
purity) they are charged to fight against the Lord God of their fathers, 2 Chronicles. 13. 12. To come nearer home in an instance. If the Turkish power should
fall upon a Popish State, under the name and notion of Christians, they were
guilty with Saul of persecuting the Lord Jesus. If this Popish State fall upon
a reformed Nation, they are much more guilty; A fouler sin for a people of
God in name and title, to persecute his people in truth, than for a people,
strangers to God, to persecute a people only in name and title. Scripture
prayers against Heathens we may fitly apply in our sufferings under the hands
of Papists. Pilate might have been guilty of persecution of a Pharisee, under
the notion of a Jew, and yet that Nation was much more guilty in delivering up
Christ into the hands of Pilate, though Christ had been no greater than the
meanest of his Disciples. A Papist persecuting a formal carnal Protestant,
under notion of a man protesting against Idolatrous ways, blasphemes and
persecutes that faith which he holds in opposition against those Antichristian
tenants. This man being thus persecuted, persecuting another for the power of
godliness, professing the same truth is equally, ye more guilty. The very
sin of Cain against his brother Abel, 1 John 3. 12. their Religions were both
one and the same, but Cains was only, in form, and Abels in power. The result
of the whole is to let us see what it is to oppose a people under any notion of
Gods people, upon any such account as belonging to Christ. A man may have his
reward, giving to any in the name of a Disciple, though he to whom he gives be
such as God will never own for a Disciple, and answerably may incur
vengeance in opposition of one under such a name, though (with those on the
rocky ground) he be nothing less than such in deed and truth.

Fourthly, Consolation.
Abundance of sweet consolations yet flow from this birth-priviledge and
covenant-holinesse, and that in several streams.

1. In regard of Nations.

2. In regard of Persons.

In regard of Nations they have royal transcendency above all others as alone
worthy the name of a people: 1. To Nations thus honored.
Nigh unto God: A people of hope: Enjoying light; when others are darkness,
without hope, and without God in the world. The Psalmist reckons up many and
sweet-blessings of a Nation. That our sons may be as plants grown up in their
youth, that our daughters may be as corner-stones polished after the similitude
of a palace, that our garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that
our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets, that our
Oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in nor going out, that
there be no complaining in our streets, Psalm 144. 12, 13, 14. All these are
singular National favors, but only serving to make up a comparative, not an
absolute blessedness. This one rises higher and makes it complete, Blessed
are the people whose God is the Lord. The glory pertaines to a Nation thus
honored, Romans 9. 4. Of such a people (though otherwise mean and despicable, as
was Israel in the Wilderness, comparative to other Nations) it may be said,
What Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our
God is in all things that we call upon him for? Deuteronomy. 4. 7. No people can so
bottom their prayers against adversaries, as they who are the people of Gods
holiness; This mercy is a birth-mercy to al such persons whose parents with
Timothy from one to another have been Believers, 2 Timothy 1. 5. and while
national provocations break not forth (which alone with God have separating and
deafning power) his ear is ready to hear, and his hand to help, while he sees
not iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel, (which I understand of
National out-breaches from God, which by Balaams counsel presently followed to
Isreal's danger) so long God is among them, as the shout of a King, and there is
no sorcery nor divination against them, Number. 23. 21, 23. A Nation fast to God
has God fast to them, The Lord is with you, while ye are with him, 2 Chronicles.
15. 2.

In regard of persons, for Themselves. 2. To single persons.
Posterity.


For themselves, 1. Respective to themselves.
it is much to be able with the Psalmist to say, Thou art he that took me out
of the womb: Thou did make me to hope when I was upon my mothers breasts. I
was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly, Psalm.
22. 9, 10. This puts upon confidence in prayer (as an argument drawn from long
continued acquaintance) as there follows, Be not far from me, for trouble is
near, Ver. 11. Such have timely knowledge of God, sucking in somewhat of him
while they suck milk from the breasts. An expression of height setting out this
birth-happiness that has sure more in it, then can be applied to sinners of
the Gentiles; see how the Psalmist yet farther pleads it with God, O Lord,
truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, Psalm.
116. 16. an allusion to the law of servants who were the inheritance of the
Master in whose house they were, Exodus 21. 4. Levit. 25. 16. I am such, says
the Psalmist (thy servant, thy servant) with all earnestne^^ of affection, I am
of thine inheritance, I am one of those that are thy house-borne-servants, my
mother was thy handmaid, I have therefore this relation to plead; and this he
pleads again and again in the same words, Psalm. 86. 16. This great privilege
Isaiah in like manner takes notice of, Isa. 49. 1. The Lord has called me from
the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name. The
Apostle minds the Ephesians of their former condition, and will have them to
remember the time past, when they were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no
hope, without God in the world: But there never was a time in which men of this
birth-priviledge were in that condition, these are Gods heritage from the
womb, and with Timothy (some in greater, some in less measure) from children
have the knowledge of the Scriptures, if not with John Baptist full of the Holy
Ghost from the womb, Luke 1. 15. which yet doubtless is the happiness not of
few, who are eminent in sanctification, whose growth in grace is seen, and yet
the beginnings not known. Howsoever it is with them for personal
qualifications, yet they are nigh when others are afar off, Ephesians. 2. 13. at
the pools brim waiting the Angels moving of the water, John 5. 3. Salvation is
of the Jews, says our Savior, John 4. 22. Saving Ordinances are their
inheritance; They are happily seated under that joyful sound which is able to
save the soul, Jam. 1. 21. Salvation is of his house, who is the son of
Abraham, Luke 19. 9.

As it is full of consolation to Believers in respect of themselves, 2.
Respective to their posterity.
so also in reference to their posterity, their children are Gods children;
they being the Lords inheritance, their children are his heritage in like
manner, they bring ^orth children to God; and he ownes and challenges their
seed as his, Ezekiel, 16. 20. An infinite love in God, an unspeakable comfort to a
perent, when the Infant who by corruption of nature, is in Satan's jaws, and in
no less danger of hell than Moses sometimes was of the water, and not so much
as sensible of his condition, God pleases in this sad state to look upon him,
and to make it the time of love, finding out ways for his freedom. What the
Apostle speaks from the Prophet, Romans 10. 10. of Gods care of the Gentiles, is
certainly true being applied to infants, I was found of them that sought me
not, and made manifest to them that enquired not after me. Had we that
hopeless opinion of our children, as Papists have of theirs that die without
Baptism, what a wretched case were it with David to part with an infant out of
the world? How could such mourn in any other way than as those that are
without hope, parting with an infant without any part in Christ, and in no
better posture toward God than the seed of the sinners of the Gentiles doomed
both by the Psalmist and the Prophet Jeremy, Psalm. 79. 6. Jerem. 10. 25. Pour
out thy wrath on the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the families
that call not upon thy name; they might with Rachel weep for their children,
and refuse to be comforted, because for eternity they are not. But we find God
more rich in mercy, entering covenant with his and their seed, Christ himself
embracing them in their infancy, and taking them into his special love, as
those that bear his name: and though death should prevent their Baptism,
whereby they have an actual interest in visible Church Priviledges, yet he that
has appointed Ordinances is not tied to them, but where he has entered
covenant can save without them. Bellarmine confesses that the desire of
Baptism in one that is in the number of the Catechumoni (instructed in the
principles of Christ, and not baptized) does save, though the text John 3. 5.
so much urged by that party against the salvation of infants, understood with
their Comment be in the letter against it; why then should not that grace which
would show it self in like desires, when the person is of capacity, qualify
for salvation in like manner? Finding this love in God, these bowels in Christ,
we may safely conclude, that children have bliss, parents have comfort,
parents and children have their interest in Church-Ordinances and
Administrations.

And let God have the glory.
FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL Table, Relating to the chief Heads handled in this Treatise.
A
Abraham.
CIrcumcision was not a Seal of Faith peculiar to him. page 239. Arguments
evincing it. ibid. All his seed were not in Covenant, but his seed by Promise
only. page 298 He was not taken into Covenant as a natural Father, but as a
natural Father accepting Gods tender. page 299 His seed is entitled to saving
mercies on Gods terms. ibid. His houshold-members out of Covenant not
circumcised. page 425 See Circumcision. Root.
Actions.
Immanent and transient. page 132 See Justification
Adam
Was in Covenant with God. page 9 His integrity was connatural. page 103 Stood
not in need of a Mediator. p. 91 In what sense imperfect. ibid. In case he had
stood* whether he had been translated out of Paradise into Heaven? p. 100 He
might have gone quick to Hell if Christ had not been promised. p. 102 See
Covenant
Adoption
Adoptive-right to Baptism questioned. p. 454
Angels.
In Covenant with God. p. 7 Needed not a Mediator. p. 91 In what sense their
obedience was imperfect. ibid.
Antiquity.
For Infant Baptism cleared. p. 416
Apostasy.
Total and partial. p. 453
Assembly.
Of Divines vindicated. p. 406
Assurance.
Is to be gathered from the conditions of the Covenant. p. 195 See Spirit.

B.
Baptism.
SIgnifies not barely dipping, but every way of washing. It is the door for
admission into the Church visible. p. 275 Pharisees not denied it seeking, but
being tendered, rejected it. p. 272 Baptism into particular Church-societies
examined. p. 461 See Infants. Infant Baptism.
Believers.
Unregenerate persons have the name and outward privileges of Believers. p.
249
Berith.
In the most proper sense signifies a Covenant. p. 37
Birth-priviledge.
Birth-interest in Ancestours-priviledges, is of the nature of the things that
descend from Parent to Child. p. 401 402 It is so in civil Privileges, in all
Kingdoms, States, Corporations. ibid. Upon this account Protestants are taken
up by Jesuits, and the Orthodox by Anabaptists in their words. p. 403
Birth-interest in Ancestours-priviledges, is held up in all other Religions. p.
405 God ownes Infants borne in the Church, upon account of their birth as his
children, his servants. ibid. Birth-interest being denied, parent and child
are heterogeneal. p. 406 Children then brought up, not in Covenant, but for
Covenant. ibid. According to Scripture-grounds, no hope left of their
salvation. p. 407
Branch.
What with the Apostle it signifies, Romans 11. 16. p. 325 Branches of two sorts.
Natural and engraffed. ibid. See Root.

C
Canaan.
GIven to Abraham's natural issue by Promise. p. 301 That gift was an appendant
to the Covenant. p. 303 The promise of it did not denominate the Covenant mixed.
p. 226
Carnal.
See Covenant.
Camero's.
Assertion of an animal life in Paradise. p. 100 His distinction of an absolute
and conditional Covenant, of the Antecedent and consequent love of God. p. 46,
47
Children
Acts 2. 39. Comprizes Infants p. 322 Not the same with sons and daughters of
the Nation. verse. 17. p. 319 See Promise.
Christ.
Is the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, a fullness and fitness in him for
that work. p. 92 A Covenant made of God with him. p. 14 This Covenant, not the
same with the Covenant of Grace made with man, ibid. In the assumption of man's
nature he did not change the law of nature. p. 57 Whole Christ is to be
received by Believers. p. 190 Justification strictly so called, seems to be
the fruit of Christ's passive righteousness. p. 123 His active and passive
obedience, both concur to man's full happiness. ibid. See Mediator.
Christians.
Unregenerate persons have the name and outward privileges of Christians. p.
252
Church.
The distinction into visible and invisible, asserted and explained. p. 267 See
Engraffing.
Church visible.
Distinguished into universal and particular. p. 269
Universal visible.
Asserted. p. 267 etc. It consists of all that make profession of Christian
Religion. p. 268 Interest in it is of equal latitude with the Covenant. p. 267
Church particular.
A man by Covenant with God interessed in the universal Church visible, needs
nothing farther for his access and interest in particular Churches. p. 270
Cohabitation makes not up a Church congregational. p. 273 Yet it is necessarily
required. ibid. A people cohabiting in a vicinity, ough to associate in
Church Fellowship for Ordinances. ibid. Professing Christians in such
cohabitation are to be esteemed particular Church Members. p. 274
Church Covenant.
Explicit or implicit. p. 459 Covenant explicit not essential to the
relation of a particular Churchmember. p. 460 Without any Scripture-precedent.
p. 272 460 Where all is enjoyed for the being of a particular Church, much may
be wanting for the well-being. p. 273
Church, pure, impure.
When to be judged pure. p. 277 Impure Churches, have yet the being of
Churches. ibid Rome a Church of most impure being. ibid. That which especially
denominates a Church, pure, or impure, is doctrine. p. 278 Doctrines tending to
the defilement of Churches, are tainted either in the foundation or
superstruction. ibid. See Errors.
Parochial Churches.
Vindicated. p. 274 See Place.
Circumcision.
A seal of spiritual mercies. p. 227 Both a privilege and a bondage. p. 208
Called by the name of Covenant. p. 423 It was bottomed on the commandment. p.
297 Which command had relation to the Covenant ibid. It was peculiar to
Abraham's natural issue. p. 301.
Cohabitation.
See Church particular.
Commands.
Frequent and full under Moses his administration. p. 213 See Law.
Consent.
In man of necessity to his being in Covenant with God. p. 3.
Consequence.
From Scripture justified. p. 416
Conditions, Covenant.
What a Covenant-condition is. p. 35 Conditions of the Covenant of Works, and
the Covenant of Grace on Gods part seem to be the same. p. 99
Conditions in the Covenant of Works.
Were in man's power. p. 102, 103 Kept man within himself for righteousness. p.
115, 116 Their end was man's preservation. 117
Conditions in the Covenant of Grace.
Covenant of Grace has it is conditions, p. 33, 34 Arguments asserting it. p.
34, etc. Objections answered. p. 36, etc. These conditions are not performed
without special assistance of Grace. p. 104 Arguments for special assistance in
this work. p. 104, 105 Objections answered. p. 113, etc. These conditions carry
a man out of himself for righteousness. p. 116 They are for man's restitution.
p. 117 A people thus in Covenant, must come up to the terms and conditions of
the Covenant. p. 190, etc. No happiness or assurance but in performance of
these conditions. p. 195 Objections answered. p. 199
Covenant in general.
Figurative acceptions of the Word. p. 2 Requisites in a Covenant. p. 3 Mutual
contracts of the nature of it. p. 38 Distinguished. p. 4 Defined. p. 5
Covenant between God and Man.
Reasons why God dealt in a Covenant-way with man. p. 6, 7 Covenant between God
and man defined. p. 8 Definition asserted. p. 37, 38 This Covenant
distinguished into Covenant of Works, and Covenant of Grace. p. 8
Covenant of Works and Grace.
Their agreement. p. 86 Their respective differences. p. 87, etc.
Covenant of Works.
Was entered in man's integrity. ibid. Was alone for his preservation. p. 88 Did
precede the Covenant of Grace. ibid. Was a small time in force. p. 90 Had no
Mediator. p. 91
Covenant of God with Christ.
Not the same with the Covenant of Grace entered with fallen man. p. 14, 15
Covenant of Grace.
Defined. p. 159 Distinguished into the Old and New, or first and second. p.
202 Has it is solemnities in the highest way. p. 5, 12 Was entered in man's
fallen estate. p. 87 Is for man's restitution. p. 88 Is in time after the
Covenant of Works. ibid. Is of everlasting continuance. p. 90 Is in, and by a
Mediator. p. 91 God in this Covenant so manifests his free grace, that he
still keeps up his Sovereignty. p. 53
Old and New, or first and second Covenant.
Their agreement in 6. particul. p. 202 etc. They are one in substance. p. 204
Old Covenant.
Was administered and held forth by Servants, Prophets, Priests, etc. p. 205 It
received only the Jews. ibid. It had its date of time, and is antiquated for
another to succeed. p. 206 It was dedicated with the blood of Bulls and Goats.
ibid. It held forth Christ only in a promise to be incarnate, to suffer. p. 207
It held all out under types, figures and shadows. ibid. Under that
dispensation knowledge dim; those under it in a state of darkness comparative
to Christians. p. 208 Circumcision that painful sign, was the leading
initiating seal of it. p. 209 Nine positions tending to clear the Old Covenant
under Old Testament-dispensations. p. 210, 211, 212, etc. See Moses. It was not
made up of carnal promises. p. 219, etc. The charge of the Old Covenant to be
merely carnal, serves diverse interests. 1. To bring down all honor and esteem
of Old Testament-Scriptures. p. 220 2. To take Infants out of Covenant. p. 221
3. To keep Infants from Baptism. p. 222 Testimonies evincing the spirituality
of Old Covenant-Promises. ibid. This Old Covenant was a pure Gospel Covenant,
and not mixed. p. 224
New Covenant.
It is held forth by Christ the Mediator. p. 205 It takes in all Nations.
ibid. 206 It must remain till the end of time. ibid. The dedication of it is in
the blood of Christ. p. 207 Christ already come in the flesh is set forth in
it. ibid. Truth without type or-shadow held forth in it. p. 207, 208 Light
abounds, and knowledge is clear in it. p. 208 Baptism is the initiating seal
of it. p. 209 It is not limited to the Elect Regenerate. p. 231 The meaning of
some Orthodox Divines, that in some expression seem to deny it. p. 233 Several
New Testament-Scriptures evincing it. p. 235, etc. Arguments asserting it. p.
205 Absurdities following upon the restraint of the Covenant to the Elect
regenerate. p. 252 Objections answered. p. 257 It comprizes professed
Believers, and their issue. p. 246 The question stated as to the issue of
Abraham in several particulars. p. 296, 297, etc. Arguments from Old
Testament-Scriptures, evincing the natural issue of Abraham to be in Covenant.
p. 301. From New Testament-Scriptures. p. 304. The grand Objection, Romans 9. 6,
7, 8. answered. p. 309 A second Objection that it is not in that latitude in
New Testament-times answered. p. 316 1. By Quaeries put. p. 317 New
Testament-authorities, Acts 2. 38, 39. Romans 11. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Gal. 4. 29.
Matthew. 19. 14. p.318 3. Arguments evincing it. p. 401, etc.

D.
Death.
WHat in Scripture it implies. p. 100 p. 101 The same in the Covenant of Works
and the Covenant of Grace, ibid. (...). The proper and most received
signification denotes a Testament, and not a Covenant. p. 38, 39
Disciple.
Unregenerate persons have the name and outward privileges of Disciples. p.
251 Whole Nations in capacity to be Discipled. p. 236 Infants are Disciples. p.
413
Discipline.
God in the Covenant of Grace keeps up his Sovereignty in exercise of
Discipline. p. 77, 78, etc. See Separation.

E.
Election.
INto a Church State. p. 340 The Covenant of Grace not commensurate with
Election. p. 98 Election leads to salvation without any merit of works. p. 341
See Reprobation.
Engraffing.
There is no engraffing into the Church invisible. p. 336 Engraffing by Faith
according to Election is into Christ. ibid. Engraffing into the true Olive,
Romans 11. is into the Church as visible. Asserted by Arguments. p. 327, etc.
Errors.
Have their estimate more or less according as they are against Christ. p. 280
Some render Christ in an incapacity to be Mediator. ibid. Some are in whole or
in part inconsistent with his Mediatorship. ibid. Errors either in the
foundation, or in the superstructure. p. 278 In the foundation more near, or
more remote. p. 279
Epample.
The Argument, that there is no example for infant baptism answered. p. 414
Extremes.
In the worship of God dangerous. p. 439

F
Faith.
IN Christ commanded in the Moral Law. p. 96, etc. Is a Condition of the
Covenant of Grace. p. 118, etc. Propos^tions tending to clear it. p. 122
Reasons to confirm it. p. 119 Objections answered. p. 130, etc. As accepting
Christ as a Lord it does not justify. p. 125 It justifies as an instrument. p.
126 Truth explained. p. 127 Objections answered. ibid. See instrument. Faith of
profession entitles to Baptism. p. 289 Arguments proving it. p. 290 Faith and
Repentance our conditions, not Gods. p. 144
Faith of profession.
Entitles to the Church visible. p. 334 May be lost. p. 333. 334
Flesh.
Birth after the flesh gives a visible title to Church interest. p. 370, etc.
Children of the flesh, those who in course of nature come from Abraham, ibid.

G.
Gentiles.
SInners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2. 15. what it implies p. 305. 306 Engraffing of
the Jews and the Gentiles, Romans 11. is into the Church visible p. 327 See
Engraffing. Church of Jews and Gentiles one. p. 328.
Gomarus.
His answer to the Anabaptists Argument draw from Romans 9. 6, 7. p. 313, etc.
Gospel.
Where it is tendered and recieved, there is a Covenant. p. 161 Where it is
tendered and refused, there is no Covenant. ibid.
Grace.
Is the Fountain and rise of every Cov^^nant of God with man. p. 9 The
necessity of the concurrence of Grace in man's conversion. p. 111 Arguments
evincing it. p. 104 etc. Objections answered. p. 113, etc. Sufficiency of
Gospel Grace in the Old Covenant, to convince men of sin for not believing. p.
215

H.
Holy, Holiness.
Holiness of relation. of infusion. p. 326

One and the same holiness in every branch of the Olive, Romans 11. ibid.
Holiness not legitimation. p. 357 Not regenerate with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.
14. ibid. See places. Holiness of relation of persons. p. 440 Of unreasonable
creatures. ibid. Persons holy in some peculiar way of service. p. 444 In a more
general way as separate from Idols to God. p. 447
Heaven.
See Kingdom

I.
Jew.
A Jew by nature, is one in Covenant by birth. p. 306
Infant.
Those little ones that Christ recieved, and blessed, were infants. p. 394 They
were infants of Parents in Covenant. p. 394, 395 They were themselves in
Covenant. ibid. They were admitted upon a common right, and no special
privilege above other infants in Israel. ibid. They were admitted to a
Church-priviledge. p. 397 The Disciples excluded them upon their minority, and
Christ will have that to be no bar for their admittance. p. 399
Infant Baptism.
By Arguments asserted. p. 410, etc. Objections answered. p. 411, etc. Infants
of all Christian Parents have right to Baptism. p. 448 Infants of wicked
Parents. p. 448 Of misbelieving Parents. p. 449 Of ignorant Parents. ibid. Of
illegitimate birth. p. 450 Of excommunicate persons. p. 468 Right of infants of
Apostates discussed. p. 453 Infants have right to Baptism, as from immediate,
so from mediate Parents. p. 465 Infants within the verge of
Baptism-institution. p. 411, 412 Infants of Christian Parents entitled to the
Lords Supper by jus ad rem, not jus in re. p. 436
Instrument.
The Word, the outward Faith, the inward instrument in justification. p. 129
Faith more aptly said to be an instrument in justification than the word. ibid.
Relative actions have not their instruments, fitly and properly so called as
those that are absolute. p. 127 Faith is the instrument of man in the work of
justification, and because of man in a work of this nature, it is not unfitly
called in instrument of God. p. 128 See Faith, Justification.
Ishmael.
In Covenant when circumcised. p. 296 Not to be branded with bastardy, ibid. He
and his seed cast out of Covenant. p. 298
Justification.
Man's concurrence in it necessarily required in it as an acceptant, not as
agent. p. 127 It is a transient act of God, not an immanent. p. 132 It is not
from eternity. p. 131, etc. A justified man, an an fitted for every duty to
which God calls. p. 135. See Faith. Instrument.

K.
Kingdom of Heaven.
IN what sense taken, Matthew. 19. 14, etc. p. 399 The Hinge of the contraversie
concerning infants interest in Covenant, hangs not on the interpretation of
those words. ibid. Anabaptists reasons not sufficient to prove it to be meant
of the Kingdom of Glory. p. 400 Though understood of the Kingdom of Glory, it
serves not to discovenant, or dischurch infants. p. 401

L.
Law.
COnsidered as a Covenant to give life, is inconsistent with the Gospel. p. 55
Moral-Law has a commanding power over Believers. ibid. By Arguments asserted.
ibid. Objections answered. p. 58 In what sense a dead husband. p. 59 See Moses.
A rule of our duty, not of our strength. p. 151.
Life.
What in Scripture it implies. p. 100 The same in substance in the Covenant of
Works and the Covenant of Grace. ibid. A Medium may be concieved, and is by
some assigned between life and death in Scripture acceptance. p. 123
Lord.
The acceptance of Christ as Lord does not justify. p. 125
Love.
To do a thing out of obedience to the Law, and by love not opposite. p. 61
Love cleaves to Christ for communion, but recieves him not for justification.
p. 125

M.
Master Marshal.
VIndicated. p. 435
Mediator.
A fourfold work respective to the Covenant incumbent on the Mediator. p.
93, etc. See Christ, Moses.
Metaphor.
God's entering Covenant with man, no Metaphor. p. 10. 37
Ministers.
Must bring their people up to the terms of the Covenant, in pressing the
necessity of Faith and Repentance. p. 188, etc. They must not sever the promise
from the duty. p. 189
Ministry.
The necessity of a Ministry to bring me into Covenant, and to bring them up to
the terms of the Covenant. p. 160. Reasons evincing that God has appointed
such a Ministry to be perpetuated through all ages. p. 162, etc. Reasons
evincing the necessity of such an established Ministry. p. 165, etc. Objections
answered. p. 168, 169 An orderly call from God into the Ministerial function
necessary. p. 180 Reasons assigned p. 181, 182 Several ways of calling to the
work of The Ministry. p. 182 See Ordination. Ministry-maintenance p. 442
Moses.
The Law as delivered by Moses, binds Christians. p. 73, 74, 75 He delivered a
Covenant to the Jews. p. 210 He delivered a Covenant of Grace to the Jews. p.
210, 211 In his time commands were frequent and full, the directive and
maledictive part for discovery of sin were open and clear, but promises for
eternity little known. p. 213 He was a Mediator in type.

N.
Nature.
TAken for Birth-priviledge, or descent from Ancestors. p. 307 Taken for
qualifications of nature. ibid. Jews by nature had privileges above Gentiles.
p. 307, 308

O.
Obedience.
See Righteousness.
Olive.
THe whole universal Church visible, Romans 11. p. 325 Fatness of the Olive,
glory of Ordinances. p. 326
Ordination.
An orderly call by way of Ordination into the Ministerial function, necessary
in all not gifted by immediate revelation. p. 182 Ordination described. ibid.
Men in Ministerial function, are to act in Ordination. p. 182, 183 They are to
set men apart as Presbyters and Elders. p. 184 Ordination not to be passed, but
upon examination and trial. p. 140 To be solemnized with fasting and prayer. p.
185, 186 Imposition of hands to be used. p. 187 Objections answered. ibid.

P.
Pardon.
NAtional and personal. p. 343
My People.
That phrase applied in New Testament-Scriptures to those that stand invisible
relation to God. p. 258
Places for worship.
In New Testament-times have their warranty. In what sense holy. p. 441 Places
holy by divine institution, by divine approbation. p. 439 Positions concerning
places for worship in Gospel Times. p. 441 Not in equipage with the Temple and
Tabernacle. ibid. Temple and Tabernacle had the pre-eminence in four
Particulars. ibid. Our places of meeting by good warranty called Churches. p.
441, etc.
Position.
This Position, that the Moral Law has no commanding power over Believers
examined. p. 58 That position concerning the Old Covenant, to be both a
Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace examined. p. 210
Power.
Necessary in the call of Nations to a visible Church State. p. 330
Privilege.
See Birth.
Professors.
Who to be accounted so before men. p. 450
Promises.
Made to the wiked, made good to the believing and penitent. p. 190 Absolute
promises yield not peace to him that is wanting in the conditions of God
required. ibid. and p. 47 Objections answered. p. 190 Spiritual promises rare
and obscure under Moses his administration. p. 213 Scriptures evincing the
spirituality of Old Testament-Promises. p. 222 Temporal promises annexed, as
appendants to spiritual in the Old Covenant p. 226
Children of Promise.
All the seed of Abraham by Isaac born, by virtue of that miraculous promise.
p. 298

Q.
Quaeries.
PVt to those that restrain the New Covenant to the Elect regenerate. p. 234,
etc. Put to those that put a limit to the New Covenant, respective to the
issue. p. 317

R.
Reconciliation.
GRadual or total, of persons, of Nations. p. 331
Repentance.
A distinct grace from faith. p. 136 A condition of the Covenant of grace. ib.
Considered in the prae-requisites. p. 137 In the essential parts of it. ibid.
Privative part which is cessation from sin is required in Covenant. p. 140
Positive part which is a return to God, and an holy walk with God, is required
in Covenant. p. 142 See Righteousness. Objections answered. p. 144, etc.
Reprobation.
No cause of unbelief or sin. p. 341 It leads not to condemnation without merit
of sin, as Election leads to Salvation without merits of works. ibid.
Righteousness.
What degree of righteousness is required in the Covenant of Grace. p. 148
Perfection of degrees is not so required, that upon the defection of it, the
penalty is incurred. p. 149 Perfection of degrees is not required; and
sincerity accepted. p. 151 Reasons assigned. ibid. etc. Objections answered. p.
153 Our Evangelical righteousness is imperfect. p. 155, etc Sincerity is
required and accepted p. 112, etc.
Root and Branch.
Denote parent and child, Romans 11. 16. p. 325
Root.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. ibid. Every natural parent a Root. p. 338 Every
natural believing Parent an holy Root. ibid. Abraham a Root by communication,
not by example. p. 399

S.
Sacraments.
ARe Gospel mysteries. p. 446
Sacrilege.
Defined. p. 440 Withholding infants of believing parents from Baptism is
Sacriledg. p. 437, etc.
Saints.
Unregenerate persons have the name and outward privilege of Saints. p. 250
Salvation.
Put for saving Ordinance. p. 299, 300
Schools.
See University.
Scholar.
The name of Scholar is applied to man of learning justified. p. 176, etc.
Scruple.
Corinthians had their scruples about their unequal marriages. p. 350 They had
their scruple concerning their issue upon such marriage. ibid. Their scruples
arose not from the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 5. 9. p. 352 In all probability from
Ezra. 9, and 10 Chap. p. 354 The Apostle brings not formal concluding
Arguments, to prove the lawfulness of such marriage-society, but removes
scruples concerning their state with their issue. p. 360, etc.
Seal.
Title to the seal necessarily follows from interest in the Covenant. p. 422
Separation.
In what cases necessary. p. 280, etc. In what cases unwarrantable. p. 283
Members of particular Church-congregations, ought much rather to endeavor, the
reformation of abuses, than to make separation p. 276 Corruption in
conversation, scarce admits of separation. p. 283 Corruption in Discipline
scarce admits of separation. p. 284 Old non-Conformists thoughts about it. p.
285 Master Cottens indulgence toward it. p. 286 Togather Churches out of
Churches in a way of separation unwarrantable. p. 288
Sorrow.
A prae-requisite to repentance. p. 137 Cautions concerning it. p. 139
Sovereignty.
Held up of God in man's estate of grace In keeping up his Commandments. p. 54
In exercise of Discipline. p. 77
Spirit.
Its office in the work of Assurance. p. 197 The immediate test of the Spirit
questioned. p. 198 Cautions that some have put to it, overthrow it. ibid.

T.
Tradition.
Distinguished. p. 418 Not the bottom of infant baptism. p. 419

U.
Unclean.
IS not Bastardy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. p. 357
Universities.
In order to a gifted Ministry necessary. p. 173, 174 Reasons assigned. ibid.
Examples of them in Old Testament-Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Writers. p.
174, 175 Objections answered. p. 174, 175

W.
Weakness.
All weaknesses not Covenant-breaches. p. 294
Will Worship.
Infant Baptism, no will worship. p. 437, etc*
Work.
Of man's salvation begins in an habit, not act. p. 112
Works.
In what manner called for in the Covenant of Grace. p. 146
Wrath.
Covenant Interest without coming up to the terms of the Covenant, delivers
not from wrath. p. 315, 316

A Table of those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, briefly
illustrated, or largely vindicated in this Treatise.
Genesis. CHap. Verse Page. 1. 28. 101. 2. 17. 9, 100. 3. 17. 37. 9. 9, 10. 36.
27. 237, 204. 17. 1. 2. 7. 43, 422. 8. 301. 9. 423 7, 9, 10. 422. 301, 297. 23.
15, 16. 3. 27. 34. 4. 48. 14. 186. Exodus. 12. 48. 209. 13. 14, 15. 228. 19.
25. 213. 20. 18. 213. 21. 2. 2. 24. 6, 8. 12. 7, 8. 206. 34. 7. 122. 30, 33.
214. Leviticus. 1. 4. 186. 8. 10. 187. 24. 14. 186. 25. 39, etc. 405. Numbers.
6. 22, 23. 397. 20. 12. 78. Deuteronomy. 4. 1. 216. 13. 30, 2110, etc. 5. 1, 2.
15. 33. 216. 6. 4. 232. 24, 25. 216. 7. 7, 8. 343. 9. 26, 27. 303. 10. 16. 228.
12. 5. 68. 24. 16. 469. 26. 17, 18. 11, 15, 210. 18, 19. 7. 29. 1, 2, 3, etc.
230, 231. 1, 4. 166. 10, 11. 15. 30. 6. 107, 2116. 16. 216. 33. 10. 176. 34. 9.
186. 1 Samuel. 8. 15. 17. 11. 12. 3. 19. 20. 174. 2 Samuel. 1. ult. 83. 12. 8,
9. 13, 84, 85. 2 Kings. 6. 1. 174. 2 Chronicles. 34. 22. 175. Esther. 6. 13. 7.
Job. 4. 18. 91. 5. 23. 2. 37. Psalms. 2. 8. 237. 4. 8. 7. 16. 35, etc. 26. 45.
26. 24. 5. 48. 44. 17. 152. 50. 1. 15, 294. 16, 17. 141. 72. 11. 238. 74. 7, 8.
442. 78. 8, 10. 255. 34. 234. 34, etc. 159. Chap. Verse Page. 79. 12. 48.
Psalms. 86. 9. 238. 94. 19. 7. 105. 12, 13. 48. 106. 35, 36. 453. 110. 3. 131.
119. 6. 159. 12. 218. Proverbes. 3. 11, 12. 78. 5. 12. 167. 20. 2. 217.
Canticles. 1. 4. 105. Isaiah. 2. 3. 54. 4. 1. 25. 24. 1, 2, 3, etc. 253, 254.
26. 12. 145. 42. 6, 7. 2. 53. 10, etc. 14, 112. 54. 5. 13. 55. 1, 2. 49. 5.
238. 7. 141. 58. 6, 7. 21. Jeremiah. 2. 5. 193. 14. 14. 181. 22. 15. 21. 15,
16. 109. 23. 13, 14. 175. 27. 15. 181. 31. 31, 32, 33. 20. 170. 32, 33. 259.
33. 2, 107. 34. 12. 2. 15, 16. 192. 18, etc. 253. Ezekiel. 13. 22. 189. 16. 20,
21. 406, 26. 35. 25, etc. 107. 39. 23. 81. 23, 24. 194. Hosea. 2. 18. 3. 19.
12. 19, 20. 247. 4. 14. 80. 6. 6. 172. Joel. 2. 28, 29. 168, 319. Amos. 3. 1,
2. 224. 7. 14, 15. 169. Habakkuk. 3. 17, 18. 135. Zephaniah. 3. 2. 142.
Zechariah. 1. 4. 446. 13. 12. 169. 5, 6. 180. Malachi. 1. 11. 162. 2. 6. 179.
Matthew. 3. 2. 136. 4. 12, 17. 136. 5. 20. 147. 48. 153, etc. 8. 11, 12. 305.
10. 42. 413. 11. 13. 75. 16. 5. 206. 19. 13. 186. 14. 393. 21. 23. 170. 31, 32.
432. 22. 21. 437. 28. 19. 235, 162. 412. 473. 20. 163. 22. 14. 239, 267. 20.
16. 239. Mark. 6. 5. 186. 12. 136. 11. 7. 170. 10. 14. 393. 12. 34. 114. 10.
16. 186. 9. 41. 413. Luke. 7. 5, 9. 441, 442. 29, 30. 433. 10. 16. 75. 14. 27,
33. 252. 18. 16. 393. 20. 21. 170. 24. 25. 416. 25, 26. 215. 44. 55. John. 3.
16. 34. 5. 39. 215. 46, 47. 211. 6. 44. 105. 7. 37. 128. 8. 51. 34. 10. 10.
100. Chap. Verse Page. 11. 40. 12. 26. 31. 12. Acts. 2. 16. 168. 38, 39. 426,
etc. 318. 39. 415. 3. 19. 190. 25. 412. 5. 31. 190. 7. 51, 52. 466. 8. 17. 186.
10. 43. 190. 47. 460. 11. 12. 95. 13. 2. 186. 14. 23. 183. 15. 17. 128. 18.
132. 16. 14. 139. 18. 7. 441. 20. 7. 415. 21. 136, 137. 29. 167. Romans. 2.
22. 439. 28. 37. 3. 1. 22. 19. 123. 20. 138. 21. 123. 21, 22. 218. 31. 56. 7.
1, 2. 58, 59. 9. 1, 2, 3. 394. 6, 7, 8. 298, 309, etc. 9, 10, 11, 12. 298. 25.
258. 10. 3. 117, 214. 11. throughout. 304. 1, 2. etc. 323. 6. 126. 28, 29. 334.
1 Corinthians. 2. 6. 155. 12. 198. 14. 166. 4. 7. 110. 5. 5, 6. 287. 11. 449.
7. 14. 349, etc. 403, 464. 9. 5, 6. 443. 9. 74. 13, 14. 164. 10. 3. 229. 17.
415. 26. 163. 11. 28. 414. 30. 79. 12. 12. 18. 28. 184. 14. 21. 54. 34. 56, 57.
15. 58. 143. 2 Corinthians. 3. 12, 13. 214. 6. 16. 258. 17. 140. 10. 7. 78. 13.
11. 153, 154. Galatians. 1. 12. 182. 2. 15. 305, 306. 3. 8. 18. 14. 127. 16.
16, 17. 18. 218. 19. 18. 17. 42, 48. 4. 29. 366. 30. 424. 5. 3. 149. 6. 137,
143. 19, 20. 141. 21. 143. 6. 6. 442. Ephesians. 1. 18. 166. 19. 105. 2. 1, 2.
104, 105. 6, 12. 94. 8. 113, 217. 10. 105, 145. 12. 161, 208, 408. 14. 55. 3.
17. 127, 128. 4. 11, 12. 162,167, 179. 5. 6. 142. 6. 4. 479. 6, 7. 157.
Philipians. 2. 6 14. 12. 144, 145. 13. 112, 131. 3. 5, 6. 116. Colossians. 1.
12. 196. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. 140. 16. 171. Thessalonians. 2. 12, 13. 120, 135. 5.
12, 13, 164. 11. 171. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 419 3. 14. 469. 1 Timothy. 1. 22.
185. 3. 6. 185. Chap. Verse Page. 10. 185. 4. 8. 135. 13, 15. 174. 14. 183. 16.
217. 5. 22. 187. 6. 11. 142. 17, etc. 200. 2 Timothy. 2. 15. 185. 19. 140 20.
240, 268. 4. 8 6. Titus. 1. 5. 183. 7, 8. 185. 16. 452. 2. 14. 257. 4. 4. 249.
Hebrews. 4. 2. 129, 135. 6. 1. 137. 18. 7. 8. 13. 268. 12. 48. 9. 16, 17. 39.
19, 20, 21. 206. 10. 1. 207. 4. 93, 214, 207. 26. 90. 29. 241, etc. 12. 5, 6,
7, 79. 13. 17. 164. James. 1. 4. 153, 154. 25. 218. 26. 109. 27. 22. 2. 8. 57.
21. 125. 1 Peter. 2. 9. 243, etc. 1. 15, 16. 74. 3. 18. 123. 21. 197. 2 Peter.
2. 22. 194. 1 John. 3. 18, 19. 201 21. 292. 21, 22. 200. ^4. 198. Revelation.
3. 19. 79. 11. 15. 237 18. 4. 259. 21. 3. 258. 22. 12. 147.

FINIS.
Paul's last Farewell, OR A SERMON, PREACHED At the Funeral of that Godly and
Learned Minister of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. THOMAS BLAKE.

By Anthony Burgess, Pastor of the Church at Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

With a Funeral ORATION made at Mr. Blakes death by Samuel Shaw, then
Schoolmaster of the Free School at Tamworth.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against S. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. 1658.

To the Reader.
READER,
THat I might satisfy the desire of some worthy Friends, I do here present
unto thee a Sermon with very little alteration) preached at the Funeral of
that Godly and Learned Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Blake, now with God: Being
the rather induced thereunto, because I know the memory of his Name, will be
very grateful and welcome to such who were acquainted with him. How sadly his
death was laid to heart, the deportment of many at that time did abundantly
manifest, and Although I cannot speak the same which Nazianzen affirms
concerning the Funeral solemnities of Basil, how that many thousands were there

(...) valedictory Sermon, we know not whether the matter, or the affection in
the delivering of it, be more admirable: It Is milk that comes hot from the
breast; excellent matter, without hearty affections, is like a Messenger
without feet, and a Bird without wings. I shall not make a Sermon upon his
Sermon, only in the general; by that discourse we have a description of a
Pastor and Officer in the Church, in Idea and in subjecto: In Idea, or in the
Thesi, there the Apostle describes such by their name and titles, they are
Overseers and Elders, v. 17. from the efficient cause the Holy Ghost has made
them so, from the relation they are in: The People are their Flock, and they
are Gods Church. And lastly, from the dignity and high thoughts put upon them
by Christ, they were purchased with his own blood, shall we think our labor,
our pains, our sweat, too much, when Christ thought not his blood too much?

To enter upon the Controversy who these Elders and Overseers were, is
repugnant to the occasion at this time: Then you have this office in subjecto,
in Hypothesi; in the practice of it, you have the rule of a Pastor, and the
example of a Ruler, and that is in Paul himself: O the zeal, watchfulness, the
diligence, the courage, the purity of aim and ends, which he professes in his
Ministerial discharge! not that he speaks these for ostentation, but
imitation; for he would not have said thus much of himself, says Grotius on
the place, but that hereby he would leave a pattern or form of life to all
successors; Insomuch, that no Minister reading Paul's expressions of himself in
this place, but may cry out, O me! a clod of earth to such a Star, Ice to such
a Fire, a worm to such an Angel! Though he were a Paul, as some think his name
denotes, little in stature of his body, yet he was a Giant in Gifts and
Graces, so that Papists themselves cannot but give the pre-eminence to Paul
above Peter, in respect of Doctrine and Ministerial abilities: He was the
earthly Angel, the Cor Christi, the Tuba Evangelii, as the Ancients call him;
yet I am not of Amyraldus his mind, consider. in cap. 7. ad Romans who denying
the Interpretation of the seventh of the Romans, to be understood personally of
Paul, thinking this would be injurious to the Grace of God sanctifying of him,
and making him so eminent a Servant in his Church: He affirms, that if God
pleased so to adorn Paul with the gifts of the Spirit, that he should in this
life arrive at that fullness and perfection of holiness, which other Believers
obtain no where but in Heaven, that thereby he might be propounded as a perfect
example to all Christians, and his Ministry be more happily efficacious; here
was not (says he) any thing to be blameworthy: But though we grant Paul to
have an elder Brothers portion in the Graces and Gifts of Christ, so that if no
Minister could be saved, unless he were a Paul, woe be to us all; yet that Paul
was not above the combat of the flesh and spirit within him, appears partly
in that careful keeping down of his body, 1 Cor. 9. 27. lest sin should
prevail; as also in those buffetings of Satan which he was exercised with, that
he might not be lifted up above measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Well, however it be, the
Apostle having both by rule and example, as you heard described what a Minister
or Pastor is to be, we have the consequent of this in my Text: When he had thus
spoken, thus of himself, and thus of a Gospel-Minister, he kneeled down and
prayed.

There are two actions of the body mentioned in Prayer, which denote that
excellent deportment that should be at that time in the soul; kneeling of the
body, that denotes self-humiliation; lifting up the hands, that implies faith
and confidence: Thus descendendo ascenditur, how hardly do the people of God
keep these two Graces cooperating together, but either their Humiliation
abateth their Faith, or their Faith hinders their Humiliation; both these
together are the Calidum and the Humidum, which maintain the life of holy
Duties; he Prayed as well as kneeled, for that is the only key to open Heaven,
that is David's Harp, to allay all those unruly affections that are apt to
disturb us.

Lastly, here is the effect of all upon the Auditors, which is expressed,
First, In their passion of weeping, with the aggravation. 1. They wept sore. 2.
Their great love, They fell on Paul's neck and kissed him. 3. The motive of all
this affectionate carriage, That which did open these Floodgates, it was
because they should see his face no more; they should for ever lose him, enjoy
no more of his Ministerial Labors and diligence: now this is recorded by the
Evangelist, as a commendation; It was a spiritual, not a natural weeping; It
was not like weeping for a dead Father, or a dead Wife, but for a dead Pastor,
by whose spiritual labors their souls had made great proficiency; I shall
from these words observe two doctrines suitable to the two considerable parts
of this auditory, the one seasonable for the Ministers of the Gospel here
present, The other opportune for the Congregation of Tamworth, now bereaved of
a faithful Pastor, whom I may see mourning and weeping, and that most of all,
because you shall see his face no more, you shall not behold him in this place
again, you shall not hear his voice from hence again. The first Observation is
grounded upon these words, when he had thus spoken, This about the duty of a
Minister, This about his Holy, Godly, and exemplary conversation; From whence
observe,

That a faithful discharge of the ministerial Office does bring unspeakable
comfort to such as can upon just grounds assume this to themselves; From this
faithfulness we see often Paul receiving a great deal of comfort. 2 Timothy 4. 6,
7, 8. The time of his departure was at hand; does not this then make him
afraid? how shall he give an account concerning the improvement of his talents?
No, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc. We have the
like glorious profession made by this holy Apostle, These. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. which
is an excellent Copy for every Minister to write after, to live and breathe
from thence; and in this he is so clear, that he says, Ye are witnesses, and
God also, how holily, justly and unblameably, we have behaved our selves
amongst those that believe. But yet let none think that Paul does thus magnify
inherent grace, to exclude imputed grace, for 1 Cor. 4. 4. Though he says, he
knows nothing by himself, yet he concludes, I am not thereby justified, but
he that judges me is the Lord, he knew more evil in Paul, then Paul him self
could do, and certainly, so great is this ministerial work, that Paul himself
cried out, Who is sufficient for these things? Chrysostom has very
discouraging passages, as if few Ministers could be saved, but his meaning must
be, because few are careful, zealous, and diligent; Otherwise such as
Chrysostom himself, that is said to fear nothing but sin, and those that by
their Doctrine and life, turn many from iniquities, shall have more then
ordinary glory in heaven; To amplify this, I shall in some particulars or
Characters describe how, or when the Ministry is faithfully discharged, what
is ingredient thereunto, or constituent thereof; And first there is required an
inward experimental savory work of grace upon the Ministers own heart, that
thereby he may more affectionately and cordially deal with others; when we know
the terror of the Lord, and the love of Christ experimentally, this makes us
able in the work of the Ministry, 2 Cor. 5. 11. I do not say that the Office
of a Minister is null, if he be not a regenerate man, or as if he were no
Minister, or might not be useful in the Church of God, but as to himself, he
cannot faithfully discharge this Office, so as to obtain a crown of glory
hereafter, unless he be thus qualified; There is Theologia ratiocinativa and
experimentalis, as Gerson speaks. A man may know things, as Aquinas says,
per modum cognitionis, or, per modum inclinationis; now it is this experimental
Divinity, that works besides Knowledge an inclination and propensitie to the
thing known, that makes us able to discharge this duty; To Preach of
Regeneration, of Faith, when a man has no savory understanding of these
things, is to talk of the sweetness of honey, when we never tasted it, or of
the excellency of such a Country, which we never were in, but know it by Mapps
only. If thou know the truths of God, but by Books, by Authors only, and
thy own heart feels not the power of these things, Thou art but as the
Conduit, that lets out wine or refreshing water to others, but thou thy self
tastest not of it, or like the hand that directs the Passenger, but thou thy
self stand still.

2. To a faithful discharge, there is required a sound knowledge, judgment
and skill in divine things; hence they are called lights, guides, and
Shepherds, they are required to be (...) 1 Timothy 3. 2. apt to teach, to reprove
in all Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4. 2. It is not enough to cry out of Heresies or of
sins, unless we rebuke with doctrine; The least Knowledge that Casuists
condescend unto in a Minister is, that he must be learned, supra vulgus
fidelium: Is he a fit Minister that can only Preach and pray by a prescript,
or form from another? He is not a fit Physician, or a fit Lawyer, that should
do so in his way; Ministers therefore should take that exhortation, which we
see Paul gave even to Timothy, though so well accomplished. 1 Timothy 4. 15.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear, yea, verse. 13. Till I come, give attendance to reading. The
circumstance of time is to be observed, for though Paul was to come shortly to
him, yet that little time he was absent from Paul, must be improved in reading
Gods Word. Be thou ascribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, that can
bring out of thy treasure, old and new; be a Fountain, not a Cestern, that will
quickly be dry; Cajetan Summula, Tit. Doctoratus, makes it a mortal sin to
approve any for a Doctor in Divinity, who is notably insufficient, because
hereby he is testified to be a Physician of souls, when yet through his
ignorance, may be the ruin of many; I dare not avouch that of Luther, who said
it is a German Proverb, that young Divines fill Hell, only it is a good
warning, that such be diligent in studying, that God may bless them with all
knowledge and understanding, first in the Scripture, and then in all other
parts of Divinity, whether controversall, positive or practical, especially
add to thy Ministerial knowledge these two things; First a firm faith, for to
read and to know much, but not to digest it, makes us scepticall; Have faith,
not reason or opinion in religious things, Calvin says in Comment. 2. Epist.
ad Corin. that the Ministers of of God, who go up into the Pulpit in the name
of Christ, to preach his Word, ought to have such firmness of Faith in them,
that they are assured that their Doctrine can no more be overthrown, then God
himself; now truly, this faith is much to be commended to us, we may have much
learning, much reading, but little Faith, be very scepticall, and deal in
Divinity as we use to do in Philosophy, videtur quod sic, videtur quod non,
Great Scholars are not always great believers, The want of this makes a man
of a Socinian faith, an Arminian faith, a Popish faith, as often as any
plausible Argument, or carnal Interest interposeth.

2. With this knowledge labor much after Casuisticall Divinity, whereby you
may be able to direct the tempted in cases of Conscience, To guide the
afflicted in soul, what they are to do; Indeed the Papists have a deal of
Casuisticall divinity in large voluminous discourses, but it is for the most
part calculated according to their meridians of superstitious usages and
Customs, but it is pity that among us Protestants, our controversall Books
are far more then our casuisticall, yet remember the Scripture calls it,
the tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50. 4. To know how to speak a word in season to
him that is weary; The wounds of Conscience are the most tender, and therefore
require a Spiritual skillful Physician. The Consciences of men are the subject
matter of your Office, and therefore look after that Ars Cordis, which is
indeed a liberal art that will set us free.

3. He that will faithfully discharge the Office of his Ministry, must regard
the end of it, the finis operis, and finis operantis, the finis ministerii, and
ministri, must be all one: The end of the Ministry is to exalt God and Christ,
to dethrone Satan, to bring many out of their sins unto the obedience of the
Gospel: Now if a man aim at other things in his Ministry then this he can never
comfortably discharge it: To be a Minister for earthly profits, for ambition
and vain glory, these will be like the gravel, that will presently stop the
Ship in its passage; and truly herein we may much lament our entrance in to
this work, how many set upon it as a profession to live upon, by that they hope
to satisfy their needs, but if this end and motive do still reign in thee, it
will be like a millstone about thy neck; outward maintenance may be a secondary
end, but not the principal; still then a we thy soul with the end of thy
office, that all other knowledge is exercised about the body, or men's Estates,
or the nature of things; but thine is Theology, De Deo, a Deo, in Deum, its
concerning God objectively, its from God effectively, its to God finally.

4. He that will faithfully discharge this Office of the Ministry, must as Paul
professes, 2 Cor. 1. 12. have his conversation with all godly simplicity and
sincerity: He is to carry on his work in Scripture-ways, avoiding those two
Rocks, Media violentiae, and Media fraudulentiae; A man of a crafty
multiplicity of Spirit, will turn into any shape dispute for any thing a
lawful: This the Jesuit said to one (for so I understand it) who doubted about
something he was to do, whether lawful or no, Aude (says he) and nos
efficiemus probabile, Jansen. St. August. lib. proaem. page 9. Be daring to do
it, and we will make it probable; now this simplicity of Spirit in Ministerial
employment, is greatly seen in an obediential dependence upon the word of God,
whether in matter of Duty, or of Faith: What is it that makes so many learned
Men embrace Errors after Errors, but because they leave Faith, and attend to
reason? They think we come to be Christians by Disputations and scientifical
Demonstrations; as we come to be Philosophers, not by a single and plain
captivating of our understandings to the scripture, whereas it is Christian
Faith, not Christian reason: It is said to be Nazianzens Emblem, Theologia
nostra est Pythagorica, by this simplicity of Spirit, a man shall overcome
those Temptations, which are usually in Scholars to bring, inaudita and invisa,
strange and unheard things unto our People; especially let the Ministers of the
Gospel be so guided by simplicity of Spirit, that they may avoid these three
Rocks.

First, that while they avoid a Popish blind obedience to men, examining
things by Scripture, they therefore do not make all things uncertain: That of
Durand is true, whosoever forsakes reason because of humane Authority, incidit
in insipientiam bestialem, makes himself like a Beast; yet let not this
liberty be abused to licentiousness, to believe nothing, to despise all those
Ministerial helps which God has vouchsafed to the Church, because he is to try
all things; though he must try, yet he must not be always trying, but hold fast
that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. This liberty and particular Judgment of
discerning, which God allows every man, is not to be opposed to that decisive
Ministerial Judgment, which God has appointed in his Church.

Secondly, under pretense of a more moderate and impartial handling of things,
as not being addicted unto parties, take heed thou do not make a party of thy
self, as the Sect of Philosophers, called (...), Diogen, Laert. in Proent.
pretending they would be of no Sect, but choose the best Art of all; thus they
made a Sect, while they condemned all.

Lastly, Take heed of being deceived under the pretense that thou do not
bring in any new matter, but new words, or thou do digest things into a
better method; for by this means, men leaving that simplicity and
Scripture-dependance they once had, have corrupted their Ministerial Office,
instead of a faithful discharge of it.

Fifthly, To a faithful discharge of this dreadful Office, there is required an
excellent compound of many choice Graces, insomuch that a Ministers
qualification, is like that Ointment that was to be made for the Priest only:
There must be love and compassion to Peoples Souls, which was abundantly
discovered in our Savior himself: Paul compares himself, sometimes to a
Father, sometimes to a Mother, sometimes to a Nurse, because of this
affectionate desire in him: There must be Zeal, Fortitude, and Courage, the
spirit of love and of power also; he is not a Minister, that is not ad mill
mortes paratus, said Chrysostom; as a good Soldier endure hardship, says
Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2. 3. There must be Prudence and Wisdom, else Love and
Power will make us like Sampson, without eyes; there must be salt in the
Sacrifice, as well as fire; Oportet Pastor sit totus oculus, a Pastor must be
an Argus, full of eyes.

Again, there must be an Heavemly heart, contemning the world and all earthly
advantages: The eye that is to see for others must not have dust falling into
it: Austin makes an Heretic to have some carnal profit or emolument that is
attractive of him: There must be a desire to please God, and not men, as Paul
says, Gal. 1. for so a man cannot be a servant of Christ: This fear to
displease men, whereby we do not reprove sin so Zealously, so Cordially and
Faithfully as we should, has eclipsed the comfort of some godly Ministers at
their death. It is too true that the Wise man says, The fear of a man is his
snare, Prove. 29. 25. The Camelion for fear, says Aristotle, turns into the
likeness of every object it meets with.

These are the special qualifications of a Godly Minister, whereby he will be
able to say with Paul, I have fought a good fight. 1 Timothy 4. 7. Yea, with
CHRIST, I have finished the work thou gave me to do. John 17. 3. To all
which must be added diligence and labor, all the names, they have denote
labor more then glory, office more then dignity; now in all these things
there is one particular, which does much quicken, and that is temptation, one
of those three things, Luther said, made a Divine; we are not to desire
temptations, but God for the most part does prepare those Ministers, whom he
intends to be serviceable, by such exercises; This is the sawing, and the
polishing of the stone, by this he is brought into the deep waters, and sees
the wonderful works of God, by this he is able to understand the depths of
Satan, and by this he is adapted to be a most special Instrument to comfort
and refresh others, when they shall see theirs is not a singular condition,
they must not think none are tempted like them, for they shall find that even
Paul's have had the buffetings of Satan, and that by these soul temptations
they have learned more then all Books or authors could teach them. And thus I
leave the first Doctrine, and proceed to the second, which is.

That a Godly People cannot but affectionately mourn under the loss of their
faithful Ministers. Doct. 2.


You see here what these Ephesians did, with what affection they were moved,
because they should never see Paul's face more; Grace does not lie in
extinguishing, but regulating affections; Christ wept, and they argued from
thence, behold how he loved him, Joh. 11. 35, 36. So that Nazianzens
commendation of his Mother Nonna, that she never wept under the many troubles
she underwent, submitting all to Gods hand, was rather Stoicisme, then
Christianity; It is said of Ambrose, when he heard of the death of any good
Minister, he could not forbear weeping; how then can a people forbear, when
their own Minister, their own Pastor is taken away, should not the Congregation
be a valley of tears, or a place of mourners; now there are these grounds for
it, 1. Because of that experimental soul-good, and spiritual advantage the
Godly have reapt thereby; Oh! when thou shall remember what quicknings, what
meltings, what warning of heart thou have had, this will cause grief to think
they are gone. Carnal natural men never are affected with the loss of a
Minister, they never got any good by their Preaching; it was no converting
Ministry, no inlightning, no comforting Ministry to them, and therefore the
loss is no more troublesome.

2. They must needs mourn, because they have just cause to fear, their sins
have caused God to deprive them of such helps; your unthankfulness, your
contempt, and low thoughts of the means of grace, your unprofitableness and
negligence, may make you mourn, for if God upon the abuse of natural
Creatures, will take away his Wine, his Bread, his flax, will he not much more
remove the candlestick, for unfruitfulness under spiritual mercies; mourn
then, lest thy sins, thy unfaithfulness, thy deadness and dullness of heart
have provoked God to take such guides away; yea in the third place, may not
some mourn, who by their Disobedience, and unwillingnesse to submit to Christ's
yoke, and opposition to his way, have so filled the Ministers heart with grief
and sadness, as thereby to hasten his death, making his life the more
uncomfortable, and causing him to mourn in secret for your stubbornness and
disobedience; Thus your sins, not only meritoriously, but efficiently may
concur to the removing of him by death; Consider that place. Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that rule over you, etc. that they may give their account with joy,
and not with grief; some make this particular to relate to the former, that
they may watch over your souls with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. A grieved Minister, a discouraged Minister cannot do his
duty, so powerfully, it will be unprofitable unto you, you will find it in his
study, in his sermons; A dull people are apt to make a dull Minister.

4. There is cause to mourn, because of the excellency of the relation between
a Pastor and a People, in some respects, it is above all natural relations.
They are spiritual Fathers, your souls receive good by them; They are
Isntrumental to bring you unto eternal glory, and therefore there is more
cause of Mourning in this respect, then when God breaks natural relations,
no Father or Mother, or friend happily has done that for thee which his
Ministry has done.

5. There is cause to mourn, because it is a sign of Gods anger and displeasure
to a people, you are not so much to look upon it; as the loss of a man, as a
token of Gods anger to the congregation; The righteous man perishes, and none
lays it to heart. Isaiah. 57. 1. Who knows what soul-Judgements, what
bodily Judgments may hereafter come upon you, and therefore it is for a people
to be sensible, and mourn, when the desire of your eyes, so I may call the
Minister (as well as the Wife) is taken away. The desire of your eyes, you long
to see him in the Pulpit again, and the desire of your ears, you long to hear
him again.

6. There is cause to Mourn, because of the sad consequents that many times
falls upon the death of a faithful Pastor; sometimes the learning and
soundness of a Minister, keeps a People from licentious errors, and corrupt
opinions; His Gravitie and Piety has a special influence upon many, but upon
his removal, then the weeds of a man's heart grows up: After my departure,
says Paul, Wolves will arise from among your selves, Acts 20. 29. Paul's
presence was a great means to hinder them.

2. What good Foundation is laid in Faith, what Godly Order may be begun? there
is danger, that all these will die, when a Faithful Minister dies: I wonder
that you are so soon removed, says Paul, Gal. 1. Alas! that which the
Ministers of God have with many years diligence, many Prayers, and much
opposition brought about, when the Minister is dead, may quickly be destroyed,
so that we may wonder, how such a Town, such a place should be overrun with
Briars and Thorns immediately.

3. Another sad consequent is sometimes, divisions and breaches among the
People, while a Godly Minister is alive, he is like a Corner Stone, that
uniteth both sides of the Wall together, but when that falls, then the wall
falls with it. Then one is for this Minister, and another for that, then one
likes this, and another the contrary, and thus seeds of contention and
division are sown, which may come up too fast, hence the presence of a Godly,
Grave, Wise Pastor is very necessary, it is the Spiritual defense of a People,
which made him cry out, when the Prophet was taken, My father, my Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, 2 Kings 13. 14. And now we come
from the Doctrinal part to the practical; And although my custom in such
Sermons, is not to discourse about the Dead, they being like Anatomy Lectures,
for the good of the living, yet because we are celebrating the Funerals of a
Learned and Godly Brother, who by his Office, was in public station in the
Church of God; I shall briefly speak to some few of those Ministerial
qualifications, that were in him mentioned in the Doctrine, not imitating
Nazianzen, who in his Funeral Orations of his Father, as also Athanasius,
Basilius and others industriously gathers up every thing that may make to
their praise, if not hyperbolically exceeding sometimes; but I shall rather
come short of what might be spoken. And first, his Doctrinall abilities, and
parts in controvsrsall points, are sufficiently known by the Books he has
written: those Children will resemble the Father, though he left no bodily
ones. It is true, there were some particular opinions and contests he was
fallen into with other Learned men, on whose side the truth did stand, you will
not judge it meet for me to interpose, only because of the difference that is
sometimes in Judgment between Godly men, we see some by profaneness, gladly
have it in their mouths, saying, what heed is to be given to these Ministers,
there are not two of a mind; They write against one another, they have Book
against Book, and then some good people they are offended; what shall we do,
say they, we look upon both as Godly, and yet they cannot agree; because I say,
of this offense, I shall speak a little to it. First, that this difference
amongst our selves, is an old objection, The Pagans and the Jews urged it
against Christianity, whose Arguments Clemens Alexandrinus answered, retorting
upon them the same divisions; the Philosophers likewise objected this to the
Christians, when that Synod was gathered together at Nice, as the Centuriators
inform us; Though Augustine (lib. de vera religione) brandeth them for this,
that the Heathens, though they had diverse schools, yet they had Commune
Templum, a Common temple, which argued, they worshipped their Gods more out of
Custom, then because of their opinion.

2. We are to know, that all the Godly do know only in part, perfection in
knowledge, and unity is reserved for heaven; there will be no parties, no
dividing opinions, there will be no different Forms, and ways of worshipping
of God in that place, so that although this difference amongst the Godly be as
Calvin said to Melanctlhon, pessimi exempli, of a very bad example, yet if we
consider, that the measure of Light and grace in this world is imperfect, then
we may not wonder at such breaches; had not Paul and Barnabas a Paroxisme, a
sharp sit, for to understand the Word in a good sense, as some would, because
the Word is used so. Heb. 10. 24. is very improbable. Austin and Hierome,
Chrysostom and Epiphanius had great contests.

3. The differences of Godly Ministers are not in fundamentals; They all build
gold and precious stones, though some may add hay and stubble

Lastly, a brotherly and amicable disquisition into truths controversed, not
fundamental, but between Godly men, though different in Judgments, is very
lawful and useful, indeed if this be done with pride, passion, scornful and
disdainful words, despising the gifts of others, This is not a dead fly, but a
dead toad in the box of ointment, that makes the wise Reader think, men do
regard opinions, not so much as they are Gods Truths, but as they are their
opinions, wherein they must have glory; But return we to our Learned Brother;
as God had given him such Doctrinall Abilities, so also was he Prudent and
Wise, and wise to direct such as were troubled in their mind, and perplexed
about what they were to do; It is true, it pleased God before his sickness to
exercise him with some sad and black thoughts, sometimes tending to the great
dejection and discouragement of his soul, but by this we see, that comfort is
not a flower growing in our Garden, that we can pluck up when we will, God is
the God of Comfort only, he gives it when he pleases, and he takes it away
again as he pleases. Christ had an Angel to comfort him in his Agonies, so
that all, both Ministers and People, are to take Gospel-Consolations, as
mercies from heaven, not as the work of our hands.

In the next place, the diligence, constancy and faithful Preaching of your
Godly Pastor is not unknown; These walls, these seats can sufficiently bear
witness thereunto; Though you a great People, and he declining in age, yet a
laborious Preacher to you, and a great Student in private: The Catechizing also
of the younger sort of people, discovered his vigilance, and it was the earnest
desire (as he would have you informed) and request of your dying Pastor, that
the younger Persons of this place would readily and willingly submit to that
order; Besides all this, his writing for the public good of the Church, still
demonstrated his faithfulness and zeal herein; when the Persecutor had cut out
Cyprians tongue, and then banished him, yet he made a supply by his Pen; but
our Learned Brother was willing both by Tongue and Pen to edify the Church of
God, so that both his opuscula, and his opera will praise him in the gates, His
tenderness of Spirit likewise was exceeding much; and as in soft wood, worms
sometimes breed to weaken it, so did (as you heard) discouragements sometimes
lie upon his soul, but the Lord did quickly blow over the clouds, and as I am
informed, his expression was, That he dyed with full satisfaction of Spirit,
and communion with God.

Lastly, you are not ignorant of the way he took about the Sacrament, that he
was not for the promiscuous Admission of all thereunto; and therefore when a
late Writer, Mr. Humphreys, would have gathered such conclusions from his
principles, he was willing publicly to vindicate himself, and to show his
dissent herein; All this, though comparatively little, I have spoken, not to
exalt man, for what have we, that we have not received, but to bless God, and
magnify him, who gives such gifts to men; he that praises the gifts and
graces of any, thereby extolleth God; as he that commends a Picture,
magnifieth the Artificer that made it; and thus we take our dear and last
farewell of him, and come to you, sheep left without a shepherd, to you on the
Sea without a Pilate; To you Orphans, without a Spiritual Father; and first
you see what cause there is for our constant expectation and preparation for
death; Gods own Ministers and servants must dye, God needs no man's labors or
parts, Moses, Joshua, Paul, Peter must die, sola mors non habet fortasse, said
Austin, only Death has no may be; It may be thou may be rich, it may be
thou may thrive in thy trading, it may be thou may have comfort in thy
Children and friends, but thy death has no may be; Oh! let not the world, let
not your Shops, let not trading take off your hearts from this Meditation, but
think you hear God speaking to you, set not your house, but your souls in
order, for thou must die.

And secondly, here is some comfort, though there be cause of much sorrow, that
though your Faithful Pastor he dead, yet the chief Pastor of your souls is
not; He that sets Pastors and Teachers in the Church, he that sends forth
laborers into his harvest, he lives for ever; as one in the Ecclesiastical
History, when news was brought him that his father was dead, Desine
blasphemias loqui (says he) pater enim meus immortalis est, cease to speak
blasphemy, for my Father is immortal; Thus let this honey fall into your gall,
this Wine into your water, The great and Chief Shepherd of your souls is not
dead.

Lastly, now the will of God is done, concerning our deceased Brother, your
duty is to be much in Prayer to God, that there may be a Joshua after Moses,
That God would join your hearts together as one man, to seek out a Pastor for
you, which shall feed you according to his holy will; The Lord has made a
great breach upon you, be sensible of it, and seriously consider how all your
soulcomforts and advantages are bound up in this matter; Ministers are compared
to the Sun, and Salt, nihil sole and sale ut^lius; can you be without the Sun
in the heavens? without bread for your body, so neither without this bread of
life for your souls, or without this light to guide you in the wilderness of
this World, to eternal happiness.

FINIS.
A Funeral Oration at the Death of the most desired Mr. Blake. By Mr. Samuel
Shaw, then Schoolmaster of the Free School at Tamworth.
WIth a face sadder then usual, with an heart sadder then my face, but upon an
occasion sadder then them both, I (who was deputed to this work by him to whom
I now perform it) am here, rather to receive the expressions of your sorrow,
then tell you the resentments of mine own. Being sensible of my stupefaction,
(caused, not through the want of my affections, but the want of their object) I
desire out of a pious policy, to supply my dryness, by taking your Tears, and
putting them into my pump, so hoping to revive mine own, which yet I judge are
rather drowned then dried up. And yet when I have done this, I know that all my
expressions will fall short of the greatness of my grief, as much as my grief
does of the greatness of its cause. This numerous Company of Pious groaners,
these so many blacks, not made, but occasioned to be Mourners (badges of
profession becoming badges of that grief, which for its greatness can be
equaled by nothing but their former happiness which they once enjoyed) the
universal gloommess of this day, represents to me rather the funeral of a
Town, then a man, and the fall of a Church, rather then a single pillar: and
rather induces me to think that ye are come to quench the unmercifull heat of a
fever, then only to bedew that which was the subject of one. But if it may be,
hold a little, and suffer your eyes a while to a new employment, even to see
where you are, what you are doing, whose Obsequies you are solemnizing with so
great devotion, and take the dimensions of your loss, if it be capable of any:
which indeed is so great, that they only can know it, who knew not him, and
they only can feel, who never enjoy^d him; I speak not to aggravate your loss,
but the sense of it, as for the cause of it, it admits of no addition. Whilst
he lived, it was as impossible for him not to love you, as it was for you
ad^quately to return his love: His care answered his love; and if his success
had answered his care, we might happily have this day wanted an object of so
great sorrow, in enjoying him. His writing* were not read without satisfaction:
His Sermons were never heard without an approving silence, seldom without a
following advantage. His kindness toward you could ^ot be considered without
love, his awful gravity, and secretly-commanding presence, without reverence:
Nor his conversation, without imitation. To see him live, was a provocation to
a godly life; to see him dying, might have made any one aweary of living* When
God restrains him from this place (which was always happy in his company but
now) he made his chamber a Church, and his bed a Pulpit, in which (in my
hearing) he offered many a hearty prayer for you: And his death made him
mindful of you, whose life made you unmindfull of him, And I did not see that
any thing made him so backward to resign up his ^ure soul to God, as his
unparalleled care for you, and your proficiency in godliness, which seemed as
little to him, in comparison of what he desired, as it does great to others in
comparison of what they find; so that I sat by him, and I only, when with as
great affluency of Tears, as words, he prayed, Lord (with some ingeminations)
charge not on me the ignorance of this people. And indeed your ignorance had
not been so remarkable, had not his Knowledge, and desire still to communicate
it been so. With what a grace and majesty have you heard him Preaching, who is
now (alas) confined to a worser wood. Could you ever resist the power by which
he spoke; or find in your hearts to contradict any thing that ever he said, but
when on his sickbed he said, I am a dying man? Ah! who would not there have
contradicted him, if they should not have contradicted Gods Decree! His
Wisdom, Justice, and Tenderness were such predomin^nt Graces in him, that it
is as much my inability to describe them, as my unhappiness not to im^tate
them: And truly, to think to express them, were infinitely to injure their
greatness. It is a sad thing that so many resplendent graces should never be so
truly, nor so fully discovered, as by the loss of him that had them; and that
we should not so justly consider that he had them, till we have not them. But
yet your loss might be the better borne, if ye were sure it had nothing of a
Judgment in it. But I fear that within a short time, it will appear as truly
that God has taken him away in anger, as now it appears sadly that he has
taken him away: And that it is not only a misery that must be repayred^y a
change of Pastors, but also a sin which must be re^^est by the change of your
lives: For, if your u^worthinesse have driven your teacher is to a corner, and
you sinned him into his grave; your Repentance and Humiliation must raise
another out of his ashes. So great, so saa, so general is this loss, that I
am ready to excuse my self, and think it more reason then passion, if in my
solitary mournings, and retired complaints, I cry out, My Father, my Father,
the horsemen of England, and the Chariot thereof. To tell you of his worth in
a measure proportionate to my experience, would require too long a discourse
from your Infant-Orator. And to tell you of your loss, I have said too much
already: which although it do not answer many of your expectations, yet I hope
may conduce to the affecting of you to an a^tention to him, whose eloquence can
represent your loss, and whose wisdom can teach you how to make the best use
of it.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line ult. for And read In. p. 2. l. 24. a Ruler, r. the Rule. p. 5. l.
16. for This r. Thus. l. 17. for This r. Thus. p. 12. l. 11. for (...). l. 13.
for Art r. out. p. 20. l. 28. dele and wise


