VIVE LA REPUBLIC.

THE ENGLISH IMPROVER IMPROVED or the SVRVEY OF HVSBANDRY SVRVEYED Discovering
the Improueableness of all Lands: Some to be under a double and Treble others
under a Five or Six Fould. And many under a Tenn fould, yea Some under a
Twenty-fould Improuement. By Wa: Blith^^ a lover of Ingenuity.



All clearly demonstrated from Principles of Reason, Ingenuity, and late but
most Real Experiences; and held forth at an Inconsiderable charge to the
Profits accrewing thereby, under Six Pieces of Improvement. 1 By Floting and
Watering such Land as lies capeable thereof. 2 By drayning Fen, Reducing Bog,
and Regaining Sea-lands. 3 By such Enclosures as prevents Depopulation, and
advances all Interests. 4 By Tillage of some Land lost for want of, and
Pasturing others destroyed with Plowing. 5 By a Discovery of all Soyles and
Composts with their nature and use. 6 By doubling the growth of Wood by a new
Plantation.


The Third Impression much Augmented. With an Additionall Discovery of the
several Tools, and Instruments in their Forms and Figures promised. With a
Second Part; Containing Six Newer Pieces of Improvement. 1 Our English
Husbandring Claver grass, and St. Foyn, as high as may be. 2 The facilitating
the charge and burden of the Plough, with diverse Figures thereof. 3 The
Planting Welde, Woad, and Madder, three rich commodities for Dyers. 4 The
Planting of Hops, Saffron and Liquorish, with their Advance. 5 The Planting of
Rape, Cole-seed, Hemp, and Flax, and the profit thereof. 6 The great Advance of
Land by diverse Orchards and Garden Fruits.
The Experimenting whereof makes good the Improvement promised.

Prove. 21. 5. The thoughts of the diligent bring abundance. A diligent man
shall stand before Kings. Eccl. 9. 10. All therefore that thy hand shall find
to do, do it with all thy power; for there is neither wisdom nor knowledge in
the grave whither thou go. London Printed for John Wright, at the King's Head
in the Old-Bayley. 1653.

To the Right Honorable the Lord General Cromwell, and the Right Honorable the
Lord President, and the rest of that most Honorable Society of the Council of
STATE.
Right Honorable,
AS a Man, or Christian, out of pure love to Mankind, I choose rather to cast my
self at Your Lordships Feet, and come under Your greatest Censure for this high
Presumption, than to omit so necessary a Duty and Discovery as the substance of
this discourse Imports; Therefore dare not conceal the least inconvenience
that may befall the Public, but take bolness to present my thoughts that Your
non-apprehending the Prejudices hindering Improvement, nor clearly your own
Capassities to remove them, and may be want of opportunity to consult about
these lesser things (though very great in themselves (the practice whereof
thoroughly promoted, might make the greater more easy) compared with our
weighty and present affairs, may in some measure be an accidental cause that
Improvements of our Lands go on no better, although materially the cause is in
our own sloth, Prejudice and ill Husbandry. And though I dare not present this
rude Treatise unto Your Honors, to crave so high Patronage, yet I shall
adventure these many most humble Representations of some Prejudices to
Improvements that remain founded by a Law; And of some other Obstacles, as
firmly rooted by Corruption, that without your Honors Power, and Wisdoms help
therein; the Improvements here tendered will be in great measure hindered.

To the removal whereof, if Your Honors shall see cause to give encouragement,
either by an Addition of such Laws as shall appear unto you wanting, or
Repealing such as hinder, I shall not question but men's spirits will be raised
to such Experimenting of the principles of Ingenuity, as that we may see this
Commonwealth soon raised to her utmost fruitfullness and greatest glory.

The particulars here are too many here to discourse at large; I shall
therefore take boldness to present some few with some brief reasons to evince
the same; and they are very great discouragements to the Ingenuous and Active
Prosecution of the Improvements of the Nation.

The first Prejudice is, That if a Tenant be at never so great pains or cost
for the improvement of his Land, he does thereby but occasion a greater Rack
upon himself, or else invests his Landlord into his cost and labor gratis, or
at best lies at his Landlords mercy for requital; which occasions a neglect
of all good Husbandry; to his own, the Land, the Landlord, and the
Commonwealths suffering. Now this I humbly conceive may be removed, if there
were a Law Inacted, by which every Landlord should be obliged, either to give
him reasonable allowance for his clear Improvement, or else suffer him or his
to enjoy it so much longer as till he has had a proportionable requital: As
in Flanders and else where, in hiring Leases upon Improvement, if the Farmer
Improve it to such a Rate above the present value, the Landlord gives either
so many years purchase for it, or allows him a part of it, or confirms more
time; of which the Tenant being secured, he would Act Ingenuity with violence
as upon his own, and draw forth the Earth to yield her utmost fruitfullness,
which once being wrought unto perfection, will easily be maintained and kept up
at the height of fruitfullness, which will be the Commonwealths great
advantage: Some Tenants have Advanced Land from Twenty pounds to Forty pounds
per an, and depending upon the Landlords favor have been wiped of all; and
many Farmers by this uncertainty have been impoverished and left under great
disgrace, which might as well have been advanced.

The second Prejudice is against that great Improvement by floating Lands,
which exposes the Improver to suit of Law for Turning a Watercourse, by
Millers or others, which are minded to molest the Improvement, although the
Improvement be ten fold greaer than the Prejudice can be, and the Advantage be
far more public than the others pretended loss can be, yet few dare adventure
upon the work, for fear of being sued or molested.

Many great Improvements have been, and are to this day hindered and ly dead
because the Miller cannot be compounded with at any rate; some I know, whose
Improvements might be Ten-fold and more, the Millers Prejudice little, if any
at all, because your exact husbands so clear all their boggy, low parts, and
some time by their large draines break through many springs and issuing waters,
that they carry a better stream unto the Miller than he had before, and his
Improvement shall be able to supply a great part of the Country with Hay and
Grass, where was before but little, and may be the Millars mill may be worth
five or six pound per an. few worth ten, that usually stand upon these waters,
and let him be damnified what ever he can, it is in no proportion to the Common
wealths loss to such an Improvement.

The third Prejudice is, where all men's Land lie intermixed in Common Fields or
Meddowes; The Ingenuous are disabled to the Improving theirs, because others
will not, neither sometimes can the Improvement be made upon any, unless upon
all jointly, or else upon an unsuppotable Charge or Burden. As also the not
cutting straight such watercourses, of such brooks and gutters that are
exceeding crooked, which some that would cannot, because of others interests
that will not, abundance of the best land in this Nation is hereby lost, and
wonderful Improvements hindered, the waters raised, the lands flouded, sheep
rotted, and cattle spoiled, all by this neglect.

The remedies to all the three aforesaid Prejudices, to resolve the greatest
advantage to the Commonwealth, and then command them either unto a loving
Conjunction in the Exchange and Improvement, or else disabling any one to
hinder another that is desirous of it, giving such recompense for any damage
he shall make, as shall be adjudged reasonable by indifferent men, or competent
Judges.

A Fourth is Unlimited Commons, or Commoning without stint, upon any Heath,
Moor, Forest, or other Common; This is a great Prejudice to many poor men,
both Cottiers and Land-Holders, who have not of their own to stock their
Commons, and so lose all, that have least need, and for whom those Commons were
chiefly intended: And also a great hindrance to all; for being without that,
every man lays on at random, and as many as they can get, and so Overstock the
same, that ordinarily they pine and starve their Goods therein; and once in
four or five years you shall observe such a Rot of Sheep, that all that the
Oppressor has gained by eating out his poor Neighbors all the other years, is
swept away in one, and so, little advantage redoundeth to any: So that many
thousand Acres of Land are as it were useless, which were all men limited
according to their Proportion of Land or Dwellings to which the Common is due,
the poor that could not stock theirs, might set them, and reap some benefit by
them: And were they easily stinted, their Commons might be as good as their own
Severals to every man that has an interest.

A Fifth Prejudice is, A Law wanting to compel all men to kill their Wonts or
Moales; the good Husband does, and the slothful man neglects it, and thereby
raises such a Magazine or Nursery, that they cannot be destroyed, but as fast
as one destroies them, the other nurseth a fresh spply to fill the Country: the
Prejudice is greater than can be reported.

The sixth Prejudice is the not compelling men to plant Wood where they do cut
down, then to set again a treble proportion or more to what they do destroy,
especially now so much of the gallant Wood of the Nation is exposed to sale: We
forget that it is a mighty pillar in the upholding this poor Island, and how
honorable a custom it is in other Nations, that look what Timber they cut down,
they must plant five or ten times as much in stead thereof: And that all men
might be compelled to plow their coarser, old mossy, rushy, bankie pasture
Lands, being now fittest for it and will be bettered by it, and suffers for
want of it, and the Country needs it, and none prejudiced: and for the best
land every man left to his own liberty.

A Seventh Prejudice is the want of a through searching of the Bowels of the
Earth, a business more fit to be undertaken by the Honorable Representation of
the whole Commonwealth, than by any particular man; Whence are all our Mines
of Lead, Tin, Iron, Coals, and Silver Mines in Wales, were they not once
hid, and as uncertain as we are now certain of them? and what should hinder but
that in many places else the like may be discovered? as suppose Coal in
Northampton, Buckingham, and Oxf. Sh. what a great benefit to those Countries
would it be? Nay, if some sorts of Stone could be but found out in some other
parts, what might it arise unto? Nay, say that either Marl, Chalk, or Lime, or
some other fat Earth could be found in some other parts where they are wanting,
how much would it enrich those parts? And who can say but Silver may as well be
found in other places as in Wales or other parts? I am sure that no man knows
but he that has searched it, and the hundred thousand part of this Nation has
never yet been tried.

The Eighth Prejudice may be the many Watermills, which destroy abundance of
gallant Land, by pounding up the water to that height, even to the very top of
the ground, and above the natural height, that it lies swelling, and soaking,
and spewing, that it runs very much land to a Bogg, or to mire, or else to
Flagg and Rush, or Mareblab, which otherwise was as gallant land naturally as
could be, I am confident many a thousand a year are thus destroyed, some mills
worth above 10 or 12. pound per an. destroy lands worth 20. 30. or 40. per. an.
I know it of my own knowledge, I had some few years since a Mill Dam in my
land which destroyed one half of a gallant meaddow, means was used that it was
removed, and that very land is returned to his perfect pureness again.

I prescribe not the utter destruction of all, of some I do, and others to have
their water brought to a lower gage, and where they are wanting, Wind-mills
erected, as in all the Fen Country are no other, or else encouragement given to
some that I am confident are able to discover a complete way for grinding all
sorts of Corn by the strength of horse and man as feasible as malt is. I am
able to give some assistance my self to this work, but shall far prefer others
thereto, A Gentleman that has waded so deeply therein as has discovered
publicly his model at Lambeth deserves great encouragement.

And the last though not the least is the reign of many abominable Lusts, as
Sloth and Idleness, with their Daughters, Drunkenness, Gaming, Licentious
Liberty. Were not the greatest and best, and all men made to be useful to the
body? why continue many men as members cut off from it, as if they were made to
consume it, are neither useful in their bodies, minds, or purses to the common
good? how comes City and Country to be filled with Drones and Rogues, our
highwaies with hackers, and all places with sloth and wickedness? I say no more
but pray some quickening Act to the execution of our Laws against these worse
than heathenish Abominations.

All which, with many more great annnoyances and Annusances (though some may
think every man will be ready to remove, but we being under such a drowsy Age,
that though each particular shall be advantaged as well as the whole body, yet
it will not be indeavored as far as I am able to see into men's minds or
practices) are no way possibly removeable, but by Your Honors either
compelling them by acting Ingenuity themselves, or else so encouraging others
that are desirons thereof, that None may Prejudice Improvements, by denying any
liberty for carrying on the Work, receiving reasonable satisfaction for the
Damage. To which if your Honors please to add but one thing more, to give
your best encouragements to all ingenious honest-hearts, some such there are
that have more within them than they can express, and many such you need, and
the Commonwealth more, whom while you are careful to countenance, from
Hucksters and Impostors, God will either keep you or enable you to discover,
but if any one can make A clear discovery of any new Invention for the advance
of Lands, Trade or Merchandise, If your Honors please to confirm it to him for
a season, to reinburse himself a little, it being unconceivable what some
Ingenuous men run themselves out herein, I cannot see the least Prejudice to
any, but a great encouragement to all, nor can I have the least glance
homeward, though plain dealing be a jewel, I finding my poor plain principles
will never reach the honor of an entire discovery, if I can either draw any
thing to life out of the deep judgments or opinion of the more learned, and
have out any thing to a profitable experiment from my own practice, and hereby
gain opportunity to cast it as a Freewill Offering into the Common Wealths
Treasury, as the best and all I have to give, is my utmost Emulation. All which
humble Proposals, though Unbeseeming me to present, yet a hope will not be
thought Unworthy the grave and serious Consideration of Your Honors Wisdom,
as being so much conducing to Public Welfare, in which you are all engaged;
to whom in this your Public Welfare, in which you are all engaged; to whom in
this your public relation, I have said so much as I must humbly beg your
Honors pardon, and shall say no more because in the succeeding Epistles your
particular advantages will be cleared, and in the discourse at large your
selves discovered to be as much discovered to be as much concerned and as
capeable (in the commonwealths advantage) of as great if not greater
Improvement upon all your own particular Estates as any, which I leave before
you until the fittest season for your Lordships Consideration and actings, as
may seem to you most conducing to the good of all Concernments. The All-wise
God guide you in your great Affairs, and make you gloriously Isntrumental to
the prosperity of the Nations; These are and shall be the uncessant and Earnest
desires of

Your Honors unworthiest-Servant WALTER BLITHE.

The Epistle to the Industrious READER.
I Shall here through thy good acceptance of my former mean Piece, and earnest
Importunity for the shadows or Pictures of those several Tools I offered,
and some other partic^lar additionall ways of Improvement I promised to
discover, present them all unto thee if God shall please to assist it to the
Compleatment; wherein I shall a little by way of Reparation in some parts
underbuild, and some lean to, or less necessary, quite pull down of the old
work, and yet not deface it neither, although by my hands it will never be
uniformable, only may be wholesome and keep warm in Winter: I shall therefore
forbear to mention here any of the particulars therein handled, but refer thee
to the Book it self; yet shall let them know (besides some illustrations upon
some of the former passages) I shall clear my promise in all particulars as to
the Land Improvement, and give in as clear as a discovery of the Tools as I
can in their several figures. And by way of Addition, or as second part, I
shall hold forth how thou may make great, and may be greater Improvements
than have as yet been usually made in England upon thy Lands diverse other ways.

As First, in the Mystery of Planting all sorts of fruits, with the speediest
raising them to perfection.

Secondly I shall endeavor the facilitating the great weight and burden of
the Plough, and give you the description of some forms most suitable unto ease
and speed, and hope thereby to take off a considerable strength and charge from
the Husbandmans daily toil.

Thirdly, give in the best experienced way of planting Hemp and Flax, Rape and
Cole-seed, Oad, Hops, Saffron, Licorish, and some other of our English wealth.

Fourthly, I shall endeavor to discover by what means we may possible raise
the benefit of the Clover grass. St. Foine La-lucerne to the nearest president
to France and Flanders, for worth and quality, as our English climate and best
husbandly experience will admit.

And Lastly, shall take boldness, with my good friend M. Samuel Hartlips
leave, to paraphrase a little upon most of those deficiencies in husbandry
which his friend charges us withal, of which we have more than a good many,
and not so few as he speaks of, and reduce so many of them that I have not
spoke to already in my first Edition, unto Practical husbandry that fall under
any of my experiences (which though they be but coarse and mean, yet have been
gained hardly, by many toilsome tedious Iourneyes, and very great and large
expenses) and for the further light and help to the clear understanding of the
Mystery of Improvement (for so I call it, and so it will be found when thou
come to the real practice of it, and may be more mysterious then thy
princiciples, customs, and experience will reach unto) I would direct thee a
little to consider, what has been written in this kind by former gallant
Instruments worthy of perpetual honor. Mr. Markham did excellently for his
time, so did Mr. Gouge in his Husbandry; Mr. Tusser rimes out his experiences
to good purpose, and in all their books thou may find out many things worth
thy observation. Sir Francis Bacons Natural History is worthy high esteem, it
is full of rarities and true Philosophy. Sir Hugh Plats Adams art revived is of
good report, I never yet could gain the sight of it, though Mr Gabrell Plats
discovery of hidden Treasure is very ingenuous, and could thou but fathom
his corn-setting Engine, and clear it to thine own and others apprehensions, it
would be of excellent use without question: but for the Country Farmer
Translated out of French, with some two or three other little books, I can find
but little Edification or Addition to our own English experiences, what other
men can find out of them I know not, but leave to thee to discover, but for the
rest they have been a great and clear light to our Horizon: yet among some of
them, one is worthy reprehension, which is their large observations of season,
signs and planets, forgetting God the maker of them and blesser of all things,
as if Seeds, Herbs and Plants were to be sown in the Moon or Planets, which
should they be observed they had need produce a double profit, because not half
of any would be sowed or planted: These times have let in so much light as will
discover the vanity hereof. But I must not forget Mr Samuel Hartlips pieces
lately put forth as discoveries made to him of great advancements other
Countries have made unto themselves thereby, both which in some particulars are
natural, and suitable, and experimental in this Nation, and of great
advantage, and merit high esteem from all, and in other particulars I know not
but why most of them also may be so applied and experimented too, as to raise a
good, commendable, and profitable advantage if they fall into the hands of
ingennous husbandry. I have therefore endeavored to make my thoughts as
legible as I can concerning them, as well as all other the aforesaid, though
not to so good purpose as I should, yet to provoke the more Ingenuous to
correct them to their own advantage, although I shall render my self subject to
various opinions, and though dogs bark I pass not, if the Ingenuous Reader
will not condemn before hearing; my design shall not be to contend against
former mistakes, New discoveries will admit some of them; but I shall persuade
all men to a thorough trial of what they fiud most probably advantageous unto
them: And what by my self shall be here held forth are most of them
experimented to thy hand at my proper cost and charge without the assistance of
any other purse or person, and so visible that thy own eyes shall be thy
Judges, and the rest shall be so clearly held forth by irrefragable
demonstration and evident conviction of the places where, and the persons by
whom, as thou need not scruple; it is time, the world is full of conceits
and fantasies, nor can my self challenge immunity there from; yea reason it
self has near beguiled me till Experience has concluded the question: And
there is a naughty generation of men that have brought an ill report upon
Ingenuity through their pretenses of great abilities in Enginreeship, and great
experience of raising and drawiug water, floating lands, oyling corn, advising
strange compositions for Seed and Land, pretending great advantages by
Chimistry, yet have or could not bring forth the fruit of their great
undertakings, some through want of means to accomplish their work, not wisely
forecastiug at first what it would cost; others indigent in their principles,
having seen or done something, therefore thought they could do all things; and
others through a base spirit of deceit, and may be some for want of Patience to
try the issue: all which have brought a scandal upon Ingenuity. Though I
verily believe much may be done by many of the aforesaid means, and more will
be discovered by unthought of ways, many men having so good inventions and
very able to advise great things for the Commonwealth advantage, yet may not
be able of themselves to bring forth the same to public experience; such may
and do deserve some public encouragement. A base privacy of Spirit has so
tainted us that few can vouchsafe public service any public honor, nor
public Instruments a public recompense: Yet still look thou out to duty,
charge not Ingenuity as an innovation, but act vigorously in thy station; good
husbandry is as the sinnews and marrow that holds together the joints of common
good; all workmanship without Invention resolves it self into the workmans
belly; for though a new world has been of late discovered, yet there is not an
occupation or trade of finding them, nor are our English people very active in
searching after them; Study Improvements, which though they may not be said to
be either Father or Mother to Plenty, yet it is the Midwife that facilitates
the birth. See what shiftings people make for livelihood, how many several
callings do men make, and yet unmake the main: The exereising these
projections accompanied with a blessing (if I may so call them without offense)
will open a way to the relief of thousands. The Commonwealth is low, and
misery and penury will follow if we do not rouse the sluggard, and post after
Industry, pursue all advantages of Improvement whatsoever: It is a great
argument to quicken me to the more speedy publication of this third Edition,
and the rest of the new additions to it; and though I here hold forth most of
my own experiences, and may be said to be a Trumpeter of my own praise, yet if
thou will but consider, First, that many of these particulars have been wrought
as particular Rules or instructions to private friends as my own experiences,
and to alter them will make so great an alteration in the whole, as my present
occasions will not suffer. And Secondly, because I find so great abuse by some
men's high affirmations, proving but conjectures, as has brought Ingenuity
under the scandal of projects and new devises, which men will scorn to deem
them so when they are made experiments. And thirdly, because the subject,
though poor and plain to be discoursed, and great proof made thereof to good
perfection, yet when thou come to the thorough practice thereof, thou shall
find it so ambiguous, as not withstanding, all my allusions to my own
experience will be little enough, and then thou will excuse me. And could the
Author have been thus supplied, it is great odds whether this Piece had
rendered it self unto the hazard of acceptance or disgrace in so rude a
manner; I should have added much more, but that the Epistle might have swelled
into a volume, and therefore chose rather to divide what I had to have spoke to
the particular ranks of men whom it most concerns, and so have distributed to
each a portion as I conceived most suitable to work their spirits into a
flexibleeness of practice and acceptance, which if they set unto experimenting,
I hope they will raise such fruit thereby, as to witness to, or be Credentialls
of my Frontispeece.

Although I endeavor so mainly to work my Improvements out of the Belly of the
Earth, yet am I neither of the Diggers mind, nor shall I imitate their
practice, for though the poor are or ought to have advantage upon the Commons,
yet I question whether they as a society gathered together from all parts of
the Nation could claim a right to any particular Common: And for their
prastice, if there be not thousands of places more capable of Improvement than
theirs, and that by many easier ways, and to far greater advantages, I will
lay down the Bucklers: Nor shall I countenance the Level principles of Parity or
Equality, which they seem to urge from the beginning, till I see the heads of
Families and Tribes, Judges and Governors, Lords and Princes of whole
Countries, blotted out of the first or succeeding generation; unless they bring
us to the new Jerusalem, or bring it down to us, when we shall not need to
trouble our selves about greater or lesser, or any distinction of person,
places, or estates, any more, but this Parity is all I endeavor, to make the
poor rich, and the rich richer, and all to live of the labor of their own
hands. And thus clearly demonstrating what I have premised, I hold my self
disobliged in all my promises, except in this which will be fitter to be
presented in a Volume of it self, after some good proof given to the world of
thy industry in improving thy lauds, viz. Some special directions when thy
Lands are improved, how to use them or stock them to the best advantage of the
Commonwealth and thy profit, and therein shall endeavor these five or six
particulars, First to hold forth the best way or means of breeding or rearing
all sorts of cattle, sheep, beasts, or Horse. Secondly, to show the way of
Cow-keeping, Dayrying, or raising most Cheese and Butter. And thirdly the ways
of Grazing and feeding all sorts of Cattle; All which are three staple
Advantages of the Nation, and will hold hands with Tillage, Corning, Trade, and
Merchandise; and shall add, Fourthly how to raise a great advantage out of
Goats and Conneys, for your harder stocking Lands, and some two or three more
particulars, that thou may not be wanting in the usage of thy land as well
as in the Improvement of it, and it shall strive excedingly to dismystery them
all; and in the fifth and last place shall proportion all with the most
suitableness I can to those several lands by which they may advance the
highest profit and greatest increase, and all as largely and plainly
discovered, as I am able.

By a wellwisher Of prosperity to each self, which is the Common Wealth, Whose
faithful servant is WALTER BLITHE.

To the Honorable the Soldiery of these Nations of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.
Gent. Comm^nders or Soldiers.
IT may be thought strange to direct an Epistle of this nature to you, as
conceived by most, least capable of being Isntrumental of advancing the common
good in this nature; yet knowing strange things are wrought by contraries, and
finding the best husbands (through my observance) among those who have been
least conversant therein, have not the least hopes of you; yet from a Principle
of charity too, lest that your learning your fingers to fight, and
discontinuance of your call^ings, might difuse your bodies and minds so from
labor, as to discourage you from your callings, have thought fit to let you
know, You also may be very capable to do good service to your present
Generation in this design: And though many say you are more likely to lengthen
cut the War to prevent Improvements, I am of better hope, and sure, that the
Armies late progresses have manifested the contrary, yet I shall humbly take
the boldness to press your speeding as full an and thereto as you are able,
both for your own good, and these Reasons.

1 Because of the gooness and welcomness of a Calm after a Storm, no less will
be a settled Peace after so great a War, and a little breathing will recover
strength and spirits.

2 Because you need not fear want of good Employment afterward: This piece will
open many doors for that, and I am confident Activity and Ingenuity will much
enlarge our Quarters, and make this Nation Rehoboth, and with good husbandry
indeed would more comfortably maintain hundreds of thousands more than are
already born, and I hope you will learn to hate Idleness wholly, as love
Liberty dearly.

3 And lastly, because your selves are interested and possessed of many lands,
and those such too as will admit of great Improvement with wise management, and
some of them as great as by this discourse is here proposed, and though you may
conceive your late lands designed for your pay were highly surveied, and to all
advantages to raise them, yet those advantages of Improvement were not to be
considered, nor indeed could be discovered by them which understood them not;
nor was any of them purchased at any other rate than the present value to be
then set and let to present Tenants; which Lands are as full of vast
Improvements as any lands in England: for all which causes I need press no
more, but in the honor I bear to a Soldiers name, which God himself has
honored by stiling himself a Man of War, although I take no pleasure in War,
otherwise than in submission to Gods will, and the accomplishment thereof,
which is not to be resisted or repined at for the satisfaction of our
inclination to ease, peace, or rest; upon this account or any other, I beseech
you (so long as necessities command you to it) to preserve always a good
Conscience within; for although hopes of Victory without may carry man through
great hardships, yet your peace with God reaches up to heaven, and cannot be
scaled with Ladders, nor undermined with batteries, being founded upon a Rock,
nor starved with famine, a good Conscience being a continual Feast. Mr. Fuller
in his holy War gives this description of a good soldier, That he that is most
courageous in War, is quiet and painful in Peace, and comfortably betakes
himself to his calling: The wielding of the sword has not made his Spirit
unwieldy for his private Calling. And I having this opportunity to distribute
this mean piece unto the World, thought good to offer a Portion amongst you the
Honorable Soldiery, as for Edification how you may turn Improvers too, also
humbly to desire your assistance in the work so far as in you lies, to remove
some grievances and Impediments of the Commonwealths advantage, largely
discovered in the other Epistles, which brevity causes me to omit, and so no
more but humbly pray you study how to serve your present generation in
extolling Gods glory, endeavoring the common-good, and in the interim abandon
privacy of spirit. Remember Christ's Counsel, view the promised Land, and
rejoice to think of that day when your swords shall be turned inro
Ploughshares, your spears into pruning hooks, and Christ only be exalted in
the Earth, and you brought back again to sit under your own vines and figtrees,
eating the of fruit your own labors, and enjoy one anot^er in Peace; which
once accomplished, here is cut out work for you, some to till the Land, and
others to feed the Cattle, as from the beginning, so will this be the lasting
Improvement. Then will the God of Peace keep them in perfect Peace, whose minds
are stayed on him, And Emanuell will break in pieces all that gather against
him, which is the Confidence and full Expectance of

Your quondam brother, fellow Soldier, and very Servant Walter Blithe.

To the Book
GO tell the World of Wealth that is got with ease,
Of certain profit (gain most men does please)
Of Lands Improvement to a treble worth,
A Five, a tenfold Plenty's here held forth;
The greedy Landlord may himself suffice,
The toyling tenant to estate may rise,
The poor may be enricht, England supplyid
For twice so many people to provide;
Though this a Paradox may seem to you,
Experience and Reason proves it true;
By floating dry, and purging Boggy Land,
The Plough old Pasture betters to your hand;
Directions to Enclose, to all men's gain,
Minerals found out, Land rich'd with little pain;
Woods ordered so, in few years yield such store,
So large, so good as you will desire no more.
In fine, all Land in each Capacity,
In which it lies, made Pleasant to your eye.
P. W.

To the Author.
THE way is new my friend thou seem to go;
We should encourage Art; But thou must know
Thou Wilt meet With Critics, and back biting foes;,
Bad men the best of Works will still oppose;
If but what only pleases all men's sight
Should come abroad no Work should come to light;
Goood is made better by Community;
It Is Public good to quicken industry:
Thou'st spent thy time, thy Pains with great Expense
On Countries Good* for love not Recompense;
Let others read, I Will labor what I can
To imitate this Complete Husbandman.
A true Friend to thee, as thou to all, P. W.

To Captain W. Blithe upon his Improved Improver.
FEw, upon search amongst the multitude
Of human race appear, who are endu'd
With such a noble Genius, as by art
Can heighten Nature, Fewer this impart:
For it is an Axiom unto must unknown,
That that is the best of good which most is shown;
Uuless some Patents for the same requite
With publiqne recompense their private mite.
How then ought all to Count this Author rare!
Who by experience and observant care,
Knows how to husband grounds to their best use,
And does to public light what is known produce!
Who clearly aims in what he does unfold
At Common good still adding new to old.
He gave us heretofore to understand
The Art of floating and of Watering Land,
Taught us how Fens and Bogs we ought to drain,
How each one might by fair Enclosure gain,
How ancient Pasture might by tillage mend,
Tilled ground by Grazing to improvement tend;
What soil and compost for each ground is good.
And what ways further best the growth of Wood.
To these this third Edition does discover
The most approved means to husband Claver,
The art of planting Liquorish descries,
Of Maddder, Woad, and Weld for richer dies:
The Planting Cole-seed, Flax and Hemp's declared
And how the Ploughs expenses may be spared.
How of especial use ground may be made
For Gardens and for Orchards, is displaid
Which this Survey of husbandry discovers
At easy Rates but not without endeavors;
Improveth Land, to three or five Degrees,
Held forth most plain, not kept within skies;
But casts it all in such a curious mould
To raise from one to ten, yea Twentyfold:
Lastly the Soldier does example yield,
How he should till as well as fight the field,
How swords should turn to plough-shares, when wars cease,
And what employment suits with times of peace.
Thine upon the public score T. C.

To the Husbandman, Farmer, or Tenant.
TO you of all others I might spare thit pains, you the very practitioners,
you that trade in Husbandry, of some of you I have high things to report, both
for your industry and activity; and though I am confident all men are thirsty
enough after profit and increase, yet few studiously industrious in this
design; though some esteem it matter of greatest moment, yet you will not all
be found patronizers hereof; there is such a scandal and prejudice among many
of you against new projections, that I shall beseech you to take a loving
admonition in two or three particulars, The first is an Epidemicall disease
(and little less are the succeeding) and it is a great mischief to your selves
and the Commonwealth, and that is such an immoderate plowing your land; some
plow far more than they can Til or Manure, and others all they have in common,
though never so much, others plowing so often and low, that they draw out the
marrow of it, and these are the great Improverishers of your gallant old
pasture, though fit enough to plow, and might be best advanced thereby with
moderation; but into both these extremes men are so apt to run so fast, that I
desire to stop their course a little, and shall make bold to tell them, that
when half or one third part of so much land as many of you Till, shall with
that very soil, and half the labor and seed saved, yield you as much corn as
all that great quantity scramblingly husbanded, that then you are ill husbands;
which you will confess if that you will but grant me that which no man will deny,
that one Acre purely husbandryed (and what need any be otherwise, or any break
up more than he is able well to compass) will be as good as two or three in
many men's ordinary practice, but in some of your wholesale husbandmen that
plow all before them, four or five Acres will not balance one purely
husbanded, then judge so much land preserved from impoverishment, so much seed
and cost preserved, and yet as great increase, whether the opposite actors be
not enemies to themselves, families and Commonwealth. The second abuse is want
of good tillage, we lose our hopes excedingly by this; and herein we must both
have respect to season, land, and corn; for good seasons at all times cannot be
expected, yet of two evils choose the least. I am confident better sometimes
lose the land, than land, seed, and all your labor, as many do that outslip
the season: but for prevention, begin earlier; I am confident though it may
admit of some inconveniences sometimes, yet at other times it is out of
question, but generally both Summer and Winter seed-time carries it away, sure
it has these advantages, that if it prosper not, you may sow it again, or if
the latter part of seed time at Michaelmas time prove wet, you are well, having
sowed before, or the latter part of seed-time in the Spring prove dry, as most
often it does, you have prevented that, and what is the great danger of growing
proud in Winter, that is to me a virtue, and if in the Spring, it is easily
taken down also; and if thou fear weeds, I am of opinion that the stronger
and thicker any corn is, it preserves it self the best from weeds; but there is
a Medium in all things, too thick sowing may be as bad, but this ever observe,
that the earlier thou sowest, the thinner thou may sow thy winter corn, and
summer too, if the season be good, and land dry and sound: And secondly, to
your land you must have respect too, Land in good tilth, in good heart and
sound, in a good season, will outcast its very marrow, through the Lords
blessing expect fruit enough: Men much wrong their corn in not giving their
Lands sufficient workmanship, I am not precise in the number of Plowing nor
Harrowing, but just so much and no more than preserves the Land from weeds,
and best brings the land into such a composition that your land mould well. I
shall not justify the old Proverb, here, No balkes no corn, I say not balkes,
all corn, even cleanly plowing is most commendable and most profitable; to some
grain more tilage, to some less is required, yet to none no less than may both
cover well and yield good bottom and rooting to the Corn. And thirdly for your
Corn, some grains require more tillage, others less; some will better beat a
drier season, some a wetter; some grain more subject to one weed than to
another, some grain will do best with two summers, and others with one: In all
which consider and advise thy self as much as thou can of the nature of them
all, and make out what experiences thou can thy self, and somewhat incline to
the most ingenuous usage and custom of thy Country. In some cases a good
custom is instructive; but I Will be brief here, that I may be a little larger
elsewhere following. The fourth and last abuse is a calumniating and depraving
every new Invention; of this most culpable are your moldy old leavened
husbandmen, who themselves and their forefathers have been accustomed to such a
course of husbandry as they will practice, and no other, their resolution is so
fixed, no issues or events whatsoever shall change them, if their neighbor
has as much corn of one Acre as they of two upon the same land, or if another
plow the same land for strength and nature, with two horses and one man, as
well as he, and have as good corn, as he has been used with four horse and two
men, yet so he will continue: Or if an Improvement be discovered to him and all
his neighbors, he will oppose it and degrade it; What forsooth says he, who
taught you more wit than your forefathers, would they have neglected so great
advantage if there had been any? they kept good hospitality, and made shift to
breed up many children, etc. and I know not what simple chaff to blind
themselves; this proud unteachable spirit an ingenious man abhorrs, which banes
and poisons the very plenty of our Nation. These prejudices both upon your
minds and practices which boult you out from wealth and glory, my dear friends
and fellow husbandmen, I pray you lay aside, and do but in charity walk with
me a little through this discourse, and I shall hope to satisfy that there is
no other end but common good proposed, The poor, thy posterity, and all
Interest advantage here intended by him that is as studious of thine, the
Common wealths Improvement, as his own.

W. B.

The several ways of Improvement, or Advancement, of the Lands of this
Nation: many whereof are undiscovered, and most of them little practiced, which
being experienced, would be the Commonwealths glory, and a pattern to other
Nations.
FOr the dscovery whereof (by Gods leave) some particulars shall be laid down
as generals to be discovered. And that I may speak to the understanding of all
men, especially those who have little or nothing at all considered of such
things, nor so much as ever suffered the practique part of Husbandry to come
into their minds; or those who in respect of their more noble and high
employment, have lived, and conversed in another Region, about the weighty
affairs of the Nation; only receiving and living upon the present profits of
their Lands, not minding their Lands advance; And some few others who have
lived more above the creature, and conversed much in heaven, and so are more
unacquainted with the language and terms of Husbandry: therefore I will
deliver my self in our own natural Country Language, and in our ordinary and
usual hom^-spun terms, especially because I can speak no other, and in as
few words as I can possibly conceive it clear to each apprehension; and
therefore before I begin to enter the discourse at large, give me leave to
premise the Excellency, Necessity, and Usefulness of improvement, or good
husbandry; And then the discourse shall follow under these two general heads:

1. First, I will discover the causes of Barrenness upon all Land, and what
corruptions both in the Land it self, and in men's opinions, practices, and
customs, must be removed.

2. The second general, being the Remedies and Preventions, of the said
Barrenness, and the means of reducing some to its utmost former Fruitfulness,
and Improving others to the greatest advantage it is capable of; wherein that
great Improvement promised is held forth at large. All which will be discoursed
under Six Several Heads or Pieces of Improvement, which are made good,
1 BY floting or watering all sorts of Lands which lie under that capacity. 2.
By drayning or reducing of Boggy, Fenny, Sea or drowned Lnds to firmness and
fruitsuiness. 3 Shall be by such a way of Enclosure of common Fields, Heaths,
Moors, or Forests, as shall admit of no depopulation nor prejudice to any
particular Interest whatsoever. 4. Shall be by such way of Plowing or comeing
some old Pasture Land, already spoiled for want thereof, as shall much better
it, and by so pasturing others, already destroyed by plowing, as to recover it:
and diverse other ways to improve your lands to a great advantage. 5 Shall be a
discovery of such simples or Materials, as Soil compounded with the Earth,
with the nature and use of both, so as thereby you shall raise so much more
Corn unto this Nation as shall make good the Improvement promised. 6 By a new
Election or Plantation of diverse sorts of Woods and Timber, as in few years a
man may make sufficient buildings thereof; yea upon diverse sorts of Land in
this Nation, at twenty years growth it will arise unto an incredible height and
bigness, yea as fast again as it naturally grows.


CHAP. I.
Treats of the Excellency, Necessity, and Usefulness of Improvement, and good
Husbandry.
WHich appears partly by the Antiquity of it; Excellency, Necessity,
Antiquity.
for every thing is the more excellent, the more ancient, and nearer it comes
to God, the first being of all things, which as all things nearest the Center
move more strongly, so all Excellency appears most evidently, the nearer (if I
may speak with reverence) to that great Majesty, the great Husbandman, God
himself. First in his making the world, he made all Creatures, and all Plants,
Fruits, Trees, Herbs, and all bearing Seed, for the food of Man and Beast; He
also made those more excellent and glorious Creatures, as the Light, the Day,
and Night, the Firmament, the Earth, and Seas, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, all
to be serviceable, and ministers unto the Creatures relief, and all the
Creatures subservient to Man, and Man to Husbandize the fruits of the Earth,
and dress, and keep them for the use of the whole Creation.

So God was the Original, and first Husbandman, the pattern of all Husbandry,
and first projector of that great design, to bring that old Mass and Chaos of
confusion unto so vast an Improvement, as all the world admires and subsists
from. And having given man such a Pattern both for precept and president for his
encouragement, he makes him Lord of all until the fall; And after that God
intending the preservation of what he made, notwithstanding the great curse
upon Adam, Eve, and Serpent, the Earth not going free, but a curse of
Barrenness cast upon it also, yet Adam is sent forth to till the Earth, and
improve it, In the sweat of his face he must eat bread until be return to the
Earth again.

And so down to Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. 2.
the one Husbanding the Earth for Tillage, and the other the Sheep in
Pasturing, and Grazing; Gen 9. 16.
and so down to Noah, he began to be an Husbandman; and to Abrabhm, and to
Jacob and Esan, and so along still till they came to the Government by Kings,
where Vzziah his commendation was beloved husbandry, ^ Chr. 26. 11.
and many excellent things, as if Husbandry were the most excellent, as indeed
it is here on Earth; else ask Solomon the wisest, the second Husbandman or
Improver of the world, and you shall find, how out of the depth of his
experience, he cries up diligence and activity in good Husbandry, therefore
sends us to the Pismire, cries down the Sluggard, and Sloathfull, on whom
comes poverty as an armed man, Prove. 6. 6.
and extolls the diligent as fittest to converse with Kings, Prove. 15. 19.
whose very thoughts bring abundance, Prove. 20. 30.
even of the diligent, whose hand and heart are best to bear rule, Prove. 22. 21.
when the idle shall be under Tribute. But to multiply more Scripture, Prove.
12. 20.
where all experience holds it so clear, is but to prove a principle
ungain-said; I Will say no more. But for the usefulness of it, it is no less
than the maintenance of our Lives, Estates, this Commonwealth, and world, and
the Improvement, or Advancement of the fruits and profits of the Earth by
Ingenuity, is little less than an addition of a new world; for what is gained
hereby either above the natural fruitfulness of the Earth, or else by
reducement of that which is destroyed, or impoverished from his natural
fruitfulness, to greater fertillity, is a clear augmentation or Addition to the
Commonwealth.

All other callings proceeding hence, the Earth being the very womb that bears
all, and the Mother that must nourish and maintain all. The Merchant is a
gallant servant to the State, he fetches it from far, and it is a gallant
Inrichment to this Nation; but he purchases it from others, who could make
good profit of it, if he buy it not, raises it not out of nothing, but parts
with good Silver, or Gold, or some good commodity for it, and is a great
Commonwealths advantage.

But this Merchant of Husbandry, he raises it out of the Earth, which
otherwise would yield little, unless this ingenuity fetch it out, possibly
never discovered to be there. And what parts he with? or at what rates
purchases he it at? Even only with the wages of the laboring man, whom he is
bound both by the Law of God, Nature, and the Land, to maintain, who may be
were he not maintained in work would cost as much to be maintained idly. Oh!
the Excellency, Antiquity, and Usefulness, of it. Improve the first and
chiefest of thy Spirits on God in omnifying him above all, and in all, and the
rest of thy wits and strength to serve thy station herein, accompting it the
second thing necessary, a blessing being upon the head of him that tilleth
Corn, Prove. 11. 26
and the thoughts of the diligent bring abundance. Prove. 21. 5
And so I proceed to the occasions of the Earths Barrenness, being the first
General of my discourse.

First General Head
CHAP. II.
Shows forth the causes of Barrenness upon all Lands.
THey are usually two. Causes of Barrenness.


1 In Man himself. 2 In the Land it self.
1 In Man himself it was occasionally, who by his sin procured a curse upon the
Land, even Barrenness it self, which by the sweat of his brows must be
reduced, if he will eat bread, and so now is.

2 In man naturally, which is the main and capital cause of all, 1 Cause of
Barrenness is ignorance occasioning Prejudice.
and is in him as I conceive the Cause of Causes, which is Ignorance,
occasioning the prejudice men bear against Improvement, especially that which
is not of their own devising, as all men naturally hate the true light of God,
because it discovers their darkness, and is contrary to their light, which is
that of Nature and Reason only, the great enemies of Gospel Light. So that
parallel hereunto in some measure, is the hatred that many bear to any new
Ingenuous discovery of that which is not under their ken or common practice,
unless they can make it their own contrivement, which arises from old Adams
proud nature so rooted in ours, that wherein we cannot ascribe unto our selves
the praise, we had rather lose the profit, and so presently decry the same,
Saying, This is no other but a principle of some young Brainsick, or of one
that would Monopolize more to his ten, twenty, or thirty years study and
experience, than our fathers and forefathers attained in all their practices;
or else some giddy head that will say more in half an hours discourse, than he
will make good proof of in an Age; or else it is an experiment that will cost
more than the profits thereof will countervail; or else the Improvement is so
great that they cannot possibly credit such Impossibilities, with innumerable
more such passages; never putting forth their Minds, Hands, or Purses, to
never so great and profitable an advantage, Prove. 4. 15.
like the Sluggard, who will not plow, Prove. 36. 13.
but says, A Lion is in the way. And so, by feeding upon these or such like
Prejudices, they suffocate their own unspeakable advantage, which they might
accomplish with setting on the work, and exercising a little patience in
waiting for a through trial. Although I Will say it should be our rejoicing when
any discovery is made, (chiefly of God) and then of that which shall concern
the public good, be the instrument what he will, and not engaged therein for
mere advantage only, as too many have done, holding forth specious Pretenses of
great wonders, and the condition has ever been great gain to the discoverer,
and more than the worth of the discovery many times has been; yet if the naked
end be the Public good, be the discovery what it will, or the Discoverer
conceived neither of so deep a head, nor of so long experience, as others have
been, yea, though thou conceive it a Project so chargeable, that will not
answer the cost bestowed, or an advance so great as is not credible, yet
consider if he utter Reason, Art, or honestly, and especially where he offers
experience for the proof thereof, have thou patience to consider thereof, if
thou will not make trial of it, his is the pains, and if to any, it is thy
Gains, he has but his labor for his travel.

The second Hindrance as in respect of the owner, or occupier thereof, 2. Cause
is Improvidence and a slavish custom.
is Idleness, Improvidence, and a slavish Custom of some old form, or way of
Husbandry, exercised therein ever since they were born, which begets so much
the ill Husbandry of these days, never affecting Ingenuity in any particulars
of their Husbandry, which is contrary to the mind and will of God in making us,
and the end wherefore we were made, Good husbandry commanded, and so
experimented by God himself, and charged on us therein, and so commended by
Solomon the wisest of men, with Ingenuity and Activity, to the putting out the
utmost of our spirits, in subordination to our spiritual calling, in our
particular callings to serve our generations, and improve our Principles for
the common good, which two aforesaid causes if they be not removed, will never
admit of the removal of the subsequent causes.

A third particular cause in man of the Earths unfruitfulness, is want of
severe punishment of Idleness, 3. Cause is want of punishment of Idleness, and
want of Stock to set the poor on work.
the Mother, and Drunkenness, the Daughter, or the putting in execution of such
good and wholesome Laws as both God and man have provided therein; As also not
raising stocks in all Countries, as a Magazine or treasury of work, and labor,
for those that want it; And those other Laws for punishing of Rogues and
Vagrants, that wander the Country, and compelling and constraining youth, and
idle people, to some callings, All which would both put them on to more
Ingenuity, and the Gentry, and Yeomanry of the Nation would be much induced to
Invention, and expatiating themselves in charge and treasure, to maintain them,
whereby these horrid sins of Idleness, Lust, and Laciviousness would be
checked, and those Drones, and Caterpillars, the bane of a Christian State, and
shame of a Christian Nation, would not so swarm amongst us. It is a crying sin
of our Nation, A Crying sin,
I pray God charge it not upon us, lest as we have already smarted for it, we
smart not now at last to purpose. So that were but these Improvements put into
Experiments, their great plea would be silenced (viz) Will you set us on work?
we will work if you will provide it? etc. (and out of all question) the
capacities of the Nation herein, are far more than here be laboring men to
act them: and so as they conceive, they justify their Abomination, both by
necessity and authority.

As for Drunkenness the Daughter, Drunkenness*
which so abounds every where, that I verily believe, and fear not to make it
forth, by reason, and experience, that were it the Daughter, with Idleness the
Mother, suppressed in this Nation, we need never to fear want or penury. I
know diverse Towns in this land, where you shall have two or three poor
Alehouses, wickedly, and wastfully, devour more Malt, than all the
Freeholders, Laborers, and Inhabitants besides. And judge you, Laboring
Country people for the most part brew their own Beer also, neither is there
any passage, or Road-way through the Towns where these private houses of
resort are, and yet these to vent so much Beer or Ale, is wonderful! How much
then is consumed in great Passages, common Roads, great Towns, Markets, or
Cities, wastfully and wickedly, if so much be in Corners remote, and not
thought of? so that were there a suppression hereof, how would Idleness be
abashed? men would scarce stand idle in open ways, or passages, for shame,
wife and children enjoy their Fathers, and Husbands at home, if doing little,
yet not consuming that they have got already, and the Markets more full, and
plentiful of corn so miserably wasted; And therefore as I highly commend these
Laws we have already, and praise God for them, so I humbly pray a quickening of
their execution, wherein our Worthies, had they not so heavy pressures upon
their shoulders, as are ready to break their backs, (I am sure they have broke
the spirits already of diverse, whose loss we have cause to lament with watery
eyes) they might humbly be implored for some Inlivening, Quickening, Laws, with
such strict penalties annexed to the execution of them, as the Discoverer or
Projector might not only be rewarded, but commended and protected from
disgrace and calumny.

The second general cause of Barrenness is in the Earth itself, A general
cause of Barrenness.
and the principal causes of her Barrenness are very many, some are obvious to
the Judgment, and understanding of all, Tilling.
as tilling Land till it bear no corn.

And mowing Ground till it Graze no more, or yield no grass; all which are
easily to be remedied if men would learn moderation.

But my design lies not so much in Reproving, as Improving, and discovering
that there are many causes which lie more obscure, and are either not discerned
at all, or else not adjudged any cause of Barrenness, or hinderance of the
Earth her fertility, and so not at all endeavored to be removed; and they are
in some Lands; extreme Coldness of nature; having a moist springing water lying
near, or just under the surface or superficies of the Earth, which does either
eat away or devour the Sap, Fruit, and Strength of the said Lands, or else
breed and increase the Rush, and Flagg, which grows in the room of Grass, and
eats away the same.

Another cause is Rockiness, Stoniness, and Gravelliness, Rockiness.
all which many times lie so near the surface of the Land, that they devour
much of the Earth, and so make that little left so weak, that it can scarce
bring forth any fruit.

Another cause is lying Mountainous, Mountainous.
sometimes so near the Sea, that the Vapors and Fogs, that come from thence,
anoy the same. Also lying far from the Sun and in shady parts occasioneth
Barrenness.

Another cause of Barrenness is the unsuitable, unnatural laying down of Land
to Graze, Improvidence laying down all Lands.
a cause scarce imagined so to be; or the present ill lying of Land, that has
layen long, and was ancient Enclosure, al which are infinitely more
prejudicial to the fertility thereof than can be imagined, till contrary
experience has discovered it: ( viz) For that Land that is sandy, How to lay
down warm Land.
warm, or gravelly, that to be laid on high Ridge or Furrow is directly
contrary to the natural fruitfulness of that Land; And that which is of a
cold, moist, spewing or weeping nature, for that to be laid down flat or
level, How cold Land.
is to the ruin and destruction of that also, and is an extreme on the other
hand.

The latter sort requires high ridged Lands, and clear open Furrows; and the
first sort the contrary: and especially all lands whatsoever to be laid down in
good heart and strength.

Also another cause is the standing of the winter water upon the land, Standing
water in winter.
or the rain of Heaven; I say not the running over lands, so that it may be
laid dry at pleasure, but the standing, soaking water breeds the Rush and
fowleness, and likewise gnawes out the heart and strength of it, like the worm
at the stomach, and devoureth the strength of it, as experience will show in
mady parts of the Land, where great Balkes betwixt Lands, Hades, Meares, or
Divisions betwixt Land and Land are left, and one Furlong butting, or
Hadlanding, upon other Furlogns, makes such a stoppage of the free passage of
the water, that a great part of that land lies as it were drowned a great part
of the year, that it overcomes not that backing many times till near Midsummer,
when other sound Lands have yielded a full half years profit, and so for half
a year yields little or no profit at all.

Another great prejudice is the Mole-hills, Mole hills.
and the Ant-hills, although I shall not directly argue hence Barrenness
naturally, yet accidentally they much barrennize it, therefore I shall
demonstrate the evil of both; for the Mole-hills that destroys some part of
the Land, by the several casting up of much mould upon the Grass, all which
are hinderanees very great to the increase of the owner. But for the Ant-hils,
if my opinion fail not excedingly, they are grand enemies to the Grazier, and
Husbandmans advantage, they destroy more than men observe, I do believe that in
some great Pastures in England, there is one fourth part of the clear fruit of
that Land lost by the multiplicity of them, and little better in other pastures
by the Molehills: for although some are of opinion that the Ant-hills are
little or no prejudice, they are much mistaken, and they will clearly be
convinced thereof, if they will but either seriously consider the quantity of
grass that grows upon them, or else consider the rareness of Cattle feeding
upon them, and then also consider the quantity of Ground, and good Ground, they
cover, will easily appear the great prejudice by them. And that the sand and
gravel washed from the Molehill, is a great cause of rotting Sheep I
absolutely affirm.

But thereto some may object, they make more ground.

I Answer, Ob.
they do, such as it is; destroy a lesser good quantity of Land, Ans.
and add possibly a double bad: but let them consider that this Addition is a
great Substraction; for if you weigh what I said before, they bear little, or
no grass, a little wild Time, and speary harsh grass, that Cattle eat not but
a little thereof in case of hunger; And I am sure they cover a great deal of
good land. Do but really consider it upon experience made upon one Acre, and
thou shall find that one Acre plain or bancked shall do as much service as an
Acre and near an half shall do that is so hilly; And again, if you do not
flatter your selves in your own judgments, you will find that while the Land
was plain, if you consider the fruit it then yielded, and the Cattle it then
maintained, you will find there is no proportion between what it then kept, and
what it now maintains, for in my experience I find that old resty Land, much
overrun with these hills, much degenerates, and does not, nor has of late
years kept the former usual Stock it kept before it grew so hilly, and so
old, by near or about one fourth part, which I am sure is as much or more
advantage, or clear profit, the Grazier, Breeder, or Tenant need expect; and
although some will not acknowledge their experience herein yet many I am sure
they find it by losing proof, besides the danger of casting their Cattle and
Sheep betwixt the Hills, which often destroys them.

Another cause of Barrenness is Bogginess or Mieriness, Bogginess.
which turns all Lands, both bad, good, and better, into such a state of
Barrenness and unfruitfulness, that it in some parts almost destroys the Land,
and in other parts it wholly destroys it, and in some places makes it worse
than nothing; for in stead of yielding some fruit, it not only yields none,
but corrupts and prejudiceth other Lands on which it borders, and it self most
dangerous to mischieve the Goods or Chattell that do pasture upon the same, and
so may be accidentally many degrees worse than nothing.

Another cause of Barrenness is the Overflowing, Constant resting of the water
on that Land.
and constant abiding or resting of the waters of the Sea, Fenns, Rivers,
standing Lakes or Pools, for be it fresh or salt water, if it lie constantly
upon it, it assuredly destroys it* although some more, some less, according
to the deepness, and barrenness of the water which covers it, and the soundness
of the ground on which it lies, so is the fruitfulness more or less
perspicuous. Some pretend strange causes which my plainess fathomes not, nor
much affects our Country Farmers now.

Yet one more I must not pass by, and that is such New Inventions for the
Improving of Land discovered by some young Husbandman at experiences as I
conceive the use whereof will rather destroy Land, and wast a man's profits
thereupon, than advance: and some such I have lately found in a little book
called New Inventions for the Improving lands, Printed for J. S. and sold at
the sign of the Ball on Adling hill, 1646. By which I fearing some willing to
lay out themselves in Husbandry experience should be beguiled by his so great
overtures of Advantage, I shall only speak to two or three particulars, and
leave the rest to thy leisure to consider of.

First, As to his manuring Plough, manuring Wagon, manuring Stone, Corroding
Harrow, or Corroding Rakes, which he pretends as Improvements, so far as my
shallow Principles will compass, are likely to prove Impoverishers, because
while a man stands to dress his Land with fine mould, in which is a little
strength, his Land decays for want of good soil or rank muck, which he may
sooner lay on, and work into his Land by the old way, than he may his fine
earth by his new devised mystical Instruments, not one of them discovered
neither; but puzzle thy self thou may about the thoughts thereof, and though
thou give twice as much for the book as it is worth, for so thou must, thou
art but where thou wast at first: And for his Seed-Barr^w, could he but hold
that forth to set Corn as he pretends, it might be of some good use, because
certainly setting Corn, could it be done with speed, and at a certain depth,
and well covered, would be worth discovering; but of this I have as little hope
and as low an esteem as of his other aforesaid Instruments, because he holds it
out to contain one Tunnell only for his Seed, which did it contain a hundred,
would more likely prove; for in setting one seed at once, no Engine can come
near the hand-setting as I conceive; And this I charge as a great prejudice,
and may be as a barrenning the land, while men stand looking for great things,
they neglect their ordinary and old way of Hushandry, far better.

Another cause of Barrenness which this Gentleman puts as a means of
Improvement is the setting up or banking into a man's land the Rain water, or
cold Spring water, and then trampling in dung by carting and cattle, as he
says, will raise and increase mire and dirt; and so it will, I must confess,
but what that mireand dirt is worth, I know not: the dung would be excellent
good of it self, but what it will be in this course of husbandry, I not only
much question, but affirm, that in all my experience, that treading, poching,
and holing land in winter, was an exceeding great hinderance to Corn or Grass
that Spring; nay some Land I have known so poched by Cattels treading, though
fothered upon the same, both in Kent and Essex, and many other parts, that it
has not recovered of diverse years: And what strength or virtue cold
spring water or rainwater has to fatten any land, I know not, but wonder then
how we have any barren land in England. And to make good his Assertion, he
appeals to them that float Land by Rivers, whose practice clean confutes his
opinion, who study to drain their Land as fast as float it; and the best and
most skillful of them will drown none at all, unless for a day or two, but
drain as fast, and draw off as fast as they bring it on: And to prove his
Tenent, he affirms how advantageous it will be in keeping up the floods by his
inbankments to secure the Fens from drowning, which is as likely as to keep the
Sea from flowing after ebbing; for he that will make banks to keep in
Land-flouds, may as well make a hedge to keep in the Cuckoo; and whereas he
pretends hereby to raise new Springs, that may be; sure I am he will raise new
Quicksands, and what good use they are of, I am yet to learn. And for Barren
Land which he seems so well skilled in the Improvement, which he desires to
purchase, I will help him to enough, if he will either be pleased to return a
mi^d answer if my plainess have offended him, or else practically make good
what he has affirmed; for that a man does do, is far more credible than that
he affirms he can do. Many other causes of offenses might be spoken unto, but
they are referred to a more proper Opportunity, wherein they may receive a more
suitable capacity of removal, and will be dropped into the discourse at large,
as occasion most seasonably is administered. And so I proceed to the Recoveries
of the said Barrenness. But before I descend to the particulars, consider the
several sorts of Lands that will admit of Improvement, Which I consider under
two General Heads.

First, 1 Head.
all enclosed, Several Land, whether Meadow or Pasture.

Secondly, 2 Head.
Common Lands, whether Arable or Grazing. First, Several enclosed Lands I
divide into three sorts, or else will rank them under three Heads.

1 First shall be our worst sort of Lands of what nature soever they be, from
the value of one shilling per Acre, to Ten shillings; The Improvement whereof
will fall under most of the six particular Pieces, it being capable of most and
greatest Improvement.

2 Secondly, is our middle sorts of Lands, from the value of Ten shillings per
Acre, unto Twenty, which falls naturally under the third Piece or way of
Improvement, yet is capable often times to fall under some or most of the other
Pieces also.

3 Third shall be our richest Land, from Twenty shillings per Acre, to forty,
and from forty to three or four Pounds an Acre; some of this sort will admit of
very little or no Improvement, having all Natural, and Artificial experiments
already made upon it, but some others of this richer sort will admit of a very
considerable Improvement, and is principally discovered under the sixth Piece.
Neither can I say that all Lands without exception of the two former sorts may
be Improved: For possibly, and out of question very much is Improved already,
and others may lie so void of any capacity of Improvement, that either there
may be none at all, or else none that will raise such Improvements, as will
well and sufficiently requite the charge and cost bestowed; but comparatively
not much of this in England. Only improve upon great advantage.


And my design is principally to hold only forth possbilities of Improving at
a far inferior charge to the cost bestowed, and the Improvement made from such
materials, as generally are lost, or little or no whit practiced in most parts
of the Land.

The second General are our common Lands, whether errable, constantly unde
Tillage, such as are our common fields, all the fieldon or field Land
throughout the Nation, of which there may be three sorts also, Bad, Better,
Best of all, and all and every part thereof may be very much and manifoldly
advanced, under some or all of the aforesaid Pieces; or else whether it be
Commons or Commune of Pastures upon those great and vast Commons, called
Heaths, Forests, Moors, Marshes, Meades, or whatsoever of them, Those also
may admit of a very great Advancement, and these Lands will fall familiarly
under every Piece, according to their several values, and capacities, but most
especially under the third and fourth Piece, treating of Tillage, and
Enclosure. And then I shall proceed to show you the nature of each sorts of
Lands whereby the Remedies will be most facile and easy in the application.
And so I have ended the first General.

The second General Head holds forth the several means of Cure: Or the
reducement of Land unto Fruitfulness and Fertility, discovered under the first
Piece of Improvement of floating or watering Lands.
CHAP. III.
Shows the first Cure or Remedy against Barrenness, and therein discourses
what Lands are most suitable to watering: And how to gain watering upon the
same.
BUt before I discourse the same at large, I shall only say that there are
several Remedies against the said Barrenness, or diverse means of reducing
these Lands to their natural fruitfulness, or to the Improvement of them to a
more Supernatural Advance than they were ever known to be.

To which I must premonish the Reader, that here lies all the Skill and
Kernel, which being made forth in some good measure, I hope will give thee
such satisfaction that thou will not only vouchsafe me the reading and thy
credit thereto, but also be a practioner therein; Which done with delight, will
not only produce the real advantage here discovered, but far greater: For
these things are, and may be brought to a greater height of Advancement, by how
much the more Ingenuity and Activity is exercised in the Prosecution and
Experimenting of them, and to a greater discovery by a constant familiar use of
them, which is the true and real end of his Discovery; and the Proverb herein
best will hold; The more the Merrier.

The Cure follows now more largely.
ALl sorts of Lands, of what nature or quality soever they be, under what
Climate soever, of what constitution or condition soever, of what face or
character soever they be (unless it be such as Naturally participates of so
much fatness, which Artificially it may be raised unto) will admit of a very
large Improvement. Yet the fattest Land was, has been, or may be bettered by
good husbandry.

And such are the Lands that lie near or bordering upon any River, Under great
Rivers will be the best Land.
or small Brooks, your little Rivers, and Rivulets, admitting of greater falls
and descents than your bigger Rivers do, which run more dull and slow, more
dead and level, whereby little Opportunity will be gained of bringing but
little Land to so great advance by them, but where the greater Rivers can be
gained over any Lands, there will the Improvement be the greatest, and the
Lands made the richest, And under lesser the greater quantities and greatest
Improvement.
the greater Rivers being usually the fruit-fullest, having more Land-floods
fall into them; But under your lesser Brooks may your greatest quantities of
Land be gained, and your water most easily and with small charge be brought
over greater parcels than upon greater Rivers.

1 For the discovering of such Lands as lie under this Capacity, you must
seriously consider the Situation of your Lands; If your Lands be a little
hilly, and your Brooks run more swiftly, more Lands may be brought under them:
Also if your Lands lie more shelving or descending toward the River, or any
low descent whatever, that your water may fall off as fast as it comes on, the
quicker and easier will your Land be Improved, especially if your Land be
sound, light, or gravelly: This is a most gallant opportunity, let your Lands
be what they will, or of what nature soever, if it lie descending, the advance
will be great enough, if you have either a constant stream, or Landflood.

And here let me (good Reader) advertise thee of one Piece of husbandry, most
highly commended of most men; And truly so it is very commendable, and
excellent, compared either with those that use none, or else neglect this where
it may be done, which is this,

Many Gentlemen have assaid to water their Lands, by setting the Water in
Pooles, Setting water on Pooles or Lakes not so excellent.
Ponds, or Lakes upon them, and continuing it standing, and soaking many days
and weeks together; yea some practice it although their lands have layen
descending; and then draw their Sluices, or remove their stoppages, and drain
away all their water again; to which way of flowing, I encourage all men rather
than neglect all, and honor them therein; yet if they please to make
experiment of the succeeding way of floating, they will easily let this fall;
The excellency whereof consists in the speedy taking away the Water, as soon as
it is brought on; And only suffer it to run over, and so with all speed run
off into some drayning Trench again: The Method whereof shall at large be
handled, by which, such a concealed Advantage will be discovered, that men will
wonder how they were so easily deceived. Wherein I shall be somewhat larger,
because able men much differ both in their opinions of both ways of watering,
as also in their manner of working the same.

My advise shall he, never cover thy Land with a standing Water, In what Cases
to cover land by Water.
unless for a day or two, or else in case thy Land should be so Level that it
has no descent at all, then better set the Water upon it, than neglect it, so
thou be sure to drain it after one or two days standing, and then bring it on
again, and take it off again, as aforesaid, yet it is impossible ever to
produce the like effect, as it shall according to the subsequent directions;
Because it neither receives the full fruit, or fatness of the water so fully
and kindly, nor is grazable and feedable so soon, nor yet so richly as in the
other kind of working.

2. After thou have considered the Situation of thy Lands, as aforesaid, then
search, and find out the lowest part of thy Lands, and there having found such
a Level or descent, as will lay all thy Lands dry again, as thou shall have
occasion to float them, which drain must be wrought So deep, as that thou may
go under that corrupt feeding, or springy moisture, that breeds and feeds the
Rush, Flag, and Mareblab, or else causes thy Land to turn Spewing, Morish, or
boggy, which two Advantages, if thou had discovered, and found upon thy Land
(which little Land in England, but has one or both of them) come to the third
Direction, and,

3. Therein consider seriously the nature of thy Land, Land sad and moist worst
to Improve by watering.
which if it be cold, and of a sad Nature, moist and spewing, and lie very
Level, It will require then a very good Land-flood, or a constant River to
overflow it, and other barren hungry Water will do very little good thereof.

But, if either thy Land be Gravel, Land found, dry, and warm the best.
or of a sound, warm, sandy, or mixed nature, and any whit descending, then any
Running stream will have a gallant Operation, The warmer, lighter, and sounder
is the Land, the greater is the Advantage. These particulars discovered, out of
question thou have a wonderful advantage before thee, especially if thou have
any great length and quantity of Land along the River, or by a great Road-way
side, or else have any good Land-floods from great Towns or Cities, make as
much of these Advantages, and prize them as thy Lands, for though hereby thou
can make thy Lands no more, yet thou may make them so much better, as thou
can desire.

Suppose some man of great credit should say, Sir, you have two hundred Acres
in such a place, what if I should lay you a hundred more in the midst of them?
he would wonder at it; yet because of the credit of him that spoke it, he does
not wholly disdain it, and if it could be done, he deserved thanks for it; but
he does do it really, though not in kind, that advances or Improves the Land
but one third part, that makes Two Acres as good as Three, much more he that
makes One as good as Three, or Five, or Ten, as before this watering business
be done shall clearly appear; and so I descend to the working out the same. I
had forgot another sort of Land which is your Boggy Quagmiry Land, Boggy Lands
good for watering.
no less capable of a mighty Improvement if it fall under the opportunity of
floating, and ly any whit descending.

CHAP. IV.
Shows how to work thy Land and Water, so as to reduce it, and work out the
Improvement promised.
WHerein a little consider of the way of both fitting thy Land to thy Water,
and thy Water to thy Land, with the truest, naturallest, and properest Seasons
for bringing it on, and taking it off, and thou shall see an admired issue.

And being resolved that thou have an opportunity upon thy Lands to make this
Improvement out, Plot out thy Land into such a Model or Platform as thou may
be sure that all thy Land thou designest to this Improvement, may not fail
therein, I mean that all thy Lands thou resolvest to float may be under the true
Level of thy Water; And that this may be, I shall here discover to thee how to
carry thy Water upon the Level, that thou shall lose no ground, neither carry
it so dead, that thou can not kindly work it, and this precisely observed,
may be in stead of many Persian Wheels so highly commended by Mr Gabriel Plats,
which Wheel is also commendable, and may be very useful, where either no good
falls can be gained, nor other wales the water cannot be raised to higher parts
of ground you desire to water; The description of which Persian Wheel I hope to
give thee before this discourse be ended, And also intend in my Additions; if
not where I describe and figure out the Persian Wheel, to discover a far better
Engine, that shall with less strength raise a greater quantity of water for any
use.

And now for the Method or way of working thy Water upon thy Land without this
Wheel, which will require a double stream, one to drive it, and another to be
raised, and without the charge of all other appurtenances to the said Wheel
belonging, as Dams, Sluices, etc. and the maintenance of the same for
preservation of this charge, and for the moee easy working the Improvement.

Take a most exact Survey of thy Water, not by thy Eye only, but by, and with
a true exact Water Level, which is an instrument though plain and easy, yet
rarely made nor used among us, which shall be largely described among other
Tools in the tenth Chapter; How to begin the first piece of watering.
then either begin at the over end, or nether end of thy Land, which thou
please, if at the over end, where the water first enters into thy Land. And
by thy Level discover and plot out where thy water will go along thy Land, as
thou go downward, that so thou may lose no Land, that will easily be
brought under thy water; Then cut out thy Master Trench or Watercourse if thou
please to such a bigness as may contain all thy Land-floud, especially to
bring it within thy Land, and so bring down thy whole Watercourse together:
But the most certainest way is, as soon as thou have brought thy Water within
thy Land, upon the superficies of it, then carry it along in a foot broad
Trench or lesser all along thy Level, which Water will be a great help, and a
second and truer Level than the other, and in thy working of it thou shall
find all little enough too prevent too dead a Level, and yet lose no Ground
neither: If thy Level be too dead, the lesser stream will follow thee, so that
a convenient descent must be minded also to give the water a fair and plausible
passage or current all along. And if thou discover in his lesser Trench, any
mistake or failing, then thou may with more ease and less charge amend the
same easily by going higher upon thy Land, or lower toward the water, and stop
up the same again (for thy Trench need be no deeper than the thickness of thy
over Turff) and cut out a new, and so thou may most certainly demonstrate
where thy main work shall go without hazard, which will be a great. certainty,
and little loss.

This done, thou may cut out thy watercourse, and be sure it be large
enough to contain the whole Water thou need or intendest, and so thou have
longitude or length of ground, the Trench must be the broader, not the deeper,
for a shallow Trench is best for this work. And when thou have brought it so
far into thy land, as thou have any land to work upon, thou may a little
narrow thy Course as thou see the quantity of thy land, or water requires,
and so far as thou would have thy course float over all at once, thou must
cut thy trench narrower and narrower, all along to the nether end, that so
without stops and stays it may flow all along at once, the Trench being
narrower and narrower, that Water that comes within the Trench when it is wider
must needs be thrust out when the narrower cannot contain it; for here is the
true excellency of this sort of Trenches; and thus should all thy floating
Trenches be made in every work.

As soon as thou have brought thy water upon thy Land, and turned it over, or
upon it, then as aforesaid, be sure thou take it off as speedy as possibly, and
so fail not to cut out thy work, so as unless thy Land be very sound, and thy
Land-floud very Rich, thou must take it off the sooner by a deep drayning
Trench, therefore I prescribe thee no certain breadth betwixt floating and
drayning Trenches, but if thy Land is sounder and Dryer, or lies more
Descending, How to make the drayning Trench.
thou may let it run the broader, and as the Land is Moist, Sad, Rushey and
Level, let it run the lesser breadth or compass; And for thy drayning Trench
it must be made so deep that it go to the bottom of the cold spewing moist
water, that feeds the Flagg and Rush; for the wideness of it, use thine own
liberty, but be sure to make it so wide as thou may go to the bottom of
it, which must be so low as any moisture lies, which moisture usually lies
under the over and second swarth of the Earth, in some Gravel or Sand, or
else, where some greater Stones are mixed with clay, under which thou must go
half one Spades graft deep at lest: Yea suppose this corruption that feeds and
nourishes the Rush or Flagg should lie a yard or four foot deep, to the bottom
of it thou must go, if ever thou will drain it to purpose, or make the utmost
advantage of either floating or draining, without which thy water cannot have
its kindly Operation: for though the water fatten naturally, yet still this
Coldness and Moisture lies gnawing within, and not being taken clean away, it
eats out what the Water fattens. And this also I must desire thee seriously to
observe, that as soon as thy Water has spent it self, and the Earth or Grass
has exhausted and drawn out of the Water her strength and richness, then how
long soever it runs longer and further, it prejudiceth and corrupts it by
breeding the Rushes in abundance: The water running trickling among the Grass,
and upon the Earth, Shows how the water is fruitful.
leaving her Thickness, Soil or Filth, which I call Richness, among the Grass,
and upon the Earth, and it self runs away into the drayning Trench, and
troubles thee no more, and so the Goodness of the Water is as it were Ridled,
Screened, and Strained out into the Land, and the Leaness slideth away from
thee, which can never be done, neither so speedily, nor so purely, by standing
on Lakes or Pooles, besides the loss of the Grazing, which may be near as good
in Winter as in Summer, upon a good Land-flood or rich Waters.

CHAP. V.
Shows the cause of water its fruitfulness, and the proper season of watering
Lands.
A Rich Land-flood is ever the washing down of great Road ways, Common Fields,
under Tillage; or else from great Towns, Houses or Dunghills; The riches
whereof is unvaluable. Consider the goodness of thy Water, if thy Water be a
rich Land-flood, or a lusty gallant Stream, it will run further and wider upon
thy Land with life and fruitfulness; If lean, thin, and only from Springs and
Herbs, or green soard, it is more barren, and so will operate upon less Lands; so
that as I said before, thou must well observe both Land and Waters
suitableness, and so increase the latitude or breadth of thy Land thou
intendest to improve with that stream, How to make the Drayning Trench,
before it fall into his Drain; Which Drain thou must dig, or make straight
down as it were by a Perpendicular plum-Line, which will drain the best of all;
Or else thou may make thy Drain, or Trench; somewhat Taper ( viz) Narrower
and Narrower downwards, which will keep open the best, and continue longest,
and for the Widness of it, that must be resolved both from the nature of the
ground, which if Sound, and Dry, will require the less, but if Moist and Boggy,
the Greater and Deeper; or else from the quantity of Water it is to receive,
that so it may carry it all away plausibly within it self, and for the drayning
Trench be sure thou endeavor to carry it as near upon a straight Line as is
possible, the Reason shall afterward appear: This work is of more advantage,
and more to thy profit than thou imaginest, but thy exercise therein will teach
thee more.

Thou must also well consider the proper seasons of the year, The best floating
season.
bringing on thy water, which is in the beginning of Winter, when Grass grows
least, and beginns to fail, and is clean eaten off thy Land, all Winter long is
very seasonable for this work; and the best season to take it off, is in or
about the beginning of March; Upon moist Land.
thou may make what Improvement almost thou desire also upon thy moist,
cold, Land, if thou observe the directions given.

But for thy warm sound Land thou may continue thy water, Upon warm Land.
and keep it working upon thy Land, almost all the year round, Provided that
thou keep it not too long upon a place, for thou must be sure to have an
especial eye, that thou soak not thy Land too much, that Cattle treading, or
Grazing upon it, foyl it not, for th^n the Rush will come upon thee, and it
will overgrow thee, and exceedingly prejudice thy hopes, (mistake me not) I
speak not here to advise thee to continue thy water thus long upon one place,
but be ever removing it from place to place, but especially to show the proper
seasons to make use of this Piece of Improvement.

Thou have also another great advantage hereby, having water drawn over thy
Land, thou art in such a Capacity that in case of drought in time of Summer,
thou need not to fear it, A double Advantage of having a water course cut
out.
thou may now and then wet over thy Land in the heat thereof, when Grass if
it have but Moisture, will grow far faster in so hot a time than any, but be
sure not to soak thy ground too much; Keep thy Land rather in a thirsting
condition, not glutted ready to spew it up again, so may thou preserve thy
Land green, and fruitful, when others are scorched all away, Then may a weeks
Grass or a Load of Hay possibly be worth Three, or Four.

I my self by these opportunities, President of one year cu^ting but five or
six and the next twenty four.
have cut twenty four Load in a Meadow; where I cut but five or six the year
before, when Hay sold at a great value; The directions exactly followed, I will
lose my Credit if thou fail of the effect promised.

And for thy encouragement, President of sandy Land.
I will give thee a president or two: Certain Acres of light, sandy Land, were
taken for a Term of one and twenty years, at the value of one shilling six
pence per Acre, and that was more than it was worth, a little Brook with a
Land-flood, issuing out of a Common Field, was brought over it, the Land
levelled, and made fit and even to receive it, for it was very Irregular, and
of great high Ridges and Furrows before (after the manner of that Country) and
after two years working, thirty shillings an Acre would have been given for
it, (I my self offered it, and some of that Land also was my own, but it was
refused) being wrought just by the aforesaid Directions. I have made the like
Improvement my self upon Lands of the same nature, to as great advancement as
is here spoken off, too tedious to discourse. M. Plat also in his book,
produces a president of Lands, Mr. Plats President.
Improved by Water, with the charge of three hundred shillings, to be worth
three hundred pounds per annum, but what it was worth before the three hundred
shillings were expended upon it, he says not, but no question, very great
Improvement, I believe it was.

As for Boggy Land also, President of Boggy Lands.
I have recovered several Pieces next to plain Quagmires: The means of
reducing whereof shall be discoursed by themselves in the next Chapter: So bad
and boggy it was that Cattle could not Graze upon it out of danger; And indeed
it bore nothing but Cattayle's; And by this course I recovered it to perfect
soundness, and made it worth betwixt thirty and forty shillings per Acre, and
so dare undertake the like where ever, lying under the aforesaid Capacities.
Many more presidents of this nature are visible in many parts of this Nation,
Some as great Improvements as these, Some less, and yet very great; And all
done without any other Cost or Expense of charge, in any other materials than
Poor men's labors: Which to me is a second argument of Encouragement, to
promote all works of this nature under these Capacities. One thing more I pray
thee observe, that though it be the common practice of most men in drayning
their Land to make many shallow Trenches of about one foot deep, and lay their
Mould on heaps, that so they may spoil put little ground, both which I must
necessarily reprove as ill Husbandry: For though I am all for Floating, To much
Trenching is madness
and Drayning, which will necessarily occasion many Trenches, yet I am an Enemy
to this ordinary and usual way of Trenching; first for so many Trenches, I
conceive no need in these works, nor upon any Land whatsoever, but something
more of them, more seasonably in the second Piece of Improvement.

CHAP. VI.
Shows the true Artificial making of the Floating Trench, and how to Level
Land, and the suddainest way to Soard it.
USually I shall advise, to make not above Two, or Three material Trenches,
having first taken up thy Turf, There are two sorts of Trenching.
just under the Grass roots, both thin and square, and as broad as can be
taken up, which I exceedingly prize for many uses, and preserve. The one called
a Flowing of Floating Trench, wherein I carry my water: which usually after I
have brought my water where I intend to work it, I carry it in a Trench seldom
above one foot deep, Manner of making the floating Trench.
or a foot and half, and many times not above eight, or nine inches deep: that
so it being made Artificially, ( viz,) so Level and taper, and Narrower and
Narrower, as aforesaid, the further it goes, that it may so cast out the water,
that it may flow over the same for a furlongs length al at once, which is the
Excellency of it; And then another drayning Trench running parallel with this,
or Two if the Land lie very flat, and of such a depth as it may not only
receive all the water that Flows over the Land clearly, but that it may also
drain away the cold Moisture and Bogginess that offends the Land, by breeding
either Rush or Bogg, and of such a latitude, or breadth, from my floating
Trench, as thy water is of strength to Improve, without Prejudicing of it, by
breeding Rush, Flag or filth, as aforesaid; And as I make not many Trenches, so
I shall fill up all others that are not serviceable to these, and so have done
many a one, that others have made to Drain their Land withal, and with this
One or Two Draines cast out, in the lowest part of my Land, laid dry more Land
than a hundred of these common Trenches would, for a thousand Trenches made
above the Corruption that feeds the Bogginess, A shallow Trench does certain
hurt and uncertain good.
or Rushes, never Draynes, or takes away the cause, that the effect cannot
possibly cease. As for heaping the Earth, and moyling the ground, that I also
conceive may be prevented by maintaining one Horse and Cart, and sometimes a
couple of Wheel-Barrowes, How to prevent heaping Earth, and in evening the
ground.
or a double Wheel-Barrow with two Wheels, made big enough for two men to
wield, or a little Cart made with two little Wheels, and another lesser than
them by half, to bear it at a constant pitch to fill, which may be so made,
that either with two men or a horse you may carry away a great weight with much
speed, and shift it horse and man at pleasure, which shall be described at
large in the shadow of it in the Tenth Chapter of Trenching tools, and into
them I cast my Mould, as I digg or cut out my Trench, and so carry it away when
I first digg it, either into some old Trench or hollow place, and there lay it,
and then take my Turf, which I took up in all my other Trenches, and cover over
that Earth, and there will be as good Soard that year, if it be laid before
February enter, as in many parts of the Field beside; And so shall save both
the labor of removing my heaps afterward, and the spoiling of so much Land as
they would cover. And for the better carrying on this Improvement by Water, if
thy Lands be either Hilly or Banky, or lie high Ridge or Furrows, upon which
thy water will never work kindly, take a Direction on or two for the more easy
Levelling of the same (how to level or plain Lands for watering most easily,
and Artificially) which thou may do either of these two ways, Either of
which I cannot more especially commend unto thee, thine own Experience will
demonstrate that.

The first is lev^lling by the Plough, which thou may do by two or three
dlowings and gain o crop also if thou rather affect it, How to Level Land.
herein thou were best to begin about the latter end of September first to
plough thy land, which I advise to cast as most men do a Fallow, and then in
the beginning of December, be sure to give it a second plowing, just overthwart
all the Lands, and so cut the Turf, that the Soard may have all the Winters
frost to wrox, and moulder it, which toward March thou may plow again, and
so cast it or raise it, Plowing to Level,
as thy Land requires, to bring it most even, and level, and if one more
plowing will not do it, then thou must do more, and Harrow it also, to draw
down high places, and fill up Valleys, and if it yet be too irregular, and
some places so high that the Plough and Harrow will not bring them down, thou
must get some Laborers, with their Spades, Spade to help Levelling.
and take down those places, and cast them into Regularity. A Labourer with a
Spade upon this wrought Land will do abundance in a day; but be most Exact and
curious in Levelling thy Land, it brings more Advantages than thou art aware
of, or I have time to show: And then about the midst of April, sow thy Lands
with such seeds as are more suitable to the nature, and richness of it, but sow
it not too thick by any meant, nor too thin neither, but the thinner is thy
Corn, the stronger it will be, and the more grass will grow among, which will
help thee more in the Soarding of it, than hinder thee in the Crop of it, which
Crop may pay a considerable sum toward this Charges; But it thou desire a
more speedy Soarding of it, and have no respect to the present profit nor
charge, The speediest Soarding of Land.
in respect of a sudden dispatch of it, then as before, so soon as Grass
begins to stand at a stay, and grows but a little, plow thy Land a thin broad
furrow, exceeding exact, and true, or rather flay it, or take off thy Skin or
Turf with a very broad whinged or rushed share, as broad a Furrow as thy Plough
will carry; and as soon as thou have plowed it, cut it all at such length, as
thy Turf may hold taking up, and heap thy Turf speedily upon the next Land, and
then plow thy Land again and cast it down, and if it lie exceeding high; cast
it twice, and then two men with their Spades will level any uneven Hill or
Ridge most easily, and thou may either with the Plough or Spade, or both,
immediately bring it flat, and pursue the work with all violence, the Turf
being taken up, speed thy levelling with Plough and Spade, that so thou may
be suddenly ready to lay down thy Turf again, and then take this Turf, by all
means before the Grass be killed, or lose the color, or deaded, and lay it
down as thou plowedst it up, every Joint meeting and closing as even as thou
can possibly, and expect how much soever thou can make plain, and Level
before February, thou may reap great fruit, or a good Crop of Grass that
Summer, especially if thou have Water to float it withal, and when thou have
done One Land, then thou may remove thy Furrows, or Turf, to that thou have
levelled, and work that Land accordingly as the other, and then Turf it also,
and so go forward throughout thy Field one after another.

Some others have levelled all by the Spade, Levelling Land by the Spade.
and by that means they have, or may more certainly mix their hungry Land, and
fat Land more equally, and lay it down all alike hereby, which course also I
very well approve, and if a man have very good Tools, and Irons made on
purpose, one to cut out his Turf, and another to take it up square, and even,
as big as it will possibly hold to take up, or a man can easily raise with his
natural strength, which Tools are hereafter to be discoursed in the Tenth
Chapter, he may very near dispatch as much, as otherwise is directed, if the
Land be very uneven. I have had a man has taken up Turf all day long near two
foot square, if not above, and heaped the same, A president what one man has
done at Turffing and Levelling Land.
and three other men have followed, and levelled, and he has also laid and
planted down the same as fast as they could level it: You cannot possibly
believe how fast work will go forward, with true Artificial Tools made exact
to every purpose, and how much delight men will have to work with them. And if
thou will be curiously Exact indeed, thou may after a Shower, or after thy
Land is once soaked, or thoroughly wet thorough, get two or three broad Beaters
made of a Plank betwixt two or three Inches thick, fourteen or fifteen Inches
long, and about nine Inches broad, with a good strong Stail put into, or near
the midst of it, with which beat over all thy Land; one lusty Labourer will
go over a great deal of Land, and it will lay it curiously and even, and very
delightful to the eye, and suitable to the Water working.

And having brought your Land thus level, then your water will work most
gallantly, and even, Floating every place Proportionably, which you must take
special care of, and not suffer it to run a whole Stream over some, and scarce
discernable over other parts, but be sure every where alike, and when you have
your water over your Land, that it run over it with a constant thin Stream, it
will Improve fast enough, for soaking water breeds the filth, which you must
avoid as the most Pestilent Enemy to this Husbandry.

The second Piece of Improvement containing the Drayning, or Reducing of Boggy
Lands to sound Pasture, is further discoursed in the Chapters following.
CHAP. VII.
WHerein is to be handled Drayning, or taking away Superfluous and Venomous
Water, which lies in the Earth, and much occasioneth Bogginess, Miriness,
Rushes, Flags, and other filth, and is indeed the chief cause of Barrenness in
any Land of this nature. Something I have already spoken as to Bogginess, that
lies under a Capacity to be floated with Water, either River or Land-floods;
in the Reducement whereof, you must precisely apply your self to al Parts of
the former Chapter, for bringing your Water upon your Land, and working it
also, and taking it off again; Especially that your Drayning-Trench or Trenches
(for possibly in this sort of Land more may be required, according to the
nature of the lying of your Land, if Uneven, and full of Dales, and Valleys) be
made one Spades graft or pitch below the matter of the Bog, I mean the Spring,
for so it is; which must be clearly Drayned, which I cannot too often remind you
of; But now I only speak to those Lands which are from under such a Capacity
of floating with Water; And are only such as are covered with constant Water,
and Lakes, or else the Boggy, Miry Lands, it self, and have no River, or
Land-flood to be brought over them, and the remedies being equally applicatory
to both for the most part, I will propose general remedies. I say that
Drayning is an excellent and chiefest means for their Reducement; and for the
depth of such Draynes I cannot possibly bound, because I have not time, and
opportunity, to take in all circumstances, therefore in general thus.

Be sure thy Draines be such, How to make thy Drayn to drain a Bog to purpose.
and so deep, and so deep, as thou have a descent in the end thereof to take
away all thy water from thy Drayn to the very bottom, or else it is to no use
at all; for suppose thou make thy Drain as high as an house, and can not take
thy water from it, thy work is lost; for look how low soever is thy lowest
level in thy Drain, thou may drain thy water so low, and not one hairs
breadth lower will it drain thy ground than theu have a fall or desent to take
it cleanly from thy Drain; therefore be especially careful herein, and then if
thou can get a low descent from thence, carry thy Drain upon thy Level
until thou art assuredly got under that moisture, mirinesse, or water, that
either offends thy Bog, or covers thy Land; and go one Spades graft deeper by
all means, or thereabouts, and then thou need not tie thy self precisely to
a dead Level, but as thy ground rises, or as the moisture lies higher, so
may thou rise also, so that thou keep one Spades graft as aforesaid under it;
Where water lies in Rushy Land.
and that thou may not fall herein, observe that in Cold Rushy Land this
moisture or cold hungry water is found beneath the first and second swarth of
thy Land; and then oft-times thou come immediately unto a little Gravill, or
Stoniness, in which this water is, and sometimes below this in a hungry
gravel, and many times this Gravel or Stoniness lies lower as aforesaid; but
in Boggy Land it usually lies deeper than in Rushy, but to the bottom where
the spewing Spring lies thou must go, and one spades depth or graft beneath,
how deep soever it be, if thou will drain thy Land to purpose. I am forced to
use Repetions of some things, because of the suitableness of the things, to
which they are applied; as also because of the slowness of peoples
Apprehensions of them, as appears by the non-practise of them, the which were
ever you see drayning and trenching you shall rarely find few or none of them
wrought to the bottom.

And for the matter or Bogg-maker that is most easily discovered, The matter
that feeds the Bog, where that lies.
for sometimes it lies within two foot of the top of the ground, and sometimes
and very usually within three or four foot, yet also some lie far deeper, six,
eight, or nine foot, and all these are feazable to be wrought, and the Bog to
be discovered, but not until thou come past the black Earth, or Turf, which
usually is two or three foot thick, unto another sort of Earth, and sometimes
to old Wood; and Trees, I mean the proportion and form thereof, but the nature
is turned as soft, and tender as the earth it self, which have layen there no
man knows how long, and then to a white Earth many times, Every Bog has most
certainly a living Spring within it.
like Lime as the Tanner, and white-Tawer, takes out their Lime-pits, and then
to a Gravel, or Sand, where the water lies, and then one Spades depth clearly
under this which is indeed nothing else but a spring that would fain burst
forth at some certain place, which if it did clearly break out, and run quick
and lively as other Springs do, thy Bog would die, but being held down by the
power and weight of the Earth, that opposes the Spring which boyles and works
up into the Earth, and as it were blows it up, and fills the Earth with
Wind, as I may call it, and makes it swell and rise like a Puf-ball, as seldom
or never you shall find any Bogg, but it lies higher and rising from the
adjacent Land to it, so that I believe could you possibly light of the very
place where the Spring naturally lies, you need but open that very place to
your Quick-spring, and give it a clear vent, and certainly your Bog would
decay, by reason whereof it has so corrupted and swollen the Earth, as a Dropsy
does the Body, for if you observe the Mould, it is very light, and hollow, and
three foot square thereof is not above the weight of one sollid foot of
natural Earth, Clay, or Land, whereby I conceive that how much soever this
Mould is forced from the natural weight, or hardness of solid Earth, or Clay,
so much it is corrupted, swollen, or increased and blown up, and so much it must
be taken down, or let forth, before ever it be reduced; I therefore prescribe
this direction, ( viz.)

Go to the bottom of the Bog, Showing how every Drayn must ^e carried up from
the lowest level.
and there make a Trench in the sound ground, or else in some old Ditch, so low
as thou verily conceivest thy self assuredly under the Level of the Spring or
spewing water, and then carry up thy Trench into thy Bog straight through the
middle of it, one foot under that Spring or spewing water upon thy Level,
unless it rise higher, as many times the water or Spring rises as the Land
rises, and sometimes lies very level unto the very head of thy Bog, unto
which thou must carry thy Drain, or within two or three yards of the very head
of it, and then strike another Trench overthwart the very head both ways, from
that middle Trench, as far as thy Bog goes, all along to the very end of it,
still continuing one foot at least under the same, and possibly this may work a
strange change in the ground, of it self, without any more Trenching,

But for these common and many Trenches, Shallow Trench reprehended.
often times crooked too, that men usually make in their Boggy grounds, some one
foot, some Two, never having respect to the cause or matter that makes the
Bog, to take that way, I say away with them as a great piece of Folly, lost
labor and spoil; which I desire as well to preserve the Reader from, as to put
him upon any profitable Experiment: for truly they do far more hurt than good,
destroy with their Trench and Earth cast out, half their Land, danger their
Cattle, and when the Trench is old it stops more than it takes away, and
when it is new, as to the destroying the Bog it does just nothing, only take
away a little water, which falls from the heavens, and weakens the Bog nothing
at all, and to the end it pretends is of no use, for the cause thereof lies
beneath and under the bottom of all their works, and so remains as fruitful
to the Bog as before, and more secure from reducement than if nothing was done
at all upon it. The most sure way to destroy a Bog.


Or thus thou may work it some what a more certain way but more chargable, (
viz.) After thou have brought a Trench to the bottom of the Bog, then cut a
good Substantial Trench about thy Bog, I mean according to the form of thy
Bog, whether round, square, or long, or three or four yards within thy Boggy
ground, for so far I do verily believe it will Drayn that which thou leavest
without thy Trench at the depth aforesaid, that is underneath the spring water
round; And when thou have so done, make one work or two just overthwart it,
upwards and downwards, all under the matter of the Bog, as is aforesaid, and in
one years patience through Gods blessing, expect thy desired Issue; and if it
be in such a place as will occasion great danger to thy Cattle, then having
wrought thy Works, and Draines as aforesaid, all upon straight lines, by all
means, prevent as many Angls, The prejudice by crooks and angles in water
courses.
Crookes, and Turnings as is possible, for those will but occasion stoppages of
the water, and filling up of Trenches, and loss of ground, and much more
trouble than otherwise. Then thou must take good green Faggots, Willow, Alder,
Elm, or Thorn, and lay in the bottom of thy works, and then take thy Turf thou
tookest up in the top of thy Trench, How to make Draynes without any prejudice
to any sheep or b^ast
and Plant upon them with the green Soard downwards, and then fill up thy works
level again, until thou come to the bottom or nether end of thy work, where
thy Trench is so shallow, that it will not endanger thy Cattle; or rather take
great Pibble stones or Flint stones, and so fill up the bottom of thy Trench
about fifteen Inches high, The best way of preventing danger to Cattle in
Drayning.
and take thy Turf and plant it as aforesaid, being cut very fit for the
Trench, as it may join close as it is laid down, and then having covered it all
over with Earrh, and made it even as the other ground, wait and expect a
wonderful effect through the blessing of God; but if thou may without
eminent danger leave thy works open, that is most certain of all. I might make
more particular Application of the premises to the drowned and covered parts of
the Fens and Marshes in the next Chapter, upon which they will have such an
Operation, as to reduce them to perfect Pasture, Fens and Marshes reco^ery.
and to great profit, and to all sorts of such natured Lands, thou may apply
them and save me much labor, being the main means of Fen Drayning. As for
Sluices, Floodgates, Waires, and Dams, are but secundary means, and being the
proper work of an Engineer or good Carpenter, I shall say no more for brevity
sake: But if thou can by any means make thy self capable of bringing any
constant Stream or powerful Landflood and Water, and constantly Flow over the
same, as in the former Chapter, that will reduce it to a greater Advance,
Floring best destroys a Beg.
and work the most certainest destruction to the Bog of all, as I have before
declared by Experience.

As I conceive, the Bogs in many parts of the Nation were occasioned thus:
wherever is a Bog, The probable occasion or first cause of Bogginess.
I am confident was formerly a Spring, which Spring running and venting it
self, kept the Land round about it sound and dry, as where most clear Springs
are at this day; but the said Spring stopping up, either with leaves, or
Cattels treading, or wood falling upon the same, or other filth (for I believe
many, or most parts of this Land was very woody in former Ages) the Spring was
stopped that it could not clearly vent, and so being a Living water, would not
be suppressed, or buried, but swells and boyles up into Bogginess, and so vents
it self by little and little in a greater Compass of Land, because it cannot
break forth clear together in a lesser, because of the pressure and weight of
the Earth upon it, and this is the most natural cause thereof that I can
gather; And my Reason is this, In many Bogs (I will not say in all) I have
found great Pieces, or Boughs, or Bodies of Trees lying in the bottom of the
Bog, Four or Five foot deep, in the full proportion of a Tree or Bough, as it
fell in, but when you come to take it up, you may cut it with your Spade just
as as you do your Earth, and it goes to Earth, but how this should come so low,
and lie so deep, and so familiarly in Lands of this nature, and not as
frequently upon sound Lands, I cannot conceive otherwise than as aforesaid.

CHAP. VIII.
Answers several Objections made against the Probalities of so great Advance
by Floating.
IT may be some will still object and say, Ob.
that these Affirmations are but Pretenses, These are but pretenses.
no such Advantage or ease as is promised can possibly be perforwed.

But I say again, Ans. 1.
many Gentlemen can witness the truth hereof, Many Lands can show it, and if
thou will not believe Relation, believe thy eyes, go and see; he who prints my
Book, shall be enabled to direct thee, where thou may see more than here is
affirmed.

Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and Wales-ward, and
Northward, there are many more Improvements made upon coarse lands, than is in
other parts upon better Lands, and the Improvements made in the Wood-land-parts
speak out the truth hereof, much whereof being most Barren of all lands, is
improved so high, as that it is at present as rich as many parts of the
Fieldon, and fuller of wealthier Inhabitants; I am confident more rich Farmers
of lateyeares than when their lands were naturally more Rich and Fertile. I
give not all, nor all sorts of Presidents of Improvements I could by far, but
only a few here and there to quicken thy desires after them, the Experimenting
whereof will bring more to thee, if not bring thee to them. These things I know
of my own knowledge.

Another he objects that it will breed the Rush, Watering breeds the Rush.
the Flag, and Mareblab, and so this floating land shall be more prejudicial
than advantageous.

I answer, its true possibly, and easily it may, at I have showed before, Ans.
but be thou careful of my directions, consider thy Land if it be dry and
sound, and thy water if it be Fat and Rank, and make the drayning Trench as
before directed, and never fear it, all the Difficulty is in the cold Land, and
Barren Water, on which also observe punctually my Directions, and I Will warrant
it; Make thy Drain deep enough, and not too far off thy Floating Course,
Especial season for watering Land.
and water it with a good force of water, and observe the seasons, which are,
all the cold Winter when the Rush grows not, It must have warmth to exhale,
and draw it out, and be sure to lay thy Land sound and dry, by the Drayning
Trench, that it may drain under that Moisture, Filth, and Venom, as aforesaid,
that maintains them, and then believe me, or deny Scripture, which I hope thou
dare not, as Bildad unto Job.

Can the Rush grow without Mire, Job 8. 12.
or the Flag without Water? etc. That Interrogation plainly shows, Ans. 2.
that the Rush cannot grow the water being taken from the root; for it is not
the moystness upon the surface of the Land, for then every rain should increase
the Rush, but it is that which lies at the Root, which drained away at bottom,
leaves it naked and barren of relief. A sign when Land begins to fatten.
But suppose it should breed some few (and the Mareblab too,) which is a sign
thy Land begins to f^tten, then take thy whole Stream, or a good considerable
stream, and bring upon that place, and overflow it, as it before directed in the
Third and Fourth Chapter, in December and January, if it take them not away, I
will do it for thee; Floating Land will as certainly destroy the Rush, the
Flagg, and Mareblab (being well drayned again) as work the least Improvement,
and no Land richer than Watered Meades.

Thou will say, Obj.
many men have made great Experiments this way, Many have done great things
herein and always to no purpose.
and done great works, and cast up all again; Either the profits would not
answer the charge, or else it would hinder some other Lands advance another
way, or else could not bring their Land to their desired Improvement, or else
do so little as was not worth their labor.

I had hoped that I had laid down such undeniable grounds and experiences, as
would have removed all those Objections; but since they are made, have patience,
and I will return a particular answer to each clause of the Objection.

1. I say, were all this true, as possibly it may in some men, and in some
parts, yet be not discouraged because of what I have said, and the Experiences
made are also obvious, and i^ the view of them thou shall see more advantage
made than is he^^ affirmed.

2. And secondly to confirm thy Objection, I say, We had some Mountebancks
abroad that have held out specious pretenses of wonders, Mountebanck Engineers
projections.
as many Engineers have done in drawing Water, or drayning Lead-Mines, Tin, or
Cole-Mines, and to that purpose have projected Engines with double, treble, and
fourfold Motions; Mysterious Engines rep^^^ved.
conceiving and affirming, every Work, or Motion, would multiply the ease in
raising the water, but not considering that certainly it must multiply the
weight and burden thereof, and also put such an Impossibility unto Tackles,
Geares, and Wheels for holding, that all would fly in sunder at the very
first motion, and continually one thing or other out of order, and snap in
sunder as fast as amended, because of the great strength is required to move
the same; mistake me not, I do not here reprove the use of Engine Work, a good
Engineer is a gallant and most useful Instrument in a Commonwealth, and they
have principles most able to make the best Husbands and Improvers, I only warn
you of Imposters: Engines are most necessary, and eases all our burdens, and
all our pondrous massy substances are or may be lightened thereby; and a good
Engineer in these days has taught us the usefulness of them, little less
necessary than our very wel-being; but those few Instruments here held forth
are plain and simple, and my Projections nothing but Country Experiments, that
I fear the plainess of them will be no less offensive, they being only to give
a moderate ease and speed to so toylsome and costly lobours.

3. I answer thirdly, that many have made some Experiments, but those I
conceive have neither been full Experiments in all particulars, nor Regular
according to the particular directions here given; And so may as well spoil
all, as he that takes all or most of the Ingredients in a Medicine, and applies
it to the Disease prescribed, but either he misseth in the Composition, or else
in the Application; or else if he be right in all, he may fail for want of
patience to wait the issue, but casts all away as worth nothing, and claps in
with another Receipt, and so is able to give no positive resolution what the
effect thereof might be. Therefore I say as before I have said, Trace me along
in all particulars, and fail in none of them, and if the issue fail, challenge
the Author as a deceiver.

4. And that I may answer the full charge, I say, take my counsel for the
several Tools proposed, and I question not that in most ordinary Works, the
charges shall not be any proportion to the profit. But say an Acre of Land
should cost thee forty shillings the fitting and preparing of it, as possibly
some may it may lie so irregularly, it is then as possible in two or three
years time, the same may be made worth forty shillings per annum; yea more,
many other Acres thou may work to as good an advantage for twenty shi^lings,
some for ten shillings, some for five shillings, and some less; I could give
the particular Experiments for them all, were it more necessary than brevity,
which I so much affect, and resolve. Object.


And for prejudicing other Lands, Answ.
as many strongly object, it is almost as if one Hive of Bees should prosper
more in one Garden than twenty would; the contrary Experience constantly
manifests, Object.
and so I have done with this improvement. Answ.
And for improving so little as it is not worth the labor, that is as
frivolous also. Many score thousands of Acres in England are under this
Capacity, and may be reduced to a twenty or thirty fold improvement; yea in
some parts of the Kingdom, some hundreds of Acres together may be wonderfully
advanced this way to a proportionable Advantage; and with less charge
proportionably than a few.

There is also much Boggy and Miry Land that may be reduced to advancement, and
such capacity as some may lie under may be improved twenty fold or more. And as
for coarse Fen and Marsh Lands upon both Fresh and Salt waters, Marsh Lands.
there have been such gallant notable Achievements, by many Accurate and
Ingenious Spirits, The first Fendrayne's or Levellers highly to be honored.
to whom the Nation owes high Acknowledgements, and whose works and
experimenuts I do admire and honor, to whom I desire to be a Pupil: Yet
notwithstanding their Discoveries, and their works, cut forth throughout the
Nation, and left to Idle Practitioners, and Slothful impatient Slubberers, who
have not only done it by the halfes, but stifled many a gallant plotted
Opportunity of a far greater Advance than it has produced; And so possibly in
many parts of the Nation there may be great Reparations of these Ruins, and a
certain Reducement to high Advantage; As also some Addition possibly to their
Model, or some increase to their Beginnings, Invention far harder than an
Addition to it.
which is acknowledged far easier than the first Projection, and shall be
discoursed at the latter end of this Chapter.

The last way of Improvement of these sorts of Lands, prejudiced by water,
Cutting watercourse strait no small a^vantage.
is a way appliable to every other sort of Land whatever, which lie under that
Opportunity, or Capacity, which is cutting straight the watercourse of little
Brooks and Streams that run many times in spirall lines, and sometimes
circularly, as they would make the figure 8. and so lose as much more excellent
Land as need be, nay in some places twice or thrice as much; besides these
Angles, Triangles, and almost Squares, and Circles, much endangering Cattle,
by goaring, rushing, and thrusting them in, and also makes such stoppages, and
oppositions to the water, that hinders the Current of it, and occasioneth it to
lie soaking on the Land, that it either breeds Rush, Flag, or Mareblab; Also
the aforesaid directions is a great means of laying sound much Land overcome by
Bogginess, the water lying so upon it, that it drowneth or stifleth a great
part of the fruitfulness of it, yea, suffocateth and choaketh others also
bordering upon it, no small prejudice to the Nation in general, and to many
Town-ships and persons in particular. A straight watercourse cut a
considerable depth, in a thousand parts of this Nation, would be more
advantageous than we are aware of, or I will task my self here to dispute
further. And though many persons are interessed therein, and some will agree,
and others will oppose; one Creek lies on one side of the River, in on^ Lords
Manor, and another lies on the other side, and diverse men own the same, why
may not one neighbor change with another when both are gainers? Many thousands
of acres recoverable wi^h little charge to manifold advantage
If not, why may they not be compelled for their own good, and the
Commonwealths advantage? I dare say thousands of Acres of very rich Land may
hereby be gained, and possibly as many more much amended, that are almost
destroyed; but a Law is wanting herein for present, which I hope will be
supplied if it may appear Advancement to the Public; for to Private Interests
it is not possible to be the least prejudice, when every man has benefit, and
each man may also have an equal allowance, if the least prejudiced.

But a word or two more, and (...) shall conclude this Chapter, and it, is a
little to further this Improvement through a great destruction (as some may
say) it is the removing or destroying of all such Mills, and none else, as
drow^ and corrupt more Lands than themselves are worth to the Commonwealth,
and they are such as are kept up, Some Mils destroy more than they are worth.
or dammed so high, as that they boggifie all the Lands that lie under their
Mill-head; such Mills as are of little worth, or are by constant great charges
maintained, I advise to be pulled down; the advance of the Land, when the water
is let run his course, and not impounded, will be of far greater value many
times: But in case the Mills should be so necessary and profitable too, and far
more than the Lands they spoil, I shall then advise, that under thy Mill-dam,
so many yards wide from it as may prevent breaking through, To prevent
corrupting land by a Mildam as much as may be.
thou make a very deep Trench all along so far as thy lands are putrified, and
thereinto receive all the issuing spewing water, and thereby stop or cut off
the feeding of it upon thy meadow, and carry it away into thy back-water or
false course, by as deep a Trench, cut through the most low and convenient part
of thy Meads: But put case thou should have no convenient fall on that side
thy Mildam, then thou must make some course, or plant some trough under thy
Mill-dam, and so carry it under into some lower course that may preserve it
from soaking thy meadows, or pastures under it, and by this means thou may
in a good measure reduce thy Land to good soundness, and probably wholly cure
it, and preserve thy Mill also. As for that objection of hindering the grinding
of corn, it is very frivolous, for

First, there are in many parts so many Mills, as hinder one another, and are
scarce able to live one by another.

2. There are, or may be Wind-mills erected in most parts, that may supply that
want, and are less chargable than Water-mills: And for that some say the wind
is uncertain, I say it is so certain, that I am confident few or none need want
grinding if they can get corn; for I my self live in a Country where are no
other but Wind-mills, and have scarce in a twelvemonth known any want of
grinding. But should it be so, one may be supplied by Horse-mills; one good
horse will grind wheat easily, and two good horses will grind any good dry
corn, and are not at that charge for repairs, as both Wind-mills and
Water-mills are.

3. I say it is possible to devise a Mill, with truth of workmanship, and some
other advantages, that two men may grind any good corn whatsoever, and that as
much in an hour as any usual Water-mill in the Country; and to this work I
shall commend one Mr. Dimock, a very ingenious Gentleman, and one who has
discovered so much to the World already, as may give sufficient testimony of
the truth of his abilities in this kind.

CHAP. IX.
The Ninth Chapter shall be a brief and plain discovery of the most Feacible
way of Fen-drayning, or regaining drowned Lands, or in bounding of the Sea from
it.
AS to the Drayning or laying dry the Fenns, those profitable works, the
Commonwealths glory, let not Curs Snarl, nor dogs bark there at, the
unparralleld advantages of the World; give me leave, because hitherto all men
have Monopolised their inventions as they call them, as possibly they might
lawfully unto themselves, and the mystery, and no man's Experiences therein have
at all been published to public view, which whether it do arise from a
privacy of Spirit, self advancement, or rather from an ungrateful frame of
men, Governors trusted with the public Weal of a Nation, or great men well
able to recompense public discoveries, whose shares will be greatest of the
Advantage (which last through Charity I am bound, and from sad Experiences many
Ingenious hearts have found, I do believe) but no man as I ever yet saw or
heard, has published any thing at all to any such purpose as to dismystery the
same, therefore by the good leave of thy patience I shall take boldness to pull
off the vizor of those apprehensions I have found therein, and discover the
open face of that Experience I have made, be it beautiful or deformed, in
pity to move others to cover the deformities thereof, or put more beauty
thereon.

In the discourse whereof I shall heartily endeavor to draw it into as plain a
Map or Platform, as the roughness and confusedness of the work, or my
weaknesses will admit; and to that end shall confine my self to these
pareiculars.

1. What drayning is, and a discovery of Fen-Lands how they lie to those that
know them not.

2. To discover some of the Rubbs or hindrances that lie in the way of working
it to the Commonwealths adadvantage.

3. To hold out the Cure, or best and speediest way for the Reducement or
recovery thereof to perfect foundness.

4. To discover the best and most profitablest way of Improvement of those
recovered Lands to the best advantage of the Commonwealth.

In all which I shall say but little, nor can say half that is to be said
herein, but to each shall speak somewhat as near to truth as may be, and leave
the Compleatment to succeeders.

1. What Fen-drayning or the recovering of Lands from under water is, that
deserves the name or merits the Title of perfect Drayning.
I say it is not only the overly taking away the Water from off the Surface or
over part of the Turf or Sword, What Fen-Drayning is not.
for then might all bogs or quagmires be recovered, and easily would; Nor the
taking off the downfalls, as our Fen men call them, that is, the waters falling
from the Heavens in great Raines and showers; Nor is it the taking off all
Land-falls, Land-floods, or great waters from off those Lands; No nor the doing
of all these in a customary and usual way that does or will deserve to be
called a perfect Drayning.

But it is as I formerly said about recovering Boggy-Lands, a going to the
bottom of the Corruption, What perfect Drayning is indeed.
and taking away the Venom that feeds the Fen or Moor, that wateriness and
coldness which gnaws out the spirit at the root.

And the taking away this is perfect Drayning; for although I say the other
Draynings are not the best nor perfect, yet I neither discommend the other, nor
discourage from them where they are made already, or may be made he reafter,
but highly commend them or any of them where otherwise there would be none, or
the Lands lie wholly drowned; yet being in all Arts, Trades, and Callings, we
ought to study cut the Mysteries thereof, and all men do or ought to entdeavour
to raise the richest fruits, and draw forth the greaest plenty to the
Commonwealth they can, out of the whole Earth; so out of this small parcel we
never accomplish The End until we have brought it to it is best perfection,
that is, not only to recover it from drowning to bearing sedge or reedy flaggy
grass, which is the first fruits of Draining, and from which the rude ignorant
Fen-man desires no appeal, nor is it to recover it to bear morish foul strong
grass in Summer, and Drowned in Winter, nor yet to lie dry both Winter and
Summer upon the Surface of the Earth, and wet and Boggy at the spades or
Plough-share point, How to know when Land is firmly Drayned.
nay though it will through a dry season or heat of Summer bear the Plough, and
much of it may be converted to Tillage or Corning, but still unsound in the
bottom, all this makes not (though a good) yet not perfect work, but the
perfection is in the reducing it to soundness and perfectness of Mould and
Earth, whether Sand, Clay, Gravel, or mixed, then returns it to a perfect
Soard and pure Turf, brings forth the small common Thistle, Clover, Crowflower,
and Hony-sukle, then shall you reap the Quintessence of the Earth, in breeding,
feeding, or Corning. These Lands thus perfectly Drayned, will return to be the
richest of all your Lands, and the better Drayned the better Land. Where are
your richest Lands of England, but your River Lands, your Marsh Lands, that all
of them lie under the Level of the Sea, and were it not inbounded by the
banks, and the power of Gods word, would all return to the Sea again, but
through their perfect Drayning, are most excellent sound and warm Lands, yea
some of them so good, that usually the Winters profit of their Grazing
equallizeth the Summer, as witnesses much of the Marsh-Land near London,
Blackwall, etc. with many other parts? Whence is the richness of your English
Holland Land but from the pure and perfect Drayning? And the outlandish
Holland Lands recovered to this great height of Richness? I know all Lands are
not so Fecible as others are, nor some cannot possibly be brought to that
perfection as others may, I shall provoke unto the best Improvement, and where
there can be a Male-Improvement offer not to the Commonwealth a Female, and so
you have as plain a description what Drayning is as I can give you: I am of a
strong opinon that there is very much Fen-Land may be recovered to as great a
worth and goodness in it self as any Meadow Marsh-Land in England; which leads
me to the second branch of this particular, to describe the Manner and lying of
the Fens, to the which I am induced too for these Reasons.

1. Because many know them not at all.

2. Because many are discouraged from the thoughts of attempting the
Improvement of them, that are very able thereunto, and I am confident would
have recovered them, yet partly because of their ignorance of the lying of
them, conceiving them to be some great Lake, Pan, or Mere, as are some in
Lancashire, Cheshire, or Yorkshire, that lies so low that has no fall or
outlet can be made to drain out the Waters of them, and partly through the
scandal and offense that is taken and given out, by rude, customary, and most
an end unrightfull Commoners, against the Drayning of them; as also conceiving
them to be nothing else but some great Bog or Quagmire lying so flat as is not
Draynable.

3. Because my self was once before I knew them in some measure thus deceived,
but especially because the report of the Country people was as one man, that
the undertakers Drayning had no whit at all advantaged them, but that their Fen
Laws and Commission of sewers, and the works they made through that authority,
and by the directions and means they used, had brought the Fens into as good a
posture as all he undertakers works, (the which my self was hardly drawn to
believe) endeavoring hereby to suggest the impossibility of ever accomplishing
a perfect Drayning, so that many not knowing that the fall is considerable in
it self, and very great into the Sea by reason of the Ebbing of the Water, will
thereby give opportunity unto a most complete Drayning of them.

And lastly, that by this information I may quicken all Ingenuous Spirits to
the helping on the work so advantageous to the Common good, and yet so fecible,
I therefore describe the Fens of England to lie in some proportionable manner
to those great Rivers and gallant Meadows adjoining to them in many eve^ and
less descending Countries, only with these two observations.

1. That these Fens are nearer the Sea, the Center of the waters, and so we
must conceive the fall or descent to be the lesser; for as our lesser Brooks
run quicker than our great Streams, and the bigger the stream and nearer the
Sea any great River runs, the slower by far the water descends, and
flatter the Land lies, so the Fens being a far vaster and greater compass lie
more flatter, and the Rivers run the slower.

2. Because these Fen-Lands being far greater, and many times more broader than
our greatest Meadows, therefore being covered with water, and lying more
level, will not Drain so fast, and so can not hold comparison in each
particular, yet a more suitable Model to describe them by, to those that know
them not, I cannot Frame.

So that the Fen-Lands so called are as I may say, great Meadows covered over
with water in the time of a great Land-flood; for as upon great raines the
Rivers or Watercourse in the uplands are not able to contain the Floods, The
just Form or Model of the Fen-lands.
neither are the Fen Rivers Sewers or watercourse able to take away those
Floods that come out of the higher Countries, or uplands aforesaid. And as the
small brooks first overflow, because of the disproportion betwixt those narrow
watercourses, and the floods that run in them, and are unflowed again, when or
before the great Rivers begin to rise, and the Flood of the great Rivers
continue longer than the lesser, so the Fen Rivers or Watercourse being much
lesser, proportionable to their great Floods than the little brooks are, they
can not contain their own water Floods, with the Rivers and Floods of the
upland Countries too; but are forced over the banks into that great Flat or
Level of Fen-land and Meadow on both sides their Watercourse, and being
there dispersed many miles into a great breadth and length, and being ever and
anon relieved with fresh Land-Floods, most part of Winter long continue,
neither having a great fall nor large ^^omthy Watercourse into the Sea, nor
other artificial Receptacles to receive them, cannot so truly nor suddenly run
off again, but had they Watercourse proportionable either in Number or
Greatness, to other great Meadows, they would most of them drain themselves,
and return to as perfect Meadow and Pasture as any in England, for almost all
Land-floods and Rivers that lie on the same side of the Country the Fens lie
on, from the highest part of the up-lands, run into and through the Fens to the
Sea, as their constant course, and if the Spring be kindly and moderatly dry,
the Fen-water runs and dries away apace, and many times in February or the
entrance of March, especially when the winds sit fair, that is, to drive the
waters Sea-ward, they are grazeable with great cattle, and many times with
Sheep too, and some part of them are all Winter dry and never drowned, and many
of those keep as much stock of cattle, especially of sheep, all Winter, as
ever I saw any Common or pasture without hay. And to conclude this description
whereby you may not only frame out a Model of the Fens, but discover the
Fecibility, if not the only way of Drayning them, which ushereth in my second
particular, which is,

2. The discovery of some of those hindrances or rubs that either hinder or
infacilitate this work of Fen-drayning, and they are either in the Land it
self, the Commoners, or the undertakers thereof.
The first Hindrance is in the Land.
1. In the Land, there may be such Mountains and Rockiness betwixt the place
you desire to drain, and the Sea, or River into which you must draw your drain,
that it may make the work so chargeable, as the profits thereof will not
counterpoise.

2. Also there may be such a Vein of Earth, as is so Moorish, or exceeding
Sandy, upon which you must be forced to plant your Sluices, or Water-gates, as
besides the extraordinary charge of Workmanship, may much hazard the
continuance of the Work, and so with extraordinary charge, and great hazard,
may render the fruits thereof below the expenses. These things are possible, yet
not usual.

The Second Hindrance may be in the People, The Commoners, and they may, and do
much hinder it in reproaching of the Work it self, as I hinted before, and
weary the minds, and weaken the hands of others that would endeavor it. But
the greatest hindrance is their unfaithfulness to the Work, How the Commoner is
a hindrance to Fen-drayning.
by their dullness and neglect of raising sufficient sums of monys to carry on
the work, and raising it so seasonably, as may expedite the same; for these
Works are not to be trifled withal, it must be the speedy and powerful
carrying on at once, as well as the Artificial and wise managing of it. A
little season lost, may lose the cost and works of a whole Summer, and whilst
neighbors are contesting about the quality of their Levies, and disputing every
man's Right to pay, and gathering up their moneys, the Works may run further
backward in a week, than they were brought forward in a month. I have seldom
known a rude multitude, or a confused heady people ever agree in this; these
works creep forward, but run post backward. Again, the combination of laborers
and Poor people may very much prejudice, besides their slothful and sleathy
slubbering of it, if not exceeding carefully overseen.

The Third Hinderance may be in the Undertaker, or Drayner. And although this
may not be such an Essential Prejudice to the Work it self as the rest are, How
Undertakers may be a prejudice to the work.
because a man would think that he that either for his wages or credit works
it, should do his best; yet to the common good it may be as destructive as the
former: And herein, and in the former Hindrance, as I desire not to discourage
any Ingenious Spirits; so neither do I desire to fawn upon the most ablest
Artist, but do hereby affirm, that the Undertaker, or Artist in this Work, may
exceedingly Eclipse the Common Good, and through a corrupt selfish Spirit may
monopolize to his private advantage particular men's Interest, and in and under
pretense of doing a Common Good, may utterly ruin thousand souls. Corrupt self,
or Corruption it self will endeavor this; but an Ingenious Spirit scorns
perfidiousness; yet many an Undertaker may in these respects be an hindrance to
the prosperity of Fen-draining, if he be upon a public Work, for private I
meddle not withal.

1. If that he lay not out a good Foundation, he either wholly spoils it, or at
least bungles out a half work, and leaves the Cream behind him, and it
destroys it self at last.

2. If that men shall pick and cull their Lands, drayn those that are more
fecible, and leave out those that are more difficult, I say he is an enemy to
the Common good; And this is a Maxim I shall declare, Drain the worst, and the
best will drain it self; and sometimes the lowest Lands may, if thoroughly
drained, prove the best Lands, and be the speediest and easiest way to drain
the whole.

3. If that men drain those Lands wherein they are like to have an interest,
thoroughly, and those the Commoners have, more overly; or imbank, or secure the
one from landfloods, and not the other; or if he make not such a through drain
of all as may go to the bottom, and lay it sound at root, I am sure he will not
attain the End, the best fruit and advantage the Lands will yield; which that
it may be accomplished, I shall descend to the third Particular.

The Third Particular to be considered, is, The Cure, or best and speediest way
of Reducing drowned Lands unto perfect soundness: A Work too great for my
shallow parts, and scanty leisure.
And therein because I shall not dare to teach men so many degrees abler than
my self, I shall only modestly propose some few Queries, the which if any
shall answer in lines or practice, I shall have my End, the Commonwealth will
receive more light, and I my self full satisfaction.

1. Whether all waters whatsoever, Queries in Fen-drayning*
the more they increase in quantity, the more in weight? if so, then

2. Whether if all waters biggen the further they run, especially in floods,
whether then all waterworks or cuts must not biggen and strengthen also, if
that a perfect securing from Floods be intended? And if so, then

3. Whether all Watercourse that are made for drains must not widen, biggen,
and strengthen proportionable both to the Land-floods that come out of the
upper Countries, as also proportionable to the waters, or downfalls that come
from Heaven, and fall upon the said Lands? And so require answerable
Receptacles? if so, then

4. Whether, or what is the proportion, or how may a man know the gage thereof,
and so how to make every course equal to the water it must carry?

5. Where the greatest difficulty lies in drayning the Fens; whether in
drayning the Fens from their own natural waters and moisture, or in preserving
them from the Land-floods that come from the high Lands? If the great
difficulty be to preserve them from the Land-floods of other Lands, as to me
seems probable; then whether it would not be more really advantageous to a
perfect draining to take off the Land-floods at or before their entrance into
the Fens, and so carry them along the Fen-side, under the up-lands, and not
suffer them to come into the middle of the Fen, Reasons why the land floods
would be best taken o^^ on the outside the Fen.
as long as it may be kept off, until you come to strike with one straight
course into the outlet of the Sea or River, or within some few miles thereof?
And whether this would not be the likeliest certain means to prevent the just
offenc^ ^he Commoner and Country seemed to take in the last undertaking, who
una voce cry out that the Undertakers secured their own by banks, and preserved
them from the Land-floods, and drowned all the Commoners side as much as ever,
and that by every considerable Flood? And if this be granted, then I dare
conclude the Fen will drain it self with a small course, and with greater
speed, and more certainty, as well as more substantially; And so I shall only
move this further, and so refrain.

6. Whether if any of the aforesaid particulars be affirmed, then must not of
necessity all the Out-lets or Mouths of all the Master-work, and Sluices, and
Water-gates, be widened and made proportionable to your higher courses, lest
that the water receive a check thereby, either to force your Sluices or give a
recoil to the waters into the Fen again, I mean proportionable as well in
greatness of the fall, as to the bre^dth and depth of the watercourse.

I shall only now desire to know whether when the Master-drains are made
substantially deep, it will not be ^o most advantage to divide the lands into
lesser divisions by small draines, than to cast them out into greater
proportions? yet I shall not prescribe so small as some do, but into the most
convenientest divisions may be for the complete draining.

And as to Sluices, Water-gates, Locks, etc. I shall say little, because they
are under the command of Rule, and Truth of Workmanship; and a good experienced
Millwright or Engineer is well able to regulate them to as much Advantage for
close shutting, and suitable opening, to the incomming of the Tide, or
out-going of the Floods, as the variousness of opportunities will require,
which I forbear, because they cannot easily be described without figures.

And as to the several Tools to be used in the working of these
Watercourse, they are common, and most of them in common use upon the Fens,
except a good water-levell, which I have at large described in the tenth
Chapter, which is most essentially necessary for the casting or laying out of
all the Works thereof, and a Trenching Plough to cut out the first Works, and
the Turfing Spade, all largely described in the next Chapter.

I shall only speak a word or two to the Improvement of some particular
parcels of Fen-lands which in themselves are drainable, and without the least
dependauce upon the general draining, although I will not say but such Land
would more easily be drained in the general, than it will be done of it self;
yet seriously pondering all things in one even balance, there may be little
difference, and that upon this account; if it be done as a member of the
General, Some particular ^ands may be drayned of themselves though the general
be not.
then it must contribute to the general charge, and share in the general
breaches or miscarriage, and in all paaticulars stand and fall therewith; Also
then it is subject to the same hazard, as the general is, of prejudice, by
reason of the differences that may arise betwixt the Owners, Proprietors,
Commoners, Undertakers, or whosoever, which may be very many, and so great, as
may tend to the ruin of the whole, which without dependence thereupon it will
not be. And I am confident, some very considerable parcels of Lands lie so
convenient, and so fecible unto the Work, that they may be done most easily;
and others lie more difficultly, and will be done more chargeably; All which I
shall hold forth under these two descriptions.

1. Are all Lands that lie somewhat higher of themselves, All such-Lands are
most fecibl^ to be drayned
and are never drowned (unless it be by some extraordinary Inundation) of
themselves, these are most easily recovered of themselves, at a little more
charge than any common Lands are enclosed, and that by one good substantial
Dike, well turfed (or sodded, as the Fen-men call it) on the outside round
about the same, and well rammed and beaten together, it need neither be very
broad nor high, the height and weight of the water offending will discover that
unto you, nor indeed cost any more than the charge of a good quick Dike, which
every good Husband bestows upon a new division; and I dare say there are many
thousands of Acres of Lands in many parts of the Fens of this nature.

2. The Second is the more difficult, and yet very fecible also, and that is
certain Creeks or corners of Land ^^unning into the up-lands, and upon the
out-skirs of the Fens, and many out-borders that are only anoyed with their
own, and the swellfng of the natural Fen-waters, and are clear from any
Land-floods, or up-land waters running through them, and have one or two sides
firm, and the securing of one or two sides more will secure the whole. These
are easily drainable without dependence upon the draining of the whole Fen, and
that by a more substantial imbanking than the former, to secure it self from
the great waters of all other Fens, and then there will only rest to resolve
how to drain it self; to which I shall only say, that having well provided
against the waters of bordering Fens, find out the lowest part of all thy
Lands, and thither draw a good substantial Master-drain through all thy Lands,
and there plant a water-Engine, which may either be wrought by the wind, or by
the strength of horse, yea possibly by the strength of two or three men; which
if the compass of thy Land be not great, and thy water small, may be but a very
inconsiderable charge. And thy Engines may also be diverse; as an Engine or
Windmill may with a water-wheel, planted in thy Watercourse, or Master-drain,
or very near unto it, which water-wheel must be made to that height as may be
sure to take out the bottom of the water, and deliver it at the middle of the
wheel, which wheel may be contrived into such a form, Water Engines helpful in
(...),
as that the Ladles, as I may call them, or Peals, or Scoops, as others call
them, will cast up, and cast out the water to a considerable height, as a man
does with a hand-scoop, pail, or kit cast water out of a ditch, which Engine
shall at large hereafter both be described, and the form of it delineated, or
else by a good chain-pump, or bucket-work, both which may be made into a
Wind-mil-Engine, or else with an Engine made with a perpetual Screw; all which
for that height as is requirable to the draining of such a Work, will lay a good
compass of Land dry in a few days, and if time prevent not, shall most of them
be described at large.

3. But a Third is most difficult, which I yet conceive also fecible, and may
be recovered also to a great advantage: And that is such a parcel of Land that
lies also at a skirt, These more difficult, and yet fecible.
or outside of the Fen, although it may have some Land-flood running through
it, or near it; which Land-flood, if it be possible either to divert it on the
one hand or the other, of the Land you desire to drain, or else if it be be a
small Flood, within the compass and power of an Engine, may also be drainable,
and by the aforesaid direction of inbanking the Land, to secure the Land-flouds
from coming on at at all, which with a reasonable Bank, and a fair open
passage to convey the Land-flouds clenly away, may prevent the fear thereof; And
then a fair Master-drain down through the lowest ground, or near the middle of
the Fen you desire to drain, which must be made so deep, as that it may
substantially draw all cold corrupt water into it self: I prescribe no depth,
because I cannot give to all sorts of Fen-lands (no nor to any other by
measure) a suitable and necessary proportion so far from off the place where it
is to be made, and this drain to be continued to that place where you have most
conveniencie to land your water, and there planting one of the aforesaid
Engines, I shall leave every of them to each man's own affection. I know they
will every one do the Work, and that a very inconsiderable charge, to the
profits and advantages to be received and reaped hereby. I shall say no more in
this case, because I much more desire the general Work, which will make all
these particulars to come on the easier, The draining of the whole Fens; yet
considering the rubs that lie in the way of the general, and the great delays
and uncertainties thereof, I am persuaded to discover the capacities of
particulars.

As for the particular Engines, the Figures and Delineations of them, they
shall hereafter follow, to be described to the very capacity of the Country
Farmer, as far as possibly may be: And because I desire to speak to the
understanding of the meanest, you must a little bear with my tediousness, till
you come to the practice, and then you will find plainness very useful, and all I
have said, little enough to discover the same.

Now to proceed to the Fourth general Head of this discourse, to set forth the
best way of Improvement of the aforesaid Lands.
I shall say the less, because through my whole discourse it is my main Scope,
and so shall confine my self only to some of those particulars more peculiar
to these Lands, though being substantially drained, they are capable of the
impress of any Husbandry whatsoever; I shall therefore divide the Fen-lands into
three sorts. First, The sound dry Land, seldom, or never drowned. The Second
shall be your constant drowned Lands in times of great Floods. And the Third
shall be your lowest Land of all, that lies constantly so wet and cold, that
it is turned into a very Moor or Bog.

1. Your dry Lands, I for the present account them the very best, and most
capable of raising the greatest present profit, I shall therefore (because it
is fruitful of it self to grass, and will yield advance enough thereby, and
also because there will be enough for many years of the other two sorts remain
to husbandrize, and toss and tumble up and down) persuade to lay it all for
pasturage, until your other Lands be perfectly recovered and improved; but this
may prove undoubtedly excellent Hemp-land, Oad-land, and may be, Mather-land,
and most excellent, yea rather too good for Cole and Rape-seed, because there
will be other worser, enough for that.

2. To the second sort, only drowned by up-land floods, and so lie dry when the
flood is gone, I say, if this be not leavened with coldness, or steeped so with
constant corrupt water, that it is turned into a moorishness, but yet remains
perfect Land, and clear Soard, this very Land may prove your best Land in a
little time, and therefore I shall only for the reducing hereof, advise to a
moderate plowing of it; and for the reducing of it to perfect soundness, advise
to raise it every plowing, dividing each ground into lands about three yards
over, or thereabout, which will take two casts of seed, and in five or six
tilths will rise up to so convenient a height, as will lay it sound and dry,
and increase your Land also; yet however you must not endeavor the laying any
Land any higher than your drains will be sure to draw your furrows: But in case
the Level of your water will not admit you to raise up your Lands to so good a
height, then you were best make your Lands somewhat lesser, and then the fewer
plowings will lay them round and sound: but be careful not to make your last
furrow alwais in one place, but in each plowing shift one furrow, or more,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another, and this will preserve the furrow from
overmuch barrenness.

This Land may be suitable and very excellent for Coleseed, and coming to its
perfect soundness for most of the aforesaid opportunities, but exceeding rich
for all sorts of Grain, out of question, only I shall earnestly persuade not
to plow too often, nor impoverish it too much at first, for hereby most men undo
their Lands. I conceive it best not to plow any of these Lands no longer than
it is brought into a perfect Tilth, or one year after, three years may do best,
though four years may do well, and you will find a gallant sweet Turf succeed,
and soard thick suddenly and sweetly, and your succeeding profits, all things
considered, may reach your very benefit of corning to a very near scantling. I
have heard very many object that matchless prejudice by so tedious and thin
Soarding, and have affirmed they have tried it by experience, and find plowing
woefully destructive; And if you should demand how many years they plowed it,
they must needs answer, some 5, some 6, some 7, some 8, and some 10, and others
more; and if you again ask them how they laid it down, they must say for the
general, they cast them down, and left an open Ridge to grass; and if you
should again demand upon what stubbles or eadish did you lay down your Land for
grass, some say upon the Peace stubble, or Barley, and here and there one upon
the Oats, which is better than either of the former, but none say upon Wheat or
Rye, which I as highly commend, and for the first years Soarding goes beyond
them all; they neither bestowed any soil upon it first, nor so much as a few
hay-seeds at laying down, and yet they will tell you a story of I know not what
experiences they have made, when alas they never knew that an Experiment must
hold in all its parts, and relate to times, seasons, natures, as well as fruit
and crop, and so bring an ill report upon the best husbandry, and stifle their
own greatest gain. But of this no more, because in other parts of the Book it
is more largely discussed, yet bear with me if repeated, because this is the
discovery of the husbanding of a new World, as a man may call it.

I proceed to the Third sort, A new World may best admit of new Husbandry
which is your lowest land of all, and lies deep and long drowned, that it is
even turned to very Turf or Bog, and very little useful, only two or three
months in summer it is commonable; but whether profitable or no, I scarce know,
nor (being a stranger both in those parts, and to those Lands) will I be
peremptorily confident in any thing, as will not hold proportion and use with
other Lands; I shall therefore only question whether in comm^ning upon these
Lands they do not often stiflle their cattle in the morishest places; and
whether they rot them not, or choke them not, through many uncurable diseases
by reason of the unwholsomness of their pasturage. This I dare affirm, I have
seen many poor thin cattle, which have brought Pharaohs lean ill favored kine
into my mind, and such truly as I have not so familiarly seen upon heathy
barren Commons, ten Acres whereof is not worth one of these, and yet thousands
are prejudiced against the draining of them; but to the Land it self, being
recovered and laid dry, it will require more time to recover it self than the
other better Lands, and require more cost and husbandry to bring it to
Fertility; and though all the preceding directions are, or may be applyable
here unto it in their propor Seasons, yet some other work may be more natural
as a groundwork to other Husbandry, and that chiefly upon your hassocky morish
rough Land, the which being left to grass, I cannot conceive it worth in its
present state not above 3 or 4s. per Acre, and some under, and yet that very
same Land, by pains and patience may recover to be very good Land immediately.
I shall therefore advise that this Land be turved, or as some call it,
Denshi^ing Fen lands very useful.
denshired, that is, all the hassocks cut up, and the overturf parted up, and
all laid upon little heaps till thoroughly dry, and then burned to ashes, and if
it be all stringy, rooty, and very combustible matter, then the thicker you
pare it up the better; for although I differ from many of the West-Country
Husbands about this denshiring their thin turved Lands, that are pure from
roots, twitch, or moss, conceiving (that though it bring their Land into sudden
Tillage, and to yield out it is Spirit the first year) it weakens the Land much,
Denshiring lands reproved in the West.
there being no addition to it but a few bushels of ashes to an Acre, in stead
of good Turf or Soard, that in a Summers working will be easily brought to
Tillage, and (as I believe) ads more by far to the fatting of the Land than
those ashes do; and I am sure, when any one lays down his lands to grass,
upon this Husbandry, the Soard comes pale and wan, and very lean and low, and
never rises to a good Crop, and whosoever seriously observes the same, shall
find that very issue; yet to Lands of this nature I as highly extol it,
Burning Land extolled in the North.
and to all such foul Lands, where is depth of soil enough, and all so
combustible as nothing else will work it unto Tillage. In the midst of May, or
any time in the very beginning of Summer, when the Land is thorough dry, is
best, and the earliest also, that you may have as much of the Summer as you
can, to the working of your other Tillages, which being burned in a dry season,
proceed to plowing and ridging up your Lands, and dividing them into such
proportions as your drains will bear, as is directed in the aforesaid last
particular, and this will then be fit to take the impress of any seed; much of
this will bear Cole-seed, or any grain, which I leave to the discretion of the
Country Experiences, only pray you study laying all sound and warm; plow not
too long, and lay it down to grass either upon the Oat-stubble, which will
soard exceeding well the second year, if not the first, or upon wheat or Rye,
the Land harrowed and laid very smooth; this will soard excedingly the first
year, as in other places of the Book. I have at large discoursed. And as your
Land recovers soundness, you will by your improving your own experiences, have
more Talents added to these, you have more opportunities to raise (...)
advantages out of them.

Now to the conclusion of this Chapter, Lands drowned by the Sea.
I shall only add a word or two of Sea-drowned Lands, and it shall be very
little, because as to the improvements of them whatever has been before spoken
and applied to other Lands, may be to these, which being once recovered, are
very sound dry Land many of them, and the rest may be reduced thereunto by good
divisions and draines, as in all other Marsh-Lands.

All the mystery of this is in the recovery of them, which to discourse at
large, would be more tedious than profitable, because as to the materials for
imbanking or bounding the Sea, whether Stone, Chalk, Wood, or Earth, little can
be said, because all must be referred to the convenience and necessity of the
place upon which they are requirable, only there must be great regard had to
the force of the Sea that lies upon them, and the strength and violence of the
winds to which it lies most obnoxious; for I am persuaded it is not so often the
Sea it self that makes the breach, as the strength of the winds that forces it
over the banks; neither can I prescribe the several Locks or Water-gates
necessary for letting out the Heavens water, nor the bigness or strength of
them, that being proper to the place upon which they are to be erected, there
to be discoursed and described, and the common Engineers are very customarily
used thereto; As to some good ingenious painful Artist, little can be added, so
that there remains only that I advise to these two or three general directions.

First, That you be very carefully observant of the power and way of the Seas
working; for although it is possible much Lands may be gained from the Sea, yet
it is not possible at all times to keep the same when it is gained; therefore
wherever you see the Sea get or recover upon any Land, be wary there, rather
study to stop the Sea there on the borders, and to divert the force of it
another way, which will sometime more easily receive a check than at other
times and places; but if that be not stayable, I should advise not to be too
busy there, but where the Sea loses, and Land increases, there is a more
probable opportunity, and there I should rather pitch down my staff. There is
store of these Lands to be recovered, so that I would not persuade any to
streighten themselves with hazards and inconveniences, when there is such a
wide opportunity for the ingenious to improve both parts and purses on the
borders of these Nations.

Secondly, Be very careful of placing your out-fals and water-gates in so
convenient parts as may both be best for the firm draining of your Lands, and
for the firm founding of your Sluices and Water-gates, both in relation to the
Earth you plant them on, and the force or strength of the water that lies
against them, or accidentally through some fierce storm that may come upon
them; this has been the overthrow of some gallant works, and particular rules
here cannot be discoursed but through so much tediousness as will tire thy
patience, which I must forbear.

Thirdly, Be above measure studious about thy Imbankments, that a foundation be
so firmly laid to the bottom with such materials as will hold out the trial;
therefore in every new work some trial would be made of all materials, and
therein thou must be steered by those the very place affords, whether Stone,
Chalk, Wood, or Earth, or all, and the present experience upon the place will
be a better Tutor than I can possibly, for I much question whether the carriage
of any of these far, will answer the cost or hazards run therein. Be sure your
foundation be broad, well ramm'd together, and so raised with solid matter and
workmanship a good height above the highest Tides, and curiously turved or
sodded on the Seaside; the better is your Turf the firmer is your work; for if
that it once begin to hole, or break, look to the main, it is in danger, and
ever be sure your new works be made the highest, because an overflowing upon an
old work is not so dangerous as upon the new, that it quickly and easily
overthrows.

Lastly, Be sure of ingenious and laborious workmen; an idle slubberer will
both deceive the work and Master, study not so much cheap wages, as to have
your work well done for good wages; careful ingenious Overseers of the
Laborers is an unvalued furtherance to the work, some men have an excellent
Genius that way, will awe men more with their wise industrious oversight, and
skill in men's frame of Spirits, and wise designing each man to his place and
work, that al of them shall be as members of the body, co-adjutors to the whole,
one take it from another, so as no work be done twice over, nor one man's labor
bear out another man's sloth, but each be helpful to another, A Good Overseer
worth Gold.
so as to advance the main. I tell you this is a mystery, and a man rightly
qualified for this work is worth gold, and very rarely to be found. I have seen
some Bailiffs entrusted herein, stand telling a story, while all his workmen
have stood looking him in the face, admiring him for his Rhetoric, and this
has pleased him as well as their working; many have an easy way of hindering
work, but few of furthering it, and he is a rare man that can sort all his
works so into each workmans hand, as that it goes on to purpose; confusion is
through ignorance and sloth; a good method, or platform to advance each man's
labor to the best furtherance of a work, is difficult, requires great
ingenuity, and laborious study, I find it most difficult, though I have had as
large experience of it as most Englishmen, yet cannot accomplish it, but many
times ran into confusion, through men's rudeness, and my want of each particular
experience in each work, the which I instance as a Rock for others, to beware,
and prize and value a good Overseer, whose countenance and conversation is such
with workmen, as will not only awe and force them, but his wise and loving
demeanor will compel them to their utmost faithfulness; a work in its geares
will thrive exceedingly. And so I have done at present with this particular,
till I have gained some more, and new experiences; and with this Chapter.

CHAP. X.
The Tenth Chapter gives directions to make and use certain Tools, or
Instruments, which shall much facilitate the Work.
ANd for thy further encouragement, Tools belonging to floating and Trenching,
to make the work more easy and less ch^rgable.
because Drayning and Trenching is found very chargable, therefore in the third
place I will discover certain Tools or Instruments, which shall make the work
more facile and delightful, with which two workmen (and indeed any Ingenious
man many quickly attain a handiness, and dexterousness therein) that can well
handle them; And shall do more than many common Laborers do in one day with
their ordinary Tools, and shall work more true, and more suitable and
commendable to the nature of this way of Improvement; which Tools are all very
plain, and simple, without several motions, or divisions, made only for ease,
lightness, and quickness, not for Admiration or Confusion.

The first is a good Line about thirty two yards long, made of the best
Water-wrought Hemp, and as big again as Whipcord, A good Line.
upon a good Reel to wind it upon; I prescribe this length because of drawing
all Works as near unto a strait Line as possible may be; which length is of
use in measuring your Work by the Perch or Rod as you desire also, and no more
of this.

The second is a Water Level about five foot long, the longer the better, A
Water-Levell.
but that it will be the far more unportatable, but four foot and an half will
do reasonable well; which Instrument many have assayed and made, some open with a
Channel for the water to run all along upon a three inched Piece of Oak, with
sights placed at each end, true to the water, that is each sight of a just
proportion from the water^ to direct the Level, but this lies so open to the
Wind, and is troublesome removing, that it is not worth prescribing.

Others have used them of seven or eight foot long, to be placed on two or
three legs, as the Surveyor places the plain Table, the Level made with an
hollow Concave, for the water to lie hid from the Wind, and to come up in two
Cups (above the wood) planted in the Level, and sights planted very
Artificially thereto, the water in each Cup holding his just proportion to both
sights, and this is a very good one, but very troublesome to remove up and
down, and to make dispatch when one has need; And in this second form were Sir
Edward Peto his Levells made very costly, Sir Edward Peto his Level.
and the Sights of good value, whose Ingenuity was very great, and the
Instrument very good and rich, but a little troublesome to carry up and down;
but I rather choose a plainer Piece which is very Portable, The manner and form
of a true, and the speediest Level that I can devise.
and it is made to fold into another square Staff, and so to carry like an
Hunting-Pole, my Staff is but five foot and an half long, made of the best
young seasoned Oak that can be got; my Level, or the Barrel of it, is but
four foot and an half, or five foot long, which Barrel in the midst of it, is
planted into the top of my Staff thus; Just upon the midst of my Barrel is a
pair of Iron joints curiously wrought into the very midst of my Barrel, on
the nether side of it, and at the very overend of my Staff, and so much of the
one part of my Staff, and just half the length of my Barrel taken away with a
moulding or rabating plain, until both joined together with these joints make
one complete Staff straight and formable, only about a quarter of an Inch
taper upward, from the bottom to the top; that it may not be too top-heavy, and
the Sights are to be fixed unto both ends of the Level Barrel, that they
stand firm and hold water, and yet are very little or no annoyance, either to
Sight or Practice; And in the portage of it, it is a ^air straight Staff, with
a strong Pike in the bottom of the Staff, and a step to set the foot, or force
it into the ground where there is no occasion to use it; And in the Exercise of
it, being unfolded it is an headless Cross, not much unlike the Surveyers cross
Staff; which when thou have done thy work thou may fold it up again, Who are
the makers of it.
and walk as with an Hunting-Pole. Any good Gun-smith will make the Iron-work,
and some Gun-smiths will make the Wooden-work also with direction, but properly
it belongs to the Joyner.

The next is the Trenching-Plough, or Coulter; whose special use is to cut out
the Trench on both sides with great expedition, The Trenching Plough.
which is thus made; Take a Piece of the best tough Willow, about the bigness
of a Spade-stayl, somewhat strait, only at the nether end it must look upward
with a neck like a foot which must run upon the ground, and just above the neck
must be an Iron, or little Coulter about the strength of a Butchers Knife,
planted in the Stayl, where the Stayl must be plated with Iron, curiously let
into the Wood on both sides, through which, as also the Wood, the tange of the
Coulter must come, with a Cotter-hole in it above, to cotter it close to the
over-side of the Staff, or rather have two Coulters, one about an Inch and half
longer and stronger than the other, that so in soft deep ground thou may use
the longest, and in dry ground the shortest.

Whose use is, when that thou have cast out thy Trench, and set thy Line, thou
may with this run along thy Line, and cut out one side of thy Trench, almost
as fast as a man can fallow it, and then set out thy other side, and cut it out
also; but if thou studiest more exactness, then in the foot of thy Staff, and
in the middle of thy foot, plant a little Braz^n Wheel about four Inches high,
that so the foot may bear it self a little upon the Wheel, which will occasion
it to run more pleasantly; but the Wheel must also be curiously planted into
the foot with Plates, and upon an Iron Axeltree, wherewith thou may cut out a
Perch whilst some will be cutting out two yards, and more true and certain;
and so also may thou use it speedily to cut out thy Tur^ overthwart thy
Trench, about eighteen inches, or twenty inches abroad, a fit proportion to be
taken up, or sometimes two foot broad; for if thou would take up all thy
Turf as curiously cut square, and pared up about three or four Inches thick all
of one thickness, just at the root of the grass, as aforesaid, of which thou
may make exceeding great use, which thou must preserve most choicely, for
therewith thou may cover thy bare places of Earth, or any low places that
thou would raise up to a Level, and may have as good Grass upon it within
half a year, better than upon the other Lands; For the taking up of which Turf
thou must make a Spade on purpose, with a bit looking up twice so much as our
ordinary Spades do, Turving Spade.
with a curious thin shoo looking up also; whose bit must be exceeding well
steeled, and more broader at the point, or nether end of the bit, than at the
over end, of about half an inch, and not above by no means; which will take up
the Turf, all at one thickness, just at the natural height a man uses it, as
he stands to shovell Earth before him. This Spade is admirable useful to
cleanse the bottom of Trenches, for which use it were very necessary to have
another an inch and half narrower than the former, for lesser and narrower
Trenches; which Spades (the broadest sort of them) are more speedy, and more
easy for Banking and Levelling high places and great Ant-hills, by far, than
other Common Spades are.

The next Tool that is to be shadowed to thee is the Trenching Spade, The
Trenching Spade.
which you may make betwixt Four and Five Inches broad, and if you make Two,
which is better, One may be Four Inches, and the other may be Six Inches wide,
whose Tree must be made more compass and looking up, by far, than your usual
Spades are, yea somewhat more compass than your Turving Spade is, though but a
very little, so that it may carry a Trench Level before you, being forced by
your strength of Arm, guided from about the bottom of your Belly, as you use
the Shovell in any thing you cleanse; which Spade shoo must be made with two
sides, or Langets, up from the end of the bit, like as if you would plant two
broad Knife Blades to look upwards with their points upon a common Spade, from
the end of your Spade bit, only they must be made a little stronger, yet they
need not be above two inches broad at the very bit, and as thin as the strength
of the work will bear, little thicker than a strong Knife, and so Narrower and
Narrower upwards, until it come to half an inch, and about Five Inches long,
which must be made very exact, and true, smooth and sharp, otherwise it it will
not work forth his Coar, and Furrow clearly, and easily, but will be above a
man's natural strength; but if it be rightly made, any ^an may easily work
forth a Trench at one time, and very fast, almost as fast as a man can thrust a
Shovell under a little Sand or Dung before him. Some have assayed to make this
Trenching Spade rudely and in other forms, which I will not stand here to
disprove, because their own Experience has laid down the use of them, but this
I am certain of in my own knowledge is wonderful useful, and herewith one man
may do more in such work as this (which to make greater Trenches is but to make
more work to no purpose) and that more formally and Artificially, than six men
can do with their own natural and usual Tools, and they shall moyl and spoil
less ground by many degrees, which Tool so cutteth out his Furrow and Coar,
that you may within a week or two, or when you have accomplished your desire,
lay it down again, and no whit prejudice the least Grass, and none shall be the
wiser for it, or Discover within two or three days whether such a thing was
yea or no, and so will prevent the least spoil.

There is another Tool or two as useful in these works, The paring Spade.
and no less necessary, and this is the Paring Spade, or dividing Iron, whose
bit may be made all of Iron, being a strong Iron Plate with a good strong
Socket, to put a straight tough Stale or Helve into, it must be made just
straight every way, the Bit must be made twenty Inches long, the two sides and
nether end all well steeled, the nether part of the bit a little bellied or
square, and the sides a little hollow or compass^d, and the end and sides as
sharp as they can be made, for the especial use of this is now and then to cut
out a Trench in valleys, The use of the Paring Spade
and low places, where thy Plough cannot come at it, but principally to pare
old Trenches after the first year, whose Edges will grow so thick with Grass,
that thou can not get thy water to pass currently, and to dig it will break
thy Trench, and cut it too thick, but with this thou may cut it as with a
Cutting Knife all along thy Trench or Line, very fast and most complete; Thy
Stail need not be so long as a natural Spade-stail, it must be kept clean and
bright, and it will work exceeding easy; And thy ordinar^ Spades also the
better they are and the sharper, and curiously kept, the better will they rid
off work by far, and the more easy and delightful to the Workman, and not fur
and clog with Earth, which makes the work go off very heavily.

The Third Piece of Improvement shows how to Enclose without offense, and
prevent Depopulation that is most common Attendant and Appurtenant to
Enclosure, and how to make Several all Arable Common Field Lands, and also all
Common Heaths, Moors, Forests, Wastes, to every particular Interests, and the
Commonwealths great Advantage.
CHAP. XI.
The Eleventh Chapter Treats of Improving Land by Pasture, Reproves
Depopulation, proves excellent advantage by Enclosure, and takes away the
usual Scandals laid upon it.
THis Piece of Improvement will be the better carried on, if we could but
prevent two great Rocks men are apt to dash upon, and keep the Medium betwixt
both.

The one is so Extreme for Pasturing and Grazing, 1 Extreme.
as he will destroy Tillage, and raising of Corn, so he may convert all to
Sheep, Wool, and Cattle; though the contrary be of incomparable more
advantage, Credit, and Glory.

The other all for Tillage, and Plowing, that he will toil all his days
himself and Family for nothing, 2 Extreme.
in and upon his common arable Field Land, up early and down late, drudge and
moyl and wear out himself and Family; rather than he will cast how he may
Improve his Lands by Impasturing, and Enclosing of it, whereby he may raise
more profit in Sheep, Wools, Cattle, and far more Corn also if he please upon
every Acre.

For the discovering a little these self deceivers to themselves, I shall speak
a word or two more large to each Extreme.

The first Extreme is partly through so deep an Affectation of Tillage and
plowing in Common, although it be to his perpetual slavery and drudgery all
his days, he will not leave it, and especially through a prejudice he has
taken against Enclosure through some men's depopulation and oppression, and
destruction of Tillage, that he will not approve hereof upon any Terms, but
oppose with all the might and main he can; what says he, Enclose, depopulate,
destroy the poor? no, our fathers lived well upon their land without Enclosure,
kept good hospitality, many servants, and bred up many children, and
abhominated the thoughts thereof, and so will we prevent it if we can; we
will toil and moyl all our days, and breed up our children to keep sheep,
horse or beast, kick up their heels upon a bank, flit our horses, and breed
them up to take our inheritance of Thirty, Forty, or Fifty pounds by the year,
with which few can scarce bring both ends together by the years end, as daily
experience shows, they not once considering the fruit of Idleness, not the
great Improvement of this honest equal Enclosure, nor their childrens ruin for
want of learning, Trade, or good breeding, the least whereof is better, or may
be better to them than all their lands. Witness thousands in England that
prefer their children better with a little good breediug, with little portion,
than they can or usually do with all their inheritance.

The second extreme is as like the former as can be, and is so prejudicial to
the Commonwealth, and destructive to good husbandry, and it arises out of
base private humor of sloth and self-will, and want of a wise Spirit of
discerning in Improvements, and because he sees some men have abused (...)
Pasture-Land by over plowing, and took out the Spirit and life thereof, that it
will not come to it self of many years (which is an ill piece of providence
indeed) therefore he will not plow any old Pasture Land at all, upon any
terms, or for any time, no though his Land be so decayed and impoverished,
that that Land which would have maintained much cattle, will not now maintain
so much by one third part or a quartern, as it did after the first through
soarding: and by reason either of the wet and cold year, or the overpowring of
the moss or Anthills, or some other trash, it puts not that proof into Cattle,
nor scarce half, as it did at the first Soarding; nay though it calls loud for
plowing, and will be much bettered, and the Rent doubled, yet he will not have
it plowed come what will; What says he, destroy my old Pasture, my
sheepwalkes, and beggar my Land? all the world shall not persuade him to that,
you may as soon persuade him not to eat good wholesome food, because some men
overcharged their stom acks by excess herein; because here and there an
indiscreet man did wrong his Land by excessive plowing, he will not use it at
all, not moderately, though he may Mend or better it thereby; No says he, I
can raise a constant profit by my Wool and lamb, my fat beef and mutton, at an
easy quiet way unto my self and family without much vexing or turmoyling,
(which is a gallant way of living, and I shall exceedingly advise and commend
it too, until the Land degenerate, and calls out for plowing, or the
Commonwealth calls out for corning, and will yield far better advance thereby)
he takes more content in a Sheep-heard and his dog, and in his own will and
ease, than in greater advantage; and as the other Extreme will hinder all
Improvements he can by way of Enclosure under pretense of overthrowing Tillage
(though a man may till as much and get far more Corn in Pasture than in Common
if he will) so will this out o^ as vain and senseless pretenses hinder all
Corning in pasture, lest he should prejudice his Land for grazing, although he
may moderate corning, and better his Land to grazing also; so have I erected a
Sea-mark upon both these Rocks, that all men may take heed of dashing
themselves thereon, the Ingenious I am sure will never come near them. But for
satisfaction to the first extreme maintained by that generation of strange men
that oppose Enclosure, yet see every day the Rents of those Lands Improved,
some doubled, some more, some less, and the Land certainly advanced by it, one
Acre made worth three or four, and after a while will bear more Corn without
soil for three or four year, than diverse Acres as it was before in Common, that
only say Enclosure may as easily be made without depopulation as with it; and
to the other Extreme.

I am not ashamed maintain, as a reproof to this Extreme, that many ten
thousand Acres of Land in England, may yield a double profit diverse years, by
plowing, and afterward yield as much rent as ever before, and possibly much
more; Nay, I Will say, observe my Directions punctually; and I Will make good the
old Rent the very first year, after Plowing, and begin to enter upon it as soon
as the Crop is reaped off, and begin my year with Winter too, which is
accounted the worst advantage to the Tenant, and so for Seven, Ten, or Twenty,
upon many sorts of Lands in England of the aforesaid Value; But to stop the
mouths of such Madcaps in each Extreme, and make good my Proposition, I will
begin and try whether I can hold out Enclosure without any Depopulation, or the
lest prejudice, and then proceed to a full answer to the rest.

And secondly that your Arable or Common Field Lands, Enclosure held forth
without Depopulation.
or common Heathes, Moors or Forests may be highly Advanced; that is out of
question I suppose, denied scarce by any, that have had seven years Experience
of the Disproportion betwixt the profits of one Lordship in Common, and the
next adjoining to it Enclosed; The one worth three hundred pounds in Common,
the other near a thousand in Pasture.

Now here lies the Trick indeed to make this Improvement, and neither
Prejudice Poor, nor Minister, Labourer nor Farmer, Tenant nor Landlord, One or
Other, that has any proper Right of interest therein, and not Depopulate.

For the holding forth of which, I will Demonstrate such a Method, or way of
Enclosure (without Depopulation) as all men in particular shall have a
Proportionable Advance thereby, and the Common Wealth a double or Treble, and
Tillage advanced also, and so the one Extreme prevented, and no man hindered,
all which shall admit of no other Inconvenience than this, viz.

The prevention in great measure of Idleness and Oppression; The grandest evil
of a just and equal Enclosure prevents Idleness and Oppression only.
it is true it will remove or take away it may be a Shepherd, or a Boy or Girl
from keeping Cattle, who are more fit for School or Trade, and put the
Shepherd to the Spade, or it may be prevent some great Oppressor of the
Commons, that drives off all poor Commoners off their Commons by his great
Flocks and Herds, whom this Project may drive off his Sheep walks, who lives
just upon the Common side and eats out the Poor, and others that live more
remote; And also happily prevent a Rot especially when it is Soarded, Enclosure
prevents the Rot of sheep exceedingly.
which usually is once in four or five years in most part of this Nation, which
destroys all before it, and consumes the Care and Pains of the Oppressor too
and others together, of all other years profit at once; And possibly may for a
little season bring down the price of Sheep, Cattle and some other things (by
reason of plenty of Sheep so suddenly destroyed) being of so ill a name,
Enclosure may occasion more work done at an easier charge.
to a low rate; Which were it not for that Rotting Deluge their incr^ase would
be beyond Arithmeticall Demonstration; But for a long season afterward raises
them to a double Rate immediately ag^in: And possibly it may be as an Engine to
facilitate mo^st parts of Husbandry, and cause a great deal of work to be done
with fewer hands, and yet before the Discourse be ended, I Will find all sorts
work enough to all men's Advantages whatsoever; and these are the Inconveniences
of Enclosure and good Husbandry, others I know none; the conveniences follow
also, if any more or greater shall be proposed I shall endeavor to Answer them
in the Sequel.

CHAP. XII.
Shows the Lands capable of Enclosure, and the Method of ^t, how it Advances
the Public Weal and all particular Interests.
ANd to this end consider that all Lands capable of Enclosure, Lands capable of
enclosure.
are either Common Fields and Arable Lands, Men's proper Right and Inheritance,
or else Common Pasturing upon Heaths, Moor; Marshs, or Forests Lands.

For the Enclosure of your common field, Arable Land, I lay down this
Direction; All Interests to be provided for, which I conceive may be reduced to
these four. 1. First, either Lord of the soil or Landlord, or, 2. Secondly, the
Minister to the People, or else 3. Thirdly, the Freeholder Farmer or Tenant, or
lastly and 4. Fourthly, the Poor Labourer or Cottier*


All which having some Interests more or less, shall be seriously considered of.

Therefore I begin with the last, the Poor Cottier, or Cottier provided for.
day Labourer, and to provide for him, because he has ever been oppressed if
any, and last or least provided for, And look what right or Interest he has in
Common, I Will first allot out his proportion into several with the better,
rather than with the worse, a Proportion out of every man's Inheritauce, and so
much, or so many Cattle as he may keep in Common, he shall keep in Pasture, or
rather more, at as easy a rate as they pay for it in Common, for their lives
that now live upon it, and ever after at an under Value; and so I cannot
possibly conceive that he has any cause to be offended.

And for the Labourer, you shall see how I shall provide for him too before I
have done, Labourer provided for.
besides the allotment of his Proportion, as to the Cottier, or to what Right
soever he has of due or Custom.

Then for the Minister in the next place, because he has seemed to be the
Opposer of it, Minister provided for.
most usually: And truly so he had good reason, as the state of things formerly
stood with him: (For though I believe that Tithes are neither consonant to a
Gospel Minister, Tithes not Gospel ways maintenance.
(the List of which dispute becomes me not, nor I intend not to enter in) nor
yet Conducing to a sweet Compliance with his people) Yet I also say, that
should a Minister either have accepted the peoples benevolence of our ordinary
English Parishes for his pay, Or have stood to the Courtesy of the Lord, or
Freeholder, what he shonld have had upon the Enclosure; I fear, for the one it
would have been too little for a Ministers Maintenance, and for the other, he
might go barefoot, and his Family a begging, for what the Common people would
Contribute to his Subsistence,

And therefore would have him to have his Proportion next, and a very
substantial Livelihood allotted out of the Lands enclosed, until the State
shall settle a more better or more suitable way of Maintenance for him; If
there be either a Competent number of people for him to preach unto, or
Competency of Land to raise it from in every Parish, or else two or more
Parishes that join conveniently to be laid together, (And according to what his
Right or Proportion) (if he have it in way of Tithing) to be enclosed, or cast
into pasture for him by himself, with as much Convenience for his dwelling as
may be.

And where either Enclosure cannot be agreed upon, or made (as possibly in some
parts it may not Consist with all men's advantages) I conceive there may be an
agreement made for the allotment of the Ministers proportion, to be cast into
Pasture, so that were his Tenth Enclosed, it would be so gallant a maintenance
for him and, contentfull to all Parties, that it would remove all troubles, or
occasion of Confusion, and Increase Love and Unity, which Tithings have ever
occasioned Divisions and Contentions: Which either he may employ his Wife and
Family upon part thereof for necessary Maintenance, And set (with much more
ease) the rest to free his Family from Care and trouble: And so receive his pay
every half year without the least Distraction. I would have him to have such a
large Allotment and Proportion, as might enable him to be Capable of
Hospitality, of which he is to be a Lover, 1. Tit. 8.
and far better able to give than to receive, and to Administer to others, than
to be administered unto by way of Charity.

And as for the great depopulation in the Nation that has devoured poor and
Tenant, Depopulation reproved.
overthrow Corning and good Husbandry, and in some parts Minister and all, and
yet persist by keeping their Land from Tillage when it wants it; when Country,
the Landlords profit, the Markets, the Labourer, Poor, and Land it self and all
calls for it, is no less than grand oppression.

As also for other places where no maintenance is assigned for the Minister,
Impropiations to be thought of*
but the people starve for want of bread, and where those great Impropriations
are that devour all the Profits, and have all to a short-coat Vicaridge; How
these things should be mended, is infinitely beyond my Sphere; how Ministers
should be raised, maintenance and all Interest preserved, I know not; only I
shall pray the wise God to direct our highest Counsels in regulating these
distractions, for it is far beyond my shallow capacity how to advise.

And for the Freeholder Farmer or Tenant, Freeholder*
I question not the Freeholders offense, for he having his proportion I know
it will be doubled and more to his advantage.

And for the Tenant let him also share in some Advancement, either let him
enjoy it at an easy rate, that look whatsoever Bargain he has in common by
the year, he may have a better upon the Enclosure; or else let him take a Lease
for Lives, or Years, that as he enjoyes the worst, upon the first Enclosure,
so he may have the best also, having a good T^rm of time therein, and then I
hope he will not wrangle neither; for I am sure he need neither Moyl nor Cark
as he did before, but manage his business with more ease, sweet content, and
advance of profit.

And for the Landlord, or Lord, I shall not much bespeak his favor, Lord of
the Soil or Landlord,
or Approbation, for he will believe me without Demonstration, that there will
be a visible and considerable advance fall upon him, only crave his patience,
that he will not be offended, that I seem (and but seem so to do) to project to
give away his Right as to the Poor, which in Common is their own, whether by
Right Custom, (for I speak of no other in this place but such as have right of
Common) and so they may require so much by Law; but to encourage them, and to
remove offense and scandal I advise it. And when all these particulars
concerned in their several Rights are satisfied, we shall do well; and yet the
great Block and Prejudice is yet to be removed, which is, the destruction of
Corn, and Tillage, which I promised to clear, which follows here.

First I endeavor before Enclosure, that either by engagements so firm and
surely made, How Enclosure shall not prejudice the increase of Corn or food.
by all parties concerned in it, as they may fall under Law to be recovered; Or
else by a particular State Law enacted to this end, so to engage all men in
this new Enclosure to allot, or cast out one third part or thereabout at least
of all their Lands constantly for Tillage, or what more at any time they
please; One third part for Meadow, Four arguments to prove the advantage by
Enclosure, and that more Corn may be raised being Enclosed than Common.
And another third part for Pasture, or feeding Land, which third part for
Tillage if my conceptions fail not, First with the help of all that Soil that
the Hay of the other third part will raise in maintaining all the Cattle in
Winter, that they Pastured in summer upon the other third part, which I
conceive may be as many more; and also.

Secondly, by that advantage there will be sometime Plowing on Pasture, and
resting Another, whereby fresh Land and Reitey for some years will bear more
Corn without Manure, than it did before with it, and indeed also after some
years of resting may stand in need of Plowing, and possibly may advance the
Land by it, as I am sure they will all our Wood-land, coarser Lands whatsoever,
that are either subject to the Moss, or Rush, or Ant-hills, whatever it, will
do to better.

Thirdly, well knowing (that without question) one Acre of well Manured and
Husbandryed Land, will yield more fruit than two or three otherwise; A
principle undeniable.

Fourthly, consider the vast advantage there will be by Husbandring a little
well, I say, it is clear some one Acre manured, plowed and hus^andred in
season, and unto that height of Richness the Land and seed sowed does require,
may and does usually bear as much Corn as two or three ill husbandred as
aforesaid. Then balance the Business, and weigh but the advantage. One Acre
bears the fruit of three, One Acre brings forth as much Corn as three.
the two Acres are preserved to graze, the seed and all other charges of two
Acres is preserved to help the Markets; The Husbandry, and Plowing, and sowing
of two Acres is also saved. Oh consider it, and neither be such Enemies to the
State, nor of your selves and Commonwealth, so great Abusers of Ingenuity and
Good Husbandry, so great Traducers; When men have their Lands enclosed, and at
their own command, I fear not but most men will covet to Husbandry every Acre
so well, as it may yield forth the utmost fruit it is possibly able to produce,
having the rest at their own Command also, to employ to another Advantage.
Which done half the Land in England thus managed would yield more than all that
now is under Tillage. This Poor Piece by the by observed, and practiced, would
make good the Improvement promised, consider it well and be convinced, or reply.

Fifthly, if you consider that all your Common Fields were never under Tillage
neither, As great part S^ades and Hade ways, and a great part Meadow, and much
and many Balkes between each Land, and many High ways, and some commune of
Pastures and Leayes left for keeping Beasts or Sheep upon, all which will
contain one third part, as I conceive, if not near half in some places, not
under Tillage but wast Lands, Certainly I conclude there may be as much Corn go
by Ingenuity upon this lesser quantity of Ground, and much more being enclosed,
than upon it all in Common; And that there cannot be any destruction of Tillage
upon all the^e Wastes and Grazed parts which ever lay to Grass, and no Tillage
was upon them, so that I must clearly conceive, were one third p^rt upon all
Enclosure allotted out or covenanted to be kept constantly in Tillage, though I
advise not to keep the same third part always in Tillage, but sometimes one
part, and sometimes another, all making up one just third part, would raise as
much Corn as all did in Common.

And lastly Enclosure cannot destroy Tillage the Staff of the Country, because
it ever yields most profit, nor will, nor need all be converted to Pasturage:
Cain and Abel were born and planted together, and ordained to live together,
and if there were any danger of one destroying the other, Tillage is likelyer
to destroy Pasturage, because Cain slew Abel; but without a fear the Ploughman
and the Shepherd may do best together in a Commonwealth.

CHAP. XIII.
Shows the Excellency of Tillage, and the great Profit thereof, and the great
Advance is made out of several Enclosed Countries beyond Champain, as also the
great Improvement of Heaths, Moors, and Forests, which will dismiss those
needless fears of overthrowing Tillage.
NOw Tillage yields the greatest profit to Landlord or Occupier, Tillage
great profit.
study especially the Good Husband to convert thy Land to the best Profit, And
that is held and maintained by all men to be by Tillage, else why do men give
double Rents to Till and Plow above what they do to Graze, and if thou art not
yet satisfied, consider but the Wood-Lands who before Enclosure were wont to be
releeved by the Fieldon with Corn of all sorts, And now are grown as gallant
Corn Countries as be in England, as the Western parts of Warwickshire, and the
Northern parts of Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, Darbyshire,
Yorkshire, and all the Countries thereabouts, and all the Chalk Countries both
South and Westward.

Also consider the Chiltern Countries, and you shall find, that were it al
Enclosed men would Plow little or no whit less than now they do, because
nothing else nor no way else would yield the like advance.

Consider Hartfordshirex, Esse, Kent, Surry, Sussex, Barkshire, Hampshire,
Wiltshire, Somersetshire, and all the rest, All which not only raise Corn for
themselves, but to supply that great City that Spends as much as all those
Countries, and far more: And yet no parts of England set at greater Rates or
makes greater Advantages by Grazing, and yet the greatest part thereof upon
Tillage, and Corning. And what Country not almost though Enclosed, yields the
greatest profit by the Abundance of Corn produced; But if all that I have said
be not enough, I have enough I am* sure before I have done.

As for your Heathes, Moors, and Forest Lands, I shall only speak thus much,
That vast and Incredulous are their Capacities of Improvement in general,
referring the particular ways of Improvement of every sort, and differing
natured Land, as they fall in the fourth or sixth Piece of Improvement to avoid
prolixity, because the very same Ingredients, Compositions, and Directions, are
suitably and naturally appliable to these Lands, as to those to which they are
prescribed.

Therefore I only say that all Interests in these Commons, Only Right in
Commons, not Usurpers I speak to.
or Rights of Common Pasture, upon any of these Lands, may without Prejudice to
any particular Interest, be advantaged, and much Improvement made to the
Public; I speak not to inright the Usurpers of right wrongfully maintained,
or Oppressors of any other men's Rights, I desire that Right might only run in
its proper Channel.

First in general by the same Method of Enclosing, held forth in this third
general Piece of Improvement, touching Common Field-Lands, if thereto, before
Enclosure you do but add the Method or Drought of first casting out your Lands,
At the first Enclosing of any Common, how to cast out Land to the greatest
Advance.
and plotting them into such Plots and Forms, so that where there is or may be
a Capacity of bringing thy Land under any good Stream or Land-flood, be sure to
cast it for Meadowing, having drawn one Master Level floating course throughout
they whole Plot of Enclosure, which may also serve as thy first division; and
to carry thy water along also to flow thy Meadowing thou shall make all under
it fit, that thou may not lose that Opportunity now at first, (which after
divisions made cannot be had) of so great an Improvement, at so small a Rate,
now at thy first contrivance thou may cast it under, and then cast out all
thy Lauds, accorto the most suitableness of them, all to such Improvements they
lie under, and then to the Conveniences of each man's Right and Interest, and
the greatest Advancement upon these Enclosures will be two.

The first giving all Ingenuous men a Capacity to Plow, Tow Advantages of this
Enclosure.
and Till what they please thereof, which will raise a double, or treble
Advantage, as to Grazing, and a Tenfold greater Advance as to Common of Pasture
(which to some is worth nothing at all, because of their remoteness, to others
but little, because of some great Oppressor, nearely and neatly seated upon the
Commons, that drives others from it) and to none what it may be, as by right,
when he may use all his Parts, Purse, and Experiences of Husbandry at his own
pleasure by improving it; And it is and never was otherwise seen, that men
would ever join together in one body, to use their utmost to improve any of
these Lands to the best Advantage; for though Common of Pasture is men's own
Inheritance, and every man not knowing his Lot, Cavils against Improvement in
Common.
or Portion, how rarely will they ever join or agree therein? although they are
all persuaded of a probable great Advancement, yet one says, I shall not have
so great an Advantage by it as my neighbor; and another he believes it will be
good for present, but it will not last; and an another says, he has no reason
to bear so great a proportion of Charge, though he have as much Land, yet he is
not capable of so great an Improvement; and another says, I could be well
content to help on any public work, if others would, but for me to bestow
cost and improve my Land, or commons, for others that will bestow none to eat
and bite up my cost, much discourageth him, and indeed there is some Reason for
his backwardness; and a thousand Excuses and Cavils there must be, which though
a wise man may easily answer, yet never convince their Judgments, for it has
ever been so since their days, and their Forefathers were as wise as they,
and they cannot be satisfied, let it alone and wee^l take the present profit it
yields, and there is an end of their Improvement.

And here I Will give you a President, which though it might as to the nature of
it, have come in more seasonably in the discourse about common Field Land, yet
here it is very natural also, both as to the end I bring it for, and for the
discovering a Capacity of a vast Improvement, both upon it self, and upon all
other Lands of that nature.

There are many hundred if not thousands of Acres of Lands near Dunstable, A
President of great store of lost Land under puddle hill capable of Improvement.
in a Valley under Puddle, or Chalk-Hills, just under the bottom of the Hills
(an eminent place known well to most) which I believe runs both ways far, but
on both sides the Rode-way to Coventry and VVestchester the Land lies, with a
little Brook, or stream running through it; All which Lands if you observe them
above half the year ly full of water, if not under water, and I believe it is
worth about five shillings an Acre, I am sure abundance of it is not worth
three shillings, and some not worth two shillings an Acre, which if my
Judgment fail not, may easily be drained, and laid so sound and wholesome,
which were but that done as it should be, or but according to the second Piece
of Improvement, and the directions given in the seventh Chapter, treating of
draining, I dare uphold one Acre would be as good as diverse now are in many
parts of it, but then should you also by the benefit of that Brook, and all
these gallant rich Land floods that issue from the Hills on one hand, and from
the Vale especially on the other hand, take the advantage and benefit of them
also, and according to the first Piece Improve it by Floating, which may very
Feazibly be done according to the direction of the fourth, fifth, and sixth
Chapter, whereby it may be Improved to its utmost. I verily believe it would
not only make good the utmost extent of my Improvement promised, but will
afford Hay sufficient to supply all those Barr^n parts, and that as good again
for the nature of it, if not thrice so good as now it is; I Instance this place
the rather, because it is so obvious to every one, An offer made once to have
made good the same.
and so well known to most, and this offer of Improvement was once tendered to
them, who could not agree therein, but made many of the Objections aforesaid,
although it was offered them to be done at ano^hers cost and charge, and they
have run no Hazard, but to have come unto so great an Improvement paying the
cost and charges, if the design had taken after they had seen it wrought unto
their hands: but there are a thousand, and ten thousand Acres up and down the
Nation, some yields more, and others less hopes of vast Advancement, and all
great enough if men would put them upon trial, and great and vast quantities
of Land in many Forests, Common Fields, and other Heaths, Wastes, Moors, and
other Commons, subject to the greatest Improvements at little charge, which
will never be done till men know their own.

And were every man's part proportioned out to himself, and laid several, 2
Advantage of this Enclosure.
it would so quicken and incline his spirits, that he would be greedy in
searching out all opportunities of Improvement whatsoever the Land is capable
of; As by Lime and Marl, Muck, Soil, Marl, Lime, Earth, Chalk, and Mud, etc.
With many other ways, (all which men will infinitely more pursue when they
know their own, than while it lies at random; And a Monarch of one Acre will
advance more profit of it, than he that has his share in an hundred Acres in
common) which will more naturally fall into the next Piece and there shall be
particularly handled, whereby great store of Corn of all sorts (where now not
one Grain is Tilled) may be gained, which raises Straw, Stover, and Fodder,
abundantly for raising Soil, Dung, or Manure: As old, and the only infallible,
and undeniable means to advance any Land whatsoever. I shall digress a little
because all men talk of Husbandry, and good Husbandry too, and especially of
much excellent Husbandry near and about London, where Soil is so plentyfull,
that half of it is scarce used, III husbandry discovered along the River Thames
both ways much barren Land near London.
though so much needed, and so unspeakably advantageous, and yet so few
practice Husbandry to purpose, though under such great opportunities, but few
practice to purpose, else what means all those Barren Lands (though not Common
Lands) lying within some two miles, other three, four, five or six of the great
City (where all men are said to be the most gallant Husbands of the Nation to
lie unimproved, all Heath, or Ling, or Broom, not worth three, four, or five
shillings an Acre; surely were there either Soil to be had at London for Money,
as indeed there is enough to be had without; nay in many parts men may have
Money to carry it away, else were there a River to Barge it up and down, men
would Improve it to great worth; Many hundred, if not thousand Acres in Fssex,
Kent, and Surry are neglected; certainly Land is worth Money, and Money enough,
too (if I be not mistaken about London; And then by these means when the same
shall be laid down to Graze, observing but the particular Directions aforesaid,
it shall feed, and fat, where before it kept but store Cattle alive; much more
might herein be said, but I Will say no more, for if the Presidenting these
experiences will not satisfy and abash the Oppressor, I am sure I shall shame
my self by my Prolixity, and therefore I Will soap the Black-more no more, until
he manifest his offense at what I have said, by way of return in the same kind,
but if he delight more in Rhyme than Reason or Experiences, Take Mr. Tusser
speaking in his Husbandry of the great Advantages betwixt Enclosure and the
Champion Countries, and betwixt Slothfulness and Ingenuity, and I will give it
in his own Phrase, which I conceive may please thee better, and he speaks very
good Reason also by his Rimas.

By Master TVSSER 106. Page Chap. 52. A comparison between Champion-Countrey
and Enclosure.
THe Country Enclosed Ipraise,
The other delights not me,
For nothing the Wealth it does raise
To such as inferior be.
How both of them partly I know,
Here somewhat I mind to show
Their Swineheard that keeps the Hog,
Their Neatherd with Curr and with Horn,
Their Shepherd with Whistle and Dog,
Be fence to the Meadows and Corn.
Their Horse being tied on a Balk,
Is ready with Thief for to walk
Where all things in common do rest.
Corn-field with the Pasture and Mead,
Though common ye do as the rest,
Yet what does it stand you in stead?
Their Commons as Commoners use,
For otherwise shall thou not choose,
What Lair much beteter then there?
Or cheaper thereon to do well?
What Drudgery more any where?
Less good therefore, where can ye tell?
What gotten by Summer is see
In Winter is eaten up clean,
Example by Liecestershire,
What Soil can be better than that,
For any thing heart can desire?
And yet they want ye see what,
Mast, Covert, Close, Pasture, and Wood,
And other things needfall is good,
All those do Enclosure bring,
Experience teaches no less,
I speak not to boast of the thing,
But only a truth to express,
Example (if doubt you do make)
Of Suffolk and Essex go take,
More plenty of Mutton and Beef,
Corn Butter and Cheese of the best,
More Wealth any where to be brief,
More people more handsome and pressed
Where find ye? Go search any Cost,
Than there where Enclosure is most,
More work for the labouring-man,
As well in the Town as the Field,
Or therefore devise (if you can)
More profit what Country does yield.
More seldom where see ye the Poor
Go begging from door to door?
In Norfolk behold the despair
Of Tillage, too much to be born
By Drovers from Fair unto Fair,
And other destroying the Corn,
By Custom, and Covetous Pates,
By Gaps, and opening Gates.
What speak I of Commoners by
With drawing all after a Line,
So noying the Corn as it lie,
With Cattle, with Coneys and Swine?
When thou have bestowed the cost,
Look half of the same to be lost,
The flocks of the Lord of the Soil
Do yearly the Winter Corn wrong,
The same in a manner do spoil,
With feeding so low and so long.
And therefore that Champain Field
Does seldom good Winter Corn yield.
By Cambridge a Town I do know,
Where many good husbands do dwell,
Whose losses by Lossels does show,
More here than is needful to tell.
Determine at Court which they shall,
Performed is nothing at all,
The Champain robs at night,
And proleth and filcheth by day,
Himself and his Beasts out of sight,
Both spoyleth and makes away,
Not only thy Grass, but thy Corn,
Both after, and ye'er it be shorn,
Pease bolt with thy Pease he will have,
His household to feed and his Hog,
Now steals he, now will he crave,
And now will he cozen and cog.
In Bridewell a number be stripped,
Less worthy than Thief to be whipped.
Lord if you do take them what stirrs?
How hold they together like Burs? 109. p. 160.

For Commons these Commoners cry,
Enclosing they may not abide;
Yet some be not able to buy
A Cow with a Calf by her side;
Nor lay not to live by their work.
But Theevishly loyter and lurk.
The Lord of the town is too Blame
For these and for many faults more,
For that he does know of the same,
Yet lets them unpunished go.
Such Lords ill Example do give.
Where Varlets and Drabs so may live,
What foot-paths are made and how broad?
Annoyance too much to be born,
With Horse and with Cattle what road
Is made through every man's Corn?
Where Champains rules the roast
There daily disorder is most,
There Sheep when they drive to wash,
How careless their Sheep they do guide?
The Farmer they leave in the lash
With losses on every side;
Though any man's Corn they do bite,
They will not allow him a mite.
What Hunting and Hawking is there
Corn looking for Sickle at hand?
Acts lawless to do without fear,
How yearly together they band?
More harm to another will do,
Than they would be done so unto.
More profit is quieter found,
Where Pastures in several be,
Of one silly Acre of ground,
Than Champion makes of there.
Again, what a joy is it known,
When men may be bold with their own?
The tone is commended for grain,
Yet bread made of Beans they do eat,
The the other for one loaf has twain,
Of Meslin, of Rye, and of Wheat.
The Champion lives full bare,
When Wood-land full merry do fare.
Tone gives his Corn in a Dearth,
To Horse, Sheep and Hogs every day,
The other give Cattle warm barth,
And feeds them with straw and with Hay.
Corn spent of the tone so in vain,
The the other does sell to his gain.
Tone barefoot and ragged does go,
And ready in Winter to starve,
When the other ye see does not so,
But have what is needful to serve.
Tone pain in a Cottage does take,
When the other trim Bowers does make.
Tone lays for Turf and for Sedge,
And has his wonderful suit,
When other in every hedge
Has plenty of Fuel and Fruit.
Evil twenty times worser than these,
Enclosure quickly would ease.
In Wood-land the Poor men that have
Scarce fully two Acres of Land,
More merrily live and do save*
Than the other with twenty in hand.
Yet pay they as much for the two,
As the other for twenty must do.
The Labourer coming from thence,
In Wood-land to work any where,
I warrant you goes not hence
To work any more again there.
If this same be true (as it is)
Why gather they nothing of this?
The Poor at Enclosure do grudge,
Because of abuses that fall,
Lest some man should have too much,
And some again nothing at all;
If order might therein be found,
What were to the several ground?
Consider well many Solid demonstrations of truth in these particulars, he
speaks very much Reason and as much Truth, his observations are very good; nor
is it the single opinion of Mr Tusser and my self, but of all that ever I yet
saw or read of these sudjects of either good husbandry or the best way of
Improvements of Lands, but ever advised and persuaded to this, as ever you
would study your own, the Commonwealth, but especially the good of your
Posterity, endeavor and prosecute such an Enclosure that is not nor can appear
to be any particular souls hindrance. It Is true I have met with one or two
small Pieces, as M. Spriggs, and another whose name I remember not, that write
against depopulating Enclosure, with whom I freely join and approve, such as
former oppressive times by the will and power of some cruel Lord either
through his greatness or purchased favor a Court, or in the Common Courts of
England, by his purse and power could do any thing, enclose, depopulate,
destroy, ruin all Tillage, and convert all to pasture withont any other
Improvement at all, lay Level many honest families to the ground, dispeople a
whole parish, and send many souls a gooding, a cursed horrible oppression,
which for my part I would it were Felony by the Law, which I think really is
no better, which has brought men to conceive, that because men did depopulate
by Enclosure, therefore it is now impossible to enclose without Depopulation,
but against Enclosure it self, merely to convert it from a general promiscuous
Common age, to a division or distribution of every ones share and Interest
therein to his own particular possession, use, and occupation, to manage
husbandry, and Improve as he shall like best, both for manner, time and charge,
I never yet did see or read any to avouch the same, but should be very willing
to meet with such an Antagonist, for whom I am prepared, and will if God please
to give opportunity in mild and loving way endeavor to convince him of his
rash mistake: but should any man take offense at Enclosure as of it self, as I
verily believe none does, yet at such a way or Method of Enclosure as is here
held forth and discovered, that provides as much for the raising and increase
of Corn and all Grain, as for supply of Pasture and Meadow, and provides for
all Interests their proportionable Advantages, I hope very Dogs themselves
will not move a Tongue.

And as for old writers, so for new and late ones they all with one consent
encourage to Enclosure and Improvements, some affirming that the great benefit
of the Sheep their Wool that Staple Commodity of England does Employ more
people by far on every Acre than by Corning, See Mr. Hartlip his legacy page 56.
which may possibly be so too, but I am sure that in a way of Improvement,
which I hold forth, it must needs more advantage the Commonwealth than lying
wast in common and unimproved. And if thou peruse Mr. Hartlips book printed two
year since, wherein he handles it very demonstratively well worth thy reading,
will confirm the same. And if thou will peruse learned Fuller in his holy
state, you shall see the Excellent advantages and Improvements may be made to
all by an Enclosure without Depopulation, in the s^^^nd book 13. Chapt. page
91. ^ most Excellently handled and cleared.

Study therefore the management of all thy estate to the best public
Advantage, Husbandry all thy Lands to the best and greatest benefit of the
Commonwealth, for in this way of Improvement thou can not possibly intending
the public good, but necessarily the greatest good must follow to Poor, thy
self and family.

Order therefore thy common Arable Lands, as they also may raise and produce
their most plenty to all Concernments, and all Wastes, Forests, and Heathes,
that they may produce their great advantage, which being so old and restie,
will yield forth Corn in great abundance, and after Pasture to double profit.
Be not peevish, nor let not passion nor old customed corrupted Will prevail
against these Advantages, for he that Improves not all his Land to this end,
the raising plenty, and relieving the miserable, answers not the ends
wherefore thy self and all thy Lands were given, as before I hinted, I have no
more to say to thee, but to entreat thee to remember that passage of the Wise
Man (viz) The thoughts of the diligent bring abundance; And if thou will be yet
unsatisfied, be so still.

The fourth Piece of Improvement shows how to Plow and Corn old Pasture Land so
as not to Impoverish it, and double the Improvement of it for a Time, and
afterward to better it for ever in a way of grazing; and will be as a medium to
allay the second Extreme; and will discover that Corn shall ever be the
predominant profitable staple Commodity in the Nation; and shows many
particular ways of Improvement of other sorts of Lands.
CHAP. XIV.
THere is a second Extreme also which men wedded to their self profit hugg in
their very bosom, which is so much to their hearts content, that they never
look what may make most profit to the Public, or good of the Commonwealth,
themselves, or Posterity; He is seated in way of Feeding and Grazing, with a
constant Stock of Breeding, and let his Land be fit for one, or fit for another
use, he matters it not, he has received a Prejudice against Plowing, partly
because of the Toil and Charge thereof, and partly because, as aforesaid, some
men have Plowed their Land so long as they have impoverished it much, and some
men so long as it is possible it may be many years before it Soard Completely,
and therefore let it be Dry or moist, Sound or Rotten, Rushey or Mossey, Fenny,
or run over with a Flag Grass, or Ant-hills, Mossure, or wild Time, let it keep
more or less; he will not alter, tell him Sir it will yield abundance of gallant
Corn to supply the whole Country, and raise great Sums of Money to your
Purse, and afterward (if you yet Plow Moderately) it may keep as many Cattle,
nay more, yet nothing takes with him, he will have no Enclosure Plowed by no
means; yet seriously weigh these ensuing particulars, and then use thy own
will and pleasure.

But to make good my promise herein, A second sort of Coarser Land the only
Land for Plowing.
I must first remise, that my Design is mainly upon a second sort of coarser
Land, betwixt twenty shillings an Acre, and ten shillings or a noble, out of
all which will come a great Advancement to no prejudice at all, and is a member
of one of the fix Pieces of greatest Advancement promised. Although the best
sort of Land of all will yield the greatest profit, yet not without some
seeming little Prejudice to it, and also this will best continue and hold his
beauty, and strength, and Improve upon Grazing rather than lose, which the
worser sort will not. And of this best sort of Lands with the Improvement to be
made thereon very Considerable, I shall also speak under the sixth and last
Piece of all: And shall now set forth how the Plowing of all such Lands,
according to the Design projected, which shall be a supply or filling up, and
running over of the measure of plenty of Corn in case Enclosure should decrease
it (which I am confident upon the consideration of the aforesaid Reasons thou
can not Imagine) and so remove that Extreme also. In which Projection I shall
tell thee, that if thou will follow the Rules prescribed, thou shall double the
prizes of thy Lands for the present time of Plowing, and after lay it down
better for Grazing than thou tookest it to plow, only consider that of this
second sort, there be three natures.

First, sad and moist strong Clay and cold. Second, Mixed with diverse Earths.
Third, Warm, Sandy, or Gravelly.
The first natured Land advances it self most be Tillage, yet raises Corn in
abundance also, but the two other latter natured Lands advances not so much in
it self, The middle sort of Clay strong Land advances it self by Tillage.
as in that wonderful increase of Corn it yields to the Commonwealth; I
verily believe that Lands of these latter natures are as fruitful and kind for
Corn (especially if they be resty) and for four years may produce as much
increase to the Strike or Market as that Land that is as Rich again, or twice
as Rich, for as to the Corning Land it may possibly sometime be too good, as
always too bad, I had far rather make choice of a middle sound warm Land, than
of the richest and fattest that is, The warm lighter Land advances most in
Corn to the Commonnwealth.
for this will yield it self and heart more to the Corn than the other, and yet
this also may be bettered with wisdom used in the Plowing for Grazing also.

First therefore consider the nature of this first sort of Land, and the way of
Husbandring it, to enable it to produce the promised Improvement; And so I
begin with that which is of a pure Clay, or of a little mixed nature either
with Sand or Gravel, and yet is of a cold temper, and so is neither so
wholesome for Cattels lodging, nor so fruitful for their Pasturing; How to bank
Ant-hills most speedily.
Which sort of Land is many times overrun with Ant-hills, which are best
destroyed this way, being opened, the Soard taken up, and the Coar taken out,
and scattered before the Plough, will make all the Land Plow the better and
also lie better, and the Mould will help a little all the parts of the Land they
are spread upon. And Rushes and Moss in abundance, may many times so overrun
the Land, which are so thick and noisome, that they not only hinder the Earths
natural fruitfulness, but the Rushes are so thick and high in many Pastures,
that the Sheep many times make them for their Refuge, to preserve themselves
from the heat, that oft-times they are sheltered so long by them until they be
lost by the Manes, The best way to destroy Rush or coldness in any Pasture
Maggots, or Vermin; A great prejudice to the Grazier, or Breeder; All which
is certainly occasioned by the Moystness, and Coldness of the Lands, which will
no way more certainly and Advantagiously be removed but by Plowing these Lands,
which course although by many men it be thought an Impoverishing of the Land,
yet I absolutely deny the same, and affirm both from mine own Experience, and
the Practice of those that have made trial thereof, that it shall most
wonderfully advance the same for present, and future; Over-Plowing indeed
weakens Land; Extremes on either hand are dangerous and destructive; Food and
Bread sustaineth Nature, but Gluttony destroys it; Wine nourishes the heart,
Moderate Tillage must needs advance ^and
but Drunkenness drownes it; And as over Tilling and forcing out the heart is
worst, so I say, not then to Plow when the Land is run to moss, and to these
corruptions, is no less bad: And being done with wisdom and moderation is far
more advantag^ than not to Plow; And this my self have offered familiarly for
Lands of this nature, worth and quality, to give a Plowing or double Rent for
the same according to his natural worth for three or four years, but not
above, as has been conceived the Land has been able to bear; Advance for
Plowing, and the old Rent the first year after
And then after* Plowing the very first year to give the old Rent, and take a
Lease for Ten, or Fifteen, or Twenty years at the same rate, whereby let
Ingenuity Judge what Prejudice this may be possibly; For the time of Plowing
the Lands may yield double Rent, some more, some Rent and half Rent, and some
one third part more than old Rent; All which I conceive is a great Advantage,
with another secret Advantage interwoven with it, as an Adddition to the State,
which is the raising of a great quantity of Corn to the use of the
Commonwealth, The setting of many Poor on work, The raising Straw, which
wintering Cattle with, may raise such abundance of good Manure, Dung, or Soil,
as may Enrich a great part of the same, An offer made of making good a Lease
after Plowing of old Rent and a great advance in Plowing.
or some other Lands; and were there no other advantage but helping the
Commonwealth herein, I hope no honest public spirit would oppose it, many
Lands lying under this Capacity lie in the South part of Warwickshire and
Worcestershire, Leicester, Nottingham, Rutland, some part of Lincolnshire,
Northampton, Buckingham, and some part of Bedfordshire, and in most part of the
Vales in England, and very many parcels in most Counties of this Nation; And
this I say again, do but observe my Method, and strictly trace my Instructions,
and pursue them all along, I dare make it good upon most Lands, except it be
upon that which is a harsh binding churlish nature, which will also admit of a
good Improvement, though not so good, especially when it shall be overgrown
with the aforesaid Annoyances.

CHAP. XV.
Shows the manner of Plowing, and working Lands to so great Advance, with two
Incredible Presidents of Advance.
THere is a parcel of Land in Warwickshire, Stratford upon Avon President.
near Stratford upon Avon, that is Oaded every fourteen years, and Corned
diverse years after that; and so there may be many more Parcels also besides
this I speak of, and so I know there is, and after that fourteen years rest
and Grazing, Oaded again and Corned also: So there are some in
Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire, and many other parts will do the like; And
so runs round, Grazing fits for Plowing and Corning, and Corning fits for
Grazing; A most gallant opportunity; Doubles the Grazing-rent, while under
Corning, and more under Oading; And Grazeth again immediately at a very
considerable Rent, and might do the first year at old Rent, and so forward,
Would they Plow but three or four years according to my direction, but they
Plow five, six, or seven; Such a Method would please me gallantly, advance the
Commonwealth exceedingly, and prejudice whom, I would fain know: Abundance of
poor set on work; Abundance of Corn raised; Abundance of Straw which spent and
fed upon the Land, shall make that up again what ever the Plowing fetched out:
Doubles Rent and more, four or five years in one and twenty: And so every age
near fetches in the Purchase; And the Land where it was, and would be as rich
as it was, if it be not (my directions observed) a great Estate raised out of
nothing: Why not thus in a thousand other parts of this Nation, as good Land,
and better, and as suitable to this Advance, and not improved to it?

O Sloth! stand by, and let Ingenuity try a trick or two more, and wonder at
thy own Ignorance and Weakness, and now see how to work it.

Secondly, The manner how to Plow such L^nds.
consider thy Land how it lies, whether round with Ridge and Furrow, then use
your own discretion for the manner of Plowing; for the first year however, Plow
it as well as you can possibly, both clear from Balks and Slips, and of such a
stitch or depth as the Land will bear; however go not under the true and
natural Soil of the Earth, neither plow it too thick, for that will be a great
prejudice to your second Plowing, because your Furrows will rise most hard and
stubborn, and so moil both Teames, Workmen and Servants, as is incredible. But
if it be Lands and great Balks together, then for the Lands Plow them as you
please, that is, whether Ridge-Are, or Cast them, but for your Balks before
you, Ridge them all. And although it will ask pains, cost and hot water, yet
fail not herein: Mow the Rushes.
And though the Rushes be thick and strong, yet be not discouraged; Mow the
Rushes in the beginning of Winter as low as you can possibly, and then you may
with pains and patience, a good Teame, and good Ploughs with sharp Irons, all
made true, sharp, and smooth, do it with incredible dexterity; Especial
directions for plowing.
fail none of these directions, you can not conceive the wonderful advantage
in this exactness; And were it so the Land were such as there must be required
as much cost and pains with the Spade, as with the Plough, I would bestow it,
and never question how it shall answer the same: For, say the cost be
extraordinary, and say one Acre cost thee as much overcomming it, and laying it
round, sound, and fair, as usually thou or others bestow on two or three Acres;
Yet what is that to the fruit or profit it may produce? I dare say one Acre of
Corn thus thoroughly husbanded may be worth two Acres, nay three slubbered over
and done many times as most men commonly do therein; And what is it to lay out
a five shillings or a noble extraordinary in every Acre in the Husbandry, and
reap it by the Pounds in the Crop, as I dare say you shall in the two first
Crops, Experiment of Plowing the second sort of Land and the fruits of it.
which are the only Crops requiring such pains and exactness. I could tell
thee an Experiment if thou durst believe it, it is this; I once held a Piece of
Land worth nine shillings an Acre, and no more to a Graze; I gave fifteen
shillings to Plow, it was great Lands, as great Balkes betwixt them, full of
your soft Rushes, and as high some of them as any ordinary Beast, and lay very
wet; The Land conceived by me not able to bear Barley, nor never would, it was
so weak and Barren, so cold and Queasie: And the neighbors very able
Husbandmen round about so discouraged me (out of their love unto me) as that
they de^ired me to forbear Tillage of it, because it would never answer
ordinary cost bestowed on it, nor be worth an old Grazing-rent to Plow, and
that they cleared to me by very clear Evidence as they conceived, affirming
that the Land next unto it, but a hedge betwixt, which was far better Land,
(and indeed so it was very near as rich again) husbanded by very able husband^,
the best in that Country, and that Land good Barley-L^nd, yet never answered
the pains and cost bestowed; yet I resolving to make a full trial thereof, I
set upon it according to the prescription aforesaid, Each Acre Plowing and
Harrowing, Spading and Dressing (for indeed I made Harrowes on purpose also) of
diverse Sizes, it cost me about fifteen or sixteen shillings an Acre the two
first Crops the very Dressing of it; A President of the fruit that came of poor
Lands worth but nine shillings an Acre.
And for these Crops, being but of Oats, I could have had five pound an Acre,
being offered it by an Oat-meal man of himself, though never asked, growing
upon the ground; Nay six pound an Acre, if I would have sold it, which is a
vast Rate for Oats in the middle of the Nation; And indeed I found the ground
so poor, that it would not bear Barley, for I tried some Acres of the best Land
in it, but it was not worth an Acre of my Oats, and after Plowing I gave the
old natural Rent as it was ever set at or really worth, and that for many
years, and the Land is better, lies sounder, warmer, and both yields more
Milk, Summers as many Cattle, and Winters far more, and feeds better than it
did before, without any other cost bestowed, and the very first year I laid it
down after Plowing, it kept me more Cattle and better than ever it did before;
and will continue better for it for ever after.

CHAP. XVI.
Shows the best, and most advantageous way of Plowing and Husbandring Lands,
so as most to Advantage it, in laying down Land to Graze, to make good the
Improvement promised, and not to over-plow, as you tender the loss of your Land.
TO this end be sure to lay your Furrows open, To lay open Furrows clear is
very good.
and clean scoured up, and capable to receive and carry away all your standing
water, or soaking moisture from your Lands, and be sure* so to Plow your Lands
as you may cast your Lands into several Furlongs, that you may have one Furrow
or Drain run into another, and that next into another, and so into the Master
Trench, which if it cannot be made deep enough with the Plow, let it be done
with the Spade substantially; And so from one to another, to carry away the
Water, that it may neither annoy your Corn throughout your Field in any
Furlong, nor your Land when you come to lay it down, and then when you have
Plowed your Lands, wherein the more truth and exactness you observe therein,
the more fruit expect.

And when you come to sowing your Lands, you must get very strong weighty
Harrowes (if you would do it indeed, and not slubber it over as most do) long
tined and sharp, and either they must be so weighty of themselves, that they
may work a gallant strong Team to draw them, or else so laden with weight,
that you tear up rough uneven places, and raise good store of Mould, What
Hardness and Harrowing is most advantageous.
which is a marveilous great Advantage to the Corn; (as for the ordinary way of
Hilding Land as most do, is Reproveable) and then with two or three sorts of
Harrowes, each Harrow having his Teeth, or tines, thicker than other, which
will so curiously and certainly cover your Corn that you will have little or
none ^ye uncovered, but well molded, which will have such strength, and heart
unto it, as by Gods blessing you may expect a Crop answerable to your cost
bestowed, and far greater.

The next direction is, that as I cry up plowing as a sovereign means of a
great Advancement, Over^plow cried down and reproved.
so I also as much decry Over-Plowing, or the Plowing of Lands as most do; some
Plow as long as it will bear any corn, and others as long as it will bear good
Corn; And others they Plow on any fashion, lay their Lands, as though they were
overrunning them, both to Corn and Graze, and when they lay it down, some lay
down sound warm dry Land very high, ridge and furrow, and small Land too, very
prejudicial to their Land and themselves too, and are justly reproveable;
others lay down strong cold Land flat, unopen'd, some part Plowed, some
unplowed, full of balkes, holes and hills; as if they would secure or ingross
all the coldness and Venom of all the water and hunger that is either naturally
upon it, Reasons why but three or four years are prescribed for Plowing old
Pasture* Land neither more nor less.
or that falls upon it, or passes by it; they matter not after what manner
they leave it, nor after what Grain; I therefore prescribe only three or four
years to Plow unto this sort of Land, and to raise it every year, not less,
because the Rush, Filth, and Earth will not be rotted, nor well compounded, nor
the nature of the Land changed with fewer Tilths, nor the Lands well brought to
a good height, roundness, and dryness in lesser time; for if it be cold Laud,
all that can possibly be done will not lay it high and dry enough, nor the
Mould wrought to her perfect tenderness and true Mixture, whereby it may yield
more fruitfulness; but if the Land be very rich of nature, and not well
wrought, nor the Rush perfectly destroyed, nor the Lands brought up to a
convenient height and roundness, then one year more may do well, which year
shall yield the best crop outof all question, but will draw a little more from
the strength of the Land, Last Crop may yield most Corn, but worst for the Land.
than any of the other years did; and if the Land be in strength, it may very
little prejudice it, and therefore this I leave to every man's pleasure, upon
this consideration, and could wish that all men would so Plow, as mainly
intending the Advance and Betterment of their Land, especially Pasture Land,
and no otherwise; For you were as good lose some of your inheritance (as you
do) in my opinion, Or as good lose the Land which is but the Carcas, as the
strength and virtue which is the Heart and Life of it, for therein is the
Common Advantage, when the Earth yields most increase, or fruit, and a little
parcel yields abundance of fruit.

Fifthly and lastly, I advise to lay down all Lands of this nature upon Wheat,
To lay down Land upon the Wheat, or Rye Stubble is best, and the reasons of it.
Mes^en, or Rye Stubble, which will exceedingly thicken and improve the
Soarding, and if my Principles fail not, will raise as good a Soard in the
first year, as after any Summer Corn whatsoever will in two, and must do well
for these Reasons.

First, because it has one half year more to Soard in, then after the Lenton
Tylth, and so is somewhat Soarded before Oats, Barley or Pease are sown.

Secondly because winter Corn grows thin, long, and a stronger Straw, and
gives more liberty to the grass to grow, and spread the thicker, and the Soard
will also be very rich and fruitful; I likewise advise to sow this Land, as
early ^as possibly you can, even as soon as your other Crop is ended, the
sooner the better, unless the Condition of the Country very much oppose it, how
ever the Earlier it is sowed, the better is the Crop like to prove in my
opinion; because these Grains of Wheat or Rye, The way of Sowing Land to be
left after to Grass
etc. require the land to be in better Tillage than this can be: Therefore help
it what you can possibly, by seasonable and early sowing, that it may have as
much Summer as may be, and by all means Harrow in your Corn after it is Plowed;
For this is more certain to produce a good Crop, And secondly leaves the Ground
even smooth to Graze; yet forget not that your Land be left High, and Round,
the Colder in nature the Highe^ and Rounder as aforesaid, and each Furrow be
Scoured up as cleanly as you can possibly; These simple particulars really
Observed, and Practiced, will bring the Land to that condition that I shall
make good what I formerly promised, and to this particular I shall say no more
for present, only this may be applied to any of this second sort of Land, be
it of what Mixture, or Composition soever, that is Banky, Mossy, Cold and
Rushy, and will have a proportionable effect promised; But if possibly you
could run over a good part of this Land with Dung after you have plowed it,
Dung laid upon the new fresh Turf, works wonders.
before you sow your last Crop, or so much as you could, it would produce a
double advantage of the cost bestowed toward the Soarding of it. And if after
you have Reaped your last Crop, you could then run it over again, with any
quantity of Muck, or Compast, it might so nourish your Land, and that for many
years after, possibly it might be near as good again upon the old Soarding, as
it was before; for you would wonder how much good one Load of Manure does upon
the Land so Tender, When one Load of Manure will go as far as two or three.
wrought, and Mixed, beyond what two or three Load will do on old Soard, or old
Pasture so Rough and Filthy; nothing will make you to believe this, but your
own experience. Let me prevail herein (good Reader) to make a trial, it will
be to thy benefit, be not an Enemy to Tillage, nor raising Corn to Poor, and
Commonwealth, and If thou expect better Satisfaction, take it from divine
evidence and from the Conclusion of him that spoke by Inspiration, as well as
from natural Experience.

He that tilleth his Land, Prove. 12. 11.
shall be satisfied with Bread, Prove. 28. 10.
and shall have plenty.

Much food in Tillage for the Poor. And if this satisfy not, Prove. 13. 23.
carry this one Text (if thou can remember no more) along with thee into thy
Pastures, when thon art in thy greatest Glory;

He that withdraws Corn, the people shall curse him, Prove. 11. 16.
and a blessing upon his bead that sells it. Prove. 13. 23.
But he must get it first, and so we ought upon that Land as will most freely
yield it, which I conceive is a main end wherefore Thou and Thy Land was first
created. Be not envious to thine own good, nor wilful to thine own profit. I
am much abashed to use so many words, to press so plain Simple Principles,
thought^ to be well known to all (and possibly they may be, better than to my
self) but truly the little Practice of them, and the Scorn men carry in their
Breasts to learn, and that Thirstiness in me after the Common good, occasions
all this Rudeness, to see thousands of Opportunities so neglected makes me
amaze.

CHAP. XVI.
ANd first for your richest sorts of Land conceived as good as Art and Nature
can make them, Richst ^or ^ of Land.
yet consider the ensuing Discourse, may hold out some Improvement to be made
out of the same. As for your best Land of all, That by Husbandry, Drayning,
Separating, clearing, Plowing, Soyling or some sort of husbandry or other was
brought to this perfection, it was not in this condition naturally nor
originally from the beginning, much whereof may be now clear from Rushes,
Mossiness, Sow Thistle, Nettles, Weeds, and Hemlocks and all other pelf, and
only bring forth pure Grass, both thick and rich; this possibly may admit of
little Improvement upon it self, but unto the Owner and Commonwealth this may
yield above double profit for some years by moderate Plowing, and afterward
return so soon to his natural fruitfulness, as that it shall yield his old
Grazing Rent the first year, and so continue; But this Land being of all other
the most subject to Abuse, and greater prejudice than any other Land
whatsoever; And I am confident unless the Presidented directions contained in
the fourteenth and fifteenth Chapter, be most punctually observed, it may
suffer loss, therefore I must provoke no man to take the pursuance of them
here, unless any who is of such a public spirit, as rather desires the
Public than his own private Advancement; And for some other men when they
find so great profit come in upon them by this or any other means, they out of
a thirsty desire of gain will Over-do, Over-plow, and so destroy their Land for
it is not Plowing simply as aforesaid; that impoverisheth Land, but too often
Plowing, and look you where you will generally throughout this Nation, and you
will find where any good Pasture is destroyed hereby, Destruction of the best
Land is by over-plowing.
they have Plowed Six, Seven, and some Nine, Ten, and some Twelve Crops
together, which I approve so well, as I say it is a Losing Extreme; And I wish
it were Felony so to abuse a man's Self; Lands, Posterity, and Commonwealth;
Also which Lands may be so many years before they come to a perfect Soard
again, as may lose as much in abatement of Rent before it come up to the old
Rent, as they got in the advance Rent by Plowing. And yet if I affirm, that
Mowing Land without Limitaion, is as impoverishing unto it, as Plowing Land
with Moderation, Mowing Land a great Impoverishing.
especially Upland Pasture, I should not much mistake; I am a greater E^emy to
the one without Limit than to the other with Moderaion, and yet tthe one is
cried down by all, and the other by few or none; Therefore my advise shall be,
to Plow thy Land three, four, or five Crops, if thy affections stand that way,
and look at greatest profit, Moderate Plowing better than unlimited Mowing.
Sowing it first with Hemp, Oad, Coal, or Rape-seed, Madder; Licorish, or Sow
such rich Commodity that will so well pay for it, or something else that better
agrees with the rankness of so gallant Land, which for diverse of the first
years will be so rank, that Corn will fall Flat, and Dwindle, or Rot, and
neither be kindly in quality, nor rise to the strike in quantity, as it will
upon those Lands after diverse Crops taken, or upon leaner Land, and then after
with Corn the last years; And if thou will but lay it down round, and even,
upon the Wheat, Rye, or Meslin Stubble Sowed in his proper Season, observing
some other few Directions, handled more at large in the aforesaid Chapters,
thou shall not need to fear thy Lands Impoverishing or abating Rent; It will
produce so gallant and sweet a Turf, as will feed as well, and faster than it
did before, if not better: For my own part, I do affirm, That had I the
managing it whilst under Tillage, I would make good the same upon good
Security; But as I said before, use your own liberty, he that Plows not such
Land at all that yields its utmost strength and fruit in Grazing, which admits
of no Corruption or Degeneration, does well: Because the Nation will afford
other Land enough, Plowing left indifferent upon the Richest Lands.
that stands in more need of this Husbandry to supply the Country Corn; And
also because many men hold it a great Disparagement to Plow up such gallant
Pasture; from whom I do very little or nothing dissent in Judgment, yet he
that (if by Plowing) can Advance the Public and himself also, I dare not say
but he does better, yet neither much amiss; Every man herein may please his own
affection, where the Commonwealth is not eminently prejudiced.

But for other ways of Improvement of the Richest sort of Land, I know little
more worth Divulging, for either the Cost and Charge expended will not produce
an answerable present Advantage, or else the continuance and certainty of
future hopes may prove doubtful; Which uncertainties I affect not, only take
this remembrance with thee, that if thy Pasture be very Vast and Large,
Divisions of Land advances.
Lesser Divisions will set the dearer and better, and every man's money for
Convenience, when greater are bargains for few men, and those for great ones
also that will make their own Advantage, yet use moderation herein also, A
large Pasture is comely, and a little Pingle Inconvenient, Extremes are neither
for Credit nor Profit, but for Destruction; Small Divisions reproved.
A Pasture about one hundred or sixscore Acres, or a hundred and fifty Acres is
very commendable where they lie remote and at good distance from great
Market Towns, or where Pasturing is very plentiful, but if either Pasture-Land
be scarce, or border upon Common Fields, or Heaths, or Forests, or if they lie
near or adjoynining to any good Market, or great City, lesser divisions will
far out-vy with greater in their price and advantage, the people lying under
such necessities of Pasturage, some to help to relieve their Common, and others
to relieve the necessities of their own neighboring Families; But in thy
Divisions be sure to make them always in the lowest parts of thy Lands, that
so thy Ditches may serve in stead of Draines or Conveyances of Water, or taking
away the Coldness that offends thy Land; every man's own Experience will
patronize this Position.

But secondly, when any of these Rich Lands shall Degenerate into Mossiness,
Rushes, Coldness, or Over-grow with Weeds, Nettles, Hemlocks, Sow-Thistles,
etc, then thy Land will need good Husbandry, and will admit of Improvement, for
Hemlocks, Nettles, Docks, Chick-weeds, and other common Weeds, these are as
much occasioned with Fatness and too much Richness, as from any other cause;
And when from this cause, no cure like Plowing, for that brings profit with the
Cure, Plowing the only Cure of Weeds.
and advance in the very Reducement; there is much Land of this Fatness; Some
there is in divess parts of this Nation, as about Hay-Stacks, or Sheep-Pens, or
places of Shade, or in the Warmest parts of many Pastures, which Sheep and
Cattle choose always for their Lieare, and very much about the heads of
Conney-Berries; All which according to former Direction (in Plowing old Resty
Land) will Reduce this to Moderation in over much Rankness; And especially if
it be Plowed somewhat oftener than the other sorts of Lands, it will bear near
as many more Crops without prejudice, and no other means whatsover will so
Surely, Feacibly, and Profitably, work this Effect in my Experience, viz. To
destroy the Weeds, and reduce it to perfect Grazing.

And as your Land degenerates to Mossiness, Plowing the only Cure against
Mossiness, Rush and Coldness.
Rushes, and Coldness, none will deny the wonderful certain change and
alteration thereof by Plowing, if they should, I conceive I have sufficiently
cleared it where I have discoursed of the second sort of Land at large in the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth Chapters, and answered several
Objections made against the same; yet one or two more remains to be Objected;
Bear with me, I say the more herein, as Coveting to beguile men of such
Prejudice as possesses most, and so deeply rooted, as will ask hot water to
Mattock up.

Some say they have found the contrary, Object*
their Land not Soarding of many years after, and when it has come to Soard,
Against timely Soarding.
it has been neither so Rich, Thick, nor Fruitful, and therefore Prejudiced
by Plowing.

All which I Echo with thee that possibly it may be so, Ans. 2.
and yet this may not reach too, nor in the least weaken my Propositions, which
give direction only to three or four Crops at most, unless in case of Weeds
and Nettles, and too much Fatness, I never advise to Plow thy Land so long to
bring it to this, I abominate such Husbandry, neither do I absolutely persuade
to the Plowing of all Lands without Exception, well knowing that in some parts
of this Nation, there are some Lands, so Binding, so Tough a Sodering Clay, and
Cold, that it will neither Soard so thick nor quick as others will, Plowing
some Land must be used as a Medicine ^o^ as a Calling.
which sort of Land if Rich, and Sweet, will less Advance by Plowing, than any
other, but to this sort of Land as it does degenerate and decay, use it as a
Medicine, and use it as according to former Rules, and lay down thy Land
according to former Limitations, and question not though it Soard not so soon
as other Lands, Mixed Light, and more Loosened, yet it shall both Soard so
Timely, and so Richly, as it shall counter-profit all thy prejudice. And for
other Lands either Gravelly, Light, Warm, and Sandy, or else Mixed, What Land
it is that may Soard as well the first year to as much profit as before.
and Compounded, I dare affirm some Land the first year may be full as good as
it was before Plowing; I have known a Winter Stubble after the Crop was Inned
of some Pastures, worth as much that Winter half year as it usually was worth
any Winter upon the old Soard, and yet has not bin Pastured the whole half
year neither, A President of Wheat stubble its speed* so Soarding.
nay some have been worth as much as the said Lands have bin worth almost the
whole year. The Eadish has bin so fruitful, and my self have had the like
Profits and Advantages, and have had a Wheat Stubble of my own being the third
Crop, that will make good what I have Affirmed, and the very first year of
Grazing full as good, if not better, than it was upon the old Turf before
Plowing.

They that cannot manage this Objection further, Object.
yet confess and say, it is true for two or three of the first years it may
possibly hold fruitful, but it shall fall after seven, eight, or ten, or more
years, after that it shall be worse than ever.

To this I can say little more than what I have said before, unless you can
produce me some Experiment, Ans.
wherein my directions have been observed, and your Prejudice succeeded,
otherwise you say nothing; which Experiment when you have found, I shall not
question but to discover your mistake, either you are mistaken in the nature of
the Land, or else in the manner or way of Husbandry and Plowing, or else in the
Method I propose in the laying of it down to Graze, or else the Stubble you lay
it down upon, in all which if you pursue me not, expect it not, all being
faciable, and any man may more certainly, and as I conceive more delightfully,
work by Rule than Random. I say then in the ordinary course of nature, Gods
blessing accompanying it, it shall increase and improve for many years, and
continue until some of the former and aforesaid Corruptions predominate again;
Of which my self have had large Experiences, and can produce many Presidents,
and do but you look into and upon much of your new laid-down-Land to Graze,
which being continually Grazed does put more proof into all sorts of Goods,
breed better, feed faster, milketh fruitfuller, than old Pasture that is
Richer, for ten, fifteen, or twenty years together. I have bought the purest
Mutton out of Land the third, A president of fattest Mutton on the newest (...).
the fourth, or fifth year after Plowing, being about eighteen or twenty
shillings per Acre, than any Land in those parts of near thirty shillings an
Acre has afforded, and in reason it must needs be so, because what Grass comes
fresh, is pure without Mixture, and sweet, being Young and tender, and having
no currupt Weeds of Filth to annoy it, and fruitful, having heat and strength
left in the Land to feed it, and for continuance fear it not, if Grazed, for
the very Grazing will Enrich it every year, and Improve it until it grow so
old again, and overrun with Moss, Ant-hills, Rushes, or other corruptions,
that it requires Plowing; and then let it have it, for the Lands and thy
Advantage sake; I know other Pastures which indeed were Plowed nine or ten
Crops, and did much prejudice the Lands thereby, which I exceedingly condemn;
yet this President answers this Objection, it lying now upon the fourteenth or
fifteenth year after Plowing, is better than ever was since Plowing, and mends
every year, and is rich and healthful if not more than it ever was, and would
far more have abounded in fruit, if Moderation had been used.

Another Objection may be raised, Object.
which is this, your new Plowed Lands are more subject to Rotting Sheep than
your old Pasture.

I answer, usually it is so, Ans.
and Experience has proved the same; Rotting Sheep in new Pastures well
ordered may be rate.
yet if you ever found any parcel of Land Husbandred according to these
directions, nicely observed as aforesaid, that it was laid so high and round,
his over-Furlongs Drained by the lower, and a good Master Ditch or Trench the
lowest, and Plowed but three or four Crops, and laid down upon the Winter Corn
Stubble, etc. you either found little danger in it for Rotting, or else no more
than other Grazed Lands thereabouts was subject to, for in great Rot years
indeed, many of your Cold, Sour, Rushy Pastures, Rot themselves though never
plowed, especially such as have either great Road-wayes; Drifts, or Passages
through them; yet observe these two directio^s following, put case it should
Rot first or second years, To prevent Rotting in new Tilled Pastures.
then Stock it with Beasts, and that prevents it, or else secondly with part
Sheep, those barren Sheep to feed, and not with a breeding Stock, and part
Beasts, and very easy that you may have Grass at pleasure, to satisfy them to
the full, which will probably prevent them from eating Dirt or Gravel, and
this will turn thee out as much profit and secure that danger in great measure
out of question.

As for Rushes, Moss, and Coldness, which does not much offend the best sort of
Land, I refer thee backward to its more proper place, and have little more to
say in the Advance of this richer sort of Land, but only that in your
Separations and divisions of your greatest Pastures, you be very curious in
erecting Quick-set Hedges after the manner prescribed in the ^ixt Piece, and
the three and twentieth Chapt^^, Separations and raising of Quick-set Hedges a
great advancement.
and be most careful of preserving them from biting and treading, and well
fenced from any Annoyance, and maintained with constant Weeding for two or
three years together, all which exactly observed, you shall raise upon each
Lordship or Pasture, Fuel and Firewood sufficient to maintain many Families,
besides the Timber which may be raised in the Hedg-rows, if here and there in
every Perch be but planted an Ash, Hedge rows a thing of delight and credit.
Oak, Elm, or Witchazell, all which will not only be most profitable, but most
delightful and honorable unto men of Ingenuous spirits.

And if to this thou would but add the sowing of Kernels, or planting
Crab-tree Stocks here and there in all your Hedg-rowes, and grasting of them,
and preserving them precisely til they come to Trees, how gallantly would this
good Land nourish them? what a benefit might the fruit of these Trees yield
either in Perry or Sider, to be transpored into other parts, or else to relieve
our poor at home? of which were there plenty this dear year, one third part of
the Malt of this Nation might be saved, and so that Barley be for Bread; But
more of this in his proper place, which I shall present thee with, as an
admirable Piece of Improvement of it self upon any Lands it is capable to be
made, as a new Addition in Orcharding Improvements.

Here two or three words more to show the great Prejudice men suffer for want
of these Plantations when they make divisions or separations in their Lands by
new Quick-setting it. Reasons why Quick-setting thrives no (...).


When men have planted the Quick, they conceive then they have don, nor
observing perhaps neither to plan^ it in the Over-most and Fattest Earth, nor
for to Root all their Sets in the best Mould, nor when they have done, to
preserve it from Sheep and Cattle, nor Mould it, Weed it, Hedge it, and secure
it as it shall stand in need, for three, four, or five of the first years, All
which were it done upon all Opportunities, No man almost in the Nation would be
either at want of Firing, or Timber, Hedge rows a great help for Firing and
Timber.
especially were all such Fields, Marshes, Heaths, and Commons thus separated
and divided; all which are fecible and might be done with great profit to all,
and prejudice to none. I am ashamed to speak so much in these so easy and
wel-known ways of Husbandry, but that there is so much neglect thereof, as if
men minded more their own and Public Confusion, and Ruin, than Profit and
Advancement; Some will cast Banks and Ditches for separation, and plant no
Quick at all in them, and so destroy as much ground as if they Quick-set it,
and spoil the ground to no advantage; and others will Quick-set and never Fence
it, Weed, nor Mould it, and so it either perishes at first, Not preserving
Quick-sets when planted is ruin to good Husbandry.
or else grows dwindled, lean, and barren, not worth any thing; or else
suffer it to be bitten, or eaten with Cattle, or else stifled with cutting or
plashing before it is ripe or ready, that it comes to no thickness, growth, or
fruitfulness; In all which were there but a little Patience, and Addition of a
little more cost and pains, there would not be one foot of ground more lost,
but a double or treble Advantage raised upon it in few years, and ever after,
with no other Husbandry continued, but ever bring in double profit for the
charge bestowed, As in the cutting, plashing, scouring of the Hedges, which
pays his cost bestowed, and sometimes double and treble, and if it be a Hedge
curiously preserved, and cut just in his ripest season, before it begin to die
in the bottom, and have in it either good store of great Wood, or Fruit Trees
planted among, the profits may aris^ to much more than is here spoken of.

CHAP. XVII.
Wherein I proceed to a second sort of Land, somewhat Inferior to the former,
wherein is discoursed the destruction of the Rush, Flag, and Mare-blab,
altering the Coldness of Nature, and the preventing the standing Winters Water,
and destroying Ant and Mole-hills, etc. All which are most incident to this
second sort of Land.
THis which I call a second sort is our midling Land (I delight in plainess,
and avoid all Language darkning the plainest sense, or whatsoever may occasion
mysteriousness, or confusion in the reading or practice) so that this middle
sort of Lands, as aforesaid, is all such Lands that are betwixt the value of
twenty shillings per Acre, and six shiliings eight pence per Acre, which sort
of Lands as they lie under a capacity of the greatest Improvement, I have
handled them at large in the foregoing Discourse, especially under the four
first Pieces of Improvement.

But as they lie under a Capacity of a moderate and less Improvement, fall here
to be discoursed; and although I call it a moderate Improvement, yet being well
Husbandred, according to the subsequent directions, may produce a double
increase, and some far more, and some less, but in all a considerable
advantage, enough to encourage to the prosecution.

And possibly some of these Lands may be of the richest, and first sort
naturally, but by some Improvidence or ill Husbandry being degenerate are fallen
under this second, Usual ways to kill the Rush Flag, or Mare'-blab.
and that where the Rush either hard or soft prevails, or else where the Land
lies so flat, cold and moist, that the Flag or Mar^-blab thriveth, I shall
here only apply one remedy for the removal of them all, to avoid Tediousness,
which is most natural thereto, and cannot fail being punctually observed, and
that is a way all men use already, Drayning the most natural way.
though to little purpose, which is to endeavor Drayning of the same; as you
shall see in most men's Lands, both Pasture and Common, ^ull of Trenches as they
can hold, to their great cost, and loss of abundance of good Land devoured in
the Trenches, Heaps, Much Trenching reproved.
and banks, they make, and yet all is of little use, the Rush as fruitful, and
the Land as cold as formerly in comparison. Therefore I shall advise far less
Trenching, and yet produce more soundness; I say then, as I have often said,
seek out the lowest part of thy Land, and there make either a large Trench or
good Ditch, or be it but the old one well scoured up (if there be one) to such
a Depth as may carry away that water or Corruption that feeds the Rush, or
Flag, from every other upper Trench thou shall see cause to make, and so ascend
to any part of thy Land where these offenses are, carrying with thee one Master
Trench to receive all thy less Draines, along with thee, and there make a Drain
(yea all thy Draines and Trenches) so deep (for I prescribe no certain depth)
as to that Cold spewing water that lies at the bottom of the Rush, How to find
the matter that ^eed the Rush and Flag.
or Flag, which always either lies in a Vein of Sand and Gravel mixed, or
Gravel or Clay and stones mixed, as aforesaid, and thence will issue a little
water, especially making thy Trench half a foot, or one Foot deeper, into which
will soak the Rushes food, which being laid Dry and Drayned away cannot grow,
but needs dye and wither.

It is impossible without going to the bottom to do any good; Our own
experience shows it, and so the depth may be two Spades grant or more, however
to the bottom thou must go, and then one Trench shall do as much good as
twenty, always curiously observing that thy Trenches run in the lowest part of
thy Ground, and through the Coldest and most quealiest parts of thy Lands, and
for the manner of making the same, and further Direction therein, I shall refer
thee back unto the second Piece, the seventh Chapter, where I have spoken
something to most of the aforesaid Passages.

But if thy Land lies upon a Flat or upon a Level, How to drain Land well
where there is no end of Trenching.
and have many great wide Balks, of which there will be no end of Trenching or
Drayning, I must then assure thee it is to little purpose, yet art not left
remediless, for this ensuing direction will not fail, and will bring profit
with it to pay for curing also, which is a moderate Plowing, Ridging all thy
Balks, raising and Landing all thy Flats, gaining them as high as possibly thou
can, Plow all, and leave none, and do this three years together, and observe
such former Directions as are contained in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and
fifteenth Chapters in the third Piece of Improvement; And by the blessing of
God expect the issue promised, It will lay Land sound and dry, more warm and
healthful than formerly, destroy the Rush, and many other Annoyances beyond
Expectation.

I have been forced to be more large, and to speak twice to one thing, because
of the suitableness thereof unto these Lands, but especially because I cannot
speak enough to make some to understand it, nor others to set upon the
Practice, and more especially because the Reader may miss the reading of it in
the former part, unless he take the pains as few do deliberately to read the
whole; Therefore if thou will forgive this fault, I Will mend the next.

As for the Mole-hils, so great an Enemy to the Husbandman, and Grazier, there
is so much Experience made for their Destruction, that almost every Ingenuous
man is grown a Moal-catcher in many parts, and that is a certain way, and yet
in many parts men are Slothful, that because all their Neighbors will not kill
them, therefore they will not, so they suffer their Land one third part to be
turned up; The causes of Moals increasing.
There is a Law to compel men to Ring their Swine, to prevent their Rooting,
it were more advantage to the Co^mon-Weal, a severe Law were made to Compel
all men to keep the Moal from Rooting; Want of a Law for killi^g of Moales a
great mischief
for he destroys abundance of Grass he covers with the Mould, and Corn he
throws up by the Roots, which utterly perishes, Spoils the M^wers work and
Tools, and raises Balks in Meads, and Pastures, besides the work he makes the
Husbandman to spread some of them, the Cost whereof, were it but bestowed in
Moal-killing, would prevent the aforesaid losses. And although I can make no
new Addition to the Moales Destruction, Pot-T^^p chief Engine in Moal
Destruction.
there being so many Artists with the Moal^staff, Tines, and Traps of several
Sorts, of all which I commend the Pot-trap set in a Bank, or Hedg-sow, which
wisely Set and Planted at all times, but especially in the natural Season of
Bucking time about March, will destroy them insensibly; Only one thing more
punctually observed in the time of breeding, will make such a Rout among them,
which thy self or any ingenuous man may do, as is not credible; one Spring at
or about March, one Moal-catcher and his boy, in about ten days time in a
ground of ninety Acres being just laid down from Tillage, took me as was verily
conceived three bushel of old and young, they were not to be numbered most of
them being young and naked, and this he only did by casting up their nests,
which are always built in a great heap of a double bigness to the rest,
Destroying the nests destroys multitudes of them.
most easily discerned, and then immediately the old ones would come to look
their young which he would snap up presently also. Yet I desire to speak a word
by way of Encouragement to the Ingenuous Husbandman not to suffer so great
Dishonor to Husbandry, nor so great Prejudice to his Profit, as to suffer
(were it possible) one to remain either in Tillage, Mead, or Pasture, and if
thou have any Opportunity of Water to be brought over any part of thy Land,
Water best to destroy Moals.
it will drive them out and destroy them so far as thou can lead it after
them, that thou need not be in any measure troubled with them in thy Meadows.

CHAP. XVIII.
And for the Ant-hills, more pestilent and Offensive than the former, in some
Sorts of Lands.
THere is but a little Addition that I can make to what I spoke before of Ant
hills destruction; Ant-hills Destruction.
But to quicken thee thereto, I shall be more large, being this is the most
proper place: I demand what is the reason that infinite great Pastures all over
the Nation are so overrun with them? Unless men Account them Virtuous. Indeed
some have said, Object.
they Increase the Land in quantity, and so they may say with shame; for so
they do, but apparently Decrease it in quality, Ans.
Worth, and Fruitfulness, half some men's Land covered over with them, and what
is the fruit of them? They bear plenty of wild Time, Mous-ear, Phins, Moss, and
Shar-grase, you shall seldom see a Sheep or Beast bite them, Ant-Hills good to
destroy Sheep or Beasts.
unless for hunger, and then if a Sheep or Beast be cast among them, many times
destroyed by them. I would have these men as are so far in love with them, but
he entreated to spend a little time to see how his cattle. Pasture upon them
in the winter, and how they burn and scorch in Summer, and but make experience
of three or four Acres banking and the fruit thereof, and never conclude a
demonstration by Opinion when experience may so easily resolve the question.
For Curing of them, I shall only direct the old Piece of banking them, but in
a more unusual way, and somewhat more speedily than formerly; How to bank Ant
Hills most speedily.
yet make a banking Iron or Spade, made very thin or smooth on purpose, a
little more compass or coming than your ordinary Spades are, and deeper bitted
also. A Spade that works smooth and clean will further this doubly, and then
begin with the crown or top of thy Hills, and so divide thy over Turf into five
or six parts, and take down the coat or over turf to the very bottom of it, the
Turf being cut as thin as possibly thou can, so thou be sure to go under
the Roots of the Grass, else it will not Soard so thick nor speedily, and so
turn it down round about the Coar, which taken out, and cast about thy Land so
deep, that when thy Turf is turned down, Why to lay them lower than the Surface
of the Earth.
even just as thou tookest it up, even so lay it down every Turf in its place,
that the whole compass of the Hill may be rather lower than the Surface of the
Ground, and but a very little neither, yet lower it must be, because else the
Ant will return more readily again: And secondly, because then it will receive
more naturally the Water, or Moisture, which will occasion a more speedy
Soarding, and prevent the Pismires return, for the Moisture will not be endured
by the old Inhabitants; And this done in the proper season, which is in the end
of November, December, January, and beginning of February, which seasons if
thou fail as good neglect them wholly; for thy Earth will neither have benefit
of the Frost to mould it, whereby it will be spread with ease, and have some of
the Winters rain to settle it into the Ground, nor the Turf have fitting time
to sodder and work together before the dry weather comes to parch it; and
loosen it again, and so may lose a great part of that Summers profit which
otherwise thou may receive; And if thy Land be clean and and free from Moss,
Rush, and other pelf, this will be a sufficient cure as to reducing the
Hilliness to Plainess, and thy Land to an exceeding good Improvement; and so
herein I have no more to say, unless thy Land be overrun with the aforesaid
filth; but what is the Burden of my Song, and is the only and sure Cure of
most of the Maladies that occasioneth Barrenness, which is prescribed as a
sovereign Remedy ( viz.) Plowing according to former directions destroys them
all, and brings meat in the mouth with it, takes away the Fins, and the
Mous-ear, the wild Time; and Shar-grass, if used with Moderation, and so I have
done with this.

As for the Sow-Thistle, Sow-thistle a great annoyance.
the chief and only Annoyance of all Thistles (as for other Thistles I scarce
know how to rank them amongst those grand Corrupters, because the opinion of
most men are, that they are most certain symptoms of good Land, as usually
they are; so are Nettles, Hemlocks, Mallowe, etc.) and yet I had rather they
were all destroyed than remain upon my Lands (but because they are of less
offense, and we have greater Prejudices than these, I Will let them pass) but for
the Sow-thistle, it is of so great offense that it destroys all the Grass it
covers, which is many times a foot round, and also so easy to be destroyed,
that I shall put the Grazier or Farmer upon no other charge or trouble, Easiest
way to destroy the Sow-thistle
but only take a little Paddle-staff, as a walking-staff, and give each one a
chop at the Root as he passes by them, which will be rather a Recreation to an
active man than a burden, and thus every day a few as they grow in bigness,
will in few days destroy them all; Or else a Shepherd, or Keeper of the
ground, as he walks among his Cattle may easily keep them under, as he goes
about his daily business; But since I have found out a more certain way which
will destroy them at once spudding up, which being done as soon as the Thistle
begins to spread, but they must be done as it were up, by, or under the Root,
which lies very overly, and if it be not cut at first chop, it may at next by
the Root: I had the last year a Field of an hundred Acres so thick over-runne,
that some Acres were as thick that one man could not do above half an Acre in a
day, I caused them to be spudded up by the Root, which was done at two chops
with my Spade, I was not only freed of them the last Summer wholly, but my
whole ground is cleansed of them for this year, and so I hope for ever. I
believe the charge thereof was near twenty shillings, or thereabout. A more
certain way I know not.

For Goose Tansey or Hoar Tansey like Weed, Goose Tansey
I must needs make Proclamation, That he that can tell the destruction of it,
shall do a very acceptable service; and for my self, I should be very thankful
for the Communication thereof, for I can say no more but this, Never Plow your
Land too long, nor out of heart or strength by no means, for this occasioneth
it to grow more thick and fruitfully; and also load your Land hard with Cattle
in the Spring, and when it does grow high and strong, Mow it down about the end
of Midsummer Moon, or in the dryest and hottest time of the Summer, but the
earlier the better, and other means I can prescribe none other, but in all your
Plowings soil it well with good Dung, and lay it down rich, and full of spirit.
I hope some man of Experience herein will help me.

For the destruction of Fearn, Fe^rn how^o destroy.
I shall prescribe such poor means that thou will take offense thereat, yet
however, Experience having proved the truth hereof, I will pr^scribe it, viz.

In the Spring, so soon as it begins to grow up a little above the Grass, while
it is young and tender, take a crooked Pole, or piece of Wood about six foot
long, and let it c^ook at one end like a Bow, or come like a Sith, with which
thon may strike off all the heads of the Fearn, as low as thou can to the
very ground, if thou please to make it with a little Edge thou may, but it
will do without; And this course thou must take the second time also, as soon
as it begins to sprout and grow up again, which may be within three Weeks after
the first; And thus having bruised, and broken, and cut off the head the second
time, thou shall see such a destruction wrought, as thou will admire, the
Reason I cannot possibly conceive other than this; This breaking, cutting, or
bruising of the Stalk does give a kind of Check or Comptroul unto the Sap which
is ascending, The reason of Fearns dying.
that it causes it again to recoyl into the Root, and so suffocates and
choaketh the life and spirit of it, that it descends dowuward and dies in the
Earth; This I am from a very Ingenuous knowing Husband informed, which not
only destroys it the present year, but for the time to come also, who has
made a more large and full experience of the same than my self has done; But I
believe if it prove a very wet Summer, thou must not wholly expect the
destruction of it. But in some parts of the Nation where Fuel is very scarce,
it will be thought to be Prejudice by many to destroy it, especially upon
Commons where they reserve it for Fuel on purpose, and is a very great help to
poor for Firing; yet whether in those very places it be so good as an Acre of
Grass I question, but there are other parts where it is little worth, and some
places not worth getting, yet it is the ruin and destruction of all the Grass
it grows over, for whose sakes I have spoke thus much, and an^sure in most
parts it a most pestilent weed.

CHAP. XIX.
Treates of the destruction of Goss, Broom, Brakes, etc. and how to Improve
ordinary Lands by Planting Fruit; and shows how to preserve Corn from Blasting,
and from Crows and Vermin, and gives a Description of the Water Persian Wheel.
AS for your Goss, Broom, Braking, etc, which in some places wehre Fuel is
very scarce, and the ground very bad, to prescribe a Cure is little Advantage:
but where either Land is good natured Land, or Broom and Goss of little value;
or else where men desire to Improve their Land to the utmost worth it can be
raised to, Easiest way to destroy Broom.
it would be worth entertainment: But to give a perfect Cure thereof without
considerable Cost bestowed upon it I know none; The best means for that, is to
cut it in the hottest and dryest time of Summer, when the Sap is drawn clean
forth of the Root, and many times this will destroy it.

But if thou will be a good Improver thou may destroy it utterly, and treble
the value of thy land in the doing of the same; which is this.

When thou have cut thy Broom, thy Goss, Ling, or Braking, it matters not at
what season; Then Plow thy Land, and make a Fallow of it if thou please;
Excellentest way to destroy Broom, Goss, Ling, and Braking.
or otherwise, take as many Crops as thou please, more or fewer, all is one
to this purpose, so as thou be sure to Plow thy Roots up clean, and then Manure
thy Land with what Compost thou can get, for I believe if thy Land be made
Rich and fruitful with any sort of Soil whatsoever, it will in a great measure
mend it; But without doubt if thou either Marl it well, or chalk it very well,
and afterward Muck it very well, to mollify, and loosen, and open the Earth;
or Lime it well, or Mud it well, and afterward Muck it over with good Cow or
Horse Dung, or any other good Soil, as House or street Muck, it will not only
Improve it, but destroy any of these offenses, or any other whatsoever that
naturally arises from Barrenness or Coldness; possibly once Manuring may not
do it, nor indeed can thou expect so great an Improvement with so little
cost; because I reckon not that any charge or cost thou expendest whilst thou
have it under Tillage, for that brings in thy charge again in thy Crop, and so
not to be put upon this Account; but that which thou bestowest upon thy last
Crop, for the last Crop I would advise thee to Manure to purpose, and so soon
as thy Crop is got Manure it again, for it will also bring in thy charge in the
Crop of Grass also; and again, whilst thy Land is young and tender, When one
load of Soil does as much good as two or three.
for at this season will one load of Soil do as much as two when thy Soard
begins to grow Tough; yea as much as three, when it grows Mossy, Rushy, Filthy.

This is a most certain Conclusion which I have ever maintained, and proved by
Practice, Ever to lay on Soil that first Winte after Corning, An unsailing way
of destroying any filth.
and at one good Soyling have raised an excellent sweet Soard the very first
year, full as good again as it was before upon the old Soard: And this gallant
Advancing-way shall certainly destroy both Briars, ^raking, Fearn, (Goo^-Tansie
also if an thing will do it) Goss-Ling-Heath, or any thing else whatsoever
occasioneth Unfruitfulness, and work an Improvement above what is Expected.
This way of destroying Broom, Goss, Braking, or any such filth, would be of
great esteem, had it been held out of it self under specious pretenses of rare
discovery as some can do, but I am confident it is an unfailing remedy, and
will certainly destroy the pelf as it inriches the Lands, and though many
devices may be found out, or strong conceits raised to do the same, yet at
present I know none so certain nor so profitable.

There is another opportunity of Improving almost any sort of Sound Land, of
which I gave a touch in the last Chapter, Treating of the way of Improving the
best sort of Lands, of which it is most capable,

That is, Planting Fruit Trees in hedges is good husbandry.
by Planting all sorts of Fruit Trees in all your Divisions, and Hedg-rowes,
where they shall not Prejudice one foot of Land, and where they may grow as
prosperously as in an Orchard, if you will but wisely manage them.

The Cost or Charge of this Improvement is as easy as any that can be made, if
you will cast it into a Method:

That is, when you make any Partition in your Lands, which I know you will not
without a Quick-set Hedge, in which in every twenty yards you may Plant a
Crab-Tree stock as well as a Thorn, only in setting of it be careful of
Moulding it plentifully with the best Mould you can get, Chief piece in
Planting all fruits.
For that is the main Piece in Planting as I conceiee: To lay a good Foundation
in every thing, prepares for a good Superstruction; So that if the Root be
Nourished from the Earth, the Root will feed both Bough and Branch more
plentifully: Therefore though thy Land be naturally Barren, yet make that place
all round about thy Stock a good compass, as good as thou can, with good
mellow Mould, Best Earth discovered.
and that which smells well in Digging is Fruitful, containing the juice of
Vegetables already prepared.

The Tender Mellow Earth is between the two Extremes of Clay and Sand, and must
needs be best: And thus having Planted thy Stock in good Earth, thy work is
half done, if thou do but now and then renew the same, that is, almost at it
were, take up thy Tree again, or else get well under the Roots, and so apply
fresh Mould to them while they are Young and Tender: And this will cause it to
Thrive without measure, and put forth a gallant Smooth Bark, which it ever a
Sign of a Thriving Tree: So that be but a little careful in the choosing thy
Graft; both for it self and the Fruit of it, and then after Grafting have but
patience in preserving of it a few years, and here is all the Cost Required.

The Improvement may be wonderful, if men would but Plant their Grounds as in
many Countries they do; as in Worcestershire, Hereford, and Glostershire, and
great part of the Country of Kent, they use* Every Hedge-row is full of Fruit,
and some men plant, whole Fields over, every thirty yards asunder, whereby they
reap a Couple of Harvests, How to reap two Harvests.
One of Grass or Hay, and another of Fruits.

O that I might but be a Remembrancer to this poor Nation, of the many
opportunities of Honor, Wealth, and Glory, it is Capable of, and that I could
but persuade its Natives to take hold thereof, and deliver the Earth of those
advantages it is so big withal: Judge the rest by this One Poor Piece; Were
all men but industrious herein, how might the very fruit that might be raised
in this Nation almost relieve it in such a year of Scarcity as this is like to
be? If it would not be bread to the Poor, as it might be in some measure, I am
sure it would be Drink, and how much Barley would that preserve to Bread-Corn
that is now turned to Malt? Yea, had this very year been but kindly, and a
Plentiful Fruit-year, what a great help would it have been to Enggland? And
might not England, had it been but generally as Ingenuous as some Members of it
are, we might have had twice as much Fruit as now we have.

But certainly we are afraid lest Plenty should be our Ruin, or else all men
that Study so much to get Estates at second hand, Each from other, would rather
strive to gain it at first hand Out of the Earth, the True mother, in whose
Bowels is more Wealth than ever will be drawn forth, and enough to satisfy
(whether theirs is or no I know not) I am sure all Ingenuous men desire it,
that so they may be as the Midwife to deliver the Earth of it Throws, it will
send forth enough, if thou will but lay an Egg in the Sand of the Earth,
'twill bring it forth: Help the Birth, be the Man-Midwife (who is never in use
but in greatest need) Need and Misery is likely to be greater than is expected;
Yea, I fear than has been of many years; If God work not above man, And man
work not now with God, by all Prudentiall means whatsoever. And so much, and no
more be said of Planting Fruit Trees at present, until I have gained more Time
therefore, and Experience therein.

And now I resolve to speak no more of any more ways of Improvement here; but
only One word of Preserving that We have already, and it is but only to Direct
a word or two how to keep Corn from Blasting, and Seed from Vermin.

For Blasting is one of a Kingdoms Curses, An unfailing way to preserve Corn
from Blasting.
And therefore to Prescribe natural, absolute, unfailing Remedies in all Places
and at all Times, is beyond my skill, yet one Unfailing Remedy there is, also
the Removal of this, so it is the Removal of all Causes or Occasions of
Barrenness whatever, And that is sin, the Root that brings forth all: First
brought forth the Curse, and ever since the fruit thereof: The only Cure
thereof is our Lord Jesus set upon the Pole, he must damn the Curse for us, and
in us, and we by looking up to him, and our Application of himself to us,
Mourning over him, and humbling our Souls before him; Hereby must we be made
Sensible of the Removal hereof, by which, and by no other means it is
Removable.

But the natural Helps as usually are Applied, are the Soaking or Steeping
Corn in thick fat water, or Limewater, or Urine or Brine, and the Mixing-Lime
or Ashes with the Corn while Wet and Moist, that so it may receive part of
Smithon-Meal, finest of the Ashes or Lime upon it self, and Cloth it self with
it, so as it may fall clothed all over to the Earth, and so be covered
therewith: This has been Highly Commended of late as a great Preservation of
the Purity of the Corn, The most usual natural help.
and in some-parts of the Chiltern Country, now put into great use, so that
instead of their Usual way of changing their seed, which has been an Old
received Principle of great advantage, A good help to preserve Corn pure.
(and I verily believe is very good Husbandry) now they betake themselves
hereto: Yet however, I would not Dehort but persuade m^n to the other also;
Especially those that use to fetch their Seed out of Chiltern into other Parts
or Countries of the Fieldon, who have found great Advantage by their Constant
Change of Seed.

And this is a very good means for the preserving of the Corn from Fowl, To
preserve Corn from Fowls and Vermin.
or Vermin also, which Usually devour one part thereof before it can be
covered, the Lime or Ashes sticking to the Corn, offends them so, that they
will avoid it, and though I say it inricheth not the Corn, or Land, no more
than what that Substance of Lime or Ashes is, that cleaves unto it; Yet so much
it does, and is help, and a very good Help to the bettering of it; Yet not such
a Help as some men cry it up to be, as if it were as good as a Manuring, or
Soyling, which usually men bestow upon their Land for Wheat; So as I would have
no man Under-value the least Opportunity of Advantage any way; So I would not
have any man deceive his Land, or himself, for herein consequently the Poor and
Commonweal are beguiled also.

There is one Poor Simple Piece of my own Experience I dare not but
Communicate, for the Preserving Early, or Late Sowed Corn, or for preserving it
when it begins to Corn in the Ear, from Crows, Rookes, or Jack Dawes, and this
was yet never failable to me since I found it: It Is no more, An unfailing
Prevention of Crows Rooks, or Daws from Corn.
but Kill a Crow or two with thy Gun if thou can possibly upon the place,
where this Vermin haunteth, is not, Kill one any where else, or if thou can
not get a Crow do but take any black Feathers of Crow, Raven, Turkey, Pidgeon,
or any other Fowl, but let them be as black as possibly they can: And them take
into thy Field where they Annoy thee, and in the most Obvious, Plain, and
Perspicuous places, make a great hole of two foot over, and about twenty Inches
deep, which Hole must be stuck round about the Edges with the longest feathers,
and some of the shortest laid in the Bottom of the Hole, with some part of the
Carkas if thou have a Crow, and that Turf that you dig out of the Hole, or else
that Earth being laid round upon a heap, you may stick round with Feathers
also; The Feathers of one Crow will dress two or three of these Holes, and
about half a dozen or eight of these Holes, will serve for a Field of ten or
twelve Acres; Which being done, and made on the highest Ground, observe the
Creatures, whether they will fall in that Field or no, all the while those
Feathers remain fresh, which may be will be a month, unless great store of
Rain, or Weather beat them much, and then they must be Rennewed once again, if
thou see need: And if they Annoy that place, or once fall thereabouts, I am
much Deceived; I know they will not, you shall see as soon as ever you have
made but one Hole, and they take notice of it, how great offense they take, if
One Crow but discover it, there is work enough for him to call his Fellows to
behold the Wonder, he will gather all the Crows thereabouts to behold the same,
which they will View with such admiration, The Reason of the Crows offense
taken.
as will make you admire the Creatures astonishment. The Reason is, as I
conceive, no more but an Affrightment, or Astonishment, by a New and unexpected
Object, or else from that Antipathie they bear, or some misgiving, or fear of
being Intrapped themselves, that possesses them, that they dare not come near
the same; Neither Gunpowder which many use to dress a Crow withal, nor
constant Shooting of them, or Killing of them, shall not have the like effect;
It cleares all the Field of every one to thy hearts desire.

I promised to give a more Full Description of the Persian-Wheel, or
Water-Wheel to raise Water out the Stream that Drives it.

And for the more Clear understanding of the Description of it, Imagine thou
stoodest just before the Face of the Wheel, as it is Plan^d in the River, to
View the same as the Water Drives it; but this is of a very Plain Wheel, and as
I conceive a better and more Exact one may be Discovered.

1. The height of the Wheel may be betwixt fifteen foot to thirty foot, or more
if thou please, according to the strength of thy Water, The fuller
Description of the Persian Wheel.
and the height thou desire to raise it, made just like an ordinary
Under-shoot Mill-Wheel.

2. The breadth of the Sole or Ring of the Wheel may be also according to thy
pleasure, from fifteen Inches to thirty Inches broad, Ladleled as other
Water-Wheeles are.

3. The Buckets or Kans to take up thy Water, if thy Wheel be about fifteen
foot high, may be Six in number, or Eight if thou please.

4. The Buckets to such a Wheel, just so long as the Wheel is broad: The Bucket
is made with four boards nailed to a bottom-board: Two sides run upon a strait
Line, which are those planted to the Ring of the wheel, and to the Ladle-board,
and the other two run toward an Angle-taper, declining from twelve Inches in
the But or bottom, to six Inches at the mouth one way; and from eight at the
bottom to four Inches at the mouth the other way; the mouth is open always.

5. The Buckets fill themselves in the bottom as the Wheel goes, and so lose
some of the Water in coming up, and when they come almost to the Top, a Trough
about three or four foot long it Planted, as it were in the Ring of the Wheel
near the Spoakes of it, and takes the rest of the Water as it delivers it out
at the Top, which may be about half the Buckets first take up, out of which
Cistern thou may either in Pumps or Trenches lead thy Water, for Watering a
House or Land as thou please, up to that Level; It matters not how slow thy
Wheel goes, nor for any greater fall or height of Dam than will drive thy
Wheel, which may be about two foot; It is of very special use; So have thou as
Plain a Description as I can give thee, until thou have the Figure or Form
Delineated, which will give more light to the Discovery of it, which shall
among other Tools be Deciphered, with a further Addition of more ease and
Exactness in it, than is here Described, if God give an Opportunity.

The Fifth Piece is a discovery of such Simples and Ingredients, to be
compounded with the Earth, with the Nature, and use of them, In Application
whereof makes good the Improvement promised, and Meliorarareth the Earth to all
Intents and Purposes.
CHAP. XX
Shows how in Tillage of thy Land, thou may improve it best, with an
Addition of an Soil, or Manure by far, than upon the Turf in Grazing, and in
particular Treats of Liming
ALl Up-Lands whatsoever, Improvement of Up-Land several ways.
especially all sound and whole some Land, will admit of several ways of
Improvement, as,

In general all coarse barren Heaths, Lingy, Broomy Lands, be it of lowest and
meanest value is suitable for Improvement, by Liming, and by all the Subsequent
Compositions; All old Resty Land, that has not been Tilled of late, although
it be coarse of it own nature, and yield little Fruit, yet by Plowing according
to former directions, all Advantages observed for three or four Crops,
President of Plowing Wood-Land Land.
which I fear not but the heart and strength thereof will bear it out, without
Prejudice; I have known Six or Seven Crops taken, of Land not worth above five
shillings or six shillings an Acre, and it very little the worse, as generally
all the Wood-Lands are apt to run to Moss, and Fearn, Goss, and Broom, and to
be so extremely overrun therewith, that it bears nothing else, and if they be
not tilled according to that ancient Principle all Husban-men retain, A
Husband-mans old principle Wood-Land Lands Tilled every ten years, yea some
every eight.
every ten, or fifteen years, they will runn into these Extremes so far; as
that they will be of little use, so all other Lands of a better nature subject
to these Extremes, no better way can possibly be than Moderate Tillage,
according to the former rules prescribed.

And in thy Tillage are these special Opportunities to Improve it, either by
Liming, Means or Materials to in-rich Land.
Marling, Sanding, Earthing, Mudding, Snayl-codding, Mucking, Chalking,
Pidgeons-Dung, Hens-Dung, Hogs-Dung, or by any other means, as some by Rags,
some by coarse Wool, by Pitch Marks, and Tarry Stuff, any Oily Stuff, Salt,
and many things more, yea indeed any thing almost that has any Liquidness,
Foulness, Saltness, or good Moisture in it, is very natural Inrichment to
almost any sort of Land, all which as to all sorts of Land, they are of an
exceeding Mellorating nature, and of these more particularly.

And first for Liming, Liming of Land.
it is of most excellent use, yea so great, that whole Countries and many
Countles that were naturally as Barren as any in this Nation, and had formerly
(within less than half an Age) supply with Corn out of the Fieldon
Corn-Country, and now is and long has been ready to supply them, and does and
has brought their Land into such a Posture, for bearing all sorts of Corn,
that upon Land not worth above one or two shillings an Acre, they will raise
(well Husbanded with Lime) as good Wheat, Barley, and White and Gray Pease, as
England yields, yea they will take a parcel of Land from off a Lingy Heath or
Common, not worth the having, nay many will not have it to Husbandry it, and
will raise most gallant Corn, that naturally is so Barren, worth five or six
pound an Acre.

And though some object it is good for the Father, Object.
but bad for the Son.

I answer, Ans.
so are all Extremes whatsoever, that is, to Plow it after Liming so long as is
either any spirit left in the Lime, or heart in the Land, or it will bear any
sort of Corn or Grain, it will ruin it for Posterity; But if that after Liming,
men would but study Moderation in their Tillage, anid not (because the Land
yields such abundance of Corn) Plow or Till it so long as it will carry Corn,
no nor so long as it will carry good Corn; But if men would after good Liming,
take three, four, or five Crops, and then lay down their Lands to Graze, it
would not be the least prejudice; or if upon the laying of it down, men would
but indifferently Manure it, or else upon the last Crop you intend to Sow, Dung
it well before Sowing, and lay it down upon the Rye, or Wheat Stubble, it would
produce a sweet Turf, and I am confident prove excellent Pasture, as good again
as it was before; but if after it is laid down you would Manure it once again,
a little Manure now will produce more fruit than as much more upon the old
Soard, it would be warrished for ever; Many men have had ten Crops of gallant
Corn after one substantial Liming, Presidents for Liming.
some more, upon very reasonable Land of about six shillings eight pence an
Acre, some Land worth a little more, but more Land less worth, and some upon
Land not worth above one or two shillings an Acre, have got many gallant Crops
upon a Liming as aforesaid; some men have had and received so much profit upon
their Lands upon once Liming, as has paid the purchase of their Lands: I my
self had great Advance thereby, yet I lived twenty miles from Lime, and fetched
it so far by Wagon to lay upon my Lands, and so not capable to make like
Advantage as other Borderers. The Land most natural for Lime.
The Land natural and suitable for Lime, is your light and sandy Land, and
mixed sound Earth, so also is your Gravel, but not so good, and your wet and
cold Gravel is the worst, except your cold hungry Clay, which is worst of all,
but all mixed Lands whatever are very good.

As for your Lime it is not of a hot burning nature as most men conceive, and
do strongly believe, and many have wrote; The nature of Lime quite contrary to
the common opinion.
it is true it is of a wasting, burning, and consuming nature, before or in the
slacking or melting of it; and may be possibly in the meal or spirit of it; but
in the use of it, and working it into and with the Land and Earth, and in the
production of the fruit, it seems and appears to be Coldest, and most sadning
of Land of any Soil whatsoever, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because of it self it is a heavy and weighty substance, and sinkes deep,
and loses it self sooner than any Soil whatsoever; if you be not very careful
in the keeping of it up, and rasing of it, you will lose it before you are
aware of it or can suspect it.

2. Because it so alters your lightest Ry Land, that though it be naturally
Sandy and Gravelly, that it never before would bear any thing but Ry or Oats,
yet by one good Liming it will be reduced to bear as good Lammas or Red straw
Wheat, with Barley and Pease, as your strong clay Land.

3. Were it of so hot a nature, then it would have the best operation upon your
coldest and wettest spewing Land, upon which it has none, and all Experience
shows the contrary.

As I remember, How much will Lime an Acre.
about twelve or fourteen quarters of Lime will very well Lime an Acre* you may
also over-Lime it, as well as under-Lime it; Also a mixture of Lime, Manure,
and Soil together, is very excellent, especially for a few Crops, and so lay
down to Graze I conceive is best; but by any means Till not long, for I say it
is possible the Land may yield Corn being so exceedingly in Tillage, and so
well wrought, as long almost as any Earth is left in it. I have seen many parts
Tilled so long as there has been little lest but small Stones, Flints and
Pebles; A mad Cmstome, fly from it, your Lime will sink downwards exceedingly,
use all means possible to keep it as much aloft as you can, else you lose it,
and the benefit of it, and remember it, whatever you forget, and then you may
plow and work your Land, as you do with any other Soil.

CHAP. XXI.
Shows the nature, use, and benefit of Marl, and gives a President of the
Improvement made by it.
MArl is also a very gallant thing, Marl.
I can say much for it, far more than I resolve to speak to, because others
have spoken much thereof though little to my especial purposes; It is commended
of all men, and very highly almost by every Writer, that says any thing in
point of Husbandry; therefore I Will say but little, only acquaint you with its
nature, and an experiment made of it, and the several Lands it is most natural
for Advancement or Melioration to a little quicken the Practice where it is
found, and the Search for it where it is not yet discovered.

And for the nature of it, Nature of Marl.
it is also of a colder nature, because it saddens the Land exceedingly, and
very heavy it is, and will go downwards also, but being so much of substance
cannot easily bury so soon as Lime will, and the description of it is not so
much in Color (as some say) as in the Purity, and uncompoundedness of it, for
in my Opinion be the Color what it will, if it be pure of it self that it will
break into bits like a Die, or but smooth like Lead, without any Composition of
Sand or Gravel; and some others of it if it will slack like Slate-stones, Signs
of good Marl described.
and then if it will purely slack after a shower of Rain, question not the
fruitfulness of it. It Is possible some Countries may yield several Colors of
Marl, as it is affirmed of Kent, wherein is found both Yellow, Gray, Blew, and
Red, and the red is said to be the worst there, which I will not here dispute,
because it never fell under mine own Experience in that Country; yet I will say
it holds not every where, indeed the Blew and Gray are very Excellent, and so
also is the Red no less; And whereas the common sign is said to be
Slipperiness, or Greasiness, in which I will not contest, but only I say there
is some as good Marl as is most this day in England, Slipper^ress no infallible
s^gn.
which is not so, but as it lies in the Mine is pure, dry, short, and if you
water it, you shall find it in slipperiness differ little from common Clayes;
The only sign, but the purest and truest sign as aforesaid, is the
incompoundness of it, and if it slack also immediately after a shower, and
shortly after turn to dust after it is thoroughly dry again, and does not
congeal and conglutinate like to tough Clay, but dissolve, fear not the
Operation, Adventure the Experimenting of it, the fruit will be answerable to
thy hopes.

And now give me leave to tell thee a true relation of one Experiment of my own
(because I speak but little but my own Experiences) A Marling Experiment.
upon an hard Enclosed Wood-land Farm I rented, having some Land also in
Common, amongst the rest I had about fifteen or sixteen little short Lands, or
Buts, lay all together in the Common Field; All which said Lands were so
gravelly of nature, that there was but about two Inches thickness of Earth
before you came to as perfect Gravel as any Highway, yea so exceeding herein,
that in many places turned to Sinder (like that the Smith casts forth of his
fire, as the corruption of his Iron, Fire, and Coals congealed) and also so
hungry and barren of nature, that before I converted it to Tillage, little or
nothing was made of it; And to Graze it was not worth above two shillings an
Acre, and y^^ it was Resty and old Turf, and had lain long, may be (...) or
twenty years; And resolving to make an Experiment I searched for Marl, and
found it where none had ever (...) in man's memory, nor within many Miles of it;
(...) in an old strong Clay Pooll I conceived it lie, the which Pool I was
forced to cleanse, being full of Mud, that so I might make the better and
greater fall of Marl at last, and my Marl was perfect Red, differing in nothing
from Clay in color, but in the breaking into bits and ends like Dies, not
slippery, as was discernable from Clay.

And because I would make an undeceivable Experiment of it (which ever was my
greatest Arrogance) I carried forth that Mud also to my Land, and laid it upon
two or three Lands, Some Mucked some Folded, some M^r^ed.
as thick again as men use to lay on Soil or Dung; I also Mucked with the Cart
two more exceeding well, and as I remember Fold-Mucked two more; Also I Marled
three or four far thicker than I Mudded the other; And one Land I neither
Mucked, Mudded, Foulded, or Marled, nor laid any cost upon it at all, yet
Plowed them all alike, and brought them into good Tillage, and Sowed them as I
remember with Wheat, One no cost at all.
and Rye mixed; and for the first year, I reaped very good Corn upon my
Cart-mucked Land, and Fold-Mucked the best of all, the best upon my Mudded Land
the next, and upon my Marled Land reasonable good, not so good as the aforesaid
sorts yielded (because Marl yields not forth his utmost strength the first
year) And upon that I laid nothing, I reaped nothing, not so much as Straw,
although I gave it the same seed, and the same Tillage as the aforesaid Lands.
Whereby you may perceive the goodness of the Land, which is bad enough indeed
when it will bear no Corn at all, for very little Land in England that is old
and Resty, and in good Tillage, but will bear some, either Oats or Tares.

The next year I Sowed Barley upon all sorts of these Lands, A double
Experiment.
and upon my Marled Land was most gallant Corn, and so was my Mudded Land, my
Mucked Land was the worst by far, the Muck decaying, and upon that I Soyled
not, I Sowed the second year with Oats, and reaped nothing again that year
also; Then afterward I Marled that which before I had Mucked, and that which
had not Soil laid upon it, and brought forth nothing the two years before,
which brought forth as gallant Corn as England yielded; And after three or four
Crops my Mud decayed also, and that I Marled again and had the same Fruit as
aforesaid; and for my Marled Land that I kept in Tillage nine years; without
any other addition of any Compost or Soil at all, and had as goodly Corn as
grew, and then I left the Land, and ever since with some small addition of Fold
or Manure, as they do the rest of their Lands; that out-strips all the rest,
and is discernable from all the Lands to this day; her in observe how it
saddens Land, Marl saddens Land exceedingly.
this was Rye Land most naturally, but it turned to Wheat, Barley, and Pease;
and as it is thus excellent for Corn, so it is also very fruitful and
enriching to Grass-land, provided you take heed of Extremes, which most men are
subject to run into, which is not to Til it forth of heart, for to Till it
forth of heart is just as if you work an Ox off his legs, a Horse off his
stomach, or a Man off his strength, Extremes is Marling reproved.
and then put them all to work for Wagers with those that are in plight and
strength; Try wha^ service one of them will do you, not a third part of that
service they did before; Nor twice or thrice to Marl together I hold not
proper, but when your resolve to lay down your Land to Graze, How to lay down
Land to graze after Marling.
be sure at the last Crop you intend to take (which may be the fourth, fifth,
or sixth after Marling) then Manure thy band well with Dung, which will so open,
lighten, and loosen thy Land (for the less binding, and the more light, loose,
and open, the more fruitful) that it will produce a gallant Glovery, and white
Hunny-suckle Grass, and Graze fruitfully; and then if as aforesaid, the first
year after thou have laid it down upon the Wheat or mixed Cornstubble, thou
would run it over again with Dung, it would pay thee treble; I cannot
forbear inculcating these two (because I see it is so little practiced in any
part of the Nation, and I know it to be so wonderful Advantageous) until thou
pursue the practice of them; if possibly never lay down thy Land to Graze but
thus, Let-not-thy Gain or Profit of a good Crop or two, hinder thee of ten fold
more, and dishonor thy Land, Prejudic^ thy Posterity, and defame thy Husbandry.

Oh that this gallant Principle of Improvement of all Lands to their utmost
worth, The Prime Principle in Husbandry.
was naturally planted in all men's Breasts, it is true to get Wealth and Riches
is natural enough, and both in our thirsting and eager pursuit hereof by many
lawful common ways, and by more indirect and baser means, Eats out the
very hearts and bowels of many, but thus to endeavor to raise Wealth out of
the Earth by ingenuity, to raise soil out of one part of the Earth to enrich
another, or out of the Seas, or any way else by a mean and Low charge or poor
workinens labor, depending upon the Almighty for that blessing, is that I so
highly magnify: not having forgot the old Proverb of making honey of a Dogs --
so I believe any Land by cost and charge may be made rich, and as rich as Land
can be, but not counterpoise one quarter of the charge or labor, which I
neither affect nor endeavor to hold forth, but my resolutions are to persuade
all men's Estates or parts to drive on all Designs for the Common good, so to
Plow all thy Lands, as to make thy Lands Fittest and Richest to Graze, and then
to Plow again, when thy Land decays in Grazing, and thy Plowing shall far out
profit thy Grazing, I am confident a man might so Husband the matter, as
neither of these should hinder each others Fruitfulness, but both help on each
others Advancement.

Now the Lands upon which Marl yields great increase, is upon your higher Sandy
Land mixed or Gravelly, Land most natural for Marl.
any found Land whatsoever though never so barren, to whom it is as natural,
and nourishing, as Bread to man's nature, and will do well upon any of these,
though somewhat mixed with Clay, but strong Clay in my opinion is most
unsuitable; But an exact trial I never made thereof, therefore am not
Peremptory, and although many men are of opinion that it can have little
Operation upon Wet, Cold, Moist Land, I say so, if there be not a possibility
to lay it sound, and Wholesome, but that I believe thou may do most Land by
Plowing of it up and Raising of it, as high as thy Land will bear it, and then
a good Drain or master Furrow, if it will serve; if not, a deeper Drayning
Trench will, for Wet, and too much Cold, and Moisture offends all Corn and
Grass also wheresoever, as well as Marl, but thus done Marl will yield great
store of Corn upon this Land also out of question, my own president was upon a
very wet Land, upon a most sharp gravel.

CHAP. XXII.
Shows the usefulness of Sand and other Soyles out of the Seas and Rivers,
Sands also are great Inrichments.
AS for Sands manure, Sand.
I conceive it warm of nature, and yet that is not the cause of its
Fruitfulness, for then would all Sands have the like Operation and virtue in
them, but of ou^ inland Sands especially these which are naturally the Surface
of the Earth, Of no worth or use at all.
or else lies by Mines in Hills, and many other parts of the Nation, I conceive
little Fruitfulness at all, however I challenge not Immunity herein from being
deceived; I may be, for I have made no trial at all therein, and therefore
what it may do upon a contrary natured Land I know not, if any have found
benefit I desire to learn it, for Reason has sometime deceived me, and so may
others, but Experience never shall.

But as for your Sands brought forth by the Violence of strong Land-floods,
Sand from the Land-flood are good.
and cast up on Hills and Shelves in many Meadows and other places in them is
Fruit and Virtue, and I question not but the Application of them, either to
Corn or Graze, will produce much Fertility; especially being seasonably applied
to such Lands as are most different from the nature of it self; What Lands are
natural for Sands.
for whatever causes Barrenness, be sure to provide a Soil that will stand in
constant opposition to it, and so though one wast another, and both are
weakened, yet the Earth is thereby bettered, as here the Sand is dry and warm,
and something inclining to Saltishness, the Land I conceive best for this Soil,
is moist, and cold, and while Heat and Cold, Dry and Moist, contest together,
the Earth steals from both, and is much Advanced thereby.

For in all Soyles and sorts of Earth there is a Combustible and Incombustible
Nature, each Wrestling with other, and the more you can occasion Quarrels and
Contention by these, that is, the more you ad to that which is predominant, and
so allay the distemper in the end, the more gains the Earth thereby; For I
suppose there is a kind of contrariety in Nature, it was ever so from the
Fall, and ever will till all be swallowed up again in one.

But there is another sort of Sand, and this is the richest of all, and that is
your Sand upon the Sea Costs, and in the Creeks thereof, Pest Sand of all.
which is very rich, yet in some parts it may be somewhat richer than others, as
I conceive, for this Reason, because al Lands that be bordering upon the Sea
Coasts might then be Improved by them, but in many, and most parts of the
Nation the use of it is neglected, and I dare not have so uncharitable an
opinion of my Nation, that they would neglect so great and facile an Advantage;
In Devonshire upon those Coasts it is very rich, and upon the Coasts of
Cornwall also, and upon all the Southern and Western Coasts as this is, if
there were that fruitfulness as there is in most Sea Sands, and is as likely
also to be in this, unless or until men have made experience, and through
experienc^ thereof, I for my part shall be loath to have other opinion of it,
but that it is of excellent fruitfulness, and so all Wales-ward borders, so
rich, as that they carry it many miles on Horseback unto their Lands, and make
such vast Improvements, as to raising Corn and Grass also, as is incredulous:
Now, were it on the Northern, Eastern, or Western Coasts, as rich as it is upon
the Southern Coast, as it may be for any contrary experience I have had, I
could not believe the people to be so Dronish as they are in some parts
thereof, but that they would Drain out that Sweetness to their Lands, as would
cost but little or nothing but their Labor; However, I must absolutely say,
there must needs be great heart and fruitfulness in these Sands also, because
the Richness of the Sands is from the fat or filth the Sea does gather in by
all Land-floods and Streams that bring it from the Lands, What causes so much
richness in the Sea Sands.
and also what the Tide fetches in daily from the Shores, and from that fat and
brackish nature in it self, and from the Fish and other creatures, and
thousands of other matters that putrify in the Sea, all which the waters Casts
to Shore, and purges forth of it self, and leaves in the Sands thereof, while
it self is clear and pure.

And now being discoursing thereof, give me leave to let you know the virtue
and excellency the Sea may yield, The Seas fruitfulness by Fish.
as from Sea-Weeds also, which Cornwell and Devonshire, and many other parts
make great Improvement of for the Soyling and Manuring of their Land, Sea Weeds
very good soil for Land.
and that to very great advantage also, and further toward the Enriching of the
Land, as from Fish of any sort, which is so fruitful for the Land, that in
many parts of the world they Dung their Lands therewith, but here with us, it
yielding more Advantage for Food to the relief of man's nature than unto the
Earth; I Will say no more, unless any Capacity fall in the dead of putrified
Fish, which is no other use than to this purpose; A good Advantage might be
made unto the Land thereof, as I said, before any Liquid Brackish-fat,
Greasie-matter, and any thing that comes from, or is the fleshy matter of the
creature, whether it be by Sea or Land, has a secret operation in it to the
Earths fruitfulness; Yea the very Urine of man is very excellent, and of all
beasts very fruitful, and very rich, and would be of more Account if men knew
the worth of it: I have read of some that have done too strange things
therewith to report, Urine fr^itful.
but most certainly it is worth labor to preserve it with most exactness.

There is yet another Opportunity, out of many of your great Rivers, and is
from a Mud, or Sludg, that lies frequently in deep Rivers, which is very soft,
full of Eyes and Wrinckles, and little Shells, which is very rich, yea so rich,
that in some parts many men get gallant Livings only by taking it up out of
the Rivers and selling it again by the Load; One sort whereof they sell for one
shilling two pence per Load, The richness of Snayl Cod.
and another sort they sell for two shillings four pence a Load at the Rivers
side, which men fetch twenty Miles an end for the Enriching of their Land for
Corn and Grass; One Load going as far as three Load of the best Horse or
Cow Dung that can be made; They call it Snayl-Cod, and it has in it many
Snayles and She^s, which is conceived occasioneth the Fatness of it; The great
Experience of this Piece, is made upon that part of the River Thames, which
runs from Oxford and Reading down to Brainford, and if my information fail not
(which I conceive I have from as good a hand, a Gentleman full of great
Experiences in Husbandry Improvements; as has not many Fellows) The Lord
Cottington drawing part of the River through his Park at Hanworth, has cut in
the same River many Outlets or Ponds, somewhat deeper than the River, on
purpose to receive the same, Where the right Snayl is to be got. The chief
River where^n this Mud lies comes from-ward Vxbridge by Cole-brook, and is not
the Thames as I can yet discover, having made a Journey thither since I wrote
the aforesaid discourse.
from out of which is usually taken up great store of Mud for the Advance of
the Upper Lands, but whether this be that richest Snayl-Cod I cannot say, but
believe it is very good, but upwards as high as Cole-Brook, in that River it
lies plentifully, all which not failing under mine own Experience, I can say
little more unto for present, neither for the seasons of applying it unto the
Land, nor the manner of working the Land to it I dare not prescribe.

Only hence I conclude, there may as well be the same opportunity in most
Rivers of the Nation, which is a most unutterable Advantage; But I can say
there is in most if not in all Rivers a very good Rich Mud, of great
Fruitfulness, which were it more sought after would work on more Experiments,
and produce Advantage unexpected, it costing nothing but labor getting, nor
prejudiceth any, but profit to all, Mud in Rivers of great use.
by clearing the Rivers, and great worth and virtue it must needs have in it,
being the Soil of the Pastures, and Fields, common Streets, Ways, Yards, and
Dung-hils, all collected by the Flood, and drawn thither, where it concenters
into Shelves and Mines as I may so call it, and remanines for ever as an
undiscovered Advantage, where no use is made of it; but hereof more, if God
give opportunity to the Author of Experimenting both this, and others of the
same nature to the utmost Advancement of it otherwise, and in the mean while
inquire it out they self.

CHAP. XXIII.
Treats of the use, and nature of Chalk, Mud of Pooles, Pigeons and Swines
Dung, and other Soyles and Manures therein contained.
AS for Chalk, Bacons Natural History, page 123.
Sir Francis Bacon affirms it to be of an over-heating nature to the Land, and
is best for Cold and Moist Land, but as it appears to me in Hartfordshire, and
other parts thereabout, there are great Improvements to be made upon Barren,
Chalk.
Gravelly, Flinty Lands, and it has great Fruitfulness in it, but not having
fallen under my own Experience I dare affirm little therein, only advise any
that have opportunity therein to be well resolved of the Fruitfulness of the
said Chalk, or of the nature of the said Lands, for there is some Chalk, though
not very much thereof; that is of so churlish a binding nature, that it will so
sodder and bind and hold the Water upon the top of the Earth so long till it
destroy the Corn, nor work a sterility in the Earth, that neither Corn or
Ground shall yield but little fruit; but there is a Chalk in thousand places of
great fruitfulness for Improvement.

And I also conceive that Chalk Earth and Manure, Chalk mixed most certain.
mixed together, makes an admirable, sure, and natural fruitful composition
for almost any sort of Lands, and is a very Excellent Unfallible Remedy against
Barrenness, and raises Corn in abundance, and inricheth it also for Grazing
when you lay it down; many great Countries in this Nation are under this
capacity.

Also the Mud of old standing Pooles, and Ditches, Mud.
the shovelling of Streets and Yards, and Highwaies, the Over^warths of Common
Lanes, or of Commons near Hedges, is very good both, of it self, and comp^unded
with other Soil, Manure, Mud, or Straw; And very much account made thereof in
some Countries; nay more than this of Manure that is made of Horse or Cow, for
some sorts of Land, and some sorts of Corn, which I conceive is for Lands very
Flinty, Stony, and Gravelly, or a little mixed with C^a^ amongst then; as also
for Wheat and B^rley it is very natu^^ll and is of constant use and great
esteem in Hartfordshir^, Ess^x, Sussex, and diverse other Countries thereabout,
and also to great Advantage being put in Execution in most of the Counties in
this Nation, Ingenuity not of such esteem as a base Outlandish fashion.
if ingenuity was of as good esteem among us all, as is a base Outlandish
fashion, for no sooner can that be brought into any part of the Country, but it
will be dispersed presently into all the parts thereof; but such as these that
are Advantage to all, and vastly profitable to the Practitioner and
Commonwealth, are slighted and little practiced.

Earth of a saltish nature is fruitful, especially all such Earth as lies dry,
Earth covered with any house or ba^n is rich.
covered with Hovells or Houses, of which you make Saltpeter, is rich for
Land, and so is old flores under any buildings.

There are many other gallant Soyles or Manure, as your Pigeons dung, Pigeons
and Poultry dung little less inferior.
a load whereof is more worth than twenty shillings in many parts, your Hens
and Poultry Dung, that live of Corn, is very excellent, these being of a very
hot, or warm and brackish nature are a very Excellent Soil for a cold
moist-natured Land, Two Load hereof will very richly Manure an Acre; so is all
Dung, the more it is raised from Corn or richer matter, the richer it self is
usually by far; as where Horses are highly Corned, the richer is the dung than
those only kept with Hay.

There is another sort of Soil and that is Swines dung, Horses well corned make
best dung.
by most men accounted the worst of all, nay not worth preserving, out of an
old received Tradition taken up by most men, Swines dung most excellent soil.
upon what ground I know not, and so generally disliked of almost every one,
and therefore they will not Experiment it, and much an end no use at all is made
thereof, possibly it came from Scotland, who knew they but the excellency
thereof; they would love the flesh the better for the dungs sake.

Which to me is very irrational, that an English man who loves Swines flesh so
well, that more Account and use is made of all the parts of him, rather than of
the Beef or Sheep, yea his very blood and guts are highly prised, and yet the
Soil of him so much undervalued.

This Dung is very rich for Corn, The great account of swines dung.
or Grass, or any Land, yea of such Account to many Ingenuous Husband, that
they prefer it above any ordinary Manure whatsoever, therefore they make their
Hogs yards most complete with an high pale, paved well with Pibble or Gravel
in the botom, where they set their Troughs partly in, and some part without the
Pale, into which they put their meat; but the most neatest Husbands indeed, The
usage of their Swine and the making of the Hogyard.
Plant their Trough without their Pale or Hog-yard, all along by the side of
it, and for every Hog they have a hole cut, the just Proportion of his head and
Neck, and cannot get in his feet to soil his meat, and out thence he eats his
meat forth of the Trough very cleanly and sweet, they keep the Trough also very
clean, they have their house for lodging by it self with dry straw always for
them to lie in, and their cornish Muskings they cast into the yard for that
purpose, How to feed Swin, without any cornish meat.
and all Garbidge, and all leaves, out of Gardens, and all Muskings forth of
their Barns, and of their Courts, and Yards, and great store of straw or weeds,
and Fearn, or any thing for the Swine to root amongst, to make all the Dung
they can into the yard for raising dung, and here they keep their Swine the
year round, never suffering them to go one day abroad, and here your dayry
Husbands or Huswives, will feed them as fat as Pease, or Beans, and are of
opinion that they feed better, and Eatter, and with less meat, than when they
are abroad with all their Grass they spoil; Which I did more than three
quarters believe, but now know it to be true of my own knowledge. Some
Hog-yards will yield you forty, fifty, some sixty, some eighty Load, and some
more of Excellent Manure of ten or twelve Swine; which they value every Load
worth about two shillings six pence a Load in their very yards, and prize it
above any other; This is practiced much about Kings norton, both in the
Counties of Worcester and Warwick, and in many other parts, as in Cheshire,
Staffordshire, Darbyshire, also I believe An Excellent Piece of husbandry; I
speak Experimentally hereof, having made great Advantage my self hereby, and do
far more prize it, than suffering Swine to run and course abroad, knowing that
rest, quiet, and sleep, with drink, and lesser meat will sooner feed any
creature than more meat with liberty to run and course about into harms and
wash off what they get with their meat, with their vexing and running up and
down, and do advise as thou valewest thy own advantage; some good dairies will
make the soil of their Hogyard produce them twenty or thirty pounds worth of
profit in a year.

As for Rags of all sorts there is good virtue in them, Ragg^.
they are carried far and laid upon the Lands and have in them a warming
Improving temper, one good Load will go as far as half a dozen or more of the
best Cow Dung, Coarse Wool, VVoo's.
Nippings, and Tarry Pitchmarks, a little whereof will do an Acre of Land,
there is great virtue in them. I believe one Load hereof will exceedingly well
Manure half an Acre, Marrow-bones, or Fish-bones, Horn or shavings of Horn, or
Broaths made of Beef, Meat or Fish, Marrowbone.
or any other thing whatsoever, that has any Liquidness, Oyliness, or Fatness,
have a wonderful virtue in them, let all be precious to thee, Beef Broa^h?
and preserved, for every little adds too, and helps in the Common stock, and
he that will not be faithful in a little, will not be faithful in a greater
quantity, as is always seen by constant ^xperience.

As for Sheep-Dung, Sheeps-Dung.
Cow Dung, and Horse-Dung, such old ordinary Soil; I intend to say little; in
regard the Common use thereof, which has extracted the virtue and excellency
to the Commonwealths great advantage, only thus much I shall say by way of
advise and reproof from my own Experience.

1. By way of advic Prize them according to their worth: The Sheeps ^ung is
best, and a little hereof is of more strength and heart than the others are,
but whether it arise from the rich, and pure nature of the Dung, or from the
warmth of the Sheeps bodies, I know not, but I conceive from both, because it
warmes the Land and makes it comfortable; And therefore in regard of the worth
and excellency of Sheeps dung, and in regard of the great want of soil, i will
discourse a little more at large of a very good way to raise easily great
quantities of soil, How with great ease to raise rich dung.
and that very good and excellent, by the help of one good flock of Sheep, and
that in the winter too, when soulding is more neglected and of le^^er use:
though I proposed it in the first Edition, yet because I set not forth the way
of raising it, I fear occasions the neglect of it. It is but to make a good
large Seep-house for the housing of thy Sheep in Winter, the comfort it will be
unto thy Sheep, will be double worth thy house charge, which may be
Sheep-cribbed round about and in the middle too, to fother them in the nights,
herein once a week, or twice according as thou desire the quantity of muck to
rise, or according to the goodness of it thou expectest, bring in several
Loades of Sands either out of the streets or ways, or from a sand-pit or mine
once or twiee a week, and lay it three or four inches thick, this renew every
week or more and let them sit on it two or three or four nights or more, and
keep this with renewing as often as thou please, and what with their heat and
warmth of their bodies and the fatness of their dung and urine, they will so
corrupt or putrify the Sand, that it will turn to excellent rich soil, and go
very far upon thy Land, and be far more serviceable than thou can conceive;
This of great use in Flanders and other parts of the World. And for your Horse
Dung that is held to be too hot, Horse Dungs Excellency.
but I never sensibly discern any inconveniences therein, especially where it
is feared, let it be but well Wroxed or Rotten, and I conceive it is one of the
best compost of Land, and I am sure, if it be Soil of Horses, or Stables where
is much Corn given, it is more hearty and rich by far, than that where Horses
live of Hay only; And for Cow Dung it is as well known by all, both in nature and
use, that I Will save further trouble.

2. But by way of reproof of one Piece of Husbandry in the applying these three
sorts of Dung to Land, I say, Men are mistaken in that they endeavor not all
possible Expedition in laying their Dung upon their Land, when once they begin,
A great mistake in letting soil be uncovered.
and in spreading of it as soon as laid on, and Plowing of it into the Land as
soon as spread, for if my Judgment fail not, they lose a great part of the
Fruit, Sap, and Virtue thereof, that carry it forth into their Land about
Midsummer, or in that heat of Summer, and spread it all over their Land, and so
let it lie open to the Air and drying Winds, and parching Sun, and Showers,
which coming hastily help to wash it off their Land, and thus lies for a
month or six weeks before they Plough it into their Lands, all over the Field
or County, and many places more, which besides the Raynes washing away,
consider but the Winds drying, and the Sun and Pearching, and Scorching of it,
and Exhaling, and Drawing away the Spirit of it, and then tell me the
Excellency of this Husbandry; to me it seems not rational, I Will submit to
better Judgments, they that are of a contrary opinion, I desire them to show
me Reason, and inform me better; And til I know better I desire to be excused.

And for their Sheeps Dung, as soon as ever one Land is foulded, let the Soil
be covered immediately, let the season or weather be what it will: Also in the
Manuring your Green-Soard or Grass Land, do little in the Summer, but either in
the latter end of it, after September, or else all Winter long is the proper
season, when it may have rain to beat it into the ground, or Frost to wrote it
and dissolve it; And though sudden showers will wash some away, How to lose
none of the least benefit in mucking any Land notwithstanding Land-floods.
which is far less upon Grass ground than Tillage, yet if thou have any Land
both below or under that thou Manurest, thou need not lose the least
benefit, if thou please to turn it over, and let it float thy other Land, with
that which the Land-flood otherwise would carry away; And this course some
Ingenuous Husbands hold in all their Lands, What Rain or Land-floods fall in
their overgrounds, Some lose no La^d flood at all.
they carry into the next below that, and float there, then what falls in that,
with the rest of that which is a floating there they carry into the next, and
so into the lowest, and so will not lose so much as the advantage of a common
Ditch that carries the least Land-flood with it, but this falls in occasionally
here, and therefore no more hereof.

Malt dust is exceeding Rich for Corn-land, and one load being sowed, as you
do, or with your Corn, will go as far as six load or more of good Dung.

Man's Urine is of great worth, Urine of mankind useful for Lands.
this will fatten Land more than you are aware of, and it were not ill Husbandry
to take all Opportunities to preserve it for thy Land. Of this somewhat is said
before, therefore no more thereof, only I have read of a good woman of Kent,
that preserved it, and sprinkled her Meadow with it, which occasioned such
fruitfulness (though at first a little yellowish) that some of her Neighbors
went about to accuse her of Witchcraft.

Ashes also have a secret virtue and operation, Ashes.
of what nature soever or sort, that are burned thoroughly to dust, but your
Wood-ashes are best, and useful for Soil and Compost. Soot.
Soot also has a virtue of Fruitfulness for Field or Garden as some affirm,
but I conceive the most proper soil for Gardens are your Sheep-dung, your
Hen-muck, and Pidgeons-dung, with your well rotted Horse-muck, especially for
cold Land; or else the rich Mould, or any good Manure that is grown to Mould,
is as good and natural as any of the aforesaid Soyles, provided you lay good
store of it thereon; and so also I conceive it is best for your Or^hards, or
young Nurceries of Fruit Trees, but of neither Garden nor Orchards Advance is
my design for present, and so no more of that, much may be hereafter.

Ouse, Best Manure for Gardens.
or a kind of fat Earth in Marsh Ditces, is of excellent use for stony,
gravelly, flinty or chalky Lands; there is an Earth or Mud got upon the River
Ware in Hartfordshire near Walton of very good use and advantage for soil.

Stubble Stubb^e, or Straw.
of all sorts, and other Vegetables, the more in quantity, or Straw, or Hay,
fothered upon the Land is very helpful and of good use with every Husbandman,
that I need say no more thereof.

Sir Francis Bacon is of opinion, Salts effect.
that Salt mingled with Corn has a very good operation being sowed with the
Corn, which possibly may, because brakishness is fruitful to the Lane. Also
that Chalk and Lime sowed with the Corn is very helpful, and that steeping
your Corn in fat Water, Limewater, of Dunghill Water, has a wonderful
effect to work strange things; Of all which my self having not made full
Experience: can find no more Advantage the Chalk or Lime in substance, How much
Liming Corn, or watering Corn advances it.
or so much as is added of therein than just so much as is added to the Corn,
either of the Soil or Fatness of either of the Waters, and no more; For having
made a thorough trial thereof, found no otherwise, nor nothing of that great
Advantage promised; But let not me prejudice any Ingenious trialls of the same,
others may find more, possibly I might miss in the manner of my application,
search it out thoroughly I beseech you.

As for Oil, Oil the fruit thereof.
I am confident it is of a very Enriching nature to Land or Corn, but whether
the Cost required will be requited I leave to Experience, for I have not
forgotten the Oyling-Corn Patentee, that great design to so little purpose; who
drew so many Scholars after him, but I had the happiness to escape him and his
Patent too, though some paid dear for it.

The Leave of Trees laid together, Leaves of T^e^^.
or cast into some Highway, or Water-flows, or mingled with other Soyles, will
make very good Compost also.

Also Fearn, or Rushes, Fearn or Rushes will make soil.
Thistles, or any coarse straw, or Trash whatever, flung, or cast into the
Fothering-yards, among your Cribs under your Cattle, will be both good Litter
to lay your Cattle dry and warm, and will make very good soil, as all good
husbands know.

Some more particulars may be spoke too, and some further directions given, but
I Will forbear ^xperiencing these, will work out more discoveries. So much for
this Fifth Piece.

The Sixth Parcel or Pice, which is a new Erection, or Plantation of diverse
sorts of Wood, and Timber, in such a way as shall raise as much in twenty
years growth, as usually and naturally grows in forty or fis^ie* years,
whereby the Draynes or Ruins of Wood in this Nation may be gallantly repaired,
and several Groves or Plumps of Trees may be Erected about any Manor, House,
or Place, for delight and pleasure; And in such several forms as men desire,
and as much Wood for quantity raised in one Acre, as is usually in three, four,
or five Acres of our usual Copices, or Spring Woods in most parts of this
Nation. As also how to thicken those Spring-woods that grow so thin, as
usually most do, whereby they might be made as thick again, and yet not hinder
the growth thereof.
CHAP. XXIV.
Speaks of the nature of the Land, and shows the several sorts of Wood, and
how to plot out the same to most delight.
TO which purpose let all men use their utmost endeavors and skill to lay
their Woods and Coppices, or Spring of Woods, as dry as possibly they can, for
Wet and Coldness is as prejudicial and offensive to the fruitfulness, thereof,
as it is to Corn or Grass, or any Fruit Trees, whether Apples, Pears, Plums,
Cherries, etc. All which though every man endeavors little herein, and though
to their ancient Spring-Woods little opportunity can be gained, yet what can be
gained hereto prosecute it, as of great Advantage.

And for a new Erection of W^od, where never any grew and raising of a new
Plantation, which is one of my main designs, a Piece so little practiced, which
before I have fully ended, you will wonder it should have been so much
neglected being so feacible.

Therefore when thou have designed a Piece or Plot of ground thereto, which
should be dry, sound, and pretty hearty, thou need not much matter what
nature of Land it be; so that thou can but get two Spade-graft, or one and an
half of good Earth, before thou either come to the strong Clay or Land, yea
though it have some Gravel, or Stones, be it but well mixed with good Earth;
it may do well, yea best of all, because of hollowness and lightness of it,
though it should be very boggy Land, yet if it have any richness of nature or
heart in it, thou shall find a marveilous suitableness therein, to make a very
good Improvement this way, yet the most natural Land hereto in the Experiences
I have made or seen, is your warm, open, gravelly, sound Land, the richer the
better, as aforesaid.

When thou would plot out thy Land thou designest to plant, The most
natural Land to plant with Wood.
which thou may cast out if thou aim at thy delight and pleasure only,
either int a square, consisting of four Equal sides or e^se into a Triangle,
having but three equal sides or else into a long square, How to cast our thy
Wood-plots for pleasure.
which has two equal sides longer, and two equal sides shorter, or an Ovall
Capacity, or else into a Circular plot either as thy fantasy leads thee, or
if thou mindest only thy profit, and intendest only to raise Wood for thy
use, and increase, and the Countries service, it matters not into what form
thou cast it into; how ever seeing the first is as easy and no more
chargeable, to cast or lot out thy Wood into an Artificial uniformable plot as
to do it rudely or confusedly* I rather advice it but press it not, Method and
con^usion to thee bring of an equal price, and probably be the cheaper*
no further than as to the Gallantary and delightfulness of it, or thy spirit
thereto, wherein may be as much pleasure, Delight and Recreation, as in your
curious Gardens, Orchards, Walks and Bowers, especially being planted about a
Manor House; or dwelling place, for warmth in Winter, and shadow and Coolness
in the summer; for which Advantages many of the nobles and Gentry to this
Nation would give great sums to purchase; How to cast out thy plot into most
delightful divisions.
Which herby may be obtained at an easier rate.

Therefore having cast thy Land into any of the plots aforesaid except the
Circular, which I conceive of least suitableness of all to this work, then
suppose it be ten, twenty, or thirty Acres, I suppose less, if thou cast it
into a Square or Triangle, or Ovall way, then having found the middle of it,
thou may if thou please, cast out a Circular round Plot or Ovall, containing
either a ninth part, or a seaventeenth part, or but a fifth part; and that
Incompass in with a little Ditch, well quieksetted with thorn, and here and
there an Ash, Oak, Elm, or Witchazell, reserving a Grass-plot to walk round
about, of fifteen or eighteen Foot wide, and then equally divide the rest into
so many parts as thou intendest several falls therein, and every Division
separate with a walk, or Grass-Plot betwixt them, containing fifteen or
eighteen Foot wideness, which will serve as a Cart-way, or Passage, to fetch
out thy Wood at every fall, as well as for walks for thy recreation, because in
this manner of Planting, thou can not Cart along thy Wood, as thou do along
thy us^all spring Woods, but only along thy Borders, which when thou have so
divied all by Ditches which make thy Divisions, thou may if thou please to
cast thy Banks outward, Planting Strawberyes, is excellent
and set thy Hedge inward, Plant the Banks with Strawberies, which will delight
themselves herein, and grow fruitfully, either on the Sun or shady sides. Now
when thou have plotted out thy ground, prepare for Planting, and first inquire,
and search about the Country for Set-gatherers, such as will bring them every
two days fresh, for the fresh gathering and sudden setting of them in their
places, is of more Advantage to the furtherance of the growth, than thou
Imaginest.

Secondly prepare such Servants here as will not deceive thee; How to get thy
se^s for planting.
And avoid the getting of Eaten, Bitten, Rough, and Brushy, all being
unproveable sets, receive them not, but give them such wages as they may afford
to get such as are fruitful and proveable, and if possible get them from off
as hard Land, as thou Plantest them upon, however be sure they be thriving
smooth Rooted, or smooth Barked sets, of what sort soever they be, and as
straight as possibly thou can procure.

Thirdly, for the several sorts of Wood quickest in rising and growing, The
quickest growing wood.
generally are your soft Woods; as Poplar, Willows, Asp, Sicamores, Maples,
Witchazell, etc. your Ash is a gallant thriving Wood also, and indeed for
quickness, and profit too, it is the best in my opinion, some good Oak set will
do very well, and Elm also toward your outsides; but if thou resolvest to be a
Planter to purpose, then thou must be a sower of all Seeds of the several
Woods aforesaid, or setter of many Sciens, and a Breeder up of Nu^ceries
continually, for indeed were Planting more in fashion, Sets would prove very
scarce, which now for present are plentiful eno^gh, and in most part of the
Nation may be had for two shillings, or two shillings six pence a thousand,
some more some less according to the goodness and bigness of them, and dearness
of the Country for workmens wages, and indeed the lesser the sets the more
certain of growing, but the bigger they are, What Sets are best.
the fatter, and sooner they rise to their growth, only some of them may fail.

Fourthly, having prepared thy Sets, then set to Planting of them, which I
advise after this manner. All thy Borders made, or but cast out, thy Sets must
be all Planted in the same way as thou would Plant, How to plant thy Sets.
or as usually men do Plant a Thorn hedge: First cast up by a Line a little
Ditch about two foot and half, or three Foot broad, just so deep and but a
little deeper than thou can take up good mould, and so as all Laborers begin
their turning Turfdo thou, and then lay up a little mould, How to make thy Dike
to Plant thy Sets in.
and there lay thy first Row of Sets, some say three Sets in each Foot, but I
conceive if thy Sets be good two may do very well, then cover them.

Secondly, raise another Border about nine Inches above that, thy Mould or Bank
laid well ashore, or sloaping, and there plant another Row: and cover them
well also, as men do their second Row of Quick-sets.

Therdly, How to plant thy Quick, and mould them also.
cast up another Dike against that like a double Dike, so as both may meet
together upon the Top, and lie close together, and then plant two Rows more of
Quick as was directed on the other side, and if thou have any quantity of
space, betwixt thy two upper Rows of Quick, thou may plant one Row upon the
Top, or two, if thou see cause, if thou have room to spare; And so thou must
go on throughout thy whole Plantation, a Dike and a Land or Bank, and again
another Dike and a Land, and so throughout. And be sure however thou do, to
plant all thy Sets in the over-most best Mould or Earth, that thy Sets may
neither root in stiffe-binding Clay: nor hungry Sand, and fear not, leave no
Land undigged or unwrought, nor plant none in Green-soard by no means.

It Is a simple Piece I confess to make good the issue promised, but when thou
have proved the truth of it, then thou shall be better able to judge of it.
Many Objections will be raised against it, but let not the simplicity thereof
offend thee; for I shall assure thee, I will give thee such a President before
I have done; and leave the thing so clear, that there shall not be left the
least cause of Suspicion.

CHAP. XXV.
Answers several Objections against this Projection, and gives a President
for making good the same.
THat you will lay your Land so dry and deprive your Sets of all Moisture; that
it is Impossible they should grow at all, Object.
especially in dry, sandy, or gravelly Land, much less to grow to such an
Increase as is promised.

Has two branches; First all Sets and Plants for the most part require
Soundness, Ans. 1.
and warmness, and were many of our Spring Woods more dry and warm, they would
prosper much the better, although much dry, haskey, sandy, hungry Land does not
many times afford a thick Coppice, or good Spring, which is especially occasioned
by reason of the Barrenness of the Land, and the ill Husbandring of the Spring
after falling, not Preserving of it from Cattells brusing of it, as will appear
more fully before this discourse be ended. But secondly, Experience shows the
same, that upon a sandy gravel Land, Ans. 2.
all the aforesaid Woods prosper exceedingly in the way of the aforesaid
Planting, in so much that should I tell you the Experience thereof, you would a
little wonder at it.

A new Erection planted twelve years sithence, 2.
at the Eleventh years end, a Fall was made, and so much VVood cut upon the
same as was worth or sold for sixty pounds an Acre or more; it was much
Pole-wood, yea a good part of it made Spars, A President of Wood planted that
one Acre was worth 60. at 11 years growth.
and some part of it small building Timber, that a Gentleman of that County
builded himself part of a very good Barn, the whole Roof of it with that
Timber; and this year was another Sale of Eleaven years growth of as good a
Value, the Land it was planted on was worth about ten shillings per Acre, and
every Acre cost somewhat under seven pound an Acre, al Digging, Quick-sets, and
all charges in the Planting of it; What an Acre costs plenting.
And the second Crop they make account will be as good at eight years growth;
And to me it seems possible it may, if not better, This President is at Billing
at the Earl of Thomunds in Northamptonshire, managed by a most Ingenuous
Gentleman called Mr. Cartwright.

This way of Planting will certainly be so thick, Object*
that they cannot prosper one by another, or else it is Impossible the Earth
should yield Fruit, Heart, or Sap, to so thick a Plantation.

Your Spring-woods, in some parts of them grow as thick, Ans. 1.
especially where your old Roots grow so thick, as you can scarce set one foot
betwixt them, and every Root may send forth twenty or forty Spineyes, and yet
all nourished from the Earth, and these Stools they grow upon also.

Secondly, I answer that Experience has also made it good as aforsaid; Ans. 2.
For other Planters in these parts Planted a foot or more asunder, and yet came
not near this, nor is neither half so much in quantity; Nor yet the other
thinner Plantation, although little or never the whit the bigger, or taller
than this, which is so thick Planted, nor never worth so much by the Acre of
many more years growth, as this at the Eleventh year.

And for the effecting of this Design, thou must take in two or three more
particulars, one is a strict Observation of the Season in Planting; And then
secondly your Demeanure toward it after Planted.

First, The Seasons are as soon as the Leaf is fallen, the earlier the better,
fail not to be well prepared of Materials to begin with November, and so thou
may continue three months complete until the end of January, and possibly
some part of February, but it is somewhat hazardous, and may exceedingly fail
thy Expectation. And for the Moons Increasing, or Declining, matter it not at
all, nor any Season, Wet or Dry, Frost or Snow, so thy Laborers can but work,
No Observation of the Moon. Eccl. 11. 4, 5, 6.
and be sure that what Sets be gathered one day, may be s^t the next if
possibly, or next after; And should thou be occasioned by any hindrance, to
keep thy sets longer Unset, be thou sure thou get their Roots into the ground,
well covered with good Mould until^ thou can set them, and be not drawn away
to the contrary by any Workmans persuasion whatsoever, for though the lying out
of Mould of Unset, do not kill them, yet will it so backen them that thou may
lose a full half years growth in them.

Secondly, Thy Ground thus planted, thou must be careful in the Weeding of it,
Weeding most necessary.
for I know no greater cause of this so great Advance than this; The keeping of
the Ground clean from Weeds, and as mellow and open as possibly, which will
cause the Roots to shoot exceedingly, and the Plant to grow abundantly, thou
must for the first and second year prize it, and dress it almost as a Garden;
And therefore be sure thou preserve it from any Beast, Horse, or Sheep biting
it, in the least measure; should Cattle break in they would destroy one years
growth in a moment.

As for Boggy Land, much of it that is perfectly Drained to the bottom,
Boggy-Land will bring forth a Plantation of Wood.
that is little worth will nourish a Plantation of Wood to good Advantage,
especially your Poplar, and Willow, and Alder, your Ash will grow well also;
But therein you must observe to make your Dikes and Draines so deep that you
may lay it completely dry, you must go under all your Bog, to the cold
spewing-Spring and near a foot below that, and then what you plant upon the
Bogs or Lands you may expect a wonderful issue: It Is very common in four or
five years that the Willow rises to gallant Hurdle-wood, and in five or six
years, to Abundance of Firewood, and small Pole for Hops, and other Uses. One
Acre of new Planted Willow upon some Land not worth two shillings an Acre, may
in Seven years be worth near about five pound, in some parts an Acre; and in
some parts of this Nation more. And I verily believe were all the Bog-Lands in
England thus planted, and Husbandred well, after these Directions, might raise
Woood enough to maintain a great part of this Nation in Firing; and for other
sorts of Wood, the well Ordering and Nourishing it, although in Lands so bad,
would produce a wonderful profit far more than I will speak of.

And I suppose, What one Acre of Willow Planted on Boggy Lands may be worth.
he is no ill Husband that can raise a bog to a double advance, considering
some of them are worse than nothing; But when they are so exceeding Coarse and
barren you cannot expect such Fruitfulness ordvance; as from that Land that is
of a fatter or better nature; For certain all plants and Woods will do much
better, on better Land than on coarser; and in case thou should bestow Soil
or Manure on thy Land before thou Plant it, it would be both Labor and Cost
exceeding well bestowed and conduce much to the nourishing of a young
Plantation.

Now shall follow a piece or Device how to thicken your Springs or Coppices,
How to thick Woods that grow too thi^.
where they grow thin or are decayed; Which fully observed, may doubly improve
the same, and such a way is here projected as is little used in any Woods where
I ever yet came, and as unlikely also to any thing I have yet spoken unto,
which is no more but this, at every Fall where thy Wood grows thin, take a
goood straight Pole or sampler growing of Ash or Willow, at the usual growth
of the Wood, and Plash it down to the Ground, about four or five Inches above
the top of the Ground; not cutting it wholly off, and cut off the head of it,
and put the over end of the Pole after the head cut off, a little into the
Ground, which thou may do, by bending it in the midst like a Bow and so
thrust it in, and so fasten it down, once or twice from the middle of it, and
upwards, close to the Ground with a Hook or two, and out thence where any
branch would put forth standing, will put forth lying, and more and more grow
up to Plants and Poles, as the other Spring does, and so you may, though it be
incapable of Sets, or Planting with the Root, lay over all your Vacant places,
and thicken your Woods where ever they are wanting.

And let me beg of thee thy credence here, it is most certain, A president of a
wood thickened.
I speak out of my own Experience, one of the gallantest Woods I know in
England, it is constantly used at every fall in some place or other of it; the
Wood is eighteen falls, every fall eighteen years growth; their very Faggots
made at length of the Wood (besides all their Pole-woods) all their brush being
faggoted into the Faggot, were this year sold for one pound three shillings
four pence a hundred, and forty Faggots make a Load; it is worth about twenty
five pounds an Acre every fall Study warmth all that possibly thou can, for
any Plants are helped much in mounting aloft thereby; therefore as I conceive
they prosper worse upon your cold Clay, which nourishes the Tree little, and
has no quickness nor life to quicken the growth thereof; but by toughness and
coldness of the Earth the Sap is shut in, and cannot get in to spread so
frankly as it should, and so instead of thriving of the Tree, the moss
prospers more fruitfully than the Tree.

Your Elm Plants may be gotten of young sprouts growing forth of the Roots of
the old Elm, many thousands, Elm plants.
which being slipped and set, will grow very fruitfully.

Your Sicamore is a very quick growing and thriving Wood, Sicamore plants.
especially if it be planted upon some warm, sound, and rich Land, they will
thrive wonderfully, and rise to gallane shade, excellent to make Walks and
Shaddow-bowers, useful for in ward building, where better is wanting, and for
firing where wood grows scarce.

As for Sets of this nature, if you go to any place where Sicamors grow, and
there in the beginning of the Spring you shall sind the Seeds chitted up and
down as thick as possible; which gather up, and set them presently, and you
shall have your increase at large, being planted curiously from any the least
prejudice of biting, breaking, or shaking the said Trees after planting;
according to the first directions.

Since the destruction of Wood increases so upon us, the which I should not so
plainly reprehend, were there any care, zeal, or industry in the planting new*
therefore I shall take boldness to enlarge my discourse a little further, and
by way of addition speak a little more particularly to some special sorts of
the most serviceable useful Wood now growing, or necessary for the supply of
the Commonwealth among us, hoping thereby to convince some of profitableness,
others of the fecibleness; some of the commodiousness, others of the
usefulness, and all of a possibility to recover some hopes of supplies
hereafter, when the old stock is yet more wasted on purpose to provoke the
ingenious to the Work. Old Virgil has this passage; That if of Woods he should
frame a Song,
To Princes care they do belong.
I Will make so bold as ad to this,
If Rulers slight it, it is much amiss.


And if the Romans ordained that Consuls should have the Charge of Woods, that
Timber might not be wanting for Shipping, and Buildings, and public Works, I
hope our States will judge it a unum necessarium among us. Venice at this day
appoints an Officer for the Woods, who sees to planting yearly, as well as
cutting down; and because we may be left more naked and convicted of our
weakness in this grand neglect of so great a public and personal good as is
the advance of Timber, I shall herby inform you, that there is scarce the worst
Land we have, but will bear as good Oak as the best Land in England. I have
read, it was a general Custom amongst the Ancients that when they found any
so barren Earth as would not graze, they presently plowed it, and sowed it with
Acorns, Ashkeyes, etc. and all other sorts of Wood-seed. We should grow wiser
than our Fathers, and we may easily outstrip their experiences; but herin of
all things else are we beneath them, they the planters, we the destroyers.

I shall therefore pray we may set upon this so good a Work, every man do a
little. I shall therefore affirm, that we can scarce tell how to employ one
acre of ground to more and greater advantage than to the sowing of it with
Wood-seeds a bed, Land as well employed by planting wood, as any way.
or two in a Garden of each would be a sufficient Nursery to plant many acres;
some to be drawn forth one year, some another as the Plants grow in bigness, so
they will require to be drawn forth to give the other more room; I dare say
that should every Gentleman of a good Estate, but maintain one or two acres as
Nurseries of all sorts of Wood, he might be furnished to plant every year a
thousand Trees, and so as he drew his plants, repair his nurcery again, and
need not have one hedg-row unplanted with good Wood and Timber.

And for further inconragement herin, I shall further say, that Trees well
planted, and carefully preserved, will grow to good perfection in one age,
especially if the ground be open and loose, and not too binding. Many men in
England have set a Tree, and lived to see it come to such a growth, as has
been worth above twenty shillings, near thirty; but I have been credibly
informed by a gallant ingenious Knight, who reported of his knowledge, that a
Gentleman in the Low Countries, or Germany, planted one hundred ashes, A
president of 50. years growth of Ash.
and at the end of fifty years resolved to sell them, and did, the price for
which he sold them was five hundred pound; and he that can improve so much Land
better, I shall desire earnestly to be his Scholar. The same Knight also
affirmed that he knew another Merchant there, that planted so much wood in his
own Life, that he would not take 50000l. for. Then how much Wood may be planted
in this Nation, and the Lands not less worth than now they are. I know some
Lands not worth above 6s or 8s. an Acre, that has yielded in wood above 50s.
an Acre per annum: And if this Government should compel all men to plant five
times as much as they destroy, they compel them to their own great advantage
and honor, witness my aforesaid English Northamptonshire President. Now to
those common and most usefulll Woods among us a word or two, and first of the
Oak, that non-decaying timber

It is somewhat slow of growing, by reason of the weight substantialness, Oak
plants.
and worth thereof, yet will in the way of ingenious husbandry quit his cost and
charge bestowed; you may either plant it from the Set, or Acorn; from the Acorn
I advise because then you may choose your seed from a likely thriving Tree,
which sowed in a Nursery, or on Beds of purpose, no disparagement to your
Gardens, or Orchard Nurceries, to have a Nurcery of all sorts of Woods planted
among them. I know a gallant Gentleman in Kent, most ingenious for public
improvements, as well in ways of Husbandry, as public services, who
maintains a constant Nurcery of all sorts of Wood-plants from the Kernel,
among his Nurcery of Orchard Fruits, and is so stocked with all sorts of Sets,
not only to supply himself, but may furnish a great part of the Country also
it is Colonel Blunt, A president for Nurseries of Wood.
living within a mile of Greenwich, not only honorable in his name, but in the
effects and fruits of all his actions.

I conceive it is indifferent, when you sow or set your Acorn, your ground
prepared and in good tillage; but why not at or in October, as soon as they be
ripe, or in the Spring early; but be sure the Acorn be full ripe, and the best
time to remove them, or transplant, may be in the end of Nove^ber or December,
into your fields where you do intend they shall grow, being planted a good
depth in as good double field mold; which done, you must be as careful of
biting, shaking, or breaking of them as you are of the Nurcery, until they be
so rootened and stifned so strong that they will endure a beast rubbing upon
them, which had need be above seven years; and if you intend them for Timber,
cut not off the heads by no means, but choose strait and smooth thriving barqued
Sets as you can, and support them from shaking with the wind for two or three
years at least, until they be most firmly rooted, so will they run up strait
and tall, and prove gallant large Timber; How to plant for Timber.
and in the removing of them, be very careful of bruising them also, for if
you bruise the top or head of any part, better cut it off; but if you intend
them for lop or shade, or for bearing mast, then cut off the heads of them,
they will spread the better, enlarge their boughs and branches further, and yet
make good Timber too, and very good, though not so long, yet may possibly be as
profitable as the other. The Oak agrees well with any Lands, good or bad,
Clay, Gravel, Sand or mixed Land, warm or cold, dry or moist, as appears by
the natural growth of it in all Countries; but for artificial planting, I
should advise to a middle mixed Land, Open loose land the best for any wood.
yea though it be but barren, it thrives excellently upon as barren Lands as
any are in England; the coldest, stiffest Clay is worst for all sorts of Woods,
your open loose Lands is best for any Woods, or Fruits, and the Oak takes not
pleasure in your richest soils of all but I question not the well prospering of
it there two, and may be the cause why so little of it is found upon your
richest Lands, may be, because the Land may, or is put to a more profitable
use; for this I must needs acknowledge, that in many parts where Land is rich
and dear, or lies near great Towns, and lets at great prizes, the wood
being in danger of stifling and spoiling by Wood-stealers, the Land may turn to
greater profit; yet however, where Land is good, I should advise to some wood,
though planted here and there a tree in hedg-rows, and where they may not
prejudice the grass, or shade the ground, it will be not only an improvement in
good measure of the Land, by adding to the incom the fruit thereof, as well as
of the grass, but an honor and delight unto your self and Posterity. The
Oak-mast makes fat fast flesh, and long lasting Bacon, and will feed Deer,
Sheep and Poultry exceeding well and profitably. I have read of one Oak in
Westphalia, An Oak above 40 yards in Timber. Another ten yards thicknes.
from the foot to the nearest bough, one hundred and thirty foot, and twelve
foot thick, and of another ten yards thick, which may possibly be; but I am
sure profit and honor sufficient will attend an ingenious plantation of any
sorts of Wood.

This is most renowned for Shipping, or any the strongest and most enduring
works or buildings, or for the most curious Wainscot, or indeed for any use
whatever. I shall be brief in all the rest, because that much that I have said
in the planting of this may be applied to the rest; the Barque is of as great
worth, as of need and use.

The Beech is also a mast-tree, Beech wood the use and fruit.
and very useful and profitable, both in the Body, Branches and fruit thereof.
The Body is very good Timber for the Joyners use, and for the Husbandman for
Axol-trees, and for much Building, and the bough for Firing, and the Fruit for
feeding Hogs and Deer, and I know not whether for Poultry or Sheep, but it
makes meat sweet and delicate light of digestion, but not so long lasting as
Peace or Acorns. It delights most in your warm Land, it grows well upon
gravelly Land, and Lands very stony; and in the Chiltern Countries, and sandy
ground, and balks not the barrennest Land, likes well, and better the hill and
mountains than the plain; The Barque thereof is useful for the floats of
fishing-nets, and pantofels for Winter, and if you spoil them of their Barque,
they die. This wood grows somewhat quicker than the Oak, and is more inclined
to some Countries than to others, especially your wood-land parts.

The Elm grows easily; The Elm described.
it is all heart if it be fallen in his season, which is when the sap is fully
and clearly down in the root betwixt November and February; it takes great
delight in ditch-banks, and dry places; they will grow thickest of any wood
whatever, and prosper, and as I conceive the most advantageous planting them is
in hedg-rows, or in little Plumbs of themselves. As for the Elm-seed, I can say
but little, because I never made experience thereof, only it is affirmed that
there is a male and a female of the Elm, and that the male Elm bears seeed,
and not the female; which if it do, then the seed when it is ripe may be sowed
as other seeds are upon a bed by themselves: and fine mould sifted and cast
upon them; and if they be dry, they as other seeds must be watered, and so
sowed in little rows, that a little trench be betwixt row and row, that they
may not root one into and upon another, but so as that they may be taken up
again with more ease, to remove and transplant where you please.

You may get Sets of the very roots which sprout forth of it, and set them, and
they will grow; and very many affirm, that any Elm, or a very chip: when the sap
is firm and proud, will grow unto a Set.

But this I had from a Gentleman of credit as a speedy and unfailing to raise
Elm-sets or Plants; How to raise Elm-plants.
Which is, dig round about a well-grown Elm a foot or more from the body, unto
many, or most of the Master-roots, and cleanse away all the earth, and then cut
the root almost quite through with an ax, and so serve most of the roots, and
if you cut some full through, you may, and forth of both those ends of the root
you cut or divide in sunder, will come forth gallant sprouts, or plants, which
you must take off with a little part of the root, or a little chip thereof, and
plant it, and it will assuredly grow to a good Tree.

The use and worth of the Elm is little inferior to the former; it is of
absolute and singular use, especially for waterworks; good for building, where
it may ly constantly dry, The use of the Elm.
or constantly wet, but sometimes dry, and sometimes wet, it will not long
endure: It makes excellent plank, and good board, the best wood in England for
Wheelwrights Nathes or Hubs for wheels, and good for felly timber also.

In your second plantation, or removal, set them in very good order, and be
careful of preserving them as a garden from shaking with wind or cattle, or
from biting or rubbing by all means.

Some write, that in your second removal you may do best to tie some knots of
some of the string, or twist them like a garland, and then set them and tread
the mold down about the roots first anointed with Bullocks dung; but my self
having made thereof no experience, cannot press it; all I say is, a small
matter will make out the experierce, which I encourage to. The Elm grows to
great worth, hinders little ground, delights in sound warm Land, dry, sandy,
gravelly, or mixed Lands, but it must have good store of mold by all means; it
does not delight in cold moist clays, nor spewing weeping Land. One Acrs length
with 1. or 2. rows of Elms upon a ditch bank at their full growth may be worth
20. or 30l. it runs up generally to the greatest height and length of any
Wood in England.

The Ash is also a gallaut quick-thriving Wood, The description of the Ash.
but it takes not so much pleasure in a hard, barren mountainous Land as the
Oak or Beech do. It will grow in good Land, and in Land of any nature or
temperature almost, what is ever; it will thrive reasonable well upon a Boggy
ground, so the same be deep Trenched to the bottom, and laid dry and sound. It
delights it self in dry sound Land, and will grow very fast if it like the
Land; faster than any of the aforsaid Woods; witness the Dutch Precedent I
brought before, speaking of the excellent and great advantage Wood might yield
in my discourse about the Oak, which I here forebear.

The use of the Ash is most manifold; good for Building, The use of the Ash.
and for any work where it may lie dry; most prime for Coopers Hoops, and Rimms
for Sives, and Wheels, as Oak is also; and excellent for the Wheelwright,
Ploughwright, and the Husbanman; far tougher than any of the woods aforesaid
and very rich and profitable, and the best Firewood, fittest for Ladies
Chambers, will burn exceeding well and sweet, though green; but all this
excellency unless for firing is quirkly spoiled, If you fall it forth of
season, it will be worst of any Wood bare the mistaking of the season; Season
for the Ash its selling.
the Worm will take it speedily, and make it the most unserviceable of any wood
whatever. The only season is from November until the end of January; for if
the sap begin never so little to arise, forbear falling Ash. It spreads his
root very large, and so is most offensive to your Corn land; because it both
draws away the heart from the land, and offends the plough by his roots.

You may sow the Ash Keys, which are the only seed, in beds by themselves,
and they will grow amain; two or three good beds will store a Country; draw
then as they biggon; and at last draw all away, or else they will destroy your
Nurcery: plant them in January or December, mould them very well and carefully
preserve them; cut not off the the top if you would have it to grow in length;
it being a pithy wood, it will somewhat endanger it; but it may prosper well,
though cut a little off the top, and spread better, and be very useful both
for Timber, Lop, and firing: I have heard of a poor woman that had two or three
ash-trees in her Garden hedge, and a strong wind came and blew the Ash Keys
all over the Garden, A president of Ash his growth and advantage.
that at the Spring, her Garden was turned from that to a hopeful plantation
of Ashes as green as a leek above the ground, the woman was at a great debat,
to loose her Garden she was loath, and to destroy so hopeful a crop she was
unwilling: at last she resolved to let them grow, and now her garden is turned
into a nurcery, and she is turned a planter, and has ever since maintained it
to that use, and made many times more profit than she did before.

The slips from the roots are not so good sets as the sciens or sprout from the
Key, The best sets etc.
that is far the best Set, being straight and smooth barked, and free from
canker. Their removing must be in the depth of winter, The best time to remove
Ash.
that it may have a whole winter to fasten the roots, the roots may be cut in
the removing a little, but the strings no whit at all. It is a Tree of
mavelous great advantage to the Common wealth, and very profitable to the
Planter. Pliny writes that the Serpent so abhors the Ash, that it will rather
choose to run into the fire than through the Ash boughs, but no more of this.

The Birch tree will grow in the barrennest land, it will not prosper in good
land, Birch.
it is good for some common meaner uses, as to make Ox yoakes, and somewhat
useful for the Turner, but most especially for the fire, where wood is scarce
and dear, it may be worth your planting, or where the land is so barren that
it will bear nothing else: Theophrastrus writes of it, that it will grow in
frosty, snowy, cold Countries, and on the hardest gravelly land, and therefore
on the barrennest land they plant Birch, Pine wood, Fur, Pitch tree, and
Larsh.

The Walnut of another use, The Walnuts.
and that bears a very gallant delightful fruit, takes his pleasure in dry
sound wholesome land; the usual way of raising them is from the Nut, set or
sowed, and preserved a year or two in the Nurcery, and then drawn forth and
planted; it will not endure cold nor moisture, and seldom any grow in your
strong clay land at all; if they be well planted and preserved, The use and
advantage of it.
they will make a good shady walk, or set in row at a good distance will
prosper very well, but they require great room, and good land, it grows to a
great bigness, and is very useful for any household use, excellent for the
joyner, and curious for the Gunsmith, and the fruit thereof is most delightful
and no less profitable.

The willow though Homer calls it an unfruitful* Tree, The Willow.
yet I shall engage much in the praise of it; it is the quickest of all wood
for growing, and rises more in one year than many do in three: And for
profit, I must question whether any can or may come near it; it comes off with
less charge than any, and has a prehemency in lightness and toughness, and is
very serviceable for spades and Gun stocks, and manifold uses more, to be kept
dry it will scarce ever decry; It delights in low ground wet and shady, yea the
most watery the more suitable, and yet will grow upon a dry bank, and in the
Champion also: It is very good for firing also. It is to be planted of young
sets cut off of any bough, about two foot and a half long, or somewhat shorter,
set or thrust into the soft earth or soft ground, almost any bog, being cast up
in great lands, and on each side thereof a Trench so deep as to go a little
below the bottom of the bog, and these set a foot and a half a sunder in strait
lines or else two foot asunder; the sets being thrust into the earth within
eight or nine inches of the top; and this to be done in February and beginning
of March, and in three or four years it will come, if it prosper as it should,
to make windings or hurdle wood, in a year or two more to make hoppoles, and
great sets to be planted at seven or eight foot length, to be set for Trees
about eight or nine foot distance by river sides or little brooks, or more, if
you would not have your ground shaded, which must be secured by stakes or
thorn, or some other means for two years, from rubbing or shaking with wind or
cattle; it is conceived, that those planted moist thrive fastest, but those
upon a dry land indureth the longest: be sure to cut your sets a little aslope
at the heather end, and set the biggest end downwards, and close the earth
pretty close to it when it is set, and cut off all twiggs that come out of any
part of the set. They may be cut as you have occasion to use them, at three,
five, or seven years.

The Osier must be planted after the same manner, Osier his use and how planted.
from short sets as abovesaid, and must be planted upon very good land, and
then it will yield a crop every year, and may possibly be worth three pound an
acre or more: is of especial use for Basket-makers, and fishermen for making
Leaps and instruments to catch fish in. The Osier is quick of growing and very
profitable in its use, you may plant them where the Sea ebbs and flows, and
covers them all over, for that they have but time now and then to lie dry, they
will prosper no less there than elsewhere: you may maintain some standers here
and there of two or three years groath, to make big splents or supporters for
your great work.

The Lime Tree is also newly discovered as useful in our English plantations,
The Lime tree.
but it grows to be of great credit among our Gentry. It thriveth exceeding
well upon midling land, makes a fine flourishing Tree, and being headed and set
in walks in roes, makes a very gallant shady walk, they begin to be much
planted about London, Surrey, Kent, Essex, etc. It carries a very fair smooth
leaf, somewhat like the Beech Tree: And as for the fruit of them, and the
manner of planting them, I shall say no more, but leave each man to his own
experience and trial, til I have further experimented them, and shall say that
they are most probably exceeding profitable, and what has been said of other
Woods for the manner of planting may in a great measure be applied to this.

So I have done for present; Causes why the Reader digest not the Discourse.
Which particulars, if thou have seriously perused, although thou have passed
many thing, offensive possibly, which has been the Authors desire justly to
Administer: And if any thing unjustly have offended he is very sorry, and
hopes, and verily believes* it either arises from want of a clear
Representation of his meaning in more Significant Terms, or Artificial
Language to the Readers misunderstanding of the Authors Sense, or
mis-conceiving of his way of of Practice, which I believe upon a second
unprejudiced Consideration, will more clearly represent it self unto him. As for
the curiosity in its composure, or Exact Method in the handling, bear with the
want thereof, thou must expect no better from a Treatise of this nature, Rudely
digested out of Confused principles and Notions, and from Experiences most of
them Completed but some in present practice, which when throvghly
Experimented, (If these weak Discoveries find acceptance with thee, and shall
appear with the least Advantage to the Common Good (if God be pleased to give
opportunity, he may present thee with a second part to the same Tune; wherein he
hopes to Complete or make up the whole part of practical Husbandry, or give
thee in a whole new Plantation of old England.

As also something may be Digested after the uttermost Improvement made upon
thy Lands, The Aut^ors promise to mend.
how to make the best Improvvement of thy Stock, to greatest advantage it is
possibly able to yield thee and the Nation, or what else shall fall into
Experience in the interim as fit for Public covery under the nature of
Improvement; Thy loving acceptance hereof and practice therein will undoubtedly
Command.

And though I have in some things been too Tedious, which I could not well
avoid, yet I hope I have dealt truly with thee, I am sure in my own
Experiences, I can make good unto the Eye what I have presented to thy Ear, and
what I have also seen as other men's, I have Represented them in Truth as near
as my abilities were able to judge of them; or I able to receive their
information; Therefore I have acquainted thee where thou may discover Truth in
all: And if I have taken any thing up by bare information, it may fail in some
circumstances, but I hope and do in good measure know it does not, nor shall
not fail, in the substance thereof; and if I shall here but make good or
clearly hold out a double Improvement, it will be worth acceptance, (to me it
has beeen worthy Respect and Imitio^, when I could but advance any Land, The
author clear, his endeavors are for public good.
one half or third part, by any Information) but if I have made out clearly to
the Nation the several opportunities of such vast improvements, that there is
such Lands, and such Capacities to advance them, as I have held forth in my
Title page, and have also as truly showed that they have been done already, and
may be done for future, with the several Ways, Rules, dnd Means for their
accomplishments: and that also at so rational, easy, and familiar cost and
charges, and principally and chiefly by the poor Man's labor, who cries for it,
and must have it: I hope I shall not be accomted or at least not Scandalized as
a projector, but as a poor and faithful Servant to his Generation Farewell.

THE SECOND PART OF Englands Improvement.
NOw I shall proceed to the Second part of my Discourse according to my promse,
and shall therein endeavor the most clear and can did discoveries of six more
Pieces of Improvement; all of the^ the most advantageous for the Improvement of
Land of all sorts, and under all capacities have yet ever been discovered, some
whereof, and very many I yet never read one word of, nor so far as I can find
out, or hear, have yet ever been published, unless you please to take that for
a Discovery which is by a Subintelligitur, as I conceive Mr. Speed that
superlative Improver (and some such others) to whom can they make good but one
quarter of what they affirm, they neither can want Money, Clothes, nor
Scholars, I know some of the succeeding particulars are the deep mysteries he
will impart for composition, and how he came by many of them too, but that they
are many of them of his own experience, or to that advance he speaks of, I
affirm the contrary; and much fear the news he tells us too good to be true.

The man I know, and have conversed with him, and have known him some late
years, and while his Books were private and conveyed into Noble, and Gentlemen's
hands, particularly by himself, and his own Agents, I could bear it, and suffer
wiser than my self to be fooled, because I was not wise enough as to beware of
him, but now they come to be sold in the Stationer shops, and spread abroad the
Country to deceive, and beguile the Nation, I cannot forbear.

He tells us his discoveries are ^methodically distributed, and so they are,
just as if you should put a man to his choic, whether if a man would give
another as willingly two hundred pounds as one, and would give him the two
hundred pounds first too, whether he would choose the one hundred pounds. So
after he has first told us of a certainty to raise two thousond pounds per
annum, with less than two hundred pounds stock, which I wonder who will refuse,
and close with another of his offers, which is, with five hundred pounds stock,
to raise a thousand pounds per annum? which of the two is more probable, yet
less desirable than the former, but both of them to be effected with money.
Yet methinks I could hearken to his fourth particular, which is to discover a
way without charge, whereby an industrious man, of a reasonable capacity and
fortune, without prejudice or dishonor, may contrive to himself five hundred
pounds per annum. Himself exceedingly wants such a discovery, or else wants the
reasonable capacity he speaks of; for sure the fortune he speaks of he cannot
want, being a man of so vast a mind, large understanding, and great experienee,
unless his experiences have eaten away the rest, which to me seems unprobable
unless they be to be found visible. These things are gallant in contemplation,
but more sadly experimented, which you will hardly find by sea or land, nor any
other place but in Mr. Speeds chamber, I believe.

He tells us by his fourth Item, that with less than fifty pounds stock visible
a man may advance a thousand pounds per annum; but I fear either the invisible
must be ten thousand pounds, or else his thousand pound will drop short by nine
hundred and eighty; and if you grant him credence, or that there were a
possibility in him ever to affect it, why should any man so much abuse himself
as to make use of his following Item, which is two hundred pounds stock in
three years to raise four hundred pounds, and in three more double the four
hundred pounds, etc. The which he affirms but in probability, and yet the other
upon certainty; but that of probability may be, and is most evidently
experimented, and was by may thousands before Mr. Speed was born; but why any
man should lay out two hundred pounds, when with fifty pounds he may raise a
hundred and sixty times as much therewith. I wonder far greater than those he
holds forth in points of Husbandry as to advance land two hundred fold, from
five shillings to fifty pounds per annum, etc. and many more, His book is but
to draw thee to his chamber to tell thy fortune there.
in all which I shall say no more, but refer thee to his Book and his personal
Discoveries; for I must and will lay him down the Gantlet: For there is enough
to advance ths Commonwealth, if not to choke it; for many times when men are
brought extreme low, either by sickness or penury, and restored, as this
Commonwealth is, suddenly to plenty, or a good stomach, surfe it and undo
themselves suddenlier with plenty, than by a sparer diet, or a more moderate
condition; and so I fear may this Nation, if they embrace so high discoveries
too hastily; yet embrace them I pray, but with sobriety: and remember him also
that ran mad upon the beholding of his great Treasure; for such variety of
Extraordinaries may make men wild, and run from one to another, not knowing
where to close or stay, and the gazing after these Princely Incomes, if they
look after it till effected, may make them look their eyes out also; but enough
hereof.

Yet let me lament the sad condition of our Times, and I fear the neglect of
our Government too; for to very many members thereof, if not to all, he has
given his Books, whose fault with humble submission it is, that so great
discoveries should still be clouded, and yet not put in practice, and the
Commonwealth thus bleeding, while either by a Patent, or rather, and that I am
sure for the value of one or two days pay at most of a common Clerk in some
Offices would effect it; for truly the man is very conscionable, and desires
not a full condition, but chooses a very mean one, and will accept of too little
in all conscience for his discoveries.

I know to whom he made many of them, and would have done all the rest for
less than twenty shillings, if the man's patience would have received them, but
most like he not being able to bear them neglected the embracing of the^.

And whether I have, and shall speak forth any of the things he mean, I will
not be peremptory, but believe I have, and shall most of them if opportunity
last, but shall never endeavor to hold them forth in that Luciferous, yet
watery luster, lest it blind my Reader, but truly and nakedly to discover them,
their nature and use, with that real and feacible advantage may be made
thereof, which will satisfy a sober spirit; and if by chance I make a
discovery of what is concealed, much good may it do the Commonwealth, for I
shall reap the fruit of my design, An opportunity to discover public
Advantages. And whosoever desires cordially to be informed of Mr. Speed may
from Mr. Samuel Hartlib, dwelling against Charing Cross, who can give fuller
and larger description both of the man and his abilities, having expressed him
self so far a Gentleman of such charity toward him, as he has maintained him
diverse monoths together while he was inventing some of these his discoveries as
I was informed from a very knowing Information.

And now to the six Pieces of Improvement contained in the ensuing discourse,
held forth under these Heads.

1 By sowing the Trefoyl or Claver; and St. Foyne, and the advantages hereby. 2
By facilitating the great charge and burden of the Plough, with the figures of
them. 3 The planting of Weld, Woad, and Madder; three great dying commodities.
4 The planting of hops, Safforn, and Liquorish, and the profits thereof. 5 The
planting of Rape, Cole see^, Hemp, and Flax, and their Increase. 6 The
Improvements that may be made by some Orchard and Garden fruits.
CHAP. XXVI.
Contains the best way of planting Trefoyle or great Claver Grass, which is the
highest advantage our English Lands will produce.
And herein I will discover the best seed and the best means to gain it, how to
sow and husbandry it for food and seed, with the most suitable land thereto,
and the profit that may accrue thereby; and for brevity sake shall speak little
to what other public spirits have discovered, but enlarge a little from later
experience in relation to our English Lands and Husbandry.

THere are so many sorts of Claver, as would fill a volume, Seed described.
I shall only speak of the great Claver, or Trefoyl we fetch from Flaunders
called by Clusius, Trifolliummajus tertium, which bares the great red
Honysuckle, whose leaf and branches far exceeds our natural Meadow Claver; it
bears a very small seed as Mustard seed, Right seed is the best piece in the
whole work.
not so round but longer like a Bean; the best is of a greenish yellow color,
some a little reddish, but the black I fear will not do well. The choice
whereof is the only piece in the whole work.

Your Dutch, Holland, or Low Country Seed, or from the lower parts of Germany,
is very much of it very hazardous that comes over hither, but being well chose
there, the tansporting of it by sea is no considerable prejudice unto it, but
much that is sold in the Seed-mens shops in London was either corrupted by the
Dutch before it came thence, or else parched by over-drying, or else by the
Shopkeepers, either mingling old and new, or keeping it another year and then
selling it for new: I my self within this four year sowed diverse Acres with
seed bought in London, Claver sowed but none came up.
which cost me about two shilllings a pound and lost it all; I am not able to
say any one seed came up at all. And I have heard that the Dutch out of an
evil spirit, lest we should find the same benefit they have, have kiln-dryed
it. Therefore my advice is, to send over a knowing man that has had experience
of it, and knows the right colored seed to buy, and search all the Country
and buy the best and choicest Seed he can possibly buy for Silver, and take
care of the bringing of it over too; and as for the sale of it, if you bring
over more than you shall use, you need not, nor shall not want customers to
take it off of hand; for I had rather give a double price for such, than run
the hazard of common Merchants experience.

But if you desire me to speak my mind from the experience my self has made,
The best is of our own growing.
I do affirm that our own Seed, that is, Seed of our own Claver, after the
first sowing of the Dutch Seed, called the great Claver, is the best, and most
certain Seed to grow, and so successively from time to time, if you can ripen
it kindly, get it dry, and preserve it. And this will bring me to my second
particular.

Which is how to get good Seed, or recover it out of our Flaunders. The best
means we do use is to thrash it out of the straw; and then chave it or cleanse
it from the straw, as you do corn, and then polt it, or faulter it as some call
it, that is, beat it over again in the husk, and then get out as much of the
refuse by chaving of it with a narrow toothed Rake as possibly you can get; I
have heard of one that got above 2 bushels out of an Acre.
which done, if you would bestow sunning of it in a hot dry season, and then
rubbing of it, will get very much of it, for this is all the means that
hitherto I have ever heard of in England, but I am confident that it may be
very feacibly got forth of the husk, being very thoroughly dried in the Sun,
upon a Corn-mill, Oatmeal, or Mault-mill, and shelled as they do Oats, by a
skillful Miller, and no seed hurt as they will Oats, and not break the kernel,
having his Millstones exceeding level hung, neither too sharp nor too dull, A
new way of getting out the Clover forth of the husk.
and very curiously set that it cut not the seed, nor yet leave too much seed
behind; which if it prove, as I am confident it will, it will be a very great
advuntage to the Nation. This upon the very writing hereof came into my mind,
which I am very confident of the performance of the work, and resolve to make
the experience thereof, if God bless my Crop of Glaver this summer. So far as I
have hitherto seen or heard, our own seed sowed in the husk, has proved the
best, thicker and certainer than that sowed of the pure seed it self, and so
shall fall into the third particular.

The best way of sowing of it, and I do verily believe, that if the husk be but
once cut and shivered a little that the Seed may but scatter, that it may be
best to sow it with the husk or chaff because it supplys the filling of the
hand better than any thing I can find out will do, with these two Observations.

1 That you be sure to find out a fit proportion of husk and seed together to
sow an Acre, and that I cannot prescribe, unless I knew how clean you could
make it; your own experience will discover that perfectly.

2 That you be sure ever and anon to stir up the bottom of your Hopper, or
Seed-lop, because the Seed will sink downward, and keep your seed and chaff
always in an even mixture and composition, lest you sow that part thicker in
the bottom than that that lay overmost; but should you fail of purifying the
seed from the chaff for private use it may do best of all, if the hop bowl or
husk be but cut and shattered as aforesaid: but if you sow that Dutch seed, as
that you must of necessity till you get into stock of seed of your own, then
the best way of sowing it must be by mixing of it with Ashes of wood, or coal
coarsly sifted or with saw-dust, or good sand or fine mould, or any thing else
that will help to fill the hand, and will spread well forth of the hand, but I
like not well the taking it up betwixt the fingers and the thumb; or the two
fore fingers and the thumb, because they cannot scatter the seed so broad nor
so even as they can out of their full hand. And this I must press as one of the
most weightiest things in this Husbandry; to have a most especial care of the
even sowing of it, your care herein must be far more than in sowing Corn for
these Reasons.

1 Because the Corn with much harrowing (which this will not abide) though
uneven sowed will be drawn into wants and uneven places, and much regulated by
the Harrow.

2 Because your Corn is of a heavier and fuller, and weightier substance, and
will spread well of it self, but this is so small and little in bulk, sowes a
land that it cannot be discerned how it spreads, and whether even or uneven.

3. Because the wind, though very small, has powe over this, and not over the
other, and how ever you must choose a calm time as possibly you can, many times
early in the morning, Best time to sow Claver.
or late at even are your calmest times. You may sow it upon any Land you
intend to graze upon, any bare places in a Meadow or highwaies trodden and
poched, and it will soard them; but the usual way is thus advised, when you
have fitted your land by Tillage and good Husbandry, then sow your Barley or
Oats, and Harrow them in, and after your Claver upon the same Land, and covered
once with a small Harrow or Bush, but sow not the Corn thick as you usually
did, but if you will lose this Crop, you may sow it of it self.

And lastly, because if your Corn should miscarry, it is but for one year; but
this for many: and as you sow once you must often reap, and will never cover or
soard kindly, if evenness be not effected, to the completing of which you must
have a sober stayed Seedsman, that carries his hand high; takes his steps even,
and delivers his seed out of his hand at one equal and constant breadth and
wideness. It is my constant cry to my own Husbandmen to take heed of
Ploough-balking, and Harrow balking, but now I say in a more especial manner,
take heed of Seed-balking. The best season for it is in the beginning of
April, or in the end of March rather, if it be likely to be a dry season; late
sowing may do in a fruitful season, but yearly is most certain.

May be ready to cut; for this I say, and most will find it, though they
otherwise speak high, that this grass will be best always to be cut green, and
before the stalk begin to grow too big, and begin to dye and wither, unless it
be for seed: Thefrore, as experience will teach, it will be excellent good to
cut it green and young, and give it cattle or horse in the house; for if you
cut it to keep, it will go so near together, as it will do but little service
dry, yet being cut young it will be very good and sweet, and either feed or
give milk abundantly; and then after the first cut, let it grow for seed, and
herein you must be carfull that it grow till it be full ripe, for it will not
be very apt to shed. And if it grow to seed, To know when it is full ripe.
I cannot conceive of what use those stalks which are so hard and dry can be
of, unless it be for Firing in a dear Country, so that the seed must be the
advance of that Crop only; and so it may well enough, and you may have a good
after pasture, and may grase it until January, and then prepreserve it; but if
you would know when your Seed is ripe, observe these two particulars.

First observe the husk, and when the Seed first appears in it, then about one
month after it may be ripe.

But Secondly, try the seed after it begins to turn the color, and the stalk
begins to dye and turn brown, it begins to ripen, and being turned to a
yellowish color, in a dry time mow it, and preserve it till it be perfectly
dry any manner of way, and then about the midst of March thrash it and
cleanse it from the straw as much as you can, and then foulter and beat the
husk again being exceeding well dried in the Sun after the first thrashing;
When and how to get one the seed.
and then get out what seed you can, and after try what a Mill will do at the
rest, as aforesaid more at large; but I will give way to a better Discovery. I
need not prescribe a time either in July or August as best to cut for seed,
because some years and lands will ripen it sooner than other will; therefore
have respect to thy seed and straw according to former directions; but when
thou art got into good seed, thou may graze it upon thy land, and then be
sure not to let it grow too rank and high; for if the stalk grow big, cattle
will balk it and stain it more, and it will not eat up so kindly at first, nor
grase so even afterward, Yields much Milk, and feeds fat Beef
but exceeding much Milk it will yield, and feed very well, but to affirm as
some have done, and do confidently unto this day, that it will grow upon the
barrennest ground as is on Windsor Forest I dare not; A great mistake about
Claver.
I have known that there it has failed; and I am confident must, without
exceeding great cost and husbandry, yet that very Land well Manured and Tilled,
Dunged, Limed, Marled, or Chalked, or otherwise made fat and warm, will bring
forth good Glover: and other rich commodities, as they do in Flaunders, upon so
coarse Lands bestow good cost, and that will do: The nature of the Land is
good, bnt the spirit of it is too low to raise it of it self. And this is all
is held forth in the discourse of the Brabant Husbandry, exceeding barren
Lands, but well Dunged and Tilled, and then Clavered; not that it is the barren
Land, but the good and costly Husbandry; only the oldness of the Land, and
restiness thereof yields more spirit to the Grain or Claver by far than the
Tillable Land constantly plowed, Old land better for Claver than tillable.
and being of the same fatness and barrenness, and no better; yet I verily
affirm that Tillable Land well husbanded, and laid down with Claver, will do
very well also. The quantity of seed to sow an Acre, How much seed sowe^han
Acre.
as I conceive, will be a Gallon, or 9 or 10 pound, though some are of opinion
less will serve turn. And so I descend to my last particular, which is,

5 To set forth the Lands most suitable for Claver, with the annual Profit
that comes thereby.

Therefore, as above, I say your old Land, be it coarse or rich, as it is, or
has been disused from Tillage long, is best for Corn; so also is it the best
and certain Land to Claver; and when you have corned your Land as much as you
intend, then to alter it to Claver is the properest season.

1 As to the nature of the Land, as I conceive your dry, warm Land, The lands
most proper for the Clover
naturally good, betwixt ten and twenty shillings an acre, or your poorer dry
Land, betwixt one shilling to ten shillings an acre, well manured or soyled,
and brought into perfect Tillage; and to speak properly and plainest, any Land
that will bear good Corn, will bear good Claver.

2 Your earthy, well mixed Land, of a middle temper, will do with good
Husbandry as aforesaid, as well as the former.

And lastly your natural cold Land, well Husbandryed, laid up very dry and
warm, and brought into good Tillage, every Land laid high, as the nature and
coldness of the Land requires, and every furlong drained, and the furrows
cleansed up by the Plough at last, will bring almost any Lands into a very good
condition for Claver, and the better husbandried the better for this use also.

This I shall lay down for a general Rule, A general rule in Clavering.
that whatever Land is neither to rank or fat for any sort of Corn whatsoever,
is not too good to Claver, and you shall always find it best Husbandry, and best
pofit upon your best Land, unless, as aforesaid, you recover the barren Lands
up to a good and rich condition, which is also the far better Husbandry than to
lie pelting and moyling upon poor mean Land unfatned by some soyls or other,
therefore I advise every man to plow up no more than he can exceeding well
overcome by his purse and husbandry, and let the rest lie till he have brought
up his other, and then as he has raised one part take up another, and lay down
that to grase, either with Clover or otherwise: And let him that flatters
himself to raise goed Clover upon barren heathy Land otherwise than as
aforesaid, pull down his Plumes after two or thee years experience, unless he
devise a new way of Husbandry.

And as to the annual Profit that may accrue thereby, The Annual profit of
Clover Grass.
I shall little differ from the Flaunders Husbandry, but shall affirm that one
acre after the Corn is cut the very next year if it be well Husbandryed, and
kind thick Claver, may be worth twenty Marks, or twelve pound, and so downward
as it degenerates weaker, less worth. In Brabant they speak of keeping four
Cowes Winter and Summer, some cut and laid up for fodder, others cut and eaten
green; but I have credibly heard of some in England, that upon about one Acre
have kept four Coach horses, and more al Summer long, but if it keep but two
Cowes, it is advantage enough upon such Lands as never kept one: But I conceive
best for us, until we be come into a stock of Seed, to mow the first Crop in
the midst or end of May, and lay that up for hay, although it will go very near
together, yet if it grow not too strong, it will be exceeding good and rich,
and feed any thing, and reserve the next for Seed: And if we can bring it up to
perfect seed, and it will but yield four bushels upon an acre, it will amount
to more than I speak of by far, every bushel being wooth three or four pound a
bushel; and then the after math, or eadish that year may put up three midling
Runts upon an acre, and feed them up: all which laid together will make up an
Improvement sufficient, Clover ^i's for corning, and corning for clovering.
and yet this propety it has also; that after the three or four first years of
Clovering, it will so frame the earth, that it will be very fit to Corn agaen,
which will be a very great advantage: First to corn your Land, which usual
yields a far better profit than grasing, and sometimes a double profit, and
sometimes more, near a treble profit, and then to Clover it again, which will
afford a treble, fou^fold yea 10 or 12 fold Advance, if not more. And so if you
consider one Acre of land with the Claver and Husbandry thereof, may stand you
the first year in twenty five shilling, the three other years not above ten
shillings, the Land being worth no more, which may produce you yearly, easily
five, six, or eight pound per annum per Acre; nay some will affirm ten, or
twelve pound or more; then most of my Improvements promised are made good, as
in my Frontspiece is he would forth under this first Piece of Improvement.

CHAP. XXVII
Speaks of the usage of St. Foyne and La-lucern.
I Proceed to the discovering of the use and advantage of St. Foyne a French
Grass, of which I mnst use plain dealing, and not put my Reader upon improbable
experiment, as is my chiefest aim. And as in some part of my former discourse I
promised to bring down to our practice some Outlandish Experiments which were
hinted at and discovered unto Mr. Hartlib by Letter to be a great deficiencie
to us in our Improvements the non-practice thereof; so I must, and will hold
forth no more than I can make proof of to the face of the world. Therefore my
self having not made a full Experiment thereof, only I have sowed of it this
year, shall give the relation of the manner of the Husbandry thereof, and the
fruit you may rationally expect, and the Lands upon which it is to be sown,
and so leave it and you to your own experience and Gods blessing.

I shall not trouble you with the description of it as an Herbalist, because as
in this, so in no other is it my design to search out the nature of any Herb or
Plant in it self, but as it is most profitable or useful for my main design,
The Improvement of Land

St. Eoyn is a French Grass much sowed there, The description of St. Foyn.
upon their barren, dry, hasky Lands, and sometimes in our Gardens has a kind
of it been much sowed, called the French Honysuckel; it is of one excellent
property yields abundance of Milk, and upon that account may be very
advantageous to many parts of the Nation: it grows best as it is said, upon
the barrennest lands, hilly and mountainous, which I am induced to believe upon
this score, because it is rendered to be worth but nine or ten shillings an
Acre, which some would not think worth experimenting, but if so, and it will
grow upon our worst land, I am sure there is thousand thousands of Acres in
England, not worth one shilling an Acre, and if that being sown upon such land
it will with one sowing advance it to that worth, and so continue for diverse
years, it is very well worth our imitation and practice; it will raise betwixt
a load and a half, and two load of an Acre: Besides it is rendered to have
another excellent quality, which is not to barrennize Land, but to better or
fatten it, and after seven years growing it so roots large and many, somewhat
like Licorish, that the Plowing up of them, is a very good soil, and much
fattens the Land for Corn: it is excellent for soarding Land the first year a
great advantage. It has been sowed in diverse parts of England, as in Cobham
Park in Kent, etc. where it thrived very well upon chalkie dry banks.

The seed is first to be had out of France, where it is sold for about three
pence or a groat a pound, but here it was sold very dear at nine pence; ten
pence, or twelve pence a pound this yrar. It is most like a Parsnip seed, only
a little browner in color, and somewhat rounder and fuller made like an
Oyster, it is very light, and so many pounds go to a strike, and it must be
sowed far more in quantity than you do the Claver seed, because it is so great
a seed; for ever the smaller the seed the further it goes: I conceive for
every pound of Claver you sow, you had need sow two of this, if not more; but I
leave it to your own experience, you will easily find a fitting proportion upon
the first trial; but the thicker the closer it grows, and stocks the ground
the better, and destroys other seed or weeds.

The manner of sowing it may be with Oats or Barley and so much as grows up with
the Barley may be cut with it, The manner of sowing it.
and then preserved, or else if it be very fruitful, it may be moed in the
latter end of the year, and then preserve it for mowing for six or seven years
after; for by that time it will have lost the spirit of it and be overcome by
our English grasses; and then be fitter to plow for Corn again.

But if men will be at charge, the best way commended to me is this, to prepare
your Lands and make them fine, as when you sow barley, and then plow in these
seeds as the great Gardeners do their Pease, yet not altogether at so great a
distance; but yet let them make their ranges near a foot distance one betwixt
another, and the grass will flourish like Pease especially if they draw the
plow throngh them once, or twice that summer to destroy all the weeds; but
whereas he speaks of using the great Claver thus also, I am somewhat jealous he
is mistaken herein, because the thicker it grows and the closer, with one
continued thickness, the better either to mow or grase, The experimenting I
leave to thee.

There is also the La-lucern, La lucern.
another French Grass, which is excellent Fodder, and is rather preferred
before the St. Foine, and it is as advantageous to dry and barren lands, and
has been lately discovered there, and is now of great credit amongst them, but
for my own particular experience, I can say little and therefore say thus much,
only to provoke the Ingenious both unto the search, experimenting, and
communicating to public view, not one man being sufficient for the
experimenting all discoveries that may be made here, and elsewhere, I am
confident every Age, nay every day will bring forth something or other worth
our embracements.

The Second General Piece of Improvement contains the discourse of facilitating
the charge and burden of the Plow, and a demonstration of the Figures thereof.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Discovers the several Abuses of the Plough.
BEfore I proceed in this discourse, I will lay down these two or three Maxims
or Conclusions.

First, that whatever moves upon the Land, or that works in the Land, and
carries the least earth or weight with it, must needs move or work easiest. A
wheel the lesser ground it stands upon, the easier it turns, and the lesser the
wheel the easier still; so the Plough, the more earth or weight it carries with
it, the more strength must be required. The natural furrow it must carry, but
the lesser compass both in height and length it bears upon the Plough, the
easier the Plough must go.

Secondly, the more naturally any thing moves, the more easily, and the more
Artificially, the more difficultly.

Thirdly, the sharper or thinner is any tool, the easier it pierces, and the
less strength is required; so contrary, the thicker or duller any tool is, the
more strength must work it; and;

Fourthly, that which is the plainest and truest to the Rule, and admits of
least multiplication of work, must needs be easiest.

All my endeavors shall only be the application of all these to the Plough,
and that as naturally as I can by truth of Workmanship, to discover the Plough
and Plough-Irons to the most exactness, which will be all the ease that I can
give it, or any man yet ever did or could: If any other shall endeavor to
discover by Engine or otherwise, to supply the strength of horse and man to
draw the Plough, I know an easy Plough will go more easy, and shall therein
rejoice.

And because I find so many different names given to the members of the Plough
according to the Country phrazes, and few of one Country understands another
Countries terms, I shall confine my self to one name to each member all along
my discourse, for the better understanding of the Reader.

As for the Plough-sheath, Wrest, Beam, Share, and Coulter, they retain these
names clearly in most parts and so I shall continue them.

But for Plough-handles, some call them Stilts, and some Hales, and some Staves
I shall confine my self to the name of Handles.

For the Plough-head, some call them the Plough-throck, some the Plough-chip,
etc. I shall retain the term of Plough-head.

And the Shield-board, some call Breast-board, or Earth-board, or Furrow-board,
I shall retain the Shield board.

And for the Coumb, or Whing of the Share, which is that which goes upward
upon the Shield-board, I shall term the Coumb.

And for the Tush or Phin of the Share, which is that that cutteth out the
bottom of the Furrow as the Fish does divide the water, I shall call it the
Phin of the Share, and so I shall avoid multiplication of terms, and a littl
shorten and clear my discourse, and so proceed.

As for the giving an addition of ease unto an ordinary way of plowing, and the
taking away of some of the strength which is so great a burden to the
Husbandmans, is of very vast concernment, and will take up a very large
discourse the effecting whereof I shall endeavor under these following heads.

1 To discover the several abuses or hindrances to the welll-going of the
plough, with some remedies thereto.

2 To give you the descriptions, with the Figures of several sorts of ploghs
now in use.

3 To demonstrate wherein the chief ease of the plough consists, with the
easiest growing plough and the advantage gained thereby.

4 To discover to what sorts of Land and seasons of plowing each plough is most
suitable, with a double plough yet unknown, and a plough that shall both plow
and harrow at once.

The Abuses or hindrances to be removed are many, wherein I shall speak to
particular abuses only.

And first I shall speak to particular abuses only prejudicial Plough irons
made very true.
or he that makes the Irons for the plovgh, I not being of the opinion as many
are, that the Irons should be made to the plough, but that the plough be made
to the irons; I therefore shall be bold to say, that if Plough Irons be not
made exceeding true in all points, according to the Land you have to plow, and
wrought fair and smooth, a plough-wright or plow maker shall not, nor cannot
work true to a false foundation and if it be not wrought true, it shall hardly
go true, unless after much wearing, being wrought into work, it may plow;
reasonable well at last, and by that time the plough may be worn out, but never
with that ease, nor continuance as it would by truth of Workmanship: Another
abuse in him is the not steeling his plough-irons well, and making them
exceeding sharp and well pointed.

The second abuse is in the plough-maker, who works according to certain coarse
Rules he has learned by trade, knows not how to hold a plough himself, nor to
apply himself to the nature of the Land according to the alteration of it, nor
scarce is able to discern the falsity of the Smiths workmanship; and is not
able to apply himself to all sorts of Lands, or those several sorts of Tilths
the Husbandman gives, he shall never make a Plough to go with ease by his
rules, unless he chop upon it by chance.





Now as to the discovering some remedies or cures against these abuses, The
remedies of the ploughs abuses.
and first as to the Smith, his Truth of Workmanship lies chief in these three
materials of the Plough, I the Share, 2 the Coulter, 3 the Shield or
Breast Plate (as some call them) Shivers: All which they being made true, and
according to the natural cast of the surrow, that so the earth stick not upon
the Plough, but the Irons wear bright and clean, it is a good sign of the truth
of Workmanship on his part. I shall only prescribe these particulars for the
advantage of the Share; if it be a Share made with a pan to put upon a wooden
head, then I do advise the pan be made pretty deep, and somewhat deeper than
our ordinary Shares are made, but not too large or wide a pan in breadth, and
the phin made broad, descending or whelmiug to the right hand; it has these
two advantages; first the deeper the pan is, the thicker and stronger may the
head be put on, and the longer it will last.

2 The Tush or Phin of the Share will whelm the more being set down to the work
which is the Level or bottom of the head, or rather a little lower, A
description of the plain share.
which will give great advantage to it of clearing the earth at the throat, or
first entrance upon the nose of the Shield-board with more ease, for if it
stick there, it will be gone all along the Plough at once: A Share made most
hanging from the very nose of the Breast-board, and not flat as most are; the
figure whereof could I describe it like the side of a hill into a level meddow,
would give a perfect demonstration of it, which I shall endeavor as near as I
can; it should be pitched or set upon the Plough-head somewhat hanging also on
the right hand, and the Plough-head pitched hanging also: As for the breadth of
it, I leave that to each man's experience as his land requires; if upon a stony
land, or twichy woody Land, it must be narrower, and the more flinty the
narrower; but if it be upon a gravelly it may increase in breadth, and so it may
upon a clay, and more upon a mixed earth, and more upon a pure earth of sand,
and most of all upon the Lay-turf, however upon all I would have it cut up very
cleanly the full breadth of the Furrow thou carriest with thee, and not rend and
tear it up with the breadth of the Plough, which increases the weight and
strength; and most Ploughs are guilty of this inconvenience, especially where
they go with their narrow long pointed shares.

But now if you demand whether it be best to have the Coumb or Wing fixed to
the Share, or put into the Share with a hole through and Riveted below, or
whether to have none at all, but only a shiver or plate upon the Breast or
Shield-board, placed curiously upon the Share, exceeding tite, and as closely
filled and wrought to the Sharepan as may be.

I answer, first, that could you have the Coumb or Wing so fixed, welded, or
wrought solidly to the Share, with its true whelming, hollow, cross winding,
compass, just answring the cast or turn of the Furrow, which cannot be
described by a Figure: this being wrought fair and smooth, and as broad as
possible you can get it, will be the best. And this is reasonable well done in
many parts of Hartfordshire, in some parts of Northamptonshire, and
Bedfordshire, and in many other parts, only the Wing or Coumb is not broad
enongh; but the best pattern for this is upon the Bastard-Dutch Ploughs, who
work them so broad, as they cover all the nose of the Breast-board, eight or
nine inches broad, and twelve or thirteen inches high, and give the truest
compass of any: I have seen of this fashion in Holland in Lincolnshire, and
many there are of them upon the Marshes and Seacoast of Lincolnshire, Norfolk,
Suffolk, and Essex, where the Dutch plough is much used, but the true Dutch
share is otherwise so costly, and made especially for boggy soft land, very
troublesome and curious to be wrought, and more curious to be kept, and by our
Country men the nicety of it will not be endured, nor indeed will it work in
most part of our Country Lands, and therefore I forbear further incoragement
thereto, than to this small branch thereof. The weelding compass of the Coumb.

But as to the fixing or weelding on the Coumb, I stand indifferent, because I
think there is another way as good and easy, however let the Share without the
Coumb be made as aforesaid, and then with a Shiner or Breast Plate curiously
wrought a little hollowish at the nose, and so continuing along, being placed
so close to the Share, that grass straw, roots, or weeds get not betwixt it and
the Share to choke it in the Breast; for then it is utterly spoiled of its
case: the Shiner will do best to be continued all along the Breast-board one
solid plate compassed and cross winding from the middle; the over end forward
looking one way toward the Land, and the over end backward toward the furrow;
and so must all your shield or breast boards be hewn or sawen, and compassed
with fire, and wrought fair or smooth afterward. This shiner if wrought fair,
as high as the earth works upon the plough, and have his true compass with the
Breast board, may also be of excellent ease to the plough; for after it has
gone, and is scoured bright, the earth will slip off, and pass away with much
ease, and will carry no earth at all, which is to the great ease of the plough;
and both these are better than a Coumb put through the Share-pan, and so come
up along the nose of the Shield-board, and there nailed to strengthen the neck
of the plough, or else put up into the plough-beam to strengthen it either; yet
this I also prefer before those that have neither this, nor the aforesaid
helps. And as for other fashioned Shares, whether made to the single wheeled
plough, or to the double wheeled plough, whether with a pan, or without a pan,
it matters not, so that at the first entrance of the earth it be rightly
compassed, and cast for the cleanly running over the furrow, and the Share
point made very small, sharp and well steeled, be it long or short.

2 As to the Coulter, his truth of Workmanship lies in this, whether it be
Dutch or English Coulter, The Coulter how best made
that it be well steeled and wrought sharp and thin on the edge; the point also
looking forward, if English, and the edge always placed just forward, neither
carving, or turning toward the Land, for that will always be apt to draw the
plough too wide, nor yet into the furrow, for that will be always apt to work it
to go too narrow, but just straight forward by a straight line to the pitch of
the plough; but if a Dutch Coulter, The Dutch Coulter.
then the wheel to be very well steeled, and about ten inches high, and to go
as true as possible; for the false cutting of the wheel will make you work at a
great uncertainty, which Coulter is not useful neither upon stony, gravelly,
flinty, broomy, gossy, or rooty ground, but upon pure turf, or pure mould, on
which it goes very easy.

The midst of the wheel had need be an inch thick because of wearing, and so
wrought thinner and thinner toward the edge round, until it come to be as
thin as a knife if it were possible; but because this Coulter is with many of
high esteem, and of some advantage, and yet not much known, I will give you the
figure of it, as also of the best sort of English, for its compass, and a sharp
thin well tempered edge, that tends most to the ease of our English Coulter,
and it shall be where I give the description of the Ploughs I intend to shadow
forth.

And as the Plough-holder or Ploughman may much prejudice the easy going of
the Plough, so one rightly qualified may in great measure advantage it,
although the Plough be made never so exact and true; and therefore I give these
two or three general Rules to the Plough-holder, which are natural to any
sort of ploughs whatever, although there are some different rules appertenant
to some particular Ploughs, as the double wheeled plough, and the Turnwrest
Kentish ploughs, which would be too tedious to discourse, but these I leave to
the plough-mans practice being easily found out by two or three days
experience.

The first general Rule shall be that the plough-man be able to judge and
determine within himself the truth both of the plough-wright, and the Smiths
workmanship, and in case he find an error therein at first to mend it, which
is far easier done than after the plough or irons be wrought into a greater
error; yea that it is possible it may not be recoverable.

And secondly, having his plough and all his Accutrements completed, then to
the trial of it, The best way for the trial of a new plough.
and therein be sure to make the first trial of your plough upon land
workable, and regular lands, not upon lands above measure hard rooty, rushy,
twichy, or any way unfeacible, because upon such lands a true demonstration of
the goodness and truth of the plough cannot be discovered, nor any Rule can be
observed.

2 Because such lands will more easily and suddenly wrench, writh, or put a new
plough out of its work before it be wrough into its work. A rough new plough
being somewhat like an unbroken horse, which may easily be spoiled in the hand
of a violent mad-cap Rider, but if the horse be kindly used, and taken of his
untamedness by degrees, by ease, kindness and patience, he is made a horse for
ever; so after that in ordinary land, your patient discreet plough-man have
well scoured your plough, brought it to a true furrow both for breadth and
depth, and set your Irons as it will go it self with the very bearing of the
hand to keep it steady, then you may afterward be bold to put it to any
service, or any lands whatsoever the strength of it will abide, and it may be
serviceable for many years.

Thirdly let him be sure having once got his plough into a perfect furrow, his
plough avoiding all the earth as it takes it on at Breast, and carrying a fair
clean furrow along with it, and turning its furrow cleaverly also from it, then
let him not neglect a day, but iron his plough with slips or clouts in all the
wearing places, smooth and even, and strengthen the neck of it with an iron
bolt, Plough well clouted, and irons sharp and smooth kept.
from the bottom of the head through the beam, and there strongly drawn up and
cottered fast, if he have none before, that the Head may not draw the least,
for after a plough is drawn in the Neck or Breast, it is probably wholly
spoiled; and then always be careful in keeping your Irons sharp, and clean
wrought, your Coulter edge thin ground, and Share phin as sharp as may be, and
very small point upon your share, all well steeled and tempered, your plough
shall go with great ease and truth.

But lastly, the plough-man must have a little regard to his Teem or Draught,
and to the well geering or ordering them, if he will take all advantages he may
or ought for ease, and therefore must always make his Horse or Ox as suitable as
may be, not some high and some low, but of an equality as even as may be, much
might be spoken herein by way of reprehension and advice too but I must
forbear, only advise that if your horses be unequal for height, then place
the highest foremost, and so your higher next, and your lowest last; many
reasons may be given therefore; however make your Horses and Oxen as equallas
you can possibly, Size your Horses or Oxen equal.
if they be unsizeable, your highest draw up your lowest, and your lowest draw
down the highest therefore endeavonring all you can that all draw by a straight
line is best, and preserves the full strength of your Teem or Draught for your
plough, which otherwise you lose a very confiderable part thereof, and let your
Gears or Harness be strong and easy.

Secondly be as careful as in sizing them for their height, so also in
matching them for their spirit as near as you can. A horse of a dull sluggish
spirit, and heavy, is fittest for sluggish service such as your heavy loads, or
weighty draughts, fitter for carting than plowing; your quick lively spirited
Horses will be best for your plough, and the dull horses will be best to be
placed together at what service soever, and then they will not deceive their
fellows, which many times is the spoil of many a good horse; your false
deceitful Horse that will draw but at his own pleasure, and fail you and his
fellows at a stand or dead lift, as we say, is exceeding unserviceable, and
must be avoided as much as is possible: Yet if he be quick sprited, and full of
metal, he may do best at plough and harrowing, and being sized with his
fellows is usefullest in that service of any other whatsoever.

Lastly, he must be able to judge of his Land, and the seasons of plowing, and
to sort his several ploughs to each alteration, otherwise he shall not be able
to plow all his Lands, nor indeed any at some seasons; and because of this I
shall say more hereafter, A good character of a good Plough-man.
I shall dismiss my plough-man with this exhortment, be as willing to learn as
thou have need, and abandon those poor silly shifts men make to preserve
themselves ignorant and unserviceable, as they have been plough-men all their
days and are not now to learn, and men may as well be too precise, and better
ploughs cannot be made than their Country affords, and could better have been
devised they would long since: With hundreds more so childish, as are not worth
an Answer, but these exceedingly stifle and choke Invention, and will do my
Readers Imitation of these rude Discoveries.

CHAP. XXIX.
The second General, whereby I shall descend to the description of the
several Ploughes in use, and show you the defects in some, and the Advantages
others have, and what Addition I can give both from my own Observations, or
otherwise, to make up as complete an easy Plough as my Experience will make
out.
I Shall therefore confine my discourse to three or four sorts of ploughs.

First the Wheel-plough, I mean the double wheeled plough.

2. The single wheeled plough, and the foot plough.

3. The simple plain plough, without wheel or foot.

4. The Dutch Bastard, or plain Dutch plough.

Many other sorts there are, as some alter in their heads, some in their Beams,
some in their Stilts, etc. and most in their Shares, and all almost according
to the Country of which they are, of al which it were too endless to discourse
but I only name these, because I conceive all these useful in some sort of
Land or other, and a good husband had need be stored with two or three sorts of
them at all times, especially he that has several sorts of Lands, of all
which I shall say but little, yet a word of each; but I shall reserve the main
of my discourse for those very particular branches of the plough that shall
make out that I shall give ease thereto.

And first, as for the double wheeled plough commonly called the Wheel-ploug,
and is of most constant use in Hartfordshire, and many up-Countries; and is
very useful upon all flinty, stony, or hard gravel, or any other hard Land
whatsoever after it comes to be beyond its natural temper, is an excellent good
form, and a very useful plow, and very necessary that al great Corn-masters
have one of these for strength, that so he may not force his other plows which
are made on purpose for lands in a Tillable condition, and so are made more
light and portable than these will bear to be, but these will go and work well
with a great strength, when other ploughs will not to any purpose; and because
much addition of ease cannot be given to this plough, which I shall not advise
to but in the cases aforesaid, when and where other ploughs cannot work, these
Lands being under an extreme. And as to such extremes, nor none else will any
ordinary Rule hold, that I may not work against the stream, lest I swim alone;
I will only give you a short description with the draught or figure thereof, and
as any addition may be given to the plough in any of its members, it shall not
be restrained from an application to this as well as to any other.

This is usualy drawn with Horses, or Oxen geered double two a breast and
indeed so they draw the strongest but tread the Land the more, but why they may
not be put single in wet seasons, or in dangerous times, I know not.

This Wheel-plough is made of a strong clest Ash-beam, about six foot long,
Plough-beam.
and is contrary to all other beams in the Compass of it the crook or compass
whereof looks upwards, and the Land-handle thereof is placed at the great or
nether end of the beam, as other ploughs are for it is usually made with one
handle, Wheel plows described.
and the plow-staff is instead of the Furrow-handle, and is very long
answerable to the length of the handle, the length whereof I much approve, and
could wish it were observed in every plough whatsoever, it tending much to the
easy and certain holding of the plough.

The Sheath is made of the toughest, youngest Ash, and perfect and dry that can
be got, Plough-sheath
and set with a very good mortess very much forward, joynted exceeding true and
close into the beam, and driven up so exceeding hard, with a bragget behind it
to hold it from declining, that it stands and will to its work in the strongest
land whatsoever.

The Head is pitched as strongly at the nether end of the Sheath and Stilt as
can be, Plough head.
and pinned through both, and the Share is pitched upon the Head at a very deep
pitch and somewhat hanging, that so the plough may go much a shore, because
the holder usually goes two furrows off the plough wider on the near side the
plough: And as it is pitched deep, near a full yard pitch, so it is also very
broad, being near half a yard, and that I conceive arises from the former
Reason, because of the man's going so far wide of his plough. Their Shares are
made exceeding narrow, and very strong, and running out to a very exceeding long
small point, very well steeled, and sometimes they add a Tush or Phin, but they
make it very narrow also, and so it must needs be, the hardness, and stoniness
of the land not admitting of it: And the Coulter stands a little above the
Share-point, and not before it, but rather behind it.

As for the Wheels that bear it, Plough-wheels
being eighteen or twenty inches high, are made of about six spokes of wood or
iron, fastened into a little short Hub or Nath, and a bark hoop or iron binding
round about them: they run upon an iron Spindle about two foot long: which runs
round in a Boulster which the iron spindle bears, and it is three or four
inches thick, and lies betwixt the wheels about fifteen or sixteen inches in
length or more, and at least eighteen or twenty inches in height, standing up
to bear the plough-beam, and upon the same Boulster goes up an Iron pin eight
or nine inches above the Beam, and to gage it for its true depth; to the middle
of which Boulster is fastened a short chain backward with a strong iron Collar
almost like a round Ring which encompasseth the Beam, and is moveable, and to
be put forward or backward, to make the plough go deeper or shallower, as
occasion is, and is held in its place with an Iron Hammer; the helve or shaft
all of solid Iron, and that is to be taken in or out of the beam at pleasure,
to let it down or take it up as cause requires: and when the plough turns out
of work at Lands end, it must have some cord or strong whit-leather thong to
come up from the boulster, to keep the beam from slipping off being empty. And
so you have a short verbal description of the Wheel-plough as it is used in
most parts of England.

This Wheel-plough requires a great strength; and the greater because of the
great length they are made of, which carries such a long and heavy weight of
earth upon it, that it adds exceedinly to the burden of it, which may be
easily removed in some measure, by contracting the plough into a shorter, and
somewhat narrower compass, and taking off as much of the weight and load both
of Wood and Iron, as the strength of the work will bear upon which it is to be
employed; yet it being a very useful plough upon some lands and at some
seasons. The Figure expect with the other ploughs.

There is another double Wheeled-plough, and it is called the Turn wrest
plough, The Turn-wrest plough.
which of all ploughs that ever I saw, surpasses for weight and clumsiness: it
is the most of use in Keut, Picardy and Normandy, and is called the Kentish
plough with us.

The beam may be made of any wood for the bigness of it, but Ash is best: but
the two handles are made of one forked piece of any wood, and the beam tenanted
into the Stlit below the Fork, and so it runs down into the plough-head, and is
there tenanted and pinned into the head; and as for the Sheath, that is a good
strong piece of dry Ash tenanted into the beam, directly down right, but
looking forward at the nether end, and fixed into the Head somewhat as other
ploughs are, but the Sheath far bigger downwards: the plough-head is pitched at
a very great depth, or else at random for depth, being carried with two Wheels
as the former, but nothing like so neat nor easy; and for breadth, it is
pitched just under the Beam upon a straight line, and so it ought to be, as you
shall see anon. As for any Shield or breast-board, it has none at all on
either side the plough, as all other have, but a little piece of wood set along
the Sheath forward, about five inches broad, closing upon the Share just as if
you would cut a Die in the midst from corner to corner, and place the flat side
to the Sheath, and the edge forward, which is their breast-board. The Share is
put upon the plough-head with a pan half round upward, and flat downward, and
is, or ought to be tushed a little on both sides, as our ordinary ploughs are,
and so runs out to a sharp point.

They have one Wrest or two, some one and no more, but sometimes two, which I
should conceive always and at all times best; and this Wrest is to be put upon
pins, one in the Sheath, standing just under the Breast board, and the other
unto a longer pin or round staff fixed into the bottom of the handle, as wide
as the furrow, and this Wrest is no other but as a round stick about two foot
long, or rather a half rovnd one, with two holes in it to put the aforesaid
pins into; and at every Lands end this Wrest must be turned on the other side;
so if they have two must they both be altered also, and one placed two or three
inches higher than the other, and the highest is to be placed broader by an
inch and half, or two inches, and sometimes three inches than the lowermost to
cast the furrow cleanly over.

And for the Coulter, that is also moveable in the Coulter hole, it being made
very wide, at every Lands end, to which purpose they have a strong ground
Oak-plant, about an inch and half over, that is very tough, and with that they
will, having two pins placed upon the top of the Beam, one an equal distance
from another, and both equally distant from the Coulter, wrest or writh the
Coulter from one side to another, and there hold it till they come to the lands
end, and there turn both Wrest and Coulter.

And thus you have a rude description of the Turnwrest or Kentish plough, and
the Figure you should have, would it advantage my Reader half so much as it
would cost the cutting; but they are so common in Kent all the Country over,
and that so near London, that I had rather when thou have a mind invite thee
thither to see the thing it self which will give thee better satisfaction than
all the Figures can dot.

Yet thus much learn from hence, that the Land that lies so upon the side of a
hill, as there is no plowing it upward and downward, may very well be plowed
with this plough, and best of all, and it is especially useful hereto; or it
you have any flat level piece, where you would not have one furrow discovered,
this will do it also; the foremost Horse or Ox always going in the furrow, and
the nearest always upon the Land, and always double; and I am consident it may be
cast into a neater form, and made to very good advantage; the weightiness and
ugliness of it I hate, but the Turnwrest conceit I like, which my occasions
have not permitted me to experiment, of which I shall say no more at present,
but that the Turnwrests to cast the furrow is very good and useful for the two
sorts of ground abovesaid.

I shall now come to the one wheeled Plough, The single wheel plough.
and of that I shall give you also somewhat a large account, because it is an
excellent good one, and you may use it upon almost any sort of Lands, which the
Figure and description of the same, which shallbe drawn into that shape and
form that will admit of more lightness and nimbleness than any of the former.

You may see the use and fashion of it too at Collonell Blunts near Greenwitch
in Kent, a Gentleman of great esteem and honor in his Country, who has made
very many of them.

The main Plough-beam is very short, about five foot long, made of very good
wood, but small and light as may be, to which is another false Beam added below
the Coulter hole, under the other and fixed to it by a staple, drove up into
the true Beam, with a capping upon the false beam end, or some other way, the
form whereof is not much material, which false beam is that by which the
plough is drawn, and gives opportunity by a Standard put into the end of it,
bored full of holes; and passing through the Master-beam, to let the plough up
and down to any gage of depth or shallowness whatsoever, and indeed that beam
is the guide of it.

The Sheath is pitched very forward from the beam into the mold of the Share
whose Share-mold, as I may call it, is made as long as the Head should have
been, and is of the same use as the plough-head is of, and is made of two small
slips, not so heavy as the Head would be, and there being no head at all, the
Land-handle is put into the Share-mould with an iron pin, and so is the
plough-sheath also, and there fixed fast with an iron pin, and the Share
forward made like anotheher Share; and then just before the Breast Plate is a
hole made through the Share, and there is rivetted, or else with an iron hook
put into a long iron slipe, which is made an inch, or inch and half broad, and
so comes up to the beam just before the nose of the Shield board, and so runs
through it, and is cottered upon the top of the Beam lying upon the Shield
board, and the Shield board is compassed a little hollow in the very breast,
and so from before the middle, begins to whelm and wind toward the furrow, and
so winds more and more to the very end, and this Breast-board is placed close
upon the Share, which is made with a long point, and broad or narrow phin, as
the land requires; and sometimes, and any time any ordinary Pan de Share may
be used, and placed upon a Head as other ploughs are; either with a narrow
point for gravel or stoniness, or with a broader Phin, and long sharp point,
for mixed, sandy earthy Land, as well as that fashioned Share, and be of the
same use as I conceive.

The Pitch of these Ploughs are about, or above two foot in depth, and about
eight or nine inches in wideness: This always carefully observe that the
uprighter you pitch your plough to go the narrower, and the more hanging, the
broader. As for the depth, I conceive it is not much material, because it is
born up from the false beam till it come to a true working pitch; and in the
false beam is planted an Iron Axeltree, about one inch or a little more in
bigness, and about one foot long nine or ten inches before the end of the false
beam, and put in square into the beam, that it may stick fast; and at the other
end of the Axeltree runs a wheel upon it, about eighteen or twenty Inches, or
may be a little higher, or lower, as you please, which guides the plough from
that false beam, that it cannot sting or draw into the ground, and so is drawn
at the end of that false beam, either with Horse or Oxen, with Cock or Clevies,
as you have occasion or do desire; but because this plough cannot be fully
discovered by the most familiar discourse, but will require the Figure also I
will here give ye it, as near to the life as possibles.

That which is the Standard, fastened in the lower beam, and runs through the
over, to gage the plough, is made near two foot high, and in the over end is
made two holes to put the Horse-raine throngh, to come from the Horse head to
the very plough handles, to guide him to and fro, and under them diverse
removing holes, and one or two in the beam equal to those in the Standard, and
an Iron pin put through them both. This plough neatly made, and very small has
been drawn with one horse, and held by one man, and plowed one Acre a day at
sowing time in a moist season; and as Collonell Blunt has related to me, he
has with six good horses six men, and six ploughs, plowed six Acres a day at
sowing rhyme, in light well wrought Land.

The Figure expect with his fellows.

CHAP. XXX.
Shall discover some general faults that may be incident to all sorts of
Ploughs, and give you the description of the Dutch and Norfolk Ploughs.
I Shall now proceed in this place, though not so Methodically as I should, to
discover the usual faults of many ploughs of all sorts, and most ploughs in
England are tainted with some of them.

1 When they are made too big both of Wood and Iron, that is bigger than the
work requires, they are the heavier to be drawn, carry the more weight with
them, and require the more strength to draw them. A husbandman must have his
several ploughs if he will carry on his work comfortably.

2 Fault may be in the roughness and ill compassendness of the Share, as
aforesaid; and when a plough is made too thick in the very breast; of this
fault are many ploughs in some parts, and though it help well in the sudden
cast of the furrow, and will carry a great furrow with it, yet it goes very
sore; of this fault are the plough in Holland in Lincolnshire, which otherwise
have a gallant cast of the Shield board as I ever saw, which I have before at
large described.

3 Is the shortness of the handles, by which a man cannot command his plough
with that ease and truth as he might do if his handle had length and compass: A
short upwright handle exceedingly dislike, a man having very little power to
command the same, and when the plough is not truly held it never goes easy.

4 The straitness of the Breast-board neither made nor drawn compass and
croswinding for the cast of the furrow, a very great fault to the Ploughs ease.

5 The placing the Wrest even with the Breast-board, and as long as it, or near
as long, nay I have in some parts seen it longer. It is as great a hindrance to
the easy and true going of the plough as any I know, and yet by very few
discerned or reproved; I say, and had I time I would give reasons enough to
clear it, that a good broad Wrest; and five, six, or seven inches shorter than
the Shield-board, is best, which being at the further end set even, or a little
under the breast-board, and at the nether end where it is pinned, either to
land, handle, or otherwise it be set two inches narrower and under the
Shield-board, is both easy to the holder and to the cattle, and a main
advantage to the turn and strike of the furrow, and especially the plough being
made no broader behind than a just furrow breadth.

6 And lastly the dullness of Irons, and either not clouting at all, or else
uneven rough clouting and plating your ploughs, is a considerable hindrance
both to the ease and lasting of ^ste plough.

And these, or any of them all are generals, and will hold, let them be upon
what plough they will, or upon what Lands they will, or in what seasons soever,
and are greathindrances of the good of plough and Plowing: And therefore what
fashioned ploughs soever you make; take heed of these Rocks, and for what
seasons soever you make them, avoid them all, and then if thou will follow
thine own Country fashion do, and God bless thee with it. I say not that these
are all the faults, for there are many more, particularly treated of also
aforegoing, but these are such as may be prevented in any common sort of
ploughs whatever, and most of them In all sorts, and will put such an advantage
to the ploughs ease, as with observing the foregoing directions also will be
woth thy imitation.

In Norfolk and Suffolk are very good ploughs in many parts of the Country, and
upon the sandy parts two horses and one man will plow at ordinary seasons, and
almost any land of that sandy nature, two Acres of a day, and many times one
man with two horses has plowed three Acres in one day: They seldom go with
above two horses, and may with one horse, and one man; and if they plow any
strong land, that they are forced to put in three or four, they set them
double, and have but one man to plough and drive: Their ploughs are very small
and light, and little compassed, all which are great advantages, but the
greatest is the Land, which is a pure sand for the most part, and very easy
working land; yet though this be the easiest, yet we have in many hundred
places of this Nation very sandy light land, and very earthy moldy land, a
light mixed chissely land, and abundance of Errable Land in very good Tilth,
where men usually go to plow with four horses or four oxen and a horse, and
seldom less, but many times more (which might as well if not better be done with
two) unless at seed time, now and then two oxen and a horse, or three horses
and two men, which is a wonderful charge to the poor Husbandman, the extremity
of which charge were it but removed, would be sufficient of it self to make him
thrive and prosper. I shall conclude this discourse with a relation I had from
a Norfolk Gentlman of very good worth and credit in that Country. Upon the
Marsh-lands bordering upon the Seacoast, a Gentleman set an hundred Acres to a
man to plow, he covenanted with him to find him horse, and ploughs, and irons
and meat for the horses, and he was to find only all man's labor, and he
allowed him eight horses for the work, and for the man's labor that he was
only to find to plow this land: the man covenanted to plow this Marsh-land,
which is a mixed earth, and we have many thousand Acres as easy plowing in
England, almost in all Countris for 5d. an Acre, and performed it; he plowed his
8 acres a day, he found but 3 men to the work, he went to plow with two Teems,
two horses and one man to one plough, and two horses and one man together in
the morning, and one man to shift them at noon, and meat and gear them, and
then he brought in two Teem in the afternoon, two horses in a Teem with the
same men, and so plowed, as aforesaid, his eight acres: I saw the ground thus
plowed, and the poor man got his three shilling and four pence for his men and
himself, that is tenpence a day a man, A president of land plowed for 5 s. an
Acre plough and horses found.
which is good wages in Norfolk. It is a wonder that we should be so slothful,
when some are so ingenious.

As for the Dutch plough I have also considered, which exceedingly differs from
our several fashioned Ploughs, therefore I shall not give you the large
description thereof, because as it is the pure Dutch plough, it is only
applyable to Fen and Marsh-land, where there is neither stone, nor root nor
hard place, and the chiefest advantage it has to east and expedition is in the
breadth and sharpness of the share which is made about a foot and a half broad,
some more; and sharp in the point; and as thin in the phin as a knife, and
wrought most curious: a good share being worth above twenty shillings, which
casts up a very grear broad Furrow, very clean, and easy as is possible, out
of which I have contracted as much therefrom, in the description of my Share
as I can possibly allow to our uncertain changeable Land, to advance the ease
which many times alters the temper and strength twice or thrice in one land.

And then for the Coulter, The dutch coulter is appliable to any pure clean
land.
that is also especially applyable to the aforesaid Land, but may be used upon
any fair, pure, lay, turf, being old pasture. And thus I have given you the
description and leave it to thy imitation; a good one will cost a mark or
fifteen shillings; only say you can hardly have a Smith in the country to work
well upon it, and far worse upon the share; but as to the bastard Dutch, which
is somewhat nearer appliable to our Lands, I have taken from it as much as it
will afford me both in the cast of the Shield-board, which is very good, as
also in all the other parts of it, and do apply it to the plough hereafter
described; and shall ingeniously acknowledge I have some branch from every of
these roots, and from the Norfolk plough, and one wheeled plough also, from all
which I find, that the shorter and lesser any plough is made, The only
advantages for making the easiest going plough.
having its true pitch, with its true cast on the Shield-board, and short
Wrest, and sharp irons, the far easier. Of all which having so seriously
considered, made and tried them almost every one upon several sorts of Land,
and experimented them to the full with my own hands to my great expense, shall
descend unto my third General head for easing the plough.

CHAP. XXXI.
Thereby to demonstrate wherein the chief ease of the Plough consists, with the
easiest going Plough, and the advantages gained thereby.
I Shall not with the least disparagement to any of them (giving them their due
praise and honor) draw forth a description of the most easie-going Plough I
can, and contract it to the least charge is possible; having all these helps
and lights; and to add nothing thereto were a shame to an ingenious man.

I will therefore take a short beam, deeper one way than another, The
description of the plain plough.
of a tough and dry young Ash, betwixt five foot, and six foot long, rising in
the Coulter-hole, and strong there, but thence declining both ways for
strength, and so growing smaller, wrought round and smooth, my Sheath most
exactly fitted into the beam, and pitched pretty forward, and driven up so
close with a little lace or bragget put behind the Sheath into the beam and
Sheath, just butting at both ends when the Sheath is driven up, which shall
stand as a Buttress to support it, and may be as serviceable as an Iron dog as
many use; my nearer Handle put upon a Tennant through the same, and drawn close
with two or three wooden pins, and then both sheath and handle tennanted
exceeding close into the head, being about two foot long, not standing upright
nor level, but beam-handle and sheath hanging from a perpendicular point one
fifth or sixth part to the Land on the nearer hand; my Furrow-handle with two
good round staves planted on my Land-handle, as wide in the ends as a man can
hold them, being very long and well compassed and fairly wrought; my share
formerly described pitched true upon my head, and drawn up with an iron bolt
through head and pan into my beam, and cottered up, my share standing rather
more hanging than the head does, so close and true, as that water cannot pierce
betwixt them either with a Coumb weelded on, rightly compassed, laid into my
sheild-board, placed as high as the earth works up, and as smooth as may be, to
the end my breast not being too thick at the nose, nor widening too suddenly,
and as soon as the earth comes to the middle my Shield-board to widen, whelm,
or compass, as if it would lie upon the furrow, and so to widen and whelm more
and more unto the very end; or else a shiner planted upon my share, most close
wrought, compassed and nailed to the sheild-board in the form before prescribed.

My Wrest a large hand breadth, The benefit of a broad and short Wrest.
planted under my sheild-board bottom, and narrower than it, and rather yet
narrower to the sheild-board end, so that it retain the just and full breadth
of my furrow and no broader, it both goes easier, and helps the cast of the
furrow: I desire it be well plated too, but shorter by five or six inches than
my sheild-board, and by two inches than my Plough-head; my whole Plough boarded
up so close as no earth may get into it, and plated very well and smooth in
every wearing place whatsoevor: As for the pitch both in breadth and depth,
that must be resolved both from the height you make your Plough, if high in the
chest, your pitch must be the deeper about eleven or twelve inches, or about
ten or eleven and a half; if to go single you must pitch it broader, if to go
double narrower: Every common Plough-wright can help you here, and also
understand what is here dirrcted; my irons kept both hard and sharp in points
and Phin, and this plough being once well scoured and clean, if it go not with
as much ease as nature does admit, or Art has hitherto discovered, I will
acknowledgemy mistake; but what strength may draw it I shall not determine, I
have told you what has and does draw the other ploughs before described, and
could you show me all the Lands, and all the temperatures at all seasons of
those Lands, I could easily demonstrate that, but to me it is s^fficient if
that I have both rationally and experimently discovered to thee the best plough
and easiest that I know or have read of in the world, as I have cordially don,
and given thee the product of my experience, and from each removed the
inconvenience, and drawn out the quintessence as I am able. If this plough be
preserved from any earth cleaving at all to it, be as little in compass as
any, have the advantages of sharp irons, and perfect true Workmanship, as that
it need no Wheel which is a weight, and requires strength, and is of no use but
to guide the Pitch, and this Pitch be made so true of it self as it will go
without it, and the Wrest cut shorter which gives much ease, and makes the
plough go more certain, and the furrow turn better, and all these are as an
addition to it; I conceive and know less strength will draw it; to which if you
please you may add the Dutch Coulter, it going somewhat easier, and is best for
the pure turf without stones, but the other being kept as sharp is more
certain, and not subject to be cast out of the ground, and will do exceeding
well in wrought tillable land, if you keep it a little before the share, that
it may cut first, and one thought wider also but never within the share: It Is
true in irreguler extreme land either for stones, roots, or hardness, I am at a
loss, and for that end advise to the double-wheeled plough, which though it
will be no otherwise advantaged to ease than as it is well and completely made,
yet it is for strength and to supply extremities and cases of necessity without
rule.

But thus much I will say, that take or make me such a plough, aforesaid
described, upon any of the aforsaid lands, where the easiest and best ploughs
are used (which I could wish had bin before now discovered which would have
saved me this labor (and make trial of it, and as the land is lighter and
easier so make the plough lighter and lesser, and if it go not easier by a
considerable part, my judgment fails me; What ease and advantage this plough
and the directions will afford.
I am sure these particulars considered, and solidly put in practice throughout
this Nation, may very well save one third part of the charge and toil of Horse
and man; nay in some parts I am confident near one half, and if to the best
plough it will give but the least addition, it is satisfaction enough to me;
but I very well know, it will save one horse in four, and I believe one in
three, as most Countries use, and one man in two. All that I have said is but
to the pitch, and making the body of the plough. I say again, if any contend
for wheel or foot, he need but give his plough a little deeper pitch, and he
may add either thereunto, as well as to any other, and please himself. The
description of it shall follow in the end of the 33 Chapter.

And if you object, what shall guide the plough for depth, and keep it from
stinging in clay ground, and how may you let it up and down as the nature of
your land requires.

To which I answer, that having both in your plough, and plough-irons brought
your plough to a true and perfect pitch, it will require but little help herein,
yet hereby you may much answer your desire in two particulars.

1 In your hindmost gears you may at your chain that is put upon your
plough-cock, or clevies, which ought to be made short linked on purpose to take
up or let down as you see occasion.

2 Your hindmost, or Fil-horse at the back-band, which may be to take up or let
down, you may ease your self at plearsue; and so I descend to the last General
head.

CHAP. XXXII.
Contains the Applicatory part of Ploughs use, wherein I shall endeavor to
hold forth to what sort of Land, and to what seasons or Tilths of Land each
Plough is or may be most serviceable.
IN the description whereof I shall in general say, that when lands come to
that extremity of hardness as the plough is forced beyond its gage or pitch of
Truth, and that nothing but force will overcome it, then we must be content to
lay by our hopes of ease and all our ploughs whatsoever that were made upon
that account; for it is concluded that all good Husbands will take their
seasons, which seasons are chiefly for all their Summers crops, in Winter when
the Land is moist and workable, The season of plowing for summer corn
from November until March, and for all Winter crops the foundation of that
work is to be laid in Winter, as in the end of December and January to fallow
as we call it, The season for plowing for winter corn.
al our strong coarse lay Turf, when we may work it well and clear it up to the
bottom, which being once well ploughed in a right season, it will work
reasonable well in the hardest season the next plowing, and so very well the
next, and so throughout, when it is completely plowed at the first; which first
opportunity if it be overpassed by too much business or sloth or otherwise
makes all the rest of our Tilths uncomfortable; every common Husbandman knows
these things.

And for this Tilth, or season of plowing, and these sorts of Lands especially
being very rough, hilly or banky, your Wheeled-ploughs will not work, but will
be cast out by every hill: for this use I shall advise you to the plain plough
made a little stronger than ordinary, with a true pitch both for breadth and
depth, and because both wheel and foot too will cast it out at every hill, and
some men cannot hold a plough without either; and possibly thy land may be
uncertain Land, that is, some clay, and some sand, and some mould, A foot
described as will go in hilla^ground*
each of which will alter the going of the plough, therefore in this case let
an iron foot be made, with a sharp edge like a Coulter forward to the bottom of
the shank, and the foot made flattish, and very thin at both edges, and a
little stronger in the middle, rising like a Place fish, and no thicker, and
that will cut your hills before your Coulter, and keep it out of the ground too
from stinging or drawing into the clayes; but yet a good Plough-holder with a
good Plough, will cast this away also in the roughest lands, and merely with
this hinder chain, and backband of his hindmost horse take it up at pleasure,
and even play with it too in the strongest workable work, when another shall
moyl himself like a Beast, as we say.

But to hasten, when by a drought you are out of work, then I say as before,
that with strength your wheeled-plough will do exceeding well, and none like
it, your double wheeled one I mean, and your single wheeled ploughs too being
exceeding strongly made, will tear up any reasonable ground, but in regard the
wheel goes but upon an Axeltree, and that is fixed but in one end, in the false
beam end also, it cannot be so strong as the other by far, therefore I advise
every good Husband to one of these, the body of whose plough may be made to the
same advantages heretofore prescribed.

As for the casting down a land, A plow to cast down land.
or plowing any flat land, almost any plough will do well, and so your
broad-breasted ploughs will turn over a great furrow, though your Shield-board
have little compass; but as to the setting up a Land, or ridging it, as most
call it. I would have a narrow brested plough, A plow to set up land.
with an exceeding whelming compassed Shield-board, increasing both in the
breast by small degrees, and in the compass of the Shield-board with a very
broad and short Wrest, which adds one or two degrees of cast or compass to the
Shield board; for in this work you will most apparently see the ease and
advantage thereof

The Coulter having first done his office by going before, The particular use
of many of the members of the well regulated plough.
and dividing out the furrow.

The Share his, in cutting it up clear, and raising it from the solid Land.

The breast of the Shield-board takes it and gives it a cast and turn, that it
is ready to fall.

The Wrest keeps its furrows breadth (for the horses easy going) and not
suffer the furrow to drop short of its true place, but least it should stand an
edge.

The Heel, or hinder end of the Shield-board comes, being longer than the
Wrest, and standing as it were overlooking to see what it will leave, and like
a Ladies trial, gives the Furrow a sweep, or a good check, and bids it lie
there in its proper place and not stand upon the edge.

And thus each member having done his office, one taking it from another
regularly must needs admit of the greatest ease. A Saddle-tree is made of many
pieces, and some compass one way and some another but all to the true compass
and easiness of the horseback, so a plough it might be made of fewer parts and
lesser compass, but that sewer will not give the true compass or cast of it,
and deliver his furrow upon the best advantage.

As for your ordinary seasons of plowing your Land being in good Tillage, How
to plow as it may yield most mould.
any well ordered, and truly compassed plough will do, you may help your self
sufficiently in the making of your irons, if you would have the edge of your
lying furrow lie up higher, which will yield most mould, then set your
Share-phin the shallower, and set your plough the broader, and hold it the more
ashore, the Plough-man going upon the Land, and it will lay it with a sharp
edge, which is a gallant posture for almost any Land, especially for the lay
Turf beyond compare.

But if you would have you land lie most even and flat, How to plow as your lay
your land most level.
then set the Phin of your Share deeper, or holding, as some call it, and set
your plough the narrower, and the holder always always going in the furrow, and
the Shield-board end will so humble it, as you may lay it upon a level; this
is best for land of which you will make a fallow, or cut and burn the Turf, or
for land you intend to lay flat to grase. If the furrow should be all at once
turned at the very breast, then it would go just as if you would put a Mold to
root with her breech forward; which plough I have seen, but how the furrow
would lie I know not, nor well what strength to draw it; but then there need
neither be use of the hinder part of the Shield-board, nor Wrest neither; or if
you would have it cast all in the Shield-board as some do that make no Wrest at
all, then it will either not clear up the furrow well, set the furrow upon an
edge, or else the hinder end of the shield board, must whelm beyond all
president or rule; or if you would have it made so thin in the breast as to cut
through like a knife, and turn nothing till it come to the midst of the
Shield-board and end of the Wrest and Shield-board, then there it gives too
sudden a check too, and causes the earth to choke and mouther upon the Breast
board, that it will not slip away with ease; so that as I said before a medium
in all, each member doing its particular office, preserves the health and
comfort of the body.

These things (and many more which might be ncessary, I will forbear to speak
to) are accounted niceties among many, the knowledge whereof has cost me much,
and therefore am able to affirm that the very mystery of Ploughmanship lies
upon the knowledge and practice of them, and so I proceed to the double plough,
and the description thereof.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Holds forth a description of a double Plough carrying two Fuorows at once, and
both proportionable to a Furrow one ordinary plough shall carry: With a plow
that shall both plough and Harraw both at the same time; and how to make a
plough last a dozen years.
THe double plough shall be as plain as may be, it shall consist of one long
Beam of an ordinary length, and another short one, little above half the length
of the other. The first plough may be made up complete in all the members
thereof according to the last preceding description of the plain plough except
the handles which may be very short, only so long as may receive the Beam with
the Land-handle, and place the Shield-board on the furrow side, which may be
done without any but a round staff from the Beam to the Shield-board; which
handles excepted, it is one complete plough in all particulars. The hinder end
of the Beam is to be left a little stronger, because of fastening the other
beam firmly thereunto; and then I proceed to the making of the hindermost
Plough, which must be made in all the members and branches like the other,
except the beam cut off about three inches before the Coulter-hole, and the
handles of this at length and strength as an ordinary strong plough is made,
just according to the pattern of the plain plough.

Which being done, and the handles upon the last plough, you must set to the
placing of it in his place which I discover thus, the first plough standing in
its working posture, the other plough with is the handles to it to be affixed
on the nearer side, or left hand, one furrow breadth wider than the other, just
in the very same posture both for depth and breadth as the other does, and so
held off: from the first ploughs beam by alining, or filling of wood just that
substance as may continue it firm and fast to a just furrow, and there drawn
close and firm to that Master-beam with two small iron boults, How to set the
double plough together.
and a broad float or two of wood, all which may be so keyed and cramped up,
that it may be as one solid beam, and so move as the first moves, either for
height or depth, which it must needs do, and this I conceive may be best used
with a plough-foot to guide the depth of it, unless you place a wheel to that
foremost beam, but not in a false beam, because I have not experience of
applying this doubleness to those deep pitched ploughs, but in the end of that
beam you may have as good a mortess as your beam will bear, which is the
mortess for the foot, and therein you may place a square good strong piece of
tough Ash, or rather of iron, into which you may have your iron Axeltree with
its square end sitted into three or four several holes of it, by which means
you may set your plough at a working gage, and there continue it, and alter it
as you see cause; which plough thus marshalled, you may well plow upon ordinary
errable land that is in good tillage a double proportion, and also upon fair
clean lay Turf, and this you may manage with two men and four good horses, but
not either upon stony land, or rough land, the description and discourse whereof
I give not in as of any great advantage above the other plain plough, but for
variety sake, and to provok others to the amendment and perfecting of this
discovery; yet I for present see not, but it may be of excellent use and
expedition upon many lands in England; and to say much more is needless, in
regard of what has been before spoken and experience of a good ploughman will
order it at pleasure.

And so I shall only discover one other plough that will both plow and harrow
of it self at one and the same time, The plough wi^h a harrow affixed.
and it is used in several places in Norfolk, yet casting about with my self
the advantages and disadvantages also, and finding not how it will so well suit
with our common ways of Husbandry as to be a general advantage, I shall say
the less, only tell you the manner of it, It is a common light Plough as all
theirs are, and as little and light a Harrow, which may contain three little
Bulls, and about five Tines in a bull, which is made light also, and fixed to
the plough at the one end of the beam, so that as the plough turns this turns
also, and as the plough turns one furrow, the harrow harrows it over, reaching
two more furrows, and so by the overreaching it strikes two or three times in
one place, which is sufficient for the covering any corn whatsoever shall be
sown upon Norfolk lands; but finding these two prejudices against it, viz,
either this land must be sowed as the land is plowed, and so it will take up a
man's time sowing an Acre, when otherwise a man will sow nine or ten Acres in
one day, or else it must be sowed before plowing, and then it must be plowed
in, and harrowed upon the top of it, which falls not under my experience,
having known much land ^all far the heavier and more subject to bind and bury,
than if only lightly covered with the plough, and laid more open; and now thou
^ast the story, that such a thing is; and may be done, may thy own experience
be the determiner of the matter, but after the writing hereof having
communicated thus much to a Gentleman of art and worth, do find that another
addition may be made thereto, which is how to drop the corn, corn by corn
proportionably to that quantity I desire to sow upon an Acre, Plough harrow,
seedsman, and all in one plough^o work all at one time.
which if by his assistance I can experimentally make out, I fear not to give
you plough, and harrow, and seedsman all at once, and all to work with two
horses and one man upon some lands, and with three horses upon all of this
nature, and al to be done almost within the same compass of time that you are
upon the plowing of it, it shall not require one hour in the day more; which if I
shall accomplish, you shall save near three parts of your seed also, and a
considerable piece of labor too and not fail to have a better crop through the
blessing of him that waters all, than ordinary wise. All which I hope to have
brought into substantial experience upon my own lands by the next edition, and
then expect the faithful communication thereof. One word more which would have
come in more seasonable about the description of the plain plough, and that is
how to make a plough that may last many years ten or twelve, or fifteen years,
yea I heard a workman affirm he would make one should last twenty years: As for
the manner of the plow it is sufficiently spoken to already, all lies in two
things: one thing is the wood it is to be made of, and the other is the
workmanship of it.

The wood, especial of the Sheath and plough-head, which is the material
fundamental piece in the Plough, The lasting plough that may endure many
years,
must be made of heart of Oak, which to me at first seemed strange, but upon a
full debate of the matter I find that if it be young tough Oak, and wrought so
exact true in the joints as may be, and kept so close boarded up as that water
cannot get into any of them, and laid always dry, and so kept, but while in
working, and every part of it well clouted and plated with iron, and drawn
close in the throat from a hole in the Share, through the Head and part of the
Breast-board with a through iron pin which is to be wrought somewhat bigger
under the head, that so it may somewhat strain the share to a more perfect
closure, and stronger sticking to the head and well cottered up through the
beam, being bored with a long shanked Auger through al: And all the rest of the
wood to be young white tough Ash, and wrought complete and true in every joint,
and laid up when out of use, both out of wind and weather, and out of question
a good plough may well serve a man's uncertain life: and so having as I hope, in
some good measure supplied that deficiency in Husbandry Mr. Hartlips Legacy
charge us withal in the fifth page of his Book, and so proceed to the next
piece of Improvement.

The Third Piece of Improvement treats of Welde, Woade, and Madder, three rich
commodities for the Dyars.
CHAP. XXXIIII
Only holds forth Welde, or Would, as some call it, or more properly
Dyars-weed.
IT being a rich Dyars commodity, Welde described.
bears a long, narrow, greenish, yellow leaf, and brings forth a yellow
flower, which runs to a small seed far smaller than a Mustard seed, very thick
set with seed; Pliny calls it Luted, but Virgyll calls it Lutum, and in our
English Welde or Dyars-Weed. It flourishes in June and July; it in many places
growth of it self, in, and about villages and towns, and is of a very great
use, and considering the easy charge of the raising of it, and the badness of
the land upon which it will grow is of incomparable advantage.

For first it will grow of very indifferent land, not worth above ten groats or
half a Crown per Acre; yea as some affirm, the veryest hilly, barren, chalky,
light land, not worth twelve pence per Acre will carry it, and bear it to very
good purpose, but unto so barren lands I shall not give encouragement, unless
where there is little or none better; but as any indifferent land, so it be of
a very dry, warm nature, it will do very well.

And secondly, The manner of sowing it at no cost.
it will cost but a little the managing, it requires no tillage at all, no
harrowing, it being to be sowed when and where you sow your Barley or o^ts
upon that Husbandry without any other addition, unless you draw a bush over it,
or a role, either of which is sufficient to cover it after you have sowed it,
the difficultest piece in the managing hereof is the very sowing of it, that
is, that it may be sowed even; for the seed being so very small, will require
both skill and an even hand to scatter it; some sow it by taking it with one
finger and the thumb, others with the two fore-fingers and the thumb, but
neither of these do I affect the best way, because they cannot spread it so
well as they may with their whole hand, I therefore prescribe a mixture with
Ashes, Lime, fine earth or some such thing as will best suit with the weight of
the seed; for could you find out that, that agreed both in weight and bigness,
then out of all question none to that to sow it withal.

A gallon of this seed will sow an Acre, How much sows au acre
which had need to every quart of seed have two gallous of some of the
aforesaid, and it must be often stirred together lest that the seed sink to the
bottom, and sow that part thicker than the other, and then cast it out at arms
end at as good and even compass as you can possibly.

This seed thus sowed may grow up among the Corn, and yet be no prejudice,
because it grows not fast the first Summer; but after the Corn is cut it must
be preserved.

And the next Summer you shall receive through Gods blessing a comfortable
crop; you must be exceedingly curious of the ripening of it, if yon let it grow
too long, your seed will fall out, if not long enough, your seed will not be
perfect, nor your stalk neither; and therefore observe both the turning of the
seed, When ripe.
and the ripenining of the stalk; for I cannot tell you which of either will
admit of a dispensation, and as soon as ever you perceive it near up to perfect
ripeness, you must down with it, that is, pull it as you do Flax up by the
roots, and bind it in little hand^uls, and set it up to dry in little stilches
or stitches, until both seed and stalk be both dry, and then carried away
carefully as that the seed be not lost, and laid up dry, and so keep as you see
cause for a good market; for it is to be sold for the Dyars use, who sometimes
will give a very good price, How to use it
but at all times sufficient profit, and go far to buy it, from forty shillings
an Acre, to ten or twelve pound an Acre, some say more. And you may barn it up,
and keep it and the seed together until March and then you may get out this
seed by lashing or whipping of it forth upon a board or door, which reserve for
seed; the seed is of good value, sometimes worth twenty shillings a bushel,
and sometime ten shillings a bashell, and sometimes more or less as markets
rise and fall.

It colors the bright yellow and the Lemon color; The stalk and root are
both useful, and must go together to the Dyar.

And if this Weed prosper well, as questionless it will after you be got into
good seed, What Improvement welde yeilde^h
this will make good my promise, if it prove worth but forty shillings per
Acre, the land being not worth above five shillings or six shillings and eight
pence as either of these will do exceeding well, the charges of sowing, and all
things till you come to pulling it, is not above one shilling per Acre; the
pulling, whipping and barning may come to four shillings more; the seed may be
worth half a crown, so that all charges and rent of the land may amount unto
less, but I will say fifteen shillings, then the Improvement will be fourfold
if worth four pound ten shillings an Acre, fixsold, if worth six pound per
acre, eight fold, and much more as some affirm to sixteenfold Improvement.

This Land though it lie far from Towns, Cities, yea in your remotest Countries
may be brought to this height of Improvement, and it begins much to spread and
thrives very well in Kent in many parts of it; the best place for to get the
seed is in Kent clean down to Canterbury and Wy, where you may see both the
land, the growth and discover the mystery thereof. It is sold by weight so much
a hundred, and so much a tun weight. It is my desire to make public whatever
comes under my experience, yet this has been used this many years by many
private Gentlemen in diverse parts but not discovered for public practice, but
no marvel, for that great business of planting Hops, that is one of the famous
pieces of our Nation, has not any thing been wrote near this fourscore years
that I can read of, and indeed then was wrote a large discourse thereof but I
remember not his name, or else I should have here raised up his memorial,
having done exceeding well thereon, but that all this time of so large
experience, none should get upon his shoulders, and a little add to his
beginnings, is the unthankfulness and shame of your great Hop-masters. I fear
men's spirits are strangely private that have made excellent experiments, and
yet will not communicate; surely methinks plenty and public fullness should
not be so much feared as rejoiced in. And so I hope in this I have in some
measure supplied my promise.

CHAP. XXXV.
Treats of Woad, the Land best for it, the usage of it, and advantages thereby
WOad it is also a great commodi^y, it lays the foundation for the solidity of
very many colors more: A Woaded color is free from stayning, and excellent
for holding its color; almost any sad holding colur must be Waoded. It has
been one of the greatest Inrichments to the masters thereof, until the midst
of our late Wars, of any fruit the land did bear. It is called Glastum or
Garden-woad, by the Italians called Gu^do, in Spanish and in French Pastell, in
Dutch Were, and in English Woad or Wade. It has flat long leaves like Behen
rubrum, the stalk is small and tender, the leaves are of a bluish green
color. The seed is likest to an Ash-key or seed, but not so long, like little
blackish tongues. The root is white and simple. It is a very choice seed to
grow and thrive well; it bears a yellow flower, and requires very rich land,
and very sound and warm, so that very warm earth, either a little gravellish or
sandish will do exceeding well, but the purer warmer solid earth is best: Land
exceeding rich, and though it should be mixed with a little clay will do well,
The best Land for Woad.
but it must be very warm. There is not much land fit for this design in many
Countries, especially your hardest Wood-land parts you have in many of your
great, deep, rich pastures, many hills and hill sides good Woad-ground, when the
bottom ground will doeno service but your chifest is your home-corse, or lesser
ground lying near and bordering about the towns.

Your best and naturallest parts of England for Woad, are some part of
Worcestershire, Pest known parts for Woad.
and Warwickshire Southward, Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, Northamptonshire,
Leicestershire, some part of Rutland, Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire, and
some other places here and there, all these parts have some admirable Woad-land
in them.

But when it is a quick commodity, as now it is dull, they will find as much
more land as now they will, and then more indifferent, dry, sound, warm land
will serve, but very dry and sound it must be, and worth about twenty shillings
an Acre to grase at least, or else it will not be worth the Woading.

And to plow to sow Woad it may be worth as much more as to grase, What price
men will give for good Woad-land.
yea somewhat more if it be extraordinary rich soil, and trading good, but now
as the seasons are, and trading stands, they will now make great orts of land,
and not bid any money for that which in good trading times they would have gone
fifty miles to have took at great rates.

And whereas some write that it undoeth the land, I answer as I judge in my own
breast, that in regard it is so often cut and grows so thick, and is so often
weeding, that it must needs do so, as I believe al Corn does draw forth some of
the spirit thereof, but no more than other Grain would if it could be so often cut
up to grow again.

But it is the confidence of many Woad-men that will maintain against any man
that it betters the land and mends it, but to that I cannot accord neither, but
thus much I do say, it prepares the Land exceedingly for corn, Woad prepares
exceeding well for Corn,
and does a bate of the strength and superrichness, or rankness thereof, which
corn would not well endure, for I maintain still that the richest Land is not
best to corn, for though the one may ouer-burthen and be so rank, The best Corn.
yet the other may bear as much to the strike, and for goodness your middle
Land bears the bell away for corn in my opinion.

Very much may be spoke to this particular, but I must shorten and will as much
as may be, and acquaint you with the use thereof. And herein I must do these
three or four things.

1. Show you how the Land must be prepared and sowed.

2. Show you how it must be ordered, when the leaf must be cut, and how ordered
after cutting.

3. And lastly, how it must be tempered and seasoned to make the best Woad for
use and profit; but before I proceed I must inform my Reader that this
commodity can not be played withal, as you may do with Liquorish, and
Saffron, etc. to make experiments of a little parcel, but a man must of
necessity set forth, and forward so much stock and Land, and seed, as may keep
one Mill or two at work to make it into perfect Woad; It is the doing of a
great quantity, and carrying on a great stock that makes this work, and will
carry it on to profit and credit: Some have as much underhand, and will work
six or eight Mills. The charge of it is exceeding great in the mannagement of
it, and as well it pays for all charges as any commodity I know of, that is
of old experience.

The ground must be old Land as aforesaid, How ploughed.
and a tender Turf and must be exceeding choicely plowed, if very hilly they
must be cast, and well cast, that that you cast forth lie not high to raise the
furrow, they usually plow outward or cast all their Lands at the first Plowing,
and having broke the ground with a Harrow, then they sow it, and sow about four
bushels or strikes of an acre, How much sows an Acre.
which done, then cover it, and harrow it very well and fine, and pick of all the Clots, Turvees and stones, and lay in the hollow places of the ridge on
heaps as is the usual custom, but now I should rather (if there be no other
reason than I conceive (choose to take a little Cart with one horse, and as the
boys or children pick them up, cast them into the Cart, and carry, them into
some flank or hollow place and lay them down to rot, or else mend some barren
place, because they lose a good considerable part of Land and so of Oad too,
which otherwise might be as good as the rest, and is now worth nothing; the
Land that is lost is very considerable in regard it is so goood of it self, and
the stock so good and rich that is sowed upon it, that all even ground had need
be regained that possibly may be. And so I descend to the second particular.

2. Which is to show how it is to be husbandried, and when the leaf must be
cut, and how used, and how often, etc.

After the Land is sowed and it begins to come up, as soon as any weed appears
it must be weedded, yea may be twice weeded or more if it require before it be
ready to cut, but if it be special good, and come thick and cover the ground
well, What is costs an Acre weeding.
it will ask the less weeding; to them that are exercised in this service, and
have their work and work folks at command, they will have it weeded for eight
pence an acre, and sometime less: as soon as the leaf is come to its full
growth, which will be sometime sooner, sometime later, as the year is dryer or
moister, more fruitful or less, which when you perceive at the full ripeness
set to cutting of it.

As soon as ever it is cut, you Mills being prepared, and great broad fleakes
so many as may receive one Crop prepared, and planted upon galleries or stories
made with poles, Fir, alder, or other wood whatsoever; your Mill is usually
known, a large Wheel both in height, and breadth, and weigh does the best, it is
a double wheel, and the Tooth or ribs that cut the Woad, are placed from one
side of the Wheel to the other very thick, wrought sharp and keen at the Edge,
and as soon as the Woad is cut and comes out of the field, it is to be put into
the Mill, and ground one kilnfull after another as fast as may be; the joyce of
the leaf must be preserved in it and not lost by any means, The joyce of the
Woad must by carefully preserved.
and when it is ground it is to be made in balls round, about the bigness of a
ball without any composition at all, and then presently laid one by one upon
the fleakes to dry, and as soon as dried, which will be sooner or later as the
season is, they are to be taken down, and laid together, and more put in their
places; but because all Circumstances will be too tedious to discourse, and the
work is a common work and very many well versed therein, I will rather advise my
Reader to get a workman from the Woad-works which can carry it on artificially,
then venture the experimenting of so great a work upon words and rules, and
therefore I shall be very brief, Five or six Crops in one year of Woad.
and let you know that good Woad may yield in a very good year five or possibly
six crops, yea ordinarily four and yet sometimes but three, but the Winter crop
is of good worth, excellent for sheep, conceived good against the rot, or will
recover a rotten sheep, and also it will maintain them well, and though at
first they will not much affect it yet with a little patience in holding them
thereto, they will take to it most perfectly and that with love, Season for
sowing VVoad.
and it will continue them in good heart, and strength, till sowing time again.
The time of sowing is in the middle and end of March.

And thus when you have cut all your crops one after another till the Autum or
declining season will not ripen it again, and your mill is at leisure, then you
must proceed to the third particular.

Which is to the ordering and seasoning of it, and working it up to use, which
must be done the manner following, you must set your mils to work again, to
grind it all over again, and then season it up, and so you may make it stronger
and weaker as you see occasion.

There is so much difference betwixt Woad and Woad, that the Buyers though so
experimental will hardly buy you any parcel until they have experimented it
in Coloring; And therefore for me to prescribe a Rule upon such uncertainties
I hold it not safe: The Woad-man will make you up three or four sorts of Woad,
according as he intends to friend a Customer.

A word or two more, as to the seasoning of Woad, and but very few, because the
very first years trial will put you into sufficient experience. As the Woad
yields many Crops, so each Crop is worse than other, the first Crop is best,
and the second next, and the third much worse, and the fourth far worse than
that, and the fifth worst of all; if you get a fifth but that is not usual,
four Crops is sufficient, and sometime you must be content with three, and as
the first Crop is usually (in a good kind year) ripe by the amidst of June, so
will the second be usually ripe within one month after that, and so every month
or thereabouts each Crop will be ready, and if the latter end of the year prove
kind, then you may expect a Crop the more.

Now to know when the Woad is ripe, When Woad is ripe.
and to take it in the very season, is a fundamental piece, which is when the
leaf is come to a full growth, and retains it perfect color and lively
greenness, then with all your might set so many hands to cutting of it, as that
it begin not to fade or wax pale or wan before you have cut your crop, for then
it begins to be over-ripe, and the sap and marrow of it drinks in again and
will not yield store of juice, which is the spirit of it and best of Woad.

The Woad-man seasons the two first Crops together, and some season the third
by it self, and the fourth by it self, and some put the three first Crops
together, which makes the worser Woad, but the very virgin Woad is the first
and second, and the better they desire to make it, the more entire they
compound it, not confounding it with diverse sorts.

The manner of seasoning is thus, The best Woad for use.
after every crop is cut, and grinded, balled and dried, as dry as can
possibly, and laid up in the ball every crop by it self, then you must take the
first and second Crops and grind them all over again together, or apart if you
please, but they must be then wrought to dust as it were in the mill, and
ground very well the first and second Crop, or so much as you will make of your
best sort of Woad, and so laid upon a floor in a heat or couch, and then you
must mix it with water, and turn it over, The way of seasonidg Woad.
and so mix it again, and turn it over, and give it so much water as that it be
all soaked thoroughly, however you may oversoke and drown it, and that is very
prejudicial to it, it must be turned in the couch every day once for three or
four weeks together, and then every other day once for about a fortnight, and
then twice a week till it be come to a right temper, at the first many men must
be employed carrying water as hard as they can till it be all of it wet and
well soaked, and that you may know the better how to temper it aright, you shall
find it heat exceedingly in the couch, which you must look to keep in a
moderate condition; which overheating you may prevent with turning, that it
overheat not by any means, How hot the Woad arise un^o in the couch.
it may grow so hot as you can possibly abide your hand in it, but not to
exceed that heat; and how to know its seasons kindly, and so will in time come
to perfect rich Woad you must observe that it will alter and change diverse
times, first it will mould, hoar and frost, and smell exceeding strong; then it
will in a little time abate thereof and grow toward a black color, and then it
will hoar or mould again, and change a little whitish, and after this second
change it will come to a perfect black, which the brighter and clearer color
the better; This must be the winters work, and it will be good for cold
weather, and when it is thus wrought and comes to its color, then you may lay
it up, or heap it up, to lie for a sale, putting diverse poles into each heap to
the bottom to open it, and keep it cool, and you must be sure it take not heat
again; and thus all your ^orts of Woad must be seasoned one after another, and
especially all such as you can dry that summer, but to tell you how to know or
chose the best Woad is scarce in the power of the Woad-man, who can but guess
at it from that experience he has in the mixing of it, but it must be tried by
the dyer, who usually will before they buy any quantity.

And therefore I shall advise thee rather to get an ingenious workman at the
seasoning of it; who with that judgment he has, and the experiences, he is
now in capacity to make, he may season it to all occasions and interests
whatsoever, and so I come to the advantages thereof which are very great.

And first it is national, in that it sets many poor on work, The advantage of
VVo^d.
is the staple and chief of the Dyers Trade, lays a foundation for all
holding colors, and much advances land in the Rent, it doubles or more, and
in the usage of it upon this husbandry trebleth or quadrupleth it, and many
times more: and then secondly it is personally advantageous, the best Estates
that has been got in all our rich upland Countries have been got by it; at
some seasons, and when they have aright Crop and good markets, it will amount
unto as much more: it has been sold from twenty pound the best Woad to thirty
pound, and back again from thirty pound and twenty six pound down to six pound
a Tun.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Which discovers the nature, use, and advantage of Madder,
ANd so I shall descend to my third Dyers commodity in relation to Dying or
Coloring, and that is to the story of Madder that colors the rich and best
solid Red, the which if I can so manage as to bring it unto the same progress
as Oad is brought unto in England, I mean that whereas (though very rarely it
is now planted in some gardens, and in some small plots of ground, and does
amount unto a very great advantage to the Planter, by the sets they sell forth,
and by the roots they draw to vent to the Apothecary; and medicinably to
others, and yet so make a most excelling value of their Lands, indeed beyond
credence, some have made as I have been most credibly informed after the rate
of three hundred pounds an Acre in three years, for so long it grows before it
come unto pe^fection, what it yields an Acre.
and others that have sold it wholesale a parcel together at the worst
advantage after one hundred and sixty pounds per Acre, and some have out of
small plots in gardens made more than I have or will here affirm, and however,
though I shall be so modest as to confess that much of your garden stuff may
yield with the cost and labor that is continually applied thereto, as much or
more than here is spoken of as I am confident. I could name diverse things which
some preserve as rich Treasure in their brains and will not discover them, yet
this I shall affirm, that this being a fundamental fruit, and such a one as
that the plenty thereof will not much abate the market, Our dying trade being
supplyied herewith from beyond the Seas, that the Erection of such a Plantation
as may bring it forth wrought up and fitted to the dyars use, and so be a
supply to our selves within our selves, I am confident is a design of
incomparable good, to the Commonwealth especially, it employing so many hands
as will be to bring it to perfection: It is like to prove a staple commodity,
and will turn land to as great an advance as any seed or root that it is
capeable to receive, and need no more fear want of markets for the venting of
it, than we need for wool that staple commodity of the Nation. And because
the discovery thereof is a matter of so great Importance, I shall spend a
little more time in the discovery of the whole frame hereof.

And I shall proceed to the description of it.

There is bute on kind of Madder which is manured and set for use, The
description of Madder.
but there is many things like thereto, as Goose-grass, soft Cliver, Ladies
Bedshaw, Woodroof and Croswort, all which are like to Madder leaves, and are
thought to be a wild kinds thereof; It has long stalks or trayling branches
dispersed upon the ground; rough and full of joints, and every joint set with
green rough leaves in manner of a Star. The flowers grow at top of the
branches, of a faint yellow color, after which comes the seed, round and
green. The root creeps far abroad within the upper crust of the Earth,
intangling one root into another, and when it is green and fresh, the root is
of a reddish color, it is small and tender, but gathers and runs in the ground
just like an Ivy along a House or Tree. It is a commodity of much value
Patentees strove hard for it, and Patents were gained about it in the late
Kings days, and yet now in these times of freedom who pursues it?

For the making out a good Plantation hereof, I must do these three or four
things.

1. Show you what it comes of, and how to plant it and preserve it.

2. How to get it and use it, to bring it to saleable Madder.

3. The benefit and advantage national and personal.

Although it bear a seed, yet that seed comes not to perfection here, it is
therefore to be planted of the sets that are to be gotten from the Madder it
self, and they are be bought in many gardens in London, who keep up that
Plantation for the advantage of selling their sets and roots Physically to the
Apothecaries only, all the skill is to distinguish of the goodness thereof:
And for the discovery thereof, The seasons of drawing the sets.
first know the season of getting or rather drawing them, which is in March and
April, yea as soon as they are sprung forth of the ground two or three inches
long, then you must be careful you get sets rooted; Every set having some
suckors or spinies of root going out from them, they must be slipped from the
main root, and these sets as soon as ever took up, put into some basket with a
little mould, and posted to the place where they are to be set, the sooner the
better; and then your ground being very rich it cannot be too rich for this
commodity, What ground is best, and how to prepare it.
however it must be a warm and very deep soil, and dug two or three spade
graft depth, and two shovellings also, and raked and laid even and level, and
then by straight lines trod out into long beds about four foot broad from one
end of your work into the other, and set about one foot asunder every way, and
if it be a dry spring they must be kept with watering until they recover their
fading wan condition; you may begin to dig your ground in the beginning, so all
along Winter till the very day of setting, and then you must keep it with
weeding and hoing till it have got the mastership of the weeds and then it
being a weed of it self will destroy all other.

One rod of ground is worth seven pence a rod diging, A rod of ground what
worth setting.
or if very dry strong ground, eight pence, but six pence the best ground will
require, and you may sow some early sallet Herbs, or Reddish, or Onions, or
such things as will be ripe betimes, among it; the first year good weeding is
the best preservative unto it, and in your setting of them by a line, At what
distance and how to set them.
one goes before and lays every set in his place, and another comes and with
a broad dibble made for purpose, thrust down deep and open a hole, and put in
the set, and for the nourishing of it, in case any dye you must plant new in
the room of what decays, for the time of the growing of it until it come to
perfection is three years, the first year you may take off some few sets here
and there, but that is somewhat dangerous, but that year it must be kept with
hoing a while also, and then the second year you may take up sets as fast as
you will, When to get sets of our own planting.
and almost as many as you will; leaving but as you do in the croping of an Oak
one bough for the drawing up the sap out of the root being so thick and strong
in the ground that nothing will decay it almost; if thou have but a reasonable
quantity, then thou must get it for the use of the drugsters and Apothecaries,
and the sets to plant again, and then in the taking up of every root there will
be one runner which has little buds upon it, the which may be divided and cut
into a fingers length, each so planted with one bud out of the ground set
upright, which makes very excellent good sets, one runner will make many sets,
but these sets cannot be got up until the Madder be taken away: And having
thus preserved it until it come to a good crop, if thou intendest it, and have
a quantity sufficient to set up a Madder Mill; having curiously dried it as you
do your hopps to a just and perfect gage of drought; Thou must provide all
materials to that purpose; the Mill I cannot well describe, and it is exceeding
curious to be made aright, and I do not hear of any one can do it, yet possibly
there may be some Engineer or some Dutch man here that can do it; it being a
common Mill in Holland and the Low Countries, which is the only place for
Madder that I hear of in the World. A rude discovery I could give, but I will
forbear least any one taking pattern by it should abuse himself more and me in
some measure, yet here is the mystery of it; so to pare of the husk that it may
be if possible (as the wheat is ground beflaked or flayed that it may go all
one way, which sort they call the mull Madder and is little worth, not above
nine or ten shillings a hundred, and then you must take out the second sort
called the number O, which is the middle rind, and is not worth so much as the
third sort called the Crop madder, by one sixth part, and this crop Madder is
the very heart and pitch of it inclining to the yellow, and this lesser in
quantity but better in quality by far. Sometimes the best Madder is worth eight
or nine pound a hundred, and the number O is worth but six pound six shillings
8 pence or eight pound two shillings fix pence, and sometimes, it is not worth
above four pound or five pound a hundred, yea sometime it may come to three
pound the hundred possibly, because I would not abuse the Reader, I advise my
Madder-Planter to send over for a workman thence, who can both describe the
Engine, and the manner of mixing and sorting of it, which is the greatest
mystery, and well worth your labor and pains it will be.

At Barn-Elms was once Madder sown and brought to good perfection and a Mill
erected by one Mr. Shipman the late Kings Gardner, Madder planting formerly
gran^ee by Patent.
who had a Patent for it from the late King; but being as I am informed, a poor
man, was not able to carry it on for want of stock, and as I conceive these
times coming on broke his new Plantation but on Mr, Hassey bought his Madder,
which proved excellent good, and sold it again to the Dyars who exceeding high
commend it.

Which is sufficient proof to me that we may raise and make as good as any is
in the world, and why not as well as Holland? our Lands both Marsh, Fen,
abundanceof Up-land and Meadow is as rich, dry, and deep of soil and good for
it as theirs is, and we have use enough for many thousand weight of it, some
Dyars using above a 100 pound a week a man.

The profit I shall not determine, because it will be long before a thorough
trial can be made of it, but now as it is planted in Gardens unspeakable
advantages are made thereby, and should it hold that proportion when it comes
to be made up and completed to the Dyars it would prove the richest commodity
that I know sowed in England.

I hear Sir Nicholas Crisp is erecting a Plantation of it, At Dedford by
Greenwich is his Plantation.
his ingenuity is to be commended highly in many things, and for his public
spiritedness countenanced in a work that is so likely to tend to the public
good. I know none can drive on public ends without private aims; neither know
I well why he should to his own ruin; but he that drives on his private so as
the public shall be most advanced, from men deserves great honor; and thou
that repinest, set such another work on foot, and then thou will grow more
charitable. But I shall say no more, but humbly pray all encouragement may be
given hereunto; for could it be brought to that perfection as Woad is here; it
might be as great an addition to the nation as any thing I can discover. I have
done.

The Fourth Piece of Improvement has respect unto the Plantations of Hops,
Saffron, and Liquorish, both in relation to the mystery thereof, and profits
thereby.
CHAP. XXXVII.
Only treats of Hops Plantations, and how Land is improved thereby.
AS for Hops it is grown to a National commodity. But it was not many years
since the famous City of Land. petitioned the Parliament of England against two
Anusancies, or offensive commodities were likely to come into great use and
esteem, and that was Newcastle-coal, in regard of their stench, etc. and Hops
in regard they would spoil the taste of drink, and endanger the people, and for
some other reasons I do not well remember, but petition they did to suppress
them, and had the Parliament been no wiser than they, we had been in a measure
pined, and in a greater measure starved, which is just answerable to the
Principles of those men that now cry down all devices or ingenious discoveries,
as projects, and so this day thereby stifle, and choke Improvement; yet we see
what national advantages they have since yielded and no less will many of the
other.

This Hop plantation would require a large discourse, but I shall contract my
self to the briefest discovery thereof I can possible, and therefore shall under
three or four Heads,

1 Show you the land is best for them, and best Sets to plant withal.

2 The manner of planting them and husbandring them until they be fit for sale.

3 The profit and advantage that will accrue thereby.

I shall describe it thus, it comes up with several sprouts like Sparrowgrass,
runs up and climbs on an thing it meets withal, bears long stalk., hairy, and
rugged leaves, broad like the Vine, the flowers hang down by cushers, set as it
were with scales yellowish, called in high Dutch Lupulus in Low Dutch Hopssem,
and in English Hop. It is offensive upon this score, hot in the first degree,
stuffs the head with the smell, therefore use it not too much, yet the leaves
open and cleanse.

1 The best land is your richest land, and in time you must gain therein, lest
another reap the benefit of your labor.

It must be a deep mould, that which lies near the Rock, the Poles cannot be
set deep enough to stand firm; Best Hop-land.
it would be a mixed earth that is compounded of sand and a little clay, but
much solid earth; a strongish land laid dry and warm will bare the most
weightiest Hops.

A barren, morish wet soil, is not natural to the Hops delight, but if this be
laid very dry and made very rich with dung and soil, it may do reasonable well.

It will be best to stand warm if may be, preserved from North and East wind,
rather by hills than trees, How a hop-garden should stand.
as near your house as may be, and that Land you determine for your Hop-garden,
lay as level and as square as ye can possible, and if it be rough and stiff,
it will do well to be sowed with Hemp, Beans or Turnips before; but in what
state soever it be, till it in the beginning of Winter with plough or spade,
and this not only the year before, but every year so long as you use it, and
the more pains and cost you bestow, the more profit, and the nearer you
resemble the Flemming in his hopping.

And for your Sets, those are your Roots taken from your old hills and roots, go
to a garden ordarly kept, Best hop-sets, and where to have them.
where the Hops are of a good kind, all yearly cut, and where the hills are
raised very high, for there the roots will be greatest, and buy choice Sets;
they may cost six pence a hundred, and sometimes have them for taking up,
leaving things orderly and their hill well dressed.

You must choose the biggest roots you can find, such as are three or four
inches about, and the Set nine or ten inches, long, and have three joints in a
root.

Take heed of Wild-hops they are only discerned by the fruit and stalks.

The unkindly Hop that likes not his ground, Signs of an unproveable hop
soil or keeper, comes up green, and small in stalk, thick and rough in leaves
like nettles, much bitten with a black fly, but it destroys not the Hop, but
hurts it somewhat, and so you have the first particular.

2 The manner of planting as soon as your roots are got, either set them
speedily or lay them in some puddle, or bury them in earth: but leave them not
in water above four and twenty hours.

Then begin to direct your hills with a line; How to make the hop-hills.
tied with knots or threads thereto, the due distance had need to be 8 foot
betwixt, because then you make the fewer and bigget hills the sun comes about
them, the poles reach not one another, and so it may be plowed yearly,
otherwise it must be dug some say seven foot, and others say six foot, as
our late accustomed manner is, and I am confident there is most advantage by
thin planting, but that I leave to each experience.

Your hole under the knot of your line had need be a foot square and deep, then
if you can have the wind South or West it is best, The very time to plant in
, if not, go on having made many holes, matter not the wind: be sure to take
the month of April for the work, and take two or three of your roots; as a
great old Gardener affirms, which by this will yield green Sciences or whit
buds, and will have small beards growing out, and join your sets together even
in the tops and set them altogether bolt upright, and there hold them in their
place till you have filled the hole with good mould, and set low, but just as
the tops may be level with the ground, and then after they must be covered two
inches thick with fine mould; be careful you set not that end downward which
before grew upward, which you know by the bud growing upward, and let no part
of the dead stalk remain upon the uppermost joint thereof, The best manner of
setting the sets.
then press down the earth hard to the roots; some will set them every one at a
corner of the hole under the line which I rather incline to, because they have
room and stand round; but if you plant late, and have green Springs upon them,
then be careful of not covering the Spring; but to set more plants lest some
should fail, and in a bigger hole, and round about the same set 8; some say ten
or more, which is thought tedious, but I will make a trial thereof, it being
the latest experimented in our days; now at this time you need make no hills
at all there as aforesaid. Poultery must be preserved from scratting, the Goose
especially.

Now for poling, How to pole them, and which poles are best.
if your distance be 3 yards, or 8 foot, then 4 poles are repuired, else three
will serve, but I incline to 6 or 7 foot distance, and 4 poles, and as many this
year as any. Alder poles are very good, taper and rough, and suitable to the
Hops desire, but you must take such as the Country will afford.

The time of cutting your poles is in December or November, and then dress them
and pile them up dry; if you leave some twigs it will not do amiss.

For length, 15 foot is a good length, Poles length.
except your ground be very rich, or your hills exceeding heightened, or if they
grow too thick, your poles need to be the longer. The Hop never stocketh kindly
until it reach higher than the pole, and returns a yard or two; for whilst
it is climbing, The best sort of poling.
the branches that grow out of the principal stalk grow little or nothing. Your
poles be strong, 9 inches about the bottom they stand faster: 150 poles make a
load, which may be worth a little more than ordinary wood* a few will supply the
standing stock; And spediest way.
in setting your poles lay all to each hill you intend to set, which speeds the
work.

When your Hops appear, And best season.
as you discern where your principal root stands, then set to poling, having a
orow of Iron to make entrance for the pole; but if you stay longer, then you
will be more subject either by ramming or making holes to bruise the root, or
else they will not so easily catch the pole without flying.

Your foot of the pole must be set a foot and half deep, and within 2 or three
inches of the principal root; but if your land be rocky, then you must help
your self by making your hill higher to strengthen your poles, for which you must
stay the longer too lest you bury your Sciences. Your poles of each hill lean
them rather outward one from another, and then with a rammer ram them outward
and not inward

If a pole should break you take away the broken pole and ty the top of those
hops to the top of a new pole, then winding it with the sun a turn or two, set
it in the hole; but if you can take a stake and ty it too without wresting the
wiers of it may do well to piece; but if broken at the nether end shove the
pole in again; How to draw broken hoppoles.
and if your poles break in the pulling up, or will not be drawn by reason of
drought or hardness, you may make a pair of pinsors of 4 foot long, with an
iron running hook upon them, and with a block laid under upon the top of the
hill, and so coleweigh up your pole; the mouth whereof made hollow. And for
laying up your poles, How to lay the poles.
the usual way is to ty two and two together in the top, being set in 6
opposite hills, and so raise a little earth betwixt the hills as if they were but
three hills, and lay some hopbands upon the 3 hills under your hop-poles, and so
draw your tops nearer together, or further off as you see cause.

When your hops are grown two foot high, How to turn the hops to the pole.
bind up with a rush or grass your binds to the poles, as does not of it self,
winding them as often about the poles as you can, and wind them according to the
course of the sun, but not when the dew is upon them: your rushes lying in the
sun will toughe^.

And now you must begin to make your hills, One of the main things in the
hop-yard is raising the hills.
and for that purpose get a strong ho, of a good broad bit, and cut or ho up
all the grass in the borders between your hills, and therewith make your hills
with a little of your mould with them, but not with strong weeds, and the more
your hills are raised, the better, the larger, and stronger grows your root, and
bigger will be your fruit: and from this time you must be painful in your
garden, and ever and anon till the time of gathering, in raising your hills, and
clearing your ground from weeds.

In the first year suppress not one science, and suffer them all to climb up
the poles, and should you bury the springs of any one of your roots it would
die, so that the more poles are required to nourish the spring. At first
suppress not one science.
But after the first year you must not suffer above two or three stalks to grow
up to one pole, but pull down and bury all the rest. Yet you may let them grow
four or five foot long, and then choose out the best for use. As soon as your
pole is set, you may make a circle how broad your hill shall be, and then hollow
it that it may receive the moisture, and not long after proceed to the building
of your hills.

And where you began, or where your Hops are highest there begin again, and
pare again, and lay them to your Hops, but lay the out-circle highest to
receive moisture; be always paring up, and laying it to the heap, and with some
mould until the heap coms to be near a yard high, but the first year make it
not too high, and as you pass through your garden have a forked wand in your
hand to help the hops that hang not right.

Now these hills must the next year be pulled down and dressed again every year.
How to heighten your hills. When to break off the top of the hop bind.
Some when their hop bind is 11 or 12 foot break off the tops, which is better
than they that have their poles so long as the hop runs: but if that your hop
by the midst of July attain not to the top of your pole, then break off the top
of the same hop, for then the rest of the time will nourish the branches which
otherwise will lose al, it being no adva^tage in running up, to the stock or
increase of the hop.

Now we come to the gathering of the^ about Margarets day hops blow, When hops
blow and bell, and are ripe.
and at Lammas they bell; but when your hops begin to change color is a little
before Michaelmas, but long before some will turn and change and grow ripe, which
howsoever the best way will be to pull them, and not suffer the^ to shed; they
are called Midsummer hops; let them not grow til the other be ripe, and as soon
as the seed of the rest begins to change then get pullers amain, and as many as
you can taking a fair season; and note, you were better to gather the^ too
early tha^ too late.

Therefore for neatness sake, How to pull your hops.
pull down four hills standing together in the midst of your garden, cut the
roots pare the same plot level, throw water on it, tread it, sweep it, and make
it far, wherein the hops must lie to be picked.

Then begin and cut the stalks close by the tops of the hills, and cut the^
asunder that grow one into another with a long sharp hook, and with a fork take
them down; you may make the fork and hook, one apt instrument with which you
may shove off al from the pole, and carry it to the place. But I have seen of
late they carry pole and all to the place and pick them off the pole: strait
fine poles is best for this way, but cut no more stalks tha^ you can carry away
in the space of one hour aforehand; for either sun or rain will offend when
they are off the pole you must all stand round the floor, and speedily strip
them in baskets; for it is not hurtful though some smaller leaves fall among
them.

And clear your floor twice a day, Neatness about them is very good.
and sweep it, and if the weather be unlike to be fair, they may be carried
into the house in blankets, but use no linen, it will stain to purpose. And if
you pull them upon poles, then lay them upon forked stakes, and dispatch the^,
be careful of wet, lest they shed their seed, which is the marrow of them. When
you have leisure take up your poles and pile them, and carry out your straw,
and so depart your garden till March unless it be to bring in dung. And for the
advancement of your Hop-garden, get dung into your garden, and lay on some in
winter for to comfort and warm the roots, your hills pulled down, and let your
roots lie bare all winter season: your old dung is best, rather none than not
rotten.

And in April help every hill with a handful or two of good earth when the hop
is wound about the pole, How to dress and pruin the roots in Winter.
but in March you will find unless it has been tilled, all weeds; but if you
have pulled down your hills, and laid your ground as it were level, it will
serve to maintain your hills for ever; but if you have not pulled down your hills
you should with your ho as it were undermine them round til you come near the
principal, and take the upper or younger roots in your hand, and discerning
where the new roots grow out of the old sets, of which be careful but spare not
the other; but in the first year uncover no more tha^ the tops of the old Sets,
but cut no roots before the end of March or beginning of April. The first year
of dressing your roots you must cut away al such as grew the year before within
one inch of the same; and every year after cut the^ as close to the old roots;
those that grow downward are not to be cut, they be those that grow outward,
which will incumber your Garden, the difference between old and new easily
appears; you will find your old sets not increased in length, but a little in
bigness, and in few years all your sets will be grown into one; and by the
color also, the main root being red, the other white, but if this be not early
done, then they will not be perceived; and if your Sets be small, and placed in
good ground, and the hill well maintained, the new roots will be greater than
the old; if they grow to wild hops, the stalk will wax red, pull it down and
plant new in their places, The charge of se^ting and dressing hops.
As for the annual charge of the Hop-garden after it is planted, the dressing
the hills, the alleys, the hoing them, the poling, and tying to the poles, and
ordeing the hops is usually done for 40. s. an Acre, and pulling, and drying,
and bagging by the day.

And so I shall proceed to the drying of them, How to dry hops.
which may be done upon any ordinary kiln, with any wood that is dry, but not
too old; or else good sweet Rye straw will do well, but charcoal best of all.

They must be laid about 9 or 10 inches thick, and dried a good while on that
fide, and then turned upside down, and dried as much on the other side. About
12 hours will dry a kiln full, which must be followed night and day, and then laid
up in a close room upon a heap together for a month if your markets will give
way to frume and forgive again. The sign when they are dry enough.
When the stalk begins to be brittle, and the leaf also begins to rub, then the
hop is dried sufficiently, but tread them not while they are hot, it will tread
the^ to dust; and the^ either against Sturbridge Fair, or what other markets
thou providest for, thou may bag them up as close and hard as is possible,
either to 200 or 200 and a quarter in a bag, as thou please, but the usual
bag is 200 and a quarter. And so I come to my third particular, to show you the
profits and advantages that are to be gained thereby. One acre of good hops may
possibly be worth at a good market 40, 50, or 60 pound: An acre may bear 11 or
12 hundred weight, The profits may be made of hops.
possibly some have done more, many ten, but grant but eight hundred, they are
sometimes worth not above 1. l. 4. s. the hundred, and some other times they
have been worth 12, or 14. l. a hundred, and usually once in three years they
bring money enough. It is an excellent commodity if curiously and well
husbandried. I know in common ways of opping a Gentleman has made of two
Acres and a rod 180. l. in one year; the same ground has after it has been
improved let for 50 l. per an. to a Hop-master; nay I believe I could easily
president you with 100. l. that has bin made of one Acre, and may be more. It
is usually a very good commodity and many times extraordinary; and our nation
may ascribe it unto it self, to raise the best Hops of any other Nation. The
constant charge of a Hopgarden is usually known, men order and dress the^ at a
rate by the Acre all the year. And this very way I fear not to make out my
Improvements promised.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Treats of the mystery of Saffron, and way of Planting of it.
THere is another very rich commodity wherein our nation has the glory, and yet
is a ver^ mystery to many parts of it, they know not whether such a thing grows
in England, and yet none such so good grows in the world beside that I have
ever read of, and that is Saffron. Best time for Saffron.
Now Saffron is a very sovereign and wholesome thing and if it take right it is a
very great advantage for price; it has its ebbings and its flowings, as almost
all things have, yet I would fain give encouragement to this Improvement also.
I shall briefly give you the story of it; Good land that is of the value of 20.
s. an Acre being well husbandryed, tilled and fitted, or worser land being well
manured, and brought to perfect tillage will serve the turn; but the better, the
better for the work. The season is about Midsummer which it is to be set, that
being the season they usually take up, or draw their sets or roots and old
store, when they may be had, and no time else. The land being brought into
perfect Tillage the best way is to make a tool like a ho in operation, but as
broad as six of the^, it may be 15 or 18 Inches broad, and with that they draw
their land into ranges, open as it were a furrow, about 2 or 3 inches deep, and
there place their sets or roots of Saffron about 2 or 3 inches asunder (which
roots are to be bought by the strike, How to set Saffron.
sometimes dearer, and sometimes cheaper, and are very like an Onion, a little
Onion about an inch and a half over) and as soon as they have made one furrow
all along their land from one end to another, then they, after that is set,
begin another, and draw that which they raise next to cover this, and so as
they make their trench, so they cover the other; they keep one even depth as
near as may be, which ranges or furrows are not above three or four inches
distance, that so a hoe of two or three incnches may go betwixt them to draw up
the weed, Saffron as green as a leek all Winte.
which being set and covered, it may come up that summer, but it dies again,
yet it lives al winter, and grows green like Chives or small Leeks, and in the
beginning of summer it dies wholly the blade of it as to appearance, that so
one may come and take a hoe and draw all over it, and cleanse it very purely
and then will come up the flower without the leaf, and in September the flower
of it appears like Crocus that is blew, and in the middle of it comes up two or
three chives which grow upright together, How to pick Saffron.
and the rest of the flower spreads broad, which chives, that is the very
Saffron and no maore, which you may take betwixt your fingers and hold it, and
cast away all the rest of the flower and reserve that only, and so they pick
it, and they must pick it every morning early, or else it returns back into the
body of it, to the earth again, until next morning and so from one to
another, for a months space will it bear Saffron, you must get as many pickers
as may overcome it before it strike in again at the very nick in the morning.

It will grow to bear 2 crops and then it must be taken up, and planted new
again, and then it will yield good store of sets to spare, which cannot be had
no other way, it must be taken up at Midsummer and then set as aforesaid. And
when you have got your Saffron, then you must set a drying of it, How to dry
Saffron.
and thus you must do, make a kiln of clay, not half so big as a Be hive, and
very like it will be made with a few little sticks and clay, and serve
excellent well, for this service, a little small fire of charcole will serve to
dry it, and it must be carefully tended also.

Three pounds of wet Saffron will make one of dry Saffron.

An Acre of Land may bear 14. or 15 l. of Saffron, if very good, but if but 7
or 8 l. it will do the work; And one Acre of it will be managed with no great
charge, I do not believe it can come to 4 l. an Acre, it has been sold from 20
s. a pound to 5 l. a pound. It is an excellent advantage and brings in at worst
a saving bargain, but it may possibly be worth 30 or 40 l. an Acre; but if it
come but to 7 or 8 l. it loses not, so I have given thee a brief story wherein
I would have been more large but having lost my observations upon it which I
took when I was upon the very Lands, and received full satisfaction in every
particular and member, or branch thereof, but as yet it has not fell under my
own experience; therefore I give the heads as I remember, as they were delivered
unto me upon the place, though I have forgot many of them, The Saffron Country.
to encourage to the work.

The Saffron Country is on one side and ^ook of Essex, and some part of
Suffolk, and at Saffron Walden, and betwixt that and Cambridge is very much of
it in their common fields, and truly these Lands are but of a middle worth. I
have seen as rich land again in many parts of England, but it is as I believe
loamy ground and of a little saddish nature, it will require to be laid dry and
sound, and the land it self must be very sound wholesome Land.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Treats of the Plantation of Liquorish at large.
I Proceed to another National business, in the Plantation whereof we exceed
all Nations, and that is Liquorish, our English Liquorish as we call it, not
yet wrote of by any that I could ever see, is far beyond the Spanish small dry
Liquorish or any other.

As for the use of it most of you know, but as to the profit and adva^tage, and
the mystery of Planting of it but few understand, and fewer practice; but that
I may be as open and full in the discovery of it as I can in this short
discourse I have to make, I shall under these two or three heads formalize what
I intend to speak.

1. Shall be to discover the best land to bear it.

2. The best way I can find practiced to plant it.

3. The profits and advantages of it.

The best Land to raise your Liquorish upon is your richest you can get or
make, The best land for Liquorish.
your warmest you can find out, the soundest and dryest that is possibly to be
had, of a very deep soil, you must dig and prepare your Land before you set,
and it must be dug three spades depth, and two or three shovellings at the
least, laid as hollow and light as may be: you may have it dug out of
natural Land if it be very rich indeed, that it will feed an Ox in a summer,
The charge of workmanship.
it is the best) for eight pence a rod at London, yea for seven pence and
sometimes for six pence a rod, forty rods make a rood which is a quarter of an
Acre, which comes to about 4 or 5 l. an acre and this is the main charge of all
for three year, there is no more unless it be a little hoing, which will off
hand very fast, I believe it will not cost above 20 s. an acre more all three
years both in setting and all the dressings of it, besides the sets and Land:
The sets being doubly trebly worth your money; sets have been sold for 2 s. the
hundred and more, sometimes are not worth above 1 s. a hundred, but if your
Land be not fresh old Land, Price of sets
or extraordinary rich, and as rich as your best gardens are, it must be made
so with soyles and warm Manures, horse-dung is excellent to be entrenched into
the Earth, it both warms and lightens it, and makes it very fit for this
service. About London is very serviceable Lands for it, and so is on any dry
soil whatever where it is rich enough and deep. Holland in Lincolnshire must
needs be very good, The place where best lands lie for this use.
many of the Marshes that are sandy and warm most excellent, that which bears
this well, will also bear your Madder-weed that rich commodity: I hear that
Liquorish grows naturally at VVorsop in Nottinghamshire and about Pomphret in
Yorkshire, so also I hear your sparrow-grass grows naturally at Moulton within
a few miles of Spauldwin in Lincolnshire, and so I proceed to my third
particular.

Which is the best experimented way of planting of it.

Having dug and prepared your Land, and a little raked and evened the same,
you may proceed to the Planting of it, and therein you must endeavor the
procuring of the best sets you can, and from the best and largest sort of
Liquorish. The best sets are your Crown sets or heads got from the very top of
the root a little shived down; be careful of this, of very sound Land* for how
soon soever you come to the water your Liquorish will check and run not one
inch further, How to set your Plants.
and having procured your sets your ground being cast into beds of 4 foot
broad, all along your plantation, from one end to another by a long line, you
may lay down a set at every foot along the line, which line may have knots or
thirds at every foot, if you be so exact, and then a man come with a tool made
a little flattish if you will, or roundish, of the breadth or bigness of a good
pickfork stail, about half a yard long with a crutch at the over end, and sharp
at the nether, and that thrust into the ground, it being made of wood or iron,
but if flat an iron one will do best, and open the hole well, and put in the
set and close a little mould to it, and so you may overrun an acre very quickly
in the setting of it, and if it should prove a very dry time, If dry, water
^your sets
you must water your sets woe or three days at first, until you see they have
recoved their withered and wanness, and then the first year you may Plant your
garden with Onions, Reddishe, or any sallet herb or any thing that roots not
downward, and I am confident it will be better too, because it will prevent
some weeding, and for the second it must be hoed and kept from weeds too, and a
little the third; but one thing be very curious off, in the taking up and
sudden setting thy sets, as soon as took up set again, but if you fetch from
far, then as soon as taken up, put a little mould and post them away by horse
back, Time of planting.
and get them into the ground as soon as possibly, the delay of setting,
spoils many thousand sets. The seasons of planting is in the month of Feb. and
March You may the secoud year take some sets from your own stock, but be very
curious thereof, but the third year you may take what you please and in the
taking of the Liquorish up, the best season for which is in November and
December, then there runs from every master root, a runner which runs along the
over part of the ground, which has a little sprouts and roots or sciences, The
Runuer yields good sets.
which will yield excellent sets, if they be cut 3 or four of them in every
set, which may be about 4 or five inches long, which is also to be planted, and
is as good as the crown set, also if it be any thing a moist time, you may take
slips from the leaf or branches and set them; and they some of them will grow,
but they may be set betwixt the other to thicken, lest they should fail.

There is abundance of Spanish sets come over of late. One M. Walker sells of
them at Winchester house in Southwark London, but how good they be I am able to
say little, but hear various reports of them, and therefore I will forbear,
they are bought cheaper than English sets can be, but if they bring forth a
small Spanish Liquorish I shall not much affect them.

The third particular is the profit and advantage may be made thereby which is
very considerable, but it is also subject to the ebbings and flowings of the
market. It must be taken up in winter, and must be sold as soon as taken up,
When taken up, and when sold.
lest it lose the weight which it must needs do, you may make of one Acre of
indifferent Liquorish 50. or 60 l. and of excellent good, 80. 90. or 100l. it
is not of so great use as some other commodities are, The advantages thereof.
and so will not vent off in so great parcells as others will, neither will it
endure the keeping for a good market because it will dry exceedingly.

The Fifth Piece contains the Art of Planting of Rape, Coleseed Hemp and Flax,
with the several advantages that may be made of each.
CHAP. XL.
Only contains the Discovery of Rape and Cole-seeds husbandry.
THe planting of Cole-seed, or Rape-seed is another excellent good means for
the improving land; the Coleseed is of late days best esteemed. And it is most
especially useful upon you Marsh-land, Fen land, or upon your new recor vered
Sea-land, or any lands, very rank and fat, whether arable or pasture.

The best seed is the biggest, fairest seed that you can get, it being dry, and
of a pure clear color, of the color Best seed.
of the color of the best Onion-seed.

It is to be had in many parts of this Nation, but Holland is the Center of it,
from thence comes your good seed usually.

The season of sowing, Time of sowing
is at, or about Midsummer, you must have your land plowed very well, and laid
even and fine, whether upon the lay, turf, or areable, and both may do well,
but your arable must be very rich, and fat, and having made your land fine,
then you may sow it, and about a gallon of seed will sow an Acre, How much seed
sowed upon an Acre.
the which seed must be mingled, as before was directed about the Claver, with
something, that you may sow it even, and not upon heaps; the even sowing of it
is very difficult, it grows up exceedingly to great leaves, but the benefit is
made out of the seed especially.

The time to cut it, is when one half of the seed begins to look brown, you
must reap it as you do wheat, When to cut it.
and lay it upon little yelmes, or two or three handfuls together till it be
dry, and that very dry too, about a fortnight will dry it, it must not be
turned nor touched, if it were possible, for fear of shedding the seed, that
being the chief profit of it; about a fortnight the seed will be dry, How to
use it.
it must be gathered in sheets, or rather a great ship sail-cloath, as big as
four or six sheets, and carried into the Barn, erected on purpose, or to that
place designed on purpose to thresh it that day; you must have sixteen or
eighteen men at a floor four men will thresh abundance in a day. I have heard
that four men have threshed thirty Coume in a day.

The seed is usually worth sixteen shillings a Coume that is four shillings a
busnell, sometimes more, and sometimes less.

It will, if exceeding good, bear ten Coume upon an acre, or five quarter; How
much an Acre may bear
if it be but indifferent, and will not bear above seven or eight Coume of an
Acre. It will raise a good advance upon your lands.

It is a commodity you will not want sale of, the greater the parcel is, the
better price you will have. It is used to make the Rape-oyl, as we call it. The
Turnep seed will grow among it, and it will make good oil also, you may sell a
thousand pound together to one Chapman, it is best to be planted by the water,
or near it.

It cannot be too rank, it Eadish or Stubble will exceedingly nourish Sheep in
Winter.

It has another excellent property, it will fit the land so for corning, for
Wheat it may produce a crop as good, or better than it self, and for Barley
after that.

The charge of the whole Crop, I conceive may come to be betwixt twenty and
thirty shillings an Acre, The charge of an Acre.
and a good Crop may be worth four, five, six, seven, or eight pound an Acre,
the least is a very good improvement, because it will do excellent well, if
well ordered, and a kind season upon land the very first year after recovery,
when it will do nothing else, if it can be but plowed, when other things as
corn or grain may be hazarded; and so have you this Discourse, though in much
brevity; your experience will teach you what ever here is wanting, and my
weighty business will not suffer me to supply.

Shows how good a public Commodity Hemp is, with the mannar of planting.
CHAP. XL.
AS for Hemp, that is a very good Commodity, and would be far the better* but
that it is not mad so National, yet as necessary I am confident, as any thing
amongst us is yet; but not being intended, nor encouraged, as a staple or grand
business as it might, and Flax also, and that more especially then this, but
both joined together, and a public stock erected, either in the general, or
else in every particular Township; A design to set all poor to work^ and well
maintain them.
I know not but why the product thereof might not only bring in a constant
considerable profit for the stock, and the poor in every Parish maintained,
both comfortably in a calling and livelihood, especially all women kind, and
children, but they fitted and brought up to a Trade and way, that may render
them publikly useful to the Nation. I should undertake to make it out, that
this very way of it self would do it, if it would advance the work, Why should
we run to France and to Flanders, and the Low Countries, and I know not
whither, for thread and cloth of so many sorts, and fine linen, and cordage?
or rather, why should we not, if we be at want of Workmen to make out to that
worth and goodness, fetch here and there a workman from thence, and so
preserve, or rather raise the Trade wholly within our selves, had we but Law
put in execution to constrain people to labor, and some way to persuade men to
use their Lands to the best advantage to themselves and public, what should we
want? We have the Commodity grows exceeding well among us; we see we have and
can make excellent good cloth, better for use then theirs.

Object. You will presently say, we want Workmen, especially such as do it
well.

Answ. To that I shall answer, people we have enough you will confess it, and
some that can work well too where is the fault then? I being not a Tradesman
can scarce tell you, but only will desire an answer to this question: and then
it may be I shall resolve you: what has made clothing common among us? and
made Worke-men at it too, but the very Trade of it, the experimenting of it to
purpose, the carring it on with power and purse, that by this means, where
ever it is planted, there needs no workfolks, they are ready to come from all
parts where work may be had, then that is supplied. It is true, at the first
setting up, people are raw, untaught, and not very willing to learn, and may
be (as ever it was,) in all new inventions, or setting up new works, you may
suffer some loss and spoil; yet if this be backed with public countenance,
and authority; I fear not any suffering at all, but if you should, you are but
in the condition of all honest, public ingenuous spirits.

And secondly, I shall answer, that nothing ever did, or will come to
perfection without great experiences, constant practices, and great scrutiny
into the bowels of it, and that will draw forth the mystery, and that is the
profit and glory of all Trade and Merchandise, and then why we should not make
fine cloth, and almost any cloth of our Flax, and raise our Flax to a great
betterment too, I know not; I could name many things in England now, are made
as good with us, as few years since we could not, but were made altogether a
beyond seas, and we supplied from thence; but grant we raise not so pure a
Flax, then buy your Flax from the East or Best Countries endeavor the Trade of
making your finer cloth thence, and your courser from our own, until our Flax
come up to theirs in goodness, which I am confident will refine exceedingly,
both in the growth and workmanship of it; however use all means as to preserve
the Trade of clothing Linning, so far as our own native Hemp and Flax will:
I have heard of most pure cloth some Gentlewomen have made of their own flax,
and Hemp.

I shall now proceed to a brief description of the way of raising it. How to
know the best hempseed.
As for the seed of it, that is familiarly bought and sold in all places in the
season, but the best seed is your brightest, which you may try by rubbing of it
in your hand, if it crumble with rubbing, it is bad, but if it still retain its
substance and color, it is good.

The best land for it, is your warm land, your sandy, Best hempland.
or a little gravelly, so it be very rich and of a deep soil, will do well,
as for your cold claies, as some affirm to be good for Hemp, they
exceedingly abuse the Reader, it is as tender a seed as any I know, and to make
good my affirmation as to the land, consider the land where the best Hemp of
England grows, which is upon the Fens and Marshes, and especially in Holland,
in Lincolnshire, where the land is very rich, and very sandy and light; but
their morish land, though rich, is not good, and yet the very best land they
can pick there, is but good enough for it, yea that very land they are forced
to dung and soil exceedingly too, after two or three crops, or else it will not
do; Nettleplots, and Thistle-plots, and land over grown wi^h the rankest
weeds, if well purged therefrom, will do exceeding well for Hemp.

The quantity that is to be sowed upon our statute Acre is three strike or
bushels, The quantity the time of sowing of it*
and harrowed in with small harrowes, the which after the land is made
exceeding fine as the finest garden, then in the beginning and middle of April
is the time they sow it; some sow it not till the end of April, but if it be
any thing a kindly year, the earlier the better, and so preserved exceeding
choicely at first, for fear of birds destroying of it as you see in many
Countries; but yet there where they sow so much they never value it, be
careful that cattle neither bite it, nor lie upon it; for though some say it
matters not for being kept from Cattle, so they may save the fencing of it, It
must be fenced.
yet I say if it be either bitten, or else but a beast lies upon it, after it
is come up, it will destroy it.

The season of getting of it is first about Lammas, Times of getting it.
when a good part of it will be ripe, it may be about one half, that is a
lighter Summer Hemp that bears no seed, and the stalk grows white and
ripe, and most easily discernable, which is about that season to be pulled
forth and dried, and laid up for use, or watered and wrought up as all
hous-wives know, which you must pull as neatly as you can from among the rest,
lest you break it, for what you break, you utterly destroy, and then you must
let the other grow for seed until it be ripe, which will be about Michaelmas,
or a little before, may be a fortnight before (when seed and stalk are both
full ripe, and you come to pull, How much the statute requires in a bundle.
you bind up in bundles as much as a yard band will hold, which is the legal
measure; but for your simple or Summer Hemp, that is bound in lesser bundles,
as much as may be grasped with both your hands; and when your Winter Hemp is
pulled, you must stock it up, or barn it, any way to keep it dry, and then in
the season of the year, or when you please, thrash it, and get out the seed,
and still preserve your Hemp till you set to the working of it, which instead
of breaking and tawing of it as they do in most parts, there they altogether
pill it, and no more, and so sell it in the rough; but I leave all at liberty
for that, whether to pill or dress up by brake and Tewtaw.

As for the seed an Acre will bear, What seed is worth.
is two or three quarter, and it is there sold but usually about a mark a
quarter, sometime ten shillings, and sometime less, this year it was sold for
twenty shillings a quarter, if good great Hemp, then store of seed, else not,
but in many and most parts of the Nation it is sold for about four shilling a
bushel.

Your fimbled Hemp is not worth above half so much as your other, sometimes
it is subject to weeds, to carlock and muckel-weed, which must be weeded, but
the best way to destroy them, is to let you Hempe-land lie one year fallow, I
only speak of Holland, the cheapest place for it and the first fountain of
it, but generally throughout the Nation, it is of far more worth and value.

The richer your land is, The best land for Hemp.
the thinner, the poorer, the thicker, you must sow. One Acre of good Hemp may
be worth five, six, seven or eight pound an Acre, and sold as soon as pulled,
and gathered; but if it be wrought up, it may come to eight, nine, ten, or
twelve pound, or more, it is a common thing in use, every one knows the manner
of working of it to cloth.

It maintains many people in a good employment, and ought to have more public
encouragement given to it, not so much beca^se of its advance of land, as the
poor poople of the Land.

CHAP. XLI.
Only speaks to the husbandring Flax so as to make it come up to as much of
the improvement as we can.
FLax, it is a very good Commodity, and I shall endeavor to encourage all
ingenuous men, that delight in the common good, thereto, as much as may be;
especially all such as have suitable lands therefore, upon this account,
because it is, as I may call it, a root, or roundation of advantage, upon the
prosperity whereof, depends the maintenance of thousands of people in good,
honest, and laborious callings: and were but this very piece of husbandry
advanced, the sowing and raising of it, according to the capacity the lands of
this Nation will afford; I dare affirm to hold it forth against the stoutest
opponent, that it would maintain near all the wanting people of this Nation.
A volume is too little to contain this vast Discourse; yet take an abstract of
it, which for the more methodicall demonstration, shall be held forth under
these heads.

1. The several Lands capable of improvement hereby.

2. The many people capable of imploymen hereby.

3. The best experiences of plantiug and raising to the best advantage.

4. The profit accrewing there from both general and particular.

1. As for the land, Fit^est flaex Land.
capable of raising good flax; is any good sound Land, be it in what Country
sover it will, if the land be good, either earthy or mixed of sand or gravel;
and old land, it is the best, that has lain long unplowed, it had need come up
to the value of a mark, or near twenty shillings an Acre, 3. l. given for slax
Land.
that is your kindest slax-land, but I know where they give three pound an Acre
to sow flax upon, within a mile of London, and yet in most Counties of England,
I know as good and kind land for that husbandry, as any other, and at London,
they have workmen dearer too, and yet can raise (though they give so dear) a
very considerable profit out beside.

Again, any of your good Arrable, that is in good Heart and rich, that is
perfect sound dry land, is perfect good flax land. Some parts of Essex, from
Bow and Stratford, down along the way, by the Marsh side, a great part of
up-land thereabouts, is good flax Land, so is there very much in Kent, all
along on the other side the river by the marshes side, is good natural land
thereto; in very many parts, about Maidstone in Kent, where the best thread is
made of England, is excellent good flax-land: so is there also in most
Counties, as Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Northampton, etc.

2. And that I may give the more encouragement here to spin, The several
persons that slax imployes.
I say, as heretofore, it is a commodity that will set abundance of persons
upon an honest and profitable calling, from the first preparing the land,
until the fruit of your labors come in; one acre of good flax may maintain
diverse persons to the completing of it to perfect cloth: Consider how many
Trades are supplied hereby.

1. The Land must have the same husbandry of plowing; harrowing and sowing, as
lands have for corn, there is the husbandmans business, sometimes, yea many
times weeding too, then pulling, stitching and drying, then rippelling, and
laying up and preserving the seed, then watering it either on the ground, or in
the water, then drying it up, and housing it, and kilne-drying it, then
breaking and towtawing it, then hetchelling and dressing it up; then spinning
of it to yarne or thread, then weaving of it, and bleaching, then it returns
again to the good house-wives use or Seamster, and then to the wearing and
usage, and all these particular employments be upon this poor business, half
a dozen good callings and employments this makes out, and therefore many
persons it will employ, and we both want cloth, and our poor work.

3. Now as to the carrying on this design, How to raise the best flax.
and making the best of this improvement, I shall here give in the best
approved way of planting of it, as is yet discoved; as for the Land, let it be
good and well plowed, both strait and even, without balkes, and in due season,
about the beginning of March, or the latter end of February.

And as for the seed, the true East Country seed, is far the best, Best flax
seed.
although it cost very dear, one bushel of it to sow; is worth ten bushels of
our own Couetry seed; but the second crop of our own, of this Country seed,
is very good, and the third indifferent, but then no more, but again to your
best seed.

The quantity of it is about two bushels upon an Acre at least, some sow a
pecke more; but I conceive two may be enough, but of our seed it will require
half a strike more then of the East Country seed, you may buy it in the
Seedmens shops at Billingsgate, our Flax men in former days did not sow above
half so much, or little more, but now their experience has brought them to
this pitch.

At my first knowledge of the East-country flax seed, An experiment of both
sorts of seed.
for the perfect discovery of the goodness of it, I sowed one land, the ridge
or middle of the Land with our own Country seed, and both the furrows with
this Dutch or East-country seed, our seed was encompassed with this, as with a
wall abought it, it so much over-grew it in height.

The season of sowing of it, if a warm season, in the latter end of March, The
season for sowing flax.
but in the warmer parts, as Essex, and Kent, I conceive mid March may do
well, but in colder parts, as down toward Warwickshire, and Worcestershire,
the beginning of April may be early enough, and if it should come a very wet
season you must take care of weeding of it also, and in the ripening of it, you
must be careful, that it grow not till it be over-ripe, lest the stalk should
blacken or mildew, yet to his full ripeness you must let it grow, the which you
may perceive both by the harle, and by the seed; some will ripen earlier, and
some later, as you sow it earlier or later, but against it be ripe, be sure to
have your pluckers to fall in hand with plucking of it, and then tie up every
handful, and then set them up upright, one against another, like a Tent, till
they be perfectly dry, and then get it all into the ba^ne, or where you please
to preserve it for use, it is indifferent whether you ripple it, or take off
the boles of it, as soon as you bring it home, or when you intend to use it.

As for your watering of it, whether in the water or upon the Land, The manner
of watering of it.
that I shall not determine peremptorily, but thus much I say, that both may
do well, and he that gets store, will find use of both: because of the one,
you make use as soon as your flax is pulled, and then you need not stand so
curiously upon the drying of it, but after you have got your seed, you may
water it, and the watering of it, opens, and breaks the harle the best; but
then you must be careful of laying up your seed, that it heat not, nor
mould, and that which you water then, may be a winters work for your people
until the Spring come on, and then get it forth upon your grass Land, and
spread it thin, and turn it to preserve it from mildewing, and keep it so
until you find the harle be ready and willing to part from the core, and
then dry it up and get it in for use.

As for the drying of it, a kilne made on purpose is best, so that you be
careful of scorching of it, this will make great riddance of the same, and to
them that have great store, sunne-drying will never do the feate, though it
may do well for a small quantity, or the flax of a private Family.

As to the working of it, you must provide your Brakes and Tewrawes both, the
one, and that is the brake which bruises and toughens, the harl, and the Tewtaw
that cut and divides out the coare, if you use the Tewtaw first, it may cut
your well dried flax to pieces, yet both do best, yet the brake first.

These things are common and known to many in most Countries but not to all,
and least to those that have lands most capable thereof.

It will cost the Workmanship of it, The charge of the flax from the beginning
till it come to the Market.
betwixt three and four pound an Acre to bring it up to sale, it lies much
upon the workmans hand, and therefore far more to be advanced, by how much the
more it raises employment, for many people to live thereby.

Where wages is great, it comes off the hardest; yet where it is carried on to
purpose, people flock hard that want work, and because of constancy, will
work at easy terms, else how could they possibly do good of it at London, or
near about it, where they work at double rates, but there have I seen the best
flax I ever saw.

4. Lastly, the benefit that may be made hereby, an Acre of good flax, may be
worth upon the ground, if it be the first East-Country seed, seven or eight,
yea, possibly ten or twelve pound, yea far more, the charge whereof beside the
seed, until it be ripe, may not be above ten shillings an acre, which if you
work up to be fit to sell in the Market, it may come up to fifteen, or sixteen,
or near twenty pound in the market, but to bring it so high, as thirty pound,
as in Flanders, I dare not say.

But an acre of our Country seed, will hardly come up to above three pound or
four pound an Acre; unless very good indeed, to which if it amount unto, and
no more upon the Land, it will make a good advancement of the Land, which may
be, Land, and Seed, and all charges, may come to about fifteen or sixteen
shillings an Acre, the seed being not worth above two shillings a strike.

I shall say thus much more, that I verily believe we are not come up to that
perfection, we may attain unto in this mystery, because I have heard of some
Gentlewomen that have out of their own Flax and Hemp drawn out a thread
exceeding pure, as pure and fine again as our ordinary Traders therein do,
and have made as much more cloth of a pound of both, and that both strong, and
more serviceable, then the strongest and best Outlandish Hollands; The flax and
Hempe-trade not come to perfection.
and I am confident, if this mystery do but receive encouragement from
Authority, and it made more tending to public good, the maintenance of the
poor in work, and sequestring the Trade so far to our own proper Natives,
as may be a sufficient Magazine of work for them. I am sure we have land
suitable enough to bear it, and to afford sufficient profit, and will be a
considerable advance unto the lands throughout the Nation.

And so I hope I have supplied in some measure, more of our deficiencies that
really are, and are said to be in our English Husbandry.

The sixth, and last Piece of improvement is for the discovering what great
advance may be made upon our Lands by a Plantation of some Orchard-fruites, and
some Garden-commodities.
CHAP. XLIII.
Treates how our Lands may be advanced by planting them with Orchard-fruites.
ANd for making good the Improvement promised, I shall show these two or three
things. 1. That abundance of Land is planted in many parts of this Nation, and
thus improved. 2. That there is land, and very much, in all other parts that
may be improved. 3: The fruits especially, by which they come to such an
improvement.

1. That there is such land alreadey improved, What parts prove the
improvements.
none dare deny; to that height as is affirmed, many will question: I therefore
do in brief affirm for my president, that, Worcestershire, part of
Glocestershire, and part of Herefordshire will speak out this truth, some men
having their Plantations, both of Apples, Pears, and Cheries, and so ordered
that they hinder no more the growth of grass then the compass of a tree that
grows upon it, nay, some question whether with their shadinesse in Summer, and
warmness in Winter, they better not the land far more, and their very
growing upon it does not enrich it, they having usually the earliest grass,
and many times the greatest swath and burden, and will keep more cattle too.
And certainly where they are formerly planted, and grow not too thick, I
cannot see reason to the contrary; as for the land, I know very much, if not
most of it, was worth, not above ten shillings, some less, or thirteen
shillings four pence an Acre at the first, now the grass of most of them thus
regularly planted, and draw as they grow in bigness (that so they may never
grow to touch one another by a good space, when they come to the best age, for
when they come to decay, plant new ones in their room, and down with them to
the very grouud (I say the grass of such Orchards or Pastures is worth thirty
shillings, some forty shillings, some fifty shillings, and some more, and the
fruit that grows upon the Trees planted therein, may yield some three pound,
some five pound, yea, some will come up to seven or eight pound an Acre.

But come you up to Kent, Essex, Surry, Middlesex, and part of Suffolk, where
naturally the land was worse then in those parts by far; I dare affirm there
are many Orchards planted there upon land, that was not naturally and really
worth above six shillings, What Nurceries of young Trees may improve.
or eight shillings an Acre, when they began the work, and that some thousands
of Acres too, and with some good soil, and good husbandry, dividing,
quicksetting, and laying dry and sound their land, and gardening some, and
planting others with kernels of all sorts of fruits, and all sorts of woods,
and sets, and trees, have brought many plots, some containing five or six
acres, some to ten, or twelve, and some to twenty or thirty acres, in one plot,
to that improvement that they have made twenty pound an acre, yea, if I should
say forty or fifty pound, I should find sufficient testimony to the truth
hereof, and all this while but in preparation for a plantation too, their young
trees being not come yet to bear, nor to shade the land, and then they lay it
down to grass; but say the land was worth twenty shillings an acre, and some
is, and very much worth more, which is so much better it will prosper, and so
much less cost need be bestowed, and yet by all, will be made good the
improvement promised. These Orchards many of them are worth to grass forty,
fifty, or three pound per acre, and so set; their fruit will seldom yield
them so little as double or treble the worth of their grass, many times five
or six fold, yea, possibly ten fold, and what is this toward the making good
my improvement promised.

If this land was not worth above six or ten shillings an acre, as very much
was not, How land is improved to twentyfold by Orcharding.
then it is fourfold doubled in the grazing, and if it treble in the fruit,
then there is sixteenfold, and if it come up to sixfold in the fruit, then
there is two and thirty fold. I will go no higher, but I might, and many do
and will, the cost bestowed, for the two, three, or four first years may be
was three or four pound an Acre, may be five pound, but then the Garden fruits
which they raised upon them, the sets, the grafts, the trees, and fruit they
raise upon it, may be possibly worth as much more as it is worth, when it
comes to be laid down to grass, but then it costs no more then mowing their
grass, and gathering their fruit, and yet during the flourishing condition of
this Orchard, it shall hold forth the improvement aforesaid.

Object. But some will say this may be true in some few Acres, and by some few
excelling husbands, but in very few persons, and upon f^wer lands.

Answ. If any, why strive not others? after the same pitch, One land may
improve as well as another.
why run not others to the same mark? if one Acre, why not two? if there be
one so good a husband, why imitate we not him? we know one man may have as
good means to the same end, as another. If one Tradesman get an excellent
commodity, or attain to an excellent mystery in his Trade, do not all men study
it, thirst after it, and endeavor it, and may gain it?

Object. You will say our land is not so good, there is little such, and most
lands in England are not for that use, and in some Countries little or none at
all.

Answ. To which I answer; neither was theirs as good, or known to be so good
(and that is all one) until they made the experiment. Very much land may
improve as well as that which is improved.
It is but very few ages, since these Countries have been so famous; every age
has exceedingly improved, and this very last age as it were almost doubled
what former ages came to; and truly when you have made the same experience, you
will find your Land as good, and by good husbandry with a strong resolution to
the same end, will bring forth the accomplishment of the same fruit; Object.
and so I shall proceed to an answer of the second part of the objection, which
is, there is little such land, or little fit land for this use in many Counties
in England, which brings me to my second particular, Answer. 2.
which is to show that there is land as well in all Countries, The natured
lands upon which the chiefestfruits do grow.
and Counties, as those lands of Kent Essex, Surry, etc. and very much in many,
where is no improvement at all made thereon; and that I thus demonstrate, by
inquiring into the nature and qualifications of these lands, and these lands
are many of them exceeding dry, sound, warm lands, some perfect sand, some
gravelly, some of a very shallow mould, not above half a spades pitch before
you come to hunger and barrenness, some exceeding stony, some of them are upon
a very rich soil, as by the Marshes sides, some of them are upon a cold,
spewing wet, clayey land, but made rich, and warm by soil and husbandry, and
some upon a perfect clay, cold and barren; and yet upon them all, you have
exceeding great advances, as aforesaid.

And that there is some such natured lands in all Countries, and in some all
these natured lands directly, no man will deny, and also means and soyles to
enrich them, though not so much; Answ. 3.
but yet I am sure many times more then is improved to so good an advantage and
more may be made, Lands of the same nature may raise the same improvement.
and gained to enrich them, if we grow industrious. And now that I have proved
there is such natured lands, what remains to clear the full demonstration,
but that as great advancement may be made in those Countries, as in these.
Object.


Why this remains, that they are not under so warm a Climate, as those Lands
are, which is true, and this is all that can be said, to which I answer.

1. Ans. That the climate is much to the drawing forth these fruits, The
climate but a very small hindrance.
and especially to the drawing them forth so early, but yet not sufficient
excuse to hinder the work, for then why should Gloucestershire,
Worcestershire, and Hereford-stire be so famous; I am confident they are as
natural and as fruitful this way, as these Countries are, only I believe they
are not so quick for sale, nor so early ripe, may be by a fortnight of days,
which is nothing.

And the climate is as cold in these Countries, as in almost any, except two or
three of the Northern Countries, in which Countries are very much good fruits,
and many good Orchards too, and why not more I know not, I do confess Cherries
grow upward, more rich, early, and more profitably, then in other parts, yet
Worcestershire comes near them, but what if they come not up so high? they may
come up high enough, and we see they will grow well, and to good profit in
other parts, as well as here. But say there was not a cherry growing in any of
those parts: I should not much matter, they being only for delight and
pleasure, yet if good Pears for Perry and Aples for Syder would prosper well,
Sloth and ignorance the greatest hindrance of improvement.
which I am confident they would, if industriously experimented, which would be
for the great supply of the poor, and the whole Country for every Town and
House almost has an Orchard bigger or lesser, that do, and will bear both
Apples and Pears of all sorts whatsoever, and all Countries have Lands
natural therefore, as well as these, where there is so great improvements
made, and therefore I know neither nature nor reason against the same, nor
nothing else but ignorance, sloth and prejudice, and so far as I know, or I
believe any man else knows, there is Land enough in every Country suitable
hereunto, however to make a very substantial and gallant improvement, if not
altogether so great as these. And as for the sale of them, or Perry, or Syder,
we need not much trouble our selves, nor hinder our improvements thereby,
until our selves, our Neighbors and the poor about us are supplied, and then,
when we have it to spare, to sell it; it may be transported much by water,
and many places by Cart to places of vent, whereas some of it, and that most
excellently made, (these days will teach us (may be sold for Wine, and in
thousands of places now it is; and serves as well as that, for men to fox their
neses, befool themselves, and wast their patrimony: And so I hope I have
sufficiently proved the capacity of advancement of many thousand acres of
Lands, upon this account; yea the great advance might be, if you planted but
all your barren and empty hedges with good fruit Trees, and so I descend to my
last particular which is.

Thirdly, the special fruits I intended and they were these five: 1 the Vine,
2 the Plumb, 3 the Cherry, 4 the Pear, and 5 the Apple.

First, As to the Vine and Plumb, I intended not them directly upon this
account, as to the great adva^tage their plantations would raise Lands unto,
because they would be confined to lesser quantities of Land, but chiefly to
show the advantages might be raised through their own plantations.

And for Vines in relation to themselves, That Wines may be made in England
feasibly.
I did intend a large discourse, whereby to have presumed to have raised a
public experimenting of them to this effect, as thence to have raised good and
useful Wines which that it may feasibly be done (in this season of Wines
dearth (I have these two grounds.

1 Because the South-west parts of England are within one degree South of the
Northern parts of France, as Bramont; yea the very Latitude of Paris it self is
not two degrees South of us: but,

Secondly, and chiefly, because it has been made already in many parts, as in
diverse places in Kent and Surry, and many other parts, as old Chronicles
report, and that frequently, and may unquestionably be raised, in case we fail
not in the advancement of the Plantation, but hit that right; But for a weighty
reason hereafter discovered, I shall say no more.

But for the three last, the Cherry, Pear and Apple, I had absolutely resolved
to handle the^ at large in the whole mystery of the^, both in Setting,
Planting, preserving, pressing, barrelling and Merchandising of them; to clear
up the great advance Lands may be raised to by their Plantations; but that in
this very interim, whlist I was about the very work, Mr. Samuel Hartlib, that
public spirit, sent me in this assurance, (with his desire that I would not
publish it to the world) that an Oxford Gentleman, called Ra. Austen, an Artist
both learned and experienced, had finished a Work fit for the Press, of
approved experiments in Planting late Fruit, from better Rules than have
hitherto yet been published, of which taking notice, I was most willing not
only to publish, but (to embrace the tender, upon a double score.

First, my own, and secondly, the public advantage.

1. My own advantage is great (being tired out with journyings and travels, to
evidence my experiences the more heartily to the world (to be ceased from the
writing thereof, by one better able to hold it forth, having made it his
Masterpiece, both of study and recreation: A brief discourse whereof would have
made a considerable Book.

And Secondly, upon the public advantage too, who herby are like to
communicate in a more full and copious discovery of the Art and Mystery thereof,
from him that has engaged singlely in this business rather than from my self,
that could but confusedly, and not have been so large and full as he may be:
Besides, this pregoing piece of mine (though possibly of little worth) might
have stifled a better and larger in the birth upon a discouragement, lest the
free sale thereof migh in some measure; have been retarded hereby. I therefore
durst not neglect to receive the motion with most real and candid imbracings.

CHAP. XLIV.
Shall contain a brief discourse of some choice and more general Garden
Fruits, intended to have been spoken to more largely.
AND they were six, 1 the Cabbage, 2 the Carrot, 3 the Onion, 4 the Parsnep. 5
the Artichoak, and 6 the Turnep.

In the discourse whereof I should have spoken distinctly as I could, and have
labored to have laid naked the Mystery of each of them with the best and
latest husbandring of them according to use and exercise of our now present art
of Planting; but expecting it more large in all the members and branches,
thereof from so learned and experienced a hand, who undertakes the task, the
art of Planting singlely of it self, I shall hope to have discharged my
promise, better by my silence, then in holding them forth under so brief, and
confused discoveries, as I have done many other in my foregoing Discourse, and
should for want of time been forced to have done these.

And so I shall conclude all, and my whole Discourse with a few words to my
main scope and aim, which is to affirm and prove, that by these Plantations,
Lands may come to a very great advance; yea, unto as great as the greatest that
is affirmed in my Frontispiece; but yet never to that height, as some have
fondly imagined, and do affirm in word, and have done in Print, they can raise
land to, many whereof are from several sorts of Garden-commodities, as from
some of these, and from the great million Pompion, which I least matter to own
of all the rest, I being once so weak as to come to an agreement with Mr.
Speed, who writes such high things, as reason cannot fathom, to discover his
particulars to me, which he gave me in writing, some whereof were some of these
Garden-commodities, and another the planting of Conies upon hard land, all
which (except the Pompion) were as well known before to my self, as to him,
but not, that from them to raise so great advantages, I never knew, nor shall:
and some other things, he told me of, as laying up coals at Newark in a dear
time, which I fear the Merchant has found out that, and to keep them till they
grow scarce, and ingross them, and hold them up to an exceeding price, but of
the manner how this must be done, and some few other things, promising him not
to reveal them to others.

I will say no more; for in regard I never phactised them, I have forgot them,
and (...) shall leave my Reader to search for them from himself as well as
(...) certainly now must needs have made more full experiences of them, it
being near two year since I had first acquaintance with him: but the aforesaid
being my own as well as his, and all men's as well as ours, I shall make bold to
discover them to my intendment (for as to his I shall never attain) and that is
to encourage their Plantations, because Lands may be highly advanced by them,
and when thou have the Art of planting dismysteried to thee at large, as will
be very shortly, fall upon them.

And because Land of great quantities cannot be advanced to that height,
Charges and hazards in gardening cuts the comb of its greatest hopes.
as lesser parcels, which are within the power and purse of the Gardner, which
with his constant pains, watching, toilings, hazards and adventures, he runs,
he may make one hundred pound possibly out of some one Acre of Land, if his
commodity prosper well, as some have done; but in the case of non prosperity,
some are half undone again, as if it thrive not exceedingly in the growth,
prosper not as well in the ripening, escape frost, and thieves, and meet not
with a good market, what it will come to then I determine not, neither does Mr.
Speed consider of these things, and how then it would do, when thousand of
Acres should come to be planted therewith I know not, I shall leave it to him to
resolve, and only take out Turnips, mainly intending my design, which will be
sowed at small cost and charge, and grow upon indifferent Land, and bring forth
great increase, and are of more general use: and in case much Land be sown
therewith, and they come to so great plenty, that the Markets will not carry
them away, at such a proportionable rate, as the Gardner can afford them, then
may they be disposed of, to the feeding of sheep and Cattle* which they will
do, and to good advantage too, How Turnep^ will help out the improvement
though Markets fail. How Turnep makes bread in a dear year.
and in a dear year, to make bread thereof, half meal, half boiled Turnep,
mixed and wrought together into dough, and kneaded and made into bread, will
make a good and delightful food, as has been by many experimented already;
yea, as Sir Richard Weston affirmed to my self, he did feed his swine with
them, though all men hold the contrary, that Swine will not eat a Turnep, (so I
say too) no more than a Scot will Swines-flesh, yet the boiling them at first,
and giving them to his Hogs in good wash, and afterward all boiled, that at the
end they came to eat them raw, and would run after the Carts, How Hogs may be
kept and fed with Turnips.
and pull them forth as they gathered them.

So that upon these accounts, and because I know it will bring Land to a good
advance, as unto 8. pound, 10. pound, or possibly 12. pound per acre, I propose
this especially; but for the fuller discovery hereof in the mystery, I leave
that to be more fully discussed in the Art of planting, and should that fail of
seasonable coming forth, or of a full discovery, it is but about eight or ten
quarts of seed sowed upon an acre of dry sound land, indifferent rich land,
well plowed, dug and harrowed, as for corn, and then after sowed thin, and
even with some composition with it; and then slightly covered with a bush, What
Turnep seed sowes an Acre, and how to order it throughout.
some sowed early, where the land will do, and some late, when other crops are
off; and selling them, or spending them at a Market-pri^, they will bring forth
the advantage promised, and so I have endeavored to supply this deficiency in
husbandry, also in some poor measure the want of improving our garden-fruits,
our Lands being as capable of improvement this way, and as high, as is by their
Brabant husbandry, and so am come to my desired end at last, all which I
commend to thy patience, and thy self, and it to the word of our Lord Christ
his blessing.

FINIS.
A Table of the most principal Heads and branches of this Discourse, as they
are laid down under the several main Pieces of the Book, and illustrated in
that Chapter discoursing each particular Piece.
Chap. I. Shows the antiquity and necessity of Husbandry. page 3, 4, 5. Chap.
II. The causes of barrenness as they are in men. 6, 7, 8. The causes of
barrenness as in the land it self. 9. to 14.

The first Piece contains the 3, 4, 5, and 6 Chap. Treating of the Remedies
against Barrenness, and particularly of Floating and Watering Land.
Chap. III. Shows what Land lies best for advancement by water. 17. Of
impounding water upon land, and in what case. 18. Of what nature the best land
for watering is. page 19. 20.
Chap. IV. and V. How and where to begin your first watering, and how to
proceed. 21. How to make the floating and drayning Trench. 22. What makes the
watering land so fruitful. 23. The best flowing season upon all lands. 24, 25.
The advantages of watering land. 25. Presidents of watered land. ibid. and 26.
As well too much trenching as too little. ibid.
Chap. VI. A larger explanation both of the floating and draining Trench. 27.
How to prevent heaping of the earth in trenching. 28. The manner of levelling
land by the plough to water. 29. The speediest way for soarding Land after
levelling. 30, 31. To level by spade, and what a man may do a day. 30.

The second Piece has the 7, 8, 9, and 10 Chap. Containing draining Fen,
reducing Bog, and recovering Sea-land.
Chap. VII. To drain a bog, and where the water lies. 33. What makes a bog,
and how to carry a drain. 34. 35, 36. Best and certainest way to d^stroy the
bog totally. 36. The great prejudice by crooks and angles in watercourse.
ibid. How to make deep drains without any danger to cattle. ibid. Floating a
bog best destroys it. page 37.
Chap. VIII. Answers several objections made against the probabilities of so
great advance by floating. 38 Cutting Watercourse straight no small
advantage. 42. Some Mils destroy more than they are worth. 43.
Chap. IX. Shows a brief and plain discovery of the most feacible way of
Fen-draining, or regaining drowned lands, or in bounding of the Sea from it.
45. Hindrances of Fen-draining. 51, 52. The cure, or best and speediest way of
reducing drowned lands unto perfect soundnes. 53. The best way to improve
drowned lands. 58.
Chap. X. Directions to make and use several Tools or Instruments which shall
much facilitate the work* 65 The manner and form of a true, and speediest
Level that I can devise. 66. The Trencheng Plough. 67. The Turving Spade. 68.
The Trenching Spade. ibid. The Paring Spade. 70. The use of the Paring Spad.
71.

The Third Piece has the 11, 12, 13, and 14. Chap. Shows to enclose without
offense, and prevent depopulation that is most common, attendant and
appurtenant to enclosure, and how to make severable Errable, common field
Lands, and common Heaths, Mores, Forests, Wastes, to every particular
Interests, and the Commonwealths great advantage
Chap. XI. Treats of Improving Land by Pasture; Reproves Depopulation, proves
excellent Advantages by Enclosure, and takes away the usual Scandalls laid
upon it. page 72. Chap. XII. Shows the Land capable of Enclosure, and the
Method of it, how it advances the Publick-Weal and all particulars interests.
77. Chap. XIII. Shows the tillage, and the great profit thereof, and the
great Advance is made out of several Enclosed Countries beyond Champian, as
also the great Improvement of Heaths, Mores and Forests. 83. Cavills against
Improvement in Common. 85. Advantage of Enclosures. 87.

The fourth Piece contains the 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. chap. And shows how to
Plow and Corn old Pasture-Land and double the Improvement of it; and shows
many particular ways of Improvement of other sorts of Lands.
Chap. XIV. Shows how to bank An-hills most speedily. 98. The best way to
destroy Rush or coldness in any Pasture. ibid.
Chap. XV. Shows the manners of Plowing, and working Lands to so great
advance, with two incredible Presidents of Advance. 100. Especial directions
for Plowing. ^01 A Noble experiment of Improvement. ibid.
Chap. XVI. Shows the best and most advantageous way of Plowing and
Husbandring Lands, so as most to advantage it, in laying down Land to graze, to
make good the Improvement promised, and not to overplow, as you tender the loss
of your Land 103. The way of sowing Land to be left after to Grass. 106.
Moderate Ploughing better than unlimited mowing. 108. Plowing the only cure of
Weeds. 110. Reasons why quick sets thrive no better. 114.
Chap. XVII. Shows the dectruction of the Rush, Flag, Mareblad, altering the
coldness of Nature, and the preventing of the standing Winters Water, and the
destroying Ant, and Moul-hils etc. 116. The causes of Moales increasing. 118.
Chap. XVIII. Shows how to destroy Ant-hils more pestlent and offensive than
the former in some sort of Lands. 120. Sow-thistles a great annoyance. 121. The
easiest way to destroy them. 122. Of the destruction of Goss, Broom, Brakes,
etc. and how to Improve ordinary Lands by planting fruit; And shows how to
preserve Corn from blasting, and from Crows and Vermin, and gives a
Description of the Water Persian Wheel. 124. The excellentest way to destroy
Broom, Gose, Ling, and Bracking. 125. An unfailing way to destroy any filth.
ibid. How to reap two harvests, page 127. An unfailing way to preserve Corn
from Blasting. 128. An unfailing prevention of Crows, Rooks, or Daws, from
Corn. 129.

The fifth Piece has the 21, 22, and 23 Chap. And shows a discovery of such
simples and Ingredients, to be compounded with the Earth, with the Nature and
use of them.
Chap. XX. Shows how in tillage of thy Land, thou may improve it best with
an Addition of Soil, or Manure by far, than upon the Turf in Grazing, and in
particular treats of Liming. 132. Means or Materials to enrich Land. 133.
Chap. XXI. Shows the nature, use, and benefit of Marl, and gives a
President of the Improvement made by it. 136. A double experiment. 138. The
Prime principle in Husbandry 139.
Chap. XXII. Shows the usefulness of Sand and other Soyles out of the Sea and
Rivers, Sands also are great Inrichments. 141. Sea weeds very good soil for
Land. 143. Mud in Rivers of great use. 144.
Chap. XXIII. Shows the use and nature of Chalk, Mud of Pools Pigeons and
Swines Dung, and other soyles and Manures therein contained. page 145.
The sixth Piece contains the 24, and 25, Chap. And is a new erection or
plantation of diverse sorts of Woods, and Timber, in such a way as shall raise
as much in Twenty years growth, as usually and naturally grows in forty or
fifty years, etc.
Chap. XXIV. Speaks of the nature of the Land, and shows the several sorts
of Woods and how to plot out the same to most delight. 154. How to cast out thy
Wood-plots for pleasure. 155. What sorts are best. 157. How to plant thy sets.
ibid. How to make thy Dike, to plant thy sets in. ibid. How to plant thy
Quieksets and would them up. ibid.
Chap. XXV. Answers several objections against this projection, and gives a
president for making good the same. 159. How to thicken woods that grow too
thin. 161. Lime-tree water exceeding precious to be used against convulsion
fits. 172.

The second part of Englands Improvement, contains these several heads. viz
1. By sowing the Trefoyl or Claver, and St. Foyne, and the advantages thereby.
2. By facilitating the great charge and burden of the Plough with the figures
of them. 3. The planting of VVeld, VVoad, and Madder; three great dying
commodities. 4. The planting of Hops Saffron, and Liquorish, and the profits
thereof- 5. The planting of Rape, Cole-seed, Hemp, and Flax and their Increase.
6. The Improvements that may be made by some Orchard and Garden fruits.
Chap. XXVI. The best way of planting the Trefoyl, or great Claver, which is
the highest advantage our English lands will produce. 178. Chap. XXVII. Speaks
of the usage of S. Foyn. 186. The descripoion of S. Foyn. 187. The manner of
sowing it. 188.

The second general Piece of improvement contains the discourse of
facilitating the charge and burden of the Plough, and a demonstration of the
figures thereof.
Chap XXVIII. A descritpion of the plain Share. 193. The Coulter how best made.
195. The Dutch Coulter. ibid. The best way for the trial of a new plough. 196.
A good Character of a good Plough-man. 198.
Chap. XXIX. The description of the several Ploughs in use, and the defects in
some, and the advantages others have, both from my own observations, and
otherwise, to make up a complete and easy Plough. 199. The VVheel-plough
described. page 199. The description of the Turn-wrest Plough. 201. The single
wheel-plough. 203.
Chap. XXX. Discovers some general faults that may be incident to all sorts
of Ploughs, with the description of Dutch and Norfolk Ploughs. 206. Chap. XXXI.
Demonstrateth wherein the chief ease of the Plough consists with the easiest
going plough, and the advantages gained thereby. 112. The description of the
plain plough. ibid. The benefit of a broad and short Wrest. 113.
Chap. XXXII. Contains the applicatory part of the ploughs use, wherein ts
endeavored to hold forth to what sort of Land, and to what seasons or tilths
of Land, each plough is or may be most serviceable. 116. The season for plowing
for summer corn. ibid. The season for plowing for winter corn. ibid. A Plough
to cast down Land. 117. A Plough to set up land. ibid.
Chap. XXXIII. Holds forth a description of a double plough carrying two
furrows at once; with a plough that shall both plough and harrow at one and the
same time; how to make a plough to last many years. 123.
The Third Piece of improvement treats of Weld, Woad, and Madder, thee rich
commodities for Dyers.
Chap. XXXIV. Describes Weld, or Woad, as some call it, or more properly Dyers
w^ed. 125. The manner of sowing it at no cost. ibid.
Chap. XXXV. Treats of Woad, the Land best for it, and Advantages thereby. 127.
The best Land for Woad. 128. What price men will give for good Woad-land. ibid.
Five or six Crops in one year of Woad. 131. The advantage of Woad. 133.
XXXVI. Which discovers the nature, use, and advantage of Madder. ibid. The
description of Madder. 135. The season of drawing the sets. ibid. Madder
formerly granted by Patent. 137.

The fourth Piece of improvement has respect unto the Plantations of hops, and
Liquorish, both in relation to the Mystery thereof, and profits thereby.
Chap. XXXVII. Treates of Hops plantation, and how Land is Improved thereby.
ibid. How a hop-yard should stand. 139. One of the main things in the Hop-yard
is raising the hills. 140. The profits may be made of them. 145.
Chap. XXXVIII. Treats of the mystery of Saffron, and the way of Planting it.
148. How to set Saffron. ibid. How to pick it. page 149. How to dry it. ibid.
Chaap. XXXIX. Treates of the plantation of Liquorish at large. 150. The best
land for it. ibid. How to set your plants. 151. The time of planting it. 152.
The advantage thereof. ibid.

The fifth Piece contains the 40. 41, and 42. Chap. And treats of the Art of
Planting of Rape, Cole-seed, Hemp, and Flax, with the several advantages that
may be made of each.
Chap. XL. Contains only the discovery of Rape, and Cole-seeds Husbandry.
253. The best seed. ibid. The time of sowing it. ibid. When to cut it. ibid.
How to use it. ibid.
Chap. XLI. Shows how good a public commodity hemp is, with the manner of
planting. 255. How to know the best hemp seed. 259. The time of sowing it.
ibid. The time of getting it. ibid. The best land for hemp. 260.
Chap. XLIII. Treats only of the husbandring Flax, so as to make it come up
to as much of the Improvement as we can. 261. How to raise the best Flax. page
263. The best Flaxseed. ibid. The season for sowing it. ibid. The manner of
watering it. 264.

The sixth and last Piece contains 2 Chapters And discovers what great
advantage may be made upon our lands by a plantation of some Orchard Fruits,
and some Garden commodities.
Chap. XLII. Treats how our Lands may be advanced by planting them with Orchard
fruits. 265. Chap. XLIV. Does contain a brief discourse of some choice and more
general Garden fruits, intended to have been spoen to more largely. 271.
FINIS.

