THE REMAINS OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS Lord VERULAM Viscount of St.
Albanes, sometimes Lord Chancellor of England. BEING Essays and several
Letters to several great Personages, and other pieces of various and high
concernment not heretofore published. A Table whereof for the Readers more ease
is adjoined.

LONDON: Printed by B. Alsop, for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at his
Shop near the Savoy in the Strand, 1648.

THE TABLE.
AN Essay of a King. -- page 1. An Explanation what manner of persons they
should be, that are to execute the power or Ordinance of the Kings Prerogative.
page 3. Short Notes of civil conversation. -- page 6. An Essay on Death. --
page 7. His Opinion concerning the disposition of Suttons Charity, delivered to
King James. page 13. A Letter of advice written to Sir Edward Cook Lord chief
justice of the Kings Bench. page 20. A Letter to the Lord Treasurer in excuse
of his speech in Parliament agrinst the treble subsedy. page 28. A Letter to my
Lord Treasurer recommending his first suite tonching the Sollitours place. page
29. A Letter of Ceremony to Queen Elizabeth upon the sending of a new years
gift. page 31. Another to the Queen upon the like Ceremony. page 31. A Letter
of advice to the Earl of Essex to take upon him the Care of the Irish
business when Mr. Secretary Cecill was in France. page 32. A Letter of advice
to the Earl of Essex upon the first Treaty with Tyron 1598 before my Lord was
nominated for the charge of Ireland. page 34. Another Letter of advice to my
Lord immediately before his going into Ireland. page 37. A Letter to the said
Earl, of offer of his service when he was first enlarged to Essex-house. page
41. Two Letters to be framed the one as from Mr. Anthony Bacon, to the Earl of
Essex the other as the Earls answer thereunto delivered, with the advice of
Mr. Anthony Bacon, and the privity of the Earl to be showed to the Queen upon
some fit occasion as a mean to work her Majesty to receive the Earl again to
favor and attendance. page 42. My Lord of Essex his answer to Mr. Anthony
Bacons Letter. page 46. A Letter to Mr. Secretary Cecill, after the defeating
of the Spanish Forces in Ireland. page 47. Considerations touching the Queens
service in Ireland. page 48. A Letter of recommendation of his service to the
Earl of Northampton a few days before Queen Elizabeth's death. page 54. A Letter
of offer of his service to his Majesty upon his first coming in. page 55. A
Letter to Mr. Fauls in Sco land, upon the entrance of his Majesty's Reign. page
56. A letter of commending his love to the Lord of Kinlosse upon his Majesty's
entrance. page 58 A letter commending his love and occasions to Sir Thomas
Challenor in Scotland, upon his Majesty's entrance. page 59. A letter to Mr.
Davies, then gone to the King at his first entrance. page 62. A letter to Mr.
Fauls 28 March, 1603. page 62. A letter to Dr. Morrison, a Scottish Physician
upon his Majesty's coming in. page 63. A Letter to Mr. Robert Kenny upon the
death of Queen Elizabeth. page 61. A Letter to my Lord of Northumberland
mentioning a Proclamation for the King, etc. page 62. A letter to my Lord (...)
Southampton upon the Kings coming in. page 66. A letter to the Lord of
Northumberland after he had been with the King. page 66 A letter to the Earl of
Salisbury, touching the Solicitours place. page 67. A letter to the Earl of
Salisbury, touching the advancement of learning. page 68. A letter to the Lord
Treasurer Buckhurst upon the like Argument page 69 A letter of expostulation to
the Attorney General Sir Edward Cook. page 69. A letter to the Lord
Chancellor of the like Argument. page 72 A letter to the King concerning the
Sollicitour place. page 73 Aletter to the Earl of Salisbury, of courtesy upon
New years gift. page 73 A Secaod letter to the Lord Chancellor. page 73.
Another letter to the Lord Chancellonr touching the former argument. page 74 An
expostulatory Letter (...) Vincent Skinner. page 75. A Letter to Mr. Davis his
Majesty's attorney in Ireland. page 76 A letter to Mr. Pierce, Secretary to
the Lord Deputy of Ireland. page 77 A letter to Mr. Murrey. page 78 A Letter to
my Lady Packington. page 78. A Letter to Mr. Matthews imprisoned for Religion.
page 79 Sir Tho. Bodleys Letter to Sir Francis Bacon, about his Cogitata and
visa, wherein he declares his opinion freely touching the same. page 80. The
Characters of a believing Christian in Paradoxes and seeming contradictions.
page 88 A Confession of the Faith, written by Sir Francis Bacon, Knight,
Viscount of St. Alban, about the time he was Sollicitour General to our late
Sovereign Lord King James. page 95. A Prayer made and used by the Lord Bacon.
page 101.
BACONS REMAINS.
1. ACHING is a mortal God on earth, unto whom the Living GOD has lent his own
Name as a great honor, but withal told film, he should die like a man, least
he should be proud and flatter himself, that GOD has with his Name imparted
unto him his Nature also.

2. Of all kind of men, GOD is the least beholding unto them, for he does most
for them, and they do ordinarily least for him.

3. A King that would not feel his Crown too heavy for him, must wear it
every day, but if he think it too light, he knows not of what metal it is
made of.

4. He must make Religion the Rule of Government, and not to Balance the
Scale, for he that casts in Religion only to make the Scales even, his own
weight is couteined in these Characters; Tekel uprasin, he is found too light,
his Kingdom shall be taken from him.

5. And that King that holds not Religion the best reason of of State, is void
of all Piety and Justice, the supporters of a King.

6. He must be able to give Counsel himself, but not to rely thereupon; for
though happy events justify their Counsels, yet it is better that the evil
event of good advice be rather imputed to a Subject then a Sovereign.

7. He is the fountain of Honor, which should not run with a waste pipe, lest
the Courtiers sell the waters, and then (as Papists say of their holy wells) to
loose the virtue.

8. He is the life of the Law, not only, as he is, Lex loquens himself, but
because he animateth the dead letter making it active toward all his subjects,
premio and poena.

9. A wise King must do less in altering his Laws then he may, for new
government is even dangerous, it being true in the body politic as in, the
corporal, that omnis subditi imitatio est periculosa, and though it be for the
better, yet it is not without a fearful apprehension, for he that changes the
fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, thinks there is no good title to a Crown
but by conquest.

10. A King that sets to sale seats of justice, oppresses the People, for
he teaches his Judges to sell justice; and Precis parata precia vincitur
justitia.

11. Bounty and magnificence are virtues very Rege, but a prodigal King is
nearer a Tyrant, then a parcimonious, for store at home draws his
contemplations abroad, but want supplyeth it self of what is next, and many
times the next way, and herein must be wise and know what he may justly do.

12. That King which is not feared is not loved, and he that is well seen in
his craft must as well study to be feared as loved, yet not loved for fear,
but feared for love.

13. Therefore, as he, must always resemble him whose great name he bears,
and that in manifesting the sweet influence of his mercy on the severe stroke
of his Justice sometimes, so in this not to suster a man of death to live; for
besides that the land does mourn the restraint of Justice; toward sin does
more retard the affection of Love then the extent of mercy does inflame it, and
sure where love is bestowed fear is quite loft.

14. His greatest enemies, are his flatterers, for though they ever speak on
his side yet their words still make against him.

15 The Love which a King owes to a weal public should not be restrained to
any one particular, yet that his more special favor do reflect upon some
worthy ones, is somewhat necessary because there are few of that capacity.

16. He must have a special care of five things if he would not have his
Crown to be put on him In felix felicitatis.

1. First that simulata sanctitas be not in the Church, for that is duplex
iniquitas. 2. Secondly that inutilis equitas sit not in the Chauncery for that
is ineptem misericordia. 3. Thirdly that utilis iniquitas keep not the
Exchequer for that is crudele latrociniam. 4. Fourthly that fidelis temeritas
be not his general, for that will bring but seram penitentiam. 5. Fifthly that
infidelis prudentia be not his Secretary, for that he is anguis sub viridi
herba.
To conclude, as he is of the greatest power so he is subject to the greatest
Cares, made the servant of his people, or else he were without a Calling at all.

He then that honors him not, is next an Atheist, wanting the fear of God
in his heart.

An explanation what manner of persons those should be that are to execute the
power or Ordinance of the Kings Prerogative written by the said Sir Francis
Bacon, late lord Chancellor, and Lord of St. Albans
THat absolute Prerogative, according to the Kings pleasure, revealed by his
Laws, may be exercized and executed, by any Subject to whom power may be given
by the King, in any place of Judgment or Commission, which the King by his Law
has ordained, in which the Judge subordinate cannot wrong the people, the Law
s^ying down a measure by which every Judge should govern and execute; against
which law, if any Judge proceed, he is by the law questionable, and punishable
for his transgression.

In this nature are all the Judges and Commissioners of the Land no otherwise
then in their Courts, in which the King in person is supposed to sit, who
cannot make that trespass, felony, or treason, which the Law has not made so
to be, neither can punish the guil^y by other punishment then the Laws have
appointed.

This Prerogative or power as it is over all the Subjects, so being known by
the Subjects they are without excuse if they offend, and suffer no wrong if
they be justly punished; and by this Preroga^ive the King governs all sorts
of people according un^o known will.

The absolute Prerogative which is in Kings, according to their private will
and judgment, cannot be executed by any Subject; neither is it possible to give
such power by Commission, or fit to subject the People to the same for the
King, in that He is the Substitute of God immediately the Father of His People,
and Head of the Commonwealth, has by perticipation with God, and with His
Subjects a discretion, judgment, and feeling love toward those over whom he
reigns, only proper to himself, or to His places and person, who seeing he
cannot in any others infuse His wisdom, power or guif^s, which God in respect
of his place and charge has enabled him withal, can neither subordinate any
other Judge to govern by that knowledge, which the King can no otherwise then
by his known will perticipate unto him; And if any such subordinate Judge
shall obtain Commission according to the discretion of such Judge to govern the
people, that Judge is bound to think, that to be his sound discretion, which
the Law in which the Kings known will shows unto him to be that justice which
he ought to administer, otherwise he might seem to esteem himself above the
Kings Law, who wiil not govern by him, or to have a power derived from other
then from the King, which in the kingdom will administer justice contrary unto
the justice of the Land; neither can such a Judge or Commissioner, under the
name of his authority, shroud his own high affection, seeing the conscience and
discretion of every man is particular and private to himself, as the discretion
of the Judge cannot be properly or possibly the discretion of the conscience of
the King; and if no^ his discretion, neither the judgment that is ruled by
another man's only.

Therefore it may seem they rather desire to be Kings, then to rule the People
under the King, which will not administer justice by Law, but by their own will.

This administration in a Subject is derogative to the Kings Prerogative, for
he administreth justice out of a private direction, being not capable of a
general direction how to use the Kings children, in pleasure, in causes of
particular respect, which if no other th^n the King himself can do, how can it
be so that any man should desire that which is unfit and impossible, but that
it must proceed out of some exorbitan* affection, the rather, seeing such
places to be full of trouble, and being altogether unnecessary, no man will
seek to thrust himself into it, but for hopes of gain. Then is not any
Prerogative oppugned but maintained, though it be desired, that every
subordinate Magistrate may not be made supreme, whereby he may seal up the
hearts of the people, take from the King the respect due unto him only, or to
judge the people otherwise then the King does himself.

And although the Prince be not bound to render any account to the Law, which
in person administreth it self, yet every subordinate Judge must render an
account to the King, by his Laws, how he has administered justice in his place
where he is set. But if he has power to rule by private direction, for which
there is no Law, how can he be questioned by a Law, if in his private censure
he offends.

Therefore, it seems, that in giving such authority, the King ordains not
subordinate Magistrates, but absolute Kings; and what does the King leave to
himself, who gives so much to others, as he has himself. Nei her is there a
greater bond to tie the Subject to his Prince in particular, then when he shall
have recourse unto him, in his person, or in his power, for relief of the
wrongs which from private men be offered, or for reformation of the oppressions
of any subordinate Magistrate, shall impose upon the people, There can be no
offense in the Judge, who has power to execute according to his discretion,
when the discretion of any judge shall be thought fit to be limited.

And therefore there can be therein no reformation, whereby the King in this
uses no prerogative to gain his Subjects right, then the Subject is bound to
suffer helpless wrong, and the discon^ent of the people is cast upon the King*
^he Laws being neglected, which with their equity in all other causes and
judgments (saving this) interpose themselves and yield remedy,

And to conclude, Custom cannot confirm that which is any 1. Custom.
ways unreasonable of it self.

Wisdom will not allow that which is many ways dangerous. and no ways
profitable. 2. Wisdom.


Justice will not approve that Government, where it cannot be but wrong must be
committed. 3. Justice.


Neither can there be any rule by which to try it, nor means of 4. Rule
against it,
reformation of it.

Therefore, whosoever desires Government, must seek such as he is capable of,
not such as seems to himself most easy to execute; for it is apparent, that
it is easy to him that knows not law nor justice, to rule as he lists, his
will never wanting a power to it self, but it is safe and blameless, both for
the Judge and People, and honor to the King, that Judges be appointed who know
the Law, and that they be limited to govern according to the Law.

Short Notes for civil conversation by Sir Francis Bacon.
TO deceive men's expectations generally (which Cautell) argues a staid mind,
and unexpected constancy, viz. in matters of fear, anger, sudden joy or
grief, and all things which may effect or alter the mind in public or sudden
accidents, or such like It is necessary to use^a steadfast countenance, not
wavering with actions, as in moving the head or hand too much, which shows a
fantastical light, and sickly operation of the spirit, and consequently like
mind, as gesture, only it is sufficien^, with leisure, to use a modest action
in either.

In all kinds of speech, either pleasant, grave, severe, or ordinary, it is
convenient to speak leisurely, and rather drawingly, then hastily, because
hasty speech confounds the memory, and oftentimes (besides unseemlinesse)
drives a man either to a nonplus, or unseemly stammering, harping upon that
which should follow; whereas a slow speech confirms the memory, adds a
conceit of wisdom to the hearers, besides a seemlinesse of speech and
countenance: To desire in discourse, to hold all arguments, is ridiculous,
wanting true judgment; for in all things no man can be exquisite. To have
common places to discourse, and to want-variety, is both tedious to the
hearers, and shows a shallowness of conceit; therefore it is good to vary,
and my speeches with the present occasions, and to have a moderation in all
their speeches, especially in jesting of Religion, State, great persons,
weighty and important business, poverty, or any thing deserving pity; A long
continued speech, without a good speech of interlocation shows slownesse, and
a good reply, without a good set speech, shows shallowness and weakness. To
use many circumstances, ere you come to the matter is wearisome; and to use
none at all, is but blunt. Bashfulnesse is a great hinderance, both of uttering
his conceit, and understanding what is propounded unto him: wherefore, it is
good to press himself forwards with discretion, both in speech, and company of
the better sort.

Vsus promptus facit.
An Essay on Death, by the Lord Chancellor Bacon.
I Have often thought upon death, and I find it the least of all evils; All
that which is past, is as a dream, and he that hopes or depends upon time
coming dreams waking, so much of our life as we have discovered, is already
dead; and all those hours which we share even from the breasts of our Mother,
until we return to our Grandmother the Earth, are part of our dying days,
whereof even this is one, and those that ^ucceeds are of the same nature, for
we dye d^yly, and as others have given place to us, so we must in the end give
way to others. Physicians in the name of Death, include all sorrow, anguish,
disease, calamity, or whatsoever can fall in the life of man, either grievous
or unwelcome. But these things are familiar unto us, and we suffer them every
hour; therefore we dye daily, and I am older since I affirmed it, I know many
wisemen that fear to die, for the change is bitter, (...) and flesh would refuse
to prove it; besides, the expectation brings terror and that exceeds the
evil. But I do not believe, that any man fears, to be dead, but only the
stroke of death, and such are my hopes, that if Heaven be pleased, and Nature
renew but my lease for 21. years more, without asking longer days, I shall be
strong enough to acknowledge without mourning, that I was begotten mortal,
virtue walks not in the highway, though she go per alta, this is strength,
and the blood to virtue, to contemn things that be desired, and to neglect that
which is feared.

Why should Man be in love with his setters, though of Gold? Art thou drowned
in security, then I say though art perfectly dead? For though thou movest, yet
thy soul is buried within thee, and thy good Angel either forsakes his Guard,
or sleeps; there is nothing under Heaven, saving a true friend, who cannot be
counted within the number of movables, unto which my heart does lean.

And this dear freedom has begot^en me this peace, that I mourn not for that
end which must be, nor spend one wish to have one minute added to the
incertaine date of my years. It was no mean apprehension of Lucian, who says
of Menippus, that in his travels through Hell, he knew not the Kings of the
Earth from other men, but only by their louder cryings and tears, which was
fostered in them through the remorsefull memory of the good days they had
seen, and the fruitful havings which they so unwillingly left behind them: he
that was well seated, looked back at his portion, and was loath to forsake his
Farm, and others either minding marriages, pleasures, profit, or preferment,
desired to be excused from Deaths banquet, they had made an appointment with
Earth, looking at the blessings, not the hand that enlarged them, forgetting
how unclothedly they came hither, or with what naked ornaments they were
arrayed.

But were we servants of the precept given, and observers of the Heathens Rule
Memento mori, and not become benighted with this seeming felicity, we should
enjoy them as men prepaaed to loose, and not wind up our thoughts upon so
perishing a fortune, he that is not slack^y strong (as the servants of
pleasure) how can he be found un^eady, to quit the veil and false visage of
his perfection, the soul having shaken off herflesh, does then set up for her
self, and contemning things that are under, shows what finger has enforced
her; for the souls of Idiots are of the same piece with those of Statesmen,
but now and then nature is a fault, and this good guest of ours takes soil in
an unperfect body, and so is slackned from showing her wonders, like an
excellent Musician which cannot utter himself upon a defective instrument. But
see how I am swarved, and lose my course, touching at the soul that does least
hold action with death, who has the surest property in this frail act, his
style is the end of all flesh, and the beginning of incorruption.

This Ruler of Monuments, leads men for the most part out of this world with
their heels forward, in token that he is contrary to life, which being
obtained, sends men headlong into this wretched Theater, where being arrived,
their first language is that of mourning, nor in my own thoughts, can I compare
man more fitly to any thing, then to the Indian Fig Tree, which being ripened
to his full height, is said to decline his branches down to the Earth; whereof
she conceives again, and they become Roots in their own stock.

So Man having derived his being from the Earth, first lives the life of a
^ree, drawing his nourishment as a Plant; and made ripe for death he tends
downwards, and is sowed again in his Mothe^ the Earth, where he perishes not,
but expects a quickening. So we see death exempts not a man from being, but only
presents an alteration; yet there are some men (I think) that stand otherwise
persuaded, Death finds not a worse friend then an Alderman, to whose door I
never knew him welcome; but he is an importunate Guest and will not be said nay.

And though they themselves shall affirm, that they are not within, yet the
answer will not be taken; and that which heightens their fear is, that they
know they are in danger to forfeit their flesh, but are not wise of the payment
day; which sickly uncertainty, is the occasion that (for the most part) they
step out of this world unfurnished for their general account, and being all
unprovided, desire yet to hold their gravity, preparing their souls to answer
in scarlet.

Thus I gather, that Death is unagreeable to most Citizens, because they
commonly die intestate; this being a rule, that when their Will is made, they
think themselves nearer a Grave then before: now they out of the wisdom of
thousands, think to sc^r destiny, from which there is no appeal, by not making
a Will, or to live longer by protestation of their unwillingnesse to die. They
are for the most part well made in this world (accounting their treasure by
Legions, as Men do Devils) their fortune looks toward them, and they are
willing to anchor at it, and desire (if it be possible) to put the evil day
far off from them, and to adjourn their ungrateful and killing period.

No these are not the men which have bespoken death, or whose looks are assured
to entertain a thought of him.

Death arrives gracious only to such as sit in darkness, only heavy burdened
with grief and irons to the poor Christian, that sits bound in the Galley, to
dispairfull Widows pensive prisoners, and deposed Kings; to them, whose fortune
runs back, and whose spirits mutinies, unto such death is a redeemer, and the
grave a place for retiredness and rest.

These wait upon the shore of death, and wast unto him to draw near, wishing
above all others, ^o see his star, that they might be led to his place,
wooing the remorslesse Sisters to wind down the watch of their life, and to
break them off before the hour.

But Death is a doleful Messenger to an Usurer, and Fate untimely cuts their
thread; For it is never mentioned by him, but when Rumors of War, and civil
Tumults put him in mind thereof.

And when many hands are armed, and the peace of a City in disorder, and the
Foot of the common Soldiers sounds an allarm on his stairs, then perhaps such
a one (broken in thoughts of his moneys abroad, and cursing the Monuments of
Coin which are in his house) can be content to think of death, and (being
hasty of perdi^ion) will perhaps hang himself, least his Threat should be
cut; provided, that he may do it in his Study, surrounded with wealth, to which
his eye sends a faint and languishing salute, even upon the turning off,
remembering always, that he have time and liberty, by writing, to depute
himself as his own heir.

For that is a great peace to his end, and reconciles him wonderfully upon the
point.

Herein we all dally with our selves, and are without proof of necessity, I am
not of those, that dare promise to pine away my self in vain glory, and I hold
such to be but seat boldness, and that dare commit it to be vain, for my part,
I think nature should do me great wrong, if I should be so long in dying, as I
was in being born.

To speak truth, no man knows the lifts of his own pa^ience; nor can divine how
able he shall be in his sufferings, till the storm come (the perfectest virtue
being tried in action) but I would (out of a care to do the best business well)
ever keep a guard, and stand upon keeping faith and a good conscience.

And if wishes might find place, I would die together, and not my mind often,
and my body once; tha^ is, I would prepare for the Messengers of Death,
sickness, and affliction, and not wait long, or be attempted by the violence
of pain.

Herein I do not profess my self a Stoic, to hold grief no evil, but
opinion, and a thing indifferen^.

But I consent with Caesar, and that the suddainest passage is easiest, and
there is nothing more awakens our re^ve and readiness to die then the quieted
con^c^ence, str^^g^hened with opinion, that we shall be well spoken of upon
Earth by those that are just, and of the Family of Virtue the opposite whereof,
is a fury to man, and makes even life unsweet.

Therefore, what is more heavy, then evil fame deserved, or likewise, who can
see worse days, then he that yet living does follow at the Funerals of His
own reputation.

I have laid up many hopes, that I am privileged from that kind of mourning,
and could wish that like peace to all those with whom I wage love: I might say
much of the commodities that death can sell a man but briefly, Death is a
friend of ours, and he that is ready to entertain him, is not at home, whilst
I am, my Ambition is not to fore-slow the Tide, I have but so to make my
interest of it, as I may account for it, I would wish nothing but what might
better my days, nor desire any greater place then the front of good opinion, I
make not love to the continuance of days, but to the goodness of them; nor
wish to dye, but refer my self to my hour, which the great Dispenser of all
things has appointed me; yet as I am frail, and suffered for the first fault,
were it given me to choose, I should not be earnest to see the evening of my
age, that extremity of it self being a disease, and a mere return into
infancy: So that if perpetuity of life might be given me, I should think what
the Greek Poet said, Such an Age is a mortal evil. And sinee I must needs be
dead, I require it may not be done before mine enemies, that I be not stripe
before Ibe cold, but before my friends; the night was even now; but that name
is lost, it is not now late, but early mine eyes begin to discharge their
watch, and compound with this fleshly weak nesse for a time of perpetual rest,
and I shall presently be as happy for a few hours, as I had dyed the ^t hour
I was borne.

The Lord Chancellor Bacon his Opinion, concerning the disposition of Suttons
Charity, delivered unto King JAMES.
May it please your Majesty,
I Find it a positive precept of the Old Law, that there should be no Sacrifice
without salt, the moral whereof (besides the Ceremony) may be, that God is not
pleased with the body of a good intention, except it be seasoned with that
spiritual wisdom and judgment, as it be not easily subject to be corrupted
and perverted; for Salt in the Scripture is a figure both of wisdom and
Learning.

This comes into my mind upon this Act of Mr. Suttons, which seems to me as
a Sacrifice without Salt, having the materials of a good intention, but not
powdered with any such Ordinances and institutions, as may preserve the same
from turning corrupt, or at the least from becoming unsavorie and of little
use; for although the choice of the Feo^es be of the best, yet neither they can
live always; and the very nature of the work it self, in the vast and unfit
proportions thereof, being apt to provoke a mis-employment, it is no diligence
of theirs, except there be a digression from that model that can excuse it
from running the same way, that gifts of the like condition have heretofore
done. For to design the Charter house (a house ^r a Princes habitation) for an
Hospital as some should give an Alms of a rich embroydered cloak to a Beggar.

And certainly a man, see tanquam quae o^is ceruantur, that if such an Edifice
with six thousand pounds Revenue be ^rected into an Hospital, it will in
small time degenerate to be made a preferment of some great person to be
Master, and he to take all the sweet, and the poor to be stinted, and take but
the crumbs, as it comes to pass in diverse Hospitals of this Realm, which have
but the name of Hospitals, and are but wealthy Benefices, in respect of the
Mastership, but the poor which is the propter quid, little relieyed.

And the like has been the fortune of much of the Alms of the Roman Religion
in their great Foundations, which being in vainglory and ostentation, have had
their judgment upon them in the end, in corruption and abuse.

This meditation has made me presume to write these few lines to your Majesty,
being no better then good wishes, which your Majesty's great wisdom may make
something or nothing of, wherein I desire to be thus understood, that if this
foundation (such as it is) be perfect and good in Law, then I am too well
aequainted with your Majesty's disposition. To advise my course of power, or
profit, that is not grounded upon a right, nay further, if the defects are
such, as a Court of Equity may remedy and cure, then I wish, that as St. Peter's
shadow did cure Diseases, so the very shadow of a good intention, may cure
defects of that nature.

But if there be a right and birthright planted in the Heir, and not
remediable by Courts of Equity, and that right be submitted to your Majesty,
whereby it is both in your power and grace what to do; then I do wish that
this rude Mass and Chaos of good deed, were directed rather to a solid merit
and durable charity, then to a blaze of glory, that will not crackle a little
in talk, and quickly extinguish.

And this may be done, observing the species of Mr. Suttons intent, though
varying individuo: For it appears, that he had in notion a triple good, an
Hospital, a School, and maintaining of a Preacher, which individuals resort
to^ee general head, viz.

Relief of the Poor. Advancement of Learning. And the propagation of
Religion.
Now then if I shall see before your Majesty, in every of these three kinds,
what it is that is most wanting in your Kingdom, and what is like to be the
most fruitful and effectual use of Beneficence, and like to be least
perverted. That I think should be no ill scope of any labor how meanly soever
performed, for out of variety presented election may be best grounded.

Concerniug the relief of the Poor, I hold some number of Hospitals with
competent good, then any Hospital of an exorbitant greatness; for though the
course will be the more seen, yet the other will be the more felt.

For if your Majesty erect many, besides observing the ordinary maxim, bonum
quo communius deo melius, choice may be made of those Towns and places, where
there is most need, and so the remedy may be distributed, as the Disease is
dispiersed.

Again, greatness of relief accumulated in one place, does rather invite a
swarm and surcharge of Poor, then relieve those that are naturally bred in that
place, like to ill tempered medicines, that draw more humor to the part, then
they evacuate from it. But chiefly I rely upon the reason that I touched in the
beginning, that in those great Hospitals the Revenue will draw the use, and not
the use the Revenues, and so through the mass of their wealth they will swiftly
tumble down to a mis-employment. And if any man say, that in the two Hospi^als
of London there is a president of greatness concurring with good employment,
let him consider, that these Hospitals have Annual Governors, that they are
under the superior care and policy of such a State, as the City of London; and
chiefly, that the Revenues consist not upon certainties but upon casualties,
and free gifts would be missing, if they appeared once to be perverted: so as
it keeps them in a continual good behavior and awe to employ them aright;
none of which points, do match with the present Case. The next consideration
may be, whether this intended Hospital, as it has a more ample endowment then
other Hospitals, should not likewise work more in a better subject then other
poor, as that it should be converted to the use of maimed Soldiers, decayed
Merchants, and Households, Age and destitute Churchmen, and the like, whose
condition being of a better sort then loose people and beggars, deserves both
a more liberal stipend, and some proper place of relief not intermingled and
coupled with the basest sort of people, which project (though spacious) yet in
my judgment will not answer the designment in the event, in these our times;
for certainly, few men which have been some body, and bear a mind somewhat
according to the Conscience and remembrance of that they have been, will ever
descend to their condition, as to profess to live upon Alms, and to become a
Corporation of declared Beggars, but rather will choose to live obscurely, and
as it were to hide themselves with some private friends; so that the end will
be of such an intention, that it will make the place a receptacle of the worst,
idlest, and most desolate persons of every profession, and to become a Cell of
Loyterers and cast Servingmen and Drunkards, which will rather give a scandal,
then yield any fruit of the Commonwealth.

And of this kind, I can find but one example with us, which is the Alms
Knights of Winsor, which particular would give a man small encouragement to
follow that president.

Therefore, the best effect of Hospitality is to make the Kingdom [if it were
possible] capable of that Law, that there be no Beggar in Israel; for it is
that kind of people that is a burden, an eyesore, a scandal, and a sort of
peril and tumult in a State; but chiefly it were to be wished, that such a
Beneficencie toward the relief of the poor, were so bestowed, as not only
the needy and naked poor should be sustained; but also that the honest person
which has had means to live upon, with whom the poor are now charged should
be in some sort eased, for that were a work generally acceptable to the
Kingdom, if the public hand of Alms migh spare the private hand of Tax.

And therefore, of all other employments of that kind, I commend most the
Houses of relief and correction, which are mixed Hospitals, where the impotent
person is relieved, and the sturdy Beggar buckled to work, and the unable
person also not maintained to be idle, which is ever joined with drunkenness
and impurity, but is sorted with such work, as he can manage and perform, and
where the uses are not distinguished, as in other Hospitals, whereof some are
for aged and imp^tent and some for children, and some for correction of
Vagabond, hutare general and permiscous that must take of every for from the
Country, as the Country breeds them. And thus the poor themselves shall find
the provision, and other good people the sweetness, of the abatement of the
Tax.

Now if it be objected, that houses of correction in all places, have not done
the good expected [as it cannot be denied, but in most places they have done
much good] it must be remembered, that there is a great difference between that
which is done by a settled Ordinance subject to regular Visitation, as this may;
and besides this, the want has been commonly in houses of correction, of a
competent sum and certain estate, for the materials of the labor, which in
this case may be likewise supplied.

Concerning the advancement of Learning. I do subscribe to the opinion of one
of the wisest and greatest men of your Kingdom, That for Grammar Schools there
are already too many; and therefore it is no providence to add where there is
excess: For the great number of Schools within your Highness Realm, does
cause a want, and likewise causes an overflowing, both of them being
inconvenient, and one of them dangerous; for by means whereof, they find want
in the Country and Towns, both of Servants for Husbandry, and Apprentices for
Trade; and on the other side, there being more Scholars bred then the State
can prefer and employ, and the active part of that life not bearing proportion
to the preparative, it must needs fall out, that many persons will be bred
unfit for other vocations, and unprofitable for that which they are brought up
which fills the Realm full of indigent, idle, and wanton people which are but
materia rerum nova.

Therefore, in this point, I could wish Mr. Suttons intention were exalted a
degree higher, that, that which he meant for Teachers of children, your Majesty
should make for Teachers of men, wherein it has been my ancient opinion and
observation, that in the Universities of this Realm, which I take to be both of
the best pol^ed, and of the best endowed Universities of Europe, there is
nothing more wanting toward the flourishing state of Learning, then the
honorable and plentiful Salaries of Readers, in Arts and Professions.

In which point, as your Majesty's bounty has already made a beginning, so
this occasion is offered of God to make a proceeding.

Surely, Readers, in the Chair, are as Parents in Sciences, and desire to enjoy
a condition not inferior to the children that embrace the particular part,
else no man will sit longer in the Chair, then he can walk to a better
preferment, and it will come to pass, as Virgil says.

Vt Patrum invalidi referant tenina nati, for if the principal. Readers
through the means of their entertainment, be but men of superficial Learning,
and that they shall take their place, but ju passage it will make the mass of
Sciences, want the chief and solid dimension which is death, and to become but
pretty and compendious habits of practice.

Therefore, I could wish, that in both the Universities, the Lectures as well
of the three Professions, Divinity, Law, and Physic, as of the Arts of
Speech, the Mathimatiques and others, were raised in their Pensions to 100. l.
per annum a piece, which though it be not near so great as they are in some
other places, where the greatness of the reward does wish for the ablest men
out of all Foreign Parts to supply the Chair; yet it may be a portion to
content a worthy and able man, if he be contemplative in nature, as most of
those spirits are that are fittest for Lectures.

Thus may Learning in your Kingdom be advanced to a further height; for
Learning, which I say under your Majesty the most learned of Kings, is so
cherished, may also claim some degree of Elevation thereby.

Concerning propagation of Religion, I shall in few words set before your
Majesty three Propositions, none of them devices of mine own, otherwise then as
Fever approved them; two of which have been in agitation of speech, and the
third acted.

1. The first is a College for controversies. whereby we shall not still
proceed single but shall as it were double our files, which certainly will be
found good in the encounter.

2. The second is a Receipt (not Seminary in respect of the vain vows, and
implicit obedience, and other things tending to the perturbation of States
(involved in that term) of Converts to the Reformed Religion, either of youth,
or otherwise: for I like not the word Seminary, in respect of the vain vows,
and implicit obedience, and other things tending to the perturbation of States
involved in that term) of Converts to the Reformed Religion, either of youth,
or otherwise: for I doubt not but there are in Spain, Italy and other Countries
of the Papists many, whose hearts are touched with a sense of those
corruptions, and acknowledgment of a better way; which grace is many times
smothered, and choked through a worldly consideration of necessity to live
there, men not knowing where to have succor and resuge here.

This likewise I hold a work both of great piety and consequence, that we also
may be wise in our Generation, and that the watchful and silent night may be
used as well for sowing of good seed, as tears.

3. The third thing is an imitation of a memorable and religious Act of Queen
Elizabeth, who finding a part of Lancashire to be extremely backward in
Religion, and the Benefices swallowed up in impropriations, did by decree in
the Duchy Court, erect four stipends of 50. l. per annum a piece for Preachers
well chosen to help the Harvest, which have done a great deal of good in those
parts where they have labored; neither do there want other Corners in the
Raelm, that for a time would require the like extraordinary helps.

Thus have I briesly delivered unto your Majesty my opinion touching the
employment of Suttons charity, whereby that mass of wealth, which was in the
Owner, little better then a heap of mack, may be spread over your Kingdom to
many fruitful purposes, your Majesty's planting and watering, and God giving
the increase,

Amen.
A Letter of advice written to Sir Edward Cook, Lord chief Justice of the Kings
Beneh.
My very good Lord,
THough it be true, that who so considers the wind and Rain, shall neither
sow nor reap; yet there is a season fit for every action, and so there is a
time to speak, and a time to be silent: there is a time when the words of a
poor simple man may profit and that poor man in the Proverbs, which delivered
the City by his wisdom, found it without this opportunity, the power both of
wisdom and eloquence lose but their labor, and charm the deaf Adder. God
therefore before his Son that brings mercy, sent his Servants (the Trumpets of
repentance) to level every high hill to prepare the way before him, making it
smooth and straight, and as it is in spiritual things, where Christ never
comes before his Way-maker has laid even the heart with sorrow and repentance,
since self-conceited, and proud persons think themselves too good, and too wise
to learn of their inferiors, and therefore need not the Physician: So in the
acquiring of Earthly wisdom, it is not possible for nature to attain any
mediocrity of perfection before she be humbled by knowing her self and her own
ignorance; and not only knowledge, but also every other gift (which we call the
gifts of Fortune) have power to puff up earth, Afflictions only level those
Molehils of Pride, plowes the heart, and makes fit for wisdom to sow her seed,
and for grace to bring forth her increase: happy is that man therefore, both in
regard of heavenly wisdom, and of Earthly, that is thus wounded to be cured;
thus broken to be made straight; thus made acquainted with his own
imperfections that he may be perfected, utilius est frangi lanquoribus ad
salutem, quam remanere in columen ad damnatione, supposing this to be the time
of your affliction, that which I have propounded to my self, is by taking this
seasonable advantage: like a true friend, though far unworthy to be accounted
so, to show you your true face in a glass, and that not in a false one to
flatter you, nor in one that is oblique and angular to make you seem worse then
you are, and so offend you, but in one made by the reflections of your own
words and actions; from whose light proceeds that voice of the People, which is
often, not unjustly called the voice of God.

But herein since I purpose a truth, I must entreat liberty to be plain a
liberty which I know not whether at this time, or no, I may use safely, I am
sure at othertimes I could not: yet of this resolve your self, it proceeds from
love, and from a true desire to do you good, that you knowing the general
opinion, may not altogether neglect or contemn it, but mend what you find
amiss in your self, and return what your judgment shall approve. For to this
end, shall truth be delivered as nakedly, as if your self were to be anatomized
by the hand of opinion.

All men can see their own perfections, that part of the Wallet hangs before; A
true friend, whose worthy office I would perform (since I fear both your self
and all other great men want such being themselves true friends to few or none)
is first to show the other end, which is hid from your eyes.

First, therefore behold your errors in discourse, you delight to speak too
much, but not to hear other men; this (some say) becomes a Pleader, no Judge
for by this means sometimes your affections is entangled with a liking of your
own arguments, though they be the weaker and rejecting of those, which when
your affections were settled, your own judgments would allow for stronger.

Thus while you speak in your own element, no man ordinarily equals you: but
when you wander (as often you delight to do) you then wander indeed, and never
give such satisfaction as this curious time requires.

This is not caused by any natural defect, but first for want of election,
when you having a large and fruitful mind, should not so much labor what to
speak, as to find what to leave unspoken, Rich Soils are often to be weeded.

Secondly, you cloy the Auditory when that you would be observed, speech must
either be sweet or short.

Thirdly, you converse with books, not with men, and of books especially
humane, and have not excellent choice with them who are best books, with a man
of action and employment. You seldom converse, and then with your underlings;
not freely, but as a Schoolmaster with his Scholars, even to teach, and never
to learn.

But if sometimes you would in your familiar discourses hear others, and make
election of such as know what they speak, you should know that many of these
tales which ordinarily you tell, to be but ordinary, and many other things
which you delight to repeat, and serve in for novelties to be but Crambebis
cocta, as in your pleadings you were wont to insult over misery, and to inveigh
liberally against the person which then bred you many enemies, whose poison yet
swells, and the effect now appears: So were you still wont to be a little too
careless in this point, to praise and dispraise upon slight grounds, and that
some times untruly; so that your reproofs or commendations were for the most
part neglected and contemned, when the censure of a Judge coming slowly, but
surely, should be a brand to the guilty, and a crown to the virtuous.

You will jest at any man in public, without respect of the persons dignity,
or your own; this disgraceth your gravity, more then it can advance the opinion
of your wit, and so do all other acts which we see you do indirectly with any
touch of vain glory, having not respect to the true end.

You make the Law to lean a little too much to your opinion; whereby you show
your self a legal Tyrant, striking with that weapon whom you please, since
that you are able to turn the edge any way; For this, the wise Masters of the
Law give warning to young Students, that they should be wary, least while they
hope to be instructed by your integrity and knowledge, they should be deceived
with your subtilty, armed with authority.

Your too much love of this world is seen, when having the Living of ^10000. l.
yearly, you relieve few or none; the hand that has taken so much, can it give
so little. Herein you show no bowels of compassion, as if you thought all too
little for your self, or that God had given you all that you have (if you think
wealth to be his gift I mean that we get well, for I am sure the rest is not)
only to that end, that you should still gather more, and never be satisfied but
try how much you can gather, to account for at the great and general day; we
desire you to amend this, and let your poor Tenants in Norfolk find some
comfort, where nothing of your estate is spent toward their relief, but all
brought up hither, to the impoverishing of the County.

In the last, which might have been your best of service to the State,
affecting to follow that old rule, to give Justice leadon beeles, and iron
hands, you used too many delays, till the Delinquents hands were loose, and
yours bound; in that work you seemed another Fabius, but there the humor of
Marcellus would have done better; What need you have sought more evidence then
enough, whilst you pretended the finding out of more? missing your aim, you
discredited what you had sound.

Thus best judgments think, though you never used, such speeches are fathered
upon you: yet, you might well have done it, and done it but right, for this
crime was second to none but the Powder Plot, that would have blown up all at
one blow, a merciful cruelty, this would have done the same by degrees, a
lingering but as sure a way, one by one might have been called out, till all
Opposers had been removed.

Besides, that other Plot was scandalous to Rome, making Popery odiovs to the
eyes of the whole world, this has been scandalous to the truth of the Gospel,
and ever since the first nullity, to this instant, when Justice has her hands
bound, the Devil could not have invented a more mischievous practice to our
State and Church, then this has been, is, and is likely to be, God avert the
evil; but therein you committed another fault, that you were too open in your
proceedings, and so taught them where to defend themselves; so you gave them
^me to undermine justice, and to work upon all advantages, both of affections
and humors, and opportunities and breaches of friendship which they have so
well followed, sparing neither pain nor cost, that it almost seems an offense
to you to have done so much, indeed that you have done no more; you stopped the
accusations and confessions of some, who perhaps had they been suffered, would
have spoken enough to remove some stumbling blocks out of your way: And that
you did not this in the true form of any one, but out of I know not what
present unadvised humor, supposing enough behind to discover all, which fell
not out so; for there is sigillum confessionis non confiteri, howsoever as the
Apostle says in another case, you went not right to the truth; and though you
are to be commended for what you did, yet you are to be reprehended for many
circumstances in the doing; and doubtless in this cross God has an eye to
your negligence, and these Briars are left to be pricks in your sides, and
thorns in your eyes.

That which we commend you for, are those many excellent parts of nature, and
knowledge of the Laws, you are endued withal; but these are only good in their
good use, wherefore we shank you for standing stoutly on the behalf of the
Commonwealth, hoping it proceeds not from a disposition to oppose great Ones,
as your enemies say, but to do justly, and deliver truth indifferently, without
respect of persons; and in this we pray for your prosperity, and are sorry that
good actions should not ever succeed happily; but in the carriage of this you
were faulty for you took it in hand in an ill time, both in regard of the then
present business which it interrupted, and in regard of his sickness who it
concerned, whereby you dis-united your strength, and made a gap for the enemy
to pass out at, and to return and assault you: but now since the case so
stands, we desire you to give way to power, and so to fight as you be not
utterly broken, but reserved entire to serve the Commonwealth again, and do
what good you can since you cannot do all the good you would; and since you are
fallen upon this Rock, cast out the goods to save the bottom, stop the leak,
and make toward Land, learn of the Steward to make friends of the unrighteous
mammon.

Those Spaniards in Mexico who were chased of the Indians, tell us what we are
to do with our goods in extremity, they being to pass over a River in their
flight as many as cast away their goods swam over safely, but some more
covetous, keeping their Gold were either drowned with it, or over-taken and
slein by the Salvages, you have received, learn now to give. The Beaver learns
us this lesson, who being hunted for his stones bites them off, Cantabit
vacuus, is an old, but a true saying.

You cannot but have much of your estate (pardon my plainness) ill gotten.
Think how much you never spoke for, how much by speaking either unjustly, or in
unjust causes; account it then a blessing of God, if thus it may be laid out
for your good, and not left for your heir to hasten the worst of much of the
rest, perhaps of all: For so we see God oftentimes proceeds in judgment with
many hasty gatherers you have enough to spare, being well laid, to turn the
Tide, and fetch all things again.

But if you escape J suppose it worthy of an if, since you know the old use,
that none called in question must go away uncensured. Yet consider, that
accusations make wounds, and leave skars. And although you see the toil behind
your back, your Self free, and the Covert before, yet remember there are
Floods: Trust not reconciled friends; but think that the peace is but to secure
you for further advantage, expect a second and third encounter, the main
Battle, the Wings are yet unbroken, they may charge you at an instant as
Death, therefore walk circumspectly. And if at length by the means of our good
Masters and Governors, you recover the favor you have lost: give God the
glory in actions, not in words only, and remember us with some of your past
misfortune whose estate and undoings, has, does, and may hereafterly in the
power of your breath.

There is great mercy in dispatch, delays are tortures, wherewith by degrees
we are rent out of our estates: Do not you, if you be restored, as some others
do, fly from the service of virtue to serve the time, as if they repented their
goodness, or meant not to make a second hazard in Gods house. But rather let
this cross make you more zealons in Gods cause, sensible in ours, and more
sensible in all that express thus.

You have been a great enemy of the Papists, if you love God be so still, but
more indeed then heretofore: for much of your zeal before was wasted in words,
call to remembrance they were the Persons that thus prophesied of this Cross
of yours, long before it happened, they saw the storm coming being the principal
contrivers, and furtherers of the Plot: these men blew the coals, heat the
irons, and make all things ready, they owe you a good turn, and will if they
can pay it you, you see their hearts by their deeds, prove you your Faith so
to; the best good work you can do, is to do the best you can against them, that
is to see the Laws severely, justly, and diligently executed.

And now we beseech you, My Lord, seem sensible both of the stroke and hand
that strikes you, learn of David to leave Shemy, and look upon God, he has
some great work to do, and he prepares you for i^; he would not have you faint,
nor yet bear this Cross with a Stoicall resolution, there is a Christian
mediocritie worthy your greatness, I must be plain, perhaps rash: had every
note you had taken at Sermons bin written in your heart to practice, this work
had been done long since, without the error of your enemies; but when we will
not mend our selves, God (if we belong to him) takes us in hand, and because he
sees maius nit us dolem us per hoc quod for is patimur. He therefore sends us
outward Crosses, which while they cause us to mourn, they do comfort us, being
assured testimonies of his love that sends them: To humble our selves therefore
to God is the part of a Christian: but for the World and our Enemies that
council of the Poet is apt, Rebus angustus animosus atque forte apparere
sapienter item contrahes vento in nostrum secundo turgida vela.

The last part of this you forgot, yet none need to be ashamed to make use of
it, and so being armed against casualties, you may stand firm against the
assaults on the right hand, and on the left; for this is cer^ain, the mind that
is most prone to be puffed up with prosperity, is most weak, and apt to be
dejected with the least touch of adversity: indeed, she is able to stagger a
strong man, striking terrible blows, especially Immerito veniens paena dolonda
venit, but true Christian wisdom gives us armor of proof, against all these
assaults, and teaches us in all estates to be contented: for though she cause
our trencher friends to declare themselves our enemies: though she give heart
to the most coward to strike us: though an hours continuance countervails an
Age of prosperity: though she cast in our dishes all the evils that ever we
have done, yet has she no power to hurt the humble and wise, but only to break
such as too much prosperity has made stift in their own thoughts, but weak
indeed, and fit for ruin, when the wise from thence rather gather profit and
wisdom by the example of David, who says, Before I was chastis^d, I went wrong.

Now then he knows the right way, and will look better to his footing. Cardans^
says that weeping, fasting and sighing are three great purges of gries.
Indeed, naturally they help to assway Sorrow, but God in this Case is the best
and only Physician, the means he has ordained are the advice of friends, the
amendment of our selves: for amendment is both the Physic and the Cure. For
friends, though your Lordship be scanted, yet I hope you are not altogether
destitute: if you be, look on good books, they are true friends that will
neither slatter nor dissemble, be you betwixt your self, applying what they
teach to the party grieved, and you shall need no other comfort nor
Counselors. To them and to Gods holy spirit directing you in the reading of
them, I commit your Lordship, beseeching him to send a good issue of these your
troubles, and from henceforth to work a Reformation in what has been amiss,
and a resolute perseverance proceeding, and growth in all that is good, and
that for his glory, the benefit of your self, this Church and Commonwealth,
whose faithful Servant while you remain, I remain a faithful Servant to you.

Suppose this boldness, occasioned by something I hear, which I dare not
write, be not so secure, though you see some Clouds break up, all crosses and
damages may be compared to a Woolf: which coming upon a man suddenly, causes
his voice and heart to fail. but the danger that is expected is toothlesse, and
half prevented.

A Letter to my Lord Treasurer, in excuse of his Speech in Parliament, against
the Treble Subsidy,
It may please your good Lordship,
I Was sorry to find by your Lordships Speech yesterday, that my hasty Speech
in Parliament, delivered in discharge of my Conscience, my duty to God, her
Majesty, and my Country, was offensive. If it were misreported, I would be
glad to attend your Lordship, to disavow any thing I said not. If it were
misconstrued, I would be glad to expound my words, to exclude any sense I meant
not: if my heart be mis-judged by imputation of popularity or opposition.

I have great wrong, and the greater, because the manner of my Speech did most
evidently show that I spoke simply, and only to satisfy my conscience, and not
with any advantage or policy to sway the cause. And my terms carried all
signification of duty and zeal toward her Majesty, and her service. It is very
true, that from the beginning, whatsoever was a double Subsidy, J did wish
might, for presidents sake, appear to be extraordinary, and for discontents
sake, might not have been levied upon the poverty, though otherwise J wished it
as rising, as J think this will prove, and more: this was my mind, J confess
it.

And therefore, J do most humbly pray your good Lordship First, to continue me
in your own good opinion, and then to perform the part of an Honorable friend,
toward your poor, humble, and obedient Servant, and Alliance, in drawing Her
MAJESTY to accept of the sincerity and simplicity of my zeal; and to hold me
in Her Majesty's good favor, which is to me dearer then my life. And so, etc.

Your Lordships most humbly in all duty, FRAN. BACON.

A Letter to my Lord Treasurer, recommending his first since touching the
Sollicitours place.
My Lord,
AFter the remembrance of my humble duty, though J knew by late experience how
mindful your Lordship vouchsafes to be of me and my poor fortunes, since it
pleased your Lordship during your indisposition, when Her Majesty came to
visit your Lordship, to make mention of me for my employment and preserment:
Yet being now in the Country, J do presume, that your Lordship, who of
yourself, had an honorable care of the matter, will not think it a trouble to
be solicited therein.

My hope is this, that whereas your Lordship told me, Her Majesty was somewhat
graviled upon the offense She took at my Speech in Parl. Your Lp^. favorable
endeavor, who has assured me, that for your own part, you construe that J
speak to the best, will be as good a Tide to remove Her from that shelf. And it
is not unknown unto your good Lordship, that J was the first of the ordinary
sort of the lower House that spoke for the Subsidy. And that which J after
spoke in difference, was but in circumstance of time; which me thinks was no
great matter, since there is variety allotted in Council as a discord in
Music, to make it more perfect. But J may Justly doubt not so much Her
Majesty's impression upon this particular, as Her conceit; otherwise, if my
insufficiency and unworthiness, which J acknowledge to be greater: Yet it will
be the less, because I purpose not to divide my self, between her Majesty, and
the causes of other men, as others have done.

But to attend her business, only hoping that a whole man meanly able may do as
well in half a man betterable.

And if her Majesty think either, that she shall make an adventure in using me,
that is rather a man of study, then of practice and experience. Surely, I may
remember to have heard that my Father (an example I confess rather ready then
like) was made Sollicitour of the Augmentation (a Court of much business) when
he had never practiced, and was but 27. years old.

And Mr. Brograve was now in my time called Attorney of the Duchy when he had
practiced little or nothing, and yet has discharged his place with great
sufficiency.

But these things, and the like, as her Majesty shall be made capable of them,
Wherein, knowing what authority your Lordships commendation has with her
Majesty, I conclude with my self, that the substance of strength which I may
receive will be from your Lordship.

It is true, my life has been so private, as I have had no means to do your
Lordship service.

But as your Lordship knows I have made offer of such as I could yield; For
as God has given me a mind to love the public: So incidently I have ever had
your Lordship in singular admiration, whose happy ability her Majesty has so
long used to her great honor and yours. Besides, that amendment of State or
countenance which I have received, has been from your Lordship. And therefore,
if your Lordship shall stand a good friend to your poor Alge, you shall but
Tuere opus, which you have begun. And your Lordship shall bestow your Benefice
upon one that has more sense of Obligation, thenof self-love. Thus humbly
desiring pardon of so long a Letter, I wish your Lordship all happiness,

Your Lordships in all humbleness to be commanded. F. BACON.
June 6. 1595.
A Letter of Ceremonies to Queen Elizabeth, upon the sending of a New Years
Gift.
It may please your sacred Majesty,
ACcording to the Ceremony of the Time, I would not forget in all humbleness,
to present Your Majesty with a small New Years Gift, nothing to my mind; and
therefore to supply it, I cannot but pray to God, to give Your Majesty His
New Years Gift, that is, a New-Year, that shall be as no Year to your Body, and
as a Year wi^h two Harvests to your Cofters, and overy other way prosperous and
gladsom, and so I remain

Your Majesty's loyal and obedient Subject, FRAN. BACON.

A Letter of Ceremonies to Queen Elizabeth, upon the sending of another
New Years Gift.
Most excellent Sovereign Mistrisse,
THe only New Years Gift which I can give your Majesty, is that which God has
given unto me; which is, a mind in all humbleness, to wait upon the
Commandments and business wherein I would to God, I were hooded, that I saw
less, or that I could perform more.

For now I am like a Hawk, that baits when I see occasion of service; but
cannot fly, because I am tied to another Fist. But mean while, I continue of
making your Majesty my Obligation of a Garment as unworthy the wearing, as his
service that sends, but the approach to your Excellent person may give worth
to both, which is all the happiness I aspire unto.

A Letter of advise to the Earl of Essex, to take upon him the care of the
Irish Business, when Mr. Secretary Cecill was in France.
My singular good Lord,
I Do write, because I have not yet had time fully to express my conceit; nor
now to attend you touching Irish Matters; considering them, as they may concern
the State, that it is one of the aptest particulars that has come, or can come
upon the Stage to purchase your Lordship honor upon. I am moved to think for
three Reasons, Because it is ingenerate in your house, in respect of my Lord
your Fathers noble attempts; because of all the accidents of State of this
time, the labor rests most upon that.

And because the world will make a kind of comparison between those that set it
out of France, and those that shall bring it unto France, which kind of honor,
gives the quickest kind of reflection; the transferring this honor upon your
self consists upon two points: the one, if the principal persons employed
come in by you, and depend upon you: the other, if your Lordship declare your
self to undertake a care of that matter. For the persons it falls out well,
that your Lordship has had no interest in the persons of imputation.

For neither Sir William Fitz-Williams, nor Sir John Norrice was yours, Sir
William Russel was conceived yours, but was curbed, Sir Connyers Clifford (as I
conceive it) depends upon you, who is said to do well.

And if my Lord of Ormond in this interim shall accommodate well, I take it he
has always had good understanding with your Lordship: So as all things are
not only whole and entire, but of favorable aspect toward your Lordship.

If you now choose well, wherein, in your wisdom you will remember there is a
great difference in choice of the persons, as you shall think the affairs to
incline to composition or to war. For your care taking, general and popular
conceit has been, that Irish causes have been much neglected, whereby the very
reputation of better care will be a strength.

And I am sure, her Majesty, and my Lords of the Council, do not think their
care dissolved, when they have chosen whom to employ.

But that they will proceed in a Spirit of State, and not leave the main point
to discretion.

Then if a resolution be taken, a consultation must be governed upon
information, to be had from such as know the place and matters in Fact.

And in the taking of information, I have always noted, there is a skill, and
a wisdom. For I cannot tell what an account or enquiry has been taken of Sir
William Russel, and of Sir R. Bingham of the Earl of Thomond, of Mr. Wilbraham.

But J am of opinion, much more would be had of them, if your Lordship shall be
pleased severally to confer not. Obliter, but expressly, and upon Caveat given
them to think of it before. For, been docet qui prudenter interrogat.

For the points of opposing them, J am too much a stranger to the business to
deduce them: but in a Topique, me thinks the pertinent interrogatories, must be
either of the possibilities and means of accord, or of the nature of the War,
or of the reformation of the particular abuses, or of the joining of practice
with force, in the division of the Rebels.

If your Lordship doubt to put your sickle in others Harvest; First, time being
fit to you in Mr. Secretaries absence.

Next, Vnita fortior.

Thirdly, being mixed with matter of War, it is fittest for you.

Lastly, I know your Lordship will carry it with that modesty, and respect
toward aged Dignity, and that good correspondence toward my dear Ally, and
your good friend now abroad, as no inconvenience may grow that way.

Thus have I played the ignorant Statesman, which I do to no body but your
Lordship, except J do it to the Queen sometimes when she trains me on. But your
Lordship will accept my duty, and good meaning and secure me, touching the
privatnesse of that I write.

Your Lordships to be commanded, FRAN. BACON.

A Letter of advise to my Lord of Essex, upon the first Treaty with Tyron,
1598. before my Lord was nominated for the Charge of Ireland.
My Lord,
THese Advertisements which your Lordship imparted to me, and the like, J hold
to be no more certain to make judgment upon, then a Patients water to a
Physician: Therefore for me upon one water, to make a judgment, were indeed
like a foolish bold Mountebank, or Doctor Birket: yet for willing duties sake,
I will set down to your Lordship what opinion sprung in my mind upon that I
read.

The Letter from the Council there leaning to mistrust, J do not much rely
upon, for three Causes.

First, because it is always both the grace and the safety from blame of such a
Council to err in causion: whereunto add that it may be they or some of them
are not without envy toward the person who is used in treating the Accord.

Next, because the time of this treaty has no show of diffimulation. For, that
Tyron is now in no straight. But he is not now like a Gamester, that will give
over because he is a Winner, then because he has no more money in his purse.

Lastly, I do not see but those Articles, whereupon they ground their
Supposition may as well proceed out of fear, as out of fals^ood.

For the retaining of the dependence of the porracting the admission of a
Sher^ff, the refusing to give his Son for Hostage, the holding off from present
repair to Dublin, the refusing to go presently to accord without including
Odonell, and others his Assistants, may very well come of a guilty reservation,
in case he should receive hard measure, and not out of treachery: So as if the
great person be faithful, and that you have not here some present intelligence
of present Succors from Spain: for the expectation whereof, Tyron would gain
time.

J see no deep cause of distrusting the cause, if it be good. And for the
question, her Majesty seems to me a Winner three ways.

First, her purse shall have some rest.

Next, it will divert the foreign designs upon that place.

Thirdly, though her Majesty is like for a time but to govern Precario on the
North, and be not in true command in better state there then before: yet,
besides the two respects of ease of charge, and advantage of opinion abroad
before mentioned, she shall have a time to use her Princely Policy in two points
to weaken them, the one by division and disunion of the heads; the other by
recovering and winning the people from them by justice, which of all other
causes is the best.

Now for the Athenian question, you discourse well, quid igitur agendum est. I
will shoot my fools bolt since you will have it so^ The Earl of Ormond to be
encouraged and comforted above all things, the Garrisons to be instantly
provided, for upportunity makes a thief; And if he should mean never so well
now, yet such an advantage, as the breaking of her Majesty's Garrisons might
tempt a true man.

And because he may as well waver upon his own inconstancy as upon occasion.
(And wanton variableness is never restrained but with fear.)

I hold it necessary he be menaced with a strong war, not by words, but by
musters, and preparation of Forces here, in case the Accord proceed not but
none to be sent over, least it disturb the Treaty, and make him look to be
overrun as soon as he has laid Way Arms.

And (but that your Lordship is too easy to pass in such cases from
diffimulation to verity) J think if your Lordship lent your reputation in this
case, it is to pretend, that if a defensive War as in times past, but a woeful
reconquest of those parts in the Country, you would accept the charge, J think
it would help to settle him, and win you a great deal of honor gratis.

And that which most properly concerns this action, if it prove a peace, J
think her Majesty shall do well to cure the Root of the Disease, and to
profess by a Commission of peaceable men, chiefly of respect and countenance,
and reformation of abuses, extortions, and injustices there, and to plant a
stronger and surer Government then heretofore, for the ease and protection of
the Subject, for removing of the Sword or Government in Arms from the Earl of
Ormond, or the sending of a Deputy which will eclipse it, if peace follow, J
think unseasonable.

Lastly, I hold still my opinion, both for your better information and your
fuller declaration of your care, and meddling in this urging and meriting
service, that your Lordship have a set conference with the persons I named in
my former Writing, I rest

My Lord, At your Lordships service, FRAN. BACON.

A Letter of advice to my Lord of Essex, immediate before his going into
Ireland.
My singular good Lord,
YOur late Note of my silence on your occasions, has made me set down these
few wandering lines, as one that would say somewhat, and can say nothing,
touching your Lordships intended charge for Ireland, which my endeavor I know
your Lordship will accept graciously and well, whether your Lordship take it by
the handle of the occasion ministered from your self, (...) or of the affection
from which it proceeds, your Lordship is designed to a service of great
merit, and great peril; and as the greatness of the peril must needs include
a like proportion; So the greatness of the merit may include no small
consequence of peril, if it be not temperately governed: For all immoderate
success extinguisheth merit, and seareth up distaste and envy, the assured
Forerunners of whole changes of perils. But I am at the last point: First,
some good spirit leading my pen to presage to your Lordship successes; wherein
it is true, I am not without my Oracles and Divinations, none of them
suppositions. And yet not all natural.

For first, looking into the course of Gods providence in things now depending,
and calling to consideration, how great things God has done by her Majesty,
and for Her, I collect he has disposed of this great defection in Ireland,
thereby to give an urgent occasion to the reduction of that whole Kingdom, as
upon the Rebellion of Desmond, there ensued the whole reduction of that whole
Province.

Next, your Lordship goes against three of the unlucky Vices of all others,
Disloyalty, Ingratitude, and Inconstancy, which three offenses, in all
examples, have seldom their doom adjourned to the world to come. Lastly, he
that shall have had the honor to know your Lordship inwardly as I have had,
shall find Bona extra, whereby he may better ground a divination of good, then
upon the defection of a Sacrifice. But that part I leave: for it is fit for
others to be confiden upon the Cause The goodness and justice whereof is such,
as can hardly be matched in any example.

It being no ambitious War of Forraigners, but a recovery of Subjects. And that
after lennity of conditions often tried and a recovery of them not only to
obedience, but to humanity and policy from more then Indian Barbarism.

There is yet another kind of Divination familiar to matters of State, being
that which Demosthenes so often relyeth upon in his time, when he says, That
which for the time past is worst of all, is for the time to come the best;
which is, that things go ill not by accident, but by error: wherein your
Lordship have been heretofore an awaking Censor, but look for no other now, but
Medicae cura, etc.

And although your Lordship shall not be the blessed Physician that comes in
the declination of the Disease, yet you embrace that condition which many noble
Spirits have accepted for advantage; which is, that you go upon the greater
peril of your fortune, and the less of your reputation, and so the honor
countervaileth the adventure: of which honor your Lordship is in no small
possession, when that her Majesty known to be one of the judicious Princes, in
discerning of Spirits that ever governed, has made choice of you merely out of
her Royal judgment (her affection rather including to continue your
attendance) into whose hand and trust to put the commandment and conduct of so
great Forces, the gathering in the fruit of so great charge, the execution of
so many councels, the redeeming of the defaults of so many former governors,
and the clearing of the glory of so many and happy years Reign, only in this
part excepted.

Nay further, how far forth the peril of that State is interlaced with the
peril of England.

And therefore, how great the honor is to keep and defend the approaches of
this Kingdom, I hear many discourse. And indeed, there is a great difference
whether the Tortoys gather her self into her shell hurt or unhurt. And if any
may be of opinion, that the nature of the enemy does extinuate the honor of
the service, being but a Rebel and a Savage, I differ from him: for I see the
justest tryumphs that the Romans in their greatness did obtain, and that
whereof the Emperors in their Styles, took additions and denominations, were
of such an Enemy; that is, people barbarous and not reduced to civility,
magnifying a kind of Lawless Liberty, prodigal in life, hardened in body,
fortifyed in Woods and Bogs, placing both justice and felicity in the sharpness
of their swords.

Such were the Germains and ancient Britains, and diverse others; upon which
kind of people, whether the victory were a conquest, or a reconquest, upon a
Rebellion or Revolt, it made no difference that I could ever find in honor.

And therefore, it is not the enriching predatory War that has the
pre-eminence in honor, else should it be more honor to bring in a Carrack of
rich burdens, then one of the twelve Spanish Apostles.

But then this nature of people does yield a higher kind of honor, considered
in truth and substance, then any War can yield, which should be achieved
against a civil enemy, if the end may be pacique impovere morem, to replant
and refound the honor and policy of that Nation, to which nothing is wanting
but a just and civil Government, which design as it does descend to you from
your noble Father, who lost his life in that action, though he paid tribute to
nature, and not to fortune.

So I hope your Lordship shall be as fatal a Captain to this war as Affricanus
was to the War of Carthage, after that both his Uncle and his Father had lost
their lives in Spain in the same War. Now although it be true, that these
things which I have writ (being but Representations unto your Lordship of the
honor and appearance of success of the enterprise) be not much to the purpose
of my direction; yet it is that which is best to me, being no man of War and
ignorance in the particulars of Estate. For a man may by the eye, set up the
white right in the midst of the Butt, though he be no Archer,

Therefore, I will only add this wish, according to the English phrase, which
terms a well-willing advise; I wish, that your Lordship in this whole action
looking forward, set down this position. That Merit is worthier then Fame.

And looking back hither, would remember this Text. That Obedience is better
then Sacrifice,

For designing to Fame and Glory, may make your Lordship in the adventure of
your person, to be valiant as a private Soldier, rather then as a General.

It may make you in your commandments, rather to be gracious, then
disciplinary.

It may make you press Action, in respect of the great expectation conceived,
rather hastily, then seasonably and safely.

It may make you seek rather to atchieve the War by force, then by intermixture
of practice.

It may make you (if God shall send you prosperous beginning) rather seek the
fruition of that honor, then the perfection of the work in hand.

And for your proceeding like a good Protestant upon warrant, and not upon good
intention, your Lordship knows in your wisdom, that as it is most fit for you
to desire convenient liberty of instruction.

So is it no less fit for you to observe the due limits of them, remembering
that the exceeding of them, may not only procure, in case of adverse accidents,
a dangerous disadvow. But also in case of prosperous success to be subject to
interpretation, as if all were not referred to the right end.

Thus I have presumed to write these few lines unto your Lordship, in methodo
ignorantiae, which is, when a man speaks of a Subject not according to the
parts of the matter; but according to the model of his own knowledge. And most
humbly desire your Lordship, that the weakness thereof may be supplied in your
Lordship, by a benign acceptance, as it is in me by my best wishing.

F. BACON.

A Letter to the Earl of Essex, of offer of his service, when he was first
enlarged to Essex house.
My Lord,
NO man can expound my doings better then you Lordship, which makes me need to
say the less: only J pray you to believe, that I aspire unto the Conscience
and commendation of Bonus civis, and Bonus vir, and that J love something, J
confess, better then J love your Lordship: yet J love few persons better, both
for gratitudes sake, and for your virtues, which cannot hurt, but by accident:
of which my good affection, it may please your Lordship to assure your self of
all the true effects and offices J can yield.

For as I was ever sorry your Lordship should fly with many Wings, doubting
Iearus fortune: So for the growing up of your own Feathers, be they Ostriges,
or other kind, no man shall be more glad.

And this is the Axeltree whereupon I have turned, and shall turn, which having
already signified to you by some near means, having so fit a messenger for mine
own Letter, J thought good to redouble also by Writing. And so commend you to
Gods goodness.

My Lord, Yours in all humbleness, FRAN. BACON.
From Grays. Inn, etc.
Two Letters framed; the one as from Mr. Anthony Bacon to the Earl of Essex;
the other, as the Earls Answer thereunto, delivered with the advice of Mr.
Anthony Bacon, and tho privity of the Earl to be showed the Queen, upon some
fit occasion, as a mean to work her Majesty, to receive the Earl again to
favor and attendance.
My singular good Lord,
THis standing at a stay, does make me in my love toward your Lordship
zealous, least you do somewhat, or omit somewhat that amounts to a new
error: For I suppose, of all former matters, there is a full expectation;
wherein, for any thing that your Lordship does, I for my part, who am remote,
cannot cast nor devise, wherein any error should be, except in one point,
which I dare not censure, nor dissuade; which is that as the Prophet says, in
this affliction you look up, ad manum percutientem, and so make your peace with
God.

And yet I have heard it noted, that my Lord of Liecester, who could ^ver get
to be taken for a Saint, yet in the Queens dis favor, waxed seeming Religious,
which may be thought by some, and used by others as a case of resembling yours,
if men do not see, or will not see the differences between your two
dispositions.

But to be plain with your Lordship, my fear rather is, because I hear some of
your good and wise friends, not unpractised in the Court and supposing
themselves not to be unseen in that deep and unscrutable Center of the Court,
which is her Majesty's mind, do not only tole the Bell, but even ring out
peales, as if your fortune were dead and buried, and as if there were no
possibility of recovering her Majesty's favor; and as if the best of your
condition were to live a private and retired life, out of want, out of peril,
and out of manifest disgrace: and so in this persuasion of theirs, include a
persuasion to your Lordship wards, to frame and accommodate your actions and
mind to that end, I fear I say, that this untimely despair, may in time bring
forth a just despair, by causing your Lordship to slack and break off your
wise, loyal, and seasonable endeavor and industry, for reintegration into her
Majesty's favor: in comparison whereof, all other circumstances are but as
Attomi, or rather as vacuum, without any substance at all.

Against this opinion, it may please your Lordship to consider of these reasons
which I have collected, and to make judgment of them; neither out of the
melancholy of your patient fortune; nor out of the insusion of that which
comes to you by others relation which is subject to much tincture.

But, ex rebus opis. but of the nature of the persons and actions themselves,
as the truest and less deceiving, grounded of opinion.

For though I am so unfortunate, as to be a stranger to her Majesty's eye, much
more to her nature and manners: yet by that which is extant, I do manifestly
discern, that she has that Character of the divine nature and goodness, as
quos amavit, amavit usque ad finem.

And where she has a creature, she does not deface it, nor defeat it:
insomuch, as if I observe rightly in these persons, whom she has heretofore
honored with her special favor she has covered and remitted, not only
defections, and ingratitudes in affections, but error in State and service.

Secondly, if I can Scholar-like, spell and put together the parts of her
Majesty's proceedings now toward your Lordship, I cannot but make this
construction, that her Majesty in her Royal intention, never purposed to call
your Lordships doings into public question: but only to have used a Cloud
without a shower, and censuring them by some restraint of liberty, and debarring
from her presence. For both the handling the cause in the Star Chamber was
enforced by the violence of libelling and Rumors, wherein the Queen thought to
have satisfied the World, and yet spared your appearance.

And then after, when that means which was intended to quench Malicious Bruites
turned to kindle them, Because it was said your Lordship was condemned unheard,
and your Lordships sister wrote that private Letter: Then her Majesty plainly
saw that these winds of rumors could not be commanded down, without a
handling of the cause by making your party, and admitting your defense; and to
this purpose I do assure your Lordship that my brother Francis Bacon, who is to
wise to be abused, though he be both reserved more then is needful: yet in
generality he has ever constantly, and with Asseveration assirmed unto me:
that both those days, that at the Star Chamber, and that at my Lord keepers
were won from the Queen merely upon necessity, and point of honor against her
own inclination. Thirdly, in the last proceedings I note three points which are
directly significant, that her Majesty did expressly forbear any point which
was errecuperable or might make your Lordship many degree incapable of the
return of her favor or might fix any character indeleble of disgrace upon
you, for she spared the public places, which spared ignomine; she limited the
charge precisely not to touch disloyalty, and no record remains to memory of
the charge or sentence. Fourthly, the very distinction that was made of
sequestration from the places of service in State, and leaving your Lordship
the place of the Mr. of the Horse, do they in my understanding point at this,
that her Majesty meant to use your Lordships attendence in Court while the
exercise of other places stood suspended. Fifthly, I have heard and your
Lordship knows better, that now since you were in your own custody: her
Majesty in verboregio, and by his mouth to whom she counte^h her royal grants
and decrees, has assured your Lordship she wi^ forbid, and not suffer your
ruin. Sixthly, as I have heard her Majesty to be a Prince of that mainanimity
that she will spare the service of a meaner then your Lordship, where it shall
depend merely upon her Choice and will.

Seventhly I hold it for a principle that those diseases are hardest to cure,
whereof the cause is obscure and these rafiest whereof the cause is manifest:
whereupon I conclude, that sine (...) has been your error in your lowness
toward her Majesty which have prejudiced you; that your reforming, and
conformity may restore you; may be faber fortunae propriae. Lastly considering
your Lordship is removed from dealing in causes of State, and left only to a
place of attendance: Me thinks the ambition of any which can endure no Partners
in State-matters may be so quenched, as they should not laboriously oppose
themselves to your being in Court.

So as upon the whole matter I cannot find neither in her Majesty's Person nor
in your own Person, nor in any third Person, neither in former Presidents, nor
in your own case, any cause of peremptory despair.

Neither do I speak this but that if her Majesty out of her resolution should
design you to a private life, you should upon the appointment be as willing to
go in the Wilderness, as into the Land of Promise.

Only I wish, that your Lordship will not preoccupate despair, but put trust,
next to God, in her Majesty's grace, and not be wanting to your self.

I know your Lordship may justly interpret, that this which I persuade may have
some reference to my particular: because I may truly say, testante non virebo,
for I am withered in my self. But manebo, or terebo, I shall in some sort be,
or hold out. But though your Lordships years and health, may expect return of
grace and fortune, yet your eclipse for (...) while is an ultimum vale, to my
fortune; and were it not that I desired hope to see my Brother established by
her Majesty, as I think him well worthy for that he has done and suffered, it
were time J did take that course, from which J disswa^ed your Lordship Now in
the mean time, I cannot choose but perform those honest duties unto you, to whom
I have been so deeply bound unto, etc.

My Lord of Essex his Answer to Mr. Anthony Bacons Letter.
Mr. Bacon,
I Thank you for your kind and careful Letter, it persuades that which I wish
strongly, and hope for weakly, that is, possibility of restitution to her
Majesty's favor; your Arguments that would cherish hope turn into despair. You
say the Queen never meant to call me to public Censure, which shows her
goodness, But you see I passed it, which shows others power. I believe most
steadfastly, her Majesty never intended to bring my cause to a public Sentence,
and I believe as verily, that since the Sentence, She meant to restore me to
attend upon her Majesty's Person. But they that could use occasions, which it
was not in me to let and amplify occasions, and practice occasions, to
represent to her Majesty a necessity to bring me to the one, can and will do
the like to stop me from the other.

You say my errors were my prejudice, and therefore I can mend my self.

It is true: But they that know I can mend my self and that if I ever recover
the Queen, that I will never lose her again, will never suffer to obtain
interest in her favor, And you say the Queen never forsook utterly, where she
inwardly favored. But I know not whether the Hour glass of Time has altered
her. But sure I am the false Glass of others information must alter her, when I
want access to plead mine own cause. I know I ought double infinitely to be her
Majesty's both jure creationis, for I am her Creature, and jure redemptionis,
for I know she has saved me from overthrow.

But for her first love, and for her last protection, and all her great
benefits, I can but pray for her Majesty: and my endeavors is now to make my
prayers for her, and for my self, better heard. For, thanks be to God; they
that can make her Majesty believe I counterfeit with her, cannot make God
believe I counterfeit with him.

And they which can let me from coming near unto her, cannot let me from
drawing near to him, as I hope I do daily. For your Brother, I hold him an
honest Gentleman, and wish him all good, much rather for your sake: your self I
know has suffered more for me, and with me, then any friend I have.

But I can but lament freely, as you see I do, and advise you not to do, as I
do, that is despair: you know Letters what hurt they have done me, and
therefore make sure of this. And yet I could not, as having no other pledge of
my love, but communicate openly to you, the ease of my heart, and yours.

Your loving friend, ROBERT ESSEX.

A Letter to Mr. Secretary Cecill, after the defeating of the Spanish Forces in
Ireland, inciting him to embrace the cares of reducing that Kingdom to
civility, with some Reasons sent enclosed.
IT may please your Lordship, as one that wishes you all increase of honor,
and as one that cannot leave to love the State, what interest soever I have, or
may come to have in it; and as one, that now (this dead vacation time) have
some leisure, ad aliud agendum. I will presume to propound unto you that which
though you cannot but see, yet I know not whether you apprehend and esteem it
in so high a degree, that is, for the best action of importation to your self,
of sound honor and merit of her Majesty.

And this Crown without ventosity or popularity that the riches of any
occasion, or the tide of any opportunity, can possible minister or offer, and
that is the causes of Ireland, if they be taken by the right handle. For if the
wound be not ripped up again, etc. I think no Physician will go on with much
letting of blood, in declanatione morbi, but will intend to purge and
corroborate: to which purpose I send you mine opinion (without labor of words)
in the enclosed.

And sure I am, that if you shall enter into the matter, according to the
verosity of your own spirit; nothing can make unto you a more gainful return.
For you shall make the Queens selicity complete, which now as it is, is
incomparable.

And for your self, you shall make your self as good a Patient as you are
thought politic.

And to have no less generous ends, then dexterrous delivery of your self
toward your ends; and as well to have true Arts and Grounds of Government, as
the facility and felicity of Practice and Negotiation; and to be as well seen in
the periods, and tides of estates, as in your own circle and way: then the
which I suppose, nothing can be a better addition and accumulation of honor
unto you.

This, I hope I may in privatnesse write, either as a Kinsman that may be bold,
or as a Scholar that has liberty of discourse, without commiting any
absurdity: if not, I pray your honor to believe, I ever loved her Majesty and
the State, and now love our self.

And there is never any vehement love without some absurdity: as the Spaniard
well says, Desuario con la calentura: So desiring your Honors pardon, I ever
continue.

Considerations touching the Queens service in Ireland,
THe reduction of the Country as well to civility and justice, as to obedience
and peace; which thing as the affairs now stand I hold to be inseparable,
consists of four points.

1. The extinguishing of the Relics of War. 2. The recovery of the hearts of
the People. 3. The removing of the roots and occasions of new troubles. 4,
Plantations and Buildings.
For the first, concerning the places, times and perticularities of further
prosecution in Fact, I leave it to the opinion of men of War, only the
difficulty is to distinguish and discern, the prepositions which shall be
according to the ends of the state here: that is small, and summary toward the
extirpation of the troubles from these, which though they pretend the public
end, yet may refer indeed to the more private, and compendious ends of the
Council there; or other particular Governors or Captains; but still as I
touch in my Letter, I do think much letting Blood in declinatione morbi, is
against Method of Cure, and that it will but exasperate necessity and despair,
and percase discover the hollowness of that which is done already, which now
blazeth to the best show. For Taglaes, and proscriptions of two or three
principal Rebels, they are no doubt Iure jentium lawful in Italy, usually
practiced upon the Bandelty, best in season when a side goes down, and may do
good into kinds, the one, if they take effect, the other in the distrust, which
follows amongst the Rebels themselves; but of all other points to my
understanding, the most effectual is the expressing or impressing of the
design of this state; upon that miserable, and desolate Kingdom, Containing
the same between these two Lists or Boundaries, the one that the Queen seeks
not an extirpation of the people but reduction, and that now she has
established them, by her royal power, and arms, according to the necessity of
the occasion, her Majesty takes no pleasure in the effusion of Blood, or
displanting of ancient generations; the other that her Majesty's princely care
is principally, and intentionably bent upon that action of Ireland, and that
she seeks not so much the ease of charge, as the royal performance of her
office of protection, and reclaim of these her subjects, and in a word, that
the case is altered as far as may stand with the honor of the time past, which
it is easy to reconcile, as in my last note I showed, and again, I do repeat
that if her Majesty's designs be to reduce wild and barborous people to
civility, and justice, as well as to rebels to obedience; it makes weakness
true christianity, and conditions turn graces, and so has a fineness in
turning civility upon point of honor which is agreeable to the honor of these
time.

And besides if her Majesty shall suddenly abate the Lists of her forces, and
shall do nothing to Countervaile it in point of reputation of a public
proceeding, I doubt things may too soon fall back into the state they were in.
Next to this, adding reputation to the cause by imprinting an opinion, of her
Majesty's care, and intention upon this action, is the taking away of
reputation from the contrary side, by cutting off the opinion and expectation
of foreign Succors, to which purpose this enterprise of Algiers if it hold
according to the advertisement. And if it be not wrapped up in the period of
this Summer seems to be an opportunity Caelitus Demissa.

And to the same purpose nothing can be more fit then a treaty, or shadow of a
treaty of a peace with Spain, which me thinks should be in our power at least
Rumore tenus, to the deluding of as wise people as the Irish.

Lastly, for this point that the Ancients called Potestas factum rediundi ad
Sanctatem. And which is but a mockery when the enemy is strong or proud, but
effectual in his declination, that is, a Liberal proclamation of grace, and
pardon to such as shall submit, and come within a time prefixed of, of some
further reward to such as shall bring others in. That our sword may be sharpened
against others, is a matter of good experience, and now I think, will come in
time, And percase, though I wish the exclusions of such a pardon exceeding few,
yet it will not be safe to continue some of them in their strengths, But to
translate them and their generation into England, and give them recompense, and
satisfaction here, for their possessions there; As the King of Spain did by
diverse families of Portugal, to the effecting of all the points aforesaid, And
likewise these which fall within the divisions following, nothing can be in
priority, either of time or matter precedent; to the sending of some Commission
of the continuance. Ad res inspiciendas et componendas, for it must be a very
significant demonstration of her Majesty's care of that Kingdom.

A credence to any that shall come in, and submit a Bridell to any that have
their fortunes there, and shall apply their proposition^ to private ends, and
an evidence that her Majesty's politic Course is without neglect or
respiration; and it has been the wisdoms of the best examples of government
toward the recovery of the hearts of the people. There be but three things in
Natura rerum.

Religion. Justice and protection. Obligation and reward.
For Religion, to speak first of piety, and then of policy, All Divines do
agree, that if Conscience be to be enforced at all (where they differ) yet two
things must proceed out of their inforcement, the one means of justification,
and the other of opperation, Neither of which they have yet had. Besides, till
they be more like reasonable men, then they yet are, their society were rather
scandalous to true Religion then otherwise, as Pearls cast before Swine; For
till they be cleansed from their Blood, Incontinency, and theft, etc. which are
now not the lapses of particular persons: but the very Laws of the Nation, They
are incompetible with religion, ref^ed with policy, there is no doubt but to
wrestle with them now, is directly opposite to their reclaim, and cannot but
continue their Alienation of, made from this government; Besides one of the
principal pretenses, whereby the heads of the rebellion have prevayled, both
with the people, and with the forraigner, has been the defense of the
Catholic religion, And it is that likewise has made the forraigner
reciprocally more plausible with the Rebel.

Therefore a tolleration of religion for a time not definite, except it be in
some principal towns, and precincts, after the manner of some French edicts
seems to me to be a matter warrantable by religion, and in policy of absolute
necessity, and the hesitation in this point I fear has been a greater casting
back of the affairs there, Neither if any English papist, or Recusant, shall
for liberty of his Concience transfer his person family, and fortunes thither,
do J hold it a matter of Danger, but expedient to draw an undertaking, and to
further population Neither if Rome will cosen it self by conceiving it may be
some degree to the like tolleration in England, do I hold it a matter of any
moment but rather a good mean to take off the sciences and eagerness of the
humor of Rome, and to stay further excommunications and ininterdictions of
Ireland; but there would go hand in hand with this same course of advantage
Religion. Indeed, where the people is capable thereof, is the sending over of
some good Preachers, especially of that sort which are vehement and zealous
perswaders, and not Scholasticall, to be resident in the principal Towns,
allowing them some stipend out of her Majesty's Revenues, as her Majesty has
most religiously and graciously done in Lancashire, and the great recontinuing
and replenishing the College begun at Dublin, the placing of good men to be
Bishops, the taking care of the versions of Bibles, Catechisms, and other books
of instruction, into the Irish language and the like Religious courses, both
for the honor of God, and for the avoiding of scandal, and in satisfaction
here, by a toleration of Religion there. For instance, the Barbarism and
desolation of the Country considered it is not possible they should find any
sweetness at all of it (which has been the error of times past formal and
fetched far off from the State, because it will require running up and down for
process of polling and exactions by fees, and many other delays and charges:
and therefore, there must be an intrim, in which the justice must be only
summary; the rather, because it is fit and safe for a time, the Country do
participate of a Marshal Government: and therefore I could wish in every
principal town or place of habitation, there were a Captain or Governor, and
a Judge, such as Recorders and learned Stewards are here in Corporations, who
may have a Prerogative Commission to hear and determine, Secundum saenam
discretione, and as near as may be to the Customs and Laws of England, and that
by Bill or Plaint, without original Writ, reserving from their sentence matter
of Freehold and inheritance to be determined before a superior Judge
itener^t, and both sentences, as well the Bayliwick Judge, as the itenerant to be
reversed, if cause be, before the Council of the Prince to be established with
fit informations.

For obligation and reward, it is true no doubt, which was anciently said that
a State is contained in two words, Praemium and paena, and I am persuaded if a
penny in the pound which has been spent in paena. For this kind of War is but
paena, a chastisement of Rebels without other fruit or emolument of this State,
had been spent in praemio, that is, in rewarding, things had never grown to
this extremity. But to speak forwards, the keeping of the principal Irish
persons in terms of contentment, and without particular complaint; and
generally the carrying of an even course between the English and the Irish,
whether it be in competition, or whether it be controversy, as if they were
one Nation, without the same partial course that has been held by the
Governors and Councillors that some have savoured the Irish, and some
contrary, is one of the best Medicines of that State.

And as for the points of governing their Nobility as well in this Court, as
there of Knighthood, if education of their Children there, and the like points
of comfort and allurement, they are things which fall into every man's
consideration. For the extirpating of the seeds of trouble, I suppose the main
roots are but three.

The first, the ambition and absoluteness of the chief of the Families and
Sects.

Secondly, the licentious id^enesse of their Kerns and Soldiers thatly upon
the Country by Sesses and such oppressions.

And the third, the barbarous customs in habit of apparel in these Poets or
Heralds, that inchant them in savage manners and sundry other such dregs of
Barbarism and Rebellion, which by a number of politic Statutes of Ireland,
meet to be put in execution, are already forbidden unto which such addition:
may be made, as the present time requires. But the deducing of this Barbarism
requires a more particular notice of the state and manners there, there. falls
within my compass. For Plantations and Buildings I do find it strange, that in
the last Plot for the population of Munster, there were limitations how much in
Demeasnes, and how much in Farm and Tenantry, how many Buildings should be
erected, how many Irish in mixture should be admitted; but no restraint that
they might not build parsim at their pleasure, much less any condition, that
they should make places fortified and defensible.

The which was too much securenesse to my understanding: so as for this last
point, of Plantations, and Buildings, ^ere be ^wo considerations which I hold
most material, the one of quickening; the other for assuring.

The first is, that choice be made of such persons for the Government of Towns
and Places, and such Undertakers be produced, as be men gracious and
well-beloved, and are like to be well fellowed; wherein for Munster, it may
well be, because it is not res intigra; but that the former Undertakers stand
interessed, there will be some difficulty.

But surely, in mine opinion, either by agreeing with them, or by overruling
them by a Parliament in Ireland, which in this course of a politic proceeding,
infinite occasions will require speedily to be held: it will be fit to supply
fit qualified Persons for undertakers.

The other, that it be not best, as heretofore, to the pleasure of the
undertakers and adventurers, where, and how to build and plant, but that they
do according to a prescript, or formilary.

For first, the places both Maritine, and in Land, which are fittest for
Collonies and Garrisons, as well for doubt of Forraigners, as for keeping the
Country in Bridell, would be found surveyed, and resolved upon; and then, that
the Pattenties be tied, to build on those places only, and to fortify, as
shall be thought convenient.

And lastly, it follows of course, in Countries of new Populations, to
invite, and provoke inhabitants, by ample Liberties and Charter.

A Letter of recommendation of his service to the Earl of Northampton, a few
days before Queen Elizabeth's death,
May it please your good Lordship,
AS the time of the sowing of a Seed is known, but the time of coming up and
disclosing is casual, or according to the Season: So I am witness to my self,
that there has been covered in my mind a long time, a Seed of affection and
zeal toward your Lord, sown by the estimation of your virtues, and your
particula^^ ^our and favor to my Brother deceased, and to my self, which Seed
still springing, now bursteth forth into this possession.

And to be pl^in in with your Lordship, it is very true, and no winds not
noises of evil matters can blow this out of my head and he^rt, that your great
capacity and love toward Studies and contemplations of an higher and worthier
nature then popular, a matter ra^e in the World, and in a person of your I
ordships quality, a most singular, is to me a great and chief motive, to draw
my affection and admiration toward you.

And therefore, good my Lord, if I may be of any use to your Lordship, by my
hand, tongue, pen, means, or friends, I humbly pray your Lordship to hold me
your own, and there withal not to do so much disadvantage to my good mind, as
to conceive this my commendation of my humble service proceeds out of any
straights of my occasions; but merely out of an election, and indeed the
fullness of my heart: and so wishing your Lordship all prosperity, I continue.

A Letter of offer of his service to his Majesty upon his first coming in.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
IT is observed upon a place in the Canticles, by some, Ego sum Flos Campi and
Lillium Convalium, it is not said Ego sum Flos horti and Lillium Montinum,
because the Majesty of that person is not enclosed for a few, nor appropriated
to the great.

And yet notwithstanding, this Royal virtue of access, which nature and
judgment have planted in your Majesty's mind, as ^ortall of all the rest, could
not of it self (my imperfections considered) have animated me to have made
oblation of my self immediately to your Majesty, had it not been joined with a
habit of like liberty, which I enjoyed with my late dear Sovereign Mistress,
a Prince happy in all things, but most happy in such a Successor.

And yet further and more nearly, I was not a little encouraged not only upon a
supposall that unto your Majesty's cares, open to the Air of all Virtues, there
might have come some small breath of the good memory of my Father, so long a
principal Counselor in your Kingdom; but also by the particular knowledge of
the infinite devotion, and incessant endeavors beyond the strength of his
body, and the nature of the times, which appeared in my good Brother toward
your Majesty's service, and near on your Ma^esties part, through your singular
benignity, by many most gracious and lively significations and favors,
accepted and acknowledged beyond the merit of any thing he could effect.

All which endeavors and duties for the most part, were common to my self with
him, though by design between Brethren dissembled.

And therefore, most high and mighty King, my most dear and dread Sovereign
Lord, since now the corner stone is laid of the mightiest Monarch in Europe;
and that God above, who is noted to have a mighty hand in bridling the Floods
and Fluctuations of the Seas, and of Peoples hearts, has by the miraculous and
universal consent (the more strange, because it proceeds from such diversity
of causes) in your coming, in giving a sign and token what he intends in the
continuance, I think there is no Subject of your Majesty's who leaves this
Isla^^, and is not hollow and unworthy, whose heart is not set on fire, n^ only
to bring you Peace Offerings, to make you propitious; but to sacrifice himself
a burnt offering to your Majesty's service: amo^^st which number, no man's fire
shall be more pure and fervent. But how far forth it shall blaze out, that
rests in your Majesty's employment.

For, since your fortune in the greatness thereof, has for a time debarred
your Majesty of the fruitly virtue, which one calls the principal,
Principi^s est voritus maxima, etc. Because your Majesty has many of yours
which are unknown unto you, I must leave all to the trial of further time, and
thirsting after the happiness of kissing your Royal hand, continue ever, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Fauls in Scotland, upon the entrance of his Majesty's Reign.
SIR,
THe occasion awaketh in me a remembrance of the constant and mutual good
offices which passed between my good Brother and your self; whereunto, as you
know I was not altogether a stranger, though the nature of the time and design
between us Brethren made me more reserved: But well do I bear in mind the
great opinion which my Brother (whose judgment I much reverence) would often
express to me of your extraordinary sufficiency, dexterity, and temper, which
he found in you, in the business and service of the King our Sovereign Lord,
This latter bred in m^ an election, as the former gave an inducement form to
make this signification of my desire, of a mutual entertainment of my good
affection, and correspondence between us, hoping both that some good effect may
result of it toward the Kings service, and that for our particulars, though
occasion give you the precedence of furthering my being, known by good note to
the King: So we shall have some means given to requite your savours, and
verify your commendations: And so with my loving recommendation good Mr.
Fowls, I leave you to Gods goodness*

From Grays-Inne this 25 of March.
A Letter of commending his love to the Lord of Kinlosse upon his Majesty's
entrance.
My Lord,
THe present occasion awaketh in me a remembrance of the constant amity, and
mutual good offices which passed between my Brother deceased, and your
Lordship, whereunto I was less strange then in respect of the time. I had
reason to pretend, and withal, I call to mind the great opinion which my
Brother, who seldom failed in judgment of person, would often express to me of
your Lordships great wisdom and soundness, both in head and heart, toward the
service of our Lord the Sovereign King.

The one of those has bred in me an election, and the other a confidence to
address my good w^ll, and sincere affection to your Lordship, not doubting, in
regard that my course of life has wrought me not to be altogether unseene in
the matters of the Kingdom, that I may be in some use both in point of service
to the King, and in your Lordships particular.

And on the other side, I will not omit, to desire humbly your Lordships
favor, in furthering a good conceit and impression of my most humble duty, and
true zeal toward the King, to whose Majesty words cannot make me known,
neither mine own, nor others. But time will, to no disadvantage of any, that
shall fore* run his Majesty's experience, by their humanity and commendations.
And so I commend your good Lordship to Gods providence and protection.

From Grays-Inn^. etc.
A Letter commending his love and occasions to ^ir Tho^ Ch^lenor in Scotland
upon his Majest^es en^.
SIR.
FOr our present affairs, I am assured you conceive no insatisfaction; for you
know my mind, and you know my means, which now the ap^nesse of the time,
caused by this blessed con^e^t, and peace will increase, and so our agreement
according to your time be observed; ^or the present, according to the Roman
Addage that one cluster of grapes ripeneth best against another; so I know you
hold me not unworthy whose mutual friendship you should cherrish, And I for my
part conceive good hope that you are like to be come an acceptable servan^ to
the King our Mr. not so much for any way made, which in my judgment will make
no great difference; as for the stuff, and sufficiency which I know to be in
you and whereof I know his Majesty may reap great service, and thereof my
general request is, that according to that industrious vivacitie which you use
toward your friend, you will further his Majesty's good conceit, and
inclination toward one, to whom words cannot make me known, neither my own,
nor others, but time will, to no disadvantage of any that shall fore-runne his
Majesty's experience by their testimony, and commenadtion, and though occasion
give you the precedencie of doing me this special good office yet I hope no
long time will intercede, before I shall have some means to require your
favor, and acqui^e your repo^^ more perticulerly, having though^ good to make
Oblation of my most humble service to his Majesty by a few lines I do desire
your loving care, and help by your self, or such means as I refer to your
discretion ^to delive^ and presentthis to his Majesty's hands, of which Letter
I ^end you a Copy; that you may know what you carry, and may take of Mr
Mathews, the Letter it self, if you be pleased to undertake the delivery.

Lastly, I do commend to your self, and to such your courtesies as occasion may
require this Gent. Mr. Mathew^ eld^st Son to my Lord Bishop o^ Durham, an^ my
very good friend, assu^ing you that any cou^ that you shall use toward him,
you shall use to a worthy young gent, and one I know, whose acquaintance you
will much esteem, and so J ever continue*

A Letter to Mr. Davies, then gone to the King at his first entrance.
Mr. Davies,
THough you went on the sudden yet you could not go before you had spoken with
your self to the purpose whereof I will now write. And therefore. I know not,
but that it was altogether needless, save that I meant to show you, that J was
not asleep. Besides, J commend my self to your love, and to the well using of
my name, as in reposing and answering for me, if there be any biting or
bibbling at it in that place, as in impressing a good opinion of me chiefly in
the King of whose favor, I make my self comfortable assurance, as otherwise
in that Court; and not only, but generally to perform to me all the good
offices, which the vivacity of your wit can suggest to your mind, to be
performed to one, in whose affection you have so great sympathy, and in whose
fortune, you have so* great interest: So desiring you to be good to concealed
Poets, I continue.

Yours, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Fauls, 28. March, 1603.
Mr* Faules,
I Did write to you yesterday by Mr. Lake who was dispatched hence from their
Lordships, with a Letter of revivour of those sparks of acquaintance between us
in my Brothers time, and now upon the same case, finding so fit a messenger, I
could not fail to salute you, hoping it will fall ou^ so happily, as that you
shall be one of the Kings servants, which his Majesty will apply here about us,
where I hope to have some means not to be barren in friendship toward you. We
all thirst for the Kings coming, accounting all this but as the dawning of the
day, before the rising of the Sun, till we have his presence. And though his
Majesty must be now Ianus Bysrons, to have a face to Scotland, as well as to
England, yet Quod number instat agendum. The expectation is here, that he will
come in state, and not in strength. So for this time, I commend you to Gods
go^dnesse, and remain

Yours, etc.

A Letter to Doctor Morrison, a Scottish Physician upon his ^aiesties coming in.
Mr, Doctor Morrison*
I Have thought good by this my Letter, to renew this my ancient acquaintance,
which has passed between us, signifying my good mind to you, to perform to you
any good office, for your particular, and my expectation; and a firm assurance
on the like on your part toward me, wherein, I confess you may have the start
of me, because occasion has given you the precedence in investing you with
opportunity to use my name well, and by your loving testimony to further a good
opinion of me in his Majesty, and the Court.

But I hope my experience of matters here, will, with the light of his
M^jesties favor, enable me speedily both to requite your kindness, and to
acquir and m^ke good your testimony and report. So not doubting to see you here
with his Majesty, considering that it belonge^^ to your Art to feel pulses. And
I assure you, Galen does not set down greater variety of pules, then do vent
here in men's hearts. I wish you all prosperity, and remain

Yours, etc.
From my Chamber at Gray-Inne, etc.
A Letter to Mr. Robert Kenney upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth.
Mr. Kenney,
THis alteration is so great, as you might justly conceive some readiness of my
affection toward you, if you should hear nothing from me, I living in this
place; it is in vain to tell you with what wonderful skill and calm this wheel
is turned round, which whether it be a remnant of her felicity that is gone, or
a fruit of his reputation that is coming, I will not determine, for J cannot
but divide my self between her memory and his name; yet we, account it but as
a fair morning before Sunrising, before his Majesty's presence; though for my
part, I see not whence any weather should arise, the Papists are conceived with
fear enough, and hope too much; the French is thought to turn his practices,
upon procuring some disturbance in Scotland, where Crowns may do wonders But
this day is so welcome to that Nation and the time so short, as I do not fear
the effect. My Lord of Sou hampton expect^th release by the next dispatch, and
is already much visited, and much well-wished. There is continual posting by
men of good quality toward the King; the rather, I think, because this Spring
time its but a kind of sport: it is hoped, that as the S^are here have
performed the parts of good Attorneys, to deliver the King quiet possession of
his Kingdoms, so the King will re-deliver them quiet possession of their
places, rather filling places void, then removing men placed.

A Letter to my Lord of Northumberland, mentioning a Proclamation drawn for the
King at his entrance.
It may please your good Lordship;
(...) Do hold it a thing formal and necessary for the King to forerun his
coming be it never so speedy, with some gracious Declaration, for the
cherishing, entertaining, and preparing of men's affections; for which purpose,
I have conceived a draught, it being a thing familiar to me in my Mistress her
times, to have my Pen used in politic Writings of satisfaction, the use of
this may be of two sorts.

First properly, if your Lordship think convenient to show the King any such
draught, because the veins and pulses of this State cannot but be best known
here; which if your Lordship should do, then I would desire your Lordship to
withdraw my name, and only signify, that you gave some heads of direction of
such a matter, to one of whose style and pen, you had some opinion.

The other collateral, that though your Lordship make no other use of it; yet
it is a kind of po^t^acture of that which I think worthy to be advised to the
King, to express himself according to those points, which are therein
conceived, and perhaps more compendious and significant, then if J had set them
down in Article*

I would have attended your Lordship, but for some little Physic I took; to
morrow morning I will wait upon you: So I ever continue, etc.

A Letter unto my Lord of Southampton, upon the Kings coming in.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would have been very glad to have presented my humble service to your
Lordship by my attendance, if I could have foreseen that it should not have
been unpleasing unto you; and therefore, because I would commit no error, I
chose to write, assuring your Lordship, how credible soeve^, yet it is as true,
as a thing that God knows, that this great change in me, has wrought no
other change toward your Lordship, then this, that I may safely be now, that
which I was truly before. And so craving no other pardon, then for troubling
you with this letter, I do not now begin to be, but continue to be,

Your Lordships humble, and much devoted, FRAN. BACON.

A Letter to the Lord of Northumberland, after he had been with the King.
It may please your Lordship,
I Would not have lost this journey, and yet I have not that I went for: For I
have had no private conference to purpose, with the King; no more has almost
any other English. For the speech his Majesty admits with some Noble men, is
rather matter of grace, then matter of business. With the Attorney he sp^ing
urged by the Treasurer of Scotland, but no more then needs must; after I had
received his Majesty's first welcome, and was promised private access, yet not
knowing what matter of service your Lordships Treasurer carried; (for (...) saw
it no^,) and knowing that privinesse in adver^i^em^nt is much, I chose rather
to deliver it to Sir Thomas Horeskins, then to cool it in my hands* upon
expectation of access, your Lordship shall find a Prince the furtherest from
vainglory that may be. And rather like a Prince of the ancient form, then of
the latter time, his speeches swift, and cursarie, and in the full dialect of
his Nation, and in speech of buisinesse short, in speech of discourse large, he
affects popularity, by gracing such as he has heard to be popular and not by
any fashions of his own, he is thought somewhat general ofhis favors, and his
virtue of access, is rather, because he is much abroad, and in press* then
that he gives easy audience he hastneth to a mixture of both Kingd m^s, and
Nations, faster perhaps then policy will b^are. J told your Lordship once
before my opinion that we thought his Majesty rather asked counsel of the time
past then of the time to come, but it is yet early to be s^und in any settled
opinion: for other perticularities J refer conference, having in those
generals gone further in so tender an Argument, then J would have done, were
not the Bearer hereof so assured, So J continue etc.

A Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, touching the Solicitours place, at what
times he stood but in doubtful terms of favor with his Lordship.
It May please your Lordship,
I Am not privy to my self of any such ill deserving toward your Lordship as
that J should think it any mpudent thing to be a suitor unto your favor in a
rea^o^able m^tter, your Lord^^^p being to me, as with your good favor you
cannot cease to be: but rather it were a simp^e, and arrogant part in me to
forbear ^t, t^s thought Mr. Atto^rney shall be chief justice of the Common
place in case Mr. Sollicitour rise. I would be glad now at last to be
Sollicitour, Chiefly because I think it will increase my practice wherein God
blessing me a few years, I may amend my state, and so after fall to my
studies, and ease, whereof the one is requisire for my Body, and the other
serves to my mind, wherein if I shall find your Lordships favor I shall be
more happy then I have been, which may make me also more wise, I have small
store of means about the King, and to sue my self is not fit, and therefore I
shall leave it to God, his Majesty, and your Lordship; for I must still be next
the door, I thank God in these transitory things, J am well resolved: So
beseeching your Lordship not to think this Letter the less humble because it
is plain J rest.

A Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, upon sending him one of his Books of
advancemeat of Learning.
It may please your good Lordship,
I Present your Lordship with a work of my vacant time, which if it had been
more, the work had been better; it appertains to your Lordship, Besides, my
particular respect, in some propriety, in regard you be a great Governor in
the Province of Learning; and that which is more, you have added to your place
affection toward Laarning, and to your affection judgment: of which, the last
I could be content were for the time less, that you might the less exquisitly
censure that which I offer unto you. But sure I am, the Argument is good, if it
had lighted on a good Author. But I shall content my self, to awake better
Spirits, like a Bell-ringer, which is first up to call others to Church: So
with my humble desire of your Lordships good acceptance, J remain

Yours, etc.

A Letter to the Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, upon the like Argument.
May it please your Lordship.
I Have finished an argument touching the advancement of Learning which I have
dedicated to his Majesty the most learned of a Sovereign temporal Prince, that
time has known; and upon reason not unlike, I humbly present one of them Books
to your Lordship, not only as a Chancellor of the University: but as one that
was excellently bred, in all learning which I have ever noted to shine in all
your speeches, and behavior, and therefore your Lordship will yield a gracious
aspect to your first lover, and take pleasu ein the adorning of that, wherewith
your self is so much adorned, and so humbly desiring your favorable
acceptance thereof, with signification of humble Duty to remain, etc.

Yours, etc.

A Letter of the like argument to the Lord Chancellor Egerton.
May it please your good Lordship.
I Humbly present your Lordship with a work, wherein as you have much
commandment over the Author, so your Lordship has also great interest in the
argument; for to speak without flattery few have the like use of Learning, or
like judgment in Learning, as I have observed in your Lordship, has been a
gteat planter of learning, not only in these places in the Church, which have
been in your own gift: but also in your commendatory vote, no man has more
constantly held detur digniori, and therefore both your Lordship is beholding
to learning, and your Lordship which makes me presume with good assurance that
your Lordship will accept well of these my labors, the rather because your
Lordship in private speech, has often begun to me in expressing your
admiration of His Majesty's learning, to whom I have dedicated this work, and
whose virtue, and perfection in that kind did chiefly move me to a work of this
nature, and so with signification of my humble duty, and affection toward your
Lordship, I remain.

A Letter of expostulation to the Attorney General Sir Edward Cook.
Mr. Attorney.
I Thought best, once for all, to let you know in plainness what J find of
you, and what you shall find of me, to take to your self a liberty to
disgrace, and disable my law, my experience, my discretion, what it please you,
I pray think of me I am one that know, both my own wants, and other men's, and
it may be perchance that mine may amend, when others stand at a stay, and
surely I may not endure in public place to be wronged without repelling, the
same to my best advantage, to right my self, you are great, and therefore have
the more enviours, which would be glad to have you paid at another Cost, since
the time I missed he Sollicitours place (the rather I think because your
means) I cannot expect that you or I shall ev^r serve as Attorney, (...) Soll
citor but either to serve with another upon your remove, or to step into some
other course: so as I am more free then ever I was from any occasion of
unworthy conforming my self more then general good means or our perricular go^
usage shall provoke, and if you had not been short fighted in your own
fortune as I think you might have had more use of me; out that tide is past, I
write not this to show my friends what a brave letter I have writ to Mr.
Attorney I have none of those humors: but that I have written, is to a good
end, that is, to the more decent carriage of my Mrs. service, and to a
particular better understanding out of another. This Letter if it shall be
answered by you in deed and not in word, I suppose it will not be worse for us
both. else it is but a few lines lost, which for a much smaller matter I would
adventure, So this being to your self I for my part rest.

A Letter to my Lord of Salisbury touching the Sollicitours place.
It may please your good Lordship.
I Am not ignorant how mean a thing I stand, for desiring to come into the
Sollicitours place; for I know well, it is not the thing it has been, time
having wrought alteration, both in the profession, and in the special place;
yet because I think it would increase my practice, and that it may satisfy my
friends, and because I have been voiced to it I would be glad it were done,
wherein I may say to your Lordship in the confidence of your poor Kinsman and
of a man by you advanced. Tuidem fer opem qui spem dedisti, for I am sure it
was not possible for a man living to have received from any other more
significant, and comfortable words of hope, your Lordship being pleased to tell
me during the course of my last service that you would raise me, and that when
you were resolved to raise a man you were more careful of him then himself,
and that what you had done for me in my marriage, was a benefit to me but of^
^nse to your Lordship; and therefore I might assure my self you would not leave
me there with many like speeches, which I know well my duty, then to take any
other hold of, then the hold of a thankful remembrance, and I know and all the
world knows that your Lo^dship is no de^er of holy water, but noble, and
real, and on my part I am on a sure ground, that I have committed n^thing that
may de erve any alteration; and if I cannot observe you as I would, your
Lordship will impute it to my want of experience, which I shall gather better
when I am once settled; and therefore, my hope is your Lordship wi^ finish a
good work, and consider that ^ime grows precious, and tha I am now
vergentibus annis: and although I know your for une is not to need an hundred
such as I am. yet I shall ever be ready to give you my best and first fruits,
and to supp^y as much as in me ^yeth a worthiness by thankfulness.

A Letter to the Lord Chancellor of the like Argument.
It May please your good Lordship.
AS I conceived it to be a resolution both with his Majesty, and among your
Lordships of his Council that I shnuld be placed Sollicitour, and the
Sollicitour removed to be the Kings Sergeant, so I most humbly thank your
Lordships, furtherance, and forwardness therein, your Lordship being the man
that first devised the mean, wherefore my humble request unto your Lordship is,
that you would set in with some strength to finish this your work, which assure
your Lordship, I desire the rather because being placed I hope by for many
favors, to be able to do y a some better service; for as I am, your Lordship
cannot use me nor scarcely indeed know me, not that I think I shall be abl^ to
do any greater matters: but certainly it will frame me to use a more
industrious observance and application to such as I honor so much as I do your
Lordship, and not I hope without some good offices which may deserve your
thanks, And herewithall good my Lord I humbly pray your Lordship to consider
that time grows precious with me, and that a married man is seven years
elder in his thoughts the first day, and therefore what a discomfortable thing
it is for me to be unsettled still; for surely were it not that I think my self
born to do my Sovereign service, and therefore in that station I will live and
die, otherwise for my own private comfort it were better for me that the King
did blot me out of his Book, or that I should turn to endeavor to serve him
in some other kind, then for me to stand thus at a stop, and to have that
little reputation which by my industry I gather to be scattered and taken away
by continual disgraces, every new man coming above me, and sure I am J shall
never have fair promises, and hope from all your Lordships; For J know not what
service, saving that your Lordships all told me were good, and J would believe
you in a much greater matter, and if it were nothing else J hope the modesty of
my suit deserves somewhat; For J know well the Sollicitours place is not as
your Lordship lest it, time working alteration somewhat in the profession, much
more in that special place, and were it not to satisfy my wives friends, and
to get my self out of being a Common gaze, and a speech, J protest before God I
would never speak word for it. But to conclude as my honorable Lady was a mean
to make me to change the name of another, So if it please you to help me as you
said to change my own name, I cannot be but more, and more bounden to you, and
I am much deceived if your Lordship find not the King well inclined, as for my
Lord of Salisbury forward and affectionate.

A Letter to the King touching the Sollicitours place.
It may please your excellent Majesty.
HOw honestly, ready I have been, most gracious Sovereign, to do your Majesty
humble service to the best of my power, and in manner beyond my power, as I now
stand I am not so unfortunate; but your Majesty knows; for both in the
Commission of union, the labor whereof for men of my profession, rested most
upon my hands, and this last Parliament in the Bill of the Subsidy, both Body
and preamble, in the Bill of Attaindors both Tresham, and the rest in the
matter of purveiance in the Ecclesiastical petitions, in the grievances, and
the like, as I was ever careful, and not without good success, sometimes to
put forward that which was good, sometimes to keep back that which was good,
sometimes to keep back that which was worse, So your Majesty was pleased kindly
to accept of my service and to say to me, such conflicts were the wars of
Peace, and such victories the victories of Peace, and therefore such servants
that obtained them were by Kings that reign in peace no less to be esteemed
the conquerours in the Wars, in all which, nevertheless I can challenge to my
self our sufliciency: but that I was diligent, and reasonable happy to execute
those directions which I received either immediately from your royal mouth or
from my Lord of Salisbury at that time it pleased your Majesty, also to assure
me, that upon the remove of the then Attorney I should not be forgotten: but
be brought into ordinary place, and this was after confirmed nuto me by many of
my Lords, and toward the end of the last term the mannet also in particular
^poken of that is, That Mr. Sollicitour should be made your Majesty's Sergeant,
and I Sollicitour; For so it was thought best to sort with both our gifts, and
faculties for the good of our service, and of this resolution both Courtand
Coun^ry took knowledge; Neither was this my invention or project of mine own,
but moved from my Lord, I think first from my Lord Chancellor, whereupon
resting, your Majesty well knows I never opened my mouth for the greater
place, although I am sure, I had two circumstances that Mr. Attorney that now
is could not all adge: the one, nine years service of the Crown: the other,
being cousen Germain to the Lord of Salisbury: for of my Fathers service I will
not speak, but for the less place, I conceive etc. But after this Mr. Attorney
Habbard was placed, I heard no more o^ my preferment, but it seemed to be at a
stop to my great disgrace and coffeehouse. For (Gracious Sovereign) if still
when the matters are stirred, another shall put in before me, your Majesty had
need to work a miracle, or else I shall be a ^ame man to do you services. And
therefore, my most humble suit unto your Majesty is, That this which seemed to
me intended, may speedily be performed; and I hope my former service shall be
but as beginnings to better, when I am better strengthened. For sure I am no
man's heart is suller, I say not, but many may have greater hearts; but I say
not fuller of love and duty toward your Majesty, and your children, as I hope
time will manifest against envy and detraction if any be. To conclude, I
humbly c^ave pardon for my boldness.

A Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, of courtesy upon a New-yeers gift.
It may please your good Lordship,
HAving no gift to present you within my degree proportionable to my mind, I
desire nevertheless to take the advantage of a Ceremony to express my self to
your Lordship, it being the first time, I could make the like acknowledgment
out of the person of a Suitor: wherefore, I most humbly pray your Lordship to
think of me, that now it has pleased you by many effectual and great
benefits, to add the assurance and comfort of your love and savor to the
precedent disposition which was in me, to admire your virtue and merit. I do
esteem whatsoever I have, or may have in this world, but as trash, in
comparison of having the honor and happiness to be a near and well accepted
Kinsman, to so rare and wor^hy a Counselor, Governor, and Patriot. For
having been a studious is not a curious observer, as well of Antiquity of
Virtue, as of late Peace, I forbear to say to your Lordship what I find and
conceive: but to another I would think to make my self believed.

But not to be tedious in that which may have the show of a complement. I can
but wish your Lordship many happy years, many more then your Father had: but
even so many more, as we may need you more: So I remain.

Yours, etc.

A second Letter to the Chancellor.
May it please your Lordship.
HAving finished an argument touching the advancement of learning which I have
formerly dedicated to his Majesty, I humbly presume (once more) to present one
of them Books to your Lordship, not only as a Chancellor of the University:
but as one that was excellently bred, in all learning which I have ever noted
to shine in all your speeches, and behavior, and therefore your Lordship will
yield a gracious aspect to your first lover, and take pleasu^e in the adorning
of that, wherewith your self is so much adorned, and so humbly desiring your
favorable acceptance thereof, with signification of humble Duty to remain.

Yours etc.

Another Letter to the Lord Chancellor touching the former Argument.
My Lord,
AS I conceived it to be a resolution both with his Majesty, and among your
Lordships of his Council that I should be placed Sollicitour, and the
Sollici^our removed to be the Kings Sergeant, so I most humbly thank your
Lordships furtnerance, and forw^rdnesse therein, your Lordship being the man
that first devised the mean, wherefore my humble request unto your Lordship is,
that you would set in with some strength to finish this your work, which assure
your Lordship, I desire the rather, because being placed I hope by for many
favors, to be able to do you some better service; for as I am, your Lordship
cannot use me nor scarce^y indeed know me, no* that I think I shall be able to
do any greater matters: but certainly it will frame me to use a more
industrious observance and application to such as I honor so much as I do your
Lordship, and not I hope without some good offices which may deserve your
thanks, And here withal good my Lord I humbly pray your Lordship to consider
that time growe^h precious with me, and that a married man is seven years
elder in his thoughts the first day, and therefore what a discomfortable thing
it is for me to be unsettled still; for surely were it not that I think my self
born to do my Sovereign service, and therefore in that station I will live and
die, otherwise for my own private comfort it were better for me that the King
did blot me out of his Book, or that I should turn to endeavor to serve him
in some other kind, then for me to stand thus at a stop, and to have that
little reputation which by my industry I gather to be scattered and taken away
by continual disgraces, every new man coming above me, and sure I am J shall
never have fair promises, and hope from all your Lordships; For J know not what
service saving that your Lordships all told me were good, and J would believe
you in a much greater matter, and if it were nothing else J hope the modesty of
my (...) deserves somewhat. For J know well the Sollicitours place is not as
your Lordship lest it, t^me working alteration somewhat in the profession, much
more in that special place, and were it not to satisfy my wives friends, and
to get my self out of being a Common gaze, and a speech J protest before God I
w^u^d never ^peak word for it. But to conclu^e as my honorable Lady was a mean
to make me to change the name of another So if it please you to help me as you
said to change my own n^me, I cannot be but more, and more bounden to you, and
I am much deceived if your Lordship find not the King well inclined. So
remaining,

Yours, etc.

An expostulatory Letter to Sir Vincent Skinner.
SIR,
I See that by your need esse delays, this matter is grown to a new question
wherein for the matter it self, if it had been stayed at the beg^nning my Lord
Treasurer, and Mr. Chancellor I should not s^ much have ^tood upon it, For the
great and daily travails which I take in his Majesty's service, either are
rewarded in themselves, (...) that they a^e but my duty, or else may deserve a
much greater matter: Neither can I think amiss of any man that in furtherance
of the Kings benefit moved the doubt, that knew not what warrant you had. But
my wrong is, that you having had my Lord Treasurers, and Mr. Chancellours
Warrant for payment of above a month since, you I say, making your payments be
like upon such differences, as are better known to your self, then agreeable
to due respect of his Majesty's service, have declared it all this time,
otherwise then I might have expected, either from our ancient acquaintance, or
from that regard which one in your place may owe to one in mine: by occasion
whereof, there ensues unto me a great inconvenience, That now my name in a
sort must be in question amongst you, as if I were a man likely either to
demand that which were unreasonable, or to be denied that which is reasonable;
and this must be, because you can pleasure men at pleasure.

But this J leave with this, that it is the first matter wherein J had occasion
to discern of your Lordship, which I see to fall to this, That whereas Mr.
Chancellor the last time in my man's hearing, very honorably said, that he
would not discontent any in my place, it seems you have no such occasion.

But my writing to you now, is to know of you where the stay now is, without
being any more beholding to you, to whom indeed no man ought to be beholding in
those cases in a right course, and so I bid you farewell.

Yours, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Davies, His Majesty's Attorney in Ireland.
Mr. Attorney,
I Thank you for the Letter, and the discourse of this new accident you sent
me, as things then appeared, I see manifestly the beginning of better or worse:
but me thinks, it is first a tender of the better and worse following.

But upon refusal or difficult, I would have been glad to have seen you here;
but I hope occasion reserveth our mee^ing for a vacation.

I would have more fruit of conference to requite your Proclamation, which in
my judgment is wisely and seriously penned, I send you another with us, which
happened to be in my hands, when yours came, I would be glad to hear often from
you, and be advertized how things pass, whereby to have some occasion to think
^me good thought, though I can do little, at least it will be a continuance in
exercize of friendship, which on my part remain (...) reased by that I hear of
your service, and the good respect, I find toward my self. And so I continue,

Yours, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Pierce Secretary to the Lord Deputy of Ireland.
Mr. Pierce,
I Am glad to hear of you as I do and for my part you shall find me ready to
take any occasion to further your credit and preferment; and I dare assure you
though I am no undertaker to prepare your way with my Lord of Salisbury for any
good fortune which may befall you, You teach me to comp^a^n of business,
whereby I write more briefly, and yet I am so unjust as that which I allege
for my own excuse, I cannot admit for yours. For I must by expecting, exact
your Letters with this fru^t of your sufficiency, as to understand ^ow things
pass in that Kingdom: and therefore, having begun I pray continue.

This is not merely curiosity, for I have ever (I know not by what instinct)
wished well to that un olished part of this Crown, And so with my very loving
commendations, I remain.

Yours, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Murrey of the Kings Bed Chamber.
Mr. Murrey,
IT is very true, that his Majesty most graciously at my humble request
knighted the last Sunday my Brother in law, a towardly young Gentleman; for
which favor, I think my self more ^ound to his Majesty, then for the benefit
often Knights. And to tell you truly, my meaning was not that the suit of this
other Gentleman Mr. Temple, should have been moved in my name.

For I should have been unwilling to have moved his Majesty for more then one
at once, though many times in his Majesty's Courts of justice, if we move once
for our friends, we are allowed to move again for our Fee.

But indeed my purpose was that you might have been pleased to have moved it as
for my self.

N^verthelesse since it is so far gone, and that the Gentleman's friends are in
some expectation of success. I leave it to your kind regard what is further to
be done, as wa^ling to give satisfaction to th^se which have put me in trust,
and loath on the other side to press ab^ve good manners. And so with my loving
commendations, I remain

Yours, etc.

A Letter to my Lady Pagington, in answer of a Message by her sent.
Madam,
YOu shall with right good will be made acquainted with any thing which
concerns your Daughters if you bear a mind of love and concord; otherwise,
you must be content to be a stranger unto us. For I may not be so unwise as to
suffer you to be an Author or occasion of dissension between your Daughters
and their Husbands, having seen so much misery of that kind in your self.

And above all things I will turn back your kindness, in which you ay you will
receive my wife if she be cast off. For it is much more likely we have occasion
to receive you being cast off, if you remember what is passed. But it is time
to make an end of those follies. And you shall at this time pardon me this one
fault of writing to you. For J mean to do it no more till you use me, and
respect me as you ought. So wishing you better then it seems, you will draw
upon your self, I rest

Yours, etc.

A Letter to Mr. Matthews, imprisoned for Religion.
Mr Matthews,
Do not hink me forgetful or altered toward you: but if I should say that I
should do you any good. I should make my power more then it is. I do hear that
which I am right ^orry for, that you grow more impatient and busy then at
first, which makes me to fear the issue of that, which seems not o stand at
a stay.

I my self am out of doubt, that you have been miserably abused when you were
first seduced, and that which I take in compassion, others may take in
severity, I pray God that understands us all better then we understand one
another continue you, as I hope he will at the least within the bounds of
loyalty to his Majesty and natural piety toward your Country, and I entreat
you much to meditate sometimes upon the extreme effect of Supersti^ion in this
last Powder Treason, fit to be tabled and pictured in the Tables of meditation
as another Hell above the ground, and well justifying the Censure of the
Heathen that Super^^ition is far worse then Atheism, by how much it is less
evil to have no opinion of God at all, then such as are impious toward his
divine Majesty and goodness.

Good Mr. Mathews, receive your self back from these courses of perdition, and
being willing to have written a great deal more I continue,

Yours, etc.

Sir Thomas Bodleys Letter to Sir Francis Bacon, about his Cogita and v^sa,
wherein he declares his opinion freely touching the same.
SIR,
As Soon as the Term was ended, supposing your leisure was more then before, I
was coming to thank you two or three times, rather choosing it by word then by
letter, but I was sti^ disappointed of my purpose, as I am at this present upon
an urgent occasion, which does time last to Fulham, and has made me now
determine to impart my mind in writing.

I think you know I have read your Cogita and visa, which I protest I have done
with great desire, reputing it a token of your singular love, that you joined
me with those your chiefest friends, to whom you would commend your first
perusal of your draught. For which, I pray you give me leave to say but this
unto you.

First, that if the depth of my affection to your person and spirit, to your
works and your words, and to all your abilities were as highly to be valued, as
your affection is to me, it might w^k with yours arm in arm, and claim your
love by just desert. But there can be no comparison where our states are so
uneven, and our means to demonstrate our affections so different; insomuch as
for my own, I must leave it to be prized in the nature that it is, and you
shall evermore find it most add^cted to your worth.

As touching the subject of your Book you have set a foot so many rare and
noble speculations, as I cannot choose but wonder (and I shall wonder at it
ever) that your expense of time considered in your public profession, which
has in a manner no acquaintance with any Scholarship or Learning, you should
have culled out the quintessence, and sucked up the sap of the chiefest kind of
Learning.

For howsoever, in some points you do vary altogether from that which is, and
has been ever the received Doctrine of our Schools, and was always by the
wisest, as still they have been deemed of all Nations and Ages adju^ged the
truest, Yet it is apparent, that in those very points, and in all your
Proposals and Plots in that book, you show your self a Master-Workman.

For my self, I must co^esse and I speak it ingenue, that for the matter of
learning I am not worthy to be reckoned in the number of Smatterers.

And yet because it may seem, that being willing to communicate your Treatise
with your friends, you are likewise willing to listen to whatsoever I, or
othe^can except against it. I must deliver unto you for my pr^ (...) I am one
of that crew that say there is and (...) (...) ^r greater hold-fast of
certainty in your Scien^ (...) (...) your ^course will seem to acknowledge.

(...) (...) (...) you (...) (...) ill success and errors of (...) (...)
(...) you know as well they do proceed of the (...).

(...) ^e (...) ^d does obey his Physician, in observing (...) (...), or by
mis-in^tion of their own indisposi^.

For (...) are able in this kind to explicate themselves, or by reason their
disease, are by nature uncurable which is incident you know to many sorts of
malladies, or for some other hid cause which cannot be discovered by course of
conjecture, howbeit, J am full of this bel^ese (...) as physic is ministered
now a days by physicians it is much to be ascribed to their negligence or
ignorance or other touch of my imperfection, that they speed no better in
their practice, for few are found of that profession so well instructed in
their Art, as they might by their receipts which their art does afford, which
though it be deffective in regard of such perfection, yet for certain it does
flourish with admirable remedies, such as tract of time heth taught by exper
entiall events, and are the open high way to that principal knowledge that you
recomend.

As for Alchimy and magic, some conclusions they have, that are worthy the
preserving, but all their skill is so accompanied with subtilities, and guils,
as both the Crafts, and Craftmasters are not only despiseo, but named with
derision, whereupon to make good your principal affection me thinks you should
have drawn your examples, from that which is taught in the liberal sciences
not by picking out cases that happen very seldom, and may by all confession
be subject to reproof, but by controlling the generals, and grounds, and
eminent positions, and Aphorisms, which the greatest Artists, and
Philosophers, have from time to time defended.

For it goes for current amongst all men of learning, that those kind of Arts
which Clerks in times past did term Quadra vi nliis, confirm their Propositions
by infallible demonstrations.

And likewise in the trivials, such lessons and directions are delivered unto
us, as will effect very near, or as much altogether, as every Faculty does
promise, now in case we should concur, to do as you advise, which is to
renounce our common Notions, and cancel all our Actions, Rules, and Tenants,
and so to come Babes, ad regnum naturae, as we are willed by Scriptures to
come, ad regnum toelorum, there is nothing more certain in my understanding,
then that it would instantly bring us to Barbarism, and after many thousand
years, leave us more unprovided of theoricall furniture, then we are at this
present, for that were indeed to become very Babes, or Tabula rasa, when we
shall leave no impression of any former principles, but be driven to begin the
world again, and to travel by trials of Action and sense (which are your
proofs by particulars) what to place in intellectu, for our general
conception, it being a maxim of all men's approving, in intellectu, nihil esse
quod non prius fuit in sensu, and so in appearance it would befall us, that
till Platoes year be come about, our insight of Learning would be of less
reckoning then now it is accounted.

As for that which you inculcate, of a knowledge more excellent the now is
among us, which experience might produce, if we would but assay to extract it
out of nature by particular approbations, it is no more upon the matter, but to
^cire us unto that, which without instigation by a natural instinct men will
practice of themselves; for it cannot in reason be otherwise thought, but that
there are infinite Members in all parts of the World. For we may not in this
case confine our cogitations within the bounds of Europe, which embrace the
course that you purpose, with all the diligence and care that ability can
perform, for every man is born with an appetite of knowledge, wherewith they
cannot be so glutted but still as in Dropsies they thirst after more.

But yet why they should hearken to any such persuasion, as wholly to abolish
those set^ed opinions, and general Theores, to which they attained by their
own and their Ancestots experience, I see nothing yet alleged to induce me to
th^nk it.

Moreover I may speak as I should suppose with good probability, that if we
should make a mental survey what is like obe effected all the World over those
five or six inventions which you have selected and imagine to be but of
modern standing, would make but a slender show amongst so many hundreds of all
kinds of natures which are daily brought to light by the enforcement of wit, or
casual event, and may be compared, or partly preferred above those that you
have named.

But were it so here that all were admitted, that you can require for the
augmentation of our knowledge, and that all our Theorems, and general
Positions were utterly extinguished with a new substitution of others in their
places, what hope may we have of any benefit of Learning by this alteration.

Assuredly, as soon as the new are brought, with their additions by the
inventors and their followers, by an interchangable course of natural things
they wilfal by degrees to be buried in oblivion, and so on continuance to
perish out right, and that perchanc^ upon the ^ike to your present pretenses,
by proposal of some means to advance all our knowledge to an higher pitch of
perfectness. For still the same defects that Antiquity found will recide in
Mankind.

And therefore, other issues of their actions, devices, and studies are not to
be expected, then is apparent by Records were in former times observed.

I remember here a Note which Paterculus made of the incomparable wits of the
Gretians and Romans in their flourishing state, that there might be this reason
of their notable downfall in their issue that came after; because by nature,
Quod summo studio petitum esse ascendit in summum difficisque in perfecto mora
est: insomuch, that men perceiving that they could go no further, being come to
the top, they turned back again of their own accord, so saking these Studies
hat are most in request, and beraking themselves to new endeavors as if the
thing that they sought had been by prevention surprised by others.

So it fared in particular with the eloquence of that Age, that when their
Successors found that hardly they could equal, or by no means excel the
Predecessors they began to neglect the study thereof, and both to write and
speak for many hundred years in a rustic^ll manner, till this latter revolution
brought the Wheel about again, by inflaming gallant spirits to give the onset
afresh, with straining and striving to climb unto the top and height of
perfection, not in that gift only, but in every other skill in any part of
Learning.

For I do not hold it an erroneous conceit to think of every Scierce, that as
now they are professed, so they have been before in all preced^nt Ages, though
not alike in all places, nor at all times alike in one and the said place, but
according to the changings and ^winings of times, with a more exact and plain,
as with a more rude and obscure kind of teaching,

And if the question should be asked, what proof I have of it, I have the
Doctrine of Aristotle, and of the deepest learned Clerks, of whom we have any
means to take any notice, that as there is of other things, so there is of
Sciences, Ortus and interius, which is also the meaning, if I should expound it
of Nihil novum sub sole, and is as well to be applied, ad facta, as ad dicta,
ut nihil neque dictum neque factum quod non and dictum, and factum prius. I
have further for my warrant that famous complaint of Solomon to his Son,
against the infinite making of Books in his time, of which in all congruity it
must needs be understood that a great part were observations and instructions
in all kind of literature, and of those there is not so much as one petty
Pamphlet, only some parts of the Bible excepted remainig to Posterity.

As then there was not in like manner any footing to be found of millions of
Authors that were long before Solomon, and yet we must give credit to that
which he affirmed, that whatsoever was then or had been before, it could never
be truly pronounced of it. Behold this is new.

Whereupon I must for my conclusion infer, seeing all the endeavors, study,
and knowledge of Mankind in whatsoever Art or Science, have ever bin the same,
as there are at this paesent, though full of mutabilities according to the
changes and accidental occasions of Ages and Countries, and Clerks
dispositions, which can never be but subject to intention and commission, both
in their devices, and in their practices of their knowledge, if now we should
accord in opinion with you.

First, to condemn our present knowledge of doubts and incertitudes, which you
confirm but by averment without other force of argument and then to disclaim
all our Aximes and Maxims, and general assertions that are left by tradition
from our Elders to us, which (for so it is to be intended) have passed all
probations of the sharpest wits that ever were.

And lastly, to devise, being now become again as it were Abecodarii, by the
frequent spelling of particulars, to come to the notice of the true generals,
and so afresh to create new principles of Sciences, the end of all would be
that when we shallbe dispossessed of the learning which we have, and our conse
quent travails, will butly he as in a Circle to conduct us to the place from
whence we set forward, and bring us to the happiness to be restored in
integrum, which will require as many Ages as have marched before us to be
perfectly achieved.

And this I wri^e with no dislike of increasing our knowledge with new found
devises, which is undoubtably a practice of high commendation, in regard of the
Benefit they will yield for the present; that the world has ever been, and
will assuredly continue very full of such devisours, whose industry that way
has been very obstinate and eminent that way, and has produced strange
effects, above the reach, and the hope of men's common capasi^ie, and yet our
Notions and theorems have always kept in grace both with them, and with the
rarest that ever were named among the learned, by this you see to what
boidnesse I am brought by your kindness, that if I seem to be too saucy in
this contradiction, it is the opinion that I hold of your Nobld disposition,
and of the freedom in these cases that you will afford your special friend
that has induced me to do it, and though I my self like a Carriers horse
cannot bank the beaten way in which I have be^e trained, yet such is my Censure
of your Cogitata, that I must tell you to be plain, you have very much wronged
your self, and the world, to smother such a treasure so long in your Coffer,
for though I stand well assured for the tenor and Subject, of your maine
discourse, you are not able to impannell a substantial Jury in any university
that will give upp a verdict to acquit you of error, yet it cannot be
gainsaid, but all your treatise, ever does abound with choice conceits of the
present state of learning and with so worthy contemplations of the means to
procure it as may persuade with any student to look more narrowly to his
Business, not only by aspiring to the greatest perfection of that which is
now a days divulged in the sciences, but by diving yet deeper into (as it
were) the bowel^s, and secrets of nature, and by enforcing of the powers of his
judgment, and wit to learn of St. Paul consectari meliora dona, which course
would to God, (to whisper so in your ear you had followed at the first, when
you fell into the Study of such a Study, as was not worthy such a student,
Nevertheless being so as it is, that you are therein settled, and your Country
soundly served, I cannot but wish with all my heart, as I do very often that
you may gain a fit reward to the fu^l of your deserts, which I hope will come
with heaps of happiness and honor.

From Fulham, Feb. 19. 1607. T. B.

POST SCRIPT.
SIR,
ONe kind of boldness does draw on another, insomuch, as me thinks I should
offend not to signify, that before the transcript of your Book be fitted for
the Press, it will be requisite for you to cast your eye upon the style, which
in the framing of some periods, and in diverse words and phrases, will hardly go
current, if the Copy brought to me, be just the same that you would publish.

Sir, Clouds of misery darkens so much such as are not in the Sunshine of
prosperity, as they prevail with many good Natures, furnished with commendable
judgment, to give wrong Censures of them. I am one of those that cannot
justify my self so far, as not to be liable to reproof; yet I am of that rank
that cannot stoop to the stroke of every malicious tongue. But in you I have
found such abundance of favor, who never knew me, but in my tide of Ebb, that
I must needs leave this with you, as and Record to witness my shame and
reproach, if I be ungrateful for it, so far as either abilities of body, or
goods of fortune may extend to perform. And hereunto he sets his hand, that
resolves to live and dye,

Your faithful friend to serve you, A. B.

THE CHARACTERS OF A Believing Christian, in Paradoxes, and seeming
Contradictions.
I. AChristian is one that believes things his reason (...) comprehend, he
hopes for things which neither be no^y man alive ever saw: he labors for that
which he know^ he can never obtain, yet in the issue, his belief appears not
to be false, his hope makes him not ashamed, his labor is not in vain.

II. He believes three to be one, and one to be three, a Father not to be elder
then his Son, a Son to be equal with his Father, and one proceeding from both
to be equal with both; he believes three ersons in one nature, and two Natures
in one Person.

III. He believes a Virgin to be a Mother of a Son, and that very Son of
hers to be her maker. He believes him to have been shut up in a narrow room,
whom Heaven and Earth could never contain. He believes kim to have been born in
time, who was and is from Everlasting. He believes him to have been a weak
Child carried in Arms, who is the Almighty, and him once to have dyed, who
only has life, and immortality in himself.

IV. He believes the God of all Grace to have been angry with one that have
never offended him, and that God that hates sin to be reconciled to himself,
though sinning continually, and never making or being able to make him
satisfaction. He believes the just God to have punished a most just person, and
to have justified himself though a most ungodly sinner, He believes him freely
pardoned, and yet a sufficient satisfaction was made for him.

V. He believes himself to be precious in Gods sight, and yet loathes himself
in his own. He dares not justify himself even in those things wherein he can
find no fault with himself, and yet believes God accepts him in those services
wherein he is able to find many faults.

VI. He praises God for his justice, and fears him for his mercy. He is so
ashamed as that he dares not open his mouth before God and yet he comes with
boldness to God, and asks him any thing he needs. He is so humble as to
acknowledge himself to deserve nothing; but evil, and yet believes that God
means him all good. He is one that fears always, yet is as bold as a Lion. He
is often sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, many times complaining, yet always
giving of thanks, He is the most lowly minded, yet the greatest inspirer, most
contented, yet ever craving.

VII. He bears a lofty, spirit in a mean condition, when he is ablest he
thinks meanest of himself. He is rich in youth, and poor in the midst of
riches. He believes all the world to be his, yet he dares take nothing without
special leave from God, He Covenants with God for nothing, yet looks for a
great reward, He loses his life and gains by it, and whilst he loses it,
he saves it.

VIII. He lives not to himself, yet of all others, he is most wise for
himself, He denies himself often, yet no man loves himself so well as he.
He is most reproached, yet most honored. He has most afflictions, and most
comforts.

IX. The more Injury his Enemies do him, the more advantage he gains by them.
The more he forsakes worldly things, the more he enjoies them.

X. He is the most temperate of all men, yet fares most deliciously, he lends,
and gives most freely, yet he is the greatest usurer, he is meek toward all
men, yet inexorable by men, He is the best Child, Husband, Brother, Friend, yet
hates Father, and Mother, Brother, and Sister. He loves all men as himself,
yet hates some men with a perfect hatred.

XI. He desires to have more grace then any man has in the world, yet is truly
sorrowful when he sees any man have less then himself, he knows no man
after the flesh yet gives all men their due respects, he knows if he please
man he cannot be the servant of Christ, yet for Christ his sake he pleases all
men in all things. He is a Peace maker, yet is continually fighting, and an
irreconcilable Enemy.

XII. He believes him to be worse then an Infidel that provides not for his
family, yet himself lives, and dles without Care. He accounts all his
inferiors, yet stand; stiffly upon authority. He is severe to his Children,
because he loves them, and by being favorable unto his Enemy, he revengeth
himself upon him.

XIII. He believes the Angels to be more excellent Creatures then himself,
and yet counts them his servants. He believes that he receives many good turns
by their means, and yet he neither prays for their assistance, nor offers
them thanks, which he does not disdain to do to the meanest Christian.

XIV. He believes himself to be a King how mean soever he be. How great soever
he be, he thinks himself not to good to be a servant to the poorest Saint.

XV. He is often in prison yet allwaies at liberty. A Freeman though a servant.
He loves not honor amongst men, yet highly priseth a good name.

XVI. He believes that God has bidden every man that does him good, to do, so
he yet of any man is the most thankful to them that do ought for him, He would
lay down his life to save the soul of his Enemy, yet will not adventure upon
one sin to save the life of him who saved his.

XVII. He swears to his own hinderance, and changes not, yet knows that his
Oath cannot tie him to sin.

XVIII. He believes Christ to have no need of any thing he does, yet makes
account he does relieve Christ in all his acts of Charity. He knows he can do
nothing of himself, yet labors to work out his own salvation, he confesses
he can do nothing, yet as truly prosesseth he can do all things, he knows
that flesh, and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, yet beeleeveth he
shall go to Heaven both body, and soul.

XIX. He trembles ar Gods word, yet counts it sweeter to him then honey, and the
hony-Gombe and dearer then thousands of Gold, and silver.

XX. He believes that God will never dame him, and yet fears God for being able
to cast him into Hell. He knows he shall not be saved by nor for his good
works, yet he does all the good works he can.

XXI. He knows Gods providence is one all things, yet is so diligent in his
calling, and business, as if he were to cut out the thread of his fortunes. He
believes before hand that God has purposed what he shall be, and nothing can
make him to alter his purpose, yet prays and endeavors, as if he would force
God to save him for ever.

XXII. He prays and labors for that which he is confident God means to
give, and the more assured he is, the more earnest he prays, for that he knows
he shall never obtain, and yet gives not over. He prays, and labors for that
which he knows he shall be no less happy, without he prays with all his
heart not to be lead into temptation, yet rejoiceth when he is fallen into it,
he believes his prayers are heard even when they are denied, and gives thanks
for that which he prays against.

XXIII. He has within him both flesh, and spirit, yet he is not a double
minded man, he is often ledd Captive by the law of sin, yet it never gets
domminion over him, he cannot sin, yet can do nothing without sin. He can
do nothing against his will, yet maintains he does what he would not. He wavers
and doubts, yet obtains.

XXIV. He is some times so troubled, that he thinks nothing to be true in
Religion; yet if he did think so, he could not at all be troubled, He thinks
sometimes that God has no mercy for him, yet resolves to dye in the pursuit of
it. He believes like Abraham against hope, and though he cannot answer Gods
Logic, yet with the woman of Canaan, he hopes to prevail with the Rhetoric
of importunity.

XXV. He wrastles and yet prevails, and though yielding himself unworthy of
the least blessing he enjoyes, yet Jacob like, he will not let him go without a
new blessing. He some times thinks himself to have no grace at all, and yet
how poor and afflicted soever he be besides, he would not change conditions
with the most prosperous man under Heaven, that is a manifest Worldling.

XXVI. He thinks sometimes that the Ordinance of God do him no good, yet he
would rather part with his life, then be deprived of them.

XXVII. He was born dead, yet so that it had been Murder in any to have taken
his life away. After he began to live, he was ever dying.

XXVIII. And though he has an eternal life begun in him, yet he makes
account he has a death to pass through.

XXIX. He counts self murder a hainour sin, yet is ever busied in crucifying
the flesh and in putting to death his earthly Members, not doubting, but there
will come a time of glory where he shall be esteemed precious in the sight of
the great God of Heaven and Earth, appearing with boldness at his Throne, and
asking any thing he needs, being endued with humility, by acknowledging his
great crimes and offenses, and that he deserves nothing but severe punishment.

XXX. He believes his soul and body shall be as full of glory, as them that
have more, and no more full, then theirs that have less.

XXXI. He lives invisible to those that see him, and those that know him best
do but guess at him; yet those many times judge more truly of hm then he does
of himself.

XXXII. The world will sometimes account him a Saint, when GOD accounted him a
hypocrite, and afterward when the World branded him for an Hypocrite, then God
owned him for a Saint.

XXXIII. His death makes not an end of him. His soul which was put into his
body, is not to be perfected without his body; yet his soul is more happy, when
it is separated from his body, then when it was joined unto it. And his body
though torn in pieces, burnt in ashes, ground to powder, turned to rottenness,
shall be no loser.

XXXIV. His Advocate, his Surety shall be his Judge; his mortal part shall
become immortal, and what was sown in cor^ption, shall be raised in
incorruption and glory, and a finite Creature, shall possess an infinite
happiness.

A Confession of the Faith, Written by Sir Francis Bacon, Knight, Viscount of
St. Alban, about the time he was Sollicitour General to our late Soverign Lord
King James.
I Believe, That nothing is without beginning, but GOD, nor Nature no Matter,
no Spirit, but one only, and the same GOD,

That GOD as he is Eternal, Almighty, only wise, only God in his Nature: so he
is eternally Father, Son, and holy Spirit in Persons.

I believe, That God is so holy, pure, realous, that it is impossible for him
to be pleased in any Creature (though the work of his own hand) so that neither
Angel, Man nor World, could stand, or can stand one moment in his eyes, without
beholding the same in the face of a Mediator.

And therefore, that before him, with whom all things are present, The Lamb of
God was slain before all Worlds, without which Eternal Council of his, it was
impossible for him to have descended to any work of Creation, but should have
enjoyed the blessed and individual Society of three Persons in God, head only
for ever; but that out of his eternal and infinite goodness and love
(purposing to become a Creator, and to communicate with his Creatures he
ordained in his Eternal Council, That one Person of the God head should in
time be united to one Nature, and to one particular of his Creatures, That so
in the person of the Mediator; the true sadder might be fixed, whereby God
might descend to his Creatures; and the Creatures might ascend to God: So that
by the reconciliation of the Mediator, turning his Countenance toward his
Creatures (though not in the same degree) made way unto the disposition of his
most holy, and sacred will whereby some of his Creatures might stand and keep
their State, others might fall, and be restored into their state, but yet
remain in Being, though under wrath and corruption, all in the virtue of the
Mediator, which is the great Mystery and perfect Centry of all Gods ways with
his Creatures, and unto which all his other works and wonders, do but serve and
refer. That he chose (according to his good pleasure) Man to be that Creature,
to whose Nature the Eternal Son of God should be united, and among the
Generations of men elected a small flock, to whom the participation of himself,
he purposed to express the riches of his glory. All the ministration of
Angels, damnation of Devils and Reprobats, and universal administration of all
Creatures, and dispensation of all times have no other end; but as the ways
and Ambages of God, to be furthet glorified of his Saints, who are one with the
Mediator, who is one with God.

That by virtue of his Eternal Council (touching a Mediator) he descends at
his own good pleasure, and according to times and seasons to himself known, to
become a Creator) and by his Eternal Word created all things, and by his
Eternal Spirit does comfort and preserve them.

That he made all things in their first estate good, and removed from himself
the beginning of all evil and vanity, unto the liberty of the Creature; but
reserved in himself the beginning of all restistitution, and the liberty of his
grace using (nevertheless) and turning the falling and desention of the
Creature, which to his Presciens was eternally known to make way to his
Eternal Council, touching a Mediator and the Work, he purposed to accomplish
in him.

That God created Spirits, whereof some kept their standing, and others fell.
He created Heaven and Earth, and all their Armies and Generations, and gave
unto them constant and everlasting Laws, which we call Nature, which is nothing
else but the Laws of Creation; which Laws (nevertheless) have had three
changes or times, and are to have a fourth and last.

1. The first, When the matter of Heaven and Earth was created without forms.
2. The second, The interim of every days work. 3. The third, By the Curse,
which notwithstanding was no new Creation, but a Privation of part of the first
Creature.
And the last end of the world, the manner where of is not yet revealed. So as
the laws of Nature which now remain and govern Inviolably till the end of the
world begin to be in force when God first rested from his works, and ceased to
create. But received a revocation (in part) by the curse, since which timey the
changed not.

That, notwithstanding God has rested, and ceased from creating since the
first Sabbath, yet nevertheless he does accomplish and fulfill his divine
will in all things great, and small, singular, and general, as fully and
exactly by providence, as he would by miracle, and new creation, though his
work be not immediate, and direct, but by compass, not violating Nature which
is his own law upon his Creatures.

That as at the first the Soul of Man was not produced by Heaven or earth but
was breathed immediately from God: So that the ways and proceedings from God
with Spirits are not concluded in Nature, that is in the laws of Heaven and
Earth, but are reserved to the law of his secret will, and grace wherein God
works still, and rests not from the work of Creation, but continnueth
working till the end of the world, what time that work also shall be
accomplished, and an eternal Sabbath shall ensue.

Likewise that whenever God does break the law of Nature by miracles (which
are ever new Creatures) he never comes to that point or pass, but in regard
of the work of Redemption which is the greater, and whereunto all Gods Saints
and Martirs do refer.

That God created man in his own likeness or Image in a reasonable Soul, in
innocence, in free will, in Sovereignty That he gave him a law and commandment
which was in his power to keep, but he kept it not.

That Man made a total defection from God, presuming to imagine, that the
commandment and pro^i^ition of God were not the rules of good and evil, but
that good and evil had their Principles and Beginnings, to the end, to depend
no more upon Gods will revealed, but upon him and his own light as a God, then
the which, there would not be a Sin more opposite to the whole law of God.

That (nevertheless) this great sin was not originally moved by the malice
of man, but was intimated by the suggestion and instigation of the Devil who
was the first defected Creature, who did fall of malice and not by temptation

That upon the fall of man death and vanity upon the Justice of God, and the
Image of God was defaced, and Heaven, and Earth which was made for man's use
were subdued and corrupted by his fall. But then that instant and without
intermission of time after the words of Gods law became through the fall of man
frustrate, as to obedience there succeeded the greater word of the promise, the
righteousness of God might be wrought by faith.

That as well the law of God as the word of his promise enduce the same for
ever, but that they have been revealed in several manners according to the
dispensation of times for the law was first imprinted in that remnant of light
of nature which was left after the fall being sufficient to accuse, then it was
more manifestly expressed in the written law, and was yet more opened to the
Prophets, and lastly expounded in the true perfection of the Son of God the
great Prophet, and interpreter of the law.

That likewise the word of the promise was manifested and revealed. First by
the immediate revelation and inspiration after the figures which were of two
Natures.

The one, of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law; the other continual History
of the old World, and Church of the Jews, which though it be literal, is true;
yet it is pregnant of a perpetual allegory and shadow of the work of
redemption, to follow the same Promise or Evangell, was more clearly revealed
and declared by the Prophets, and then by the Son himself. And lastly, by the
holy Ghost which illuminateth the Church to the end of the World.

That in the fullness of Time, according to the promise and oath of God, of a
chosen Image descended the blessed Seed of the Woman, Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, and Savior of the Word, who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and took flesh of the Virgin Mary.

That the Word did not only take flesh, or was joined to flesh, but was flesh,
though without confusion of substance or nature: so as the Eternal Son of God,
and the ever blessed Son of Man was one Person: So one, as the blessed Virgin
may be truly and Catholikely called Dei Para the Mother of God. So one as there
is unity in universal Nature. Not that the soul and body of Man so perfect, for
the three heavenly Unities (whereof that as the second) exceed all natural
Unities; that is to say, the unity of God and Man in Christ and the Church, the
holy Ghost being the worker of both these latter unities. For by the Holy Ghoct
was Christ incarnate and quickened in the flesh, and by the Holy Ghost is Man
regenerate and quickened in the Spirit.

That Jesus the Lord became in the flesh a Sacrifice for sin, a satisfaction
and price to the justice of God, a meritour of glory and the Kingdom, a Pattern
of all Righteousness, a Preacher of the Word which himself was, a finisher of
the Ceremonies, a corner stone to remove the sepa^ation between Jew and
Gentile, an intercessour for the Church, a Lord of Nature, a conqueror of
death, and the power of darkness in his Resurrection.

And that he fulfilled the whole council of God, performed his whole sacred
office, and anointing in Earth, accomplished the whole work of Redemption, and
restitution of man, to a state superior to the Angels, whereas the state of
his Creation was inferior, and reconciled and established all things,
according to the eternal will of the Father.

That in time Jesus the Lord was born in the days of Herod, and suffered under
the government of Pontius Pilat, being Deputy of the Romans, and under the high
Priesthood of Caiphas and was betrayed by Judas, one of the 12. Apostles, and
was crucified at Jerusalem, and after a true and natural death, and his body
laid in the Sepulcher, the third day he raised himself from the bonds of death,
and arose, and showed himself to many chosen witnesses by the space of many
days. And at the end of those days, in the sight of many ascended into Heaven,
where he continues his intercession, and shall from thence at a day appointed,
come in great glory to judge the World.

That the sufferings and merit of Christ, as they are sufficient to do away the
sins of the whole World, so they are only effectual to such as are regenerate
by the Holy Ghost, who breaks where he will of free grace (which grace as a
seed incorruptible) quickneth the Spirit of Man, and conceives him a new the
Son of God, and a Member of Christ.

So that Christ having Man's flesh, and Man having Christ's spirit there is an
open passage and mutual imputation whereby sin and wrath is conveyed to
Christ from man, and merit and life is conveyed to Man from Christ, which Seed
of the Holy Ghost, first figureth in us the Image of Christ, slain or crucified
in a lively faith, and then reigns in us the Image of God, in holiness and
charity, though both imperfectly and in degrees far differing, even in Gods
elect, as well in regard of the fire of the spirit, as of the illumination, which
is more or less in a large proportion; as namely in the Church before Christ,
which yet nevertheless was partakers of one and the same salvation, and one
and the same means of salvation with us.

That the work of the Spirit, though it be not tied to any means in Heaven or
Earth, yet it is ordinarily dispensed by the preaching of the Word, the
administration of the Sacraments, the covenants of the Fathers upon the
children, prayer, reading, the censures of the Church, the society of the
godly, the crosses and afflictions, Gods benefits, his judgments upon others,
Miracles, the contemplation of his Creatures. All which things, some be more
principal. God usethas the means of Vocation or conversion of his elect not
derogating power to call immediately by his grace, and at all hours and moments
of the day (that is) of man's life according to his good pleasure.

That the word of God whereby this will is revealed continued in revelation and
tradition until Moses and that the Scriptures were from Moses time, to the
times of the Apostles and Evangelicts in whose ages after the coming of the
Holy Ghost the Teacher of all truth the book of the Scriptures is shut and
closed up, to receive any new addition, and that the Church has no power over
the Scriptures to teach or command any thing contrary to the written word, But
is as the Ark, wherein the tables of the first Testament were kept and
preferred (that is to say) the Church has only the Custody, and delivery of
the Scriptures committed unto the same together with the interpretation of them.

That there is an Universal or Catholic Church of God dispersed over the
face of the Earth, which Christ's Spouse and Christ's Body being gathered of the
Fathers of the old world of the Church of the Jews, of the Spirits, of the
faithful, dissolved of the Spirits of the faithful militant, and of the names
yet to be born, which are already written in the Book of life.

That there is a visible Church distinguished by the outward works of God
Servant, and the receiving of the holy doctrine, with the use of the mysteries
of God, and the invocation and sanctification of his Holy Name.

That there is also a Holy succession of the 'Prophets of the new. Testamen,
and Fathers of the Church from the time of the Apostles and Disciples which saw
our Savior in the flesh unto the consumation of the work of the Ministry,
which persons are called of God, by gift or inward anointing and the vocation
of God followed by an outward calling or ordination of the Church.

I Believe that the Souls of those that die in the Lord are blessed and rest
from their labor and enjoy the sight of God, yet so as they are in expectation
of the further revelation of their glory in the last day. At which time, all
flesh of man shall arise and be changed and shall appear and receive from
Jesus Christ his eternal Judgment, and the glory of the Saints shall then be
full and the Kingdom shall be give, to God the Father from which time all
things shall continue for ever in that being and estate which then they shall
receive: So as there are three times (if times they may be called) or parts of
Eternity.

The first, The time before beginning, when the Godhead was only without the
being of any Creature.

The second, The time of Mystery, which continues from the Cretion to the
dissolution of the World.

The third, The time of the Revelation of the Sons of God, which time is the
last, and is without change.

A Prayer made and used by the late Lord Chancellor.
OEternall God and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, in whom thou have
made. Let the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts be now and
ever gracious in thy sight, and acceptable unto thee O Lord, our God, our
strength, and our Redeemer.

OEternall God, and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ; in whom thou have
made a Covenant of grace and mercy with all those that come unto thee in him,
in his name and mediation we humbly prostrate our selves before thy throne of
thy mercies seat acknowledging that by the breach of all thy holy Laws and
commandments we are become wild Olive branches, strangers to thy covenant of
grace, we have defaced in our selves thy sacred Image imprinted in us by
Creation; we have sinned against heaven and before thee, and are no more
worthy to be called thy children, O admit us into the place even of hired
servants. Lord thou have formed us in our Mothers Wombs, thy providence has
hitherto watched over us and preserved us unto this period of time O stay not
the course of thy mercies and loving kindness toward us; Have mercy upon us O
Lord for thy dear Son Christ Jesus sake, who is the way, the truth, and the
life. In him O Lord we appe^l from thy justice to thy mercy, beseeching thee in
his name, and for his sake only thou will be graciously pleased freely to
pardon, and forgive us all our sins and disobedience, whether in thought, word,
or deed committed against thy divine Majesty; and in his precious
bloud-shedding, death, and perfect obedience, free us from the guilt, the
stain, the punishment and dominion of all our sins, and cloth us with his
perfect righteousness; there is mercy with thee O Lord that thou may be
feared: yea, thy mercies swallow up the greatness of our sins, speak peace to
our souls and consciences, make us happy in the free remission of all our sins
and be reconciled to thy poor servants in Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well
pleased: Suffer not the works of thine own hands to perish, thou art not
delighted in the death of sinners, bat in their conversion. Turn our hearts,
and weshall be turned, convert us and we shall be converted; illuminate* the
eyes of our minds and understanding with the bright beams of thy holy Spirit,
that we may daily grow in the saving knowledge of the heavenly mystery of our
redempsion, wrought by our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, sanctify our
wills and affection by the same Spirit, the most sacred fountain of all grace
and goodness, reduce them to the obedience of thy most holy will in the
practice of all piety toward thee, and charity toward all men. Inflame our
hearts with thy love, cast forth of them what displeases thee, all infidelity,
hardness of heart, profaneness, hypocrisy, contempt of thy holy word and
ordinances all uncleanness, and whatsoever advances it self in opposition to
thy holy will. And grant that hencefor^h, through thy grace we may be enabled
to lead a godly, holy sober, and christian life in true sincerity and
uprightness of heart before thee. To this end, plant thy holy fear in our
hearts, grant that it may never depart from before our eyes, but continually
guide our feet in the paths of thy righteousness, and in the ways of thy
commandments, increase our weak ^aith, grant it may daily bring forth the true
fruits of unfeigned repentance, that by the power of the death of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, we may daily die unto sin, and by the power of his
resurrection, we may be quickened, and raised up to newness of life, may be
truly born a new, and may be effectually made partakers of the first
resurrection, that then the second deach may never have dominion over us. Teach
us O Lord so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom;
make us ever mindful of our last end, and continually ^o exercise the
knowledge of grace in our hear^s, that in the said divorce of soul and body we
may be translated here to that Kingdom of glory prepared for all those that
love thee, and shall trust in thee, even then and ever, O Lord let thy holy
Angels pitch their ^ents round about us, to guard and defend us from all the
malice of Satan, and from all perils both of soul and body, Pardon all our
unthankfulness, make us daily more and more thankful for all thy mercies and
benefits daily powered down upon us. Let these our humble prayers ascend to the
throne of grace, and be granted not only for these mercies, but for whatsoever
else thy wisdom knows needful for us, and for all those that are in need,
misery, and distress, whom Lord thou have afflicted either in soul or body,
grant them patience and perseverence in the end, and to the end. And that O
Lord not for any merits of thy Son, and our alone Savior Christ Jesus; to whom
with thee, and the holy Spirit, be ascribed all glory, etc.

Amen.
Imprimatur.

JA: CRANFORD.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 21. for ^ege read regal, p. 7. l. 9. for my r. suit, p. 10. l.
23. so wast r. wast, p. 12. l. 7. for is ready, r. is not ready. p. 14. for my
r. any, ibid^ 28. for not r. but, p. 21. l. 17. for that part r. in that part,
p. 28. l. 8. for worst r* wast, p. 31 l. 8. for as no, r. as a new, ibid l. 20,
for upon the r. upon your, p. 32. l. 11. for moved to think r. moved so to
think, p. 35. l. 7. for here r. there, p. 36. l. 3. read as to pretend not only
a desensive war as in times past, but a whole reconquest, ibid l. 10. for
respect, r. therespe^^, p. 48. l. 8 for verosity r. vivacity, p. 73. l. 27. for
was good, r. not good. The Reader will also meet with some stight errors, as
purpose for propose, remission for commission, and such like.


