

Ordinances made By The Right Honorable Sir Francis Bacon Knight, Lord
Verulam, and Vicount of Saint Albans, being then Lord Chancellor.

For the better and more regular Administration of Justice in the Chancery, to
be daily observed saving the Prerogative of this COURT.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbanke, and Lawrence Chapman 1642.

Ordinances made by the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, for the better
and more regular Administration of Justice in the Chancery, to be daily
observed saving the Prerogative of the Court.
NO Decree shall be reversed, Decrees.
altered, or explained, being once under the Great Seal, but upon bill of
Review, and no bill of Review shall be admitted except it contain either error
in Law, appearing in the Body of the Decree, without farther examination of
matters ^n Fact, or some new matter which has risen in time after the Decree,
and not any new proof which might have bin used when the Decree was made:
Nevertheless upon new proof, that is come to light after the Decree made, and
could not possibly have bin used at the time, when the Decree passed, a bill of
Review may be grounded by the special License of the Court, and not otherwise.

2. In case of miscasting (being a matter demonstrative) a Decree may be
explained, and reconciled by an Order without a bill of Review, not
understanding by mis-casting any pretended misrating or misvaluing^ but only
error in the Auditing or numbering.

3. No Bill of Review shall be admitted, or any other new bill to change matter
Decreed, except the Decree be first obeyed and performed, as if it be for
Land, that the Possession be yielded; if it be for money, that the money be
paid; if it be for Evidences, that the Evidences be brought in, and so in other
Cases which stand upon the strength of the Decree alone.

4. But if any Act be Decreed to be done which extingu^sheth the parties Right
at the Common Law, As making of assurance or Release, acknowledging
satisfaction cancelling of Bonds, or Evidences, and the like; Those parts of
the Decree are to be spared until the bill of Review be determined. But such
sparing is to be warranted by public Order made in Court.

5. No Bill of Review shall be put in, except the party that preferres it
enter into Recognizance with Sureties for satisfying of Costs and damages for
the delay, if it be found against him.

6. No Decrees shall be made upon pretense of Equity, against the express
provision of an Act of Parliament: nevertheless if the Construction of such
Act of Parliament has for a time gone one way in general opinion and
reputation, and after by a latter Judgment has bin controlled, then relief
may be given upon matter of Equity, for Cases arising before the said
Judgment, because the Subject was in no default.

7. Imprisonment for breach of a Decree is in nature of an Execution, and
therefore the custody ought to be straight, and the party not to have any
liberty to go abroad, but by special License of the Lord Chancellor; but no
close imprisonment is to be, but by express Order for wilful and
extraordinary contempts, and disobedience as has bin used.

8. In Case of enormous and obstinate disobedience in breach of a Decree, an
Injunction is to be granted Sub poena of a sum, and upon Affidavit, or other
sufficient proof of persisting in Contempt, Fines are to be pronounced by the
Lord Chancellor in open Court, and the same to be extracted down into the
hamper if Cause be, by a special Order.

9. In Case of a Decree made for the possession of Land, a Writ of Execution
goes forth, and if that be disobeyed, then Process of contempt according to
the course of the Court against the person to Commission of Rebellion, and then
a Sergeant at Arms by special warrant, and in case the Sergeant at Arms
cannot find him, or be resisted upon the coming in of the party, and his
commitment; if he persist in disobedience, an Injunction is to be granted for
the Possession, and in Case that also be disobeyed, then a Commission to put
him in possession.

10. Where the party is committed for breach of a Decree, he is not to be
enlarged until the Decree be fully performed in all things which are to be
done presently. But if there be other parts of the decree to be performed at
days, or times to come, then he may be enlarged by Order of Court upon
Recognizance, with Sureties to be put in for the performance de futuro,
otherwise not.

11. Where Causes come to hearing in Court, no Decree binds any person who
was not served with Proc^s ad audiendum Iudicium, according to the course of
the Court, or did appear in person in Court.

12. No Decree binds any that comes in Bona fide, by conveyance from the
Defendant before the Bill exhibited; and is made no party, neither by Bill nor
Order: But where he come^ in pende^te lite, and while the Suite is in full
prosecution, and without any color of allowance or privity of the Court, there
regularly the Decree binds, but if there were any intermission of Suite, or
the Court made acquainted with the conveyance, the Court is to give order upon
the special matter according to justice.

13. Where Causes are dismissed upon full hearing, and the dismission signed by
the Lord Chancellor, such Causes shall not be retained again, nor new Bill
admitted, except it be upon new matter, like to the Case of the bill of review.

14. In Case of other dismissions, which are not upon hearing of the Cause, if
any new Bill be brought, the dismission is to be pleaded, and after reference
and report of the contents of both Suites and consideration taken of the causes
of the former dis^ission, the Court shall rule the reteyning or dismissing of
the new Bill according to Justice, and the nature of the Case.

15. All Suites grounded upon Wills, nuncupative, Leases paroll, or upon long
Leases, that tend to the defacing of the Kings Tenures, for the stablishing of
perpetuities, or grounded upon Remainders put into the Crown, to defeat
Purchasors, or for Brocage or rewards to make Marriages, or for bargains at
play and Wagers, or for bargains, for Offices contrary to the Statute, of 2.
Edw. 6. or for contracts upon Usury, or Symony, are regularly to be dismissed
upon motion, if they be the sole effect of the Bill, and if there be no
special circumstances to move the Court to allow them a proceeding, and all
Suites under the value of ten pounds, are regularly to be dismissed.

16. Dismissions are properly to be prayed, and had either upon hearing, or
upon Ple^ unto the Bi^l when the Cause comes first into the Court: But
dismissions are not to be prayed after the parties have bin at charges of
examination, except it be upon special cause.

17. If the Plaintiff discontinue by prosecution, after all the Defendants
have answered above the space of one whole Term, the Cause is to be dismissed
of course without any motion: but after Replication put in no Cause is to be
dismissed without motion and order of the Court.

18. Double vexation is not to be admitted, but if the party Sue for the same
Cause at Common Law^ and in Chancery, he is to have a day given to make ^is
election where he will proceed, and in default of such election to be
dismissed.

19. Where Causes are removed by special Certiorari upon a Bill, containing
matter of Equity^ the Plaintiff is upon receipt of his Writ to put in Bond to
prove his suggestion within fourteen days after the Receipt, which if he
do not prove, then upon Certificate from either of the examiners presented to
the Lord Chancell^^, the Cause shall be dismissed with dosts and ^ Procedendo
to be granted.

20. No Injunction of any nature shall be granted, Injunction
revived, di^^olved, or stayed upon any private Petition.

21. No Injunction to stay Suites at the Law shall be granted upon priority of
Suite only, or upon ^urmise of the plaintif^s Bill only, but upon matter
confessed in the D^fendants answer, or matter of Record, or writing plainly
appearing, or when the Defendant is in contempt for not answering, or that the
Debt desired to be stayed appears to be old, and has slept long, or the
Creditor, or the Debtor has been dead some good time before the Suite brought.

22. Where the Defendant appears not, but sits an Attachment; or when he does
appear and departs without Answer, and is under Attachment, for not answering;
or when he takes Oath; he cannot answer without sight of Evidences in the
Country, or where after Answer he sues at Common Law by Attourny, and absents
himself beyond Sea: In these Cases an Injunction is to be granted for the stay
of all Suites at the Common Law, until the party Answer or appear in person
in Court, and the Court give further order: But nevertheless upon Answer put
in, if there be no motion made the same Term, or the next general Seal
after the Term, to continue the Injunction in regard of the insufficiency of
the Answer put in, or in regard of the matter confessed in the Answer. Then the
Injunction to dye and dissolve without any special Order.

23. In the Case aforesaid, where an Injunction is to be granted for stay of
Suites at the Common Law, if the like Suite be in the Chancery, either by Scire
facias, or privilege or English bill, then the Suite is to be stayed by Order
of the Court, as it is in other Courts by Injunction, for that the Court cannot
enjoyne it self.

24. Where an Injunction has been obtained for stay of Suites. and no
prosecution is had for the space of three Terms, the Injunction is to fall of
it self without further motion.

25. Where a Bill comes in after an Arrest at the Common Law for a Debt, no
Injunction shall be granted without bringing the principal money into Court,
except there appear in the Defendants Answer, or by sight of writings, plain
matter tending to discharge the Debt in Equity. But if an Injunction be awarded
and disobeyed, in that Case no money shall be brought in, or deposited in
regard of the contempt.

26. Injunctions for Possession are not to be granted before a Decree, but
where the Possession has continued by the space of three years, before the
Bill exhibited, and upon the ^ame Title; and not upon any Title by Lease, or
otherwise d^termined.

27. In Case where the Defendants sits all the process of Contempt, and cannot
be found by the Sergeant at Arms, or resist the Sergeant, or makes rescue, a
Sequestration shall be granted of the Land in question, and if the Defendant
render not himself within the year, then ^n Injunction for the Possession.

28. Injunctions against felling of Timber, ploughing up of ancient pastures,
or for the maintayning of Enclosures, or the like, shall be granted according
to the circumstances of the Case; but not in case where the Defendant upon his
Answer claims an Estate of Inheritance except it be where he claims the
Land in trust, or upon some other special ground.

29. No Sequestration shall be granted but of Lands, Sequestrations.
Leases, or Goods in question, and not of any other Lands or Goods, not
contained in the Suites.

30. Where a Decree is made for Rent to be paid out of Land, or a sum of
money to be levied o^t of the profits of Land, there a Sequestration of the
same Lands being in the Defendants hands may be granted.

31. Where the Decrees of the provincial Counsel, or of the Court of
Requests, or the Queens Court, are by continuancy or other means interupted:
There the Court of Chancery upon a Bill preferred for Corroborations of the
same Jurisdictions, Decrees, and Sentences shall give remedy.

32. Where any Cause comes to hearing that has been formerly Decreed, in any
other of the Kings Courts of Justice at Westminster, such Decree shall be
first read, and then to proceed to the rest of the Evidence on both sides.

Suites after Judgment.
33. Suites after Judgment may be admitted according to the ancient Custom of
the Chancery, and the late Royal Decision of his Majesty, of Record after
solemn and great deliberation: But in such Suites it is Ordered, that Bond be
put in with good Sureties to prove the suggestions of the Bill.

34. Decrees upon Suites brought after Judgment shall contain no words, to
make void or weaken the Judgment, but shall only correct the corrupt
Conscience of the party, and rule him to make restitution, or perform other
Acts, according to the equity of the Cause.

Orders, and the Office of the REGISTERS.
35. THe Registers are to be sworn, as has bin lately Ordered.

36. If any Order shall be made, and the Court not informed of the last
material Order formerly made, no benefit shall be taken by such Order: as
granted by abuse, and surreption, and to that end the Registers ought duly to
mention the former Order in the later.

37. No Order shall be explained upon any private Petition but in Court as
they are made, and the Register is to set down the Orders as they were
pronounced by the Court, truly at his peril, without troubling the Lord
Chancellor by any private attending of him to explain his meaning: and if any
explanation be desired, it is to be done by public motion, where the other
party may be heard.

38. No draught of any Order shall be delivered by the Register to either
party without keeping a Copy by him, to the end that if the Order be not
entered, nevertheless the Court may be informed what was formerly done, and
not put to new trouble and hearing; and to the end also that knowledge of
Orders be not kept back too long from either party, but may presently^ appear
at the Office.

39. Where a Lease has been debated upon hearing of both parties and Opinion
has been delivered by the Court, and nevertheless the cause referred to
Treaty, the Registers are no^ to omit the Opinion of the Court, in drawing of
the Order of Reference, except the Court does specially declar^ that it be
entered without any Opinion either way; in which case nevertheles^e the
Registers are out of their short note, to draw up some more full remembrance of
that that passed in Court, to inform the Court i^ the cause come back and
cannot be agreed.

40. The Registers upon sending of their Draugh^ unto the Counsel of the
parties, are not to respect the interlineations, or alterations of the said
Co^nsell ((...) counsel never so great) further, then to put them in
remembrance of that which was truly delivered in Count and so to conceive the
Order upon their Oath, and duty without any further respect.

41. The Registers are to be careful in the (...) and drawing up of D^^rees^
and special matters of difficulty and weight, and therefore when they present
the same to the Lord Chancellor, they ought to give him understanding which are
those Decrees of weight, that they may be read and reviewed before his
Lordship sign them.

42. The Decr^es granted at the Rolls, are to be presented to his Lordship,
with the Orders whereupon they are drawn, within two or three days after
every Term.

43. Injunctions for possession, or for stay of Suites after Verdict are to be
presented to his Lordship, together with the Orders whereupon they go forth,
that his Lordship may take consideration of the Order before he sign them.

44. Where any Order upon the special nature of the case shall be made
against any of these general Rules, there the Register shall plainly and
expressly set down the particulars, Reasons, and Grounds moving the Court to
vary from the general rule.

45. No Reference upon a Demurrer, Referen^es
or question touching the jurisdiction of the Court, shall be made to the
Masters of the Chancery: but such Demurrers shall be heard and ruled in Court,
or by the Lord Chancello^ himself.

46. No Order shall be made for the confirming or ratifying of any Report
without day first given, by the space of a seve^ight at the le^^^, ^o speak to
it in Court.

47. No Reference shall be made to any Masters of the Court, or any other
Commissioners to hear and determine where the cause is gone so far as to
examination of Witnesses, except it be in special Cases of parties near in
blood, or of extreme poverty, or by consent and generall^ Reference of the
estate of Cause, except it be by consent of the parties to be sparingly
granted.

48. No report shall be respected in Court, which exceeds the warrant of
Reference.

49. The Masters of the Court are required not to certify the state of any
cause, as if they would make breviate of the Evidence on both sides, which does
little ease the Court, but with some Opinion, or otherwise in case they think
it too doubtful to give Opinion, and therefore make such special Certificate,
the cause is to go on to a judicial Hearing without respect had to the same.

50. Matters of account unless it be in very weighty causes are not fit for
the Court, but to be prepared by reference, with this difference
nevertheless, that the cause comes first to a hearing, and upon the entrance
into a hearing, they may receive some direction, and be turned over to have the
accounts considered, except both parties before a hea^ing do consent to a
reference of the examination of the accounts, to make it more ready for a
hearing.

51. The like course to be taken for the examination of Court Rolls, upon
Customs and Coppies, which shall not be referred to any one Master, but to
two Masters at the least.

52. No Reference to be made of the insufficiency of an answer, without
showing of some particular point of the defect, and not upon surmize of the
insufficiency in general.

53. Where a trust is confessed by the Defend^nts Answer, there needs no
further Hearing of the Cause, but a Reference presently to be made of the
Account, and so to go on to a hearing of the Accounts.

Suites in Court^ Bills, Dem^rrers, Answers, Pleadings, and Coppies.
54. In all Suites where it shall appear upon the hearing of the Cause, that
the Plaintiff had not Probabilem causam ltigand^ he shall pay unto the
Defendant, his utmost costs to be assessed by the Court.

55. If any Bill answers Replication, or Rejoinder, shall be found of an
immoderate length, both the party and the Council under whose hand it passes
shall be fined.

56. If there be contained in any Bill, Answer, or other pleadings
interrogatory, any matter libellous, or slanderous against any that is not
party to the Suite, or against such as are parties to the Suite, upon matters,
impertinent, or in derogation of the settled authorities of any of his Majesty's
Courts, such Bills, Answers, Pleadings, or Interrogatories shall be taken of
the fyle and suppressed, and the parties severally punished by Commitment or
ignominy, as shall be thought fit for the abuse of the Court, and the
Counselors at Law, who have set their hands shall likewise receive reproof or
punishment if cause be.

57. Demurrers and Pleas which tend to discharge the Suite shall be heard,
first upon every day of Orders, that the Subject may know whether he shall
need further attendance or no.

58. A Demurrer is properly upon matter defective, contained in the Bill it
self, and no forrayne matter, but a Plea is of forrayne matter to discharge or
stay the Suite, as that the cause has been formerly dismissed, or that the
Plaintiff is Outlawed, or Excommunicated, or there is an other Bill^ depending
for the same cause or the like, and such Plea may be put in without Oath, in
case where the matter of the Plea appears upon Record; but if it be any thing
that does not appear upon Record, the Plea must be upon oath.

59. No Plea of Out-lawry shall be allowed without pleading the Record Sub
pede sigilli, nor plea of Excommunication without the Seal of the Ordinary.

60. Where any Suite appears upon the Bill, to be of the natures which are
regularly to be dismissed according to the fifteenth Ordinance, such matter is
to be set forth by way of demurrer.

61. Where an Answer shall be certified insufficient, the Defendant is to pay
costs, and if a second answer be returned insufficient, in the points before
certified insufficient, then double cos^s, and upon the third ^^eble costs, and
upon the fourth Quadruple costs, and then to be committed also until he has
made a perfect answer, and to be examined upon interrogatives ^ouching the
points defective in his answer, but if any answer be certified sufficient, the
Plaintiff is to pay costs.

62. No insufficient answer can be taken hold of after Replication put in,
because it is admitted sufficient by the Replication.

63, An Answer to a matter charged as the Defendants own fact, must be direct
without saying it is to his remembrance, or as he believes, if it be laid
down within seven years before, and if the Defendant deny the fact, he must
traverse it directly, and not by way of negative pregnant, as if a fact be laid
to be done with diverse circumstances, the Defendant may not traverse it
literally as it is Law in the Bill, but must traverse the point of Substance:
So if he be charged with the receipt of one hundred pounds, he must traverse
that he has not received a hundred pounds, or any part thereof, and if he
have received part, he must set forth what part.

64. If a hearing be prayed upon Bill and Answer, the answer must be admitted
to be true in all points, and a decree ought to be made, but upon hearing the
answer readin court.

65. Where no Council appears for the Defendant at the hearing, and the
Process appears to have bin served, the answer of such Defendant ^s to be
read ^n Court.

66. No new matter is to be contained in any Replication, except it be to avoid
matter set forth in the Defendants answ.

67. All Coppies in Chancery shall contain 15. ^^^es in every sheet thereof
written orderly and unwastfully, unto which shall be subscribed the name of the
principal Clarke of the Office where it is written, or his Deputy for whom he
will answer, for which only subscription no fee at all shall be taken.

68. All Commissions for examination of Witnes^es shall super inter^ inclusis
only, Commissions, Examinations, and Depositions.
and no return of Depositions into the Court shall be received, but such only
as shall be either comprised in one Role, subscribed with the name of the
Commissioners, or else in diverse Roles; whereof each one shall be so
subscribed.

69. If both parties join in Commissions, and upon warning given the Defendant
bring his Commissioners, but produces no witnesses nor ministers
interrogatories, but after seeks a new Commission, the same shall not be
granted^ but nevertheless upon some extraordinary excuse of the Defendants
default, he may have liberty granted by special Order to examine his Witnesses
in Court upon the former interrogatories, giving the Plaintiff or his
Attorney notice, that he may examine also if he will.

70. The Defendant is not to be examined upon interrogatories, except it be in
very special Cases, by express Order of the Court, to sift out some fraud or
practice pregnantly appearing to the Court, or otherwise upon offer of the
Plaintiff to be concluded by the answer of the Defendant without any liberty
to disprove such answer, or to impeach him after of perjury.

71. Decrees in other Courts, may be read upon hearing without the warrant of
any special Order. But no depositions taken in any other Court are to be read
but by special Order, and regularly the Court grants no Order for reading of
Depositions except it be between the same parties, and upon the same title and
cause of suite.

72. No examination is to be had of the credit of any Witness but by special
order, which is sparingly to be granted.

73. Witnesses shall not be examined in perpetuam rei memoriam, except it be
upon the ground of a Bill, first put in and answer thereunto made, and the
Defendant, or his Attorney made acquainted with the names of the witnesses
that the Plaintiff would have examined, and so publication to be of such
Witnesses with this restraint nevertheless, that no benefit shall be taken of
the Depositions of such Witnesses, in case they may be brought Viva voce upon
the trial, but only to be used in case of Death before the trial, or age, or
impotency, or absent out of the Realm at the trial.

Ad informandam Conscientiam judicis
74. No Witnesses shall be examined after publication, except it be by consent,
or by special order Ad informandam conscientian judicis, and then to be
brought close sealed up to the Court, to peruse or publish, as the Court shall
think good.

Affidavits.
75. No Affidavit shall be taken or admitted by any Master of the Chancery,
tending to the proof or disproofe of the Title, or matter in question, or
touching the merits of the cause, neither shall any such matter be colorably
inserted in any Affidavit for serving of Process.

76. No Affidavit shall be taken against Affidavit, as far as the Masters of
the Chancery can have knowledge; and if any such be taken, the latter
Affidavit shall not be used nor read in Court.

77. In case of Contempts granted upon force or ill words, upon serving of
Process, or upon words of scandal of the Court, proved by Affidavit, the
party is forthwith to stand committed; but for other Contempts against the
Orders or Decrees of the Court an Attachment goes for the first upon Affidavit
made, and then the party is to be examined upon Interrogatories, and his
examination referred; and if upon his examination he confess matter of
Contempt, he is to be committed, if not, the adverse party may examine
witnesses to prove the Contempt, and therefore if the Contempt appear, the
party is to be committed, but if not, or if the party that pursues the
Contempt do fail in putting in interrogatories, or other prosecution of fail
in the proof of the Contempt then the party charged with the Contempt is to
be discharged with good costs.

78. They that are in Contempt, specially so fa^ as Proclamation of Rebellion,
are not to be here, neither in that Suite, nor any other, except the Court of
special Grace susspend the contempt.

79. Imprisonment upon Contempt for matters past, may be discharged of grace
after sufficient punishment, or otherwise dispensed with. But if the
Imprisonment be for not performance of any Order of the Court, in force they
ought not to be discharged except they first obey, but the Contempt may be
suspended for a time.

80. Injunctions, Petitions.
Sequestrations, Dismissions, Reteyners, upon Dismissions, or final Orders,
are not to be granted upon Petitions.

81. No former Order made in Court is to be altered, crossed, or explained
upon any Petition, but such Orders may be stayed upon Petition for a small
stay, unti^l the matter may be moved in Court.

82. No Commission for examination of Witnesses shall be discharged, nor no
examinations or depositions shall be suppressed upon Petition, except it be
upon point of course of the Court first referred to the Clerks, and
Cert^ficate thereupon.

83. No Demur shall be overruled upon Petition.

No Scire fac. shall be awarded upon Recognizances not enrolled, nor upon
Recognizances enrolled, unless it be upon examination of the Record with the
Writ, nor no Recognizance shall be enrolled after the year except it be upon
special Order from the Lord Chancello^.

85. No writ of Exeat Regnum, prohibition, consultation, Statute of
Northampton, Certiorari special, or Procedendo special, or Certiorari or
Procedendo general more then one in the same cause; Habeas Corpus, or Corpus
cum causa vi laica removend', or restitution thereupon De cor^natore et
viridario elig^ndo in case of a moving De Homine repleg. Assiz. or special
Patent, Inde ballia amovend' Certiorari super presentationibus fact. coram comm
ssariis Seward, or ad quod dampnum shall pass without warrant under the Lord
Chancellors hand, and signed by him, save such Writs as Ad quod dampnum, as
shall be signed by Master Attorney.

86. Writs of Privilege are to be reduced to a better Rule, both for the
number of persons that shall be privileged, and for the case of the
privilege: and as for the number, it shall be set down by Schedule: for the
case it is to be understood, that besides parties privileged as attendants
upon the Court^ Suitors and Witnesses are only to have privilege, eund^;
redeundo, et morando, for their necessary attendance, and not otherwise; and
that such Writ of privilege discharges only an Arrest upon the first
Process, but yet where at such times to necessary attendance the party is
taken in execution, it is a Contempt to the Court, and accordingly to be
punished.

87. No Supplicavit for the good behavior shall be granted, but upon Articles
grounded upon the Oath of two at the least, or Certificate of any one Justice
of Assize, or two Justices of the Peace with Affidavit, that it is their hands,
or by Order of the Star Chamber, or Chancery, or other of the Kings Courts.

88. No Recognizance of the good behavior, and the peace taken in the Country,
and certified into the Petty-bagge shall be filled in the year without Warrant
from the Lord Chancellor.

89. Writs of Ne exeat regnum are properly to be granted according to the
suggestion of the Writ, in respect of attempts prejudicial to the King and
State, in which case the Lord Chancellor will grant them upon prayer of any the
principal Secretaries without cause showing, or upon such information as his
Lordship shall think of weight. But otherwise also they may be granted
according to the practice of long time used in case of enterlopers, in Trade,
great Bankerupts, in whose estate many Subjects are interes^ed, or other cases
that concern multitudes, if the Kings Subjects also in case of Duells and
diverse others.

90. All Writs, Certificates^ and whatsoever other Process Ret. coram Rege in
Canc. shall be brought into the Chapel of the Rolls, within convenient time
after the return thereof, and shall be there filed upon their proper files and
bundles as they ought to be, except the Depositions of Witnesses, which may
remain with any of the six Clerks by the space of one year next after the
cause shall be determined, by Decree, or otherwise be dismissed.

91. All Injunctions shall be enrolled, or the Transcript filed, to the end
that if occasion be, the Court may take order to award Writs of Scire fac.
thereupon, as in ancient time has been used.

92. All days given by the Court to Sheriftes to return their Writs, or bring
their Prisoners upon Writs of privilege, or otherwise between party and party
shall be filed, either in the Registers Office, or in the Petty-bagge
respectively, and all Recognizances taken to the Kings use, or unto the Court,
shall be duly enrolled in convenient time, with the Clerks of the inrollment,
and Calendars made of them, and the Calendars every Michaelmas Term to be
presented to the Lord Chancellor.

93. In case of Suites upon the Commissions for charitable uses to avoid
charge, there shall need no Bill, but only exceptions to the Decree, and
answer forthwith to be made thereunto; and thereupon, and upon sight of the
Inquisition, and the Decree brought unto the Lord Chancellor by the Clarke of
the Petty-bagge, his Lordship upon perusal thereof will give order under his
hand for an absolute Decree to be drawn up.

94, Upon Suite for the Commission of Sewards, the names of those that are
desired to be Commissioners are to be preferred to the Lord Chancellor in
writing; then his Lordship will send the names of some Privy Counselor,
Lieutenant of the Shiere, Justices of Assize, being resident in the parts for
which the Commission is prayed to consider of them, that they be not put in for
private respects, and upon the return of such Opion his Lordship will further
order for the Commission to pass.

95. No new Commission of Sewards, shall be granted whiles the first is in
force, except it be upon discovery of abuse, or fault in the first
Commissioners, or otherwise upon some great or weighty ground.

96. No Petition of Bankerupt shall be granted but upon Petition first
exhibi^ed to the Lord Chancellor, together with names presented, of which his
Lordship will take con^ideration, and always single some learned in the Law
with the rest, yet so as care be taken that the same par^ies be not too often
used in Commissio^s, and likewise care is to be taken that Bond with good
surety be entered into in 200. pound at lea^t to prove him a Bankerupt.

97. No Commission of Delegates in any case of weight shall be awarded, but
upon Petition preferred to the Lord Chancellor, who will name the Commissioners
himself, to the end they may be persons of convenient quality, having regard
to the weight of the cause, and the dignity of the Court from whom the appeal
is.

98. Any man shall be admitted to defend in Forma pauperis upon oath, but for
Plaintiffes they are ordinarily to be referred to the Court, of Requests, or
to the provincial Counsels, if the case arise in the jurisdictions, or to
some Gentlemen in the Country, except it be in some special cases of
commiseration or potency of the adverse party.

99. Licenses to collect for losses for fire or water^ are not to be granted,
but upon good Certificate, and not for decays of surety-ship or debt, or any
other casualties whatsoever, and they are rarely to be renewed, and they be to
be directed unto the County where the loss did arise, if it were by fire, and
the Counties that abut upon it as the case shall require, and if it were by
Sea, then unto ^he County where the Port is, from whence the Ship went, and to
some Counties adjoining.

100. No exemplification shall be made of Letters Patent ( Inter alia) with
omission of the general words, nor of Records made void, or cancelled, nor of
the Decrees of this Court, not enrolled, no^ of depositions by parcel, nor of
depositions in Conrt, to which the hand of the examiner is not subscribed, nor
of Records of the Court not being enrolled or filed, nor of Records of any
other Court, before the ^ame be duly certified to this Court, and orderly
filed here, nor of any Records upon the sight and examination of any Copy in
Paper, but upon sight and examination of the Original.

101. And because time and experience may discover some of these Rules to be
inconvenient, and some other to be fit to be added: therefore his Lordship
intends in any such Case from time to time t^ publish any such Revocations or
Additions.

FINIS.

